A Brief Examination and State OF Liberty Spiritual, BOTH With Respect to
Persons in their Private Capacity, and in their Church Society and Communion.

Written for the Establishment of the Faithful, Information of the
Simple-Hearted, and Reproof of the Arrogant and High Minded, by a Lover of True
Liberty, as it is in Jesus, William Penn.

To go amongst the People of the Lord, called Quakers.

If the Truth make ye Free, then are ye Free indeed.

If we walk in the Light as he is in the Light, then have we Fellowship one
with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin,

1 John 8. London, Printed by Andrew Soul, and sold at his Shop in Devonshire
Buildings, without Bishops-Gate, 1681.

To the People of the Lord, called QUAKERS.
Dear Friends and Brethren;
IT has of long time rested with some pressure upon my Spirit, for Zion's
sake, and the Peace of Jerusalem, to write something of the Nature of True
Spiritual Liberty; Liberty, one of the most Glorious Words and Things in the
World, but little understood, and frequently abused by many. I beseech Almighty
God to preserve you, his People, in the right Knowledge and Use of that
Liberty, which Jesus Christ, the Captain of our Salvation has purchased for
us, and is redeeming us into, who has led Captivity captive, and is giving
Gifts to them that truly believe in his Name. Christ's Liberty is obtained
through Christ's Cross; they that would be his Freemen, must be his Bondsmen,
and wear his blessed Yoke. His Liberty is from Sin, not to Sin; to do his Will,
and not our own; no, not to speak an Idle Word. It Is not I that live (says the
Apostle) but Christ that lives in me, who had set him Free from the Power of
Sin, and brought Immortality to Light in him; whence he learned thus to
triumph, O Death, where is thy Sting! O Grave, where is thy Victory! This is
the Personal Freedom that comes by Jesus Christ, to as many as receive him in
the Way, and for the End for which God has given him, to wit, to be a Savior
and a Leader, to save us from our Corruptions, and guide us in the Narrow Way
of his holy Cross, and through the strait Gate of Self-denial, which lead to
Eternal Life. And as many as have entered at this Door, are come to have Unity
with God, and one with another; To love him above all, and their Neighbors as
themselves; yea, to prefer each other before themselves. Such will not violate
the great Law of their Lord and Master; Love one another, the New; and yet the
Old Commandment: These dwell in Love, and so they dwell in God; for God is
Love. 'Twas the beloved Disciples Testimony, and it comes up to what another
man of God has said, namely, The Church that dwells in God, if she dwells in
God, then in Love; consequently her Members are in Union, of one Mind in Church
Matters, since she has but one Head to Rule her.

Peruse this brief Discourse in this Love, and it may be to Edification. My aim
is to assert the Truth, detect Error, and point in true Brotherly Kindness at
those Shoals and Sands some by Mistake, or Overboldness, have and may run upon.
O Friends! I greatly desire, that the Spirit of Love, Wisdom, and a sound
Understanding, of Meekness, Judgment and Mercy may ever rest upon you, that
blamelesly you may be kept, an holy Family, at Unity with it self, to the Lord
God your Redeemer, that he over all may in you, through you, and by you be
Exalted, Honored and Praised, who is worthy and blessed forever.

A Brief Examination and State OF Liberty Spiritual, etc.
Question. What is Spiritual Liberty?

Answer, It is twofold; there is a true and a false Liberty, as a true and
false Spirit, the right discerning of which concerns every ones Eternal
Well-beeing.

Qu. What is true Spiritual Liberty?

Answ. Deliverance from Sin by the Perfect Law in the Heart, The Perfect Law of
Liberty, James 2. otherwise called, The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, that makes Free from the Law of Sin and Death; elsewhere styled, The
Law of Truth writ in the Heart, which makes Free indeed, as says Christ, If
the Truth make you Free, then are you Free indeed. So that the Liberty of Gods
People stands in the Truth, and their Communion in it, and in the Perfect
Spiritual Law of Christ Jesus, which delivers and preserves them from every
Evil Thing that does or would embondage. In this blessed Liberty, it is not the
Will nor Wisdom of man, neither the vain Affections and Lusts that rule, or
give Law to the Soul; for the Minds of all such as are made Free by the Truth,
are by the Truth conducted in doing and suffering through their Earthly
Pilgrimage.

Qu. What is False Liberty?

Answ. A Departing from this blessed Spirit of Truth, and a Rebelling against
this Perfect Law of Liberty in the Heart, and being at Liberty to do our own
Wills; upon which comes Reproof and Judgment.

Qu. But are there not some things wherein we ought to be left to our own
freedom?

Answ. We are not our own, for we are bought with a Price; and in all things
ought we to glorify God with our Bodies, Souls and Spirits, which are the
Lords.

Qu. But must we have a Motion or Command from the Spirit of Truth for all
things that we do?

Answ. That may be according to the Truth, which may not be by the immediate
Motion or Command of the Truth; for that is according to the Truth, that is not
against the Mind of the Truth, either particularly or generally expressed. The
Truth commands me to do all to the Praise and Glory of God; but not that I
should wait for a Motion to do every particular thing. For Example: The variety
of Actions in Trading, Commerce and Husbandry, the variety of Flesh, Fish and
Fowl for Food, with more of the same Nature, in all which there is a Choice and
Liberty, but still according to the Truth, and within the holy Bounds and
Limits of it.

Qu. Then it seems there are some things left to our Freedom.

Answ. Yes; but it must still be according to the Mind of Gods Truth: There are
things enjoined, such as relate to our Duty to God, to our Superiors, to the
Household of Faith, and to all Men and Creatures, these are Indispensible. There
are also things that may be done or left undone, which may be called
Indifferent; as what sort of Meat I will eat to day, whether I will eat Flesh,
Fish or Herbs, or what Hours I will eat my Meals at, with many such outward
things of Life and Converse; yet even in these cases I ought to act according
to the Truth, in the Temperance and Wisdom of it.

Qu. But does not Freedom extend farther than this; for since God has given me
a Manifestation of his Spirit to profit withal, and that I have the Gift of God
in my self, should I not be left to act according as I am free and persuaded in
my own Mind, in the things that relate to God, lest looking upon my self as
obliged by what is revealed unto another, though it be not revealed unto me, I
should be led out of my own Measure, and act upon another Motion, and so offer
a blind Sacrifice to God?

Answ. This is true in a sense, that is, if thou art such an one that can do
nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth, then may thou safely be left to
thy freedom in the things of God, and the Reason is plain; Because thy Freedom
stands in the Perfect Law of Liberty, in the Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus, and in the Truth, which is Christ Jesus, which makes thee Free
indeed, that is, Perfectly Free from all that is Bad, and perfectly Free to all
that is Holy, Just, Lovely, Honest, Comely, and of good Report; but if thou
pleadest thy Freedom against such things, yea, obstructest and slightest such
Good, Wholesome and Requisite Things, thy Freedom is Naught, Dark, Perverse, out
of the Truth, and against the perfect Law of Love and Liberty.

Qu. But must I conform to things whether I can receive them or no? Ought I not
to be left to the Grace and Spirit of God in my own Heart?

Answ. To the first part of the Question, Nay; to the last, Yea. But now let us
consider what is the Reason thou can not receive them: Is the fault in the
things themselves? Are they inconsistent with Truth, or will not the Truth own
or assent unto them, or is the fault in thee? that is to say, Is it thy
Weakness, or thy Carelessness? If thy Weakness, it is to be born with, and to be
informed; if thy Carelessness, thou oughtst to be admonished; for it is a
dangerous Principle, and pernicious to true Religion, and which is worse, it is
the Root of Ranterism to assert, That nothing is a Duty incumbent upon thee,
but what thou art persuaded is thy Duty; for the Seared Conscience pleads his
Liberty against all Duty, the Dark Conscience is here unconcerned, the Dead
Conscience is here uncondemned, unless this Distinction be allowed of, that
there may be an Ignorance or an Insensibility from Inability or Incapacity, or
a Dark Education, and an Ignorance and Insensibility, from Carelessness,
Disobedience, Prejudice, etc. So that though thou art not to conform to a thing
ignorantly, yet thou art seriously to consider, why thou art ignorant, and what
the cause of such Ignorance may be; certainly it cannot be in God, nor in his
Gift to thee; it must then needs be in thy self, who have not yet received a
Sense for or against the Matter, about which thou art in doubt. To the second
part of the Question; Ought I not to be left to the Grace of God in my own
Heart? Ans. That is of all things most desirable, since they are well left that
are there left; for there is no fear of want of Unity, where all are left with
the one Spirit of Truth; they must be of one Mind, they cannot be otherwise. So
that to plead this against Unity, is to abuse the very Plea, and to commit the
greatest Contradiction to that very Doctrine of Scripture, viz. That all should
be guided by the Grace and Spirit of God in themselves; for the end of that
Doctrine is, certainty. They shall all know me, says the Lord, from the least
to the greatest. And I will give them one Heart, and one Way, that they may
fear me forever, for the good of them, and of their Children after them, Jer.
32. 39. And I will give them one Heart, and I will put a new Spirit within you;
and I will take the Stony Heart out of their Flesh, and will give them an Heart
of Flesh, Ezekiel 11. 19. And the multitude of them that believed were of one
Heart, and of one Soul, Acts 4. 32. Is not this Unity too? I will restore unto
you a pure Language; they shall be of one Heart and of one Mind, and great
shall be their Peace. Therefore I must say to thee, Friend, What if thou will
not be left with the Grace and Spirit of God in thy self, nor wait for its
Mind, nor be watchful to its Revelations, nor humble and quiet till thou have
received such necessary Manifestations, but pleadest against the Counsel of the
Spirit of the Lord in other faithful Persons, under the pretense of being left
to his Spirit in thy self; by which means thou opposest the Spirit to the
Spirit, and pleadest for Dis-unity, under the Name of Liberty; I ask thee, May
not I exhort thee to the Practice of that I am moved to press thee to the
Practice of? If not, thou art the Imposer, by restraining me from my Christian
Liberty; and not only so, but away goes Preaching, and with it the Scriptures,
that are both appointed of God for Exhortation, Reproof and Instruction.

Qu. But are there not various Measures, diversities of Gifts, and several
Offices in the Body?

Answ. True; but therefore are not the Members of one Mind, one Will and one
Judgment in common and universal Matters, especially relating to the Family and
Church of God? And indeed there cannot be a falser Reasoning than to conclude
Discord from Diversity, Contrariety from Variety. Is there Contrariety of
Bloods, Life's, Feelings, Seeings, Hearings, Tastings, Smellings in one and the
same Body, at one and the same time? No such matter: Experience is a
Demonstration against all such Insinuations. So that though it be granted, that
there is Diversity of Gifts, yet there is no Disagreement in Sense; and though
Variety of Offices, yet no Contrariety in Judgment concerning those Offices.
Well says the holy Scriptures of Truth, there is but One God; the Lord our God
is but One Lord; there is but One God and Father of all things (that are good;)
and there is but One Lord, One Faith and One Baptism; and his Light, Life and
Spirit is at Unity with it self in all; what comes from the Light, Life or
Spirit in one, it is the same in Truth and Unity to the rest, as if it rise in
themselves: This is seen in our Assemblies every day, and will be throughout
all Generations in the Church of God, among those that live in the lowly Truth,
in which the pure Sense and sound Judgment stands; God is not the God of
Confusion, but Order: Every one in his Order is satisfied, has Unity and true
Fellowship with whatever comes from the Life of God in another; for this
precious Life reaches throughout the Heritage of God, and is the common Life
that gives the common Feeling and Sense to the Heritage of God. Degree or
Measure in the same Life can never contradict or obstruct that which is from
the same Life for the common Benefit of the Family of God. The Lord is the
Unmeasurable and Incomprehensible Glorious being of Life, yet have we Unity
with him in all his Works, who are come to his divine Measure of Light and
Truth in our own Hearts, and live therein; and shall we not have Unity with
that which proceeds from a Fellow Creature? In short; the Saints Way is in the
Light, wherein there is neither Doubts nor Discord; yea, they are Children of
the Light, and called Light, and The Lights of the World; and can it be
supposed that such should disagree and contradict each other in their exterior
Order and Practice in the Church before the World; Oh, the blessed Seamless
Garment of Jesus! where that is known, these things can never rise. But yet
again, The Just Man's Path is not only a Light, but a shining Light, Brightness
it self: Certainly there can be no stumbling. It is also said, That Light is
sown for the Righteous; then the Righteous shall never want Light upon any
occasion: And says that beloved Evangelist and Apostle of our Lord Jesus
Christ, They that walk in the Light have Fellowship one with another, 1 John 1.
Whence it is easy to conclude, they that go out of the Fellowship, go out of
the Light; but if they that walk in the Light, have Fellowship one with
another, what shall we say of those that plead being left to the Light to
justify their not having Fellowship one with another? and which is yet worse,
who suppose People may Conscientiously and Justifiably Dissent within
themselves, and that by reason of the Variety of the Degrees of the Spirit and
Grace that are given of God unto them; as if the lesser Degree may dissent from
the greater, because of its not being able to comprehend it. And to make this
Principle more Authentic, such tell us, This is the Ancient Principle of
Truth; and object, How will you else be able to maintain the Quakers
Principles? The Fallacy of all which, lies (as I said before) in not rightly
distinguishing between Diversity and Disagreement, Variety and Contrariety; for
this Diversity has Concord, and this Variety has Unity: And it is a Blindness
that has too much of late happened to some, by going from the one Life and
Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, first to fall into Disagreements, and then
plead for it, under the Notion of Diversity of Measures. I would ask all such
Persons, who arrogate to themselves such a peculiar Knowledge of the Ancient
Principles of Truth, or the Quakers first Principles; 1st, Whether they believe
there be a Christian Body? 2dly, Whether this Body has a Head? 3dly, Whether
Christ be not this Head? 4thly, Whether this Head be without Eyes, Ears, Smell
and Taste, and this Body without Sense and Feeling? If not, Whether this Head
Sees, Hears, Smells, Tastes DIFFERINGLY and CONTRARILY to it self? And
whether this Body has a Contrary Feeling at the same time about the same
thing? And if it be true, that the Church of Christ, redeemed by his most
precious Blood to live to him, see with the same Eye, hear with the same Ear,
speak with the same Mouth, live by the same Breath, and are led by the same
Spirit, where is this Disagreement, Contrariety or Dissent about the things of
his Church?

Qu. But the Members of Christ's Church in the Primitives had different
Apprehensions; as the Apostles, and the People gathered by them.

Answ. Pray let me know who they were, and in what Cases?

Qu. The Persons were PAUL and PETER, and those Christians that differed about
Meats; and the Scripture is plain in the Case.

Answ. The Difference between Peter and Paul [in the Acts] testifies the
Weakness of Peter, and the place justifies Paul's Reproof of his too great
Compliance with the Jews in some of their Rites; which makes against Liberty of
various Practices in the Church of Christ, and not for indulging them. That
Instance about the Difference of Christians as to Meats, etc. has nothing in it
to the end for which it is alleged; for this related not to Church Order or
Communion, but Private and Personal Freedoms, what each might do with respect
to themselves; that is, they might make Laws to themselves, in things that only
concerned private Persons, and it centred there; Here, What I will eat, When I
will eat; things to my self, and for my self, as a man having Power over my own
Appetite: This Liberty in things Private, Personal and Indifferent, makes
nothing for Dissenting about Church Matters in things of Communion and Society,
and that also are not Indifferent, as to eat Fish, or eat Flesh, or eat Herbs,
plainly is: But necessary; As to be careful and orderly about the External
Business of the Church: These are no Jewish Rites, nor Shadowy Ceremonies, no
Meats nor Drinks that are Private and Personal, where Weakness* is apt to
mistake (That were an Unnecessary and an Unchristian Yoke to bear) but things
comely, orderly and of good Report, that tend to Purity, Peace and Diligence in
things acceptable to God, and requisite among his People in their Temporal
Christian Capacity. And herein the Apostle Paul exercised his Godly Authority;
and we find that not only those that opposed themselves to it, as thinking, he
took too much upon him, (demanding a Mark of Christ's speaking in him) are in
Scripture branded with Contention. But the true Believers, that had in
themselves a Mark of Christ's speaking in him, were of One Mind, and avoided
such as were given to Contention; for it was not the Custom of the Churches of
Christ. Thus were Christ's People of One Heart, in things relating to their
Communion. Yet a little further; They that have the Mind of Christ, are of One
Mind; for Christ is not divided: They that have Christ for their Head, have One
Counselor and Prophet, One Seer and Bishop, they disagree not in their
Judgments in things relating to him, and the good of his Church; they have one
and the same Guide; For the one Spirit, into which they have all drank, and by
it are baptized into one Body, leads them all. Now to every Member is a Measure
of the same Spirit given to profit with; and though every Member is not an Eye,
nor an Ear, nor a Mouth, yet every Member has Unity with the Eye, with the
Ear, with the Mouth in their proper and respective Acts, and they one with the
other: The Eye sees for the Mouth, the Mouth speaks for the Eye, and the Ear
hears for both; this Variety has no Discord, but in this Diversity of Gifts
and Offices, each Member is sensible of the other, and moves and acts by one
and the same Life, Spirit and Guidance, which is Omnipresent proportionable to
every Member in its distinct Office. It must be granted, that there are Helps
in the Church, as well as that there is a Church at all; and the holy Ghost has
compared those Helps (as is before mentioned) to several Members and Senses of
man's Body, as an Eye, an Hand, a Foot, Hearing, Smelling, etc. All then cannot
be the Eye, neither can all be the Hand, for then they would confound their
Office, and act disagreeably to the Ordination of the great Orderer of his
Church. And if I will not comply with him that God has made an Eye, because I
am not that Eye, or an Hand, because I am not that Member my self, nor a Party
to the Action, or Performance of that Member, I resist the Lord, though under
pretense of resisting man for the Lords sake. And truly, this is the Rock that
some of our own time, as well as Persons of former Ages have split upon; they
have not been contented with their own Station in the Body, they have not kept
to their own Gift, nor been taken up with the Duty of their own place in the
Church. If he that is a Foot would be an Hand, and the Hand covets to be an
Eye, envying others their allotted Station, through highth of Mind, and walking
loose from the holy Cross, there can be no such thing as Concord and Fellowship
in the Church of Christ.

Furthermore, since the Spirit of the Lord is one in all, it ought to be obeyed
through another, as well as in ones self; and this I affirm to you, That the
same lowly frame of Mind that receives and answers the Mind of the Spirit of
the Lord in a man's self, will receive and have Unity with the Mind of the same
Spirit through another, and the Reason is plain; Because the same
Self-evidencing Power and Virtue that arises from the Measure of the Spirit of
Truth in ones self, and that convinces a man in his own Heart, does also
attend the Discovery of the Mind of the same Spirit, when delivered by another;
for the words of the Second Adam, the quickening Spirit through another, are
Spirit and Life, as well as in thy own particular; this is discerned by the
Spiritual Man that judges all things, although the Carnal Man pleads, Being
left to his Freedom; and it may be talks of being left to the Spirit in himself
too, the better to escape the Sense and Judgment of the Spiritual Man. It is my
earnest Desire, that all that have any Knowledge of the Lord, would have a
tender care how they use that Plea against their faithful Brethren, that God
put into their Mouths against the persecuting Priests and Hirelings of the
World, namely, I must mind the Spirit of God in my self; for though it be a
great Truth that all are to be thereunto left, yet it is as true, that he whose
Soul is left with the Spirit of Truth in himself, differs not from his Brethren
that are in the same Spirit; and as true it is, that those who err from the
Spirit of Truth, may plead, being left to the Spirit in themselves, against the
Motion and Command of the Spirit through another, when it pleases not his or
her high Mind and perverse Will; for a Saying may be true or false, according
to the subject Matters it is spoken upon, or applied to; We own the Assertion,
we deny the Application: There lies the Snare. It Is true, the People of God
ought to be left to the Guidings of the Spirit of God in themselves; but for
this to be so applied, as to disregard the Preachings or Writings of Christ's
enlightened Servants, because by them applied properly to the Preaching or
Writing of false Prophets and Seducers, will by no means follow. I say the
Doctrine is true, but not exclusively of all external Counsel or Direction;
therefore false in application, where men are allowed to have had the fear of
God, and the mind of his Spirit, and are not proved to have acted in their own
Wills and Wisdom, or without the guidance of the Spirit of God, about the
things of his Church and Kingdom.

Qu. But though this be true, which has been alleged for heavenly Concord,
yet what if I do not presently see that Service in a thing, that the rest of my
Brethren agree in; in this case what is my Duty and theirs?

Answ. It is thy Duty to wait upon God in Silence and Patience, out of all
fleshly Consultations; and as thou abidest in the Simplicity of the Truth, thou will receive an Understanding with the rest of thy Brethren about the thing
doubted: And it is their Duty, whilst thou behavest thy self in Meekness and
Humility, to bear with thee, and carry themselves tenderly and lovingly toward
thee; but if on the contrary, thou disturbest their Godly Care and Practice,
and growest Contentious, and exalts thy Judgment against them, they have Power
from God to Exhort, Admonish and Reprove thee; and (if thou perseverest
therein) in his Name to refuse any further Fellowship with thee, till thou
repentest of thy Evil.

Qu. But lest I should mistake, when thou speak of true Liberty, that it
stands in being made Free by the Truth, from all Unrighteousness, do thou
mean, That no other Persons ought to have the Liberty of Exercising their
Dissenting Consciences, but that Force may be lawful to reduce such as are
reputed Erroniously Conscientious?

Answ. By no means: It were a great Wickedness against God, who is Lord of the
Souls and Spirits of men, and ought to preside in all Consciences, who, as the
Apostle says, is the only Potentate, and has Immortalety. For though I give
the true Liberty of Soul and Conscience to those only that are set free by the
Power of Christ, from the Bondage of Sin and Captivity of Death, yet do I not
intend, that any Person or Persons should be in the least harmed for the
external Exercise of their Dissenting Consciences in Worship to God, though
Erroneous; for though their Consciences be blind, yet they are not to be
forced; such Compulsion gives no sight, neither do Corporal Punishments
produce Conviction: This we above all People in our Day have withstood, in
Speaking, Writing and Suffering, and blessed be God, continue so to do with
faithlness. For Faith is the Gift of God, and forced Sacrifices are not
pleasing to the Lord.

Qu. But according to thy Argument, it may be my Fault, that I have not the
Gift of Faith; and upon this Presumption, it may be, thou will inflict some
Temporal Penalties upon me.

Answ. No such matter; for such kind of Faults are not to be punished with
Temporal or Worldly Penalties; for whether the Errors be through Weakness or
Willfulness, not relating to Moral Practice, all External Coertion and Corporal
Punishment is excluded. For the Weapons of our Warfair are not Carnal, but
Spiritual.

Qu. But what then is the Extent of the Power of the Church of Christ, in case
of Schism or Heresy?

Answ. The Power that Christ gave to his Church was this, That Offenders, after
the first and second Admonition, (not Repenting) should be Rejected: Not
imprisoned, Plundered, Banished or put to Death; this belongs to the Whore and
false Prophet: Oh! all these things have come to pass for want of Humility, for
want of the ancient Fear, and keeping in the quiet Habitation of the Just: The
Truth in you all shall answer me. And this I affirm, from the Understanding I
have received of God, not only that the Enemy is at work to scatter the Minds
of Friends, by that Loose Plea, What-hast thou to do with me? leave me to my
Freedom, and to the Grace of God in my self, and the like; but this Proposition
and Expression, as now understood and alleged, is a Deviation from, and a
Perversion of the Ancient Principle of Truth; for this is the plain Consequence
of this Plea, if any one (especially if they are but lately convinced) shall
say, I see no Evil in paying Tithes to Hireling Priests, in that they are not
claimed by Divine Right, but by the Civil Laws of the Land. I see no Evil in
Marrying by the Priest, for he is but a Witness. Furthermore, I see no Evil in
declining a public Testimony in Suffering times, or hiding in times of
Persecution, for I have Christ' s and Paul' s Examples. I see no Evil in
Worshipping and Respecting the Persons of Men; for whatever others do, I intend
a sincere Notice that I take of those I know, and have a good Esteem for.
Lastly, I see no Evil in keeping my Shop shut upon the Worlds Holy Days and
Mass-days (as they call them) though they are rather Lewdly and Superstitiously
than Religiously kept; for I would not willingly give any Offense to my
Neighbors. And since your Testimony is against Imposition, and for leaving
every one to the Measure of the Grace which God has given him, not only, No
man has Power to reprove or judge me, but I may be as good a Friend as any of
you, according to my Measure. And now, here is Measure set up against Measure,
which is Confusion it self -- Babel indeed: This is that very Rock both
Professors and Profane would long since have run us upon, namely, That a way
is hereby opened to all the Worlds Libertines, to plead the Light within for
their Excesses; Which indeed grieves the Spirit of God, and was severely judged
by our Friends in the beginning, and is still reproved by them that keep their
Habitation, though some are become as wandering Stars through their own Pride,
and the Prevalency of the hour of Temptation that has overtaken them; whereas
had they kept in the Channel of Love and Life, in the Orb and Order of the
Celestial Power, they had shined as fixed Stars in the Firmament of God
forever. And from the deep Sense that I have of the working of the Enemy of
Zions Peace, to rend and divide the Heritage of God, who under the pretense of
crying down Man, Forms and Prescriptions, is crying down the Heavenly Man
Christ Jesus, his blessed Order and Government, which he has brought forth by
his own Revelation and Power through his faithful Witnesses. This I further
testify, First, That the Enemy by these fair Pretenses strikes at the Godly
Care and Travail that dwells upon the Spirits of many faithful Brethren, that
all things might be preserved Sweet, Comely, Virtuous, and of good Report in
the Church of God. Secondly, That there never was greater necessity of this
Godly Care than at this day, since we were a People, wherein the Cross by too
many is not so closely kept to as in days past, and in which there is not only
a great Convincement, but a Young Generation descended of Friends, who though
they retain the Form their Education has led them into, yet many of them adorn
not the Gospel with that sensible, weighty and heavenly Conversation as becomes
the Children of the Undefiled Religion, and the Seed of that precious Faith
which works by the Love that Overcomes the World. And the Lord God of Heaven
and Earth, that has sent his Son Christ Jesus a Light into our Hearts and
Consciences, to whose Search and Judgment all ought to (and must) bring their
Deeds, and render up their Account, bears holy Record, that for this end has
he moved upon the Spirits of his Servants, and for this good end only have his
Servants given forth, recommended, and put in Practice those things that are
now in Godly Use among his People, whether in this or other Nations, relating
to Men and Women's Meetings, and their diverse and weighty Services. And further;
in the fear of the Almighty God, I shall add, That heavenly Peace and
Prosperity dwell with those who are found in a holy and zealous Practice of
them; wherefore I warn all, that they take heed of a slight and obstinate Mind,
and that they have a care how they give way to the Outcry of some, faisly
entitled, Liberty of Conscience against Imposition, etc. for the end thereof
is to lead back again, and give ease to the Carnal Mind, which, at last, will
bring Death again upon the Soul to God, and the living Society of his Children.
And indeed, it is a great shame that any who have ever known the Truth of God
in the inward Parts, and the sweet Society of Brethren, especially those who
were early in the Work of this blessed Day and heavenly Dispensation, should so
far depart from the Fear and Awe of the Lord, as to use such Unsavory, as well
as Untrue Expressions; this is very far from that Meek Spirit of Jesus, and the
first Love, which they pretend to have so singularly kept in, which bears all
things, suffers all things, and endures all things, and teaches to keep the
Word of Patience in the Hour of Tribulation; Nay, but this is judging of
Spiritual things with a Carnal and Prejudiced Mind, stumbling at the Matter,
for the sake of the Persons through whom it comes, not eying nor weighing the
Spirit the thing arises from, but the Person by whom it is spoken, which
darkens the Eye of the Understanding, and blinds by Prejudice the Mind that
should discern, taste and judge; from whence many Mischiefs have sprung to the
Courch of Christ in diverse Ages: Nor is it the least Evil this Spirit of Strife
is guilty of, even at this day, that it uses the words, Liberty of Conscience
and Imposition against the Brethren, in the same manner as our suffering
Friends have been always accustomed to intend them against the persecuting
Priests and Powers of the Earth, as if it were the same thing to admonish and
reprove Conceited, High-minded, Loose or Contentious Persons in the Church, as
to compel Conformity in matters of Faith and Worship, by Worldly Violence upon
the Persons and Estates of Conscientious Dissenters: O such Iniquity God will
not leave unreproved!

This, Dear Friends, I send amongst you, as a token of my true Love, in the
Revelation of the free Spirit of our God and Father, who have ever been a
Friend to true Liberty, as in the State according to Law, so in the Church
according to Scripture, and as it stands in the Truth of Jesus, that makes
them who love it Free indeed. Let us all keep low, and remember the Rock from
whence we were hewn, and dwell in a tender and reverent Sense of the daily
Mercies and Providence of the Lord, looking well to our own Growth and
Prosperity in his heavenly Way and Work, then shall the Desire of our Hearts be
more and more after him, and the remembrance of his Name, and with our Love to
God, will our Love increase one toward another, helping and aiding one
another: And I no ways doubt, but God that has brought us out of the Land of
Egypt, and out of the House of Bondage, and delivered us from the Mouth of the
Lion, and the Paw of the Bare, will preserve his People from this Uncircumcised
Spirit that is not in Covenant with God, nor under the Yoke of his Holy Royal
Law of True Spiritual Liberty; for they that keep and walk in the Light of
Jesus, are fenced from the Power of this Crooked Serpent, that seeks whom he
may betray; nor are any stung by him but the Unwatchful, the Lisseners and
Hearkeners after his jealous Whispers, and detracting Insinnations: They are
such as make their Dwelling in the Earth, where his Region is, and where he
creeps and twists, who is Earthly, Sensual and Devilish, and so is all the
Wisdom that comes from him.

My dear Friends, Keep, I pray you, in the Simplicity of the Truth and Cross of
Jesus, and wait for your daily Bread, and to be daily renewed from the Lord;
look to your Increase about Eternal Riches, and be sure to lay up Treasure in
Heaven, that fades not away, that your Faith and Hope may have Eternal
Foundations, which the cross Occurrences of Time and fears of Mortality cannot
move; and beware of that Loose and Irreverent Spirit, which has not those in
high esteem among you, that are faithful in the Lords Work, and that labor in
his blessed Word and Doctrine: I plainly see a coldness and a shortness on this
hand, and be the pretense as it will, it is not pleasing to the Lord: They that
love Christ, his Servants are dear to them, and they bear a tender Regard to
their Trials, Travails, Spendings and Sufferings, who seek not yours, but you*
that you may all be presented Blameless at the Coming of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ, that so the Gospel Ministry and Testimony may be held up
with holy fervent Love and Godly Esteem, to the keeping under every raw and
exalted Mind, and whatever may slight and turn against it, lest God that has
Richly visited us with his Fatherly Visitations and Day springing from on High
should remove his Blessing from amongst us, and place his Candlestick amidst
another People. Be wise therefore, O Friends! for behold, he is at the Door
that must have an Account of your Stewardship: Be watchful, keep to your first
Love and Works, that so you may endure to the End, and be saved: And having
Overcome, you may have right to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst
of the Paradise of God.

The God of Peace, who has brought our dear Lord Jesus from the dead, and Us
with him, more abundantly enrich you all with Wisdom and Knowledge, in the
Revelation of himself, through Faith in his Son, by whom in these last days he
has spoken to us, who is the blessed and only Potentate, King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, who only has Immortality; to whom be Honor and Power
Everlasting. Amen.

Your Friend and Brother in the Tribulation and Salvation of the enduring
Kingdom of our God, William Penn.
Warninghurst in Sussex, the 20th of the 9th Month, 1681.

