Just Measures, IN AN EPISTLE, OF PEACE and LOVE TO Such Professors of Truth as
are under any Dissatisfaction about the present Order practiced in the CHURCH
of CHRIST.

By a Lover of the Truth and Them, G. P.

COL. iii. 15. And let the Peace of God rule in your Hearts, to the which also
ye are called in one Body; and be ye thankful. LONDON: Printed for Tho.
Northcott, in George yard in Lumbard-street, 1692.

Just Measures IN AN EPISTLE OF PEACE and LOVE, etc.
Friends,
I Have, with a deep Sense and Sorrow, often beheld the Distance and
Dissatisfaction you are under in reference to your ancient and faithful
Brethren and that Fellowship, which, I am sure, was once very dear and valuable
with you, and I would have the Charity to hope, is what many of you desire
still: And, for your sakes that would not willingly think amiss, nor differ,
nor divide from those that otherwise you have an Esteem for and are in Judgment
one with, as to the Worship and Doctrines of Truth; I desire to open my Mind,
both with tenderness and plainness; and if what I say has the Voice and Matter
of Peace and Love in it, and may be helpful to you, in closing with your
Brethren again, I shall greatly rejoice: In which, know this, I seek you not in
the words of Man's Wisdom, nor to raise Controversy, nor for Victory, nor any
By ends, but for the sake of that precious Fellowship and seamless Garment, in
which the Truth clothed us all in the beginning, and with which it will cloth
and comfort all its faithful Servants and true Friends to the end. 1st. I shall
begin with the Difference, and what you have both in Conferrence and Writing
alleged for the Ground of your Dissatisfaction and Dissent: Next, I shall
consider the Nature and Merit of it; and last of all, give my sense upon the
whole matter, in order to a better understanding for the future.

That there is a Difference, is but too plain, for it has in some parts
proceeded to a Separation, as well to places of Worship as in matters of
Discipline. The Ground of this Dissatisfaction, upon which so great a Distance
has been raised, you say is, Requiring your Compliance with some Practices
relating to Discipline, particularly Women's meetings and coming twice before
Men and Women's meetings about Marriages, before they are admitted to be
solemnized among us; some of you thinking, that there is no Service for Women's
meetings at all; others, no Service in their being distinct from Men's meetings,
at least, no necessity for either, and therefore no necessary Compliance to be
required and insisted upon, but every one left to their liberty in Christ, lest
Imposition and Formality should prevail among us, as they have done in other
Religious Societies. In this, I think, I have truly and fairly stated the Case
on your part, and given your Objection to our Practice, and the reason why you
dissent from it.

Now Friends, I shall consider the nature and merit of this Dissatisfaction and
Dissent, wherein I beseech your Attention, Patience, and Candor, and I hope
you will find, that we are clear of the Imposition and Formality you object or
fear.

In the first place, I do not find that you have any just cause to fear, in
general, an infringement on your Christian Liberty, since it has been, and is
most sincerely declared by the Brethren, chiefly concerned in the good Order
and Service of the Church, that they have no thought or design of imposing any
thing upon the Consciences of Friends; or, that Friends ought to have now any
more than at the beginning, any other reason or Measure of Compliance or
Conformity in Matters relating to God, than the conviction of the Light and
Spirit of Christ in every Conscience. But there is this distinction to be
considered well of, That the matters in Difference are not such as require such
an Exercise and Conviction of Conscience as is pleaded, because they relate not
to Faith or Worship. Did they require Faith, or did they appertain to Worship,
as if you were obliged to worship God only in such a Place, Time, Gesture,
Raiment, with such words and forms of Speech, etc. which has been the case of
the Dissenters from the National Church, your Objection and Plea were good: But
this about which your Dissatisfaction arises, is purely Discipline in
Government, and not in Worship; Formality in Order, and not in Religion: It is
about methods of regulating our selves, as to the civil or outward part of the
Church, as we are a Society; how we may avoid Disorder, and preserve the Credit
of our Society from Censure and Scandal.

For instance, To keep the necessitous; as Poor, Aged, Sick, and Orphans: To
reconcile Differences: To take care of Births, Marriages, and Burials: In fine,
to prevent, rebuke and restore disorderly walkers. To all which, I conceive,
there is no need of an Act of Faith, or other Exercise of Conscience, than, as
the Apostle exhorts, to be ready to every good word and work: I mean, here is
nothing required to be believed as an Article of Faith; here is, no Novelty or
Formality in Worship introduced, or any thing proposed as an End or Service for
our Men and Women's meetings, that can reasonably admit of the raising of such a
Scruple of Conscience, since the things proposed are Duties that all civil
Societies, as well as Church-fellowships, agree in, as requisite to the support
of the Reputation of Fellowships and Societies.

Now this being the great and true End, Use, and Service of our Men and Women's
meetings, and that it is the End that always denotes and constitutes the nature
of the means, it cannot justly be thought to be of the nature of Imposition and
Formality, as the words are commonly taken in an i^l sense* to expect the
compliance of Members of a Society, to such Methods of Order as the Elders
thereof have exhorted to, and the generality of the People have embraced, and
which the most considerable part of those that dissent, declare they dissent
from, rather for fear of suffering an Enfringement of their Christian Liberty,
than any dislike to the Practice it self: I say, this cannot be called or
accounted such an Imposition upon Conscience, because they are Expedients of
Order and Methods of Rule about things universally agreed upon. The thing will
not bear the word; for instance, Because I may say it is against my Conscience
to confess to such an Article or Doctrine of Faith, or to worship God after such
a prescribed form, that therefore it would sound reasonable for me to say it is
against my Conscience to submit to the Council of the Church for ending of
Differences; and it is against my Conscience, after having once told the
Brethren I intend to marry such a Woman, to come again a fortnight, or a month
after, to ask if they have informed themselves of mine and the Woman's
clearness, both toward Parents and other persons, before we solemnize it.
Surely this would look to reasonable people an over-tender or an
over-righteous, or rather, indeed, an over-free and large Conscience, that
would scruple, at twice or thrice publishing the Banns, to prevent
undutifulness to Parents and injury to Pre-engagements, when those, we profess
to exceed, require in their Communion that it be thrice done. In like manner it
would look very strange in me to call a Church-care of circumspect walking up
to the religious Principles of the Society, that I have voluntarily embraced,
an imposing or over-driving of me.

But you object, Why must we go before Women, and why Women apart from Men?
This still, Friends, can be no Imposition, as is before expressed, because it
is no Matter of Faith, nor Practice of Worship, but a referring still to our
external Order of Life; And we say, Women as well as Men, because they are
concerned, for they are part of the Church of Christ; and the common Banus that
are published in Churches (so called) or Markets, exclude not Women to make
their Exception any more than Men. But why Women apart, say you? We think for a
very good reason; the Church increases, which increases the Business of the
Church, and Women, whose bashfulness will not permit them to say or do much as
to Church Affairs before the Men, when by themselves, may exercise their Gifts
of Wisdom and Understanding in a discreet care for their own Sex, at least;
which makes up not the least part of the Business of the Church, and this while
the Men are upon their proper business also. So that as Men and Women make up
the Church, Men and Women make up the business of the Church; and therefore it
is very reasonable they should be Helpers together, in doing the Church's
business. This way Women are made useful and serviceable in and to the Church,
as were the Holy Women of old, that were so much commanded by the Apostle, for
Deaconnesses indeed. And, as I said before, their businesses being hereby
distinct, two businesses are doing at one and the same time, and consequently,
there must needs be a greater dispatch; which in Country places, and Winter
Seasons, where Friends come Ten or Fifteen miles to Meetings, must needs be
very convenient and comfortable. I may add, that there are diverse things that
seem peculiar to Women, that were not fit for Men, and in which Men did and
would find themselves often at a loss, which renders their distinct Meetings
farther convenient.

These are the Reasons and Motives to the present Practice of the Church of
Christ, without enfringing Christian Liberty, by compelling Conscience to any
matter of Faith or Practice, relating to Worship; we meaning by our whole Order
and Government, no other thing than a careful Eye and Check upon Practice; an
Expediency against Irregularity in Conversation, whether toward them that are
without, or those that are within the same Communion, to which the strong will
submit for the sake of the weak.

My own sense upon this whole matter is, That a misapprehending the Intention
of the Brethren, and an undistinguishing zeal against Impositions on the one
hand, and a fear on the other side, that those who so mistook and misrendered,
the design of the Brethren, were either high-minded and unruly, or prone to
undue liberty, or that they not being the first promoters of this Discipline in
Government, detracted from them that were, and so would lessen the Credit and
Authority of their Endeavors, with such as were peculiar Favorers; and that,
in fine, their Dissent tended to the breach of Brotherly Love and Unity in the
Church. I say, my sense is, That this on each side, with the heats that
followed, perhaps much worse than the thing it self, gave life to the Division
that those that fear the Lord have truly mourned for. And since I have hinted
the Heats that may have attended the management of this Difference, be not
offended that I say, the Difference, through those Heats, is now more in Spirit
than Fact, in Mind than Matter: It is come in Fact to this; Whether the care of
Conversation should belong to Women as well as Men, especially relating to
their own Sex, the Women being so great a part of the Church: And over this, I
think, you are got for the most part. 2. Whether the Women may meet separately
from the Men? And for answer to this, be pleased to take notice of your own
unavoidable Concessions: You allow Meetings of Care in general, and do not deny
Women absolutely their share among the Men, and that particular Members must be
accountable to the Society they are of, in point of Conversation, according to
the Rules embraced by the said Society. I say, you own the end, you allow the
means, you referr the choice of your means to the Society, and you, as well as
we, expect a compliance with those Rules. Then the Question is, Whether infact
Women's meetings be a part of that Discipline the Church admits of? And it is
evident, that the Church of God does, generally speaking, receive and practice
it, with satisfaction and advantage. I would therefore beseech you, Friends, to
ponder in your minds, upon what a narrow point your Distance stands, and that
the main and tender point is allowed you, viz. Conscience is free, and
unconcerned in the Question; and the visible Ground of Distance being so small,
weigh with your selves by what has been, what may be the consequence of this
lamentable Breach.

I am as much for Liberty as any man; I ever was so, and hope I ever shall be
for it; but we must refer it to a proper Object, or we shall abuse what we do
so much prize, and pervert one of the greatest Privileges we can pretend to. I
do not mean, by the Liberty we are to resign to the Benefit of Society, That
which is private or personal; no, this does not enter into private or personal
Liberty, concerning which, the Apostles taught us to bear, and not offend one
another; as about Meats and Drinks: I may add Clothes, Houses, Trades, etc. so
as there be no Excess, for that is every where wrong: These things regard not
Society, but a man's self, and his private Liberty alone. What is it to the
Society, what or when I eat, what sort of Clothing I wear, or House I live in,
or Trade I will be of, so as Excess or Uncomeliness be avoided? This is still
in my own power, and many like things, hard to be numbered, about which Society
is not in the least concerned, nor in which any Member of it is interrupted, or
called in question. In the next place, we do also all agree, that Faith must
not be forced nor Worship constrained, for that grates upon Conscience, which
God only can effectually enlighten or rightly persuade. But that bears not upon
our Question, as I said before; for the compliance desired in it is about
Order, not Faith, and that not about Worship, but Conversation, in which if you
submit your Liberty, it is for the Good of Society, and you have the Returns of
in the Benefit and Comfort thereof. Do you serve or take care of others, that
before were free of that Engagement? Others also are tried by the same Rules,
to serve and be concerned for you, that formerly owed you no obligation; and if
you are under the Notice and Reproof of others, as to your personal Conduct,
they are equally under yours upon occasion; so that you lose nothing but what
you get, nor give nothing but what you receive again, and to a right Spirit and
a good Mind this mutual Service will appear reasonable, christian, and
requisite. And as in no Age the Resister and Gainsayers of Care and Order, in
any of the Lord's eminent Servants, have passed without the mark of God's
Rebuke; so those that have contested and opposed the Wisdom of God in his
faithful Servants, have ever failed of their Purpose, and been finally
manifested to have been lead by a wrong Spirit. And as observable it is, that
those by whom the Lord has eminently appeared, and who were the first
Instruments of his several Dispensations to the Sons of Men, have always
exercised that Authority among the People they have gathered, and have been
constantly preserved from falling away, though some or other have rise against
them with that clamor, as if they had set up themselves, and were gone from
what they taught or were, and took too much upon them. But, what have they all
come to? Read and Judge.

Nor was it ever heard of in the Dealings of GOD with the Sons of Men, that he
varied or changed his Dispensations in the Lifetime of the Instruments of any
of them, as some have been ready to imagine, nor yet in that Age in which he
has brought them forth: Which engages me to beseech you, in the Bowels of the
Love of Christ our only Root of Life and Light, and Love and Peace, that you be
like minded with your Friends and Brethren, and see that the Life and the
Fellowship of the Truth be preserved in the enjoyment and practice of
Fellowship; which will be, if the love of God, which first made us love one
another, be kept in, for that is a sovereign Antidote against all the Poison of
Discontent, evil Jealousy, and the Divisions that are wont to follow. And
instead of reproaching our Elders and Brethren, whom God has honored, and whom
we have honored, and could have laid down our Lives for, and who know nothing
by themselves, but that they are as true to the Lord, and in as good a
condition in the Truth as ever they were, and have done, and intended in what
they have done, as much the Benefit of the Lord's People I say, instead of
reproaching them with Usurping Authority, and taking too much upon them, let us
consider, that those whom we have received with so much reverent Love, and as
worthy of double Honor in the greater things, are not unworthy to be heard and
followed by us in lesser matters: Let us regard and value their Care, and love
them for it. So true is that Saying among Men, That is well spoken which is
well taken, that the Bent and Purpose of a Man's Spirit is that which gives the
Just reason of acceptance or rejection.

You have, dear Friends, judged too much after an outward appearance, and, you
may see, not truly there neither. Open therefore your Hearts, your Souls, and
Spirits, and taste with the divine sense of the tender and meek Truth, the aim
and end of Brethren: Herein be a little more truly free and universal in your
Minds, and you will perceive this Care has a large and a long Prospect for
Good. The due exercise of your spiritual Senses will answer all your
Objections, and satisfy every upright Soul among you; but if you look out,
mistake Liberty, mistake Imposition, mistake Formality, mistake the nature and
end of things, and the Intention of your ancient Friends and Brethren in them,
you will judge carnally, and be ready to think as it outward Rule and
Lordliness were aimed at, and a departing from the Truth, even whilst our Care,
in the sight of the Lord, is for the Honor of it, in reference to the young,
the weak, and such as may be careless, and ready to fall asleep; for such some
yet are, and such are yet like to be; and for their sakes a Discipline, as to
Conversation, must be, as well as that there are natural Infirmities, as
Sickness Age, etc. that unavoidably call for it. Nor did or can ever any
Community subsist without it; and the Heats, Prejudice, and Rents that have
arisen about the How or Manner of it, show the Opposition not to be right, nor
of a good tendency; the end of that Order, in the Minds and Hands of those from
whence we joyfully received the Testimony of the Truth, being the Glory of God,
and Good of his People, as a Primitive Christian Society.

To conclude; As this is not a Plea for Imposition nor Forms of Worship, but
Forms of Discipline, as to the Government and Behavior of our selves in our
Converse both with those that are without and those that are within, and that
there is no visible Communion or Society in this World of Bodies, but what is
subject to them, and must in some sort subsist by them; I beseech you, that we,
as becomes a reasonable and modest People, and as dear Children, may be of one
Heart, and one mind, and walk together as those that have been Partakers of one
Life, and that have drank into one Spirit; for, it is a comely thing to see
Brethren walk together in Love.

O Friends, let us labor against secret Animosities, watchings for Evil,
Detractation, the Sin that flung the Angels out of their Heavenly Station: Let
us see to our own Spirits, how they are, if meek, lowly, humble, tender, by
which the true and preserving Judgment is only known and felt; or, if not high,
fierce, hard, and prejudiced; for a man may come to lose a good frame of Spirit
upon very Trifles. It is not always what the Matter is the Dispute arises
upon, but how far the thing is espoused, and what place a man suffers it to
have in his Mind: If Jealousy, Reputation, Revenge, or Contradiction prevail,
Division must follow: Some are apt to resent things too soon, and carry it too
far, even to Obstinacy, through the Workings of the Evil One in a Mystery; so
that though the pretense of the Quarrel may be some Fact or other, yet that has
the least share oftentimes in the Difference, it being enflamed and increased
by the mysterious workings of the Spirit of Strife and Variance in the Mind,
according to an old Saying, The greatest Feuds oftentimes arise from the
slightest Causes. Let me beseech and prevail with you to read and weigh the
Bent and Force of the Apostle's Spirit in Romans 12. also 14. 19. and 15. 4, 5,
6. and especially 16. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 Verse. Likewise. 1 Cor. 14. 32, 33.
weighty places indeed. 2 Cor. 13. Ephesians. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. Phil. 3. 16, 17, 18.
chapter 4. 8, 9. Col. 3. 12, 14, 15, 16. 1 These. 5. 12, 13, 14. 2 These. 3. 4, 5, 6.
He often commands Order and Obedience to the Apostolic Tradition in this
Epistle, Tit. 1. 15. chapter 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Heb. 13. 1. And, 1 Pet. 4. 8.
All which exhort to Peace, Brotherly Kindness, to be of one mind, to study one
thing. O follow the things that make for Peace, and not to contend, dispute,
and strive one with another. A blessed Doctrine, and it has a blessed Reward.
The Lord God Almighty dispose your Minds, my Friends, to a tender returning
state, and frighten not your selves with Designs (of the Brethren) that have no
Being, but in Jealousy and Misapprehension: I beseech you, in the Lord, lay
down every Mark or Ensign of Difference or Separation, and behold our Arms as
open as ever, to receive you, and let your Heart be as our Heart, and then our
Meetings your Meetings: Let the Fear and Awe of the Lord, the becoming love of
his precious Truth, which is Christ in us, the Hope of our Glory, who gave
himself for us, to redeem us from the Enmity, Death, and Curse Disobedience had
laid us under, melt and cement us as one lump; Flesh of Flesh, and Bone of
Bone; so shall our Joy exceed our Sorrow, and Tears be wiped from our Eyes on
this occasion; and GOD our exceeding Great and Glorious Rewarder, be our Crown,
Portion, and Diadem for ever.

Yours, In and for the Truth, G. P.


