A DEFENSE OF THE Duke of Buckingham's BOOK OF RELIGION and WORSHIP, FROM THE
Exceptions of a Nameless AUTHOR. By the PENSILVANIAN.

Deceit is in the Heart of them that Imagine Evil; But to the Counselors of
Peace is Joy. Prove. 12. London, Printed for A. Banks, in the Year 1685.

To the READER.
IT pleased me so well to see any thing in Defense of RELIGION, under the Name
of the Duke of Buckingham, that I was quite of another mind to the Gentleman
that troubled himself with an Answer; And thought if he had said less to his
Point, it showed, to his greatest Honor, by his own Sense, the force of his
Convictions, and how little served him to the Belief of a Deity.

That so much Wit and Quality, that have made so great a Figure in the world,
should give this Onset to Atheism, that had so long stolen the Credit of both,
to giver her self Value with Men of Highest Rank, might have escaped a
Reprimand from the Deist or Christian; And This was enough to send the Atheist
a Challenge.

That his Discourse was not labored with Repetitious Thought, nor writ in the
Language of the Schools, is owing to his better genius, and more sensible
Education. It needs no Apology, and is its own Encomium; To be sure it is like
Himself, and That is an Original.

In this Evening of his Time, I heartily wish him the Felicity of living the
irreprovable Life of his Admired Instinct, especially, since be Believes it is
not out of his Power, and that such extraordinary Rewards follow it. And This
will add a Demonstration to his Probabilities for Religion.

I would then press the Nobility and Gentry of England, to the Imitation of so
Illustrious an Example, and that those Virtues might be recovered, that once
made the Discipline of their Ancestors so much the Honor of their King, the
Safety of their Country, and the just Fear and Admiration of all Foreigners.

For the Person that undertook to Answer the Dukes Discourse, in my Opinion, he
has, with the Duke, abused his Time; As all do, that, Mistake. Write loosely,
beg the Question, pervert the Sense; And, to Crown their Work, Contradict
themselves.

Hear the Noble Peer this Friendship, and his Essay may Challenge it for a
Duty: But I am particularly Interested in a Reply, by a Reflection the Author
gives me in his Answer. 'Twere Justice to vindicate a less Man, when assaulted
in my Name. But there is another Reason; His Arguments were too low an
Entertainment for the Duke, and therefore fit for a man of my inferior Talents.
While I Reprehend his Performance, I must not be too confident in my own,
especially when I have not his Six Hours Haste to offer in excuse of my self;
For, to my Dullness I must own, it has cost me the best part of Six Days, and
therefore time for me to rest. Such as it is, Friendly Reader, Take, Read, and
Judge. I am no Sceptick, for I believe what I Write. If I err, I am to be
informed: The way, must be Reason, as it is with all reasonable Men, and as I
profess my self such, so from them I expect, the Mercy that all Men need, and
desire, when it comes to their turn to be where I am, I mean, upon the Stage of
Censure, Farewell,

Just Reader, Thine of long standing, W.P.

A DEFENSE, etc.
HIs first Paragraph contains his wonder, that the D. should espouse the Cause
of Whiggism in her old age, when a cast Mistress, and scorned of all. And all
that know the D^ humor, would wonder too, if the thing were true; and if not,
the wonder turns upon the man's Confidence. It has been the D's fault to love
fresher game; But This is as much below his Wit, as the other against his
Inclination. But if the story could be true, I am not of the Answerer's mind;
it was not his Pity but Policy to entertain her; perhaps, to know the secrets
of his Great Peer, p. 1. for so Cecil served Essex.

But what is Whiggism? He tells us very briefly; it is Tolleration and
Persecution; and that these Qualities made her so amiable to the Associating
Lords. How this affects the D. that was not of their knot, is un-accountable,
and how those Lds. loved the persecuting part of her, is as hard to understand;
unless he means it of the Exclusion, and prosecution of the Popish Plot; and if
that be it, He does ill to rail at the Romans Cath. and their Religion too, p.
15.21. as able to ruin the whole Earth, and lay the foundation of eternal
mischiefs to mankind. But if Tolleration be a part of Whiggism, it may touch
the D. in general: Only in this the man is mistaken, she came not last to his
hands* he was the first of all the Peers of England that had her: And his
credit be it spoken, in This he is constant, and more the same George D. of B.
than this Author fancies him, p. 8.

But must the D's Book of the weightiest matters; be disgraced with Whiggism?
Is it Whiggish to assert a God, his Providence o^ the world, the Immortality of
the Soul, the Duty of Divine Adoration, Freedom of our Wills from Absolute
Predestination, the Unreasonableness of one man's forceing another man's
Conscience in Religion, the necessity of good Works, and Rewards and
Punishments*

Must so Noble a Design be blasted with so odious a Name? And his Essay Branded
without Distinction? Don't we all know that the State Dissenter was esteemed
the Whig, and the great Offense of Whiggism the Interruption of the Line? Which
must be the Persecuting part of Whiggism in this man's account, or none, And can
the Duke be guilty of this, for writing a Discourse against Persecution of any
Body for Religion? If Indulgence be Whiggism, let him remember who it was that
lately wanted it. And if Persecution be Whiggism too, who it is that he makes
Whiggs now: Himself a great one to be sure, page 28, 29, and 30. In the mean
time, the Duke of Buckingham it seems, Has entered the Lists, is become a
Champion, and a Glorious Protector of Whiggism, alias, Toleration of Dissenting
Christians; A greater Honor, I think he could hardly have done him: And in
this I am of his mind.

His second Paragraph begins with a question every body may Answer, to wit, If
it was not boldly done of him to Answer a Peer of his High Rank, page 2. And
for my part, I think so, and something worse; considering the Abuse, Slightness,
Untruth and Contradiction with which he has performed it. For the Duke cannot
think it ill done of him to Answer, but to Answer ill, no body can think well
done, and that is his Case*

But to fight this Noble Peer with Success, he unhappily tells us, He has armed
himself with an Invulnerable Conscience; And I am afraid so, because he shows
himself Insensible of his Injustice and Indecency to a Peer, that himself says,
Is of the Highest Rate, in the beginning of his Answer, and flies to the Penal
Laws to support himself at the latter end of it.

But he would have us believe, His Nature and Education are more soft and
obliging; and if we may trust him, it is pity his Religion should have spoiled
him, or that a man should be the worse for that which should have made him
better.

He says, Though in approaching so near his Grace, he cannot be procul a Jove,
he will be sure to be procul a Fulmine. This I presume was to pass for Wit, but
he is somewhat unlucky in it, and either jeers the Duke, or Himself; For this
is to tell us the Dukes Arguments have no force; or if they have, he has wit
enough to keep out of their way. I might add a third, perhaps he presumes upon
his Goodness, which I perceive is more then Jupiter himself must hope for in
some Countries, from the Malitia of the Pulpit. But now I think of it, who
knows but he meant Scandalum Magnatum, and that by concealing his Name, he
should escape the Thunderbolt; least that might happen to turn the Wine of his
Hopes into the Vinegar of Despairs; his own sweet Metaphor.

He ends this Paragraph p. 4. with be*speaking his own Impunity, And professing
a profound Veneration for his Graces High Character. He more than once labors
to persuade the Duke to let him abuse him Gratis: To be sure, I shall not oppose
the Charity, but advise him to prove himself the better Christian by exercising
it. But methinks it shows the man's Fear, and That, his Guilt, as his Hope, the
Dukes Goodness, and his diffidence in the Invulnerableness of his own
Conscience. He would have something else to trust too.

It is an odd thing to bespeak a man's Sanctuary where he intends the wrong, and
presume upon the Goodness of the Person to abuse him safely. He profoundly
respects the Duke, and yet makes him to keep, and be the Champion of Whiggism;
and then too, When every Body else for fear or shame has forsaken her. I will
end with this, That he that Intitles a Man to the Sin, does his best to Entitle
him to the Punishment too: Which in my Judgment shows a wild and an ill
Conscience in the Answerer.

His third Paragraph p. 4. Declares, His own belief is unavoidable, and his
Book, That they that don't avoid their own beliefs, to believe as he believes,
are justly punishable; and why? Because he believes as the Church believes,
that is by Law Established. Here Is the reason of his Creed: And they that offer
to have any better, are dangerous to the Government, p. 19, 22, and 23. I think
I don't wrong him with Consequences; the places import as much. There is little
else in this Paragraph, but that he has a mind to show his Affectation and
Ignorence of French, by Opinionatre, instead of Opiniatrele, and cautions us to
take head of him, for he does not know, But he may be Mad before he has done,
at least freakish and unruly. He would place it to the Infection of the Dukes
Wit; but his Book proves he has escaped the Contagion.

But in his fourth Paragraph, p. 5, and 6. It wants, Temperamentum ad pondus.
If so, it shows the man Lightheaded; for that which has pondus, will not be
taken with that which has none. All true Wit has weight; for Wit is an apt and
strong expression of a thing, such as strikes our Understanding Truly and
Lively. I should take his Praise and Pleasure to be the best Argument in his
Book against the Duke, but that they are Dissembled. It Is a kind of a Civil way
of taking leave, to be Rude, (all Abuse is such:) For to tell us, of his Graces
Facetious Pen, taking Air, Pleasant and Wity Reasonings; In fine, The Tarantula
of his Paper (which is a Fly, that makes Folks Dance and Caper,) as if the Duke
had written a Farce, is Idle. It may be the Encomium of a Play, but it makes an
ill Character for a Religious Essay.

But this sticks in his Stomach too, That Noble Cavaliers should trouble their
Heads with Religion; And who knows but he has reason, for 'twere the way to
make Chaplains necessarily Learned, or unnecessary and useless to their
Masters. He wonders as much at Noble Cavaliers writing of Religion, as to see a
Blew Apron Knight correcting Euclids Elements. And yet I think they use to wear
Green ones that Teach them. I thought he would allow it to Nobles after
Mechanics; But this shows he is of the Tribe of --, and has no Charity for
those that han't enough to believe in Verbum Ministri. I expect in the next
Book, the Gentleman will plead his Charter against such Interlopers. But the
Duke hates Ingrocers, and is too Old to mend: It Is Labor lost; He is and will
be the same D. of Buckingham he was forty years ago, in the Point
Controverted. Arguments drawn from Selfish Topics and Private Interests, move
slowly with men of large and Generous Minds.

This is worse by half then Praying in Latin* (which he is against, p. 15*) if
I were to be Judge; For men may learn that, but our Nobility must not meddle in
Religion, though it seems They helped to make ^is. However, he graciously allows
this Noble Peers Notions to be fine, and many of them Natural and True, yet in
a breath His ^onceptions are greatly to the Disadvantage of Religion, And why?
Because the Duke (poor man) had not attended their Consequences; which, of
things Natural and True, I had always thought there had been no danger.

He concludes with a Story of an Airy Gentleman of his Acquaintance (for he is
of that Element) that being pressed with the Consequences of his odd Opinions,
would cry, A Pox upon Consequences, I hate these Consequences: Who the Story
belongs to, the Reader must judge: But if the Answerer be not more Inconsequent
then the Duke; I will share in the Blame, that for all him, had no share in the
fault.

In his next Period page 6, 7. he looks like a man of the White Apron; and I
think it as Lawful for a Blew one to talk of Euclids Elements, as for that to
meddle with Religion; and of the two, that spots least: He says, He will not
read us an Anatomical Lecture upon his Graces Paper, nor curiously dissect
every Nerve and Muscle. This is be like to excuse both his Skill and
Courseness; he was for shorter work, though it savored somewhat more of the
Butcher. From hence he shifts Callings and turns Cook, Cousen-german to
the other; and without so much as washing his Hands, falls to talk of Hashing of
Books, and serving them up with Limon and Anchovies. Men use the Metaphors of
their Calling and Genius; but he shows ill Judgment: For an Ass in a Chair were
as true Painting, as this Wit: That Sauce in my Opinion had done much better
with a Calves-Head. And now he Promises us his matter in a lump, and to say
true, it looks as if it came out of the Mine of Confusion, Gross enough.

He first salutes the Dukes Method to confute the Atheist, p. 8. and will not
have the Mutation of things in the World a reason against the Eternity of it,
no more than the Dukes to render him not the same George Duke of Buckingham he
was forty year ago. But in this the Gentleman is short, and beside the Cushion:
For though I fancy the Duke would say him many kind things to be the same he
was forty years ago, yet because he is the same Personality under mutations; to
conclude, the World may be Eternal notwithstanding its proper Revolutions, is a
mighty Non-sequitur. For it is to say, because a thing is, it must always be. I
should rather think, that because the Duke is a Being of time, and once was
not, and again will not be that George D. of Buckingham he is, and therefore he
suffers those mutations, we see him under: It is a good Argument, that the
Revolutions we daily see the World subject to, makes it, at least probable,
that it is a Being of Time, that once was not, and again will not be the World
it is.

In Truth, there is no Parity in his allution, and therefore his Argument is
fallacious; for how does this follow, that the World may be Eternal for all its
Changes, because George D. of B. is the same he was forty years since,
notwithstanding his Bodily Mutations. I must return him his Complement, which
he, with less reason makes the Duke, that his Argum^nt is not too Logical. A
thing's being the same, does not necessarily conclude it never had a beginning,
and to be sure its Mutation, be it but of Accidents only, does not make its
Eternity more credible.

If the Duke were Eternal, for all his Change, it were a good Argument that the
World might be so too, under all its Revolutions; But that the Dukes being that
Individual he was forty years ago, for all his Mutations of Body, should prove
the World Eternal, notwithstanding the changes of it, is as un-accountable as
his poison of Wit, p. 4.

I take it to be a better way of Arguing, that if the Duke was Born, grows old,
and must die, though He be the same D. of B. he was forty years ago, the World,
that feeds him, had a beginning, grows old, and will have an end, though it be
the same in nature that it was five thousand years ago. And of this the daily
mutation we see it subject to, are almost a Demonstration.

For all the Productions of the World Die, and all that are nourished of it
End: It can neither give nor feed a life beyond Time. And that it self should
yet be Immortal, that neither makes nor keeps any thing else so, is against
that parity of Reason, which we observe about all other things, and cannot
refuse here. All Productions are of the nature of the thing Producing: And though
it may reasonably be ordained by some Superior Being, to entertain and nourish
many Generations of Mankind, it is Incomprehensible that it Self should be
Eternal, whose Nature and Powers we see so short and finite by the Revolutions
and Mortality of the Creatures they exert and feed. Plain it is, upon our
notion of Creation, this Dilemma vanishes, but upon Production, it will remain.

If it should be objected: But the World out lives Man, and the Creatures it
produces; and if the absurdity of the World's being Eternal, is taken from its
Productions not being like it Self, why does not the World, such as it is,
produce or feed a life as durable as its own? I answer, that it differs
mightily, Men beget lives longer and shorter than their own, are they not
therefore Mortal? or did they not beget them? It is one thing to talk of Mortal
Production out of an Eternal Being, and another thing to say that a Temporal
Being should produce or nourish another less durable than it self: Besides, the
Objection granting the Question of the In-eternity of the World, it is easy to
conceive that the Supreme Agent, whose Wisdom and Power made it, contrived that
excellent Fabric, House or Stage of Life, more durable than that of any Man or
Age, to entertain so many Generations of Mankind, as he designed to inhabit and
subsist in it. It lies much in the Frame and Constitution of the Subject. Men
make Clocks that go a Week, a Month, a Year, Seven years, and are out-liv^d by
the works of their own hands. They may allow it to those of the Supreem Agent
to survive them, without the necessity of their being Eternal.

But, Argumentum ad hominem, the World cannot to him be mutable and Eternal;
For it is plain, that he allows Impassibility (which he knows, with
Philosophers, takes with it immutability) to be an Atribute of God, and that
God only is Eternal, p. 9. Now I cannot apprehend why he refuses Mutability to
be an Argument against Eternity, or how the World may be Eternal though Mutable,
when he argues that God is only Impassible or Immutable, because he is Eternal.
Let him have a care of his Airy Gentleman's Fate, p. 6. And yet if he be as much
a School-man as he would have us believe, he must know that the Argument the
Duke has advanced against the Athiests, is Celebrated by the Schools. And though
the Apostles Testimony is a begging of the question to an Athiest, it is
doubtless Orthodox with this Person; and he tells us, That the things that are
seen, are Temporal, and the fashion of this World passes away.

But for all this he fancies the Duke has done little, and that he could do
wonders against the Athiest, and therefore, If he were to discourse him, he
would press him with this Dilemma. If the World be Eternal, it must be the
cause of its own existence, p. 9. And this he urges without mercy upon his
Athiest, and runs through all the Consequences of it, with as much confidence
and vanity as if he had first obliged the World with the knowledge of the
secret; and when all is done, it is better said by the Duke, and with less
exception, in the main question, p. 5. And to say true, it grows upon every
Common in the Country. But with his leave, I take the Dukes Argument of the
In-eternity of the World, from the Mutability of it, to be much the better of
the two; for the absurbity of any thing being the Cause or Effect of its own
existence, which this man says is the consequence of the Worlds being Eternal,
being perhaps as applicable to one Eternal as another, is no credit to his
better way of Discoursing an Athiest, and proving a Deity. For a thing to be
the Cause or Effect of it self, is, in my poor Opinion, not too Logical and I
am afraid, too near a Kin to Nonsense. His making the Duke to hint at nothing
else in proof of a God, is dis-ingenious; for there is one thing mentioned, he
takes no notice of, p. 5. For, says the Duke, Whether the World has been
Created out of nothing is not material to our purpose, because if a Supreme
Intelligent Agent, has framed the World to be what it is, and has made us to be
what we are, we ought as much to stand in awe of it, as if it had made both Us
and the World out of nothing. Which plainly imports thus much; That though the
matter of the World were Eternal, that Being whose Wisdom and Power, disposed
and framed it into the Glorious and Regular thing we all see it is, show him to
be what we call God, and Us that we should fear Him; which is best done by a
sober and regular life, because that is most suitable to the Law of our Nature,
and consequently the mind of the great Workman.

The Built and Skill then of the World, thus proving the Supreme Intelligence,
and at the same time, that he is the object of the Adoration of his Creatures,
we are naturally brought to the Dukes next point, too weakly opposed by his
unweary Answerer, viz. That Man only of all other Creatures, having had
conceptions, at least suspicions of a Deity and another World; It is probable
there is something nearer a Kin to the Nature of God in Man, than in any other
Animal whatsoever, and that Instinct of a Deity ought to be our Guide and
Director in choosing the best way for our Religious Worship of God. This is the
passage the Gentleman falls upon, and tells us p. 11, 12. That that is as fair
a Plea for the Alcoron; as the New Testament for Pythagoras's Golden Verses, as
St. Paul's Epistles. But which way, he leaves us to guess? And yet we shall not
guess to say that Pythagoras's Golden Verses are much nearer a Kin to St.
Paul's Epistles, than the Alcoron to the New Testament. For the one has great
and excellent Truths, without Imposture; the other not. And though less Nobly
descended, and of inferior Authority, so far as they are right, it is no
dishonor to St. Paul's Epistles, that Pythagoras writ Truth, nor to the
Instinct that his Verses are so far approved by it. And if this Gentleman would
but allow the Duke the Law, which is yet less than the courtesy of the Learned,
he knows how Fruitful the Doctrine of Idea's is to the defense of the Dukes
Instinct.

To say true, it were enough to refer the Reader to the Dukes Paper, and that
of his Answerer. The natural, plain, and easy Deduction of the one from p. 11.
to p. 19. the Dis-ingenious Citation, Pervertion and confusion of the other
throughout, will make him think I might have spared my self the pains of
following him here. But that it may appear, beyond all doubt, let us hear him
at large how well he grounds his Exceptions.

He says, if he be not mistaken, (and that is modestly conditioned,) his Grace
must mean Humane Reason, not regulated by any Public and Politic Reason of a
Community, but as every private Man's Reason dictates to him. And that then the
Duke has this Consequence, That it is one of the greatest crimes a Man can be
guilty of, to force us to act or sin against that Instinct of Religion, and
something Akin to the Sin against the H. Ghost. For this Doctrine, thus hash'd
and dressed by himself, he is angry with me; And but that his Grace is no Minor,
he should suspect the Pensilvanian had Tutored him with his Quakeristical
Doctrine; Mighty civil to the Duke, and very just to Me. I am sorry the Duke
pays so dear for my acquaintance, and that I cannot have the Honor to have
such a Pupil without a Jeer upon His. The Man might have named me plainer if he
had pleased, without fear of the fatal and murdering blow of Scandalum
Magnatum, though not without great Scandal. But in this we are both Debtors to
his singular Goodness, that whosoever got the Child, he resolves to be Gossip;
and for that purpose has provided four Names, which are these four ensuing
Consequences.

First, that Reason is the Sole guide of every Man's Religion, though neither
Sole nor Reason are any terms of the Duke's Doctrine, and that the D. excuses
the omission of Scripture because of the qualifications of the Men his
Discourse was designed too, that he might come close to their own Natures and
not beg the Question. But in its due place he recommends Christanity as the
best Religion, p. 18. and then to be sure he cannot neglect the Scripture.

His Second consequence he pins upon the Duke, is as just as the former. That
Divine Revelation is not necessary to Salvation; when it is evidently the
meaning of that part of the Duke's Discourse, that People use the Light that
God has given them to choose themselves a Religion by, and recommends the
Christian for the best. Is it the way to deny revealed Religion to press men to
choose, with the best Skill they have, the Christian, that is the truest
Revelation. Certainly this Man must be beside himself a little, or He could
hardly be so much beside the matter.

His Third Consequence is yet more dis-ingenious than the other; for he makes
the Duke to say, That it is a most horrid Sin to lead Men out of the Errors
Natural Religion, and bare Reason of necessity lead Men's to, whose very Essay
was on purpose to lead Natural Men by the way of first Principles to embrace
revealed Religion. But is it, in good earnest* a Sin to lead Men out of
Errors, because it is a Sin to force Men against their Consciences? what Man
can have a happier Tallent than this: The very gift of Consequences. To shift
Force for Lead, and Conscience for Error, shows His to be invulnerable with a
Witness. In one he forges, and begs the Question in the other: No Man could be
more dextrous at it: doubtless he will in a while be as much out of humor with
Consequences, as his Airy Gallant; for no Man can make worse. I must not
persuade a Man, because I must not F^^ce him; I must not Lead a Man, because I
must not drag and whip him; In fine, I must not Inform a Man, because I must
not knock him on the head. If this be the Gentleman's Leading. I shall have a
care how I take him for a Guide. There Is a sort of Men, whose Mercies are
Cruelties, and who with all their pretense to Revealed Religion, have not the
Justice and Mercy of a poor benighted Pagan.

His Last Consequence he draws from the Duke's Position and Deductions, is
this, That Men who believe a God, and follow the Dictates of Reason in his
Worship, may be Saved in any, in all Religions, provided they know no better.

But how this Consequence can with any Justice be charged upon the Duke, that
so expressly, p. 18. prefers the Christian Religion, is past my Skill. For
unless he will make the Duke, to say that no Religion is necessary to
Salvation, when he writes to persuade People to have one, he must confess he
makes the Christian to be It, because he recommends That to our Belief and
Practice; confirming it to himself from the agreeableness of its Doctrine with
what he is prompted by his Pious Instinct to believe to be true. Can a Man then
say with any Conscience that is Just, that the D. of B. thinks Men may be Saved
in any and in all Religions, when he first, makes Religion necessary, and then
tells us that in his Conscience he believes the Christian to be the true: As if
his business had been to Profane, and not advance the True Religion.

And I cannot but wonder how this wild conception came in his head, so
disagreeable to the Duke's Reason, Instinct and Deductions. If he had said, in
any, or all Persuasions, he had Magnified the Duke's Charity, with this
distinction, that Men of Sincerity in all Persuasions may be Saved, and not
that Men may shift Persuasions for Interest, and yet go to Heaven: though if it
were so, perhaps this Doctor might have the better of the two by the Notion;
Hypocrisy being none of the Dukes Vice. But to say that men may be Saved in
any, or in all Religions, is somewhat harsh upon the Duke; and yet if in all
these Religions, a Man must be, a Man that believes in God, and lives
Virtuously, and in modes of Worship, knows no better, then the Tradition of his
Fathers, it is hard to Damn him; And this Gentleman must produce better
Authorties for his Severity, before it will have credit with Men of Sense and
Bowels,

Now though this does not touch the Dukes Discourse any more then his Charity,
to admit that a Dissenter, a Roman Catholic, a Jew, a Turk, an Indian may be
saved, let us see how well it may be supported. St. Peter seems to have been of
this Man's mind in the Preamble to the Story of Cornelius, Act. 10. till better
taught: and who knows what this man may be in time. Of a truth I perceive (says
Peter) that God is no respecter of Persons, but in every Nation he that fears
him, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him. This was a Gentile, a
Roman, neither Jew nor Christian, yet Devout, a Just man, one Fearing God; And
as such, with all, of all Nations of the same Quality, declared by this great
Apostle, accepted with God: So that it seems here is (greatly doubtless against
this Gentleman's mind) some acceptance for the poor Men of the Dukes Instinct.
Well, but let us suppose them to be Comparatively Benighted, was not Cornelius
so too? Yet we see the consequence, He was accepted as he was; and why, but
because sincere, and he knew no better? He stood the fairer for revealed
Religion; this prepared him for it: Nay, we are told by the same unquestionable
Authority, That in the times of Ignorance, God winked. And such to be sure he
thinks theirs are, and I think are like to be, for all him: For if I mistake
not, the man is for the Promise at Home, let what will betide them Abroad. If
he can but sit under his Own Vine here, let the Rore, the Devil take the Turk
and all the rest for him. Extraordinary Itinerary Calls are ceased; for there is
extraordinary Pains and Perils in the case, and though he may love Souls well,
yet who shall Pay him.

Well, but if God Winks at the Ignorant, must this Man be so prying? And if the
Judge of the whole Earth will not be strict, Ought He to turn Inquisitor? Or
must it be an heinous Error because He says it, That Men that Fear God, and
follow the Dictates of Reason in any Religion, and know no better, may be
Saved? Most unjust then is his Clamor, against the Divinity of Calvinists, as
Inhumane, p. 4. That Damns men, p. 13. for not being better than they know how
to be.

But the Man builds the things he destroys; For he more than any body believes
one of these three things; First, That there is no such thing as Salvation, or
that men may be Saved in the Religion as it is by Law Established in all
Countries, Or that men are bound to submit to the Religion Established by Law,
let the Issue in the other World be what it will: For that Power he gives
absolutely into the Magistrates Hand; And who can be Judge upon him? The
English of all which I take to be this, that men may be of any or all
Religions, but not in the same Country, for fear of Suffering for it; but, cum
furis Romae Romano vivete more. One after another, at Rome a Papist, at London
a Protestant, at Constantinople a Mohammedan. This Principle, so naturally his
own, is the consequence of his Malice upon the Duke; for he would have the D's
deduction of the Reasonableness of Men's choosing their Religion by the
direction of that which in themselves is nearest akin to the Nature of God, to
imply, that for all that, Men may be of any, and of all Religions; a pretty way
to shift with all Winds, and Sail the Compass round: But in this he has more
than avenged the Dukes quarrel upon himself; for he cannot make himself more
ridiculous then in attempting to make the Duke so unreasonable.

And he is just as fair to Reason as he has been to the Duke. For if he says
true, A man may follow the Dictates of it, and be of all Religions too: Such a
Gipsy is Reason with him. And if you ask him, why Reason is so prostitute a
thing, that nothing comes amiss to her; His Answer is extraordinary, For (says
he) it can never lead men to the knowledge of the Belief of a Trinity, the
Incarnation, Death, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, or Divinity of Christ.
Ergo what? Ergo, It will bow to any else, though it be never so Idle and
Extravagant. Is not this sad work for a Doctor.

But if the Dictates of Reason will fall in with any Religion, they may embrace
the Christian as well as another, and then he is gone again. He will certainly
hate Consequences too, when he has but thought of his own, that so inevitably
attended his Conceptions to the disadvantage of Religion. But the Dukes
Instinct, or that which God has placed in our Hearts, so near akin to the
Nature of God, he says, must be Reason, and that Reason he makes an arrant
Strumpet; for he assures us, She is a Prolifick Parent of Idolatry,
Superstition, Will Worship, and a thousand Absurdities more in Religion, and
quotes All Times, Places, and Ages for proof, p. 14. But as it happens, names
not one of them to the point asserted.

Now the little skill I have in Books, tells me quite other things to the Tale
of this Answerer: That Superstition and Idolatry are the most Unreasonable
things in the World, that They could never Bribe Her in any Time, and till
Sensuality had Darkened and Over-laid Men's Reason, It was impossible for
Superstition and Idolatry to obtain that Empire, that in Prejudice of Reason,
they have at any time got upon the belief of any part of Mankind. And if we
will be just to Ethnic Ages, we find men among them of extraordinary Light;
That, As having no Law, became a Law unto themselves, and that were of the
Uncircumcision that kept the Law, as the Apostle of the Gentiles speaks. Such
was Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, Socrates, Plato, Xenocrates, Plotin, Antipater,
Zeno, Epicteius, Seneca, Plutarch, Cato, Cicero and others. And to be free with
the Dukes Undertaker, I take old Plutarch to be much a better Christian, who
calls this Instinct, The everlasting foundation of Virtue. A Law written, not
in Pillars of Wood or Stone, but in the Hearts of men. But that he may meet
with some Rebuke; for much is owing him on this account; I shall take upon me
to examine his Imputations, be it upon this Instinct, or be that, Reason, I
will not quarrel the word.

I do say then, that He must either deny that God has placed any such thing in
man, to distinguish him from other Animals; or if that be true, He is to choose
his Religion without consulting it. If the first, he makes us all Beasts and
himself an Atheist; if the last, our Religion is in*evident, we know not what,
for we are not to take the Judgment of the Divine Gift in our Election: What a
Religion must that be? If his Argument were true, here would be indeed as fair
a Plea for the Alcoran as the New Testament. But it were Blasphemous so to
speak of the Dukes Instinct For it is that Notion of God which is innate, and
as it were congeneal to Us: We bring it with us into the World. The peculiar
Seal and Mark of Divinity: A kind of counter*part of himself in Man; his
Picture in little: The Attributes that are Infinite in Him, being here
Epitomized and Resembled in Man, that by It He may have a right knowledge of
his Cretor, and sense of his Duty. Antiquity offers a cloud of Witnesses both
Pagan and Christian. Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus and Origin exceed. But
the opposition is too mean to draw out so great an Artillery; It will be time
enough when a greater force appears to assault so venerable a Truth: And in the
mean time I will attend him in his Exceptions, such as they are. But perhaps he
will excuse himself, because he does not certainly know what the Duke means by
that part of Us which is nearest a kin to the Nature of God. For he says. If he
be not mistaken, it must be Reason. But if I be not mistaken, he had better
have known first, and not have drawn positive Conclusions from doubted
Premises. But suppose the Duke understands Reason by that Instinct, rather
than a Divine Gift to guide our Reason and Understanding; will Reason plead the
cause of the Alcoran as soon as that of the New Testament? What has God done
then to make us Reasonable? I had thought that the New Testament had been a
more reasonable Book, and that God Almighty had not made Man so deceivable a
Creature, or framed him with such false Intellects; and submitted him to such
dangerous Errors. And though he might have made him Feeble, yet not so
squint-eyed or tender-sighted that he could not see straight, or tell colors,
or distinguish an Alcoran from the New Testament.

I pray, is the Alcoran as credible as Christ's Sermons upon the Mount, to the
Multitude, to his Disciples? Wherein we find the most excellent Morality,
Piety, and Purity of Discipline; so suitable to our Understandings, that they
seem to answer the Perfection of Reason? I know he will tell us he means it of
Revealed Religion, as he does, p. 13. Reason (says he) can never lead us to the
knowledge of the belief of the Trinity, Resurrection, Ascension, or Divinity of
the Son of God. To be led to the knowledge of the belief of any thing, is odly
said; but let it pass: However, there is a difference between Miracles and
Fables; Arrant Poperies and Fictions; so ill counterfeited too, that a man of
small sight must needs discern them.

Tradition, and prejudiced Education indeed give credit often to such things;
but Reason does not choose, but is overborn: Besides, we have as good Authority
for our Saviors Miracles, as for any thing we did not see: Of Mahomets we have
not the like; And this is further to be said, if Reason cannot work them, it
never opposed them: On the contrary, it leads us to believe them, and Revealed
Religion for their sakes; For a man must be a Hogg to oppose himself to so
overcoming an Evidence, in lieu of a man that is led by Reason.

It seems to me as if this Gentleman dare not venture his Religion with Reason,
that opposes Reason to Religion. The New Testament is so far from refusing
Reason any share in our Christianity, that it is made a Duty to us to give a
Reason of our Christian Hope, 1 Pet. 3.15. And it were absurd to give a Reason
for that which a man Receives without Reason, and is impossible to Receive by
it, or for Reason to apprehend; and if it could, it judges so ill, that it will
as soon prostrate it self to the Alcoran as to the New Testament.

But this is not all the Dukes fault, perhaps he would go a great way to yield
him his point, if he did but mean Political Reason, or Reason regulated by a
Community. This he explains, p. 19. For his Community is the Government: But
had not this been a fine Receipt to keep Christianity out of all Countries? For
had this reason of Community prevailed, there had been neither Christians nor
Protestants. Without Racking a Syllable of his excellent Argument; I think I
may say, it pleads as much for the Alcoran as the New Testament, and more in
Turkey; For if the Political Reason of the Community of a Country is still to
conclude those that dwell in it; Turks, must be Turks, Infidels, must be
Infidels, Idolators, must be Idolators still: In which also I perceive he is a
Republican, after all his Railing at Commonwealths-men: for the Community over
all Causes, with him, Judges. I don't know but it may run as far as Exclusion
too: To be sure it would, if all had agreed; for all measures of Right or
Wrong, True or False, are by my Man humbly submitted to the Political Reason of
the Community; What is this but to say; that every Religion is best where it is
Established, though the most disagreeing among themselves, and any or all of
them with the True?

Nor is this the extent of the Dukes Error, He is not only for Reason, guiding
and choosing, but he would have every private man's Reason Dictate for himself.
This is a Pestiferous Doctrine in the Answerers account; and yet should a man
choose without himself, for himself, he must certainly be beside himself. Who
should choose for a man but himself, if he must answer for himself? It would
certainly be most unreasonable to judge a man for a thing he is not allowed the
liberty of his choice in: Nor do I think a man can have any Reason to render
for his Religion, that receives his Religion without the suffrage of his own
Reason.

Has our Bodies Eyes, and our Souls none? Shall our Temporal part act upon
sight, and our Eternal upon Trust, and That not of God, but of Man? That when
the poor Labourer will be Judge of his pay, and not trust his very Minister
about the currentness of a Groat, we should be left without distinction about
that Treasure, which is of Eternal moment to us: Surely then, Understandings
are of no use in Heaven: But I know not how to believe it. To be a Child in
Malice is excellent; But under favor, in Understanding, not. To trust out our
Souls upon Humane Say-so's, is to go into Coats again; And to be sure, a
Child's Coat, is a Fools, upon a man's Back. Let them wear Bibs that Slabber, and
the Blind follow the Dog and the Bell. In Religion, Authority concludes Minors;
but Conviction determines Men.

That this Gentleman should pretend to Protestancy, and rail at a man's Judging
for himself, is absurd. If the reason of the Community must guide, let him not
be so angry with the Romanists for saying, Believe as the Church Believes; when
he says, Believe as the State requires: The one presses Conformity as by the
Catholic Church Established; the other cries as by Law Established; A Doctrine
Calculated to all Meridians.

I fear he grants too much for the quarrel, but let Him look to that: For the
one pre-supposes the Holy Ghost to conduct, to justify the determination; The
other scorns her words, but will not bate one jot of Conformity. I shall only tell
him, that taking the Translation of the Bible to have been an Appeal to the
People, made by the first Reformers, against the Church they Dissented from; If
as this Man suggests the English of reading it now, be, that we must not make
any Judgment to our selves of what we read, the Appeal cannot be determined,
and our Case is not mended; On the contrary, it is made a Temptation of Trouble
and Mischief to Us: For, whereas the Inspired Doctor tells us, that in
Religious matters, We are to be persuaded in our own Minds That they commended
Themselves and Doctrines to men's Consciences, so making Them Judges for
Themselves. That Conscience Accuses and Excuses, ay, our own Hearts, that all
are to walk as they have Received, and not usurp a Judging Power over our
fellow Christians Faith or Liberty; We are told now, that all our Faith and
Worship must be submitted to the Political reason of the Community, we are of,
hit or miss. I take this to be leaping blind fold into the other World in matters
of Salvation.

But it may be, he will tell me, that he has nothing to say against Reason
considered in its Purity, and un-deprav'd, only, That it cannot lead us to the
knowledge of Revealed Religion; and he says as much, p. 13. But this will not
do, or else do worse then before; For if by Reason he means a Reasonable
Capacity, he does not mean as the Duke means, and says, and then he is mistaken
indeed in what his Grace calls that part of us that is nearest a kin to the
Nature of God, to wit, His Instinct in Us, and is understood by this Noble Peer
to be the Guide and Director of our Understandings in our choice, and, which
gives the Rectitude and true Judgment.

On the other hand, if he understands Reason abstractly, and as the Principle
it self; It can no more be depraved, then the Sun darkn'd by the Mists and
Vapors of the Earth. And truly it is just as reasonable to accuse the Law of
Moses with the Death of our Savior, and the Gospel with the Errors and
Impieties of Christians, as to charge to the account of Reason all the ill
things, that men pretending to it, have committed. And yet to do the worst of
them right, the most Idolatrous, Unnatural and Senseless Rites the darkest Ages
of the World ever had, they have discharged their Reason, and placed them, in
all times, to the unaccountable Tradition and Authority of their Priesthood:
Where, (...) this time, I will leave them too: Only I must needs say, I wish
the Dust this man has so vehemently raised upon Reason, be not to put out our
Eyes too, that we may be less Resty, and lead better. For if such men once get
us out of our depth, we are gone. Trust thick and threefold. And the more
Un-Intelligable, the more Venerable, this will be the Maxim.

But if I may, I would wonder for all that, how after all, He can so expressly
contradict himself, as p. 14. to allow Reason to Judge, and p. 36. To send his
Readers thither to convince others of their Duty both in their Spiritual and
Civil Capacity. He must have relented him mightily, or having been in a Fit, is
come to himself, or else his own reason has had the wind, and is too many for
his Perjudices, or he could not have given himself so quickly so great a
Reprimand; But this shows the Nature and Power of Reason, that it will rise to
its own Evidence and Vindication, even in the most Unreasonable Men.

But this Author tells the World, That granting the Duke to have carried his
Postulatum of the being of a Supreme and perfect Power, he would have followed
his blow at another rate, and sent his Reader another Road, which shows the
Duke's little, and his better Skill and Courage; though he might have been so
modest as to let us have been the Judges of that: He did not catch this of his
Grace's Pen. And pray what would he have done? why, after a flood of words (and
that is all.) he tells us, That he would have sent them to the Scriptures. And
by this, one would think that the Man had never read the Book he pretends to
Answer; For that Noble Peer expressly tells us in the beginning of his
Discourse, that he has to do with Men that deny their Authority, and therefore
to use it to prove what he asserts, were to beg the Question. And I do assure
him, so soon as he had Gained the Postulatum of the being a Supreme and perfect
Power, he recommends them to the Christian Religion, of which I had always
understood till now, the Scriptures had been the Creed.

Well, but in case of doubtful places he has an Interpreter, a Judge for Him at
hand too, and That is the Society of Christians; why could not he as well have
said the Church; and then have told us which Church; for there is not one of a
douzen that don't allege the Text for their Authority. But to do him Right, he
has given us a Rule to know her by; he takes it, ( Good Protestant) from
Vincentius Lirinensis, and a Golden one it is, he assures us; But for all that,
I fancy it has an Iron Rod at the Tail for him.

It Is this, Quodubique quod semper, quod ab omnibus, id vere quidem Catholicum
est, and that this would have shown the Duke a thousand Errors, p. 15* Now,
methinks, out of mere pity, I am not willing to allow his Rule; For if I
should, first this showing Rule, will infallibly show him, that the Duk^s
Instinct and the Pensilvanian's Doctrine, (to his unspeakable grief,) has the
hope to be Established by it. For there is nothing more Ancient, more
Universal, more constantly credited, at all times, in all places, by all
Nations, then a Divine Instinct in the Natures of Men: And then, if this
attempt upon the Duke has not been Unreasonable, as to the Pensilvanian, an
Honor as much above his hope, as his Adversary's intentions, let Him Judge.

My second Reason of unwillingness is this, he says, p. 16. This Rule would
have taught the Duke to avoid the cruel Divinity of Calvinists which his Grace
lashes with so much Truth and Justice: where, besides the nonsense of teaching
a Man to dislike a thing, he already is allowed to have lasht with Justice, he
confirms the Judgment of his Instinct, by which, he was lead to lash that
Doctrine, for a Golden Rule.

But lastly, as he has Established the thing he would overthrow, so it is to be
feared, he has overthrown the thing he would Establish; And would not a
well*natured Man be sorry for that.

For most evident it is that the Church of England is not every where, there is
for His Vbiques: And some tell us, that She was not always what She is, there is
for His Semper: And that every Body is not of Her Communion, this Gentleman's
Invectives against Dissenters, iprove the Roman Church, charges Novelty; She
flies to Scr^pture; The Roman Church disputes the Sense, the Church of England
appeals to the first Doctors of the Church; the Romanists to the Sense of the
Church upon the Doctors. Now says He, The Society of Christians must be Judge.
p 15. Not the Few that separate from the Many; For then they will be Judge in
their own Cause, and the Dissenters at Home will expect the same Privilege; If
the Church they Dissent from, they are gone; If the Scripture, it is the Subject
to be Judge. This must issue therefore, or in no Judge, or in an External
Judge, or in an Internal Judge. If no Judge, we are left without Decision till
the last Judgment. If an External Judge, it must either be the Church or Civil
Government. If the Church, the Romanists think they carry it. If the Civil
Government, to be sure the Church of England has it here. If lastly, an
Internal Judge, that every Man should try, fast, and examine for himself, the
Dukes Instinct, (much against this Gentleman's mind) will come in for a share
in the choice of a Man's own Religion, and that within the Rule too.

The next point he falls upon, is the Dukes Maxim about Persecution; he does
not think it Antichristian at home, but the Duke under a mistake of the Reason,
Nature, and necessity of those Humane Laws Dissenters are prosecuted by. p. 17.
And upon this he bestows eight Pages, which in a Lump, comes to thus much. That
though he allows punishing the Professors of a True Religion, purely for
Religion, ( living otherwise inoffencively to the Civil Government) is
Persecution, and truly Antichristian, which was the Primitive Christians case
under the Heathen Emperors of Rome; yet the Laws against Papists and
Dissenters are out of a Political, not Religious necessity to secure the Peace
and Safety of the Government; And if this be Antichristian, the whole World,
all Ages, Times, Governments, and Governors must have been, and are
Antichristian, and it turns his Admiration into Wonder, that his Grace should
be of this mind that had his share in passing those Laws. I perceive his
dis*ingenuity continues to the Duke. For besides that, he loves Wondering, he
might know that the Dukes share was to Vote against them, and so that he did
not Espouse Tolleration a cast Mistress; The Dukes Discourse relates to Men of
^onscience, not Rebellion; And to conclude, more or less than the Question
contains, is not fair or sound,

The Duke says, it is Antichristian to Persecute: His Answerer says It Is truly
so of the true Religion; And pray where does the Duke say it, of the false? But
I am ready to think that if Persecution in all the World, were stopped, till that
were determined, we should at least gain one Age of Peace: And to have any of
it before, is, at least in this Author, unaccountable, and a begging of the
Question.

But he would not have Danger ensue to Government, and therefore draws upon the
Duke this un-natural Consequ^nce; That the whole World, and all Governments and
Governors are Antichristian; whilst that Noble Peer meddles not with
Government, nor Solicits freedom for them that di^turb it. He declares himself
for Men's having Liberty to Worship God according to their Persuasion, and the
Reason of it. If Men will call Consciene this Plea is no shelter; Currat ^ex.
His Argument is safe: the Consequence is the partial application of h^s
Answerer. The Duke thinks perhaps, 'twere m^re easy and Honorable to let ill
Men not have that to say against good Government, You trouble us for our
Consciences, since in its self, there is no Real and Proper OvertAct of
Sedition, merely in performing a differing sort of Worship; and that there are,
or may be Laws enough provided to secure the State from those civil disorders*
that any such Man might attempt under that pretense. Here, such People would
not only justly suffer, but without a cover too: The Disgrace and Odium, in the
opinion of all, as well as Penalty, falling only upon the Criminals head. I do
with the last duty and defference a Man can bear to his King and Country, Wish
and Pray for their Prosperty: I would by no means that any Man should be
indulged to their detriment: I should besides my civil obligations, cancel
those of Conscience before Almighty God, if I thought it; But I cannot prevail
with my self, to believe that the Government may not be safe by some civil
Provision, with the most suspected Dissenter: Else 'twere past a scruple with
me that his Liberty should at all times purchase the public safety.

This Gentleman allows all Dissenters may not be Guilty; if so, it must be a
dangerous Execution; Especially when the Justice of our humane Laws had rather
an hundred Criminals should escape, then that one Innocent should perish. But
he says, he has not Momus' s Windows to see, and know them by. I am sure he has
too much of his mind, or he had not troubled the World with such a bundle of
Exceptions: But if he cannot distinguish them, will that excuse his destroying
them? I am sorry this Gentleman's Divinity has no more Bowels, nor better
sense; for if Mankind be left without the knowledge of Guilt from Innocence,
They must punish in the lump; They must be unjust.

This is Judging without Overt acts; by guess and jealousy. A way that may make
an Innocent Guilty, and a Guilty Person Innocent. To be cast without Evidence
is wrong, and what Witness is there of that which is only in foro Conscientiae?
then what Judge? A piece of cruel Enthusiasm. I know not what to call it. Not
only Christianity, but Gamaliel; ay, our own Laws would have taught Him a
better way of finding out Criminals, yet His excels.

Well, But the Laws against Papists, (He says) are occasioned from their
Unchristian Machinations and King-killing Doctrine, able to ruin the whole
Earth, and lay the Foundations of Eternal Mischief to Mankind; And for those
against Dissenters, They were made, because of their Rebellious, Excluding,
Covenanting, Associating, Murdering Principles. p. 15.16.21.22.

Now though this Man would think it imprudent in me, and I, that it is none of
my business, to vindicate the Persons charged from His imputations; yet I have
so much Justice, I confess, as not to condemn Parties by Particulars, and
Charity as to be satisfied with their solemn disclaimings of such Practices:
For I did never love that one Man should have the making of another Man's Faith
or Confession, especially if He were His Adversary.

I must tell Him also, I cannot admire His Wisdom, Manners, or Justice, in his
Reflection upon the Roman Catholics, after the assurances that so great an One
of their Communion has given Him and His Friends of their Security and
protection: For if they are a People able to ruin the whole Earth, and lay the
Foundations of Eternal Mischief to Mankind; believe me, England is in an ill
pickle, and though I am an ill Judge, He has in it put but a Scurvy Complement
upon the King. But if by the Kings promise p. 33. He means that the King is to
destroy the Men of His own Faith, to support and secure Theirs; I shall only
admire, first His understanstanding, and next His Charity.

For Dissenters, I shall say no more, than that it may be, the Wars made Them,
rather than They made the Wars, and that things older than the Act of Oblivion,
are in Law, buried by it. And with Submission, this Gentleman's Conscience, for
ought I know, might have done as well to let Them alone.

For the late occasion He takes, let him be just, and He will find the
Excluders, almost, every Sunday at their Parish Churches: And if three quarters
of them were to Pray for their lives, it may be they could better Read their
Clergy, then say their Prayers without the Public Liturgy. What follows? Shall
I recriminate the usuage of the late King about the Declaration of Indulgence?
And say, that some Men loved Him well for their own ends? And that when they
were not humored exactly, They would pout, slack their Loyalty, and grow
passive, let things go as they will for them: A thing almost threatened by this
Loyal Gentleman, p. 33. May not this be aggravated, and with as many harsh
words, by a Man of words and no Charity? But I would be modest* and that not of
Prudence, but Choice, for I hope He would give His Replicant the Liberty He
expects, and takes with the Great Peer He answers.

And I must say I cannot but extremely admire, that less than twelve Lines, so
softly dropped by the Duke in favor of Liberty of Conscience, should have almost
as many leaves of little invectives to answer them. Believe me, it impeaches
His pretenses to Christianity, and renders Him to have more of the Fire brand
than of the Loyal Subject.

I should end here; but there are two things more I think must be mentioned,
that nothing carrying any pretense to Weight may be omitted.

First, That the reason of the Penal Laws is purely Political and not
Spiritual, to obviate the Overt-acts, Acts of Treason and Rebellion; for a man
may be of any Religion to himself* and privately exercise it too, not exceeding
such a number above their Families.

Secondly, That Tolleration is the way to overthrow Religion, and with it the
Government, especially as now Established; and is a fatal Enemy to Monarchy.

To the first, I say, Fact must Rule us; I would desire to know if the Act of
Uniformity, Printed with the Liturgy, be purely Political and not Spiritual? I
hope, without offense I may say, it is not. The Laws of the 23, and 28th. of
the Queen, Requiring People to come to Church, will not let People be of any
Religion to themselves; for unless they are, at least once a Month at Divine
Service, and show, to join in the Publ^ck Worship, by Law Established, he pays
twenty Pounds Monthly, and has two Thirds of his Real Estate exposed to
Sequestration. And this is done in one place or another every day. So that it
is not true in Fact, That People may have any Religion to themselves; because,
both those that keep home, and within the number allowed by the Act against
Conventicles, and those that exceed it, are notwithstanding presented upon the
former Statutes of the Queen; Nay, I have known some persons Prosecuted by them
all, at one and the same time.

And, with all due respect to the Wisdom of our former Legislators, if this
Gentleman's gloss be true, I think Improprieties should no more have been
Enacted, then Impossibilities or Contradictions. To make a man Dangerous to the
State, for not going to Church; or a Breaker of the Peace, for being at a
Meeting of a hundred People, when their persons were Naked their Entertainment
mere Devotion, and their Behavior very quiet and Innoffensive, sounds in the
use of words, very harsh. It puts me in mind of a Wity Passage of the Lord
^hancellor Hyde, when the Bill prohibiting the Importation of Irish Cattle was
read in the Lords-house, hearing it styled a Nuisance; Pray, (says he) let it
for this time be called Adultery, for one word is just as fit as the other.
Inadiquate and unsuited Expressions are oftentimes of dangerous consequence. No
man knows where the practice may stop. Religion should sweeten and humble the
Spirits of men, abate their Passions and ex^ite their Obedience to their
Superiors. And it is one of the strangest things in the World that greater
numbers may meet on twenty other occasions every day, with less fear of the
Breach of the Peace. As that Religion cannot be good that makes any man the
worse for having it: So I am not for beheading any thing before it is born, or
punishing People for fear of what they may do. I would hope the best, and that
if they had that freedom they desire in the exercise of their Religious
Persuasion, their Condition would teach their Wit, it were too good to hazard,
that if their Duty or Gratitude did not oblige them, their very Interest must;
and there is hardly one of them so stupid, as not to understand and pursue the
ways that preserve it.

For that of Colleration, it is my Opinion, he does ill to distinguish it from
Liberty of Conscience; For if he mean the same thing, it needed not have had a
fresh Head with other Consequences; nor was it requisite that I did further
consider it.

And I am heartily sorry, I must say, that to the end of his Answer he hardly
fails of his usual way of Construction: For after having made Tolleration as
ill a thing as he could, and as such, the Duke to be the Patron of it; He falls
on with a whole Volly of hard words, asking the Duke, p. 27, 28, 29* If he
would give Tolleration to a Rebellious, Associating, Sanguinary, Inhumane,
Blasphemous, Murdering Conscience, such as that of Calvanists, that Decrees
Damnation without free Conditions; Killed his Master, Father and Brother, and
that particularly used him so ill. But this is so far from determining, that in
ill Language it miserably begs the question, by the reflection of false and
Scandalous Consequences, upon what the Duke said in favor of Indulgence.

Is there no such thing as Conscience, because it may be falsely pretended? Or
shall a Sober and Moral Conscience be denied Indulgence, because some or other
may, or do misuse it? And that He may have something to think on; I ask if
those Calamities were the effects of a Tolleration? If so, pray when was there
one to do us so much mischief? The difficulty, I know, he will have to find
one, makes me ask him another question: If Ease to men in that respect, were
not the way of greatest Safety to the Public, at least, fit to be tried. I
must say, this Gentleman takes too many things for granted, and needs a very
merciful Adversary: One that will do less then not exact the uttermost
Farthing, though he himself will reap where he has not Sown, and Compel
Conformity where he cannot convince. The very point, he says, His Grace has
with so much Justice lasht the Calvinists for, and that he himself did but just
now call Inhumane and Blaspemous.

Goodnature with all that little prudence that falls to my share, makes it
easier to me to believe that a Christian Tolleration were the best way to
prevent the Mischiefs that are said to be the effects of it. I say, by all
means Secure the Government; But withal, pray let us see if that may not be
done, by some other and easier method: It is pity that it should cost the
Liberties or Estates of so vast a People as do Dissent, and, I would hope,
without so much as an ill Thought to the King or his Government.

But he is so in love with the Chase, that without any more to do, he sends us
to the French King, p. 29. To take measures for England in point of Religion:
Which is pretty well for an Englishman and a Protestant, and perhaps a Doctor
too. This in any Man had not been well, but in an English Protestant, with his
leave, is Impious, since it is to draw that Kings Severity into Example, and
render it a Prudence to be imitated here. A Notion, he has taught me to call,
in him, Atheistical, because it cannot be done by a Protestant, Whose
Conscience, as he says, will not let him be of any, and of all Religions. This
yields little Consolation to the French Protestants: And if he would but think
well upon it, not too much to the English Church; For if he says true, That
Lewis the Fourteenth does well to Compel an Union of his Subjects in his own
Religion; He has recommended a Policy that goes a great way to discharge the
King of His Promise, and make us all of his: I don't know whether Coleman's
Letters say so much as this, that were made the Proof of the Plot. This may
make Roman Catholics amends for p. 27, 28, 29.

To Conclude, he is so fond of the Instance, that he Appeals to Crowned-Heads
in General; If a Tolleration be not Inconsistent with their Safety. A man had
need be well assured, at least as far as an Invulnerable Conscience, to try his
Appeal, but that I am, and therefore join Issue with him; submitting with all
my heart, to their Royal Evidence in the Decision of the Point: But because it
requires more Room then agrees with the success of this Reply, in an Age that
loves not length; I have chosen to make it a Discourse of it self, and refer
him thither: The Title, A Persuasive to Moderation: And shall conclude this
with the Wise and Christian Judgment of King CHARLES the First, in His Advice
to the late King.

Take head (says he) of abe^^ng any Factions, your Partial Adhering to any one
side, gains you not so great Advantages in some Men's Hearts, Who are Prone to
be of their Kings Religion, as it loses you in Others; Who think themselves
and their Profession, first Despised, and then Persecuted by You. A Christian
Tolleration often Dissipates their Strength, whom Rougher Opposi^ion Fortifies.
This was the Council of a Crowned Head: The Judgment of his Adversity: Always
the Soundest: Resentments could not Blind it, nor Revenge of wrongs,
Precipitate it. In which, he Acted the Christian Prince, and not the Amilcar.

Let us then Remember his Council with his Afflictions, and the one the more
endear the other to us; least we despise some of the best Fruit of the Autumn
of his Life, to wit, his Wisdom and Goodness, that the Gusts of Time and
Troubles he lay under did not shake; and which he has Recommended to us for a
Guide in Future Times, to prevent them.

FINIS.

