A Just Censure OF Francis Bugg 's ADDRESS TO THE Parliament Against the
QUAKERS.

Published by, and in behalf of the said People.

By evil Report and good Report: as Deceivers, and yet True,

2 Cor. 6. 8. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in
Gracious-street, 1699.

TO THE READER.
IT is certainly very unreasonable that any should be denied the liberty of
Wording their own Belief, since there is nothing more Just than that Peoples
Faith should be taken at their own hands; for how else can it be theirs? And
yet it is the Disadvantage we lie under, that our Enemies will not let us
believe what we do believe, lest they fail of their Ends, which is to make us
in the Wrong, whether we are or no.

All other Persuasions have the Happiness of being taken upon their own
Confessions; but we, alas, at our Adversaries Perversions: Though where Premises
are not agreed, Conclusions can never be just. The first Question between Us
and our Opposers, is not about what is Sound, but what we Believe; and that it
seems, must not be of our own giving, but of our Adversaries straining: The
most Intolerable of Impositions, that any one should answer for the Faith that
is not theirs. Yet so it is where one Man's Comments is to go for another Man's
Belief, which makes it plain to the Judicious Inquirer, some People will not
allow that any Good can come out of our Nazareth, and are much more fearful we
should be in the Right than in the Wrong.

And as they treat our Principles, so they do our Practices; for if we collect
Money to relieve the Exigencies of our Poor, it shall be rendered a Fund for
Rebellion: And our Monthly, Quarterly and Yearly Meetings, constituted for the
Promotion of Peace, Piety and Charity, must be interpreted an Imperium in
Imperio, a Design no less than to supersede the Laws and Sovereignty of the
Kingdom. One while we ought to be suppressed, as a Confused and Immethodical
People; another time, because we have Meetings of Church Order and Authority.
In short, rather than fail, our very Virtues must be made our Vices, by the
same Figure that our blessed Savior was said by the envious Jews, to cast out
Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils.

And indeed any Candid and Judicious Person, who has read the Books lately
published against us, must see so much of this Spirit prevail, as to think we
might have saved our selves the pains of this, and our other Answers: But lest
our Silence should be mistaken for our Guilt, and F. Bug's assurance, in his
Address, pass for Truth; we have persuaded our selves once more to bestow an
Answer upon him, which we recommend, Reader, to thy Impartial Perusal.

A Just Censure, etc.
THE single Consideration that could induce us to take any notice of so
Scurrilous as well as injurious a Paper, as that which was presented to the
Lords and Commons against us (the People called Quakers) by F. Bugg, is, lest
the Confidence and Solemnity of the Address, should give it any Weight with
those that know neither him nor us; for to others this Defense would be wholly
unnecessary; this troublesome Man being neither honest to his own Conscience,
nor just to Us and our Profession, in his Attempts against us. To know this
Satisfactorily, it is only needful to consider the Man, and the Merit of his
Paper, equally Confident and Abusive, and then our Reader will be able to
determine, if we are that pernicious People to Religion and Civil Society, he
would represent us, and He that Convert, Patriot and Reformer, he vainly sets
up for, in his busy Work against us. But we must premise, lest we should be
misunderstood, that we would not be thought to Excuse our selves from ill
things, if guilty, because He and his Abettors are Ill Men; for that will not
Excuse us, though it ought to rebate their Credit, where a Point depends upon
their Veracity. For we will allow, that what an Ill Man alleges, when it is
upon good Authority, is Valid, though he be not; yet where a Witness is found
false, there is Reason to suspect, if not disbelieve him in all the rest.
However, let every thing have its due Weight, and we will abide the Consequence
of so fair an Inquiry; Knowing that we are abused where we are made Criminal.

First, Then we say, that this Man acts not upon Principle, but Prejudice; not
of Conscience, but Envy and Interest: And if this appear, to be sure it must
weigh much against him with all Candid Spirits. Now, that this is the Case, let
it be considered, that after a long and sober Profession of the same Judgment
with us, he Revolted from us, as he confesses, not for any Dissatisfaction
with us about our Principles, relating either to Faith or Worship (the usual
reason for changing of Communions) on the contrary, he seemed to Cool toward
us, because we did not, in his opinion, adhere to them as strictly as in former
times; faulting us for quiting (as he alleged) in Practice our Characteristick
Principle, of directing all Men to the Spirit of Christ in themselves, as a
sufficient Guide in Religion, because we, as an orderly People, recommended and
pressed Good Order and Discipline as requisite to the preservation of Society.
And because we could not gratify him in all points upon a mere personal
Difference, with one of our Communion, and that about a Money-matter too, He
flings off his wonted Respect and Regards, grows Murmuring, Complaining and
Troublesome; finding Faults, his better Mind and Temper never let him see
before, and takes part with those that would not be under any Rules of Society,
for Common Order and Decency in that Relation, or in things that purely regard
Conversation, as Justice, Peace, Charity, etc. and a sincere walking according
to their Profession. Here he interested himself as a busy Advocate for those,
as mistaking our usual Plea of every Man's being left to the Light of Christ in
the Conscience, as to Matters that concern Salvation, would weakly leave every
Man in Society to his Freedom, about the External Rules and Orders of that
Society, whether he would act in Concurrence or Independently, or act at all:
Which naturally dissolves Society, and brings every Member to an Independency
one toward another.

Having made this step himself toward Dis-Unity, he halts here a while, and
sets up for a strict Walker, according to the Quakers first Doctrine, and a
fervent Advocate for it; charging several of the Elders with too much
Indifferency about it, if not Declension from their old Fundamental; as if they
that had formerly preached others from Man, to an inward Principle, were now
preaching them to Man again; and who had before decry'd Imposition, were now
become Imposers themseves. And what was all this for, but because we
distinguished upon the Extent of our Testimony, limiting it to things that
concerned Faith and Worship? But as to what related merely to the Order and
Decency or Society, the Concurrence of the Generality should suffice; of which
I have already spoken, to wit, Charity, Justice and Concord, against which
Conscience never can be warrantably pleaded.

Here he became an Advocate for them, (in the Name of Christian-Liberty) that
having since seen the Mischief of making that Plea in the wrong Place, would
sooner perish than become One for him in his abusive (and Self-condemning)
Practices against us. He then had no Scruple concerning our Belief of the
Trinity, that it was not full or Express enough, nor about our owning or
disowning either the Divine or Humane Nature of Christ, nor the Virtue and
Benefit of his Death and Sufferings to Justification, nor what we hold of the
Res^^^ection of the Dead, or about the Use of the Sacraments; nor lastly of our
Judgment about Ministry and Worship: Not one word of these things, as the
Pretense or Reason of his Dislike of us, or Separation from us, did he ever
object. And he knows very well, it is not one way to define these things in our
Ministry or Writings, otherwise, than as they are left in the Scriptures of
Truth, that so we may avoid the Dangerous Evil of Curiosity, and Supersining
upon the Text, which does not only set the Head at Work instead of the Heart
unto Regeneration (the great Requisite in Religion) but hardly ever fails to
occasion Controversy and Division, if not Hatred at Last, even to Persecution
it self; as all time witnesses against that Practice.

Nor was our dissatisfaction about these things (as he well knows) the Ground
of our Separation from the National or other Churches, but the Work of God's
Grace and Spirit in our Hearts, which alone can make the Living and right
Christian and Christian Churches. And such as we are sensible, have their Eyes
opened, and their Hearts touched and affected with this holy Spirit, we receive
and have fellowship with; as we dissent from those, that make not the Work of
God's Spirit the Ground of their Ministry, Worship and Communion; according to
that known and weighty saying of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a Form of
Godliness, but denying (in Practice) the Power thereof, from such turn away. So
that notwithstanding the Bustle he now makes against us, in reference to the
aforementioned Doctrines, they were Unconcerned in the Reason of his
Separation. For it is not Credible as well as Reasonable, that he should then
palliate his Dissatisfaction with us (if any he had) in reference to them,
since he shows himself so ready now to Create Occasions against us. As it is
very Probable, that had he been Conscienciously doubtful about any point of
Faith, he would often have earnestly endeavored our better Information, or his
own, by Conscientious Conferences with us to that Purpose; which we can boldly
say, he never did. What a Sort of a Convert then must this Man be, and what a
kind of Conscience has he Carried to the Church he now embraces? However he
carried Prejudice against us, and has found Indigency; and some of them have
Employed the one, and Supplied the other; and Doubtless while they pay him
well, they shall have him a ready and Confident Tool against their Peaceable
Neighbors.

Nevertheless we find it has fared with him as with Gamesters, sometimes get,
and sometimes lose; for his hand has been out a great while, and waste Paper
will not pay for Printing. Which we have reason to believe is his Case; since
his London-Factors have sadly complained of the Dullness of the Market. For tho
his Cargo was large, they could get but 50 Shillings for him. And to give them
their Due, they desired him to stop his hand, for they had more already, than
they knew what to do with. This (doubtless) put his wits to work for a fresh
supply; and we see, with the help of the Bp. of N's Contribution, the effect of
it: And yet when his new Cloths, Horse and Pocket-Mony for the Expedition are
discounted, with the many Books and Papers that were given away at the Lobbies
of both Houses, his Harvest must fall short of his Expectation; as (Thanks be
to Almighty God) did the Design some had against us by those endeavors.

So that it may be truly said of him, he has sold himself to do wickedly, if
the most malicious and abusive Treatment may be called so. He is indeed in some
Respects our Exercise; but it is our greatest Trouble that in the End he will
bring upon himself Destruction if he repent not.

We are sorry too, that some Men of note in the Church, (doubtless not
altogether of their Own Inclination) should turn Brokers for the Books of so
Unconsciencious a Convert, in Order to supply him in his ill Practices against
a Body of Sober People, and that are by Law indulged. But that the B. of N.
should give himself the Trouble of mis-leading People with an Apocriphal Story,
of this Man's having been Instrumental to turn several Quakers from their
Errors, as appears by his Recommendatory Alms-Letter to the Clergy of his
Diocese, etc. in Favor of this Deserter, seems to us in no wise to become his
Better Character. For besides that the Fact is not True, it cannot be Charity,
to support and encourage a Spirit of Envy and Persecution. He that can
reconcile F. Bugg's Work with Charity, must read the Gospel Backwards, and turn
Turk in order to be a Christian. And this sort of busy and vexatious Work in
such Churchmen, at this time a day, but too plainly shows they are grown weary
of Liberty of Conscience, how much soever they boasted themselves to us of
allowing it, at its being settled by Law, to lessen the Kindness and Security
of the Liberty we enjoyed before. For they that are as troublesome as the Law
will permit them to be, want only more Power to be more troublesome. And we
hope we shall take the Aim by it, the thing gives us; since of some Men it may
be said, Can a Black-a-moor change his Skin, or a Leopard his Spots? There must
be a Miracle in the Case, or it can never be done. But how any Person of that
Coat can heartily be Friends to the Present Government, and Spit in the Face of
the Liberty that is (as it were) an Article of its Original Contract, is
another Dilemma, I will not say Praemunire, that some of them have of late (at
best unadvisedly) run themselves into.

We are very far from Concluding and Condemning all that wear it (as too many
treat us) by their Unkindness and plain Violation of our Lawful Quiet, who too
palpably encourage some Renegades to roar out their Anger at us, while we are
quiet in the Land; and least of all to suspect the Inclinations of the
Government, that has with so much Humanity, as well as Regard to Natural Right,
added Law to Liberty. But at the same time we would willingly believe, these
active Incendiaries, that are thus flinging their Bombs among us (which is
indeed a plain Disturbance of the Liberty, and at least the Seeds of
Persecution) are neither many, nor out of the Observation of our Superiors: We
would hope a much better Temper affects the Generality. Yet these Actions are
but too lively an Instance of the Warm Work such violent Spirits would renew in
these poor Kingdoms, if their Power did but equal their Will, which (we pray)
God prevent and defend us from; for that Day can never happen to England, and a
severe Judgment of God not follow it. It were greatly to be wished, that these
Zealots would turn their Spleen against Sin, and make Practice more their
business than Opinion in Religion, especially where Opinion does not hinder
Practice. It is a Scandal to the very Profession of it to observe, what fair
Quarter all sorts of Enormities meet with from some of them, where a Virtuous
Dissent can find little. And truly it is only want of a due Consideration in
the People, that supports the Credit of such angry Men so much above their
Merit: For it is plain, and but too common too, that they are upheld by their
Character, rather than their Virtue, and are much less loved, than feared.

Lastly, we pray our Candid Reader to observe, that this troublesome Man, that
has thus set his Conscience to Hackney, has not obliged the World with any
thing new and material. For what he alleges, and his three Seconds, has been
said long before them, and by much abler Pens than his or theirs, as T. Tombs,
T. Danson, J. Faldo, Steph. Scanderet, Tho. Hicks, Tho. Jenner, etc. In which
Controversies large Books have been exchanged between them and some of our
Friends, about the very Points wherein we have been lately misrepresented, by
these angry People, and which remain in our Vindication Unconfuted to this Day.
Unless any thing be too good for us, and that we are Incapable of being Injured
in whatever is said against us; and that the best Answer is none from our
Hands; and finally that Accusation, is Evidence; Slander, Proof; and
Perversions, Principles for which We must be Accountable. To conclude, we ask
no Favor, but Justice, and shall take that for a great One, if we may have it.
We hope for it, and are willing to believe we shall not be frustrated of our
Reasonable Expectation in our Reader. Thus much of the Man, and his true
Motives to Separation from us, and of his and his Abettors Persecution of us.

Next, the Paper: The Title is, An Address to the Parliament. Of which, whether
he was the Author, or Hawker only, it matters little; to be sure it cost a
Contribution: For it cannot be unreasonable to suppose, that they that do
nothing without Money, should have Money for what they do. We shall consider it
in the Method of its Paragraphs.

I. His first is a Plea of Privileges, as an Englishman, to discover to the
Government, what may be Dangerous to Church or State; and this he says, he has
done many Years. But while he was an honest Quaker, and followed his
Family-Affairs (which seemed better fitted to his Capacity, as well his Duty)
both his Family and Dealers had Reason to entertain a much better Opinion of
him. Well, but what said the public to this mighty Zeal for their Safety? Why,
nothing: A sad Disappointment certainly. From whence we must needs suppose the
Government Care-less of their Safety, or that his Work was not worth their
Notice. However, it seems he has got Money from some or other for many Years,
which was his business, or without doubt he would have Waved his Privilege
long ago. A notable Privilege indeed! to impose upon the Government malicious
Untruths, instead of discovering dangerous Practices, and exposing us to their
severe Displeasure, whom a public Good would oblige to protect. Certainly, no
Man ever read a Word of such Privileges in Magna Charta, or the Petition of
Right; and to be sure, not in the greatest Charter of all, the Bible

II. His second Reason for thus treating us, is this; viz. Because, as in the
Quakers ancient Books, so in their late; they seem to allow of an
Excommunication, saying, Blame not before Examination; first understand, and
then rebuke.

Answer, But this none can think we would have done, if we were as Tardy as he
represents us. What can be fairer than this? Where is the Snake in the Grass
now? Is this hiding or disguising our Principles from Peoples understandings?
Or is it the Equivocating Art and Affected Obscurities we are charged with,
since it seems we challenge a fair Enquiry, by his own Confession.

III. His third Reason is, Because he does not find the three Norfolk
-Ministers intend our Persecution, or any Alteration of the Act of Toleration.

Answer, A Tenderhearted Man! What! for no Persecution, nor Alteration of the
Indulgence? And yet pray to have our Principles and Practices suppressed? A new
sort of Moderation: For nothing less is the very Title and End of his Paper,
and their Books.

Fourthly, But if he may be believed, he says, It Is morally Impossible to know
what the Quakers Principles are.

Answer, If so, how can they be Examined, or rightly Censured? Is not that
morally Impossible too? Parliaments certainly have other Work to do than to
hunt after Impossibilities: Yet that seems to be the Task he has imposed upon
them. But though his Wits have gone a Woollgathering by his own Confession, we
hope other Men find better Employment for theirs.

The Reason he gives for this moral Impossibility of understanding our
Principles is, Because our Books carry two Faces, and are fitted for the
compass of all Occasions; which he proves thus, That some of our Books are
directed only to our Friends; others more at large, both to Teachers and People
of other Persuasions: And that in one sort we seem to own Jesus of Nazareth to
be the Son of God, and that in the other sort we deny him to be such.

Answer, But if it be as he says, it cannot be morally Impossible to understand
our Writings, while he cites such plain Contradictions from them. And as we
think it no Crime to entitule or direct our Papers according to the Subject
Matter of them; so we cannot but think it a great Contradiction in him to make
us to carry Two Faces, in reference to our Principles; since what he represents
in the worst Terms is out of Books, chiefly directed to those that are not of
our Communion, which is to be barefaced and candid in the account of our
Doctrines, as the very Passages he cites (though very Partially) evidently prove:
So that the Insincerity he would insinuate against us flees in his Face; since,
if we were blameable for what we have writ, we can never be blamed for
concealing it, which yet is the drift of this 4th Paragraph; the particular
Citations injuriously made crowded by him together, are considered at large by
G. W. in his Answer to two Books lately delivered to the Parliment, by the
three Norfolk-Clergy-Men and F. B. abhorred by us, as by them and him perverted
and applied, yet owned by us, the true Scope of the Context, and Intention of
the Author considered.

V. His fith Reason for the Suppression of our Principles and Practices, is,
That W. Penn, in his Defense against the Bishop of Cork, p. 38. and 79. means
by these words, That where the Quakers seem to differ least from the Church of
England, they differ most, viz. touching the English Government; thereby
representing us Enemies, and consequently exposing us to it: Whereas it is very
plain, that not only the Drift, but the very Words of W. Penn show quite
another thing; for as he had explained himself, as to what he meant, where he
said, As to what we are thought to differ most, we differ least, viz. about the
Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity. So when he says, Where we are thought to
differ least, we most of all differ. He plainly expresses his meaning in those
words, to wit, about the Nature and Quality of a true Gospel Ministry and
Worship. Civil Government of any sort or kind, not so much as being expressed
or meant by him upon that Subject. An Abuse not only gross, but aggravated by
his Impudence; and which is such a measure of the Man, that no Person with whom
Honesty or Charity have any Reputation, can Patronize his Work.

VI. His sixth and last Reason he makes to be an Inconsistency in our Books
about Government, that in one sort of our Books we seem to own Love and Honor
the King, yea, to pray for all Men, for Kings and all that are in Authority;
but in other of our Books, that we tell People, That Kings and Emperors sprang
up in the Night, and among Apostate Christians; and that we are against the
English Government, etc.

Answer, But he gives us here neither Book nor Author, and unless he can prove,
it is our Principle to excite People against the Civil Government we live
under, of what Form, or in what Country soever it be, he says nothing to the
purpose; for that only can render us unfit for Protection, which makes
Governments unsafe from our Principles; and such we have ever denied; but these
things are fully answered by G. W. in his Truth and Innocence vindicated; and
Jos. Wyeth, in his Anguis Flagellatus: Or, A Switch for the Snake in the Grass;
and we think, with submission to better Judgments, that it no way becomes the
present Profession of this Man, and those that countenance him, to reflect upon
us, as Temporizing about Principles of Civil Government. Thus much as to his
Reasons for his procedure against us.

The Title of the remaining part of his Sheet, proposed to the Parliament, for
our Suppression, is this, Touching the Quakers Government within the
Government, and opposite to it, as can be proved from Matters of Fact and
Practice. And the truth of it is, were he as ready at proving, as at calling
Names, he would not only deserve the Consideration, but the Reward of the
Government; but his performance will prove very short of the encouragement he
gives; because he founds it upon his Forgery just now detected; his words are
these, Having obtained the Key to open the Mystery of W. P 's Mysterium Magnum;
that where we are believed to differ least, we most of all differ; I am of W. P
's mind, that where they are believed to differ least, there they differ most
of all; namely, touching Government.

Answer, His Key must be very Fantastical, as is his Mystery; for it is plain
there is none in the Pages he quotes of W. Penn's, and his abuse of his Words
can be no Mystery, since the Perversion is so plain. But he that has violated
the Ties of Conscience for Revenge, can make no scruple of lesser points. Our
Destruction is the Mark he aims at; and though our Practice for above Forty
Years proves not only our Consistency with, but Usefulness to Civil Government:
Yet as if he were in Earnest, and Religious too, he breaks forth in this
Expression, If God be not Merciful to us, and Inspire our Governors with a
Godly Zeal, to stop the growth of the Quakers Government, it may prove like
that of Mahomet, who stuck at nothing till he had overrun the Eastern Churches.

Answer, Yet he would be thought no Persecutor; but it is well he is not to be
believed: For in one place of his Paper, he urges our Suppression, because of
the Inconsistency of our unsighting Principles, with the Preservation of the
Civil Government; and here, as well as in other Paragraphs, he presses it from
a supposition, That we, like Mahomet, and his followers, should overthrow the
Government by force. So that it is plain to such as will give themselves the
trouble of observing the Method this Man takes, to render us both odious and
dangerous, that he dare give himself the latitude of saying any thing against
us, tho it carry the grossest as well as most absurd Contradiction to it self.

For the Import of what he says is plainly this, Suppress the Quakers lest they
beat us and take the Government from us.

Secondly, Suppress them because they will not Fight at all.

We bless the Name of God, the Experience of those to whom he had addressed his
Books and Papers, is on our side, and consequently gives the Lie to his
unworthy Insinuations against us, and it is because Time and our Conversation
have worn out the froward and false Impressions, some angry and interested
People have made upon them, and that we are less bug-bears to the Vulgar, and
more acceptable with the better sort that he and other Persons are set at work
by some private Incendiaries against us.

As for his first proof, That we are a Government within the Government, and
therefore against the Government, which is begging the Question, it is not
matter of Fact, but matter of Prophecy, viz. That God will overturn, overturn,
King, Princes and States of this World, for Sin and Ungodliness, till
Righteousness take Place, and prevail with them by the Ruling of Jesus Christ
in their Hearts. This he applies to us in respect of our disowning of the
English Government, whereas it relates to no particular Constitution or Form of
Government, which in all Countries to be sure aims at Justice and Virtue in the
General, but intends the Evil administration of all sorts of Governors and
Magistrates every where. This is so far from being a fault, that it is the
Promise of God, and the Expectation of all good Men; and was writ by way of
Caution to the then ruling Authority.

His Second, Third, Fourth, and so to the end of his Twelfth Instance, which he
gives for proof of our being Enemies to the Government, are his Remarks upon
our proceeding in our Yearly Meeting, which he performs with as ill a Mind, and
just as much Truth, as he makes W. P. to mean Civil Government in p. 97. of his
Defense against the Bishop of Cork, his Key by which he opens that great
Mystery of W. P's in saying, Where we are thought to differ least, there we
most of all differ.

He says we have a Yearly Meeting, that this Yearly Meeting is made up of other
Inferior Meetings, as Monthly and Quarterly; That the Authority of it is the
Light within, which is the Higher Power, by which they make and constitute
certain Laws and Canons Ecclesiastical, contrary to the King's Prerogative,
Rights of Parliament, and Fundamental Laws of the Land; And that we virtually
repeal such parts and branches of the Laws as do not quadrate with our Light
within; and thereby Absolve the King's Subjects from their active Obedience,
causing them to adhere to a Superior Power than that of Kings, Lords and
Commons.

Ans. Here is the Charge, but where to find the proof we cannot tell, for we
think his Authority is too Apocryphal to pass for such.

That we have a Yearly Meeting is certain; and that it is made up of Persons
sent from the Quarterly-Meetings in the respective Counties is also true; but
this only relates to our own Society, and refers but to such things as are the
common Duty, and fall under the Consideration of any Christian Communion: Nor
indeed has it more Authority, though it may have a greater Influence; the
business thereof being comprised under these Four Heads, 1st, That we are at
Peace among our selves, both in respect to our selves, and in respect to our
Persuasion and Commerce; a Justice not only due to every Society, but the Duty
of It for its own Preservation. 2dly, Charity, that where there is the greatest
need and least ability to answer it, Care be taken to proportion Relief: Thus
the Poverty of Ireland after the War, the great Dearth now in Scotland, and the
Spoils made on our Friends in some parts of Germany for Conscience sake; as
also the Supply and Redemption of Captives, have and do oblige us to recommend
Charity to our Friends, that none among us may suffer want. 3dly, Compassion to
our Friends in Suffering, whose cases are there considered in order to consider
of suitable Remedies, which perhaps cannot be so well done in the respective
places where the Grievance arises: But this alas extends no farther than an
humble Application to our Superiors upon the Cognizance we receive of the
Fact, for a seasonable and effectual Redress: We pretend not to compel, but
entreat, not to make Laws as is suggested, but Supplicate Relief, be it in
Relation to any hardship by Law, or a partial Administration of it. Lastly,
That all be careful to walk up to their Profession, as the Apostle exhorted the
Primitive Christians.

And this being the Business of our Yearly Meeting, we take leave to hope, we
shall not be mis-interpreted by the King and Parliament, as if we were erecting
an Imperium in Imperio; since these things ought to be so far from rendering us
dangerous and odious to Government, that they must rather recommend us to it;
for our Obligations being Voluntary to each other, founded on Love and Choice,
where is the Scandal that we are supposed to the Magistrate that we are thus
employed? Since by these Christian Methods he will naturally find his care and
work sit the lighter upon his hands? Nor does this justle with the Laws of the
Land, since by Law we are allowed our Liberty, as Protestant Dissenters,
unless, we must be notwithstanding esteemed Enemies to Government using it; or
having Charity enough to relieve our Friends from Want or Suffering, or
maintain and encourage Peace and Piety. It seems our very Virtues are our
Crimes with this ill Man, and our Christian care must be matter of Danger to
the English Government. It Is true indeed, so far as any Man dissents from Law,
be it upon the most religious ground that can be, he may be said to contradict
the Law; and according to this Man's way of reading it, his persuading others
to be of the same Sentiment, or be true to that he has, is seducing the King's
Subjects, and so far, Contradicting or Repealing the Kings Laws: Which, as it
is a most unworthy Construction of our practice to expose us to the displeasure
of Authority, so it comprehends every Conscientious Person or Party of Men, in
this or any other Nation; and consequently all Societies of Dissenters every
where must be Rebels to the Government they live under.

But he says, We keep our Doors locked, barred or bolted, or a Guard of Men to
prevent Inspection, whereby we have forfeited the benefit of the Act of
Toleration.

Answ. This we very well know is what he would be at, but as it happens these
are not Meetings intended for Worship, which are Open; nor are these barred,
locked or bolted, or guarded, as he is pleased to phrase it, especially out of
any design of Undutifulness to Government, or Prejudice to any Person upon
Earth. But as the subject matter of this Meeting, only concerns the help and
Comfort of our particular Society, in things Honest and Laudable, so it often
happens there are many more present than those immediately concerned: And if
our Numbers are less, and Meeting more private, than what is common, it is not
for fear or shame, but to do and dispatch such business as has been already
observed.

Well! but he will have this a general Rendevouz from almost all parts of the
World.

Answ. Where is the harm of it, if it were so? Tho it is very rare that any are
present from other Countries, except Inland, and that of Choice; but they are
always welcome when they come, for our Establishment is not of Compulsion but
Voluntary: Nor do we make Laws either for Faith or Worship, as he suggests in
this his 6th Instance; though we are careful that the Churches every where
should walk correspondent to their Profession, to which commonly they receive
from this Meeting a general Christian Exhortation: In all which we cannot see
the least disrespect or insecurity to the Civil Government.

His 7th Instance is, That we have a Fund, or Common Stock, which this Meeting
orders to be raised without the Authority of Parliament, in order to support
our Government, and propagate our Principles.

Answ. It Is easily seen what this foolish Man would be at, but it will not do.
This Meeting orders no such thing: But as it is informed of the State of the
whole Society, so it recommends the Wants of it to the Free and Christian
Contribution of the respective Members thereof; which perhaps in others would
be a Mark of a True Church, though in us, of what pleases this Renegado, and
his malicious Imployers; we wish them Repentance and Remission. However, he
neither has, nor can tell us what other Government we have, than that which
has been already expressed and owned by us. And we are sure he can never
prove, that we uphold it by Money; since our Services are free, who are the
Members of that Assembly, or any other amongst us. We are not of those who have
made a Trade of Religion, nor that get by Church Government. He himself is
better instructed: And but that he has thrown off all Consideration of
Conscience or Shame, he could inform the World much better of the Reason and
Motive of our Proceedings.

But in his 8th Instance he would have it believed, That when the Nation was
actually engaged in a War with France, even then we took care that our Friends
should not be assistant; nay, not so much as to carry Guns in their Ships.

Answ. The Insinuation is plain, as if it were only then our Principle, to
serve a Present Turn of Disaffection, and not our former and constant Practice.
But all that have known us from the beginning, must vindicate us from his
Insinuation. And for this Story of Pennsilvania, as if our Friends there were
of another Mind or Practice, it is an effect of Prejudice, as has been already
made appear.

In his 9th and 10th Heads he suggests, Intelligence Foreign and Domestic, to
be one part of the business of this Meeting.

Answ. He might as well except against the Martyrs upon the Reformation, who
corresponded with the Protestants of France, Switzerland and Germany; and no
doubt of it but he would have done it then, as well as Doctor Story, and for
the same Motives. Our Correspondence is of Church, and not of State Matters;
and though foreign sometimes, yet not Foreign from our Obedience to the Civil
Magistrate; intermeddling with nothing, relating to temporal business. We are
glad to hear of our Friends Welfare, and usually do at these Meetings: But
unless it be Scotland, the Low Countries and Germany, we know no Occasion of
Correspondence that is not within this Kingdom and the Dominions thereunto
belonging. We would conclude these Instances here but for this extraordinary
passage of his, which we will barely repeat, because it does so exactly show
the Man, both in his Temper, Understanding and Design, viz. I say, when this
united Confederacy (viz. out of Maryland, Virginia, Barbados, Jamaica, East
and West-Jersie, Pensilvania, New England, North Carolina, Road-Island,
Long Island, Antegoa, Mevis, Ireland, Scotland, Holland, Port Royal, Dantzick,
Hamburgh, Brandenburgh, Saxony, Germany, etc.) I say, says he, when this united
Confederacy are moved, either by their Light within, or by a motion of their
inspired Prophets to call to their Assistance Two or Three Regiments from each
of those places, what will become of poor England? Then, tho too late, we may
experience the Truth of W. Penn's words, viz. Where we believed the Quakers
differed from us least, there they most of all differed.

This, Reader, is such a Demonstration of the Author, that there seems left no
room for us to say any thing upon it.

He concludes by way of Apology for his Undertaking, That tho the Quakers have
the Confidence to dictate, in the Name of God, to Kings and Parliaments what
they are to do, he hopes he shall not follow their Example; but when he has
discharged his Conscience as an Englishman and a Christian, he shall submit
all to the Wisdom of his Superiors, not doubting but to make proof of what he
has said, either out of our Books, or by his own Experience.

Answ. We are glad to hear he will submit to any thing, but especially to the
Wisdom of his Superiors, and thence hope he will be quiet, provided he
remembers what he says; for their Great Wisdom having neglected to take any
notice of his Attempts, he is obliged to acquiesce in their Silence. All things
do not deserve an express Sentence, and to such silence is ever one: And if he
has any respect for that Example, he would do well to follow it. However, we
can have no Apprehension of the Consequence of what Evidence he can produce
from our Writings, that have so much to show of his abusing of them. But for
his Experience, he must excuse us, if we except against it, since ours has
taught us that he is a corrupt one, by clipping our Writings, and Coining other
Sense, a Forgery as Obvious as Gross, and most reprovable with Men of Truth.

For his accepting of G. Whitehead 's Offer, to meet him with Six, Ten or
Twelve competent Witnesses, to prove that he has grossly and wickedly abused
and perverted our Writings, and wronged us in Charge, Citation and Observation.

We doubt not, if it proceed to a Conference, our Friend G. W. who has so
often detected him of gross Perversions, both by Writing, and Conference in the
presence of several Eminent Persons, will not be wanting to make good his
Charge, but not for the sake of this virulent Deserter, but those who are or
may be imposed on by him.

We are come now to his Postscript, which begins with a great deal of Rant, at
a Pamphlet against him and his Partners, written by a Member of the Church of
England, while he has reason to believe (he says) the Author was a Real Quaker.

Answ. If so, 'twas more than we knew, as it is, that F. B. had any reason to
think so; for he has taken care to give us none, and perhaps it is because he
had none to give, unless it should be this, That no Member of the Church of
England would show so much dislike to any of the same Communion for challenging
and exposing the Quakers, be it with never so much Heat or Injustice. Tho we
hope, and upon very good grounds too, that the generality of the Sober and
Discreat of them have better thoughts of us, and that upon Experience too.

But he tells us, Our Teachers are Men of design, and have Ends to serve,
being, generally speaking, Men of no Fortunes, as Journey-men Carpenters,
Tailors, Shoemakers, Combers, Weavers, etc.

Answ. We would think that such People, of all others, should be the most
likely to be free from Design, or having Ends to serve. But if that be a good
Reason which he alleges, both Jews and Heathens must have been much in the
right, in objecting Meanness against Christ and his Followers; as also the
Roman Doctors, who threw Textores and Sutores in the face of many of the first
Reformers; who were just such Mechanics, as those he intitles us to for our
Ministry. And he knows in his Conscience that such Poor Men amongst us, whom
God has qualified by his Spirit, to speak and press their Knowledge and
Experience for the Conviction and Edification of others, are conscienciously
concerned in the Exercise of those Gifts, and that they labor hard to maintain
themselves and Families, after the Example of Primitive Teachers, that they
might not be burdensome to the Church. Nothing short of the worst of minds one
would think, can make this our fault, and it must be one of the weakest that
can reconcile the Talents and Education of these Mechanics with the Jesuitical
Crafts and Ends he supposes against them.

But he says this Pamphlet suggests that F. Bugg is Judas, The Church of
England the Jews, and consequently that the Quakers are Jesus.

Answ. We will not believe him, for those that abuse Men's words, may very
easily abuse their meanings. However, there is no necessity that the Quakers
should be understood to be Jesus, because Judas and the Jews may join against
them, for that they did formerly against his Followers as well as himself, if
by Judas we may understand Apostates from the Christian Churches. But what if
that Book supposes F. B. to be a Judas? Has he not been so to the Profession he
did once, Conscienciously and Zealously adhere to, and that with the greatest
Aggravations? Let his Actions speak, and he knows very well it is a word
usually borrowed to character any Person that has been false to the People or
Profession he once was of, and as such, he may not perhaps much mistake the
Author of the Pamphlet, in applying that Epithet to himself.

But this he will needs have for a Proof, that the Author is a Real Quaker; to
Credit which, he observes to us a Story that he lately heard, of a project
proposed and carried on to acquit W. P. of the then general suspicion of being
a J -- te, though he thinks it rather increased it; for, says he, W. P. and P. E.
both juggled together, and P. E. was to be the Gentleman, and as such, to write
a Letter thus superscribed, To the Honorable William Penn Esquire Proprietor and
Governor of Pensilvania, and W. P. to answer it. Well! an answer to it was
written, and both Printed 1688. No matter whether each wrote their part, or one
wrote both, they were then both Quakers, and it was for a Design; and to serve
a Turn they can turn their Dialect into any Shape. In like manner I take this
subscription of the Obscure pretended Member of the Church of England (by his
scandalous Reflections) to be a Real Quaker.

Answ. But why so? Suppose his Story were true, is it impossible for a Church
of England Man to dislike a Renegado, disabhor his Treachery and Malice, and
discountenance those that encourage him, though they were of his own Communion?
Say no, and We believe there are many thousands of that Communion of that same
Mind. For at this rate the Author of The Contempt of the Clergy must be a
Quaker, and every one that writes against any Clergyman of her Communion. But
the Rudeness and Falsehood of the Story he alludes to about W. P. does very much
highten his reckoning. His insinuation is, that the Letter to him, is
fictitious, and that W. P. writ both, or if he did not, they were both Quakers,
and therefore the same thing. His consequence is, the Quakers will turn their
Dialect into any Shape, to serve a Turn.

Now if the Story be false, the Consequence must fall to the Ground; and that
it is so, not only W. P. denies that he is the Author of the Letter, but, the
Person that writ it, has owned himself the Author of it to diverse Persons, and
is well known to have never been of our Profession, but for several Years has
been, and still is, in a public and eminent Employment under the present
Government. And if this ill Man will not believe us, any Man between us shall
have that Satisfaction, if what we say be scrupled.

Now for as much as this Paper does in two or three places of it, maliciously
reflect upon our Friend W. P. as if he were Popishly affected, though we are
satisfied that F. B. believes in his Conscience quite other things of him; our
Reader is desired to peruse those very Letters that passed at that time of day
(88) and he will not think his time lost, or the worse of W. P. We may add that
in 86, and in the same Reign, no less Man than the Archbishop Tillotson did
beg our Friend's pardon for so much as giving Occasion to any to doubt of his
being a Protestant, from some cold words dropped upon that subject, which Letter
is extant, and written with his own hand, with a singular Respect as well as
Vindication of him from such Reflections.

Upon this subject we shall only add, That he that takes pains to mistake and
abuse People, and that at any rate, cannot deserve the Countenance of honest
Men, whatever he may of their Frowns. And we should think it Labor very ill
bestowed to attempt their Conviction, that can credit him in his Endeavors
against us, since they are attended with such horrid Instances of Corruption
and Prejudice. It is a common Proverb, that One Renegado is worse than three
Turks, which is true in this Man's case, not for his Abilities, but his Abuses.
He is the very Reverse of Christianity, for instead of doing good in season and
out of season, he seems incessantly mischievous; the worst part of which is
this, that though others may be as eager, they are not so culpable in their
Opposition; for what may be called Zeal in them, is a Self-condemning
Presumption in him: And we believe though God is pleased to suffer him to go on
for a time, He will either render his Endeavors ineffectual, or make him in
the Conclusion his own Condemnation and Burden; as has fared with others less
guilty than he has appeared.

We shall say little of his foolish Aggravations and Abuse of a Zealons Passage
in a Book of James Parnel's, who observing and blaming the great Pride, Luxury
and Forgetfulness of God, among a People of high Profession in their misuse of
their Plenty; This Man would have him say, it is Sin to enjoy such Plenty,
instead of a Sin to abuse it, lest he should want an Occasion to censure us in
the careful Enjoyment of what God has given us. But we cannot be silent under
the Injury he commits against the Dead, in robbing that godly Young Man of the
Innocence of his Death, and the Reputation of his Martyrdom, by making him to
have starved himself: For his Death was occasioned by the barbarity of the
Jailer and those that committed him; as the Leaves F. B. quotes out of the
Serious Apology written by G. W. and W. P. declare, and some yet alive in
Colchester can witness: Whose last words were, Here I dye Innocently, which he
could never have done, had he been Accessory to his own Death.

But, says he, some may still object, that they hear nothing against the
Quakers from the Presbyterians, Independents and Baptists, save only from the
Church of England, etc. to which he answers on the behalf of the Dissenters,
that they are one with the Church in this case, and are sorrowfully affected,
that they are joined with them in the Act of Toleration; and not only so, but
that he has a Testimony well Attested of their abhorrence of our blasphemous
Tenants.

Answ. We cannot think the Church of England ever made this Man her Advocate,
or that She and the Dissenters have concurred in his Enterprise, we would show
a greater Respect to both, and have a better Opinion of their Moderation. It Is
plain he wants the credit of their Authority, having so little of his own. And
we are very well satisfied he prevaricates with his Reader, when he boasts of a
Testimony so well Attested, that it is no other than what he has Collected out
of some of our old Adversaries Books of those Persuasions, which proves no
Concurrence with the Church of England, or either of them with him in his
Address to the Parliament, to have our Faith and Practice censured and
suppressed, but rather a proof of Forgery, to give his Collection the force of
a Commission. His enumeration of our Tenants is the Epitome of his Perversions:
For as we cannot quit any point of our own; so we abhor every one of them as
given by him.

To Conclude, that he may show himself all of a piece, he says to the Lords and
Commons in the Parliament assembled, Here you have the Unanimous Consent of all
Protestants, both Conformists and Non-conformists, for the Examination or
Censuring and Suppressing the Errors of the Quakers: And as this, says he,
would tend to the stopping of the Gangreen of Quakerism. So it is hoped, and
earnestly prayed, that the same may be taken into your Serious Consideration.

Answ. We have made Enquiry of the several Classes of Dissenters, and they
purge themselves from giving him any such Credentials; and least of all that
they ever said, as he expresses it in the tail of his former Paragraph, viz.
That they are sorrowfully affected, that they are joined with the Quakers in
the Act of Toleration: On the contrary they are sorry many of them, to see a
Man pretending to Reform, filled with so much Prejudice as seems to them to
animate him against us; as indeed we are that Envy as well as Untruth should so
much predominate. For under all his pretenses to mean no such thing as
Persecution in all he says, he concludes with a fresh breath of severity
against us, in an earnest prayer that we may be censured and suppressed in
Principles and Practice, that is, in our Religion. But thanks be to God, This
Man is none of our Judge, and has sufficiently forfeited the Reputation of a
Witness. We appeal to our Books in impartial Men's hands, and our constant
Converse among our Neighbors, if they have heard any such Doctrine from our
Mouths, or observed any such Actions in our Lives, as makes up the heap of this
Man's Clamor and Calumny against us.

And now Sober Reader and Inquirer, that thou may better acquaint thy self
with our real Principles, be pleased to examine them, as laid down by our
selves (a Justice never to be denied to any People) which thou will find in two
little Treatises, one entitled, Truths Principles, by John Crook, first
printed in 62, and diverse times since, the other called a Key, etc. by W. Penn,
now in the 10th Edition, and for a larger Account, Robert Barclay's Apology,
all Sold by Tacy Soul in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street; which we hope
will be Satisfactory, atleast so far as to deliver us from the Frightful and
Black Insinuations of our Busy and Angry Adversaries, to whom we wish
Repentance, and to them that unwittingly encourage them, a better understanding
of us, and our so much misrepresented Principles.

Postscript.
As for the Government of Pensilvania being guilty of Persecution for Religion
as he suggests, it is just as true as all the rest: For it is not only a
Fundamental Law of their Government, that every Person should enjoy a Liberty
of Conscience, but it is so fully practiced, that even all other Protestant
Persuasions share equally with our selves in the Administration of the
Government: The present Lieutenant Governor to W. P. being a Member of the
Church of England, and many of the Council and Assembly, the Judges and
Justices being of that and other dissenting Protestant Communions.

But as we are for Liberty of Conscience every where, so we are no where for
having Government affronted and abused, in the name of Conscience, by Gross and
Insolent Behavior.

And for our Friends there, they have been so far from a Spirit of Persecution,
that it is but too plain they have long suffered under it, from such Insolent
and Abusive Pens as this Man has treated us with.

FINIS.

