QUAKERISM A NEW Nickname for OLD Christianity BEING An Answer to a Book,
Entitled, Quakerism No Christianity; subscribed by J. Faldo. In which The
Rise, Doctrine and Practice of the Abused Quakers are Truly, Briefly and Fully
Declared and Vindicated from the False Charges, Wicked Insinuations, and utmost
Opposition made by that Adversary.

With a KEY, Opening the True Meaning of some of their Doctrine, from that
Construction which their Enemies Ignorantly or Enviously Affirm, Report and
Dispute to be theirs.

By one of them, and a Sufferer with them in all their Sufferings, William Penn.

Behold, I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, who say they are Jews, and
are not, but do Lie: Behold, I will make them to come and Worship before thy
Feet; and to know, that I have loved thee,

Rev. 3. 9. Printed Anno 1672.

The Author TO THE READER.
HOwever our many sorts of Enemies may please themselves, with their brisk
Endeavors against us, and the Expectation they thence have of our Utter
Overthrow, especially some Independents, Anabaptists and Socinians; Be it known
to the whole World, Professor and Profane, our Confidence is in God, for whose
holy Truths sake we are as Men killed all the Day long; and it is our
Persuasion, that many Thousands in these Nations have that Sense of us in their
own Consciences, which it is as impossible for the utmost Power or Artisice of
our angry Adversaries to exstinguish, as the Sun in the Firmament. We matter
not their Flourish, Number, Threat or Force, though Gog and Magog are combined
to seek our Ruin; God that made the Heavens and the Earth, the Sea and
Fountains of Water has them all in Derision, and will not be wanting to assist
us, otherwise fore-lorn upon Earth, in this juncture of close Attacque, (we
waiting on him) with that Divine Courage, Wisdom and Patience, which may enable
us to surmount the Difficulty of the Work, and through the Tribulations of our
Day, bring us to the Recompense of that Peace which is Eternal. And indeed,
this is our Joy above all worldly things, that the Lord is our Light, and our
Salvation, we know it, we experience it; therefore whom should we fear? Though
all Sects seem met in one, as a mighty Man of War, to our Overthrow, the
despised Stripling (by this great Goliath) has a Sling and a Stone, that
(however contemptible, yet) coming in the Name of the Lord, will give this
Giant's Head a Victim to his Faith. We know in whom we have believed, and
cannot be Cudgelled, Jeered, Railed or Smoothed out of our most Holy Faith, who
has God for its Father, and Victory for its Offspring. A Birth unknown to the
Bawling Pharisees of the Age; nor can any but a Conqueror inherit.

Reader, their Cries for Scripture, Christ, Fundamentals, and the like, are
mere Pretenses that make but up a Cloak to cover the Avaricious, and Ambitious
Ends of those leading Men in every Party, that as deeply and vigorously
prosecute our Ruin, as a Jew does Riches; but the Reason is known to Almighty
God. Because the Quakers having been taught that Inward, Heavenly, Straight and
Narrow Way to Life by an Internal Living Teacher; they would, say they,
srustrate all Hope of further Advantage, the Ignorance of People in the things
of God has hitherto benefited us withal, by their most vehement Declaration to
the World, that no Man can be a Child of God, who is not begotten of God; and
that no Man can be so begotten, but by the Internal Operation of his Spirit to
Wash, Cleanse and Inliven the Mind to Godward; that this is the Deepest and
most Excellent End for which Man was made, the Law was given, Prophets raised,
and Christ Came, Lived, Died, Rose and Ascended: That who know him not thus let
into the Conscience, in order to Purge it from Dead Works, by the Destruction
of that Power which product them, to lead Captivity Captive, and Reign as King,
Lord, Judge and Lawgiver, are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, and are at best
but Carnal, Historical, and merely Outside Christians. And this we standing
by, and they knowing full well, with the fatal Consequence to their Designs
that would attend the Universal Reception of this kind of Doctrine, they seek
to divert the Minds of tender and enquiring People by all the Hideous, Devilish
Falsities Satan's utmost Interest can furnish them withal; deforming us with
what Mire they can either borrow or invent, hoping by such Besmeerings to make
the Dogs fasten us for some Monstrous Beasts, and choosing rather to Solemnize
our Funeral, with the Merriment of the Vulgar, then suffer them to know us
truly as we are, lest their sober Conscience should enquire or be touched with
any the least Pity for our so hard Dealing at their Cruel Hands.

Well! but for Your sakes, O Impartial People! am I this time engaged in Spirit
to concern my self, otherwise against my Will, to take an Angry, Scoffing
Independent Priest in hand; a Man I know not, but by his Book, and certainly an
Ignorant, Malicious and Scurrilous one too. I perceive how unknown soever he is
to me, I am not to him, and he has taken great Care to tell me so: but mine own
Concern would have suggested Silence to me for an Answer to his Uncivil
Reflections (for Arguments I cannot call them) had not my earnest Desires been
for the Vindication of that Truth Living, upon all Occasions offered, which the
Grave will prevent me doing. It is my Satisfaction God has made it my Lot; and
that of suffering from Detractors, I esteem not the least part of my Crown: for
whose Holy Service, he is my Witness, I have long since cheerfully sacrificed
my All of Contentment in this World; and yet am not without a share from his
peculiar Providence.

But let us see if the Quakers are those Miserably Deluded Wretches, this
Taunting Priest would represent us, whose Triffling Quirks show the Emptiness
of the Head, and Airiness of the Mind from whence they came. If we are what he
asserts, we are the worst of Men, by how much we pretend to greater things; but
if it shall appear, we are Scripturally Orthodox, in some of those very Points
for which he represents us Heterodox, and mistaken by him in the rest; I hope
it will not be without Good Reason, that I have entituld this short Discourse
Quakerism a New Nickname for Old Christianity.

Reader, the whole of what I have to desire from thee is an Impartial Mind in
the Perusal of this Defense and Just Explanation of our so much misrepresented
Faith and Doctrine; with that we dare adventure our Cause, and without it there
is no Truth so clear, that Prejudice may not question it. Let not the Multitude
of our Adversaries be an Argument against our Cause; Their Reviling ought not
to pass for Reason, nor Noise for Conquest. With God Almighty and his holy
Witness in thy Conscience, do I leave the Issue of this Endeavor: Be Serious,
be Considerate. Farewell.

Thy Friend, very ready to serve thee with all Sincerity for the Truth's sake,
as it is in Jesus, William Penn.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Introduction. Our Adversary's Definition of Christianity
Defective. True Christianity stated. Quakerism mistaken by him. It is proved
True Christianity; and a Quaker a Right Christian. Page 1. CHAP. II. How
Christianity was introduced it hurts not the Quakers. The Question is not of
Christ's Visible Coming, that is Owned by them. Nor is their Religion a New One
from that of Christianity; but the Recovery of Lost Primitive Christianity,
since the Reign of Antichrist in the World. That Quakerism, as called, made
its Way by Purity, Sorrow and Rejoicing, as well as Christianity. The Priest's
Vilifying Expressions Rebuked. That the Distinct Times of their Appearance is
no Argument against their Harmony, or being but Two Words for the same Thing,
since the same Truth may appear at Two distinct Ages of the World. It would
strike out J. Faldo as well as the Quakers, if the Contrary were admitted. That
he grossly Contradicts himself as to Time. Christianity has more or less been in
the World where Godly Men and Women have been, as well before as since that
Appearance. We intend no New Dispensation, but the Renewed Revelation of the
same Power, which is the True Gospel. p. 11. CHAP. III. J. Faldo's Charge. That
the Scriptures are not the Word of God, Reasons for it. The Scriptures by him
urged against us, cleared and proved to be for us; They are the Words of the
Word; a Declaration of the great Law, Word, or Commandment, but not that Law,
Word, or Commandment. p. 24. CHAP. IV. His Charge. What he quotes proves it
not. Revelation, Infallibility, and Inspiration considered. The Priest proved
Uncertain of his own Faith. Our Friends debase not the Scripture, but Lift them
up His Objection about our Books Titles answered. The Use of Scripture
asserted. The Light vindicated from Insufficiency. Something of the True Rule.
p. 32. CHAP. V. The Charge Stated, not Proved. The Scriptures not the most
Excellent nor only General Rule. God may speak by Instruments. The Instruments
not the Rule, but that which uses them. That the Scriptures being Obligatory,
does not conclude it the General Rule under the Gospel. The Dis-ingenuity of
our Adversary, in citing the Apostle's Words, Reprehended: The Scriptures no
Judge in that sense wherein they are not the General Rule. The Scriptures
Confessed to. p. 52. CHAP. VI. We deny the Charge. His Proof, no Proof; but
against himself. We Own, Believe, and desire to Obey the Scriptures; they
afford Comfort, and are as Lights in the World; but not that True Light. The
Light and Spirit Superior to them. p. 63. CHAP. VII. Commands upon Conviction
to be obeyed. All General Commands Obligatory. Particular not, but upon
particular Commission Our Adversary's Dis-ingenuity. The Scriptures a Means by
which God may be known; but not the Principle. p. 70. CHAP. VIII. His Charge of
our Denying the Scriptures any Means by which God does enable Men to resist
Temptations; And that we say they are Dangerous to be read, rejected. His
Proofs lame. The Scriptures are believed to be a Means, etc. The true Knowledge
of them Divine. No Knowledge of Divine Things, but upon Experience. It does not
destroy Faith. W. Penn's Words safe and sound. The Priest a mere Shuffler.
Learning a Servant to Truth Christ the Word of God. Faith by our Adversary
preferred before Scripture. The Scriptures ought to be Read, Believed and
Obeyed. p. 76. CHAP. IX. That we do not put the Scripture and Holy Spirit in
Opposition. The Wickedness of the Priest in his Proof. They accord, and we
acquiesce in their Testimony. We do not say that they are not to be obeyed
without extraordinary Apostolical Revelation, as basely suggested. His Proof
fictitious and forged. Such only are by us denied as are only Literal, Formal
Christians. The Scriptures owned and believed in by us according as they
testify of themselves. p. 91. CHAP. X. He charge us with a Denial of all the
Ordinances of the Gospel; First in general, then in particular. His Proof of
the first Invalid. His great Dis-ingenuity in wresting our Words, especially I.
Pennington's. p. 102. CHAP. XI. The first of the particular Ordinances he says
we deny, is the Ministry. His Proof lame. W. P. and his Friends defended. J. F.
and his Gang Reproveable. We own a Gospel one; but not his. The Calling abused
by such Pretenders. p. 105. CHAP. XII. The Second particular Ordinance is a
Gospel Church. His Definition for us, by its gross Contrariety to the
Scripture. His base Inference of our Denial of Religious Societies, and Outward
Gifts from our Friends asserting of but one Catholic Church, and that it is in
God. A Gospel Church owned. Our Adversary proved Heterodox about Apostolical
Preaching. Inward Sense preferred before Intelligence. p. 112. CHAP. XIII. We
deny Preaching, says he. His Dis-ingenuity in stating our Principles. We hold
and practice true Gospel-Preaching. No Difference between what the Light
teaches, and the Scripture. Our Gospel is Peace; Our Adversary's is War, etc.
True Preaching Converts, our Adversary's not. p. 117. CHAP. XIV. His Charge of
our Denial of Gospel-Prayer, inverted. The Prayer he pleads for, Anti-Gospel.
True Prayer stated, asserted and defended with plainness, from Scripture and
Reason. That as well in Families as Meetings, and at Meals, as both, False
Worship detestable to God. All False, wherein God's Spirit is not the first,
and Chief Mover and Assister. The Subtility of Satan in putting upon
unacceptable Prayer, to prevent true Prayer. p. 121. CHAP. XV. His Charge of
our Denial of Baptism and the Sacraments, introduced with a Discourse of
positive Commands, Destructive of the Foundation of Religion. The Priest
against God, Scripture and Reason. He confounds himself. Baptism of Water
proved John's; and not to continue, Mat. 28. 19. 1 Cor. 1. 17. Ephesians. 4. 5.
cleared and vindicated. The One Spiritual Baptism defended. p. 129. CHAP. XVI.
The Supper, he says we deny, not denied but fulfilled. The Scriptures
consulted; No Perpetuity proved. That it was a Sign, and that Signs were done
away in Christ, demonstrated, The present Practice in the Case not Primitive.
Our Faith left with God in the Matter. p. 141. CHAP. XVII. His Charge of our
Denying Christ's Transactions to influence into our Justification considered.
His Proofs not for him. His Abuse of our Friends words. Justification
distinguished upon as Remission, and as daily Acceptance. The Transactions of
Christ largely owned by us. The Scriptures confirm our Faith in Christ, as a
general and particular Savior. No Works of Man Meritorious. p. 147. CHAP.
XVIII. He says we disown the True Christ. It is proved, that He denies in
Contradiction to himself what we deny; and that we are Scriptural and sound in
our Belief: And though we cannot exclude that Divinity from the true Christ;
Yet we also own, that the true Christ took Flesh, that he appeared for the
Salvation of Mankind, and that his Bodily Appearance was instrumental in the
Point. Christ owned according to Scriptures. p. 157. CHAP. XIX. Our Adversary's
proposed three Scripture-Places are by us rightly applied, and his Charge is
found untrue. Christ is proved the true Light, Comforter, Creator and Redeemer.
Our Adversay's Objections examined and refuted. His Triumph turns to his
Shame. The true signification of the Word (...), and (...) confirmed. p. 166.
CHAP. XX. Our Adversary's Charges denied: His Proofs fail him. The Quakers are
no Idolaters; and Quakerism no Idolatry. We own and profess the only true God,
that made Heaven and Earth. p. 191. CHAP. XXI. Our Adversary at a loss to prove
his Charge. We own so much of the Resurrection, as the Scriptures express; more
Curiosity Dangerous and Condemnable. Eternal Rewards owned by us. J. Faldo's
Book will prove it to him, and our Tribulations to Us. p. 199. An Appendix,
being a Reply to that Last Part of his Book, which pretends to Answer the First
of my Spirit of Truth Vindicated etc. p. 206. A Key, opening a Way to every
Common Understanding, whereby to discern the Difference betwixt the Quakers
Faith, Doctrine and Practice, and the Perversions and Traducings of their
several Adversaries. p. 236. J. Faldo's Key proved Defective. p. 246.
ERRATA.
READER,
THough this Civility of Excusing the Author from the Miscarriage of the Press,
be that which is both due in it self, and always acknowledged by Sober and
Impartial Men; yet having to do with a Generation of People resolved to our
Ruin any way (whose only Clemency to the Printer, is Cruelty to the Author,
and are therefore not weary of Excusing the one, that they may the more
Colourably Accuse the other) I have endeavored at a Correction of such Escapes
as seemed to me in over-looking the whole Discourse most hurtful to the Sense.
For many Literal Mistakes, want of due Points, Points misplaced,
Transpositions, or the like Impunctuality and Impropriety, I bespeak my Excuse
from thee: If thou art Ingenuous, thou will not deny it; and if thou art not, I
shall the less concern my self in the Advantage taken.

Page Line, Errors, Corrected. 6 32 Outward Christianity Outward Manifestation
11 28 Comparence Comparison 12 11 and but 23 19 (had so -- (had he so -- 39 17
Reconciliation reconciled 40 8 which who 47 17 want went 20 this his 50 19 for
to 51 23 whatsoever whomsoever 68 27 lightened lighted 76 17 -- to be any, etc.
85 5 Words Word 88 21 to too 89 25 that Rest the Rest 93 3 our his 94 31
Temporal Temporary 34 Word God 95 16 high highly 25 129 124 96 6 Scriptures
Scripture 107 16 God respoke God shall have respoken 17 made makes 109 5 Rich
as Rich 6 which what 28 Hawking Hackny 116 9 Certainty Certainly 123 21 are is
125 29 all Conceivings all Self-conceivings 126 4 joined enjoyed 127 24 pure
Ware, blot out 128 17 risen, departed risen and departed 132 2 punctually
punctual 139 5 I blot out 140 4 John' s John 142 2 my the 13 with respect in
Comparison 144 21 or and 146 8 to me self with my self ^^ back ^^ back at us
152 15 could would 157 19 such too as such as 29 there with where with 158 10
as at 159 12 had has 23 else it was not or else it had not been 161 34 p. 72,
77, p. 72, 77, 84, 85, 93. 164 1 answered considered 27 Matter Nature 165 17
Creco crew 168 8 of of our Principles 203 10 to too 209 14 I do and I do 30
when wherein 213 28 the gift of Spirit a Gift of the Spirit 31 not blot out 214
28 not Agents not prime Agents 217 3 the Truth of blot out 227 1 Creator
Creation 229 34 reputed reputed him 230 4 due duly 239 7 is rightly is it
rightly

QUAKERISM A NEW Nickname for OLD Christianity:
BEING A Short and Round Answer to a Book, Entitled, Quakerism No
Christianity, etc.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction. Our Adversary's Definition of Christianity Defective. True
Christianity Stated. Quakerism Mistaken by him. It is proved True Christianity,
and a Quaker a Right Christian.

. 1. AMong many other Persons, that have of late Industriously essayed the
Mis-Representing the Quakers, and their Religion (overcasting the Sincerity of
the One, and darkning the Excellent Beauty of the Other, by their Mists of
Ignorance and Prejudice) John Faldo, though the Last, has not been the Least
concerned.

. 2. I am truly Sorry to see, that among the several Arguments, some Men's
Prudence rendered for Toleration, that of giving Dissenters Liberty, and they
would War within themselves, should be so amply verified by their Unchristian
Irruption upon us (disturbing those by Slanderous Pamphlets, who would not be
concerned in their Heats.) But this Folly and Uncharitableness, I am to tell
the World, lies not at the Quakers Door, who seek Peace with all Men; but some
Restless Spirits among other Persuasions, whose whole Food seems to turn into
Contest, and show they can no more live without it, then the Air they breath
in. What shall we do then? Suffer their Slanders, Detractions, Additions, and
Downright Abuses of us to pass Unanswered? No: for then we shall be concluded,
either Guilty or Vanquished. What then? Why we will defend our selves with Truth
and Moderation; and that I hope, with God's Assistance, to do in this short
Treatise, to the Confusion of our Enemies, and Renowning the Truth, and
Clearing our Innocence to the World.

. 3. The Author is pleased to call his Book, Quakerism no Christianity. A Title
of more Reproach and Infamy, then became a Christian-Man to give. But let us
hear what he means by Christianity.

. 4. By Christianity, we are not to understand all those Matters of Faith and
Practice, Page 2. Sect. 2.
which Christianity does obliege us unto. A strange Definition, of true
Christianity: For, if to Believe, and Do all Christianity requires; be not
Christianity, then there is something beyond all that Christianity requires to
be believed and done that is Christianity; else I understand nothing. But says
he, It takes in whatever is worthy in those Religions, it has superceded, yea,
the very Heathens. What then? Is it not therefore Christianity? Egregious
Weakness! What an Hair has he split? but it flies in his Eyes: Is it not
therefore Christianity, because Christianity takes it in? If Christianity takes
in whatever is worthy in other Religions; then, since Christianity is
Worthiness It self, Comprehensive of whatever was in any degree Excellent among
Jews or Heathens; will it not follow, That, to Believe and Practice all that
Christianity requires, is Christianity; unless we are to understand, That
Christianity does not require what was Worthy and Commendable among Jews or
Heathens, which he says, we are.

. 5. This then does not make Christianity a Distinct Thing in kind, from what
was Worthy, as he calls it, that is, Godly among either Jews or Heathen: but
that Christ did by his Visible Appearance benefit the World with a more
glorious Manifestation of the same Divine Power, Purity, Truth, Wisdom and
Righteousness, then former Ages were either capable of, or attended with. To
exclude then all Antecedent Times from any share in Christianity, is both Weak,
and Cruel; since it plainly shuts them out of all hopes of Eternal Salvation:
for if no Name be given but the Name of Christ, under the whole Heaven, by
which Men can be saved; then, either Christ was always in some measure or
other a Savior, and such as were saved, in some degree or other, Christians;
or there was one Savior before Christ's outward coming, and another since; or
lastly, all that were antecedent to that Appearance, were damned.

. 6. I appeal then to the Consciences and Understandings of all impartial
People, if our Belief be not the most Just, Merciful and True; that however it
pleased God to send his Son a Light into the World at that time more eminently
then before, yet that he was so far Spiritually manifested in all Ages, as the
Word of God nigh in the Heart, and great Commandment in the Consciences of Men,
as who believed and obeyed, obtained Remission of Sins and Eternal Salvation.
This is clear; for if no man could ever see, or know the Father but the Son,
and he to whom the Son reveals him, then because many of the Holy Ancients both
spiritually saw and knew God (otherwise they could never be saved) it follows,
that Christ did in all Ages reveal God, who being Light, and that it is Light
alone which can Reveal or Manifest; it was as a Light within, that he
communicated unto the Soul of Man, which is within Man, the Knowledge of the
Pure God: Whatever may be known of God is manifest within Man, for God has
showed it unto him: so that the Contradiction and Error of the Man's Definition
of Christianity is evident.

. 7. But yet a little further: He plainly Heathenizes that notable Christian
Passage of the refusing it all Privilege within the bounds of Apostle,
Christianity, viz. Whatsoever things are True, Honest, Just, Pure, Lovely, of
Good Report; Phil. 4.
if there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise, think on these things. Now if
this Religious Chemist shall once extract all things that are Honest, Just,
Pure, Lovely, and of Good Report, from Christianity (which the Apostle makes
the Sum of what he had been writing (unless it is not a Christian Epistle) and
therefore ends with a Finally, my Brethren) tell me, O sober Reader, what a
kind of Christianity there would be in the World? O Monstrous Impiety! Is this
Man fit to write of Christianity that places it beneath the lowest step of
Purity; making manifest Difference betwixt being a Child of God, and a
Christian? True, the outward History of Christ's exceeding Love to Mankind,
deserves all humble and reverent Credit as a Godly Tradition, and it should
forever bind Men to receive and fear and worship him: yet I boldly affirm, that
though the Manifestation was clearer; yet Salvation was Salvation, and a Child
of God, a Child of God in all Ages. For what is it but to say, that Pure
Religion and Undefiled, which is to keep our selves unspotted from the World,
belongs not stricktly to the Christian, but Jewish or Pagan Religion; and that
James was but a moral Man in the Matter, and not writing on a Christian
Subject. What an empty Trunk, a Vox, and praeterea nihil, a sounding Brass and
Tinckling Cymbal would this Man make of true Christianity! Yet thus far we may
force him to speak Truth, though in double Contradiction to himself, that since
Christianity takes in all that was worthy in all Ages (not as Alien then, but
related to her self) something of the Nature of true Christianity was in the
World before that more Visible and Glorious Manifestation of it; unless
Christianity be supposed to take into it self what is not of its own Nature:
thus was Christ the Rock the Ancients built on, before Abraham was, whose Day
he had a Sight and Sense of, and from it exulted greatly.

. 8. Christianity then is not an Historical Belief of the exterior Acts, the
true Christ did in that bodily Appearance, which is but Historical
Christianity, as our Adversary weakly argues; for that was the least part of
it, since Christianity is that which page 4.
brings to God, which thousands that believe the other will never arrive at:
but a firm belief in him that so Appeared, Lived, Died, Rose and Ascended, both
as testified of in the Scriptures of Truth, and more especially as he breaks in
upon the Soul by his Divine Discoveries, as the true Light inlightning every
Man, this I call Christianity; and that Man is a Child of Light, who obeys that
Light; a true Christian, who is Christ-like; a Child of God, and Heir of the
Promise, who is inwardly renewed and begot anew of the Incorruptible Seed, and
Word of God: For those who were Christians of old, were such as came to know
Christ, no more after the Flesh, but as the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven,
the Quickening Spirit, who said, I am the Resurrection and the Life; really
witnessing him to be that in themselves, wherefore they Believed, and upon
Repentance, received Remission of Sins and Eternal Salvation. And I do affirm,
that Christianity stands in the Manifestation of a Measure of that Righteous
Power, Wisdom, Truth and Life in the Soul, which appeared so largely and
gloriously in that Body at Jerusalem, to work Repentance, then give Remission,
so Renew, Redeem, and finally Save: and who came to be made sensible of that
Heavenly Treasure in their mortal Bodies, and to improve it as good Stewards,
were Possessors of true Christianity, and therefore Right Christians. The
Distinction betwixt Moral and Christian, the making holy Life Legal, and Faith
in the History of Christ's outward Christianity Manifestation, has been a
deadly Poison these latter Ages have been infected with, to the Destruction of
Godly Living, and Apostatizing of those Churches, in whom there might once have
been begotten, some Earnest, Living Thrist after the Inward Life of
Righteousness.

. 9. By this, I think it may be pretty well known, what we mean by
Christianity, and a True Christian: How far this will agree with his Definition
of Quakerism, and a Quaker, I will proceed to examine.

Quakerism is a heap of Tenets, with the Page 6. Sect. 3.
usurped Names of true Christian Principles, which are yet really no such
thing, but subverting both Foundation and Fabric of true Christianity; And I
call him a Quaker that professes the Light within every Man to be the Lord, and
Savior, and very God: So that then I say Quakerism is no Christianity.

. 10. Indeed, if Quakerism, respecting us, were this, I would say so too: but
because it is justly a Stranger to any such Imputation, I rightly fasten that
of Ignorance or great Malice upon our Adversary. I have already expressed our
Judgment of Christianity, which I suppose to be the Quakerism struck at, what
ever may be pretended, at least, what is our Quakerism, or Christianity rather:
and we leave our Belief with that God who made it so, to justify it, and us,
who thus sted fastly hold, and daily, yet patiently suffer for it, by his own
Discoveries in the Consciences of Men. But this I will add, That since he has
rendered us to be one thing in Show, and another in Reality, our Appeal is to
the God that made Heaven and Earth, to right us in the Minds of all.

. 11. We dare not Believe or Practice what comes not in by True Conviction
(things merely Historical excepted, and yet there is a Conviction for them to)
The Devils who knew Christ and trembled, were more sensible then those who know
him only by Hearsay, and make a Mock of that Trembling, which seizes the
Contrite Souls of Men for Sin. We declare in the Presence of the Eternal God,
that it was the Striving of the holy Spirit in us, that first moved us to solid
Repentance, and as we came to be judged byit, and reconciled unto God in our
Minds, so have we appeared before all Men; therefore it is utterly False, that
We cover our Tenets with the Names of Christian Principles, since these
following, which are ours, are truly Christian and Scriptural (1.) God created
Man Innocent, in his own Image created he him. (2.) That Man or all Mankind has
fallen short of the Glory of God through Disobedience. (3.) That in the Seed
promised Redemption can only be had. (4.) That this Seed is He that in time was
called Christ. (5.) That by this Holy Seed, both before and since that Coming,
the Serpent's Head has been particularly bruised in all who have been redeemed
or saved, as the Holy Men and Women of Old, and such in every Age as have known
a Sanctification. (6.) That this Seed appeared in the Fullness and Stature of a
Man in that Outward Body prepared of God above 1600. Years since, and in it
encountered, and conquered Satan, and trod him under his Feet. (7.) That he
bore the Sin of the World. (8.) That he laid down his Life a Ransom for all.
(9.) That such as Believed and Followed him as he then appeared, received
Remission of Sins, and Eternal Life. (10.) That what was then outwardly done,
did still refer and had relation to an Inward Work in the Souls of Men: the
Holy Life put forth it self to work Inward Conviction, and drive the Mind into
a Measure of the same in it self; for the whole End of it was, to draw the
Minds of Men more Inward, to a Manifestation of that same Life, Virtue, Power,
Wisdom, and Righteousness in each Particular, which appeared in that Body in
General, and qualified it to that great Work, and sustained it under all its
Sufferings, and put that great Value upon them, which really was in them;
Wherefore, to the Divine Power first, and to the Holy Manhood next, do we
ascribe that Great and Wonderful Benefit that thereby came unto the World.

. 12. But next, we must deny his Quaker as well as his Quakerism: indeed, they
go together; who misseth one, it is unlikely he should hit the other. We never
said, that the Light in every Man was the only Lord, and Savior, and very God.
Let him but show us any passage of any one acknowledged to be a Quaker, and he
will say something: But methinks, he that has quoted so many passages out of
our Friends Books, to so little purpose, should not have neglected to instance
in some one of us, that has so expressed our selves; it shows, that either he
thinks to be believed Hand over Head, or really there is no such Doctrine by us
asserted, and consequently he knew no such place to cite. But for the
Upright-hearted in all Forms, who are desirous of the Substance, that will give
Life to the Soul; and who stand only at a distance from us, on the account of
the many frightful Characters their Teachers give of us, I shall briefly open
our Faith in this Matter.

. 13. First, We assert, that all Men are enlightened, (let it be Lighted in
their Souls or Understandings, if our Adversaries will) This is proved from
Joh. 1. 9. also, whatever may be known of God is manifest within, for God has
shown it unto them. Again, whatever Romans 1. 19. Ephesians1. 19.
is reproved is made manifest by the Light; for whatever makes manifest, is
Light. All Knowledge of God comes by the Light he gives into the Soul as well
as that all have that Light, though few obey it.

. 14. Secondly, This Light is Divine, because it is the very Life of the Word,
which is God; not an Effect of its Power, as a Created Light, which some vainly
fancy; but in Him, or It, the Word, was Life, and that Life (Numerical) was the
Light of Men: what is Life in the Word, is Light in Men, and who follow that
Light as A Reprover of the Deeds of Darkness, shall be made Children of Light,
and have the Light of Life.

. 15. Thirdly, Though we say that all are enlightened by it, or receive Light
from it, yet far be it from us to assert, every such Illumination is the only
Lord, and Savior, and very God. By no means, but rather thus, that the only
Lord, and Savior, and very God is the great Sun and Light of Righteousness to
the Invisible World of Souls and Spirits (if I may so speak) who manifests unto
every particular that which concerns the State of every Individual; but not
that every such Inlightning should be the Entire Lord, Savior, God: so that
this Priest is already found deficient in his Work: he should better have
understood us before he had given an Account of us, and discovered his
Opposition to us. What Superstructure can we expect from so infirm a
Foundation; how shall J. Faldo prove Quakerism no Christianity, who is
defective in his Definition of both? Certainly the Quaker may be the best of
Christians for ought he has groundedly opposed to him: I am sure he would have
thought such a Mistake in us most heinous; to say nothing of that Advantage he
would have taken to show his little Wit, and great Prejudice in aggravating our
Ignorance to the World.

CHAP. II.
How Christianity was introduced it hurts not the Quakers. The Question is not
of Christ's Visible Coming, that is Owned by them. Nor is their Religion a New
One from that of Christianity; but the Recovery of Lost Primitive Christianity,
since the Reign of Antichrist in the World. That Quakerism, as called, made
its Way by Purity, Sorrow and Rejoicing, as well as Christianity. The Priest's
Vilifying Expressions Rebuked. That the Distinct Times of their Appearance is
no Argument against their Harmony, or being but Two Words for the same Thing,
since the same Truth may appear at Two distinct Ages of the World. It would
strike out J. Faldo as well as the Quakers, if the Contrary were admitted. That
he grossly Contradicts himself as to Time. Christianity has more or less been
in the World where Godly Men and Women have been, as well before as since that
Appearance. We intend no New Dispensation, but the Renewed Revelation of the
same Power, which is the True Gospel.

. 1. THe next Mis-Representation, is of the Manner of our Appearance, and the
Time of it, by way of Comparence with that of Christianity, little to his
Purpose, and in my Judgment, much against him.

. 2. Christianity was introduced by Preaching the Promised Messiah and Pointing
at his Page 7. Sect. 1.
Human Person: but Quakerism by Preaching a Light within.

I answer, that this is nothing injurious to the Quakers at all, but highly on
their side: for had they preached a Christ now coming in the Flesh, they had
denied his true and only great Visible Appearance, at Jerusalem, which all true
Quakers own. Since then they believe that Appearance, and therefore need not
preach what is not to be again; and that the whole Christian-World besides,
have so long and lazyly depended on it, without their Thirsting after his
Inward Holy Appearance in the Conscience, to Bind the Strong Man, Spoil his
Goods, and Cast him out; in short, to Discover Sin, Wound for it, and make an
End of it by the Brightness of his Spiritual Coming into the Soul, of all such
as wait for him, and will receive him (in which Sense he was revealed in such,
and became in the Saints of old the Hope of their Glory) I say, since he has
Gal. 1.
been so much talked of, and depended on, as to his then Visible Manifestation
of himself, and so little, if at all desired after, as to his Spiritual and
Invisible Coming into the Hearts of Men, to finish Transgression, and bring in
Everlasting Righteousness: Therefore God raised us up, and we are now gone
forth into the World to declare, That he is Spiritually Manifested; as then
fully in that Body, so now measurably in the Consciences of all People, a
Divine Light, Reproving every Unfruitful Work of Darkness: So that here is the
Mischief, the Malice and Ignorance of our Enemies do us in this World, that
because we Speak so much of, and Preach up, and Write for Christ's Inward and
Spiritual Appearance as a Light to Mankind; therefore they conclude with a
mighty Confidence that we Deny his Outward Coming, Life, Death, Resurrection,
and Ascension, and the Benefits thereof. O Darkness it self! We have our
Witness with the Lord of Heaven and Earth, that we own Him to be the Savior
General of the whole World, as to that Appearance, and that he obtained
precious Gifts for Men; but we say (and our Adversaries have not wherewith
reasonably to unsay it) that first the Divine Light, Life, or Power that shined
through that Blessed Manhood, was Excellently the Savior, and the Manhood but
Instrumentally: Thus the Scripture, There is no Savior besides me, says God;
a Body have thou prepared me: He then was greater then his Body, for it is
called a Vail, and very properly, for it veiled much of that Divine Life, which
when it was withdrawn (as he himself said, it was expedient) the Saints did
witness inwardly Revealed, Christ in them, their Hope of Glory. And secondly,
No Man or Woman in the World is savingly benefitted by his then Appearing as a
Savior, and obtaining precious Gifts for Men, but as every such Individual
Person comes to experience his Internal Manifestation, to Convince, Condemn,
Wound, Heal, Break, Bind up, Slay, make Alive in the Newness of the Spirit:
This is the State of Right Redemption and Salvation, and thus is he
particularly a Savior, and every such one is greatly benefitted by him, as he
was in that former Appearance the general Savior of Mankind. Behold then, O
You that are Impartial! how unworthily he has Injured us? to make People
believe, that We testify to Christ's Inward Appearance in Opposition to, and
Denial of his Outward; which is far from our Hearts, so much as to Conceive.

. 3. But again he tells us, That Christianity made its way by the Purity of its
Doctrine, the gracious Words that Christ spoke, by Sings and Page 9, 10, 11.
Wonders; but Quakerism by Blasphemies against the Lord Jesus Christ; and
quotes E. B. saying, Your Imagined God above the Stars; and G. Fox. There are
Miracles among Believers in the Spirit, etc. frothily querying, whether it
smells more of the FOX or the GOOSE.

It Is true, the Purity of its Doctrine was, and is, an admirable Enforcement it
had, and has above all other: nor can he fasten justly any Impurity upon what
we profess, though he endeavors to detract from it by base Aspersions, for
indeed it is the same. Sweet were the Words of Christ, I grant; but altogether
as Severe and Terrible to Pharisaical Hypocrites, who were both the greatest
Scripturians, and Haters of Him in that Age.

. 4. Nor is it true that E. Borough so expressed himself, in Derision of God's
Presence above the Stars; but of Peoples Imagining him to be in the Likeness of
Man, and so denying his Omni-presence, that He should not be as well below as
above.

. 5. But Wonders and Miracles were wrought. What then? are not the Quakers true
Christians without them? see the Wickedness of this Spirit that works against
us; unless we will work Miracles to confirm that Doctrine in this Generation,
which was confirmed by Miracles 1600. Years ago; either it is not True or we
have no Right to it. But by the way, observe their Folly; for they Unchristian
at once Christianity and themselves too; since Christianity must either be no
longer such, nor they Christians, whilst they cannot work Wonders to prove it,
or them to be such; or else the Quakers are never the less true Christians for
not working those Wonders they boldly require from us. We pretend not to a new
Ministration, and since the Question is not about the Visible Coming of the
Messiah, which called for Visible Miracles (for that is granted on all hands in
Europe) but the Spiritual Appearance of the Messiah in the Hearts and
Consciences of his People, that he might not have a bare and empty Title when
he was called Jesus, but really save his People (now as then) from their Sins;
the Case is plainly altered as to obvious Miracles to our Carnal Senses; the
present Work being to open the blind Eye, and unstop the deaf Ear of the Mind;
blinded and stopped by the God of this World. And these are greater Things, of
more Weight, and the Consequence of them of far greater Importance. And judge
you, how Vain, Light and Unbecoming a Minister of the Gospel of Christ Jesus,
that requires an account for every Idle word, was it in J. Faldo, when treating
of Christianity, to say, whether it smells more like the FOX or the GOOSE? Vain
and Frothy?

. 6. But once more; Christianity entered the World with Ravishing Songs, and
Hallelujahs of the Angels, Healing all Diseases, Casting out Devils, Page 11.
12.
Preaching Peace: But Quakerism entered the World, as if Hell had broke loose,
and Possessions by Satan had made way, and fit Souls for the Quakers Spirit. --
O the Hell-dark Expressions of the Quakers Spirit, frightful, and amazing
Words, bitter Curses, Howlings and Roarings! and what else J. Faldo's Devil
pleases, by which to render the Quakers Odious. Well! But to Answer him.

It was a time of Joy, and a time of Sorrow; the Spirits of the Just rejoiced
that he was born forth into the World, and that Sun of Righteousness risen,
whose Discovering Light, and Refreshing Beams would renew the World, that had
been in great measure bewildered, since its first Innocent State: but therefore
was it not a time of Woe, Sorrow, Terror, and Grievous Distress to all the
Workers of Iniquity? did not Christ come to bring War as well as Peace; a
Sword, a Fire upon Earth? Did not his Forerunner come in an Astonishing
Manner, in Differing Attire, of another Diet, and from a Desolate Place to
Preach Repentance, and to Warn them, with an O Generation of Vipers, to flee
the Wrath to come? Did he not say that an Ax (a Sharp and Terrible Instrument)
should be laid to every unfruitful Tree? And did not the Apostles Preach to the
Pricking of the Hearts of Thousands, and Paul by name; that Felix himself
Trembled? and all, as knowing the Terrors of the Lord themselves, they warned
others? wherefore Judgment is said to have begun at the House of God. Finally,
did not the Devils Howl, Roar and Tremble, foreseeing they should be dislodged,
by one stronger then themselves, Christ the Son of the Living God? and was
there no Terror, Dread and Amazement in all this? I perceive, it may be a
Virtue in the Primitive Christians; but a Vice in the Quakers, at least in J
Faldo's Account.

. 7. But this know, O Impartial People, the Quakers were overtaken, by the
mighty Hand of God; and great were their Travels and Pangs of Sorrow under the
Righteous Terrors of the Lord, whose hour of Just Judgments was come; and being
thereby made Witnesses of his handy Work, and redeemed through Judgment, they
became Ministers of Judgment unto others; and the Terror of it struck
Thousands; the Devils Trembled, and all Flesh (at least in some) was as Grass,
and the Beauty of their Carnal, Outside Religion but as the Flower of the
Field, which, in the Name of the Lord we testify, fell, and withered before the
Brightness of his Appearance to us; who put on Strength like a Giant that was
to run his Race, and girded himself with Power: and who was able to stand
before him? the Hills melted at his Presence, and the Mountains fled before him
into the Sea.

And art thou given up, J. Faldo, to call Light, Darkness; and Darkness, Light;
the Terrors of God, the Possessions of Satan; and the Remorse of Conscience,
Hell Broke Loose? O Unhappy Man! The Lord will reckon with thee for this
Blasphemous Impiety: and this I say to thee, and all thy Associates, that
Eternal Misery will be the End of you, for all your sweet Notions of Religion,
unless you obtain it through the Fire; the fiery Judgments of the Lord revealed
in your Consciences. For that end is Christ now, as formerly, manifested, that
Judgment might be laid to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet in all;
and because we earnestly contend for the Inward Work of Christ, as the most
beneficial to Mankind, therefore is it that you Priests have us in Hatred,
Scorn and Derision all the Day long; and indeed, we are grievously wronged by
your Wickedness and Cruelty; but the Lord is our Strength, of whom therefore
should we be afraid? and why do you Rage, and Imagine a Vain Thing concerning
us?

. 7. Now for the time when Christianity and Quakerism came (as he is pleased to
distinguish them) Some, says he, date Christianity from Page 13, 14, 15.
the Birth of Christ: others, WITH MUCH MORE REASON, FROM THE RESURRECTION OF
CHRIST, witness that place, All Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth.

The Consequence of this Assertion is thus much, That Christ taught not
Christianity; That his Disciples who believed in him, were but better kind of
Carnal Jews; That Christ's Life, Doctrine and Miracles were not performed under
a State of Christianity; That he had not all Power before his Resurrection,
contrary to the Scripture; In short, That Christ and Christianity did not go
together; and if you will, that Christ was not Christ, but a good extraordinary
Jew, before his Resurrection; for I am sure, his Notion of the Beginning of
Christianity warrants the Consequence. O the Orthodoxality of this Wiffling
Priest, Busy-Body, and Conceited enough!

Well, but this is not all, we have a Contradiction to add to his Burden;
Christianity made its Way by many Signs and Wonders wrought before Page 9.
Multitudes, and that not only by Christ himself, but also by his Disciples and
Servants, BOTH BEFORE, AND AFTER HIS DEATH. If this be not Giving and Taking,
Granting and Denying, there is no such Thing in the World; For here is
Christianity before Christ's Death, and yet WITH MUCH MORE REASON, here is a
Denial of that Assertion, and AFFIRMING THAT IT TOOK ITS RISE AFTER HIS
RESURRECTION. Truly, we need not much fear the Consequence of such Encounters,
when our Adversary puts Weapons into our Hands to his own Shame and Overthrow.

. 8. But that he may be further kind to us, he proceeds, The Disciples were
called Christians at Antioch, Act. 11. 26. but the Thing Christianity might
well be before the Name Christian. Enough for us, Sober Reader, to defend our
first Chapter (but a Woeful Contradiction to himself) where we say, that what
was called Christ, was before the Name, and something of the Excellent Nature
of Truth, Purity, Holiness which leads to Salvation, etc. which the Word
Christianity with us imports at large (unless they should be excluded as any
parts thereof, which supposes a Christianity Destitute of Truth, Purity,
Holiness, etc. like that of this Age) though in no appearance so clear, as in
that, in which Christ visibly manifested himself.

. 9. But upon Peter's Words, If any Man suffer as a Christian let him not be
ashamed, 1. Pet. 4. he observes; Here Christianity is Distinguished both from
Judaism and Heathenism. Both the Gentiles and the Jews were bitter Enemies to
the Christian Name; and that not for the Name, but the Thing's sake.

This must either regard the Apostate Jew and Gentile, and so we close; or the
Jew and Gentile upon their Inward Knowledge of God, and Obedience to him, and
here we recede, and must deny his Assertion (nay it would be a Contradiction to
that Justice, Purity, and Worth he allows them to have had, since it were to
say, that such Qualifications could be Ignorant of Christianity, the Perfection
of them) for the Good among them became Disciples, at least Lovers of the
Christian Religion, then not Haters of either Name or Thing: For where among
Jews or Gentiles their Hearts were Upright to God, according to that Discovery
he made of himself to them, and that they kept to the divine Sense and Relish
which they had of the Love, Purity, Justice, Mercy, Goodness, and Recompense of
God (for such as in any Age could come to God, did first know that God was, and
that he was a Rewarder of all those that did draw nigh unto him, to obtain
which knowledge, God had manifested it in man; for he had shown it there unto
him) I say, those who so retained the Sense of God in their knowledge, were not
aggrieved, Christianity should take Place; for they measuring things, as they
inwardly felt them, were proper Judges of Gods Rising and Breaking forth among
the Sons of Men; they could feel him leading out of, and beyond the Use of
those Elements which were once added because of Weakness, and now became
beggarly by a brighter Glory: An inward sense being that they kept to, as the
more sure Word; as they felt a withdrawing of the divine Life, Power, Spirit,
out of those inferior Institutions, they followed it, not staying in any
outward dispensation, because God had been there, if he had once left it: But
such as were Litteral, Formal, Exact, Critical, they were the Persons, who
having least of the Divine Sight and Sense of God's goings among the Sons of
Men, they contended for God's Exterior Appointments; as that they were
signally given, Good Men had Practiced them, and are we Wiser then our Fathers?
No, we will have our Reasons (indeed Darkness) satisfied in the Matter. Behold
the Pharisee and Greek of Old, to whom Christ's outward Appearance was to the
one a Stumbling Block and to the other Foolishness; and the many-headed
Professor now, who esteems no better of his Spiritual Manifestation in the
Hearts of the Children of Men. O! what will the End be of the Gaudy Obstinate
Hypocrites of this Age, who resist so great Salvation? Tribulation and Anguish
forever, unless they repent; for what Men Sow, that they shall Reap, and who
have improved their Talent, shall enter into the Joy of their Lord.

. 10. Well, But when came this Quakerism into the world? he tells us, about the
year 1651. quoting, E. B's Epistle before Page 15. 16, 17.
G. F's Gr. Mist. also a small Treatise writ by J. Whitehead, and J.
Pennington; from whence he infers, that Quakerism is a Late Dispensation,
therefore not that of Christianity. But certainly, this Man has taken a very
Quick Course to Un-Christian himself and all the Presbyterians, Independents,
and Anabaptists in the World, as well as the Quakers: For I would ask him, if
there was not a Time since the Primitive Age, wherein Darkness had overspread
the Earth, the Beast did Reign, and the Pure Religion was wholly Wildernest? If
So? Consequently the Resurrection of Truth is no more a New Dispensation, or
not that of Christianity, then a Man that is exiled his Country, is not
essentially the same Man, when he returns, that he was before. And so far is my
Argument for those Separatists, that though I take them to be short of the True
Evangelical Faith and Righteousness; yet I acknowledge them to have a
Reformation unknown in that thick Apostasy, which has covered the World, and
Ecclipst the blessed Light of the Glorious Gospel that shined in the first Ages
after Christ: But since we are of another Religion by his Account, then the
Christian, because we cannot say that we were always successively from the
Apostles Time, I will argue, that the Presbyterians, Independents, and
Anabaptists are not Christians, nor is what they profess, to be esteemed
Christianity, because they cannot prove a Regular Succession from the Apostles
Times, their Date also being of later years. What will they say then? The
Church was fled into the Wilderness: Truth exiled; God as a stranger in the
Earth; yet Truth still the same in it self. Very well, so say we: God was
pleased to Renew the Right Christian Dispensation to us, and by us according to
John's Vision, that the Everlasting Gospel was preached again, intimating, that
their had been a Time wherein it was not preached. If this be not a New Gospel,
because anew or again preached; neither is that which J. Faldo calls Quakerism a
New Dispensation, because it is Preaching anew the Everlasting Gospel to the
Sons of Men; which is God's Power inwardly manifested for the Conviction,
Conversion, Redemption, and Salvation of the Souls of such as believe in it.

. 11. And though he particularly seems to Triumph over Isaac Pennington's
Distinguishing between the Dispensation of Moses, Christ and his Apostles, and
THIS of our Day, as if they had been three several Dispensations, and
consequently, if Christ's was not that of Moses, because it swallowed it up;
neither this the Dispensation of Christ, which J. Pennington says, it swallows
up: yet to me it seems a pitiful Catch; and shows, he knows not how to take
things with that Candor they are writ. J. P. means not a Distinct
Administration in Kind, but Dispensation of one and the same Light, Life, and
Power by Nature, at several Times, and sundry Manners to the World: Christ was
before the Law, under the Law, with the Prophets, but never so revealed as in
that Holy Manhood; will it therefore follow, he was not Antecedent to that
Appearance, or He, that appeared then more gloriously, had never shown himself
before? Or because of a Difference in Manifestation, therefore not the same HE
(through all those several Manifestations) in himself? Certainly, this Man is
very Unjust to J. P. especially, when the Words above quoted, that speak of a
Dispensation he experienced a little before God broke forth by us called
Quakers, could have informed him, that he meant the Diverse Breakings forth of
God's Light and Truth, in order to the full Discovery and Recovery of Lost
Primitive Christianity. So that this present Appearance swallowing up all going
before it (had so termed it, as he does not, and therefore wronged) is no more
then God's Retriving to us the Ancient Gospel, with additional Blessings and
Assistances, giving us the same Life and Foundation they had, and what else he
pleased by way of Improvement; which alters not the Nature, no more then a
Child in Christ is not that Numerical Creature, but another Distinct Being,
when a Man. And if this Account of Things will not satisfy him, he may choose:
I have thus far cleared the Truth, and those who sincerely profess it, and
therein my own Conscience both to God, and the World.

CHAP. III.
J. Faldo's Charge. That the Scriptures are not the Word of God, Reasons for
it. The Scriptures by him urged against us, cleared, and proved to be for us
They are the Words of the Word, a Declaration of the great Law, Word, or
Commandment, but not that Law, Word, or Commandment.

. 1. THis Chapter will concern the Scriptures more directly, in which we hope
to prove, that not We, but our Adversary is mistaken with respect to what he
charge upon us.

. 2. He intitles his Chapter thus, That the Quakers Deny the Scriptures. Page
18, 19, 20.
I was almost astonished at it, because he pretended to prove all out of our own
Books, and none such had ever yet come to my hand, But upon my sober Perusal of
the Matter, I found this to be the Upshot, That the Quakers Deny them to be the
Word of God; therefore they deny them altogether: Whence I take good Heart to
show his Ignorance, or great Dishonesty.

. 3. I will allow to him, without going any farther, that the People called
Quakers, do deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and therefore shall take
for granted what he quotes out of J. N. F. Howgil, J. Parnel, and W. Smith. But
that we do consequently Deny the Scriptures, we shall oppose, we hope, to the
Death.

. 4. I do declare to the whole World, that We believe the Scriptures to contain
a Declaration of the Mind and Will of God, in and to those Ages, in which they
were written, being given forth by the Holy Ghost, moving in the Hearts of holy
Men of God; That they ought also to be Believed, Read, and Fulfilled in our
Day, being Useful for Reproof and Instruction, that the Man of God may be
perfect; And that they have been, and are Instrumental to great Good upon the
Spirits of People, by the secret Power of God, which often strikes, and
presses home to the very Conscience the weighty Truths declared therein; yet
We do Deny them to be the Word of God, ascribing that alone to Christ himself,
and that not without Scripture and Reason.

. 5. First, It is granted on all hands, that Christ is expressly called in
Scripture the Word of God, but no where, that the Scriptures are so styled.

Secondly, That though I should allow it to be a Figurative Expression, and
therefore says our Adversary, Improper; yet because a Word among Men, conveyes
the Mind of one unto another, and that Christ is the great Word of God, that in
all Ages has conveyed, or spoken the Mind of God unto Mankind (and so the
Author of all good Words) he only may by way of Right and Excellency be so
styled of Us.

Thirdly, I shall easily grant to him, that one Word may stand representative
of many; and that the Ten Words were not Ten Numerical Words, because each Word
contained many: yet, this I will say, that Word in Scripture is taken for
Commandment, and they have an equivalent Signification, as in Deuteronomy may
be seen. And since that was the Import of the Ten Words, to wit Ten
Commandments, each Word has its own Commandment; Therefore it is no more
against us, to allow those Ten Words, to be more then Ten Words, then Ten
Commandments, to have more then Ten Words.

And whatever our Adversaries may say, or think of us, We therefore Decline to
call the Scriptures the Word of God, because we believe It to be a Title only
due to that Living, Quickening Word, by which God vouchsafes to disclose his
Mind and Will unto Mankind, Christ the Way to the Father.

. 6. But says our Adversary to this Argument, The Word was God, therefore the
Scriptures cannot be the Word, because they are not God; Let me tell you, that
the Scripture Page 27.
may be the Word, and Christ the Word also; and yet though Christ be the Word
of God, the Scriptures the Word may be quite another thing. Certain I am, this
is quite another thing then good Doctrine: How can the Scriptures be the Word
of God, and Christ the Word of God too? Are there two Distinct Words of God,
the one quite another thing from the other? O shameful Arguing! If he had said,
Christ is the Word of God, and the Scriptures a Word of God, he would have a
little better hit the Mark: But to assert Two General Comprehensive Words of
God, sounds Harsh and Inconsistent. I would fain know, in Case we should admit
this absurd Assertion, how he would distinguish between these Two General
Comprehensive Words? For my part; I think it as good Sense, to call a King's
Letters, King; or an Ambassador's Credential's Ambassador. O no, says our
Adversary, you Mistake; Page 27.
Christ is called a Light, a Rock, a Lion, will it thence follow, that there
are no other Lights, p. 28, 29, 30, 31.
Rocks, or Lions. I Answer, There is no other Light, Rock or Lion, then Christ,
with respect to That for which He is so called; Neither is there any other Word
then Christ, with respect to that for which he is so styled, to wit, God's
Living, Powerful Word: And this decides the Controversy, and plainly adjudges
us the Matter against the utmost Force of our Adversary, to the Contrary: For
if he is therefore a Light, because he only can, and does Discover the
Unfruitful Works of Darkness; a Rock, because whoever build on Him, is Safe;
and a Lion because the King of all, whose Utterings are able to Terrify all
Destruction from his Walks, but what he brings upon his Adversaries; and
therefore there is not another Light to inlighten Man's Soul, or Rock for
Christ's Church to be built on, neither any other Lion to secure them from the
Devourer: consequently, because he is the Living, Spiritual, Powerful Word of
God, there is not another, that is The Word of God.

. 7. But he further says, That the Word of God is so expressed in Scripture, as
it must needs be understood not of Christ, but the Scriptures. He that
regards not the Word of the Lord. Exodus 9. 19, 20. 1 Samuel 9. 27. Ephesians. 6. 17.
He that feared the Word of the Lord; Stand thou still a while, that I may show
thee the Word of God, the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. And
the Cares of the World -- choke the Word, and it becomes Unfruitful, Mark 4.
19. which, says he, cannot be understood of Christ or God, and that a little
Skill in the Original would free us from these Mistakes, and to that Purpose.

To which I answer, that the Word of the Lord mentioned in Exodus and Samuel
are properly to be understood of the Living, Spiritual Word of God, which spoke
to the People through those Servants of the Lord; For who Received or Rejected
the Mind of that Word, expressed in many Words, received the Word, and it had a
place in their Hearts; or else rejected it, and it had no place in them: This
makes nothing against us in the least. For that Passage in the Ephesians, Beza
whom he quotes, I suppose as embracing his Judgment, has determined the Matter;
for he has it, the Spiritual Sword. Then let us read the Words thus, The
Spiritual Sword is the Word of God, or, The Word of God is the Spiritual Sword:
For Christ is as truly a Sword, an Ax, a Fire, which the Word of God is called,
as a Lion, a Rock, a Door. And for the last Passage out of Mark, which seems to
carry most of Weight in it for our Adversary, it may rightly be understood of
that Truth, which Christ the Word livingly sows in the Hearts of Men and Women,
the Word of Advice, Reproof, Instruction, This is answered fully in a Book
entitled Christ Ascended etc. by G. W.
and the like: But of the Scriptures it cannot be understood, as neither can
any of the other places. For first, those two Passages in Exodus, and Samuel
concern only particular Cases, at a time, when not a third part of the
Scriptures were written, as our Adversary will confess. And for that in the
Ephesians, it is manifest that the Scriptures are not the Spiritual Sword, or
Sword of the Spirit, which are subject to so many Casualities as they are,
therefore not the Word of God, whose Edge never blunts; For as is the Spirit,
such is the Sword, and such the Word, to wit, Living, Spiritual, Powerful,
which the Scriptures of themselves (I think, all will, or should acknowledge)
are not. I will not stick to confess also, that a Word of Advice, a Word of
Counsel, a Word of Reproof, and a Word of Comfort lodge in the Scripture; or
the Scriptures, with respect to the Times, wherein they were given forth (and
now daily, as brought home to the Conscience by the One Word of God, who gave
them first forth) are Words of Truth, Knowledge, Wisdom, Love, Reproof,
Exhortation, Edification, etc. yet never can we be brought to attribute unto
the Declaration that Title, which is peculiarly due to Him, whose Declaration
it is. A Prince may express his Mind in Words, but those Words are not that
Prince; neither can any one of his Titles, as a Living Prince, be properly
given to his said Declaration. Nor have we any other Way to Distinguish between
the Word and Words, Commandment and Commandments, the Thing It self, and those
Expressions by which it does declare it self, then the Word of God, and the
Words of the Word, which are Words of God, or Holy Writings: Holy with respect
to the Matter or Truth they treat of.

. 8. But here J. Faldo steps in, and seems to offer an Expedient in this
Straight; Says he, Though you say they are not the Word of God eminently, and I
P. 21.
believe so too; for the Scriptures cannot be the Word of God in that Sense
wherein Christ is: yet you may call them the Written Word of God, for so we
Distinguish them.

Truly, this seems pretty modest, though here we must part too, unless he will
come a little nearer; For neither can the Word of God properly be said to be
written: The Words by which the Mind or Will of the Word is expressed, may be
recorded, and, as such, a True Declaration; but it is as Impossible for the
Word of God to be written, as it would be for a Prince, or Senate to be
written, or contained in Letters, though their Will and Pleasure may be largely
declared by a Writing; because it would be to say, that the Word of God could
grow Old, Decay, be Lost, mis-Rendred, Corrupted, Transcribed, Reprinted,
Corrected, and be Subjected to Fire, Water, Vermin, etc. which were impossible.
So would it be an absolute Derogation from the Dignity peculiarly Due to the
Living Word of God, to give that which is its proper Title to any thing beneath
its Living, Powerful, Quickening Self. He has a Scripture or two for us; I have
written to him the great Things of my Law; A sharp Rebuke, says he, to the
Objecters P. 33.
against the Written Word of God, but I don't see it for my share. The great
Things of the Law, Word, or Commandment, which are required may be written, but
that does not follow, that the Eternal Law, Word or Commandment Requiring, is a
written Law, Word or Commandment, but the Contrary; And for Moses Writings, of
which Christ spoke, it is manifest, they were not called the Word of God, but
the Word of God himself called them Writings.

. 9. But J. Faldo objects on the other hand, that he much fears, the Scriptures
will lose of their Authority with People, in case they should not be so
acknowledged; and at last he falls so down right upon us, that he boldly, but
weakly concludes, who Deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, deny them in
every respect: For who Denies them that Title, denies what Page 37, 38. 39.
they have been generally Known by, Distinguished from, and Lifted up above all
other Writings, and that Appellation, on which is grounded their Authority, and
which puts an Awe upon the Consciences of Men. How Weak and Vain this is, I
could freely leave to the Reader, without any further Consideration; But that
it might not be thought by any therefore Unanswerable, I will say, That to call
them the Words of God, and declared Mind and Will of God to Mankind, is no such
Diminutive Title, but altogether Worthy of them.

. 10. If we do Deny to them what has been wrongly Attributed, that no ways
Lessens their Authority, but Corrects the Mistake of those who thought of them
beyond what they really are; It is a poor Begging of the Question, to say, We
Deny them, that which many have Ascribed to them. Their Authority is grounded
upon the Living Word of God, and who comes to that, Honors the Scripture
aright; and who Err from the Holy Conduct of it, their Verbal Praises of the
Scripture, are but like the Pharisees Painting the Prophets Sepulchers, whilst
they were Persecutors of One greater then the Prophets: And who knows not, how
much the Shell has had ascribed unto it the Honor, only due to its Substance,
by those Watchmen of the Night, whose Dark Minds could see no farther?

. 11. And for the Awe they have upon Men, this is my Judgment, and I am not
ashamed of it, that Attributing so much to the Letter of the Scriptures, and
Declining that Regard Men ought to have had unto the Holy Living Word of God,
that alone creates all things New, and was the Author of, and Rule to those
sound Words themselves, has Robbed the Living Word of God of its True and
Rightful Honor, and rendered Men's Hearts more Formal, and less Aweful then
they would otherwise have been; So that the only Way for People to come to a
True Sight of, Sincere Respect for, and Grounded Belief in the Holy Scriptures,
is, to be turned to the Voice of the Living, Powerful Word of God, from whom
they came, which is nigh unto every one, to Direct, and Order, and Discipline
to, and in that Way of Holiness, they testify of, and which Leads to Eternal
Happiness.

CHAP. IV.
His Charge. What he quotes proves it not. Revelation. Infallibility, and
Inspiration considered. The Priest proved Uncertain of his own Faith. Our
Friends debase not the Scripture, but Lift them up. His Objection about our
Books-Titles answered. The Use of Scripture asserted. The Light vindicated from
Insufficiency. Something of the True Rule.

. 1. HIs Fourth and next Chapter to be examined, endeavors to prove, Page 40,
41.
That we Equal our Writings and Sayings to the Scriptures, and prefer them
before the Scriptures.

In this Undertaking, he must either prove, what he asserts, from our own
Writings expressly, or consequentially. To run through every Quotation he makes,
would be as Tedious, as Importinent; But a few of what make most to his
Purpose, I will faithfully observe with his Inferences.

. 2. He begins with a Book, Entitled, Love to the Lost; (and so will I) The
Things following which I have declared of, are not the Things of Man, nor by
Man did I receive them, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ: W. Dewsberry
thus, The Word of the Lord to his Beloved City, through your Brother and
Companion in the Tribulation and Kingdom of Patience in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Now what to say here in their Defense, when he lays nothing to their Charge,
but what has been generally expressed, I know not; Certain it is, that No Man
knows the Father but the Son, and Him to whom the Son REVEALS him. The
Inspiration of the Almighty gives Understanding; and, No Man can know the
Things of God but by the Spirit of God. Well may we conclude then, that J.
Faldo knows God no better then I do Terra Incognita; for he denies all
Knowledge of him by any Internal Discoveries: What he knows, is by Man, and
from Man.

What Offense, or Undervalue, I would fain know, can it be to the Scriptures,
that Men should know God that only Way, by which they testify, God can be
known of Men? Or, Why should he be Angry at his Author, for Confessing to have
known God that very Way, by which the Scriptures declare him only to be known?
But indeed, it happens ill to the Priest, for all this is to prove too, that We
deny the Scriptures, though hereby we fulfill them.

. 3. For W. D's Words, they are also firm; for God promised the Repouring out
of his Spirit, and the Repreaching of his Everlasting Gospel: And since the
Question is not, whether we have it; but, whether it be an Invalidating the
Scriptures, for any, under the plentiful Pourings out of the Spirit, and Power
of God, to say, This is the Word of the Lord; I say, it is firm, that so Saying
may therefore be in the Latter as well as Former Days allowable, and no
Detraction at all from the Scriptures: And for the Conclusion of his Epistle,
it is what every good Christian Man can say. What Folly, what Impudence is it
in J. Faldo, to make that an Equaling our Writings to Scripture, or Preferring
them before it, which both his own Tribe (I am able to make appear) has
frequently used, though by Themselves Irreproveably? And which indeed is the
Condition of every good Christian-Man, namely to be a Brother, and Companion to
the Children and Family of God, in the Tribulation and Kingdom of Patience in
the Lord Jesus. Well! If this Man's manifest Weakness make not for our Cause, I
should very greatly strange.

. 4. And therefore says he, Pennington prays seriously. My Upright Desire to
the Lord for you is -- That he would strip you of your Knowledge of the
Scriptures, according to the Flesh; By Flesh, says he, their Sense is, the Use
of our Understandings (though Sanctified) as will appear in the Key, etc.

But this Expression serves for a Notable Key to open his Ignorance and
Dishonesty. His Ignorance is evident in Reputing it a Slight of the Scriptures,
to desire that Men might be stripped of their Fleshly Knowledge of them. I do
affirm it to be both Seasonable and Serious; and did not J. Faldo stand upon a
tottering Basis, he would not so declaim against us for Undermining it. But let
all behold his Dishonesty, to say, that we desire to be Script of the Knowledge
of the Scriptures after our Sanctified Understandings; making a Sanctified
Understanding, and that Flesh which can never inherit the Kingdom of God, to
wit, the Carnal, Dead, Dark, Unregenerated Understanding to be all one. O
Disingenuous Man! Art thou fit to be a Gospel Minister, who have not learnt to
do as thou would be done by? I leave it with the Conscience of the Reader,
how Justly or Unjustly thou have dealt with us in this Matter, and what all or
any of it concerns the Scriptures; For if Men will not understand them as they
are, is it the Fault of the Scriptures? No surely; shall then Isaac
Pennington's Desire, that their wrong Knowledge of those weighty and Holy
Writings, be interpreted a Dis-Respect to them, and a preferring our own
Writings before them, which so heartily seeks their Right Knowledge of them? If
this be the Way to prove Quakerism no Christianity, we need not much fear the
Issue of his Attempt.

. 5. But he proceeds to prove our Equaling of the Scriptures two Ways. Page
41, 42.
First, from our pretending to Infallibility. Secondly, our Plea for the
Necessity of Inspiration. He quotes G. Whitehead's Letter to him, Whether
Infallibility be attainable by any in these days? which we affirm, is to true
Believers; which if thou denyst, we question thy Call. Of Inspiration he cites
J. Story's short Discovery thus, Therefore may I say, much more, it is not in
the Power of that little Book, either to throw down Self-Will in any, in whom
it is not yet subdued, or to exalt the Truth in general, because it is only
Queries gathered by the Author from the Letter of the Scriptures without, and
no Message of Heavenly Prophecy, Doctrine or Exhortation received by the
Author from the Lord through the Divine Inspiration of his Light and Spirit
within; Therefore I say, It is a very Vain and Idolatrous Exhortation. To all
which sober Matter I have no other Answer from him, then that the Quakers
Writings are full to this Purpose. Indeed I am glad of it, or we had little
Reason to Suffer what we do for our Descent from the Carnal Professors of
Religion in the World: But I have this to say to him; He that does not
Infallibly know what he knows of God or Religion, knows nothing certainly,
which concerns either. Now if Men cannot attain to any such Certainty, Farewell
all Religion; For, That a Man should affirm, and not know whereof; That he
should profess God and Religion, yet be uncertain of both: But that J. Faldo
should Preach of both, and profess himself Errable in all such Doctrine; Who
ought to believe him? Why spends he his Breath at a Venture? Rather let him
Eat, Drink, for to Morrow he shall Dye; for Death is certain. This is your
Independent, Fallible, Errable, Uncertain J. Faldo, Preacher to a People at
Barnet, and, God knows, a Lamentable one too. What Reason have any to Believe
him against Us, who is Uncertain of the Truth of what he says against us, by
his own Principle?

. 6. For Inspiration the Scriptures are not more express in any one thing. No
man can know the things of God by the bare Spirit of a Man: But, the Spirit of
a Man, or a Man distinctly considered from the Inspiration of the Almighty, can
read Scripture, and form Queries, and call them Christian too; yet, who will
dare affirm this Man's Queries to be Christian? Can they beat down Self-Will?
They may talk of it, or exalt the Living Truth, that came not from it. This is
the Scope of J. Story's Answer to the Questioner; For, what is this but
Stealing the Prophets and Apostles Words, when they are made Use of out of that
Sense in which they were given forth, and to an other End, then that for which
they were given forth, which proves to us, that the Sense, and not the Words,
shows the End of their being so given forth. The Scriptures are a Sealed Book
to all, but those who know them by the same Hand, which Originally gave them.
So that however Common they may be in the World, they are Strangers to them
that understand them not: And though Old, respecting the Time, when they were
revealed to the Saints, yet New to every Age; so that we assert not a
Revelation of New Things, but renewed Revelation of those Things God made
former Ages Witnesses of: otherwise Men are no more benefited by them; And to
be benefited, they must be made ours by the Spirit, which made them the Holy
Ancients.

. 7. In short, No Man can understand Spiritual Things, but the Spiritually
Discerning; None can so be without the Inspiration of the Almighty, or Spirit
of God. This is Scripture. Now the Author of those Queries, and J. Faldo also
Denying Inspiration, they consequently deny themselves to be Spiritually
Discerning; and for Men not Spiritual, to Judge of Religious and Spiritual
Matters, much less to Write of them, and bid their Writings go, and throw down
Self-Will, and exalt the Truth, is Vain and Idolatrous; For, the Scriptures
themselves, considered merely as such, are unable, much less Writings founded
on the Authority of Self Will; for it is the alone Privilege of God's Power
and Spirit, and no Writing whatever, distinct from it, can perform that Great
and Mighty Work in Man.

. 8. And, for Equaling our Writings with the Scriptures, because we assert
Inspiration, and that what we have received, and do declare of the Things of
God, is from the Revelation of his Spirit in our Hearts, it is a Foolish
Inference; Truth was and is Truth all the World over, and there was and is but
One Way to come to it in all Ages, I mean Inspiration. The Scriptures are True,
and our Writings are True; but will it therefore follow, that we bring them
upon a Vie? Is this your Disputant? But to determine this Case, He should first
have proved if he could, what Power God gave to the Ancients, and what to Us.
How much of his Spirit to those Ages, and what to This; or else he loses
himself. If he can Experimentally tell, what were their Discoveries and
Experiences, and what are Ours, he would be a Proper Judge: But to think to run
us down by Exalting them, or to lessen what we are, by Increasing their Praise,
is an old Artifice of the Devil; and Sober Men will be more True to Themselves,
and Just to the Matter, then so to censure us. Cannot one Man be another Man's
Brother, and not the Elder Brother? Does it follow, that because God has made
what we know our own, by his Holy Inspirations and Operations, that therefore
we put our selves upon the Comparison with the Ancients? If true Christians
fill up, or add to Christ's Sufferings, yet behind, why should their Writings
be shuffled out of all Relation to the Scriptures? There may be a Relation,
where there is not an Equality, much less a Preference, and that we do assert
against all Opposers.

. 9. But now let us see what he says of our setting the Scriptures beneath our
own Writings; and I will take his own Way to do it. Page 5.


The Characters of the Scriptures, given by the Quakers, as says J. Faldo.
Characters of their own Teachers Writings, and Sayings, given by them. Feeding
Death with Death. The Letter which Kills. [Declar. from the Minist. of the
Word, p. 7.] The Voice of the Son of God was uttered forth by him, by which the
Dead was raised [F. H. Life of E. B. p. 20.] Seeking the Living among the Dead
[J. Parn. Shield] His Words Ministered Grace to the Hearers [Fox jun. Life E.
B.] A Mistake, for he died before E. B.

Reconciliation: Death is a State without the Living Experimental Knowledge of
God, and his Work in the Heart; And that State will talk of the Fame of Wisdom,
as says the Scripture, and that from the Scripture, that is, from, or in the
words of Scripture, being Ignorant of the true Sense of the Scripture, thinking
there to have Life; which Literal Knowledge it feeds upon, and contents it self
with, where Nations have lain Apostatized from the Life of God, and Power of
Godliness. The Letter Kills, that is, the Literal Knowledge (or rather their
Imaginations from the Letter, not being Divinely Inspired, so as to understand
it) by which Men buoy and lift up themselves as Christians in the World, and
yet are Strangers to the inward sensible Work of God: And it does Kill the
Soul, with respect to that true Life the Spirit and Power of God begets in all
right Christians, through whom the Voice of the Son of God has, does, and will
utter it self to the Ends of the Earth, for the Raising the Dead in Trespasses
and Sins, as that worthy Servant of God did, which is now with his Lord. This
disreputes not the Scriptures, but those who make a wrong Use of them; nor is
there any Comparison betwixt Reading what God's Spirit requires, and immediate
Hearing his Voice, and being sensible of his present living Touches upon the
Soul: Writings are but holy Things at second hand; a Living Ministry is the
very Life, Power and Spirit present, and more immediate. In short, the
Testimony of F. H. we prefer not before the Testimony Luke gives of holy
Stephen. We prefer the Scriptures before all Writings, but before God's
immediate Power we dare not do.

Paper, Ink, and Writing the same, page 7. A Shield of the Truth, [Title J. P's
Book.]

Reconcil. What Is this to the purpose? We say that the Scriptures, or the
Writings, not the Things written of (mark that) are Paper, Ink and Writing,
which was spoken abstractively, and upon a Comparison of them with the Word of
God (that was with God, and was, and is God over all, blessed for ever) Does
any Man think, that we believe greater things of J. Parnel's Book? By no means.
He called not his Book, consisting of so much Writing, Ink, and Paper, a Shield
of Truth; but that of which it treated, was the Truth, and with respect to the
Controversial part of it, as it was writ in Defense of the Truth, it might be
termed a Shield; in which sense the Scriptures by him urged, have the
upper-hand of his Writing, by whose greater Authority with Men, he abets and
maintains the Doctrine contended for.

Shows you (I suppose the Light) your own Faces, which the Scriptures cannot do
[Scorned Quak. accounts, p. 20.] A Spiritual Glass opened [Smith' s Cat. etc.
and Morn. Watch.]

Reconcil. This can be no way hard to reconcile; For, when we say, the
Scriptures cannot show Men at all Times, and in all States, their Conditions,
but the Secret In-shining Light of God alone, we are not so unworthy as to
intend, that any Book of ours can; No, but with respect to that Principle which
it directs to, and is able to tell a man All that ever he did, The only
Spiritual Glass, and which the best of Writings fall short of.

Precepts and Traditions of Men [Morn. Watch, p. 18.] Truth's Principles [Title
of Crook' s Book.]

Reconcil. It is denied that ever any such Words were ever spoken, or written
of the holy Scriptures, as Precepts and Traditions of Men; for they contain the
holy Precepts and Traditions of the Word of God, who is God himself; it is base
and unworthy, thus to mince and mis represent our Writings. For Truth's
Principles, it signifies no more, then the Declaration of what we believe, as
the very beginning of the Book expressly proves.

That Light is in the Scriptures, prove that; or tell me what one Scripture
has Light in it [Lip of Truth, p. 7.] Light risen out of Darkness. Title of
Farnsworth's Book.

Reconcil. There is not Light in the Scriptures, that is, there is not Living,
Spiritual, Essential Light in the Scriptures, or by way of Excellency; but a
descriptive and declarative Light they carry with them of the true Light, the
Author of those excellent Things therein mentioned; In which Sense alone do we
understand Richard Farnsworth's Title. God having caused his Light to spring
out of Darkness, and he being then the Witness of it, testified to the Truth
thereof, by a Declaration to the World of what he knew in the Matter. He did
not say, That Book was that Light; for so it had never been before him that
writ it, and the Writings of it; and what Casualities the Book was, or is
liable to, would fall upon the Light, though he bears Record to an Everlasting
Spiritual Light, that shines Within, where his Book cannot be. But rather, that
he knew and witnessed the Visitation of the Dayspring of God's Eternal Light
of Life to the World, he writ his Book to give Notice thereof, calling it by
that Name, because his Subject treated on, does manifestly import so much; not
that the Book was that Holy and Eternal Light.

. 10. Let it suffice to all impartial People, that we only desire to make a
Difference betwixt the Writings, and the Thing written of; and to the Eternal
Overthrow of our Adversaries (not wholly without their own Help) since they
think, the Titles we give our Books (very Glorious in themselves) most unworthy
of them, but proper to the Scriptures, whom they say, we slight. Let it be
considered that not one of those Books is destitute of Scripture; but is either
generally in a Scripture Style, or particularly defended by plenty of express
Scriptures cited; therefore of Necessity, they, the Scriptures, must also
partake with them in Common of those famous Titles: And thus far have they the
Preference, that they are quoted on purpose, to give the Truth we write of,
greater Credit; what is that greater Credit, but to be exactly agreeable with
themselves; so that our Adversaries Argument amounts to thus much; They
therefore prefer their own Writings before the Scriptures, because they in all
their Writings earnestly endeavor by numerous Quotations to prove, what they
write, to be according to the Scriptures. Behold Reader, how at one Blow we
fall! The whole Chapter of this Fallible, Errable, Uncertain, Busy Priest,
with respect to his Charge of our preferring our own Writings before the
Scriptures.

. 11. But there remain two Things to be considered before we close this
Chapter. First, his untrue Inferences; Secondly, his base p. 53, 54.
Comparison of us with the Papists, with Design, to render us Odious to all
that abominate their Idolatry.

First, That the Scriptures both are, and ever were Superfluous; for, the Light
within (as they pretend) was always fitted to Inspire every Man and Woman in
the same Manner, and to all Intents and Purposes, as they were inspired, and
written.

Which, how just and true it is, we do reserve the Examination of it to God's
Witness in the Conscience of the Reader. Only, this much I will say; that
though all Ability was, and is in Him, whom we declare to be the Light of all
Mankind, to Reveal the whole Mind of God, yet, in as much as very few in all
Ages were so resigned up to the Holy Conduct of it, as they ought to have been,
the Lord has put it into the Hearts of Many, to stir up the Negligent and
Sloathful, by a Reminding them with that Counsel, in outward Writings or other
Verbal Testimonies, which they had long slighted in themselves, that it might
Instrumentally work upon them unfeigned Repentance and Conversion to God.
Therefore went God's Messengers forth, Line upon Line, and Precept upon
Precept; here a little, and there a little; But this I affirm, and that in the
Name of the Lord, against the uttermost Strength of this Busy Priest, that,
had those Prodigal^ in all Ages lived up to that Measure of Divine Light (the
Talent God gave to every Individual) there had not been any such need for those
Messages: Wherefore the Occasion of them was not for want of any sufficient
Gift from God, but because of their own Rebellion. Nay, they were the
Testimonies of the very Light of Christ (in the Prophets and Apostles, who were
Heirs and Children of Light) which they gave forth at diverse Times in their
several Ages, as God pleased to move upon their Spirits with respect to
Mankind; so that still it was the Light within, which so reproved and exhorted.
But, suppose that the World had not been so Rebellious, neither will it follow,
but that a slow Improvement of the Heavenly Gift, might have occasioned many
Divine Exhortations; yea, the Exercises of Men's Spirits, as David's for
Instance, in reference to the Spiritual Travel, might for the Benefit of others
have been written. Let us suppose the highest State of Deliverance, and Praise,
Men are capable of arriving at in this World; yet Epistles of divine Love,
Experience, heavenly Praises, etc. might have been transmitted from Church to
Church, as of the Flock and Family of God. Therefore I utterly deny, that the
Perfection of the Light's Teachings makes the Scriptures superfluous, much less
the general best Seize that have been, and now are in the World.

. 12. But that any Man, so conceited of his Abilities, as J. Faldo, should so
basely mistake Reason, and abuse his Reader, as to infer from the Ability of
the Light in It self, whether obeyed, or not obeyed, the Uselesness of the
Scriptures, or Testimonies of holy Men to the World, is Ground for just Censure
and severe Rebuke; for it were to say, that because a Master is of himself able
enough, therefore all Books are superfluous. The Scripture don't argue the
Insufficiency of the Light, since so, the Instrument would rise against its
Principal; but the Insufficiency of the Creature, in which condition Line upon
Line, and Precept upon Precept may, by the Light within good Men, be given
forth to invite and encourage Man to yield Obedience to the Conviction of the
Light within every such Rebellious Person; in which the Love of God is
marvelously expressed, who by his holy Light within, and its Testimonies
without, endeavors the Conviction and Reformation of the Children of Men.

. 13. But hear him in his second and last Inference; upon the same Ground, the
Tenets and Assertions of all the Heathens are to be received as of equal
Authority with the Scriptures; for they resulted from their Light Within,
improved much more orderly and to Purpose then the Quakers do theirs. Yea, the
bitter Scoffs of Lucian, and Julian the Apostate must be admitted into the same
Orders, for if it be admitted, they did not Vilify and Scorn and Deride the
Scripture and Christianity, according to the Dictates of their Consciences; it
cannot be denied, that they therein acted from the Power within, which whether
it were the Power of Darkness or not, the Quakers having no Rule to judge it
by, but their own Sentiments, it is left by them undetermined; And I know not
hardly any Worse they said of Jesus of Nazareth, the Scripture, and
Christianity, then the Quakers have done under other Names.

This Passage Impertinent enough to the purpose, and as Black as Hell it self
in Malice against that despised Remnant of People Called Quakers, by God's
Assistance, I will effectually answer, to the shame of this ungodly Slanderer.

The Gentiles Light was one in Nature with that, which the Evangelist says,
inlightneth all Men (a Text, whose Plainness and Expressness yields that
Advantage to us, against the utmost Force of all our Adversaries, which they
are Angry at, but can never Invalid) I say, one in Nature with that Divine
Being; and as such, transcending all Writings whatever: yet that the Gentiles
had that Light in a more excellent Degree, then that in which the Prophets and
Apostles enjoyed it, whence came those excellent Writings, I utterly deny, and
that in the Name of all true Quakers, I say again, that, though the least
measure of Pure Light it self, is to be preferred before all the Writings in
the World, as mere Writings; yet that it may not be comparable to that Degree
and further Discovery of Light, which was witnessed by those who gave forth
those Writings, I gr^^t: so that to bring the Sayings and the Assertions of the
Heathens upon an Equality with the Writings of the holy Prophets and Apostles,
we dare not assent to; but vehemently oppose any such Inference made to be the
Product of our Belief. For, though as I said before, any measure of Light it
self is beyond the most excellent mere Writings of a far greater; yet the
Writings or Sayings given forth by that lesser Appearance, are not to be
brought into Comparison with those of a greater Discovery, no more then the
Degrees of Discovery, or Manifestation of the Light it self. This the Apostle
Paul practiced; who, notwithstanding that he rightly knew that Administration
to supercede, and transcend what want before, stuck not to remind the Heathens
of their own Authors, as Aratus, Menander, etc. by an apt Application of them
to this Purpose, in Defense of his Doctrine. And if Those who became a Law unto
themselves, Doing the things contained in the Law, were to be preferred before
the Circumcision, who kept not the Law, and that, who lived without Law outward
-- yet according to Law inward, should be judged by Law inward, which was
substantially the same (as testifies the Apostle) with what was required by the
Law outward; Then their Law within Substantially considered, did not fall short
of that Law without, nor they who kept it of the Circumcision themselves; which
most clearly overturns that Ignorant or Malicious Cavil, to wit, that the
Quakers have no Mean by which to judge of the Ground of Wrong and Right
Actions; For if the Scriptures be that only Judge, then there could have been
no Knowledge of right or wrong Actions, Spirits or Powers, before they were
given forth: which because the Patriarchs and Gentiles had an evident Sight and
true Sense of, by that Internal Law of Light in the Heart and Conscience,
without Scripture, it follows, that the Quakers owning the same Light, and
that, in a more eminent Discovery, can not be guilty of such an Ignorance.

. 14. But a little further to inspect his Argument: If the having no Outward
Rule was to be without all Rule, whereby to Try a Right from a Wrong Power; I
would gladly know, how the Prophets themselves were assured of the Truth of
their Motions, being without any outward Touchstone; and by what means the
Apostles knew, that the Spirit or Power which acted them to reject and decry
the whole Service of the Jews, which God had so peculiarly Instituted
(Circumcision for Instance, that was given for a Sign FOREVER) was the right
Spirit or Power? I ask, Was it the Scripture without, or the Son of God,
otherwise called the Light or Word of God revealed in them? But I will yet
proceed; Suppose any Man who is called an Independent, and owns the Scripture
to be that which J. Faldo reputes them, should pretend a Vision of very strange
and unwonted Things, should imitate a Trance, and personate some extraordinary
Inspired Person, by what place of Scripture would J. Faldo assure himself or
others, of the Sincerity or Imposture of such a Person? his Rationals being
otherwise Sound; his Life Sober, and his Pretenses no way anti-Scriptural? O
Weak Man! Is thy Religion without a secret Light, Life, Power, Virtue, Sight or
Relish of the Root and Ground of things; or rather do thou conclude, that
all Mankind, however Christian, are left Destitute of any Inward Power to Try
or Discern Spirits, because it is thine own State of Darkness? I affirm to thee
and all the World, that in this Case, no outward Mean whatsoever decides the
Matter, or clears the Doubt; only the invisible Light, Power or Spirit of God:
Yea, and that in far less Cases too. In which sense chiefly, it is the
Dispensation of the Gospel, so called, and justly preferred before all other.

And this I leave with him; that nothing can judge of the Root and Ground of
Evil, but the Root and Ground of Good. The Works of Evil, the Scriptures tell
us, are abominable; But the Question is, How do I know, what they declare to be
Evil, is so? what works the Conviction in me? and where an Evil Spirit brings
it self not forth into those Works, what shall discern him, except it be the
Good Spirit? It is the Power of God within, that crusheth the Power of the
Devil within. The Scriptures without, Reprove his Works without; But since the
things contained in the Scriptures were such in themselves, and true, and
experienced before they were written: will it not follow, that the inward Power
was both a sufficient Judge, and their Author too; and consequently Greater.

. 15. But above all, the Impudence of his Wickedness; both to charge the
Impiety of Julian and Lucian upon the Light within, by placing them in the same
Order with the best of Heathens, and Quakers, walking up to the Light within;
and to affirm, for all that the Quakers have to judge to the contrary, they
acted by a Divine Power; Ranking the Quakers Faith in Christ, upon an Equality
in Evil, with their horrid Blasphemies. The Top of all Uncharitableness, and a
very Lie; for this is to say, That the best and worst of Heathens were all
alike: that they wanting Scriptures, could not rightly discern the Difference
between the Bad and Good; that those who live up to that Light (as he cannot
deny the Quakers to do in a great measure) are but in Julian the Apostate, and
scoffing* Lucians Rank; In short, that the Quakers Believing in one God; that
he has Enlightened all Men; that he has Striven by his Light and Spirit in the
Consciences of Men through all Ages, and by it, in the Hearts and Mouths of his
Prophets; and above all, by that blessed Appearance of Christ Jesus, who
Tabernacl'd among Men in that Body prepared for that purpose; who there in
preached the heavenly Kingdom within; worked Miracles; laid down his Life for
the World; rose again, and ascended to the Father; leading Captivity captive,
and gave Gifts for Men; that who believes in him, and takes up his Cross, shall
be his Disciple, and persevering, have Everlasting Life: That the Quakers
Faith, (I say) in this Solemn and Conscientious Manner, upon which they place
the Eternal Happiness of their Souls, should scarely be a Jot better, then the
APOSTASY OF JULIAN, AND THE IMPIETY OF LUCIAN; AND BUT ONLY SERVE, TO RENDER US
AS GREAT DESPISERS AND CONTEMNERS OF CHRIST AND ALL HIS RELIGION, AS THEY WERE.
O strange Comparison^ Well, they tell us of a Book coming out of our Hard
Sayings to our Opposers; But match this, impartial Reader! But however the
Devil blinds and hardens this J. Faldo; sure I am, the Devil himself knows
better. What shall I say? Truly nothing more; but leave it with the Righteous
God of Heaven and Earth, to plead our Cause in the Hearts of all People, and
avenge himself upon his Adversaries, to whom Vengeance belongs.

. 16. For his Comparison of us with the Papists, we little heed it. He tells
the World, the Papists own Revelation (which he proves at large) and the
Quakers hold Revelation also; Therefore the Quakers are Papists, or very near
them, as his Story, indeed an arrant Lie (either in him or the Papist) will
inform us; where he says, that a Papist P. 55.
upon being ask't, which of all Sects in England approached them most? replied,
the Quakers. How near we are to the Papists, in Faith, Worship, and Discipline,
shall be left to them, that know, and have seen more then this conceited
Priest. But, Argumentum ad hominem. Thus, The Papists own a God, a Trinity of
Persons etc. and J. Faldo owns a God, and a Trinity of Persons also; therefore
J. Faldo is a Papist, or very near a Kin to one. Would this be just? If not,
neither is his Conclusion of Force against us. What is Truth, is not
discommendable, where ever, and by whatsoever held. It is high Weakness to
exclaim against true Christians for holding any Truth in common with the very
Turks; and much more Condemnable to conclude them Turks. But we must be run
down, if they can, and therefore no matter what ugly Skin they cast over us, so
the Dogs will but fasten. The Lord God plead our Cause on Earth.

CHAP. V.
The Charge Stated, not Proved. The Scriptures not the most Excellent nor only
General Rule. God may speak by Instruments. The Instruments not the Rule, but
that which uses them. That the Scriptures being Obligatory, does not conclude
it the General Rule under the Gospel. The Disingenuity of our Adversary, in
citing the Apostle's words, Reprehended. The Scriptures no Judge in that sense
wherein they are not the General Rule. The Scriptures Confessed to.

. 1. HIs Fifth Chapter designs to Prove, That we Deny the Scriptures to be a
Rule of Faith, and Judge of Controversies; And that he may sufficiently
prejudice his Reader against p. 65, 66.
us, and our most Holy Faith, He not only tells him, that to deny them to be
the Word of God, is a good Reason, why he should conclude us to deny them to be
a Rule (though at the same time, it manifestly shows, that we would acknowledge
them to be such, were they the Word of God, and that therefore the Word of God
is our Rule) but he suggests, that we believe a Conformity to their Guidance,
cannot render a profane Man less profane: To prove this, he quotes James
Parnel, thus, And he also that says, The Letter is the Rule and Guide of the
People of God, is without, feeding upon the Husks, and is ignorant of the true
Light, which was before the Letter was: Shield of Truth, p. 10.

William Smith thus, And if thou look upon the Scripture, to be for a Rule,
and for Trying, thou give that unto them, which is due unto Christ: for He is
the Rule, and leads his People; and he alone searches the Hearts, and tryes the
Reins, and not the Scripture. Again, But if you will see a Mouth full of
Blasphemies against the Authority of the Scripture; read with Horror and
Amazement, the following words: God is at Liberty to speak to his People by
them, if he please, and where they are given by Inspiration, he does so; but
says J. Faldo, the Sting is behind, and in the Tail of this non-such Sentence:
and so he is at liberty to speak by any other created thing, as to Balaam by
his Ass. Nayl. Light of Christ, etc. p. 19.

In Answer to all which, he says just nothing; but thinks, it is enough to have
cited these Passages and seems to triumph as reasonably as the Man which dreamt
he did eat, but awaket anhungry, delighted himself in his sleeping Feast. Let
us try to rouse him out of this Lethargy of Ignorance and Conceit.

. 2. I shall freely confess, that for the same Reasons, that we deny the
Scriptures to be the Word of God, we cannot own them as the General Rule of
Faith. But also, as we acknowledge them to be the Words of the holy, living and
powerful Word of God; so that they express and declare unto us many holy Rules
for Godliness; and I declare in the Name of all the Right-born Quakers in the
World, that we utterly reject all such, as Deny the Scriptures to be profitable
for Reprehension, Instruction, Exhortation and Eaification. How vain then is
this Man's Impeachment of us, as Persons void of all true Respect for them?

. 3. In short; as the Scriptures are not the Word of God, but a Declaration of
the Word of God; so the Scriptures are not the general Rule, but a Declaration
of the true general Rule: which I prove thus.

That which always was, and is a more general Rule then the Scriptures, must
needs be, and is most properly THE general Rule, and not the Scriptures; but
that was, and is the Light of God in the Hearts of Men; Consequently not the
Scriptures, but the Light was, and is most properly The general Rule. The
middle Proposition only to be excepted against is clear, in that before the
Scriptures were writ, and since, where they have not been known, Men have been
and are Convinced, Reproved, Inclined, Taught, Ordered and Ruled by the inward
Appearance of God's Light in the Conscience. And among those who are called
Christians, let them be just to God and their own Souls, and they must confess,
that there is something very near them, when the Scriptures are quite remote,
both from their Persons, and their Thoughts, which upon any Miscarriage is as a
swift Witness, to smite: and upon the approach of Temptation is as quick to
warn, and diswade the Mind from falling into the Foulness of it. Is not this
then more Living, Immediate and General, that neither Sea nor Land, Day nor
Night, nor any condition, but a Seared Conscience, can exempt People, or
deliver them from the secret living and sensible Touches of this holy Witness,
whether they be to Counsel, Justify or Condemn? This searches the Heart, this
tries the Reins: of which David said, It had made him Wiser then his Teachers,
who read and expounded the outward Law unto him.

. 4. And indeed, it is unworthy of the Excellency of the Administration of Life
it self, more glorious then that of Condemnation, the State of the Law, that an
outward Book, though declaratory of never so much good, and not the Good it
self should be the sole general Rule of such as are under it. What is it, but
to subject the Spirituallity of the Gospel to the Letter of the Law? And thus
much worse, that then it self they had either the daily Living Voice of God, or
a Law engraven on Stone, whilst the Scriptures, which they call the present
Gospel Rule, are but in Paper. But can any true Christian think, that God is so
wanting to his Promise, who promised to Write a Law in the Hearts of his
People, as to bound them by mere Literal Prescripts? No surely; but much
rather, that the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, which he promised
to write in the Hearts of Men and Women, should be the Rule of this
Administration, which is a Living Powerful Rule, present upon all Occasions,
and in all straights, and ready to assist with Counsel, Wisdom, and Knowledge,
all who act agreeably to the Mind of God, who will reward every Man according
to his Works. So that J. Parnel, and W. S. their Expressions are cleared. For
J. N's, the last of the three, it was not written in Derision of Scripture, as
is unworthily suggested; but to prove, that God is not limited to Instruments.
God, whose holy Spirit is the living substantial Rule, may appear after diverse
Manners, either by bringing into the very Conscience the Truth of some weighty
Passage in the Scripture, or by a Ministry, or any other Way; yea, by Balaams
Ass to Balaam, and that without Blasphemy or Profaneness; For by whom, or what
may not the Almighty direct the Sons of Men? still it was not so mean a
Creature as an Ass (which God spoke by, to aggravate the Stupidity of Balaam,
and greaten the Miracle) No; Nor the Apostles themselves, much less their
Writings; but the Word of the Lord, that was as a Fire to the Workers of
Iniquity, and Sanctification, and Reconciliation to them that believe it. That
was the True Rule; wherefore said the Prophet., Hear the Word of the Lord. What
Word? that, nigh in the Heart, which Moses and Paul preached. Still the outward
Instrument is not the Rule; the Prophet is not the Rule, the Apostle is not the
Rule, much less are their Writings, being they are but all external
Instruments: And this I will abide by against all the Insults of our Enemies by
God's Assistance, that both they are but such Instruments; and that such
Instruments are not the Gospel-Rule, but that Light, Life, Power or Spirit,
which uses them; and who attributes that Honor to the Instrument, which is
due to the chief Mover in it, or by it, commits downright Idolatry; Therefore
what is flung upon the Quakers by their Adversaries, is more justly chargeable
upon their Adversaries. But we cannot help it, if that People will not work
through the Outward to the Inward; the Writings or Persons, to the Light, Life
and Power that employ them for any Use or Service in the World! Nor shall we
ever be condemned of God, that we therefore decline to attribute those Titles
to the Scriptures (otherwise worthy above all Books) which are only due to that
which gave them forth; especially, since what we believe in the Matter, is with
an holy Fear and Reverence toward our God, and Good Will toward all Men.

. 5. But he Objects, (1) That what p. 68, 59, 70, 71.
is therein affirmed by the Lord, we ought to believe; proved from Christ's
Words, O Fools, and slow of Heart, to believe all that the Prophets have
spoken! Luke 24, 25. (2) That what is thereby commanded (not being repealed by
the coming of Christ) it is our Duty to obey, Deuteronomy. 5. 34. (3) That the holy
Scriptures do in their kind determine or discover to us, whether we believe and
walk, or practice aright or not, proved hence; All Scripture is given by
Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
Perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works; and herein [all things which
are written in the Law and the Prophets] do I exercise my self to have a
Conscience void of Offense. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17. Acts 24. 16.

To all which I say, we do with him acknowledge, that, whatever the Lord has
by his Prophets and Apostles, who writ the Scripture, affirmed, and required
(taking in his Exception about Christ's Coming) it is our Duty both to Believe
and Obey* so that there is no Difficulty in that Matter. For the last Passage,
there is some sober Scruple in our Minds about it; For there are manifest
Contests in the World, both about Faith and Practice. They result not from the
Scriptures. I grant: but that they proceed from Men's wrong Apprehensions of
Scripture in a great Measure, that I affirm; and I know no Man so stupid, as to
deny. Now, I would fain know, which way those wrong Apprehensions are to be
rectified: He says, by Scripture: I say, Not; for the Key is wanting. What is
that Key may some say? The Spirit of Truth, who gave them forth: Who can
explain any Man's Mind so well as Himself, in a Matter, wherein he is not
rightly understood; or it is hard to understand Him? And if none but what is
endued with Reason, is capable of understanding a Rational Proposition; Neither
can any Man whatever understand spiritual Propositions, or Propositions about
spiritual Matters in the Scriptures, but by the Illumination of the Holy Spirit
in some Degree or other. This is so clear, that the Sun is not more obvious at
Noonday in a clear Sky, then this must be to all Discerning Minds; so that the
Scriptures, though professedly owned by us to be Instrumental to the Knowledge
of that Doctrine of Reproof and Instruction in Righteousness (weightily
mentioned by the Apostle Paul (for certainly they do declare to us very
Excellent Precepts and Rules) yet, they are so far from being THE General and
Absolute Rule, that the very Light or Spirit of Christ is, and ought to be our
Rule, how far, which Way, and to what End we are to believe and practice them.
And I cannot forbear at this time (though I have often done so) to show the
horrible perversion of Scripture, this Man is guilty of in the last of these
two Scriptures, by him quoted for Proof of the Third Head. The Apostle in his
Defense against the Public Orator of the Jews, tells the Governor then
present, among other Passages, that though he was no Disturber, as accused;
yet, said he* I confess, that after the Way which they call Heresy, do I
Worship the God of my Fathers, Believing all things which are written in the
Law and the Prophets, and have Hope toward God, which they themselves also
allow, that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just and the
Unjust.

. 6. Now brings in J. Faldo these words [all things which are written in the
Law and the Prophets] do I exercise my self to have a Conscience void of
Offense toward God and toward Men. I do say, this is a perversion of
Scripture; for he has First left out that which is more applicable to the
Words, and put that only in, which is least so: and Next, he has done it in the
same Character, by which common Readers may be mistakenly strengthened against
us; this is plain: And for the former, I affirm, that it could not be so proper
in the Apostle to say, he was exercised in his Belief of the Law and the
Prophets, as in that Way of Worship, they called Heresy, and his Hope of a
Resurrection; both left out by our Adversary. Nor is such a Use of his words
suitable to the Condition Paul was in: For he having out-stript both the Law and
Prophets, and being brought to a Brighter Day, and more Excellent Dispensation,
he cannot be so rightly said to have been exercised in that he had left behind
him, as in the Work of his own Day, which fulfilled and swallowed up the other
Dispensations, as but Forerunners of it; which was that spiritual Worship
Christ set up, and he worshipped the God of his Fathers in, and endeavored to
gather others to, though they reputed it Heresy, and that Hope of the
Resurrection of both Just and Unjust, which they themselves pretended to own.
What then could be Paul's Meaning in that Confession to the Law and Prophets? I
Answer, what is ours to the World, before whom we stand charged by the
Professors, Tertullus, J. Faldo at this Day; namely, that though he preached a
further Glory, and they therefore accused him of Undervaluing the Law and the
Prophets, becoming an Heretic, Seducer, and what not; as this Man does us: he
then (as we now) made his Defense, confessed to the Law and the Prophets, yet
testified to a more Spiritual Worship, but unto which they prophetically
tended. Whence we observe (1) The greatest Enemies to the Spirituallity of that
Evangelical Dispensation, where the greatest Professors of a Literal Religion,
the only seeming Admirers of the Scriptures, and earnest Contenders for the
Faith and Religion once delivered to the Fathers, at least as they pretended.
(2) That they were wont to account such as were eminent Promotors of the
Gospel, Contemners, at least Slighters of the Law and the Prophets. What need I
say any more; Behold a Parallel, as plain as Light it self; The Literal Jews
then, the Literal Christians now; the Spiritual Jews then, the Spiritual
Christians now.

. 7. But one Passage more. The Holy Scriptures determine according to their
kind, or Page 71.
as much as a WRITING can do, whether we believe or practice aright or not;
For, says he, Those who come under the Executative Determination of Laws, do
find, that Process in Writing does not loose its Force for the Decrees and
Sentences being put into that Form.

To his Assertion, and the Instance he brings to prove it, I will return this
Answer.

To say the Scriptures determine as far as a WRITING CAN, does our Adversaries
business, I mean, for us: since it manifestly implies, that it is not so
determinative of all Cases, as some thing else may be, which is a more Living,
Immediate and Infallible Judge then a WRITING is or can be; and we will grant,
that the Scriptures do determine, as much as any Writing in the World can do,
unless God would please immediately and more full to Reveal something, less
clearly laid down in the Scriptures, and then should require that Revelation to
be Written, for Men must have a care of limiting, either his Power or Will. If
J. Faldo had at the beginning of his Opposition to the Quakers Belief in the
Scriptures, well considered this, I am of opinion, that either he would have
never given himself, and us the trouble of so much needless Discourse, or have
been so Careful of his Cause, as never to have wounded it with this fatal Blow,
that the Scriptures can determine as far as a Writing will go: Nothing to the
Question at all, which lies here; Whether any the best Writing, or the Spirit
of Truth, that gave it forth, is Judge; and as far from his purpose, as quite
loosing of his Cause amounts to. Again,

. 8. His Instance about the Law is lame, for the good Laws of any Land are but
Reason Written, or rather declared by writing, which is oblieging against the
Corruption of a Judge, but not the Reason of the Judge. Neither is the Law the
Judge, but there is a Judge, who interprets and speaks from the fresh
Discoveries of his own Reason, the Meaning and Intendment of those written
Laws. If the Laws be Sufficient without a Judge, why is there a Judge? If then
they are Dark, Obscure, and Doubtful in many Cases, so as to need a Judge and
Interpreter, which I call Living and Immediate Reason; then since the
Scriptures are Writings, in which are many Things very Difficult to be
understood; it follows, that there must be an immediate Living Judge: which
must be therefore the Spirit of Truth that gave them forth; because, none Knows
the things of God save the Spirit of God; and that those who are the Makers of
Laws, are the only Persons, who are fit to judge and determine in Case of
Difficulty, by a declaration of their Mind or Intention in any such obscure
Passage. So that if J. Faldo should write a Thousand Years against the Quakers
he would never be able to weather this one Passage, in which he has most
evidently subjected the Scriptures to a more Living, Spiritual, and Immediate
Judge, then any mere Writing possibly can be, which he makes them but to be.

. 9. In short, either the Scriptures are not obscure (a thing we daily see) or
if so, yet sufficient, which is impossible, or they must have a Judge, which is
most true and necessary; and what Judge, but the Spirit of Truth, which leads
into all Truth? And so far are Decrees from determining, because written, that
they are therefore determinative of Controversy, because of that Conviction,
the Power from whence they came, works upon the Conscience. So that, though
what is true in it self, is not the less so, because written; yet is not the
Writing (subject to an hundred Casualities) nor Matter therein declared, as
there, eminently the Rule, much less the Judge, after our Adversaries Notion of
a Judge; But that Living, Powerful Spirit, which gave it forth, and who are
made spiritual Men by it: For the spiritual Man judges all things. Such
Writings may be declaratory of the Mind and Determination of the Living Rule or
Judge, I grant; but also I utterly deny, that the Writings themselves are that
Rule, how People are to believe them; and a Judge, how to determine of the
Difficulties and Obscurities within themselves. A mere Begging of the Question,
and a thing altogether absurd.

We cannot end this Chapter without an Acknowledgment of the Goodness of God;
in Opening things so clearly to the making known his Divine Light and Truth,
and manifestly Discovering the great Darkness and Blindness of its Opposers.

CHAP. VI.
We deny the Charge. His Proof, no Proof; but against himself. We Own, Believe,
and desire to Obey the Scriptures; they afford Comfort, and are as Lights in
the World; but not that True Light. The Light and Spirit Superior to them.

. 1. THe next Charge he brings against us, is a Consequence of his already
mistaken Judgment, and untrue Assertions concerning us; viz. That we take
People off from Reading the Scriptures, p. 78.
and Looking into them for Instruction and Comfort; to prove which, as he
thinks (for none else can, that is not either as deeply Ignorant of us, or as
Malicious against us, as J. Faldo shows himself in almost every particular) he
brings out W. Smith, speaking thus in his Catech. page 95. And this is the
Meaning of our Doctrine, to bring People to the Everlasting Word of God in
themselves. O Ungodly Man! What Evil Spirit has possessed J. Faldo into this
wretched and impious Consequence? Certainly, he is grossly blind, or he has
sinned against the Light of his own Conscience, if he has Conscience enough to
think it a Sin, which I profess, I doubt, when the Malignity, Frothiness, Envy,
and Impious Unjustice of the Man are set before me. For (1) let any tell me, if
it be a Sin, to bring People to the everlasting Word of God in themselves;
though he Dirts us not a little for so doing. (2) If we do hereby take Men off
from reading and looking into the Scriptures. I do affirm against this Ungodly
Priest, and that by Authority from God, the Scriptures, Reason, and the first
See Calv. Inst. Eras. in Nov. Test. 1 Cor. 2. 2 Pet. 1. 19. Bez. ibid.
Reformers too, that no Man on Earth can understand them, but by being first
brought to the Everlasting Word of God nigh in the Heart, by which the Lord
speaks forth his Will to the Creature: and the Scriptures themselves direct to
this, and never said that of themselves, some overdoing Priests assert
concerning them; whose whole End is this, that by Exalting the Letter, and
Excluding the Spirit, they may lock up all Knowledge in their own Areanum, and
plead the Impossibility of Knowing the things of God any other way then by
their literal Ministration; for should Men be but turned to the Certain Witness
of God in their own Consciences, there placed of the Lord, their whole Trade,
Power, and Reputation would fall, and their Deceits be made manifest in the
View of the World; which God, the Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth is now
accomplishing.

. 2. But he says that J. Parnel censures such that draw Peoples Minds from the
Light P. 79.
within to the Light without, putting the Letter for the Light, etc. Shield of
Tr. page 10. And what then? Because we say, that he who inlightens all Men,
God, that is the Sun, and Fountain of all Divine Light, and in whom there is no
Darkness at all, is greater then the Scriptures; therefore will it follow, that
we take People off from Reading or Looking into them. Behold your Priest, you
that hear him! Is this Man to be accounted of, as a Minister of the Gospel,
that thus unrighteously deals with us? But God will recompense upon his Head in
the Day of his terrible Vengeance for all his Hard and Ungodly Sayings against
us.

We do say, and that rightly, Whoever puts the Letter in Opposition to, or
above the Spirit, is an Idolater; For there can be no Comparison rightly made
between them; the Heavens don't excel the Earth more, then the Spirit does the
Letter, and the Power the Form: But if we do not therefore deny the Form of
Godliness, because we prefer, and press more earnestly the Power; neither do we
exclude the Scriptures, because we prefer and press the Everlasting Word of God
nigh in the Heart: And this I will tell him, that, to busy the Minds of Men
with the Depth of those Truths the Scriptures declare of by reading, and
exercising their Minds, in Meditating thereon, before they have been turned
unto the Measure of the Light or Grace of God in the Heart, to believe and obey
that in its secret Discoveries, Reproofs and Strivings, is, to set Men about
Images, to conceive a God, a Christ, a Salvation, a Damnation, an Heaven, an
Hell; by which the Inward Work of God is overlook't, and they become Rich in
Notion, whilst most barren in Obedience, and of all People that live upon the
Earth, the Greatest Idolaters; because they bow down to their own Imaginations,
for real Truths: And this is the State of every Opposer to the Sacred Light
within, how full soever of the mere Literal Knowledge of the very Scriptures
themselves: for indeed, who knows the new Birth, though the Scriptures declare
of it, but who really experience it?

. 3. But J. Story, he thinks, has Contributed much to prove his Assertion in
this page 80.
Passage: And although the holy Scripture without, and the Saints Practices are
as Lights in the World; yet, far be it from all true Christian Men, so to
Idolize them, as to set them in Esteem above the Light, which is sufficient to
guide; or to esteem them Equal with the Light and Spirit of God within. J. S.
Short Discourse: Page 2. To this he objects, that J. S. confesses them to be as
Lights but not a Light, and that our Commendations of that Idol the Light
within, are such, that if they were true, he were a stark Fool, that would
direct his Eyes to the Scripture.

But here the Priest fail's egregiously. For if the Scriptures are as Lights, I
cannot see how they should be denied to be as in the Nature of a Light; unless
to acknowledge their Testimonies to be as Lights, be to deny them to have any
Light at all. Is this the great Originalian, Linguist, Critic, Philosopher,
and what else his own conceit will have him? What is it but to say, that six
burning Candles are six Lights? but not that they give a Light, either jointly
or separately; But it is below us to pursue every Advantage his Ignorance gives
us: I find him more in Words then Matter, a great deal, and I suppose, more are
of that Mind, or else what means his great Pains to be made waste paper of
already? Quakerism no Christianity, has exchanged the Booksellers Stalls for
the Tobacco Shops. Poor Man! perhaps he will write another Book, to complain of
the Deadness of Professors Hearts, that they make so ill Use of the Labors of
painful Ministers. I am confident, nothing but his Fear of loosing by it could
divert him from such a Lamentation.

But to his Reflection upon the Light, as our Idol; and their Folly, who attend
upon the Scriptures, when they have so excellent a Light in their own Bosoms;
the Substance of the rest of the Chapter, I thus return. God is that Light
which has enlightened Mankind, and to have the highest Reverence for him, and
believe in him can be therefore no Idolatry: And for the Scripture all grant,
that there is a State above them; For I hope, the Man does not think, that
People shall have Bibles in Heaven, and the more any approach to the heavenly
Life, and Glory, the less need there will be, and yet not the less value of
them. But this we also say, that they are profitable for Instruction and
Comfort in this World: And God has spoke, does, and yet will by the Scriptures
speak to the Consciences of Men; For, being given forth by the Spirit of God,
they do declare that Reproof, Exhortation and those Promises, which being felt
in some Sense of the same Divine Light, do administer Knowledge and
Refreshment. But we do also and again declare it as our Faith, that the Pouring
out of the Spirit, is a Gospel Privilege, yea, the very proper and peculiar
Promise and Blessing of the Father in that State; and that, as the Spirit is
superior to the Letter, so we earnestly contend, not against the Scripture, but
for that Living Experimental Knowledge of them, which all witness, who are
truly taught and led by the Spirit, and which cannot be obtained by any mere
Writings whatsoever. Nor does it follow, that because God has given a
sufficient Light, therefore all other Means should be superfluous. Certain I
am, p. 81.
this Argument is fitter for Bedlam then one who more then once Vaunts himself
to be a Critic (indeed a Quibler) For what is it but to say, that though every
Man has Reason enough in him to know, that Intemperance is below a very Brute,
yet because he is Intemperate, his Reason is not sufficient to inform him
better; Or, if it be sufficient, he ought to despise another Admonitions
however seasonable, his Reason being enough to his Information: Was Nathan of
no use to David, who had so secret, and sufficient a Teacher? And here I do
observe that all our Opposers split themselves, and will forever, unless better
informed; They ignorantly or basely infer a Fallibility or Insufficiency to be
in the Light, from the Fallibility and Rebellion of those Persons, whom we say,
are lightened by it: And on the Contrary hand, that all should be necessarily
Infallible, who are Enlightened, by an Infallible Light, not considering, that
neither is the Grace of God Insufficient to Save, because Men refuse to be
Saved by it; nor, though it be sufficient, and Infallible in it self, that
therefore all those to whom it is tendered are saved; or therefore are
Infallible, without any Consideration had to their Obedience. How False? How
Injurious? How (almost) Unpardonable is this Priest then? Who seems to charge
us with believing, that all Power in Heaven and in Earth is in every Particular
Man, because, says he p. 81.
this Light in every one is God, Christ, Spirit etc. For, though we confess,
that as to every individual Person, all the Power, which is required to redeem
that Soul from the Pollutions of the World, unto the pure and undefiled
Religion, is in that Divine Principle, which, with respect to the great
Darkness of the World, is very aptly denominated Light, yet that therefore the
whole Light and Power of it should be comprehended by, or contained in every
Individual Soul, I utterly Renounce as no Consequence of our Doctrine; For that
were to say; in every Room where the Sun shines, there is a distinct Sun. These
are but some of the Priests old Bulbeggars to scare the Simple, and they will
at last do as much for their Inventors. It shall suffice us (1) that, though
the Light shines not alike into all habitable Places, yet the same Light, by
Nature, shines into all such Places. For illustration only; If a Man has six
Rooms exposed to the Sun, there may be more Light in some one then another, yet
not therefore another Sun or Light. (2) If People refuse to see by it, it
implies no Deficiency in the Light, but argues manifest Rebellion in the Party.
(3) That, whatever Means it may please God, to use to stir up Men to observe
and obey the Light they withstand, they ought not to be thought superfluous, or
the Light therefore Insufficient. (4) That all such Means as can be effectual,
proceed from that Divine Principle in others, and with Design of turning the
Rebellious to the Grace which they resist in themselves. So, notwithstanding
the Quakers do own and assert the Spirit to be Superior to the Scriptures,
especially in this Administration; yet, they do not deny the Scripture all
Service or Benefit, by no means, but believe, it ought to be Read, Believed,
Honored and Obeyed, as that, by which God has, does, and may yet reach to the
Hearts and Consciences of People. And to the Righteous Lord God of Heaven and
Earth do we make our Appeal in this Matter (against the Unrighteous Dealing of
this traducing Priest) who is the Searcher of the Hearts of all Men.

CHAP. VII.
Commands upon Conviction to be obeyed. All General Commands Obligatory;
Particular not, but upon particular Commission. Our Adversaries Disingenuity.
The Scriptures a Means, by which God may be known; but not the Principle.

. 1. THough indeed we need not concern our selves any further in this Subject,
after the Disproof of his Premises; namely, that because the Quakers Deny the
Scriptures to be the Word of God, therefore they deny them to all Intents and
Purposes, much less, that we should esteem our selves obliged to consider,
what remains after such plentiful Confutation, being but Consequences of the
Priests drawing from his own False Assertions already enervated; or a mistaken
Understanding of ours, plainly discovered, and which indeed seems both to
resemble, and follow the old way of two and twentiethly Beloved, to spin out
the Hourglass, I mean, saying over the same things in other words; yet, that
we may remove all Ground of Scruple, I will lay down the several Charges of the
remaining Chapters, concerning the Scriptures, and the best Proofs he brings
for them, and briefly examine both.

. 2. The Quakers affirm, the Doctrines, Commands, Promises, holy Examples
expressed page 87.
in the Scriptures, as such, not at all to be binding to us. This, says he, is
a Denying of the Scriptures, and the Authority of the God of the Scriptures.
For Proof of this, he brings out E. Buroughs, Speaking thus, That is no
Command of God to me, what he Commanded to another; neither did any of the
Saints which we read of in the Scripture, act by that Command, which was to
another, not having the Command to themselves; I challenge to find an Example
to it.

To this I answer briefly, and plainly. Edward Burroughs's Expression may be
taken two ways, and both safe enough to the Honor and Credit of the
Scriptures, though not to the Charity or Honesty of J. Faldo. No Command in the
Scripture is any further oblieging upon any Man, then as he finds a Conviction
upon his Conscience; otherwise Men should be engaged without, if not against
Conviction; a Thing Unreasonable in a Man. Therefore the Apostle, when he wrote
to the Churches, exhorted them, Not to do those things whereof they were
ashamed, to shun what was manifested to be Evil; and affirms, That whatever
might be known of God was manifested Within; for God had shown it unto them.
So, that Conviction can only obliege to Obedience; and since what works that
Conviction, is the Manifesting Light, Universal Grace, or Quickening Spirit in
the Heart of Mankind, it follows, that the principal Ground for our Faith in
the Scriptures, and Reason of our Obedience to the Holy Precepts therein
contained, is the Manifestation, Conviction and Secret Drawings of the Light,
or Spirit of God in the Conscience: And thus E. B's Words are Sound and
Scriptural; for the Scriptures are chiefly believed to be true upon Conviction,
therefore every Practice therein: and when any Man is convinced, that what was
Commanded another, is required of him, then, and not till then, he is rightly
authorized to perform it. Again,

3. Such Commands are either relating to Ordinary or Extraordinary Cases: By
Ordinary Cases, I mean, such as chiefly concern Faith and Holy Life, which are
General, Permanent, and Indispensible; and then I deny his Consequence. By
Extraordinary Cases, I understand, Moses' s going to Pharaoh; the Prophets
several Manner of Appearance to the Kings, Priests and People of Israel, with
other Temporary Commands relating to Outward Services, etc. And so we do say,
that what is Commanded one Man, is not binding, as such, upon another; But when
the Lord shall say, If thou Sinnest thou shall Dye; If thou keep my
Commands, thou shall Live; Be ye Holy, for I the Lord your God am Holy: Also in
case of Example, as the Priest cites. Whose Faith follow, consider the End of
their Conversation. Leaving us an Example, that we should follow his Steps. For
1 Pet. 2. 21. Heb. 13. 7. 2 These. 3.
your selves know you not, how you ought to follow us. For after this manner in
the old time the Holy Women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves. I
say, these 1 Pet. 3. 5.
Precepts and Examples are oblieging upon all; Why? because they more or less
meet with a Conviction in the Consciences of all: For I am persuaded, none that
has a reasonable Soul, who has not outlived their Day, and on whom the Night
is not come, among the Indians themselves, but would readily say, These are
true and weighty Sayings; for Faith in God, and an Holy Self-denying Life, are
necessary, both to Temporal and Eternal Happiness. Thus then are we clear from
his Ungodly Consequence, indeed Aspersion, to wit, That the Quakers affirm the
Doctrines, Commands, Promises, Holy Examples expressed in Scripture, as such,
not to be binding. But let us hear another of his Consequences, by way of
Charge, and see, if he will acquit himself better then before.

. 4. The (Quakers) deny the Scriptures to be any Means by which we may come to
know God, Christ, and Our selves. To prove p. 96, 97.
this, he quotes W. Smith's Primmer, p. 2. Q. Is there not another Way, by
which we may come to know God?

Answ. Nay Child, there is not another Way, for Christ is the Way. To which he
replies,

Christ says, I am the Way, no Man can come to the Father, but by me; but he
does not say, that there is no Coming to the Knowledge of God but by Christ*
For, some Knowledge of God may be attained, not only without Christ, as the
Means, but without the Scriptures also; Quoting that Passage in the first of
the Romans: For the Invisible Things of him are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made, etc.

To all which I say, (1.) That greater Untruth Irreverence, and Impertinency
could not well have been expressed, then in his saying, That no Man can come to
the Father, but by Christ; and no Man can come to the Knowledge of God, but by
Christ, are two different things: For it manifestly implies, that Men may know
God without Christ, either inwardly or outwardly, (though no other Name be
given) and that to know the Father, was to know some other kind of Being, then
to know God: Or, that when they did know the one, they did not know the other.
(2.) That it was never denied by any Quaker, that God might, and sometimes does
reach into the very Heart and Conscience by the Scriptures: Shall I allow, that
a Man may be convinced of his Evil by reading one of our Books; and shall I
deny it to be as possible for any to be convinced by reading some Passages in
the Holy Scriptures? God forbid. Neither did William Smith ever mean, that
Christ was so the only Way to the Father, as thereby to exclude all
Instruments; for then he had both cut off all Benefit that could accrue to
People by his Books, and also from that Ministry God had given him to profit
others with, which was far from his Thoughts, we may be sure. So that the great
Wickedness of this Priest is herein manifest, without further Cost to know him;
for he argues from our denying that there is any other Way to the Father, but
Christ, to our excluding the Scriptures, and consequently our own Books, and
Ministry with them, from being any way Instrumental of Good. Reader, what can
be said to such a Man; but that he is either Ignorance or Malice it Self? I
wish it were the former, but his Book makes me fear the latter.

. 5. In short, through all Instruments, He, who in time, and with respect to
that Manifestation, was called Christ, was, is, and ever will be the alone Way
to the Father: And though he may discover himself by diverse Instruments, yet it
is but in order to incline Man to his Holy Voice in Man; Some they hear and
obey and live; Others they resist the Grace, grieve the Spirit, turn from the
Way of the Light, and are in a State of Death.

God has been frequently pleased to move in the Hearts of the Obedient to
visit the Rebellious, that the Inward Strivings of the Holy Spirit might be the
more Efficacious by its Strivings through some Outward Instruments; but still
it is the same Light, Grace or Spirit of God: Nor is the Light within any whit
the more Insufficient to reclaim the Rebellious, if minded; for it is the same
Light with that, which moves in the Hearts of the Obedient to bear Record for
God against their Ungodly Deeds. Only Men's Minds being far strayed from that
Holy Light, or Word in the Heart, and gone abroad into the wide World of Lusts
and Vanities, it has pleased God to visit Mankind so degenerated, by those who
have been Obedient Children, to the End they might be the more easily gained to
a Subjection unto the Holy Light in themselves: so that all Conviction and
Conversion, are to be ascribed to the Light, Grace, and Spirit of God, whether
immediately in the Creature, or mediately by any Instrument. Only take this by
the way, that whatsoever is Efficacious mediately, is not to be understood
simply of another Man's Measure of Light or Grace, but in Conjunction with what
God has given, and may be at work in the Party convicted and converting; for
every Mediate Conviction gives and Addition of Life, and Strength to the
Immediate Conviction that is wrought by the Operation of that so long neglected
Measure of Light, Grace, or Truth in the particular Conscience: We appeal then
to every Impartial Person that reads us; if we own not the Scriptures in that
very Sense he would have People believe, that we deny them, to wit, That God
may and does speak to People through the Writings of the Holy Prophets and
Apostles, which are commonly called Scriptures; and consequently, we do not
deny the Scriptures to be any means by which we may come to know God, Christ,
and Our selves, so often as it shall please the Eternal God to reach into the
Hearts of Men, by any of those Truths therein declared of.

CHAP. VIII.
His Charge of our denying the Scriptures any means by which God does enable
Men to resist Temptations; and that we say, they are Dangerous to be read;
rejected. His Proofs Lame. The Scriptures are believed to be a means, etc. The
true Knowledge of them Divine. No Knowledge of Divine Things, but upon
Experience. It does not destroy Faith. W. Penn's Words safe and sound. The
Priest a mere Shuffler. Learning, a Servant to Truth. Christ, the Word of God.
Faith by our Adversary, preferred before Scripture. The Scripture ought to be
Read, Believed and Obeyed.

. 1. HE further charges us, with denying the Scriptures to be any Means,
whereby to resist Temptation; and that we say, That they are Dangerous to be
read. For Proof P. 106, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113.
of which he quotes a Book, called, Love to the Lost; and mine, Entitled, The
Spirit of Truth Vindicated. The first is this, For, those only are Children of
God, who are led by the Spirit of God, to whom they who were led by the Letter,
were Enemies: From whence he concludes, That we account it a very dangerous
thing to read the Scriptures. Now if this Passage has any relation to his
Charge or Conclusion, no Man ever saw the like; the whole Scope of which is but
this. That there are Children of the Fleshly, Literal and Historical Knowledge
of the Scriptures and Religion, who are Strangers to, and therefore Persecutors
of the Children born of the Spirit: And that in all Ages there has been more
or less of this among Inward and Outward Jews and Christians: and let J. Faldo
deny it if he dare. How Wicked then is he to extort (indeed invent) an
Inference so foreign to the Matter, and then charge it upon the Quakers in
general; and, as if it were proved by that Passage in particular, which can no
ways be concerned in any such Unrighteous Doctrine. I perceive, it is as
impossible for our Adversaries to do any thing against us, without they have
the Making of our Consequences, as we are sure to find them misshapen enough,
by that time they get clear of their Hands; but blessed be the Name of our God,
who has given us an Understanding, and Boldness both to search the Reins of our
Enemies Cause, and defend his, which he has put into our Hands in this our Day.

. 2. But hear him further, if it may be worth while: That this Abominable Tenet
is the Quakers Take one Instance more out of their Famous Author, W. P. or
William Penn.

But I will assure them, they shall grope in the Dark, till they come into the
daily Obedience of the Light, and there rest contented to know only as they
experience; and not from a ravening comprehending Brain, that would in its
Unregenerated State, grasp at the clear Mysteries of the Kingdom, into which
Fleshly Comprehensions and Notions can never enter: but all must be as
Unlearned from their first Birth, Education, and Traditional read Knowledge, as
he is unmanned that is again become a little Child, before the Secrets of God's
Work come to be made known. Spir. Truth Vind. p. 23. Upon which hear his
Comment.

That W. P. (of all others) should talk at this rate, is most Ridiculous. What!
Know only as they experience, know what God is no farther then they experience:
Can we experience his Omnipotency? What! Know the Death of the Man Christ
Jesus, the Life to come, and judging of all Men by the Lord Jesus, only by
Experience? Where is Faith all the while? If none but Believers are Saints,
such as W. P. are professedly none.

If Reader, we are got beside the Matter charged against the Quakers, to wit,
that they deny the Scriptures to be any Means whereby to resist Temptation, our
wandering Adversary, who led me thither, is only to be blamed; But since I am
here, I shall endeavor to clear the Truth and My self, before we return to the
Point in hand.

It cannot be so ridiculous in W. P. to assert the Impossibility of any Man's
Knowing God, or the Things belonging to his Everlasting Kingdom, but by
Experience, or, as God has been pleased, by the Inspiration or Illumination of
his Light or Spirit to demonstrate, or discover unto Mankind, as it is Impious
and Antichristian in J. Faldo, to assert the Right Knowledge of God obtainable
any other way, then by Experience. And this, Reader, choaks J. Faldo, and the
rest of his Partners more then they are willing their Followers should know;
who, for all their Cries against us, as Overturners of a Gospel, and
Establishers of a Legal Righteousness, dread the Consequence of having their
own Strivings, Runnings, Willings, and Literal Knowledge laid aside, in which
their Life, Faith, Worship, and whole Religion mostly stand, and of being
reduced to the very Alphabet of Inward and Experimental Religion, where the
Righteous Judgments of God are known for Sin, which they shake off, on another
(mistaken) Account; and in this Mystery the Devil works most subtly, and
vigorously against the Light of Christ within, and its True and Holy Birth.

. 3. But says he, How! Know God's Omnipotency experimentally? Very well say I,
against the Folly of this cavilling Priest. Experience is Demonstration; and
the World without, and the Redemption I know within, which no Power, but what
is Almighty, could ever have effected, make up that Demonstration; which is
that Experience, therefore I only know God's Omnipotency by Experience.

. 4. But is it thus, that you know Christ died, that there shall be a Judgment,
and an Immortality? I answer, not altogether thus; One Part is Matter of Story,
and is believed, first, Historically, upon the Credit of History; and then upon
the Account of Inward Conviction too: The other is Knowable only upon
Experience; For we feel in our selves Rewards and Punishments for Good and Evil
in this Life, and receive them as Earnests of what will attend Mankind in the
next: And we have an inward Sense of a never dying Life; which, as we are
Gathered into it, and Grow up in it, we shall Inherit Eternal Felicity; and as
there is an Erring from that Holy Spirit of Life, the Wages of such Rebellion
will be the direful Portion of Death and Misery to every Soul forever.

. 5. Nor does this clash with Faith, whatever the Priest would suggest. For
Faith is a believing in, or relying upon God, with respect to a further
Knowledge and Enjoyment of him; which no ways impugnes or withstands a
Knowledge of God upon Experience, so far as Men do experience: wherein they
simply believe, they do not yet so perfectly experience, which ends Faith; yet
it abides certain, that when they do experience, that further Revelation of the
Goodness, and Mercy, and Riches of the Love of God, as the End of their Faith,
then, and not before, they may be said to know those things. Why then should we
be denied to conclude, and that most rightly, that to Know, and to Experience,
are equivalent Terms? No Knowledge without Experience; no Experience without
Knowledge. And though Men may believe in a further Enjoyment of what they now
have but an Earnest of, yet that, as such, they know not, consequently they
experience it not. And so much this insolent Vilifier of that serious
Expression, confesses to us, and disputes for (as he thinks against) us, when
he says, where is Faith all the while? and if none but Believers be Saints,
such as W. P. are professedly none. Since then my Affirming no Knowledge of God
without Experience, strikes not at Faith, because Faith, says our Adversary, is
not a clear knowing, but believing or relying upon God, as to things not yet
clearly known and enjoyed; what has the Man been a doing all the while? But
here was his shameful Mistake and Contradiction; That Knowing and Believing are
one and the same thing; and this I will make appear from his own Words, and a
Contradiction to himself, at the End of it.

. 6. He quarrels my affirming all Knowledge to rest upon Experience, and
opposes to it this question, Can we experience his Omnipotency? as much as to
say, yet we know it; else he queries impertinently. If so then, that God's
Omnipotency may be known, and not Experienced (the purport of his Query) it
must be only by Faith; and if by Faith, then a Man may certainly know any thing
to be what it is, and yet at the same time only believe it to be so: which he
as earnestly withstands, when he asks, Where is Faith all the while? etc. I
would then sain be resolved, whether that Man, suppose J. Faldo, who says, that
Knowing and Believing are One, and Knowing and Experiencing are Contraries, be
more ridiculous; or W. P. who affirms, that Faith (which stricktly taken, is
but an Evidence of things, not yet clearly seen, experienced or known) and
Knowing, are not one and the same thing; and that experiencing and knowing can
never be Contraries?

. 7. I would advise this Priest to be less conceited, and better grounded the
next time he has to do with us; for even in those places, where he seems most
Insulting, he appears most Weak. Reader, what we experience, we know; and from
hence are taught to believe that Fullness to be in God, which we can never
comprehensively Know; so that our Knowing God from Experience, does not weaken
Faith, but as Enjoyment is the End of Faith, so from thence great Encouragement
is to be taken, to press on from Faith to Faith; till there is an Arriving, at
the Measure of the Ephesians. 4. 13.
Stature, of the Fullness of Christ. But he leaves not off here.

. 8. I shall not Comment on his ravening comprehending Brain (a most affected
Pharisee among the Quakers) nor his clear Mysteries, as clear a Contradiction
as it is; nor Fleshly Comprehensions as much Untruth, and Nonsense, as
(according to their Meaning of it) it Comprehends; for I have not Room to
spread all his Rubbish. I wonder not at his course Usage of me; it is like a Man
of his Breeding, Fury and Profession; there is abundantly more yet behind, some
of which will be observed in a more proper place.

But to reply; Ravening, is a most proper Word and due to J. Faldo, with his
whole Tribe of Priests (and, if he will, Raving too; some few more moderate
ones excepted) for we commonly understand by a Ravenous Dog, one that is
Greedy, Sharp-set, that hunts hard for Prey, that snatches and ketches at every
thing it likes, or may answer his hungry Appetite: now whether this may relate
to that greedy pursuit of the Priests after Hire, the Basin, the Box, the
Purse; or that insatiable Thirst they have after Knowledge of those Religious
Matters, which were the dear-bought Experiences of ancient Saints, whilst
Strangers to the Fiery and Refining Judgments of the Lord; through which alone
it is obtained; certain it is, that the Word is most aptly used by the Quakers
against that Ravenous Generation.

. 9. Comprehending Brain, is compassing, or mastering of any thing in the
Understanding; and where People are more studious to fill their Heads with
Knowledge, then to adorn their Hearts with Righteousness, we use those Words in
a way of Reproof: Since having learnt of God, what we know of him, through the
Operation of his Light in our Consciences, it is our Testimony, and our work in
the World, to beat down that Thirsting Spirit after much Head-Knowledge, and
press all to the continual Observance of an humble and constant Obedience to
the Tit. 2. 11. 12, Jam. 1. 27.
Grace of God manifested in their Hearts, that teaches to deny all
Ungodliness, and Worldy Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godlikely
in this present Evil World, which is the Undefiled Religion.

Nor his Clear Mysteries; as clear a Contradiction, as it is. It was not Clear,
but Clean in my Copy, which I suppose I can produce, and has been so corrected
by me. Ingenuous Men would allow some Grains for Ill-Printing, to us
especially, who have not the Press open, nor those Advantages for
Well-Printing, which our Adversaries Enjoy; that Day is not yet come to us: J.
Faldo's Title is Imprimatur enough; we swim against the Stream, such as be,
with it: But God can, and will turn the Rivers of Waters, and make the Sea Dry
Land. Vincit qui patitur.

. 10. But once more hear him. What is to my present purpose is in the last part
of his saying, All must be as unlearned from their traditional read Knowledge as
he is unmanned, etc. Where he falls out of all bounds upon us; and draws this
Consequence, and asks these Questions: Sure the Scripture-Knowledge being
Read-Knowledge, or P. 112, 113.
Knowledge that comes by reading (as one means) is a most hateful thing to God.
That he will impart none of his Secrets to those, that will understand any
thing by his written Word. How came God to fall out with his own Offspring?
Did he write, and cause it to be written, and yet never intended we should read
it; or reading it, that we should not believe a Word of it? Shall they be
judged by the Law, who live under it, and yet the Knowledge of God thereby be a
Sin, and Hinderance to their Salvation? To what a height of Wickedness and
Folly do they quickly go; who are poisoned with that Abomination of holding the
Light in every Man's Conscience to be God, Father, Son, Spirit, Christ,
Scripture, all? W. P. what means your Latin, Greek, Authors, Logic,
Scripture-Quotations? Did you learn all those things by Immediate Inspiration?
But I smell your Design; you would have us throw away all the Knowledge we have
by Reading, or Tradition, till we come to be regenerate, that is, Quakers. But
in the mean time, you would have us without the Armor of Light (For whatsoever
makes manifest is Light) that we may not be able to defend our selves against
the most Ignorant Nonsense, that the meanest of your Votaries can attempt us
with. But the GOD ABOVE, and the Scriptures without, have taught us better
things. I am not unwilling to quote a few Scriptures. Put on the Armor of
Light, Romans 13. 12. The Word of God is quick and powerful, sharper then any
two-edged Sword, Hebr. 4. 12. Above all, taking the Shield of Faith, wherewith
ye shall be able to Ephesians. 6. 16, 17.
quench, etc. and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. Observe
Faith in the 16th verse is preferred above the Words of God in the 17th verse;
therefore it is not Christ the Word, but the Scripture the Word: For Faith is
not above Christ; Jesus Christ, who had less need of Scripture then any of us
all, resisted Satan's Temptation by Scriptures, It is written, It is written,
Mat. 4.

I have, Reader, given his Mind at large, and the rather, that the
Inconsistency of it, with the Charge he begun his Chapter upon, and the
Contradiction of it to himself, might more evidently appear. My Meaning is too
foully concealed, and disingenuously evaded by the Man. How could he think, that
I should speak so reverently of the Scriptures, and quote them diligently, and
very often to the Proof of my Assertions, and yet mean nothing less abusive of
them, then his untrue Consequences? I intended no more then this; That Men in a
State of Degeneracy from God, may have a Profession of God, and Religion, taken
up from the Words of Scripture, and outward Practice of the Saints; not being
so much as sensible of the Remorse, Convictions and Judgments, God brings upon
every Soul for Sin, which is the Beginning of his Work of Redemption: and that
many are Rich in Notion, and a Show of Religion; who never begun right, but
must know a being stripped of all their Knowledge, and those wrongly applied
Promises they have taken as to themselves out of the Scriptures, and those
Imaginations they have raised thence, toward a Fabric of Religion: and so
become Poor and Naked, and Hungry and Thirsty, as a little Child, or new Bottle
fitted for the new Wine of the Spirit; and to which the Scriptures testify.
Many can talk of Christ from the Scriptures, which crucify him in themselves
by Wicked Works, and do render Praises to him, as the Seed that has bruised
the Serpent's Head, while the Serpent may be yet reigning in them. All such
Knowledge and Profession of Religion from the mere Letter of the Scriptures,
distinct from the Revelation and Operation of the Eternal Spirit within, must
be Unlearnt, Unravill'd, Unbottom'd; one Stone must not be left standing upon
one another, that there may be a Beginning upon a right Foundation. But, far be
it from me, to say, that a Man must unlearn that Knowledge he has had of the
Scriptures from the Key of David, the Living Word of God, when it has opened
the Mysteries therein declared of; By no means; for such Knowledge is Right,
Natural, Sanctified from God, and to be esteemed very Excellent and Divine.

. 11. My Latin, Greek, Authors, Logic, Scripture-Quotations I therefore used,
and urged, with plainness and brevity, to prove and recommend the Truth I
defended to the World; that lying under great Discredit with too many, they
might see that ready to its Confirmation, which they perhaps would not
otherwise have thought upon: But the Priest has been as Uncandid with me here,
as with my Friends and Self abundantly elsewhere; for he infers general
Affirmatives or Negatives from particular Propositions: because I affirmed,
that Unregenerate Men must begin again, that their Religion must be unlearn't,
as to their way of acquiring it, the Priest concludes, the Quakers deny all
Knowledge which comes from reading, Meditation, or any such Means, however
sanctified; then which, there can be nothing of that kind more Untrue; since it
were to say, because we deny an erroneous Understanding, therefore we deny all
Understanding; or, in as much as we comdemn all illacquired or wrong-gotten
Knowledge, for that cause, we are to be concluded Enemies to all true and well
gotten Knowledge. But we must bear this, and a great deal more; and the rather,
since he does so seasonably assist to his own Confutation, by acknowledging
that the Scriptures without, and God above has taught him better things. Now
what is this Teaching of the God above? If it be in the Scripture, it was
impertinent to say any more then that the Scriptures have taught them better
things: but if he meant that God taught by his immediate Discoveries, with and
beside the Seriptures; then wherein do we differ? Why has he taken so much
Pains, and flung so much Dirt? He bids us also to put on the Armor of Light:
If he means that of the Scriptures, he errs egregioussy; for no Man can put
them on, neither are they that Light which manifests every Thought, Word or
Deed; but that Light which we assert to have been before the Scriptures were,
and now is, where they are not, or at least, when they are not thought upon,
which is some thing more Immediate, Living, Spiritual and Inward, and that
brings Thoughts, Words and Deeds to Light, savours, relishes, discovers, and
accepts or condemns. In short, thus; if whatever makes manifest, is Light, then
because the Thoughts, Words and Deeds of Men and Women have been manifested
unto them in all Ages, as well before Scritures were, and where they have not
been, as since they were, and where they have been; it follows that they had
Light, and that the same Light cannot be the Scriptures, though the Matter
Written, called Scriptures, was manifested by that Light to the holy Penmen
before they were written; which still makes for the Authority of the Light
within. The Priest exhorts us to that, he endeavors to overthrow, and with
which holy Armor we have fairly foiled him in his own Field. The same may be
said of the Word of God, though not of the Scriptures any further, then the
sharp-Word of God may speak, or pierce through them into the Consciences: for
with good Reason do we affirm, that the Scriptures or Writings, are not that
Sword, but that from whence they came. The word was a Fire, an Hammer, a Sword,
in the Prophets: But the Words or Writings it spoke by, were not that Fire,
Hammer, nor Sword; neither bad they any other Edge, then what the Word put upon
them. To the same purpose may I argue against their being the Off spring of
God, properly; for, as such, they could not be subject to Casuality. God's
Offspring is more Living and Eternal: that Word is to high, for properly
taken, I mean as Writings, they were the Offspring of the Writers only; but
the Truth they declare of, is of God, and that will abide forever.

. 12. But upon the Shield of Faith, and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God he has a pretty Fetch. Faith in the 16. verse is preferred above
the Word in the 17. verse; Therefore it is not Christ the Word, but the
Scriptures the Word; for Faith is not above Christ. But neither will this do
his Business: and a Shame it is, that this Man should bring these Places to
prove that the Scriptures are Means, whereby to resist Temptation, which
concern them not, especially this in hand; unless he would have Faith to be the
Scriptures or Word of God, in his Sense, which as it is absurd, so it will by
him be denied, since he allows the Faith to be preferred above the Word of God,
therefore distinct from it, and not Consequently the same with it. And should
we grant to him, That Christ is not understood by the Word of God, but the
Scriptures, yet observe, the fatal Blow his Cause receives at his own Hand;
Every true Christian has Faith, that Faith is above the Scriptures, therefore
every true Christian has some thing in him above the Scriptures. Every true
Faith overcomes the World, and quenches the fiery Darts of Satan, consequently
Temptations therefore not so properly the Scriptures, but true Faith which is
preferred above them, and resists Temptations, and overcomes the World. The
just they live by Faith: but Faith is above the Scripture; Therefore the Just
live by that which is above the Scriptures, and of course the Scriptures are
not the Rule of Faith; for how can any thing be ruled by that which is
inferior to it? Thus much we get, granting to him that the Scriptures are that
Word of God. But we deny that Gloss too. For the Spiritual Sword, as he says
Beza renders it, which is that Word of God, must be at least of the Nature of
that rest of the Armor mentioned in that Chapter, I mean of an Invisible
Spiritual Nature, which the Bible, as a mere Writing is not. If any should say,
but the Truth it declares of; I say so to: and the very Words, when by the
living Word brought into the Conscience, do Pinch, Prick, and Wound; but then
that Operation comes from the Power of the Word, which through them reaches
into the Heart of the Creature, and so the Words without, and the Word within
carry a double Conviction with them. But said Christ to the Devil, it is
written; what then? therefore must the Quakers needs deny the Scriptures to be
any Means to resist Temptation. Or rather are they not such Means, when God is
pleased to use them, which I am sure, no right Quaker ever denied. Besides, it
was Reasonable that Christ should so answer (set that Power aside which filled
up those Words, and chained Satan) because the Devil used Scripture to prevail
upon him, as the place proves. However, we deny not, but confess, that
wherever God is pleased to speak by any place of Scripture to a tempted Soul,
the Scripture may be very well acknowledged to be a Means by which God scatters
such Doubts and Dispondencies, and gives Power over Temptations; and that it
may often so occur: Yet we would not have People fly to them, as what of
themselves may be sufficient, but rather have Recourse to that Divine Faith,
which the Scriptures testify is able to Quench the fiery Darts, and Overcome
the Temptations of this World; and which J. Faldo has largely confessed, is to be
preferred above the Scriptures themselves.

. 13. The other part of his Charge, to wit, That they are dangerous to be read;
has been answered again and again. We say, Let them that read, understand,
fear, believe and Obey; and then they will read worthily; otherwise, men read
their own Condemnation and Destruction. For the Holy Truths they declare of,
are not to be seen, known, or enjoyed by every Profane, nor yet professing
Person that reads them: they are a sealed Book to all who err from, and despise
that Word of God nigh in the Heart, which originally gave them forth, and now
bears living record to them. Blessed are they that rightly Understand and Do
them, to such they are of great Price.

CHAP. IX.
That we do not put the Scripture, and Holy Spirit in Opposition. The
Wickedness of the Priest; in his Proof. They accord, and we acquiesce in their
Testimony. We do not say, that they are not to be obeyed without extraordinary
Apostolical Revelation, as basely suggested. His Proof fictitious and forged.
Such only are by us denied, as are only Literal Formal Christians. The
Scriptures owned and believed in, by us, according as they testify of
themselves.

. 1. TO close up his false Charges against us about the Scriptures, though I
thought not to bestow so much time about him, be pleased to hear him, and his
Testimonies, which he thinks sufficient to prove what he says of us to be true.

. 2. That the Quakers put the Scriptures and the Spirit of God in Opposition to
P. 117, 119.
each other. To make this good, he quotes W. Smith, thus; Traditions of Men,
Earthly Root; Darkness, and Confusion; Nebuchadnezar's Image; Putrefaction, and
Corruption; Rotten, and Deceitful; all out of the Life and Power of God;
Apostasy; the Whore's Cup; the Mark of the Beast; Babylon the Mother; Bastards
brought forth of Flesh and Blood; the Birth that persecutes the Son and Heir;
Graven Images, Morn. Watch p. 22, 23. It would amaze, says he, a Christian to
read what is contained in the two Pages quoted, of vilifying Reproach to the
Scriptures, and the Doctrines from them received: If this be not Opposing the
Spirit of God to the Scriptures, and rendering them advers to each other, the
Devil himself must despair of Inventing Words to express it by.

And now Reader, it is time for me, with a Soul full of Grief, to make my
Appeal to the Righteous Lord God of Heaven and Earth, and his equal Witness in
thy Conscience, if ever Quakers writ, or said any such thing of the Holy
Scriptures. O far be it from us! and very great and heavy will the Damnation of
J. Faldo be in the Day of the Lord, unless he shall unfeignedly Repent, because
of these detestable Lies, that he seems wilfully to fasten upon our Writings.
What William Smith said, reflected not in the least upon the Scriptures, nor
yet those Doctrines, which were truly received thence. No such words can be
produced by our Adversaries: had W. S. written any such thing, he that adds so
much, that was not, we are to suppose would not have omitted mentioning of
that, if it had been. But W. Smith addressed himself to that Adulterated Spirit,
which had defiled Nations, that nevertheless were under the Profession of God,
Scriptures and Religious Worship, though in Works they denied God; and as
concerning Scripture and true Worship, grossly erred, not knowing the Power of
God, nor how to Worship him in Spirit, and in Truth: not that he ever durst to
entertain so Blasphemous an Apprehension of those Holy Writings, or those
Doctrines that are truly received thence, as is suggested by our most unfair
Adversary. And is it not the height of all Unrighteousness to our Neighbor,
that when he condemns the Degenerated Spirit, Knowledge and Worship of any
People, however professing the Scriptures, and it may be pretending to believe
accordingly, as W. Smith does all Apostate Christians, J. Faldo should infer,
that his Neighbor calls the Scriptures themselves, and not a wrong Knowledge
of them, Will Worship, Corruption, Rottenness, Deceitful, Whore's-Cup,
Apostasy, Earthly Root, Graven Images, etc. and that he should intend nothing
less then Opposition betwixt the Spirit and its own Scriptures? There needs no
further Confutation then the gross and black Envy of our Adversary about this
one Passage. Be it known to all, we do affirm the Scriptures never did jarr
with the Spirit, nor the Spirit oppose himself against the Scriptures: and thus
much our Writings can plentifully prove to all sober Enquirers.

. 3. But he offers another, and the last Proof of his Charge from J. Naylor.
That of this sort are they false Prophets (as I suppose P. 120.
he means) who have their Preaching from Study, and other Men's Mouths, and
not from the Mouth of the Lord. From which he infers, that what we have in the
Scriptures, is not from the Mouth of the Lord; and queries: I would know (says
he) of the Quakers, what they will make of the Mouth of the Lord? It was said
to Jeremiah, Jer. 15. 19. Thou shall be as my Mouth.

Our Meaning is still over-look't by this disingenuous Adversary, and a quite
contrary thing substituted. The natural Purport of the Words can be no more
then this: That though the Things declared of in the Scriptures, were the Word
of the Lord to the holy Ancients, and Jeremiah as God's Mouth (not his Mouth
therefore) to the People of Israel; yea, and much of it the Word of the Lord to
us too; yet, for Men to say any part thereof by wrote, especially if they add
their own Comments and Glosses, fraim'd from Study to any part of the
Scriptures, and cry, Thus says the Lord; or Hear the Word of the Lord; and not
in the same living Sense, nor upon the like Commission, every such one does Rob
his Neighbor, and Steal his words: And He is no more a True Prophet for so
doing, then a Parrat is a Man, because he can talk. If then no such Creature is
therefore to be reputed Rational, nor what he says, Reason, as to him, though
so in it self, because it proceeds not from the Root and Principle of Reason,
but by mere Imitation, and consequently a Prater, in no case to be minded:
Neither is he a true Prophet, nor that the Word of the Lord, with respect to
that Prophet, who has not received what he delivers, from the immediate Word of
God himself, but by Hearsay, or mere Imitation. No, he is but a very Babbler,
and begets People no further then into mere Words, and Imaginary Glosses, which
is the Ground of that Uncertainty that is in the World about Religion.

The Scriptures then are to us oblieging, as the Things they declare of were
the Word of the Lord to several Ages (Temporal Commands excepted) and they are
not without a Mouth; yet they, and Jeremiah too, are Inferior to the Mouth of
the Eternal Word, which speaks in this Evangelical Dispensation the Will of God
unto Mankind after a more living and immediate Manner, as was prophesied of
old. And I may thus far gratify our Adversary's Curiosity about God's Mouth,
and tell him, that the Word of God, is the Mouth of God; and the true Prophets
and Apostles in all Ages have been the Mouth of the Word of God, and the
Scriptures are the Writings of those holy Prophets and Apostles, as they were
the Mouth of the Eternal Word, revealing God's Will in their Hearts, that they
might declare it, whether by Word of Mouth, or Writing to the People: and this
is the true Order and Descent of things.

. 4. But he has one Kick more at us, before he gives up the Ghost in his
Mis-representation of us concerning the Scriptures. page 129.
The Quakers hold it is a sin, and the sign of Idolatry, to Believe and Live
according to the Instructions and holy Examples expressed in, and by the
Scriptures, except we have them by immediate Inspiration, and at first hand, as
the Apostles received them: And now (says he) I am come to the highest Round of
their Ladder.

Indeed, those Rounds of Ladders are very dangerous places: I will not say how
often, nor for what an Army- Chaplin might deserve to be so high exalted, but
since his eager pursuit after an Innocent People has brought him actually
thither, and it falls to my Lot to be his Executioner; I shall take all the
care I can to acquit my self well of my Employment; I will warrant him for ever
coming down the same way he went up. In order to which, let us first hear what
kind of Speech he will make us, to the Point in hand.

William Dewsbury in his Discovery of Man's Return, page 21. All People may
search the Scriptures, and see how you have been deceived by your Teachers, who
have caused you to seek your lost God in Carnal and Dead Observations; which
they have not any Scriptures for. What this is to his purpose, I cannot
understand; to be sure it is for ours. For W. D. is so far from making it
Idolatry to live up to the Scriptures, that he condemns their seeking for the
true God, where he was not to be found, which, says he, they HAVE NO SCRIPTURE
FOR: As much as to say, that they seek after God not according to Scripture,
and therefore are both Deceivers and Deceived. Certainly this is a Miserable
Farewell he takes of the first part of his Book, and the Quakers Denial of the
Scriptures; that they should therefore affirm a Practice according to
Scripture, without immediate Inspiration, Idolatrous, because they assert such
to be deceived, who seek after God, not according to Scriptures; If so much
Impertinency should fall from a Poor Quaker's Pen, what Reproach, Insolence,
and Triumph would there be. But he has another Witness, that by the Mouths of
two Witnesses, his Charge against us, may be (not established, but) evidently
disproved.

. 5. And this is Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, viz. [to read and practice, as
the p. 126.
Saints did, and the Apostles of the Scriptures of the New Testament] and the
Abomination of all Uncleanness. W. Smith's morning watch, p. 23.

Forgery in the abstract, as base, black, and dishonest as Man can be to Man.
What! rob him of Truth, of a good Conscience; foist in, put out, alter, gloss
pervert, and what he pleases. What* make us lve against God, his Servants,
Scriptures, the Light within, and our own Souls? But I have the less need to
make our Defense, where his manifest Corruption of our Words accuse him, and my
Answer to the first part of his Charge in this Chapter, has done it at large;
Only thus much give me leave to say, That if Words urged upon one Subject,
shall be applied to another of a different Nature; and that our Adversary can
never prove his Charge against us, but by abusing, corrupting, mis-rendering
and interlineating our Words; there is no Reason that we should much concern
our selves in the Consequence of such Debates* that Way of Demonstration will
save us the Labor of a Vindication with all Sober Persons. But he has not done
with us yet.

. 6. I am even tired with searching the sulphurous Veins of the Pit and Mire
of Quakerism, the Root of all which, is the Deified Light Page 127.
Within: if you have not enough of this Smoke to satisfy you, it is the
Bottomless Pit it rises out of, I will give you two Ebullitions more, and then
leave you satisfied, or to get better Senses.

So amongst the words you find, how the Saints in some things walked, and what
they practiced, and then you strive to make that thing to your selves, and to
observe and do it as near as you can: and here you are found Transgressors of
the Just Law of God, who says, Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven
Image, nor the Likeness of any thing. And says J. Faldo, it follows now, what
Difference is there in the Ground betwixt you and the Pope? though in the
Appearance there seems to be such a great Space.

I have been the more punctual in the Recital of this, that I might show to my
Adversary, I will be just to him, though he be most egregiously Unmanly with
us. He says, That he is even tired; indeed he has Reason for it, though for
nothing else: For, who ever got any thing by Beating the Air, or Spitting
against the Heavens?

The Sulphurous Pit of Quakerism, we can in one sense allow, and J. F. may be
better acquainted with it; For the Plagues which the never-dying Worm, the
sharp reproving, condemning Light Within, will inflict upon the Spirits of them
who resist and gainsay the Truth, are aptly resembled to a Sulphurous
Bottomless Pit: Sulphurous, because of the Insufferableness of the Smoke: A
Bottomless Pit, by reason of a Dismal, Endless State and Condition of Woe. And I
doubt not, but J. Faldo has an Earnest of this, for his Attempts against the
Light, and the Children of it.

This long Discourse is no more to us then the rest of his Trash, that we have
already rejected as his own Invention and base Perversion of our real Meanings.
Take W. Smith in his own Sense and Belief, and all is well: But receive him in
J. Faldo's Disguize, and truly we should not know him our selves. He intended,
that all those real Experiments of other Persons (of which the Scriptures are
full) talked unexperimentally over, by Unregenerated Spirits, can be no ways
beneficial; Nay, that what Ideas or Notions they may have to themselves of the
Holy Ancients Enjoyments, while altogether unacquainted with them, are but a
kind of Images; which their believing in, and bowing to, as indispensible
Gospel Truths, is to be reputed nothing below Idolatry it self: Yet far be it
from us to say, that to believe the Truth, as declared in the Scriptures, is
Idolatry, as well as that it is manifest Folly in any so to say or think of us;
when not only we are most careful and desirous of rendering what we believe
purely Scriptural; But I do declare, that as no man can live the Life of the
Scriptures without the Operation of that Spirit which gave them forth, so to
live up to what they do exhort and declare is the highest Pitch of Purity Man's
Nature is capable of aiming at, and attaining to.

. 7. He now intends to wind up his Discourse on the present Subject with a
retrospective and contracted Argument of all those particular distinct Charges.
viz. They who deny the Scripture to be the Word of God; equal their own
Writings and P. 128, 139
Sayings; deny them to be a Rule of Faith and Life, a Judge of Religious
Controversies; take Men off from Reading them; deny the Scripture to be any
Means whereby we may come to know God, or Christ, or our selves; affirm them to
be no Means whereby to resist Temptation, and are Dangerous to be read; deny
them to be Profitable, but as Experienced; put Scripture and Spirit in
Opposition; affirm the Doctrines, Commands and Holy Examples expressed in the
Scriptures (as such) to be not at all binding to us; hold it as the Sin of
Idolatry to believe and live according to the Instructions and Holy Examples
expressed in, and by the Scriptures, except we have them by immediate
Revelation, as the Apostles: They who do all these things, mentioned in the
foregoing Particulars, Deny the Scriptures.

But the Quakers do all these things; therefore they Deny the Scriptures.

To which I return this Argument.

If to Deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God; to make what Writings are
given forth by the same Spirit relative of the Scriptures; if not to prefer any
Writings before the Scriptures, nor equal them to the Scriptures; if to deny
the Scriptures to be most properly the General Rule of Faith and Life, and
Judge of Controversy, and not the Spirit rather; if not to take Men off from
Reading the Scriptures for Instruction, etc. if not to Deny them to be any
Means, whereby Men may come to know God, Christ or our selves; if to affirm
them to be a Means whereby to resist Temptation; not Dangerous to be read; if
to deny them to be read to any profit, without the Assistance of the Spirit,
especially by such as know them not, who are in a Rebellious and Unregenerate
State; if never to dare to put the Scriptures and Spirit in Opposition to each
other; if not to affirm the Doctrines, Expressions and Holy Examples, as such,
not to be binding (Temporary Services excepted) if to hold it as no Sin of
Idolatry, nor any other, to Believe and Live according to the Instructions and
Holy Examples expressed in, and by the Scriptures: If to do all these things,
so mentioned, be not to deny, contemn and Undervalue, but rather to honor,
rightly instate and recommend the Scriptures; then the Quakers, who Believe and
Do all this, are not Denyers, but Owners, Asserters and Defenders of the
Scriptures, so far as they themselves desire to be Defended. But we have
largely proved, that so to do, is not to deny them, and that the Quakers so
hold; therefore the Quakers are no Denyers, but Maintainers of the True and
Divine Authority of the Scriptures.

. 8. For his Comparison of us with the Papists (though he has been so Cunning,
or Unjust rather, as to quote their Authors and not ours, and some passages we
justly doubt) it is Ridiculous, and every way Unworthy of our Notice. A mere
Begging of the Question, and by what we can guess, designed only to bring an
Odium upon us. He puts the Scriptures in the middle, and the Quakers and
Papists, like the two Thieves upon the Cross, on each side, to discover their
Harmonious Agreement against them; which of them he makes to be him that should
go to Paradise, I know not: but we have the upper Hand.

But we can never allow of the Comparison, since the Papists place the Rule and
Judgship, in a Pope, or General Council, and the Quakers in the Eternal,
Unerrable, Holy Spirit of God, and consequently, our Adversary is basely
Irreverent to God, that brings the Pope, or a Council of Fallible Men upon a
Comparison with his Infallible Spirit. Nor, if it were true, would it be any
thing against us; since Protestants will not allow themselves to be therefore
Papists, because in several things they agree; as about God, Eternity, Christ,
his Life, Death, Sufferings, Resurrection, Last Judgment, and Eternal
Recompense.

. 9. To conclude; We dare leave it with God, and all sober Men, to judge, how
far* J. Faldo has abused us, in giving in so black a Charge against us, and
traducing our Persons, and perverting our Writings to prove it, by base
Characters fastened upon the one, and false Inferences charged upon the other;
Which of themselves conspire the Overthrow of their Inventer: and thus is he
fairly turned off from the highest Round of the Ladder, which he has so
unadvisedly adventured to mount. And as it fares with some Notorious
Malefactors, he remains there Pendent, as a Monument of his own Rash, and
Dishonest Undertakings to the Terror of all Passengers, who shall happen to
travel by this way of Controversy to the Land of Truth.

CHAP. X.
He charge us with a Denial of all the Ordinances of the Gospel. First in
general, then in particular. His Proof of the first Invalid. His great
Disingenuity in wresting our words, especially I. Pennington's.

. 1. THe Second part of his Book begins with the Quakers Denial of all the
Ordinances of the Gospel, as he will have it. It is more then possible that we
shall prove him, ere we part, not only to p. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
be a Denier of the True Gospel Ordinances, but indeed, an Introducer of
another Gospel, if such a thing may be: But to his Charge; First in general,
then in particular. The Quakers deny the Ordinances of the Gospel in general,
by which, says he I understand, not those of Nature's Book, nor what was
revealed by Moses, but those Ordinances which were commanded by Precept, or
prescribed by Example in the New Testament. Now to prove what he says of the
Quakers, he cites G. Fox thus; And we say, He Christ has triumphed over the
Ordinances, and blotted them out, and they are not to be touched, and the
Saints have Christ in them, who is the End of outward Forms, G. Mist. p. 52.

In all which I find no Denial of Gospel Ordinances; Nor were they so much as
meant by him: His Language is Scriptural; For Christ did blot out the
Handwriting of Ordinances, and he was to the Saints then, and is to those now,
who rightly believe in him, the End of all Meats, Drinks, Washings, Days, or
any other Temporal, Elementary or Figurative Worship: for J. Faldo then to
charge a Denial of all Gospel Ordinances upon these words, is to plead for a
Legal Dispensation, and Bondage to the Shadows of the Good Things to come;
thereby making Christ's coming of none Effect: and Consequently introducing of
another Gospel, as speaks the Apostle; besides that he basely wrests our Words.

. 2. Again, But Pennington is so Cruel, by that time he arrives to P. 38. of
Unity, that he says Such of the People of God, as do not follow the Lord
perfectly out of the City of Abomination [VISIBLE WORSHIP] but be found in any
part thereof when the Lord comes to judge her, the Lord will not spare them.

I perceive that unless we will allow J. Faldo the Liberty of telling the World
our Meaning, or rather making his own to be ours, his Essays come to nothing.
What Words can be sounder of their Kind, [Visible Worship] being left out, and
which our Adversary unworthily puts in? Are not People to follow God fully?
Strange Doctrine that he teaches! But grant him his Gloss, alias, gross
Comment, without Distinction, and I know he does his Work. But we are not so
easily to be overlaid. We do declare, that while Men have Bodies, which are the
visible Parts of Men, and the Bodies of Men are conversably concerned in
Religious Worship as well as the Soul, there will be, there must be, and there
ought to be a Visible Worship; Therefore most false is J. Faldo's Paraphrase:
yet thus far we could go; That Visible Worship (as such) without a due Regard
to what Kind of Worship it may be, and what is the Root from whence it came,
cannot be well pleasing to God; For then, that so Splendid Whore, and Deceitful
Prophet, at large described in the Revelation of Saint John, would be therefore
true Worshippers, because their Worship was Visible: But I do perceive, that
here it pincheth, with almost all Professions; The Quakers would put us off our
own Strivings, Willings, Runnings in our own Wisdom, Contrivance Appointment;
whereby we must take up such a Cross to self, as is insupportable to Flesh and
Blood: And indeed it is so; which all must come to know a Crucifying of, or
they enter not into the Kingdom of God here, nor hereafter: The Old Leaven must
be purged out, and the New Wine have a New Bottle: Men must become Children,
and Religion taken up not upon Conviction, must be abandoned for the least
Appearance of God's Light breaking in upon the Heart and Conscience, reproving
the unfruitful Works of Darkness.

CHAP. XI.
The first of the particular Ordinances, he says we deny, is the Ministry. His
Proof lame. W. P. and his Friends defended. J. F. and his Gang reproveable. We
own a Gospel one; but not his. The Calling abused by such Pretenders.

. 1. HE now descends to show our Denial of the Ordinances of the Gospel 2.
part. p. 8. 9.
in particular; and we, to examine what he says; wherein if he succeed no
better then in his Endeavors to manifest our Denial of them in general; I
think the Reader will have reason to think, we shall not sit down by the loss.
But hear him.

. 2. They Deny all Ministry that has a mediate Call to that Office; quoting J.
Parnel's Shield etc. p. 16. And their Call to the Ministry we deny, which is
Mediate. Also G. Fox in his Gr. Mist. page 45. But who can witness an Immediate
Call from God, and speak as they are moved by the Holy Ghost, and such travel
from place to place having no certain Dewlling Place, this Ministry we own and
witness.

The Charge against the Priests I esteem sound, but not J. Faldo's against the
Quakers. We do for several Reasons already urged, deny that any Man can be a
True Minister who is not immediately Called; for it is not, go ye forth into all
the World and preach the Gospel, that belongs unto all Men; no more then,
because Princes send Ambassadors to Princes with their Credentials, therefore
every Man ought to do the like in Imitation, without considering those
necessary Qualifications that belong to such an Action. Peter, John etc. were a
great while Disciples, not at Academies, but in Christ's School, which taught
the Mortification of Lusts, and an holy self denying Life; To such it was that
the Commission came, but neither was their Commission of force, till they had
received that Anointing, which was to enable them to act by it. If then every
Holy Man as such, is not fitly gifted and impowerd to be a Minister, but that
it depends upon a more Immediate, and Extraordinary thing; certainly those, who
take upon them the Ministry, that have neither learnt by true Mortification to
be Holy, nor received any Power from Heaven to be Ministers, but explode both
as to the present Age, and Teach for Hire, and Divine for Money, are not of
Christ's making, but their own; and therefore to be denied. And thus much J.
Faldo to his own apparent Overthrow grants us; where page 9.
he says, we acknowledge that all True Ministers of Christ ought to have an
Immediate Call, such as consists in Grace and Gifts; And such as have not this
Immediate Call, we account unworthy of the Thing and Name.

What more has any Quaker said? Why is James Parnel quoted to prove that what
he charges upon the Quakers as to their Denying the Ministry of the Gospel, is
a Truth, when it is become no Crime at all in J. Faldo to assert, that who are
not Immediately called are Unworthy both of the Name and Thing? Is he become an
Enemy himself to that Gospel-Ordinance? If Immediate, then not Mediate: and if
not Mediate, then J. Parnel and G. Fox writ Orthodoxally; consequently, we are
not to be reputed Denyers of the Ministry of the Gospel, because we assert that
no Man is a Gospel-Minister, who is not Immediately called thereto. So that his
Mincing of the Matter in the next page, will no ways qualify it; viz. That
Motions by the Holy Ghost he allows, yet he affirms, that those who are moved
by the Commands of the Spirit in the Scripture, are moved by the Holy Ghost:
For if any holy Man reading the Apostle's Commission, shall at that instant of
Time receive an Heavenly Power to make it his, laying that same Injunction upon
him, and induing him with such a Measure of that Divine Power, as they
received, We shall cheerfully grant him to be truly called; yet not because, Go
ye into all Nations and preach the Gospel, is there written, but because God
respoke those Words by the same Living and Eternal Power immediately to that
Particular Person, which made, what otherwise was but the Commission of the
Apostles, his Commission also.

. 3. But there is a Word or two, which having layn hard upon his Stomach he
vomits up thus: As for having no Certain Dewlling Place, page 10.
and leaving Houses, Lands and Possessions, let them repair to William Penn,
and others of their Ministers, for an Answer to it, who have large Possessions
and brave Habitations, such as few Ministers as they disclaim (especially the
POOR NON-CONFORMISTS) enjoy.

What Answer this is to that part of G. Fox's Words, which it pretends to
refute, is obvious to the meanest Capacity that is not prejudiced; For my part,
I know not what induced him to any Answer at all, being Scripture Words, unless
it were, that he might reflect upon the Plenty God has given some of us. What!
Does he envy Men the Blessings of Heaven, upon their Industry? or the Love of
Parents to their Children? Is his Eye Evil, because God's Eye is Good? Does his
Mouth water after the Quakers Possessions, now the Government has justly and
seasonably prevented him of a fat Benefice? But, why must William Penn's Name
be questioned about Houses and Possessions? Is he Angry that an Enmity like his
own, in his deceased Father, deprived him not of that Estate for Conscience
sake, he now begrudges him the Enjoyment of? but he dyed a better Man, a more
Natural Father, and sincere Christian, then a Man of J. Faldo' s Sordid
Conscience will ever do; But let me tell the Man (if yet he be worthy of that
Name) that W. Penn first lost his Estate before he got it; and sacrificed it,
the Comfort of his Fathers House, and whatever was dear of this World to the
Quiet of a Conscience void of Offense, before it pleased Almighty God to make
all his. Such as have known him better then J. Faldo's Informers, of the most
eminent both of Presbyterians, Independents and Anabaptists, could tell him, he
has had a Conscience, (whatever they believe now) that was not to be caught by
the Bait of Pleasure, Estate, Preferment or Esteem in this World; as well as
that no Severity used to bow or balk it, could prevail to renounce what it had
believed upon pure Convictions. To conclude his Defense in this place; He got
not what he has, by Preaching (as perhaps Mercenary J. Faldo, and many of his
Coat have done) but having it, by God's Providence and Faithfulness, can
notwithstanding (through the continued Love of God) freely bestow his Strength,
Labor, Estate, and Life too, for the Promotion of the Unchangeable Pure Way of
God, in which he has believed, from whom he received, and to whom he ow's all
that he has.

But why poor Non-Conformists, after all their preached up Battles, Spoils,
Plunders, Sacriledges, Decimations? etc. Rich, and Covetous as ever: As Rich,
because the Basin walks, and takes its Rounds two to one of which it did; and
Covetous, because they remain as discontented, as if they were starving;
witness a Late begging Book from a Non-Conformist's hand, which conjures their
Hearers into larger Benevolence, though by the style one would think, it were
their just Due. I am persuaded, their Preachings, Christnings, Burials,
Churchings, alias, Lying in Visits, Exhortations, Thanksgivings, and Prayers,
have cheated People of more Gold and Silver, then ever they did dare to make
the least Pretense to (though they always dared to take, what they could get)
in their former Days of Power. But this is nothing to me further, then that it
is less dishonorable to William Penn, or any other Quaker, whom God has
blessed with a plentiful Subsistence, that having Estates, they notwithstanding
should sustain the Labor, and Suffering of Preaching the Gospel, and that at
all seasons, then in J. Faldo and his Brethren, who (it is greatly to be feared)
preach, what they call the Gospel, that they might get Estates, at least
Livelyhoods by it, let him or them say what they will. I could give him a long
List of more Exacting Jocky, Hawking, Mercenary, Bargains of Presbyterians,
Independents and Anabaptists, then can readily be paralleled by Parish Priests;
A thing once denied by them, and ought still to be Detested of all others.

. 4. But he ends not here concerning the Ministry: For says he, The Quakers
deny our Ministry, because we preach from the Scripture. A wicked Lie, minted
out of Hell it self: We have laid down no such Proposition; nor tending to it.
But he supposes J. Parnel helps him to prove this Assertion. And here is the
Difference of the Ministers of the World, and the Ministers of Christ -- The
One of the Letter, the other of the Spirit.

Strange Impudence, to call this a Proof. It is a Proof indeed, but against
him; for if a False or Worldly Ministry, under the Form of Godliness may not
be, Farewell Scripture. But if such a Thing will be allowed us, then since the
Letter or Scriptures are not by them rejected, but in Show most highly admired,
and that they pretend to collect all they believe or know from thence (though
indeed they understand them not) we have great Reason to say, that those who
are Ministers only from the Letter, with what they imaginarily comment upon it,
are not Christ's Ministers. We are so far from making it a Reason why we deny
your Ministry, who are under that Qualification, that we utterly deny you to
have that Knowledge from the Scripture which we except against, but your own
Inventions and groundless Conceits alone: For though J. Faldo thinks it very
Heterodox to say, that unless we are immediately assured from the Light within
of the Truth of what we hold, and that all Belief, not so discovered, is a Lie;
deriding at Samuel Fisher's Answer in that page 14. 15.
Case, Those who swore, as the Lord lived, swore falsely, because they knew him
not to Live; affirming to us, that they were such as did not believe him to
live at all, and therefore S. Fisher erred (in his Construction) I say, though
it be so, yet we are not forelorn of Reason as well as Scripture to our
Defense. For no Truth is such to me, which I either do not know to be true, or
have not some real Ground to believe to be such, however true it may be in it
self. And that Sam. Fisher urged that Scripture pertinently, and Consequently
his return upon it is impertinent, He himself has provided us with an Argument;
for if he will not have it, that they therefore lied, in saying as the Lord
lives, because they knew him not to live, we must see what was the Reason that
God gave their Asseveration the Lie. Says J. Faldo, they did not believe him
to live at all. Very well, then the Narrow of the Difference lies here, That we
say, They knew him not to live; And J. Faldo says, That they believed him not
to live. Now I would fain know which are most excusable? One says, they who
said, as sure as the Lord lives, lied, because they know not God to live; and
the other, that they believed him not to live. If any thing be to be gotten, it
is this; that they who know him not to live might believe him however to live,
whilst those who believed him not live, would not believe a thing they had no
Ground or Knowledge inducing them to it. But he has lead us to a quick
Expedient, They did know God to live; because he that lives, may know from
thence that God lives, who holds every Soul in Life that lives. To which I
return, that they did believe God to live, because they lived; for how could
they doubt of his Living, who held them in Life: But enough of this. To
conclude; A Living Spiritual Ministry we own that preaches the Everlasting
Gospel in its own Power, and that freely, to the Raising of People dead in
Trespasses and Sin, to turn them from Darkness to Light, that they might serve
the Living Lord God of Heaven and Earth, in the Newness of the Spirit, who is
worthy of all Honor and Glory forever.

CHAP. XII.
The Second particular Ordinance is a Gospel Church. His Definition for us, by
its gross Contrariety to the Scripture. His base Inference of our Denial of
Religious Societies, and Outward Gifts, from our Friends asserting of but one
Catholic Church, and that it is in God. A Gospel Church owned. Our Adversary
proved Heterodox about Apostolical Preaching. Inward Sense preferred before
Intelligence.

. 1. THe Next Gospel-Ordinance, he says we deny, is a Gospel Church; Not to
spend time about his Way of Phrasing it, though uncooth enough; We shall attend
his Proof.

And the Church so gathered into God, is the Pillar and Ground of page 16. 17,
18.
Truth, where the Spirit alone is Teacher. J. N. Love to the Lost, page 17.

Upon which he argues thus, The Gospel Church is a Church which has other
Teachers, and not the Spirit alone; whereas the Apostles gave themselves to
Preaching of the Word, and Elders were ordained; therefore the Quakers deny a
Gospel Church, and they contradict themselves, for they have more Teachers then
All others. A Lie to be sure.

There is greatly wanting to this Priest a better Understanding, or more
Honesty in using what he has; for who is not blinded with Prejudice, may
discern, that from our speaking of the Universal Church of God, which says the
Apostle, as well the the Quakers, is in God; he infers, that we deny all
Visible Religious Societies, commonly called by the Ancients the Churches of
Asia, Thessalonica, Ephesus, Corinth, etc. And from our Asserting the Spirit to
be the only Gospel-Teacher of all who believe, he concludes, that we deny all
Preaching of Men, though by the Spirit. O blind, or else most disingenuous Man!
What? Charge that upon us, which our Practice gives the Lie to every day. But
when we urge this against him, and such like Adversaries, then it is not, that
he has Misrepresented us, but that we have Contradicted our selves.

But to clear the Point, if it can yet be doubtful: We do believe, there is
One, and but One Universal Church, the Ground and Pillar of Truth, and that is
in God; anchored, established and built upon him, the Rock of Ages, and
Foundation of many Generations: and as such, neither is every Visible Society,
making Profession of Religion, nor are all of them together, that Church; but
such alone, who are washed in the Blood of the Lamb, and ingrafted into the
True Vine, bringing forth the Fruits of Holiness to the Eternal Honor, Glory,
and Renown of Christ the Head, who is over all, God, blessed for evermore. And
though there be a Mediate Preaching, which is to say, that the Spirit speaks by
such whom he has anointed to preach; yet it cannot be strictly said, that Man
preaches, or it is Man's Ministry, but rather, the Spirit by Man, and that it
is the Spirit's Ministry, and Man only a Mean, or Instrument, through which the
Teaching is conveyed, or Direction rather to the true Teacher, the Light in the
Conscience: Not that the Lord does not sometimes plentifully teach his Children
without any such Means too, who are turned to the Grace in the Heart, and
believe and walk in his Holy Light, where God is to be found, and an Access to
this Holy, Blessed Presence administered; for he has both promised it of old,
and performed it in our Days. Thus the Apostles were Preachers, not from Man,
nor by Man, but by the Revelation of the Son of God, declaring of the Mysteries
of God's Everlasting Kingdom, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost: And so none
are exempted; for all may Prophecy 1. Cor. 14. 31.
one by one, that the Church may be edified. Yet I cannot but observe, that (1)
the Man implicitly denies that to be a True Church, which is the Ground and
Pillar of Truth, for such the Quakers style a Gospel Church. (2) That he
affirms the True Church to have other Teachers then the Spirit: which is to
say; that the Primitive Churches were not led, guided and taught by the Spirit
of God only, but by some other Teachers also; contrary to express Scripture,
the Promise of God, and very End of the blessed Gospel. If he says that he
meant the Apostles, that were inspired; I answer, that was never denied by us,
because that was the Teaching of the Spirit by them, which was very little
less, then if it had been immediately in them: So that one of these two things
must follow from his kind of Arguing; Either the Apostles preached without the
Motions of the Eternal Spirit; Or, Preaching as they were moved of God's
Spirit, was their Preaching, and not the Holy Spirit's that so plentifully
dictated to them what they were to say: But in as much as neither can be
reputed true by true Christian Men, I conclude the Quakers sound, and their
boasting Adversary Heretical.

. 2. But he thinks he has clearly got the Point of us, about a Quaker's
telling him, they knew, that one of the Dutch Nation spoke by the Spirit in a
Meeting of ours, though in that Language which was not understood by the
Meeting, because they all found Refreshings.

I will be faithful in giving his Observation upon it: Of the unknown Language
he says, This was orderly according to the Popish Mass, who read Prayers in an
Unknown Tongue to the People; but herein he wrongs us, for though we do
acknowledge, that the pure and single Power of the Almighty, may both strike
Astonishment, and give Refreshment, where the words uttered are not always
understood; since he does both frequently without them: and that Understanding
and Sense are two things; for the Devil may speak the best words in the Bible,
and be an undiscovered Devil still, except by this Divine Light, Power or
Spirit he be inwardly manifested; consequently a right Sense may be had, where
words may not be understood, which is the One Tongue to the Children of the
Light. Yet we not only decry all designed Obscurity by Praying and Preaching in
unknown Languages, but with the Apostle say, that we choose rather by far to
speak in a known Tongue, that the People may understand our Words, as well as
have a sense of our Spirits; Nor did ever any Quaker yet pretend to be moved to
pray in an Unknown Language, whilst he was Master of that which was well known
to the People: since then we don't affect such Obscurity, the Case of all those
Papists, who pray in Latin, rather then in their Native and vulgar Tongue, he
is very disingenuous in that reflection.

. 3. Upon the Quakers Reason, why they knew that Declaration was from the
Spirit of God, viz. because they found Refreshings, he bestows this
Confutation, so have Children many a time AT PUPPET-PLAYES. What a pass are
these People come to, who yet deny all Teachings of Man?

But what a Pass, may I rather say, has this Man's implacable Spirit against
the Truth of God brought him to? who to his Dishonesty before, adds
Profaneness, joined with Scoff and Impudence, when he denies all Refreshment
that comes not by sound of Words, in a known Tongue, to be any more Certainty
from God's Spirit then the Pleasure, Children take at Puppet-Plays, though he
could not but think the Person that spoak to him, meant by Refreshings what
came from God, and that there can be no Proportion or Comparison betwixt that
Pious Answer, and the Ungodly Sport of Puppet-Playes. Ben. Johnsons ALCHYMIST,
which all good Men detest, and himself dying, abhorred, has nothing in it half
so gross in Abuse of Religion. I even tremble at the Thoughts of that Hand
writing upon the Wall, which this Man's Impiety is writing (I fear with
indeleble Characters) against him, who will receive a just and certain
Recompense at the hand of the Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, for all his
hard Speeches against the Holy Way of the Lord.

. 4. But let me not omit to show the Blow he gives his own Cause in this
Expression; since by the same Reason that we know no Refreshment to be any more
of God, without known Words, then that of a Puppet-Play; he knows not any more
the Teachings of the God above, p. 113. nor the Motions of the Holy Ghost or
Dictates of the Grace of God within 2. Part. 9, 10. (known Words being
excepted) to be of God; then that Refreshment little Children have in a
Puppet-Play; The Consequence of which Diabolical Comparison is nothing less,
then to overthrow all inward sense of God's Presence, or that Refreshment which
comes from it; And then indeed, we must confess, we should be necessitated
either to deny all Teaching, or conclude with this Antichristian Priest, That
Man's Teaching, or Ministry ought to be adhered to. Where if Puppet-Playes be
mere Imitations of real things, as I have been credibly told, we know not, but
our Ignorance of an Inward Sense, might render us very fit to judge in favor
of the Priest and his Puppet-Play- Doctrine; till when, we leave Imitating J.
Faldo, and the Puppets together, who alike fainedly represent Life, Power and
Spirit, but in reality are empty Sounds, and mere Wind rattling through lifeless
Truncks.

CHAP. XIII.
But we deny Preaching, says he. His Disingenuity in stating our Principles. We
hold and practice true Gospel-Preaching. No Difference between what the Light
teaches and the Scripture. Our Gospel is Peace; Our Adversary's, is War, etc.
True Preaching converts, our Adversary's not.

. 1. ANother of those Ordinances, he falsely affirms us to deny, is Preaching,
of which he speaks thus; They will allow a Hearing the Word preached, and that
must be the Light within; page 20.
but the Mind of God contained in the Scripture, they must by no means hear
preached; for (as I hinted from G. Fox) we must not hear Man; for the Prophets
bid cease from Man.

This is so far from making against us, that it makes for us, at an high rate;
For who preaches without that Light of Christ, that the Quakers affirm all True
Preaching proceeds from, preaches not from the Discoveries and Leadings of the
Light, and consequently all such Preaching is in the Darkness, where God's
Counsel cannot be known. Nay, how is it possible that People can be turned from
Darkness to the Light, (the End of Preaching) by those, who deny, that Men
ought to preach from the Revelations and Guidings of the Light?

. 2. He has also with manifest Baseness, brought us in, as putting a
Difference betwixt our Preaching by the Light within, and that Doctrine of God,
which is contained in the Scriptures; Whereas we Read, Believe, Practice and
Preach no other Doctrine, for Truth, then what is explicitly or implicitly
there held forth, and testified unto: Though we confess, that we don't only so
believe, practice, and preach it, because there written; but from an Inward
Living Power or Spirit, which both Opens the Mysteries thereof to our
Understandings, begets right Belief in them, and at sundry times moves upon our
Hearts to declare a fresh those Ancient, Blessed Truths therein expressed. And
this is what G. F. meant, and we All understand by Ceasing from Man, to wit,
mere Man; not Man Inspired, or so Divinely qualified.

But he has a Scripture, and a Passage out of W. Smith to justify his Charge,
at least he thinks so; And how shall they preach, except they be sent? as it is
written, How beautiful are Romans 10. 15. 18.
the Feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace? etc. We say so to; and did
we mean the same, 'twere happy for J. Faldo. By being sent, we understand by
the Light within, and the Scripture without, a being anointed by the immediate
Power of God, without which the Disciples themselves, who had so many
Advantages above us, were not to budge: They could have told most of what Jesus
had done and suffered, which, though Truth in it self, and they able to relate
it, yet bare Truth, and all they had seen or known, without a Living Immediate
Power and Commission within (the Baptism of the Holy Spirit) they were not to
budge on God's Account. If J. Faldo could give us as good Evidence of his being
so called, as he has done of a False and Enraged Spirit against the Truth, we
should acknowledge him for a Gospel-Minister; but since he dis-acknowledges all
share in any such Mission, we justly refuse him any part in a Gospel Ministry.

. 3. In short; If none can preach without being sent, then since he and his
Tribe were never so sent, they ought not to preach, nor any to hear them; For
Right Faith can never come by such a Ministry: No; They are Right
Gospel Ministers, and their Feet truly beautyful, whose Gospel is Peace on
Earth, and Good Will toward Men; Not Garments rold in the Blood of Kings,
Princes, Rulers and People: No Worldly Armies, Battles, Victories, Trophies,
Spoils, Sequestrations, Decimations, and the like Blood-thirsty and Tyrannical
Projects: In which J. Faldo and his POOR NONCONFORMING MINISTERS have had
their Hands almost over Head and Ears, till they had well nigh lost their Ears,
and their Heads too.

Such Covenant Breaking, Self-seeking, Proud, Covetous, Tyrannical, Club-law,
Persecuting Priests we could never own; but ever did, and ever shall earnestly
bear our faithful Testimony against them, as the Locusts, Caterpillars,
Serpents, and Dragons of the Earth, whose* Cruelty, Self-seeking and Falsness
has grieved Good Men, and caused the Wicked to Blaspheme the Name of the God
of Heaven; whose Damnation slumbers not, if by unfeigned Contrition not
prevented.

. 4. Well, but we are to hear, what strength William Smith's Primmer can give
to his Charge: Quest. Is there something of God in my Conscience, that will
give me the Knowledge of him? Answ. There is not any thing else that can do it.
That is, principally there is no other Teacher, no other Revealer, or
Discoverer of the Mind and Will of God to us then Christ the Light, as says
the Scripture; No man knows the Father but the Son, the true Light, and he, to
whom the Son reveals him: And whatever makes manifest is Light. Now unless a
Man may know God without any Manifestation, it is impossible, that he should be
known without Light, that only gives it; especially when it shall be
considered, That HE is Light it self: If then there is no Knowing of God, but
that which we know must first be manifested, and that whatever makes manifest
the Things of God, is Light; it evidently follows, That the Light is the Alone
Author of those Discoveries Men receive of the Mind of God. And whatever
Knowledge may be given or rightly obtained through the Scriptures, is not to be
imputed to the Scripture as such, but that Divine Light, which gives inward
Conviction of the Truth, of what is outwardly read, or writ in that excellent
Book called Scripture. So that still to Christ the True Light, as the Chiefest
Cause (in which sense he is most properly so called) do we rightly ascribe all
the Knowledge we have of God, and his Everlasting Kingdom.

CHAP. XIV.
His Charge of our Denial of Gospel-Prayer, inverted. The Prayer he pleads for,
Anti-Gospel. True Prayer stated, asserted and defended with Plainness from
Scripture and Reason. That as well in Families as Meetings, and at Meals, as
both False Worship, detestable to God. All False, wherein God's Spirit is not
the first and chief Mover and Assister. The Subtilty of Satan in putting upon
unacceptable Prayer, to prevent True Prayer.

. 1. BUt we deny Prayer as well as Preaching, Page 23, 24, 26.
if he may be credited; and indeed we do so by the same Figure, or contrary Way
of Speaking, that We deny them, that is, as John Faldo owns them; but not that
therefore we should deny them at all. His Charge lies in three parts.

First, That we Contemn True Gospel-Prayer; To prove which he cites W. Smith's
Catechism, p. 107. Though some may not speak in such formal composed Words, yet
in the same Wisdom their Words are formal; they can set their own Time to begin
and end; and when they will they can utter Words, and when they will they can
be silent: and this is the Unclean Part, which offers to God, which he does not
accept. Very well, and what is this to the denying of Gospel-Prayer? It seems
then, that what Prayer this Passage reflects upon, is Gospel; consequently, if
I understand any thing, formal, wise Words, in Man's Time, and Will, which is
Unclean, is Gospel-Prayer in J. Faldo's account; otherwise it is utterly false
to say, That W. Smith's Words prove the Quakers to contemn Gospel-Prayer. But
what can be more clear to the View of every Impartial Soul, then that J Faldo's
making that Prayer only which he is capable of himself, that stands in his own
Time, Will, Wisdom, and Invention to be Gospel, rather then to deny it, and
seek after one more truly Evangelical; is not so much to maintain the Truth, as
himself.

. 2. Secondly, he says, That we own no Prayer that is not by immediate
Inspiration and Motion of the Spirit, and without the Use of our Conception P.
27. 30.
and Direction of our Understanding: His third I will add to this, because to
the same Purpose; viz. That we own no Prayer, but what is by and in the Light
Within; and here he brings 3. or 4. Testimonies which are to the same purpose.
I grant what he says of us in this particular, to be our Faith; and shall prove
it to be sound Doctrine from the Scriptures of Truth. The Worship of God is in
the Spirit and in the Truth; Now unless Men Joh. 4. 24.
may perform Gospel Worship without the Spirit and the Truth, or if in the
Spirit and the Truth, yet not by the Motion of either, a thing absurd; it must
needs be, that Men ought only to pray or preach by the Motion of the Spirit and
of the Truth.

If such only are Children of God, who are led by the Spirit of God, and walk
in the Light, as Christ is Light, and that therein Access alone may be had to
God, who is Light, and in whom is no Darkness at all; then with good Reason may
we say, That no Prayer that ascends to God without the Leading of God's Spirit,
and which is not by, and in the Light, can be acceptable with him;
consequently, Gospel-Prayer is only from the Motions of the Spirit of God, and
by and in the Light of Christ. Again,

If no Prophecy or Preaching was to be of old, but by the immediate Revelation
or Motion of the Spirit, though it was but to Men; of far greater Reason,
should not any Prayer be made without a Motion of the same Spirit, which is to
the Eternal, only Wise God.

. 3. Nay, the Creature considered from under the Leadings of God's Spirit in
all Religious Actions, is unable to think a good Thought, much less, to perform
one good Work; and as the Professors say, from the Crown of the Head to the
Soal of the Foot, are altogether unclean; will it follow then, that either such
corrupt and sinful Duties are Gospel-Prayer, and an Ordinance of God: or else,
that what we assert of Praying by the Motions of the Spirit, and in, and by the
Light of Christ in our Hearts, must be the only Gospel Worship, which we are
yet further inclined to believe.

For it is said in Scripture, that the Word and Prayer sanctifies all things:
Now if we take this Word in our sense, to wit, the Word of God; then we are to
consider, whether the Word derives its Sanctifying Virtue from the Prayer, or
the Prayer from this Word? Not the former to be sure; If then it be allowed to
be the latter, since this Prayer (which to be sure is Gospel, or the Apostle
would not have owned it) has a Sanctifying Virtue in it; and that no Prayer
begun or carried on by mere Man, can sanctify, because we are of our selves
unable to think one good Thought, it evidently follows, That this Word of God,
which gives Prayer that Sanctifying Power, does begin or move first to that
Sanctifying, Acceptable, Truly Gospel-Prayer.

. 4. But now suppose by Word is meant the Words, either of Scripture, or
Preachings, yet are we safe; For, since nothing can sanctify, but it must be
from it self, or something else, and that mere Man in Preaching or Praying
cannot; and that God is that alone Power, Wisdom and Eternal Spirit that is
able to sanctify; it will follow also, that God's Spirit or Power moving in
the Heart is that alone which renders the Words or Prayers of any sanctifying.
Nor is this all: The Pool of Bethesda is a notable Figure of the Matter in
hand: where the Certainty of being cured upon stepping into the Pool so soon as
ever the Angel had moved the Waters, does very lively represent to us, that
what Benefit we may ever expect to receive from the Lord, comes not from an
hasty Rushing into any Religious Performance in our own time, but our patient
Waiting, till the Lord's holy Angel stirs and moves the Waters, and then to lay
all aside to embrace so blessed an Opportunity. Further,

. 5. The Gospel-State is an Eternal Sabbath. He that prays in his own Will,
Time, Wisdom, Invention, is picking Sticks, and kindling a Fire, and compassing
himself about with the Sparks of the Fire of his own kindling: This Man has
not Ceast from his own Works, he will suffer loss in the Day of God, and his
Bed will be made in Sorrow.

. 6. Nor is this the utmost of our Force; For whatever God has not required,
just will it be with him to say, who has required these things at your hands?
It Is true, God loves that his People should pray, and Christ injoyns it; but he
also bids all Watch unto Prayer; that is, wait to feel that Spirit of Life to
stir which gives Life to Prayer, the Key of David, by which Heaven's Door is
opened, and the Soul comes to receive True and Heavenly Refreshment. The Want
of which makes so much Complaint among some, that their Duties are Unholy
Things, they want Power, they have prayed long, but to little purpose; whereas
had they prayed aright, that had never been. Much more might be said to this,
but my Conscience is clear in the Matter, and I shall conclude this Point with
a general Confession and Caution.

. 7. We do acknowledge, That God is; That he ought to be worshipped; That
Worshipping of God is stricktly a bowing down before him, in Fear and Holy
Reverence, according as he makes himself known to the Creature. That Prayer is
a Gospel-Ordinance; That it is not only Good, but Necessary to be used; That
God only can give us to pray aright, as well to pray at all; That therefore his
Assistance is necessary; to have which, there ought to be a Waiting out of all
Conceivings, Inventions, or Forms, to receive a Living Touch, and Sense from
his Pure Living and Eternal Spirit, whereby to set our Spirits at work. This is
that Oil, which makes the Chariot Wheels go smoothly, and without which they
grate and jarr. Those who have not Words, especially in Public Places, have
Sighs and Groans, and a deep and silent Exercise of Spirit God-wards: In which
blessed Communion is joined, and Refreshments that outdo all Worldly
Satisfaction. That it is the Duty of all to wait upon God, and that not only at
Public Meetings, but at their own Houses also, and therein as well at their
Meals as at all other times for Worship. If any have the Motion of God's
Eternal Spirit upon their Hearts, let it be answered, to God's Praise, and the
Edification of others; if not, let none offer up an unsanctified, dead
Sacrifice to the Lord, as all that comes from mere Man is, for it will be their
Burden: neither prodigally spend their own Portion, or that Bread upon others,
God has bestowed for their own Use. Thus, whether such Eat, Drink, Sleep, or
otherwise Enjoy of God's Benefits; Let all be done with holy Aw, and to the
Glory of God our Father: as it will certainly be, if there be but a still and
reverent Waiting in Spirit upon the Lord, in the Light of Christ, to be made
sensible of his Goodness, and Blessings upon us, and Unity with us in our
Undertakings, and Enjoyments. And let this be a Warning unto all, in the Name
and Fear of the Jealous God of Heaven and Earth, that they do not offer up to
God their halt, and lame, and blind Self-Sacrifices, which my God abhorrs;
Especially you Professors, whose Leaves are large, but your Fruit little: Think
not to be heard by your Multitude of Words, nor Variousness of Duties; God
regards the Root, the Life, the Power, the Spirit that begets them, and whose
Life it is that animates them; if they arise from God's Holy Spirit, and Seed
of Life, they can, they will interceed and prevail; but if not, God will say to
you one Day, who has required these things at your Hands: O! for the Love of
God, and your own Souls, offer not God a Worship out of His own Spirit, much
less Contend for it: for you strengthen Satan's Bonds in so doing, and feed the
Mystery of Iniquity, the painted Jezabel, the Mother of Harlots, from whom
these false accursed Births have come; who under outward Imitations and
Performances holds People in Death and Darkness, and perfect Enmity against
God, and his Living, Spiritual, Holy Seed in them, and others, that is able to
bruise the Serpent's Head; which is the Pure Way of God, and in whom is the
Blessing forever; For the Devil the subtle Serpent having got into those
outward Courts of Religion, Signs and Shaddows of the Good Things, which God
had given Credit to by his Appearing once in them, he pleads their Divine
Institution, against the very Life and Substance, that like old Garments it
has put off; And so all are deceived by his Transformations and subtle
Twinings, who come not to that Inward Sense of Life and Power, which relish the
very Spirit, and can try the Inside: Servants are not Masters because they wear
their old Clothes; neither is the Devil an Angel of Light, because he puts on
the Pure Ware, the Spirits old Clothes. God once appeared at the Mountain, and
Jerusalem, therefore was either Worship to continue? No; God disappeared, that
he might set up a more Spiritual Worship, where ends Meats and Drinks, and all
outward Services, figurative of the Good things come.

. 8. Let it not be evilly taken by any of you, neither be ye offended in me, or
the Doctrine I here defend; For all Preachings, Prayings, Graces (as they are
called) with the rest of the Worship of the Day, which arise not from the Holy
Power and Spirit of God, it is at this time laid upon me, and I am bold to
declare, in the Name of the Eternal Holy God, A Blast, an utter Blast is coming
upon them all, and they shall be found amongst the Chaff, and not the Wheat, in
the Day of God's terrible Tempest, where nothing but the solid and weighty Seed
shall remain Stable and Unshaken. O bow, bow ye tall Cedars, and sturdy Oaks!
Come out, and be ye separated by the Power of my God, from all your Inventions,
self-Contrivances, self-Runnings and Willings, ye Children of the Night, and
Lovers of your own Works, more then Lovers of God's; who out of the Living,
Pure Eternal Spirit of Life, are holding forth Faith, Worship, Prayers, and
Ordinances, and contending for them, against the very Life it self, that in a
more plain Appearance is risen, departed from them; and come to know the one
True Faith, Worship, and Great Ordinance of God, by the Operation of his Spirit
in all your Hearts and Consciences; else you will dye in your Sins, and Christ
shall profit you nothing, but your Dreams of Salvation shall vanish, and utter
Destruction will be your Portion for evermore.

CHAP. XV.
His Charge of our Denial of Baptism and the Sacraments, introduced with a
Discourse of positive Commands, Destructive of the Foundation of Religion. The
Priest against God, Scripture and Reason. He confounds himself. Baptism of
Water proved John's; and not to continue. Mat. 28. 19. 1 Cor. 1. 17. Ephesians. 4.
5. cleared and vindicated. The One Spiritual Baptism defended.

. 1. I am now come to the two last Particulars of this Charge, Baptism, and the
Lord's Supper, which he introduces with a short Discourse of the Nature of
God's Commands, respecting Gospel Ordinances, which he says, we deny. I shall
only take notice of this Passage, where he tells us, that the Ordinances,
hitherto considered, are called Moral, from their natural Obligation, page 33.
34.
although respecting the Substance, they deserve a more EVANGELICAL
Denomination, without which we cannot (says he) call them CHRISTIAN ORDINANCES.
But these two I come now to consider, are purely positive, and depend merely
upon divinely revealed Institution, and God has so expressed his Jealousy over
this Right of his, that when Sins not only against natural Light, but
superadded Precepts to confirm and strengthen its Doubtfulness and Decays, have
been passed by without any special Expressions of his Provocation; Sins
committed against his positive Laws (as CIRCUMCISION, and all Ceremonial Laws,
as well as Water Baptism, and what is generally called the Lord's Supper) have
been avenged with a high Hand.

To all I return these short Heads of Matter. First, that a Ministry, grounded
Internally upon the Grace and Gifts of God; externally upon the Scriptures of
Truth; A well ordered Church, consisting of Religious Members; Preaching,
Praying, and that Scripturally too (by him called Christian-Ordinances) are by
him made Natural to all Nations, antecedent to Christ's outward Coming, and
consequently, there was the Thing Christianity, before the Name Christianity:
which pleads our Cause against his first Chapter; and a gross
Self-Contradiction. Next, that those he calls Natural Ordinances, and of
Universal Obligation, are far more Substantial and Necessary to Salvation, then
those two of Water Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, upon which he more
peculiarly bestows the Title of Christian; since no Man can ever be saved
without the one, I mean those Natural Ordinances, as he calls them; and any Man
may be certainly saved without the other, that he so peculiarly calls
Christian-Ordinances; which how Unreasonable, and Preposterous it is, let the
Impartial Judge.

Yet again, his great Ignorance, and Abuse of God, and true Religion appears in
this, that not only he himself egregiously errs in such a Construction, but
confidently affirms God to be more concernd to vindicate the former, and take
Vengeance for the Breach of his positive and exterior Precepts, as the
Ceremonial part of the Jews Worship, and the Bread, Wine, and Water
Sacramentally used now a days (if yet as such, they may be accounted Precepts)
which the Devil himself can creep into the Profession of, and cannot cleanse as
concerning the Conscience, then of his fundamental natural and substantial Laws
and Ordinances, without which God cannot be worshipped, nor one Soul saved; in
plain Contradiction to that notable Passage of the Prophet, Bring no more Vain
Oblations, Incense is Abomination unto me, the Sabbaths, Isa. 1. 13, 14, 15,
16, 17.
the Calling of Assemblies I cannot away with, it is Iniquity, even the Solemn
Meeting. And when you spread forth your Hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you;
yea when ye make (or multiply) many Prayers, I will not hear; your Hands are
full of Blood: WASH YE, MAKE YOU CLEAN, PUT AWAY THE EVIL OF YOUR DOINGS FROM
BEFORE MINE EYES; CEASE TO DO EVIL, LEARN TO DO WELL, SEEK JUDGMENT, RELIEVE
THE OPPRESSED, JUDGE THE FATHERLESS, PLEAD FOR THE WIDOW; Where the Case is
determined against him. For here we have an Account of their Exactness in many
Outward Ceremonial Laws, standing in figurative things, and a most severe
Reproof of them, for their great Degeneracy and Corruption, as to their Morals,
or Rebellion against God's Natural Ordinances, as J. Faldo calls them.

God himself brings the natural and positive Ordinances (as by this Priest
distinguished) into the Scales, and gives the weight against the latter. Let him
show us when ever there was a Man washed and cleaned that was reproved for
omitting any of those positive and Ceremonial Laws, as I have produced a plain.
Scripture, that expresses God's Detestation and Abhorrence of those of his
Elected Nation the Jews, that erred from the Eternal Law of Righteousness writ
in the Hearts of the very Heathens, though they were never so punctually as to
their Observance of outward Institutions; and he will do something: otherwise,
as it is manifest, what a Kind of Christianity this Man would make, that any
Celsus or Porphyry would blow away with a breath; so it is most clear, that God
lays a far greater Stress upon Men's walking up to those Immutable Ordinances
(by our Adversary called Natural, which we can accept of, as being proper to
Mankind) then those Temporary and Shaddowy Services that must vanish upon the
Appearence of the Substance it self.

And Lastly, It is no less then Blasphemy in our Adversary, and an evident
Contradiction to himself, to assert, That the Light he grants those Immutable
Ordinances to result from, may be doubtful, or decay, respecting it self: since
it were to say, That God the Fountain of that Rivelet of Light, from whence
those excellent Streams come, is Doubtful, and liable to Decay; for whatever is
naturally incident to any measure of Light; is so to the whole: Nay, it is to
affirm, that from a doubtful and decayable Light may and does issue forth
Clear, Divine and Eternal Precepts of Righteousness. I would not have J. Faldo
lay the Blame of his own Doubts or Decays upon the Light; but upon his own
Rebellion against it. He has too too largely vilified that blessed
Manifestation, to receive much Benefit by it. But O the Injustice of Men, that
impute all of Incapacity to see, which is truly from themselves, to the Light
Within, which yet they refuse to be ruled by! Let the sober Reader be seriously
warned, that he believes in no such Pestiferous Doctrine, which in short, tends
to no more nor less, then an Exalting and Preferring the Exterior Coat, or
Shell of Religion (and that most of their own making too) above and beyond that
Eternal Light, which is the Law of God in the Heart, that leads to perform our
Duty uprightly both to God and Man. For I had rather be Moral Socrates in the
Day of God's terrible Judgment, then Out-side-Christian J. Faldo, with all his
Jeer and Enmity against Christ's Light within. But let us hear what he says to
these Christian-Ordinances in particular, though we have no Reason to expect
much to his own Purpose, whatever he may say for ours, when we consider, how
shamefully he has introduced them.

. 2. I shall begin with Water Baptism, it being the first in order of the two,
both in its Institution and Practice; which the Quakers deny (in these P. 36.
words) Baptism we own, which is the Baptism of Christ with the Holy Ghost, and
with Fire; but we deny all others. J. Parnel's Shield of Truth, page 11.

To which I say, that we have great Reason so to do; for first. Christ never
was Administrator of Water Baptism, but that of Fire and the Holy Ghost.
Water Baptism was John's, the Forerunner, figuratively, and used to that
Preparation, necessary to receive the visible Coming of the Messiah; were the
Messiah now visibly to come, and John Baptist alive, it would be Indisputable:
But that Time being past, and it being John's Visible Administration, which is
over, and not Christ's; and lastly, that the Forerunner is not to continue,
but give way to Him, and his Administration, that was so fore run, which was
Christ, and his Baptism; we do conclude, that there is no such Baptism, as J.
Faldo charges us with the Denial of, that can plead any Continuance in the
Christian Church: Which John himself was not unsensible of, when he said, I
shall Decrease, but he will Increase; and who (like the Morning Star)
accordingly Decreast, and became Ecclipst by the Increase of the Brighter Glory
of Christ, who was and is Lord of all.

. 3. If any should say, that it is not meant of John's Baptism; but a new
Water Baptism instituted by Christ, because of those only Words on which they
ground their Commission, Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. J. Faldo
answers for me, that it is a Mistake; He means not another Water Baptism from
John's, when he tells us, that the Water Baptism (which he calls the Christian-
Ordinance, and renders the Quakers a sort of Heathens for denying) is that
Baptism which was in point of Order and Institution, before the Bread and Wine
were instituted: which how well soever it may square with the Episcopalians,
Presbyterians, Independents, and Anabaptists Notion of Baptism, (whom he says,
he has no further concerned in his Book, then vindicated) and his own date of
Christianity from Christ's Resurrection, it is manifest; first, That no
Commission was given by Christ, before he broke Bread with his Disciples;
Consequently he must intend John' s only: And next, That John' s Commission it
self is not extant; much less any Commission to perpetuate his, as generally
oblieging: But above all, that the Disciples of Christ should not only use,
but esteem for an Ordinance of Christ a Baptism, that had not their Lord for
its Administrator, as says the Scripture; for Jesus baptized not: is absurd,
and all together Anti-Gospel. If we will credit Christ's own saying, The least
in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater then John; as if he should have said;
John's Administration was an Introduction, and a Kind of Preparation in order
to my Coming, but no otherwise is it interessed in my Kingdom, which is
Spiritual, and that I am now about to set up in the Hearts and Consciences of
Men; and the least of that Spiritual Kingdom is greater then the Children of
John' s Watery Dispensation.

. 4. That this is Truth I will further prove even from that very Place, which
they repute a sufficient Commission for Water Baptism. Go therefore and teach
all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, Son and the Holy Mat, 28.
Ghost, etc.

In discoursing of things laid down by the Evangelists, it will not always
suffice, what some one Evangelist says; as in the Passage Controverted. We
have here a Commission, it is granted; but what it was with respect to the
Baptism mentioned, and the Time when it was to take place, will be the
Question; To resolve which, we must have recourse to another place, without
which this cannot be so clear to those, who seek after Scripture-Demonstration.
Luke in his History of the Acts of the Apostles, soon after his Address to
Theophilus, gives us an Account of some farewell-Expressions, Christ used to
his Disciples; not so fully expressed in his History; which he delivers to us
after this manner; And being assembled together with them, he (Christ)
commanded them, that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the
Promise of the Father, which (says he) ye have heard of me. FOR JOHN TRULY
BAPTIZED WITH WATER, BUT YE SHALL BE BAPTIZED WITH THE HOLY GHOST NOT MANY
DAYS HENCE.

From whence nothing can be clearer, then first, that the Baptism mentioned in,
Go, teach all Nations, Baptizizing them, etc. was not the Baptism of John; but
the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, called, the Promise of the Father, which they
were to wait for, recorded by Luke, both in the 24th Chapter of his History of
Christ, and the first Chapter of his History of the Acts of the Apostles. Nay,
lest it should be thought, that he meant of another Water Baptism, as some
vainly imagine; to help their Understanding, and prevent all such Mistake, he
distinguishes, not betwixt John' s Water Baptism, and his own, but betwixt Any
Water Baptism at all, and his own Baptism of the Holy Ghost. John indeed
baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. Then you
will be fitly qualified, and commissionated, after you shall have received the
Promise of the Father, which you are to wait for; and then to go, and teach all
Nations, baptizing them, etc. Suitable to those Expressions of the Baptist
himself; I indeed Baptize you with Water, but he shall Baptize you with the
Holy Ghost. His Fan is in his Hand, he Mat. 3, 11, 12.
will thoroughly purge his Floor. He that comes after me is preferred before me.

Besides, the very words themselves taken in the Original Tongue, import in
Point of Propriety nothing less; For the Greek knows no such thing, as (...),
etc. baptizing them in the Name, but (...), baptizing them into the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which by the frequent use of that Preposition
'Eis, Into, it is impossible for Water Baptism to do; no more, then for a Man
by it to be baptized with the same Baptism, wherewith Christ was to be
baptized; to be buried with him, Christ, to be baptized into Christ, Romans 6. 4.
and so to be baptized into his Death; or by it, and not by One Spirit, to be
baptized into One Body. Which because no Water Baptism could ever do, it
consequently follows, that it was never intended of Water Baptism, since it
would then have been, to ascribe that to mere Water Baptism, which it is both
utterly impossible for it ever to perform, and is really the alone Property of
the Spiritual Baptism of Christ to effect.

. 5. To our Objection of the Apostle's Answer, Christ sent me not to Baptize,
but to Preach; he argues; Because he did Baptize some, therefore it p. 39.
was an Ordinance: and that he baptized so few, was but providential, not
designed; and the Reason why it was not laid upon the Apostle Paul, was because
his Call was extraordinary and out of due time.

But the Confusion and the Weakness of this Reply, might save me the Labor of
an Answer with all, but those who might esteem it Unanswerable, because almost
Unintelligible. For if every Practice was an Institution, then because the same
Apostle Circumcised, it was a Christian-Ordinance. Practice then, we see, and
all the reasonable World knows, is not Institution. Many things indifferent in
their Nature may be practiced and used, and yet never instituted or required.

That he had it not in his Commission, the Priest himself grants; but excuses
that Defect by a greater, viz. He was called extraordinarily, and out of due
time. But as they were all extraordinarily called, or else the Priest
contradicts himself, so if we may believe the Apostle, he was Inferior to none
of them; If not in his Works, I know no Reason, why he should be reputed so in
his Commission. That his Commission was of God is granted on all hands; And if
it pleased God to make it none of Paul's Commission, we would be glad to see
any of our time produce one more large, and effectual; till when, we are
contented with no more Extent in the Point, then God pleased to give his great
Apostle: and believe, whatever J. Fuldo says to the contrary, that he was a
Gospel-Christian-Apostle: And if Water Baptism had been then reputed a Gospel
Christian-Ordinance, neither had God omitted that in his Commission, nor had
the Apostle spoke so lightly of it.

. 6. But J. Parnel offends him in these words, at least he takes Offense at
them; They who would have one Baptism inward, page 37, 38.
an other outward, would have Two Baptisms, when the Scripture says, The
Baptism is but One. Shield of Truth, p. 11. Which he would be thought to
Confute thus, and it seems more material, then any thing he has writ on this
Subject.

I must tell him by the way, that he tells an Untruth wilfully. He uses, or
rather abuses the Words of the Apostle just before repeated; one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism; and there he adds but, which the Text has not. And here the
Scripture says, the Baptism is but one: Let him find me (says J. Faldo) such a
Scripture, and I will be bound to turn Quaker.

I perceive the Man thinks he can turn Quaker much at the rate he can Pray, I
mean, when he will; but I will tell him so much, that it is as hard a Task for
him to turn True Quaker, as to be a true primitive Christian, a thing most
difficult to be sure.

But to his Quibble about But, that J. Parnel has told a I wilful Untruth, in
saying the Baptism is but One: suppose it will be allowed that there was one
Baptism, in the same sense that there was one Lord, one Faith. Now if there is
but One Lord, and One Faith, as it is to be supposed, J. Faldo believes, why
should it be so Criminal to say, there is but One Baptism? If saying, there is
one Lord, and one Faith, be synonimous or equivalent, with affirming that there
is but one Lord, and one Faith; I cannot see how it should be an Untruth to
say, that there is One Baptism, is one and the same thing wish our saying,
there is (but) One Baptism. In short, if there is more then One Baptism,
because the Apostle does not say, there is but one Baptism; then there are more
Gospels, Lords and Faiths, because the Apostle did not say, there was but one
Gospel, but one Lord, and but one Faith; consequently there may be many
Gospels, Lords and Faiths, as well as Baptisms.

. 7. Enough of this Weakness; His Strength follows. Water Baptism is the Sign,
the Baptism of the Spirit something (but not all) page 38.
signified. Now to call the Thing signifying and signified, by the same Name,
does not make them Two of that Name, no more then there were two New Covenants,
because both the Matter contained in it, Hebr. 8. 10. and Circumcision the
Sign, Genesis 17. 13. are called the Covenant.

I shall grant to him, that the Thing signifying, and signified are sometimes
called by one and the same Name; as Baptism: But when distinguished by Water,
and Holy Ghost, I hope, nothing that is not as blind or hardened as J. Faldo
(if yet he himself) will say, that therefore they are but One Baptism. Christ
himself distinguishes betwixt John's and his Baptism; and himself and his
Baptism: And frequently his Apostles, yea the Baptist himself, seemed to take
all Occasions, whereby Mark 11. 30. Acts 1. 22. 10. 37. 18. 21. 19. 3.
to let People know, that his Baptism was but that of Water, and that the
Baptism of Christ was not of Water, but of the Holy Ghost, as the Scriptures in
the Margent, plainly prove.

So in the Word Circumcision compounded of the same Letters, and Syllables, let
it be used to express that of the Body, or the Flesh; or that of the Heart in
Spirit: Yet it is to be hoped, that none will conclude, there were not Two
Circumcisions, and so Two Jews; the one Inward, and the other Outward. Though
now he is no more a Jew, that is one Outwardly; neither is that Circumcision,
which is outward in the Flesh; but he is a Jew which is one Inwardly, and
Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the Spirit, and Romans 2. 28, 29.
not in the Letter, whose Praise is not of Men, but of God.

. 8. And should we grant him what he desires, as to the same Name, being
applicable to the Sign and the Thing signified; yet Weak and Wretched must his
Sophism appear to all clear-sighted Readers; For if therefore the Baptism of
Water and of the Spirit are One, because the same Word is applicable to the
Sign, and the Thing signified, and in that sense they are both of them One
Baptism: Then by just Consequence, must the Circumcision outwardly in the
Flesh, and the Circumcision of the Heart in the Spirit, be One; because the
Word of it self is equally applicable to both; and Consequently they are both
of them One Circumcision: And here, but must and will be allowed us. What Jew
Living could have reasoned better for the Continuation and Perpetuity of
Circumcision? But because he has said nothing here for Baptism, more then what
may be said for Circumcision; and that Circumcision is utterly exploded of the
Christian Religion, as a Sign, whose Signification is come, and therefore no
more a Sign; our Assertion of the One Spiritual Baptism of Fire and the Holy
Ghost, as only upon the same Fundation, proper to Christ's Kingdom, does
remain fix and Immovable against all the Batteries of our Adversary.

CHAP. XVI.
The Supper he says we deny, not denied but fulfilled. The Scriptures Consulted.
No Perpetuity proved. That it was a Sign. And that Signs were done away in
Christ, demonstrated. The present Practice in the Case not primitive. Our Faith
left with God in the Matter.

. 1. BUt the Quakers (he says) disown the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper to be
now a Gospel-Ordinance; for which he cites J. Parnel, a Young Man often in his
Eye, now dead, as he was grieveously so to J. Faldo's Brethren the Independents
at Cogshall in Essex, who by unparalled, and never to be forgotten Cruelties,
murdered him, as may be seen in my Second part of our serious Apology page 185.
186. 187. His words, as he quotes them, are these; For the Bread which the
World breaks, is Natural and Carnal; so also the Cup which they drink: and here
is no Communion, but what is Outward and Carnal. Shield of Truth. page 13. Also
W. Smith thus; They [Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper] are the Popes
Invention. His Primm. page 39.

To the first Citation, I answer, that the Bread and Wine, being of an Outward,
Elementary Nature and Substance, may with respect to what they signify, be
very properly termed Natural and Carnal, for so they are. And the World, that
is, those who are doing it upon mere Imitation, and not from any Heavenly
Commission, they see no further, and their Communion may well be said to be
Natural, Outward and Carnal.

To the second, I do challenge J. Faldo to make it good, and require it at his
Hand in the View of the World, to produce any such words out of W. Smiths
Books; and that he may not plead Mistake of Authors, I will give him the Scope
of all our Books and Friends, to prove that we ever called the Bread and Wine
Christ blessed, the Invention of the Pope. O ungodly Man! What have thou done,
that God should thus give thee up, not only to believe Lies thy self, but to
endeavor to make others do the like? Thy Book shall be a Millstone about thy
Neck in the Day of the righteous and terrible Judgments of Almighty God. We
deny the Expression, and lay the Slander at John Faldo's door.

. 2. But the Quakers main Objection, says he, is, that Christ is come in Spirit
to them, and his Disciples were to do it in Remembrance of him till he came;
therefore this Precept does not bind them. J. Faldo pretends thus to answer,
But who would think, that Christ in the Spirit was not come (either in shedding
it abroad miraculously, as in the 2. of the Acts; or as a Sanctifier) in the
Hearts of his People, when the Disciples and whole Church of Jerusalem, were so
frequent in this Ordinance; and when the Apostle Paul tells us, to the
Corinthians; The Bread which we break etc. it was for those to whom Christ was
come by a Spirit of Sanctification, not those in a State of Sin, unconverted to
Christ.

That I may briefly and fully reply, be pleased to observe (1) That we don't
deny Bread and Wine to have been given, and that by Command of Christ to his
Disciples. (2) That it was a Sign to them of that Life he would give for the
World, and which at that time they were weak in the Knowledge of (3) We believe
the Life most eminently meant, and which they were to do it in the Remembrance
of, was that Flesh and Blood that in the 6. of John he said, Who did not eat
nor drink thereof, Joh. 6. 53. 58.
should have no Life in them; and which, 5. verses after, he calls the Bread
that came down from Heaven. (4) It Is our Faith, that this heavenly Bread and
Wine, and Flesh and Blood, which such were to eat of, that would have Life
Eternal, for which he came (and of which the Disciples themselves were then so
ignorant) was the Thing signified by the Sign Christ gave his Disciples. (5)
That Sign is no longer of force in Point of Institution, then till the thing
signified is come; so that who truly witness the Coming of Christ into their
Souls, and the Eternal Bread of Life, or Flesh and Blood to nourish, are
rightly come to an End of the Sign and Figure. (6) That Christ did so come is
evident from many Scriptures. There be some standing here, that shall not taste
of Death Math. 16. 28.
(said he) till they see the Son of Man coming in his Kingdom. I will not leave
you Comfortless, I will come to you. Implying, that he was the Comforter, that
should come to them after the withdrawing of that Outward Appearance, which
was expedient for them to be done: He that is with you, shall be in you; and
abundance to the same purpose. (7) That the Practice of it after the Pouring
forth of the Spirit, is not, neither can it be, any Institution, or so much as
a Continuance of it upon an Institution, any more then the Apostles forbearing
several things lawful in themselves, that were upon the Command of the Jewish
Ceremonial Law forbidden; The Circumcision of many Gentiles; and above all, the
Apostle Paul's Purifying of himself at the Temple of Jerusalem, after he had
been near thirty years a Christian, or Gospel-Preacher, and consequently a
Thrower-down and Demolisher both of the Temple, and all its Ceremonial Worship.
(8) That every one who believed, and were in some measure turned to the
Christian Religion, and were accounted Members of the several Churches because
of such Profession, did not presently come to know Christ after the Spirit, or
discern his spiritual Manifestation, and whilst they were as yet Weak and
Carnal in their Conceptions of Christ, believing in him, and accounting of him
but after the Flesh (a Knowledge of him, the Apostle himself confesses once but
to have had) the Outward Bread and Wine might be suitable to that sort of
Belief, and a Sign showing forth a more Spiritual, Internal Bread and Cup,
which the Apostle in the same foregoing Chapter to the Corinthians expresses
thus; FOR WE BEING MANY ARE ONE BREAD, 1 Cor 10. 15, 16, 17.
AND ONE BODY; FOR WE ARE ALL PARTAKERS OF THAT ONE BREAD; The Cup of Blessing
which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which
we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? I speak as to wise
Men: Judge ye what I say. Which evidently imports a more Inward Heavenly Bread,
Fellowship and Communion, both with Christ, and one and another. (9) It ought
not to stumble any, that it should last to that Day and yet be laid aside Now;
For, Customs when once introduced and received, are not easy to be relinquish't
or left off; and it having been the Token Christ gave to his Disciples in the
time of their great Weakness, Fear and Unbelief concerning him, it was quickly
embraced and imitated, by such as believed, especially Jews, who just coming
out of a Multitude of External Services, were ready to make part of their
Religion consist therein: But as such came to grow into the true Jews State,
they saw beyond all Exterior Signs and Services, And that nothing which could
be tasted or handled, and that perished with the Using, and that could never
cleanse the Conscience from dead Works but were the Shaddows only of Christ the
Living Eternal Substance and Bread of Life, could be a standing Ordinance of
the Everlasting Gospel.

. 3. And truly, when I have sometimes considered the Apostle Paul's Inspired
Epistles to his beloved Timothy, and that among the many weighty, plain and
necessary things therein declared, and recommended for the Increase of
Godliness, and good Order in the Church of Christ, he should be wanting to
express something about these two Points, of Water Baptism, and the Lord's
Supper, so called, and insisted upon, as the most weighty Ordinances of the
Gospel (in Comparison of which Praying, Preaching, good Life, and such like
(the great Subjects of those Epistles) J. Faldo reputes mere Heathenism) I have
concluded to me self, that had his Value of them been equal, with what some now
adays put upon them, he would not, or rather the Holy Spirit, have omitted a
very peculiar Recommendation of them. But though this be sufficient to dull the
Edge of their Spirits, who daily cut and hack us for our (not Denial, but)
Affirming the Fulfilling of them by the coming of a more Living Bread; Yet our
so knowing and witnessing a more Heavenly Table spread, and the Presence of the
Eternal God withdrawn out of that so abused Practice, by the Idolatries,
Superstitions and Pervertions of several Ages; and that Revenge, Bloodshed and
Destruction, which have followed the several Contenders for it, all without
Commission, as well as out of the Primitive Order; is the chief Ground, nor of
denying it ever to have been in Use before its Abuse, as is before expressed, but
of our letting fall any further Practice of it. And this I hope, will be
accounted a Modest, Sober and Christian Account of our Faith, which we leave
with God to weigh against the chaffy Flurts, and vilifying Epithetes J. Faldo
uses against us; and which for Brevity sake I omit to transcribe.

CHAP. XVII.
His Charge of our Denying Christ's Transactions to influence into our
Justification considered. His Proofs not for him. His Abuse of our Friends
Words. Justification distinguished upon as Remission, and as daily Acceptance.
The Transactions of Christ largely owned by us. The Scriptures confirm our
Faith in Christ, as a general and particular Savior. No Works of Man
Meritorious.

. 1. I Am now come to that part of his Charge, which affirms our Denial of the
Transactions of Jesus Christ in the Flesh to have any Influence into our
Justification (an uncooth Phrase) before page 46.
God, and our Salvation. To prove which he brings forth three Passages of our
Friends; All that are called Presbyterians, and Independents, with their
Feeding upon a Report of a thing done many hundred years ago. E. Burroughs's
Trump. p. 17. Which J. Faldo wickedly construes thus; This he says by way of
Reproach against all that act Faith on, and receive Comfort from the Blessed
Effects of Christ's Righteousness and Sufferings by him wrought and suffered,
when he was in the World: Whereas in Honesty and Truth (which J. Faldo shows
himself wholly unacquainted with) he meant no more, then their Excessive
Admiration of, and the Regard to what Christ did without, whilst they
neglected, undervalued and decry'd for Blasphemy and Euthusiasm the Appearance,
Work and Righteousness of Christ within. But he thinks, we have mistaken him,
and that he is better armed for us, then we are aware of: What Righteousness
Christ performed without me, was not my Justification, neither was I saved by
it: R. Farnsworth he quotes for Author, but no Book; which is very unfair.
However, this may be said in Defense of R. F. that what gives daily Access and
Acceptance to, and with the Lord, is that Preparation of Clean, and Righteous
Adornment the Soul actually receives from Christ, who is the Lord her
Righteousness. And take Justification in this sense, and not for Remission, in
which he meant it, if ever he said it, and we do all own and acknowledge the
same, and let our Adversary do his worst: Only I desire him to tell us the Book
next time, which affords that Expression.

. 2. But I. Pennington, he thinks, he has made his own. Can Outward Blood
cleanse the Conscience? Can Outward Water wash the Soul clean? Quest. p. 25. I
beseech you that read me, hear his comment, A plain Denial of the Efficacy of
the Blood of Christ shed on the Cross to cleanse the Soul from the Guilt of Sin,
by its Satisfaction to the Justice of God.

I have had to do with many Enemies to God's Truth; But I must profess to the
whole World, I never yet saw, spoak to, or read of a more disingenuous Man: To
pervert our Words, alter Sentences, draw Generals from Particulars, and then
call them Ours is Base and Unmanly. I would fain have an impartial Man answ^r
me. Does I. P. deny, or any way meddle with the Outward Blood concerning the
Guilt of Sin past, how far it had an Influence into Justification, taking
Justification in that Sense? But does he not treat of the Outward Blood, with
respect to Purgation and Sanctification of the Soul from the present Acts and
Habits of Sin, that lodge therein? Is he so Sottish, as to make no Distinction
betwixt being pardoned Sin past, and the Ground of it; and being renewed and
regenerated in Mind and Spirit, and the Ground of that Conversion? or else is
he so impiously Unjust, that because we do deny, that Outward Blood can be
brought into the Conscience to perform that Inward Work (which they themselves
dare not, nay, do not hold) Therefore I. Pennington, denis any Efficacy to be
in that Outward Offering and Blood toward Justification, as it respects mere
Remission of former Sins, and Iniquities? This may give the Sober-minded some
Relish of his Rancker: We do say, that Outward Blood can no more cleanse, then
Outward Water; But we also say, that Christ's Blood had an Influence into
Justification (as he phraseth it) which I shall presently show.

. 3. He undertakes the Defense, of what he falsely says we deny, but so
confusedly, as ought to shame a modest Man, and a Pretender to Controversy.

His first Scripture is this. And he received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal
of the Page 50, 51.
Righteousness of Faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised, that he might be
the Father of all them, that believe, though they be not circumcised, that
Righteousness might be imputed to them. Romans 4. 11. His Observation and
Inference run thus, that Imputation is a Reckoning that to any, which they have
not from themselves, nor actually from another, otherwise it could not be
Grace, therefore it was the Righteousness of another, not his own.

This is so base a Pervertion and Mis-using of the Word, that Imputation both
in Scripture, and Common Discourse is always taken and used in the contrary
sense; Let him produce me one Scripture that countenanceth his Notion. This
imputed Righteousness is best understood by the Context: Even as David also
describes the Blessedness of the Man unto whom God imputes Righteousness
without Works, saying, Blessed are they, whose Iniquitys are forgiven, and
whose Sins are covered; Blessed is the Man, unto whom the Lord will not impute
Sin. Comes this Blessedness then upon the Circumcision only, or Uncircumcision
also? for we say, that Faith was reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness. How was
it then reckoned? when he was in Circumcision, or Uncircumcision? And he
received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith,
which he had yet being Uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all them
that believe, though they be not Circumcised; that Righteousness might be
imputed unto them also. verse. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

In which we may perceive, First that the Righteousness was by the Apostle
inferred from David's Words of the Blessedness of that Man, unto whom God
imputed not Sin. As much as if he had said, whom God forgives, he imputes not
Sin to; and to whom he imputes not Sin, such he looks upon as Righteous, that
is, to be as clear of the Guilt of former Sin by Remission, as if it had never
been committed. Secondly; that not Works of our own, no, though assisted by the
Holy Spirit to perform them, stricktly considered, can justify in this sense,
but Faith only in the Goodness, Mercy and Promise of God to Pardon, Remit, and
show Favor unto all such, who Distrusting their own Weakness, and Repenting of
their former Miscarriages, humbly, yet firmly put their Confidence in him. This
being Abraham's Case with respect to himself and Posterity; God no more looked
upon him as a Stranger at a distance from him, but one, who by Faith was
brought nigh, and became thus justified not by Works of Righteousness that he
wrought, but by Faith in God, which was accounted unto him for Righteousness,
and that really too; since he could not believe without an Inward Act of
Righteousness: but not of his own.

. 4. In short, Justification bears a twofold sense in the Scripture; and
because we are frequently mistaken about it by such as understand not the
Extent and Use of the Word, I will explain it. Justification is sometimes to be
understood of Remission, or non-Imputation of Sin upon Repentance, and Faith in
the Promise of God. In which sense we say, That all the righteous Works Man is
capable of, either from himself, if such can be; or from the Assistance of the
Holy Spirit stricktly as such, can never move one Jot to Justification, that
is, to the Blotting out of former Iniquities; for if Men could do more a
thousandfold then they do, and that it were never so acceptable, it is but
their present Duty, and cannot have Virtue enough in it to answer a present
Obligation, and cancel the old Debt of Disobedience too: God only upon Faith in
his Goodness, Mercy and Holy Promise can give Remission, Pardon, or make free
from the heavy Debt Transgression has brought upon us; and that not as thereby
meriting, but as obtaining such Remission from God, upon his own free tender.
This is Evangelical Faith, and Righteousness too, of which Abraham was a
Partaker, as well before as after Circumcision, that he might be the Father of
all.

. 5. But Justification is not only taken for Remission of former Sins, and
Accounting of Believers, as if they had never transgrest, that is, Righteous;
but for that Regenerate and Clean State of Soul, and that Access to, and
Acceptance with God respecting Daily Duty; In which sense no Man, nor Woman
ever was, or ever will be Justified another way, then by Inward and Real
Righteousness: Nor in this sense can any be further Justified, and Accepted,
then as they are thus purified and regenerated; Since it could be to say, not
only that God upon Repentance of former Sins and Belief in his Promise has
blotted out their Iniquities, which may be, whilst habitual Sin is yet but a
working out, and not quite overcome; for that is true enough: but that God
accepts such as purified, sanctified and regenerated (the other sense of
Justification) while they are actually Impure, and Unregenerated; this we
abominate, and then which nothing can be affirmed more Reproachful to, and
Destructive of his Eternal Holiness.

. 6. Having thus explained and expressed what we understand by the Word
Justification, I shall declare, How far we believe Christ Jesus our Lord,
respecting his Coming both in the Flesh, and Spirit, influenceth into our
Justification (as the Priest terms it) The Seed, afterward called Christ, was
and is God's free Gift, Promise, and Covenant of Light, by whom alone,
Remission, Justification, and Eternal Salvation did or can come to Mankind;
That in the Fullness of time a Body was prepared, in which he came to fulfill
the Fathers good Pleasure; that he preached the Promise of Remission of Sin, and
Salvation to as many as believed in him, and took up his Cross and followed
him; confirming the same by many Miracles. For this Doctrine of Redemption, and
asserting himself to be the Offspring of God, one with God, to whom all Power
in Heaven and Earth was committed, the Jews persecuted him, stigmatizing him
with the Name of Blasphemer, and at last apprehended and crucified him. We do
say then, that Faith in the same Christ who then appeared, who so preached,
worked Miracles, and laid down his Life for the World, and not in another,
does give Remission of Sins; and as followed, as become all true Disciples,
Eternal Salvation: yea, that Outward Blood was then, and is now to be
reverently believed in as a Seal, Ratification and strong Confirmation of that
glad Tidings of Remission of Sin, and Eternal Salvation, which he held forth in
the Name of his Father, to those who would take up the Cross and follow him.
And therefore with good reason was Remission of Sins preached in his Blood,
because it was the most visible eminent Act of his Life, both fittest to
recommend his great Concernment for poor Man, and confirm the Truth of that
blessed Gospel he preached to him in the World.

. 7. And as for Satisfaction, Though we deny any strickt and rigid Purchase, as
carnally understood, and irreverently held by many; yet that the Offering up
his Innocent Life did and does turn to Account to as many as truly receive him,
we faithfully believe; yea, that he did bear that for Man. (I mean his
Iniquity) he could not for himself; And has by that Suffering obtained precious
Gifts, that is, that Victory Man could never have obtained; yet still we do
ascribe all that was done, but instrumentally to the bodily Sufferings, and
principally to the Will of that Divine Life, whose Body it was, which offered
it up, and by the which Will it was Sanctified, and so acceptable with God:
Otherwise more, nay all would be ascribed to the Body, which I affirm to be
Blasphemy it self; for it was not the Body eminently, which saved the People
from the^r Sins; but that which dwelt in it, whose it was; so that though the
Body bore the Name of the Whole, yet was it not the Whole; but by Syneedoche, a
part for the whole, which is very familiar in the Scriptures.

. 8. To his Spiritual Coming into the Soul do we ascribe the Inward
Righteousness. We say, That Christ as he is the Light, Power and Righteousness
of God, being received into the Soul, and diligently obeyed, and communed with,
he does first Convince of Sin; then brings Trouble for Sin; and Sin thus
becoming a Load to the Soul, he administers Strength to shake off every such
Load and Burden, and to conquer and subdue the Power of Sin and Satan in the
Soul: In which sense he is more properly and particularly a Savior, when he
binds the strong Man, spoils his Goods, casts him out, destroys the Works of
the Devil, finishes Transgression, and brings in Everlasting Righteousness;
Otherwise, in vain would he have that Title, And thou shall call his Name
Jesus, for he shall save his People from their Sins; not the Effect, Eternal
Death, without the Cause, Sin: For the Wages of Sin is Death; As men sow, so
shall they reap. And a dreadful Disappointment will it be to the Hypocritical
Professors of this day, that dream of Justification, Redemption and Salvation,
and are yet carried away with the Temptations of Satan, at his will; being
ignorant of the inward Power of Christ to bruise the Serpent's Head. To
conclude, that Righteousness which Christ as God's true Light, Power and
Righteousness works in us (therefore is not of us) is that which alone brings
into true Union with God, and Membership with his Unspotted Church;
consequently, no Man without that Qualification, can be so accepted with him,
or have Access to him: for God is of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity; and
without Holiness no Man shall ever see the Lord. But let none mistake me, I do
not intend, that who is not quite Perfect, is altogether to be condemned; by no
means: but that Man is only so far accepted of God, as he is really Regenerated
and Beautified by the internal Righteousness of Christ.

And to this purpose is that other Scripture, he quotes against us; That as Sin
has reigned unto Death, even so might Grace reign through Righteousness unto
Eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord: For all Men having actually sinned, and
Sin so becoming inherent; Grace (that teaches to deny all Ungodliness, and
Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly, which is that
Righteousness) should also reign in all by Jesus Christ. Now unless it be an
Evil for us to say, that Men are accepted with God upon Christ's Inward
Righteousness, when the Scriptures say, that the Reign of Grace through
Righteousness (where Sin reigned, which was within Man certainly, and therefore
Inward) is unto Eternal Life (as full a word, as being accepted with God) I
cannot see, but in our holding forth Christ's Righteousness to be made ours by
the Operation of his Holy Spirit in the Heart, as the Efficient or Principal,
if not only Cause of our daily Acceptance with God, we are Scripturally
Orthodox.

. 9. We would also provide against the Malice of those Tongues, who, because we
do allow Good Works or Fruits to be well-pleasing to God, and necessary to Life
Eternal, do therefore rank us among the Papists, as pleading for the Merit of
Good Works: For we lay not this second sort of Justification, and much less the
first, upon any Exterior Works, that the very Spirit of Truth himself leads
into, as merely Exterior, be they Acts of Justice, Mercy, Charity, or such
like; But upon the holy Working of God's Power and Spirit in the Heart, and the
Creatures believing in, and resigning himself up unto God, to be by him
renewed, ordered, led, and disposed: So that the Creature has no further Share,
then as he bows to the Requirings of God, and contentedly acquiesceth, in what
it pleases Almighty God to do with him. So our Wills there daily submitted to
the Holy Will of God, which is Sanctification, is the Ground of our daily
Acceptance with God, and being received (not as just by the Non-Imputation of
Sins formerly committed, for that alone depends upon Repentance, and Faith in
God's free Love to remit; but) as just, by being actually and really made so
through the Participation of the Just and Righteous Nature of Christ, who is to
all such, Wisdom and Righteousness, and Sanctification and plentious
Redemption; and here we will end this Argument, leaving our Faith therein with
God and sober Men.

I shall omit here, as well as else where, taking any notice of his base
Revilings, and sordid Pedantry, unworthy of a Good Christian, or Man of
Learning and Civility; and endeavor as God shall enable me, to acquit my self
of the Remainder of his Book, with the same Honesty, Truth, Reason and Brevity,
that I hope, I have done, in what I have hitherto undertaken and dispatched.

CHAP. XVIII.
He says we disown the True Christ. It is proved, that He denies in
Contradiction to himself what we deny; and that we are Scriptural and Sound in
our Belief: And though we cannot exclude that Divinity from the true Christ;
Yet we also own, that the true Christ took Flesh, that he appeared for the
Salvation of Mankind, and that his bodily Appearance was instrumental in the
Point. Christ owned according to Scriptures.

. 1. HE is now arrived at the Root-Error of the Quakers, as he is pleased to
name it, who is a Man of Names, and such too as are Beast enough too sometimes;
but they may pass perhaps for Gospel-Zeal, or a pretty sort of Wit amongst some
of his small Companions, whose Disease is to be mistaken; but let us hear him
patiently.

The Quakers disown and deny the Christ of God, and set up a false Christ in
his room P. 70, 71.
and stead; and attribute all to that false Christ which is due and peculiar to
the true Christ. This is that Non-such Lie which travels to bring forth that
Babel, therewith their Religion abound. His Proof is at hand, This we certainly
know, and can never call the bodily Garment Christ, but that which appeared and
dwelt in the Body. Pennington's Quest. 23, 32. To which he says, They do not
deny, that there was such a Man as Jesus the Son of Mary, and that God, or
rather Christ was in him; but this is no more, then they profess of themselves,
that Christ as God is in them, yet that Body of the Man Jesus which he calls
here the bodily Garment, he tells us they can never call Christ. This Quotation
he offers as explaining by another from the same Author and Book, p. 20. For
that which he took upon him was our Garment, even the Flesh and Blood of our
Nature (VERY RIGHT; but what follows is woefully false) which is of an Earthly
Perishing Nature; But he is of an Heavenly Nature. From whence J. Faldo infers
against us, That the Body Christ took upon himself of our Nature, is not the
Christ.

But before we give him off, we hope, through the Help of our God to prove, the
Contrary to be highly against Christ, Scriptures and sound Reason; He has done
us right in two respects, which may a little answer for the Ill-Language he
gives us in our Charge. First, That he acknowledges, we own, that there was
such a Man as Jesus the Son of Mary (in Contradiction to abundance of our
Adversaries) and that God was in him, which makes up our Christ. Secondly, That
he whom we call Christ, is not J. Faldo's Christ; for he was that Body only
that dyed; else what mean those words inferred by way of Proof against us, in
Defense of the Charge; The Body which Christ took on him of our Nature, etc.
and therefore, they can never call that Christ, intimating he does; as the
following Paragraph tells us. This is a plain Denying the Man Christ Jesus: yet
behold the Babel of the Matter, who after this dare say (VERY RIGHT) to this
part of I. Pennington's words; for that which he took upon him, was our
Garment, even the Flesh and Blood of our Nature: Where he manifestly implies,
that what he just now accounted the whole Christ, and reproaches us for denying
to be such, is not the Christ Himself, but his Garment only; unless there be no
Difference betwixt Christ, and his Garment; or that Christ was but the Garment
of that more excellent Soul, or Divine Being that dwelt therein, which is
Unscriptural, and very Carnal. If this Man had not charged us, with what he
cannot prove; nay, if he has not manifestly contradicted himself in his
Endeavors to do it, no Man was ever guilty in those Respects. But that none
may be stumbled by his untrue Characters of us: We do believe, and plainly
declare, and that with Holy Reverence and Fear, that we cannot, we dare not
call the mere Body, the Christ; but the Body of Christ; That he was after the
Flesh born of the Virgin, like unto us in all things, Sin excepted; and
consequently, that Body must have been of the same Nature with ours; else it
was not a Real, but Fantastical Body, is most true; and if it had not been so,
neither could it have been a Garment of the Nature of our Flesh, which is so,
and to which J. Faldo said just now VERY RIGHT; nor could the cruel Instruments
have prevailed against his Life, as they did.

And now, whether it be most against Christ, Scripture and Reason, to say that
that Body, which was nailed upon the Cross, was the Christ, or the Body of
Christ only, I leave with Christ, Scripture and Reason to determine? Certain I
am, that this Principle must center in that senseless Dream of J. Reeve and L.
Muggleton, as well as that it makes a perfect Difference betwixt Him that was
before Abraham, and Him that said so: Him, that told his Disciples, I will not
leave you comfortless, and Him that said, I will come to you again. Nay, why
should Christ say to his Disciples, it was expedient he should go away, since
certainly if some more Excellent and Profitable Appearance of himself had not
been to succeed, at least as to them; it had been far more Expedient, he should
in that Manner have remained amongst them. And why did the Apostle speak of no
more knowing Christ after the Flesh, and of his being revealed in him, and in
the Saints, as their Hope of Glory, and that he was the Quickening Spirit and
Lord from Heaven; If that Body was the Entire Christ, and not rather the Body
prepared for that Divine Power, Wisdom, and Righteousness to transact in, and
appear by, and to the Sons of Men; which with respect to that great
Manifestation, was denominated Christ or Anointed, shall we dare think, that
he, who so spoak, and of whom the Apostle so testified, was not the true Christ
(which to be sure was before that Visible Body) God forbid. Let that Sin lie at
J. Faldo's Door.

. 2. But he offers to us Scripture, And it was revealed to him (Simeon) by the
Holy Ghost, that he should not see Death, before he had seen the Lord's Christ.
And he came by the Spirit into Luke 2. 26, 27.
the Temple, and when the Parents brought in the Child Jesus, then took he him
up in his Arms and said, Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace,
for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, a Light to lighton the Gentiles, etc.
and it is and will be granted, that Simeon saw the Lord's Christ: But I hope,
J. Faldo will not deny unto that good Man, who waited for Israel's Consolation,
that he had as well a Spiritual, as Natural, an Inward as Outward Sight of
Christ: For can he think, that the Word which took Flesh, was nothing of that
Savior, and that the True Light which then appeared, is to be excluded any
Share therein? Will J. Faldo, or any Man that owns Scripture, dare to affirm,
there was not something belonging to the True and Complete Christ, beyond what
his outward Eyes could possibly see? Certainly this Allegation from Luk 2. 26.
will never prove the Body of Jesus, which the Father prepared for him, to be
the Whole Entire Christ, Savior, Light, Salvation and Glory of Israel, unless
Christ under all these Considerations consisted, or was made up of the more
Outward Body, that only was obvious to the Outward Eyes; which to affirm, were
both to deny his Divinity, and to conclude Simeon void of any Spiritual Sight
or Intendment in these Words of the Lord's Christ, as a Light enlightening the
Gentiles, and God's Salvation to the Ends of the Earth. Though still be it
understood, that we confess that Child, as seen and understood by Simeon, with
respect to that great End of his Appearance, to be the Lord's Christ. Nay, J.
Faldo himself says as much p. 70. otherwise there would be an exalting the
Body above the Divinity; nay, an utter Exclusion of the Divinity with respect
to the True Christ. Let none then be so Ungodly and Unjust to us, as to infer,
we deny the Lord's Christ, because we rather choose to say the Body of Christ,
then Christ; for, says he, Christ is God manifest in the Flesh, see J. F. p.
72, 77.

. 3. And lest any should think, that therein I contradict the inspired Saying
of that Just Man, when he said, Mine Eyes have beheld thy Salvation; the Words
import no more then this, Mine Eyes have beholden the Manifestation and
Breaking forth of thy Seed and Heir, who is come to visit the World, and bruise
the Serpent's Head: Mine Eyes have seen him by whom thy Salvation shall be
declared; through whom thou will put forth thine Arm, and work mightily for the
Salvation of Man.

And this his other Scriptures prove at large for me, the most Considerable of
which I take to be this; The God of our Fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew,
and hanged on a Tree; Him page 74.
has God exalted with his right Hand, to be a Prince, and a Savior, for to
give Repentance to Israel, and Forgiveness of Sin, Act. 5. 30, 31. which can no
more be understood expressly, stricktly and entirely so, then it would be reason
able for a Man to say, that when Samuel died, the Soul and Body which was
called Samuel, died; and not rather, the Body of him who was called Samuel: And
this is the Ground and Reason why the Socinians, Muggletonians and several
Anabaptists hold the Mortality of the Soul, because otherwise those Words,
which speak of the Death of Christ, could not be taken properly, as they take
and defend them. I say then, and that with Force of Reason, and which at this
time, may be more to the Conviction of some, the Suffrage of our malignant
Adversary J. Faldo himself, however contradicting to his forementioned Sense,
the Words are thus to be understood. The God of our Fathers, who raised up (the
Body of) Jesus from the Dead, which ye slew and hung upon a Tree; Him, whose
Body you so cruelly used, has God exalted with his right Hand, to be a Prince,
and a Savior for to give Repentance to Israel, and Forgiveness of Sin. To put
this out of Doubt, hear J. Faldo his own self.

Let not these Blasphemers of the Lord of Life, and Glory, delude People with a
Fancy, as if we believe and preach the FLESH AND page 72.
BLOOD OF CHRIST, TO BE CHRIST, SEPARATED FROM HIS SOUL, OF THE NATURE OF MAN's
SOUL (but undefiled) OR THAT WE TAKE HIS MAN's NATURE TO BE CHRIST, SEPARATED
FROM HIS ETERNAL AND DIVINE NATURE.

One would think I had spent my Time in vain, when I set about to prove, that
the Divine Light, Life, Power, Wisdom, and Righteousness were not unconcerned
in the true Christ, and consequently that the Body which only died, was not the
Entire Jesus or Savior; since our Adversary calls us Blasphemers and Deluders
(and I know not for what, except it be) for Teaching that Doctrine he
recommends in the same Paragraph, wherein he calls us those hateful Names.

. 4. But that his great Inconsistency with himself may be further manifest;
hear him again: If Men be so blind as not to see the Error of Disowning Jesus
of Nazareth, the Son of Mary; page 75.
who was hanged on a Tree, put into the Sepulcher of Joseph of Arimathia to be
yet alive, and the Christ of God by all these Scriptures (the most considerable
whereof are answered) it is a Blindness, wherewith never any before the Quakers,
who professed the Scriptures to be a true Testimony, were smitten; surely God
has given them up for their Pride, Giddiness, or Idle Ignorance, and that
Injustice; and the Devil has blinded their Minds.

Enough of him at this time in Contradiction to himself, and of his Ungodly
Censure of us. But we hope, it may not be improper to observe, that though
before he recommended to us the Lord's Christ, as, Consisting of a Divine and
Humane Nature, that is, God and Man, and that he would not be thought to call
the Flesh and Blood and Man's Soul entirely Christ, in Dis-junction from the
Divinity; Yet now, all those who say, that Body which was born of Mary, hanged
on a Tree, laid in the Sepulcher of Joseph of Arimathia, was not, and is not
the Living Christ of God, are smitten, for their Pride, Giddiness, or Idle
Ignorance, and the Devil has blinded their Minds with a Witness: From whence
Three Things result; (1) that the Divinity is no ways concerned in the Lord's
Christ. A manifest Contradiction to himself; or else, with Noetus of old, and
J. Reeve and L. Muggleton of our Age, the Godhead dyed in Company with the
Manhood. Blasphemy it self. (2) That the mere Body was the Only and Entire
Christ, whatever he pretends, and not so much as the Man's Soul in Conjunction
with it, unless the Soul was of such a material gross Matter, as that it could
be hanged on a Tree, dye, and be laid in a Sepulcher (which is to assert the
Mortality of the Souls) all which happened to the Lord's Christ, says J. Faldo:
But because the Man's Soul was not mortal, and could not be hanged on a Tree,
and put into a Sepulcher, it follows, that it was the Visible Body, which could
only be hanged on a Tree, and laid in a Sepulcher, that was and is the Only and
Entire Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, in J. Faldo's sense: Which, how Impious
it is against him, that truly is so; how grossly Abusive of all People; and how
Contradictory to himself, let the whole World of Reason judge. Is this the Man,
that must be thought fit to vaunt it over us with such Impudent Scurrility,
Ungodly, as well as Unmannerly Reflections? But in the Earth there is not any
thing so Fantastical, Conceited; Proud, Railing, Busy Body, and sometimes
Ignorant, as a Sort of Priests to me not unknown (among whom our Adversary is
not the least) who think their Coat will bear out their worst Expressions for
Religion, and Practice an haughty Reviling for Christ, as one of the greatest
Demonstrations of their Zeal: an Ill-bred and pedantick Creco, the Bane of
Reason, and Pest of the World; the old Incendiaries to Mischief, and the best
to be spared of Mankind; against whom the boiling Vengeance of an irritated God
is ready to be poured out to the Destruction of such, if they repent not, and
turn from their Abominable Deceits.

. 5. If to excuse the Matter, he, or any else shall say, the Body is only
Synecdochically or Metonymically taken, a Part for the Whole, or
Representatively; I answer, that such a Distinction overthrows him for ever:
For if the Body, which was called Jesus, and Christ, and Lord etc. be by him
allowed as Representative of the whole Jesus, then was not that distinctly the
Christ; nay, what has he been opposing all this while? We will as truly, and
honestly say, as it is possible for him to do, that it was the Body of the Lord
Jesus Christ (which sometimes bore the Name of the whole Lord Jesus Christ, as
the Savior of Men) that was born of Mary, was hanged on a Tree, and laid in
the Sepulcher of Joseph of Arimathia. And if he will adventure to say more, the
Consequences of Excluding the Divinity, and Man's Soul, from being any part of
the True Christ, or their Mortality with the Body (who are Immortal) and not
capable of being hanged on a Tree much less buried for dead in the Sepulcher of
Joseph of Arimathia) will inevitably fall upon him, and dash him and his Carnal
Notions into pieces. Thus have I cleared my Conscience in clearing up the
Consistency of our Belief of the Bodily Appearance of the True Christ, with
Scripture, and sound Reason; and I hope, to the plain Overthrow of our
Adversary, and that with what Brevity was convenient.

CHAP. XIX.
Our Adversary's proposed three Scripture-places are by us rightly applied, and
his Charge is found Untrue. Christ is proved the true Light, Comforter, Creator
and Redeemer. Our Adversaries Objections examined and refuted. His Triumph
turns to his Shame. The true Signification of the Word, (...) and (...)
confirmed.

. 1. BUt he undertakes a more particular Enervation of our Understanding of
three places of Scripture, which he says, we grossly abuse. It will be worth our
while, to hear, and stop him a little, for he makes great have to Triumph.

That was the true Light, which lights every Man that comes into the World;
Joh. 1. 9.
Our Business is to know three things of him. (1) What Light it is (2) In what
Sense it inlightneth. (3) How he understands every Man; and this Line
Compasses the Matter.

THAT, (says he) has for its antecedent, and is to be understood of the Word,
which was in the beginning with God, which was God, by whom all page 84. 85.
things were made, the Light of Men, etc. Light is taken properly for that
which does Manifest or Discover any thing: so Christ is Light; but is now made
manifest by the Appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished
Death, and has brought Life and Immortality to 2 Timothy 1, 10.
Light through the Gospel. The Meaning is, said he, that Salvation Eternal,
which God has proposed to give to his People, which could not be seen in the
Purpose of God, as such, is by the Appearing of CHRIST IN THE FLESH, and
therein transacting and declaring this Salvation and Eternal Life, abundantly
discovered: and as Light properly is that which makes Manifest, so
metaphorically it is that which Comforts and Rejoices. I do not in the least
doubt, but Christ the Word here is called Light in both respects; And this I
take to be the Import of the 4th Verse; In him was Life, and the Life the Light
of Men, that is, The Salvation and Life Eternal of poor Sinners was wrapped up in
Christ, as God; the Consideration of God manifest in the Flesh for those Ends,
is matter of Strong Consolation.

In his First Part about the Scriptures he told us, that he was got to the
highest Round of the Ladder; in this place he has twisted himself Rope enough
to answer the End of his Climing thither; for if I do not from hence
irrefutably prove, (1) That the mere Body was not the Entire Savior: (2) That
the Light within is of a Saving Nature; I shall be ready to allow all our
Adversaries Detrectations from the Light within, but just Epithetes, and a true
Character of.

If Christ be the Light, which is that Word, which made all things, and
therefore God (as says J. Faldo) then Christ was before his Appearance, and
consequently our former Chapter is justified on our part against his Notions of
the Lord's Christ: For it was impossible, That the Visible Body taken from the
Virgin, should have made all things, which was hung upon a Tree, and buried,
etc. But J. Faldo expressly says, As the Word is the Light of Men, so, or in
that manner is Christ the Light of Men: Nay, he calls it, Christ's Appearing in
the Flesh, therein transacting and declaring Salvation, etc. intimating, That
Christ was before he took that Flesh, or appeared in that Body; and that he
therefore took it, and appeared in it, to transact, work, declare and bring to
pass by and through it as a peculiar Vessel, and prepared Holy Instrument, the
great Salvation, etc. and consequently Christ was, and is that Word which was
with God, and is God, and the Light of Men, etc. And lest we should yet mistake
him; he calls it God manifested in the Flesh, for those Ends, to wit, Salvation
and Eternal Life: And that he might speak all for us in a little, and give the
Deaths-wound to his own Cause, he tells us in so many Words, That the Salvation
and Life Eternal of poor Sinners was wrapped up in Christ, as God. Is not this
pretty fair for an Adversary, as ill-willing to us and to the Truth, as J.
Faldo, one of Ten Thousand in his Displeasure against us? Certainly, if the
Quakers are condemnable for believing, It was and is Christ, as the Word in
whom was Life, and that Life the Light of Men, that he was, and is a Savior,
J. Faldo must not be the Man, that shall give the Sentence, who, I know not
how? nor why? but that God and his Truth may be glorified by his
Self-overthrow, has asserted the Quakers Principle, and that at an high rate;
and if it can be an Honor to him, that he has assisted to the Conquest of
himself, he ought to have it without any Envy.

. 2. But he is as serviceable to us altogether in Defense of the Light, however
undesigned; which I prove thus: If Christ be properly that Light, which
manifests or discovers any thing (the terms of his Concession) and therefore it
does manifest the Purpose and Grace of God, which was given in Christ before
the World was, whereby Death comes to be abolished, and Life and Immortality
brought to Light; Then must Christ Jesus, this manifesting Light, be a Divine
and Saving Light without all Dispute: Now, J. Faldo affirms Christ to be that
Word, and proper Light, that so manifests, and discovers, as expressed;
consequently, that Light, which does so Manifest and Discover, is a Saving
Light.

Again, If the Light, be not only a Manifesting Light (which is to take it
Properly) but a Comforting Light also (which is to take it Metaphorically, as
says J. Faldo) Then this Light, as the Word-Creator, is not therefore called
Light from a bare Act of Discovery; but is a Principle of Life, Power, Virtue,
etc. by which such as obey it, are consolated, and by the Reason of Contraries,
who rebel against it, are condemned: Which makes up those two States of Light
and Darkness; and their Rewards, Consolation and Misery.

And thus much our Adversary further proves for us; In him was Life, and the
Life was the Light of Men, that is, the Salvation and Eternal Life of poor
Sinners was wrapped up in Christ, as God: which is to say; That the Life of the
Word was, and is the proper Light of Men, and unto all such poor Sinners as did
and do believe in it, that Light is unto them Salvation and Eternal Life; then
which, nothing can be more Orthodox in the Point. Who would think that J. Faldo
should ever undertake the Quakers, so little understanding their Principles?
And if he did know them, What should aile the Man to be so much our Friend to
write against himself, under Pretense of writing against us? One would think,
he did it by the same Figure Irony, that some call Fools, Wits: Yet he would
fain distinguish Christ the Light, as Creator and Redeemer, making the first
Common, the other Peculiar, and that spoils all. To which I shall briefly
answer, for he only starts it himself: There is but one Kind of Light, which
results from the Life of the Word, and because it cannot be such, but it must
be Divine and Sufficient, as well to Redemption as Conviction; it will
unanswerably follow, that the manifesting Light of the Word J. Faldo confesses
all Mankind more or less to be lighted with, is of a Divine and Saving Nature;
and that which strengthens this Conclusion, is, that Christ, as God, is by our
Adversary made the Savior; and unless he would deny him that he calls God, to
have been before that Manifestation in Flesh, a Redeemer to the Ancients (which
were to conclude the Damnation of all that died antecedent) Christ, the Word,
as that Light was the proper Redeemer through all Generations; Though I will
grant to him, and that in the Name of all that People called Quakers, the
Discoveries made by Christ, or God manifested in the Flesh transcended all
former Manifestations, and as in my Spirit of Truth Vindicated it is largely
confessed (had this Adversary been Ingenuous enough to have weighed it) So again
I declare, that eminently whatever was before, or has been since, might in a
sense be said of that Manifestation; because he that then appeared, was the
Fullness of that Light, Life and Power which measurably was, is, and may be
dispensed to the Sons of Men; wherefore in that sense he was, both before and
after, the same Convincer, Converter, Redeemer and Savior to the Souls of Men.

. 3. But he is much stumbl'd, and not a little abusive, because I would have
(...) rendered Enlightneth, rather then Lights, page 87.
in my Spir. of Truth Vindic. saying of me, I perceive he is as very -- as
those Physicians, who impose severe Abstinence on others, but they themselves
will take their Cups off, and their good Cheer to Wantonness and Giddiness.

How far this Character may be by any thought to resemble William Penn (a Man
he often strickes at) I know not; but I dare say for him, he never was so
Disingenuous as to deserve it, and least of all from J. Faldo, with whom he
never had to do, and who must needs make a Random-guess in the Matter. But this
is not the only Scurrility, William Penn, however unconcerned he be, has
received at the hands of that Rude Priest, nor that he is able to bear. He
takes it for granted that W. P's Passive Religion, is like to be a Protection
to his base Tongue, and so long the Priest sleeps in a whole Skin. I cannot
imagine what his dashoe -- should signify; But it is ill done of a Priest to
quarrel his next Order, and one too, which, if I am not mistaken, the
Nonconforming Priests have swarmed after, as the next way of Maintenance to
their displaced Carcasses; in so much, that we have almost as many Physicians
as Patients. One would have thought J. Faldo had been looking that way by his
Ebullitions, a Term of Art in page 127. But that is one of their last Refuges:
For it requires Pains, which Men of his Function cannot abide to do. They are
for the Land of Milk and Honey, whoever toils; and that they will make the
Labors of others yield them in a Land of Briars and Thorns. But it happened
unluckily, that he should charge so much Epicurism upon Physicians, whilst they
impose such Abstinence on their Sick, to whose way of Life so many of his
Friends are devoted. Shall I infer, it is to have those Cups and that Cheer,
their Ill-Preaching could not give, and that J. Faldo is therefore as very a --
as those Pharisees, that bound heavy Burdens, and laid them upon the People,
but themselves would not put their Fingers to support them. Does he live to
what he requires from others? if not (and the Course he takes, I know not how
he should) let him take his as very a -- to himself, which much better becomes
Him, then any Body I have to bestow it upon.

But to the Point controverted. I said then, and do now again, that the Light
must be in the Soul, or Intelligent Place of Man; and with respect to the
Inward parts, I saw no Difference between saying, the Light of Christ lights
the Soul, or inward parts of Man, and that the Light inlightneth Man: Only
sometimes I granted, that Enlightening did import a Belief in the Light, and
some Divine Seize thereby; both which are sober, and true, and granted by
I. Faldo, if I understand what he says when he confesses, that most
Translators render it enlightneth.

. 4. The last of what concerns his pretended Defeat of our Construction of that
Verse; That was the true Light etc. is Every Man: hear him; If this Phrase be
taken stricktly in its full page 89. 90.
latitude (a Phrase I do as little understand, as many of his other uncooth and
contradictory Terms) Intending every Individual without Exception; Christ's
Enlightening, must be understood, so doing as Creator, not as Redeemer; this is
the Opinion of many Superiors to me in Judgment by far (It may be so, though I
am apt to think J. Faldo scarce thinks so.)

But this has been so effectually considered already, that it would be
needless Repetition, a Fault I would not be guilty of (especially at this time)
to say much to it: Let it suffice, that the Light Naturally and Immediately
resulting from the Word, which was and is the Life of the Word, is the same in
Kind, both before that Manifestation of God (who is Light) in that Holy Manhood
then, and since; though not the same with respect to the Degree of its
Discoveries. But he tells us, though he can allow it universally as Creator,
yet not as Redeemer; and brings us these Scriptures; Whom we preach, warning
every Man, and teaching every Man, etc. Commending our selves to every Col. 1.
28. 2 Cor. 4. 2. Psalm. 145. 14.
Man's Conscience, etc. The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raises up all
those that are bowed down (The last an old Objection) Now says he, the Apostle
could not warn all, nor recommend himself to every Man, it must be then, all
that he preached to, and who heard him. So, who were upheld, God upheld; and who
are raised up, are raised by him.

But this is too mean to invalid the Force of the Place, and our plain and
inextorted Understanding of it. The Reason of this Mistake lies here: If it be
his Light, says J. Faldo, as Creator, then it hurts us not; if as Redeemer;
why are not all redeemed? putting no Difference betwixt the Sufficiency of the
Light to save, and the Salvation, that may be wrought by it upon the Obedience
of the Creature. A Doctrine accursed from God, and detested of all Men not mad,
or abused by the Suggestions of others; for the Calviniz'd Predestination is
the Bottom of it. Let it suffice, and so we will venture it. (1) That Christ
died for all Men, though all Men, receive not the Benefit intended by it; The
Neglect of Men don't render God's Love, no Love, or that it is not Universal,
and least of all that it should be Insufficient in it self. (2) If God has not
lightened the Soul of all Mankind with a sufficient Light to Salvation, the
Damnation of Men can never lie at their own Door; neither will they be left
without Excuse. (3) The Light with which he enlightens, being the Life of the
Word, must be Saving; call it the Light of the Creator, or Redeemer, for He is
one in himself, and so is his Light. (4) All Mankind, in all Coppies and
Translations, and from the Reason of the Thing, must be confessed to be the
Subject of this Illumination: Neither let it be hard for our Adversary to
grant; since it may be the Light of Christ as Redeemer, and yet Men may not be
redeemed thereby, through their own Disobedience. An inevitable Redemption then
not following upon Men's being thus lighted, but upon their Receiving of it, I
cannot see but it may be allowed us, that all Mankind not being redeemed, is no
Argument, why Let my Spir. of Truth Vind. be perused, from p. 53. to p. 7^.
all Mankind should not be enlightened; consequently (for all the Force our
Adversary brings to the Contrary) Every Man in our Sense is lighted with a
Saving Light in it self. I omit to mention many ancient, great and learned
Authorities, some of which are, and more may elsewhere shortly be produced in
Defense of our Assertion.

. 5. Now as to his Scripture-Quotations, they are no whit to his Purpose: For
the Warning and Commendation were Universal, there is not one Soul exempted.
And should I grant him his Desire, what could it avail? For if the Apostle had
a particular Regard to those among whom he labored, neither does that hinder
the Universality of the Truth of the Thing in it self, for the Warning is to
all, or the Scripture is not binding to all, contrary to our Adversaries
Judgment of it.

Nor is the Case parallel with the Relation given of the Divinity of the Word,
its Creating Power, and peculiar Benefit of Light from its own Life universally
extended to Mankind, unless that in the places where the word All or Every is
used without any Exception, an Exception should be made, because some one
particular Case may admit of an Exception: For neither does God raise up all
who fall; Nor is it to be understood, that all who are raised up in all cases,
God does immediately raise, but rather thus; the Lord alone is able to uphold
all who fall, and raise up all that be bowed down, as to a spiritual State, the
purport of the words: So that the Universal, I mean All, remains entire, and
the contrary Opinion respecting the Light, ends in an absolute Denial of a
Saving Light to the greatest parts of Mankind; which dreadful Consequence I had
much rather should result from J. Faldo's Opinions, then W. Penn's Faith, as
ill a Christian, as he is pleased to repute him, though it be for Vindicating
the Pure Christian Religion, as it was once delivered to the Saints.

. 6. But to shut up this Discourse, let us take notice of an Expression or two,
that this Critic lets fall in the close of this Paraphrase, and that is,
Concerning (...) or Coming, page 91.
it being more properly referrable to Light, then Man. That was the true Light,
which coming into the World lights every Man, rather then that was the true
Light, which lights every Man coming into the World. If, says he, it should
refer to Man, every Man in the very instant of, or before his Birth, Christ
enlightneth; it must be meant of created Faculties -- For Experience and Sense
without (any one Instance to control it) will tell us, that none can believe
without Hearing, nor hear without a Preacher.

He might much better have said of himself, then of the Quakers-Meeting, that
he was but a Puppet indeed, who knows nothing but by Hearsay or mere
Imitation: If Man have not some more inward Teacher, farewell to the Truth of
all Revelation, the Scriptures, and whatever comes by, or from the Inspiration
of the Almighty. This Man, if yet he ben't to much besotted to deserve so
excellent a Name, at once destroys all Ways, or Means, whereby to know, and
that not only to the Quakers, but himself too; For the Scriptures themselves
being grounded upon Revelation, and his Knowledge, upon them, as he pretends:
Take away Revelation, and ye take away the Scriptures; and consequently what
Knowledge J. Faldo pretends to have from them, falls to the ground. To pass by
what might be offered from the Ancient Puritans, Brownists, and Independents,
on our behalf, who were once reputed warm Sticklers, for that J. F. proudly
esteems Enthusiasm, for which they became the Derision of Carnalists. He
forgets to whom Phanatick belongs, and cuts off his pretended Preaching from
the God above, etc. p. 113. Thus is this Blind Leader fallen into the Ditch of
his own digging.

But must it be absurd, because Children at the Instant of their coming into
the World, cannot be said to be so enlightened. Very well; and what thinks he of
the Instant of Christ's coming into the World, out of the Virgin's Womb? Did he
enlighten all who should savingly be enlightened at that Instant? A mad
Disputant, indeed. What was it enlightened Simeon? Who told and revealed to him
the Lord's Christ? For Shame quit all Pretense to dispute.

. 7. But let us hear him further; There is a Reason in the Text, gives such a
Countenance to referring it to the Light, as will never be found for the
Contrary. That was the true Light, not This, or This is; not as Christ is now
in Heaven, nor as present with the Evangelist John, and the then Saints; but it
points at Christ's Appearance in the Flesh. Very notable indeed, and we will
not let it slip our Observation.

If the Word that made all things, which was with God, and was God, was that
true Light, as says J. Faldo himself, p. 84, then can it never be restrained
to that Appearance as the Beginning or End of it. Nay, the Evangelist is not
yet come, so much as to mention any thing of his Manifestation in Flesh; and if
we will believe J. Faldo, the Verse concerns the Word as Creator, and not as
Redeemer, which he stints to his Coming in the Flesh, see page 89. But by his
Interpretation, that is not relative to his Appearance in the Flesh, but rather
to the Word, which was with God, and was God, as p. 84. and so the Spanish
Translation has it, That Word was the true Light, etc. so that either the Word
was not before that Appearance; or if it were, being that true Light, that true
Light was before that Appearance; And Mankind being: also antecedent to that
Manifestation, may very well be said always to have been enlightened by that
Light. For that the Word should be before that Appearance, and that true Light,
which is the very Life of the Word, or Word it self, should be stinted to that
Appearance, is as absurd, as any thing well can be. Again, that we should take
It to deny Christ now to be the true Light, that enlightens all, because he was
so, is a strange Impertinency, and gross Falsehood; for then by good Reason
ought we to infer, that because the Word was with God, and was God, therefore
he is not now either with God, or God. Is this your Tertullus? Besides, If we
had nothing of this to offer, the Evangelist might very well refer to that
Appearance without any Denial at all of an antecedent Illumination; It being
the most excellent Breaking forth of the Divine Light. And this is largely
acknowledged and proved in my Spirit of Truth Vindicated. Which had he
considered but half as much as he importunes us to have his own, he might have
saved us the Labor of this Animadversion. But God knows, it is our Portion
from many such like base and unworthy Adversaries. Every thing is a Fault in a
Quaker, and nothing in them. We have great Reason to despair of any Good upon
the most of them, whose Spirits are so leavened into Prejudice and Revenge,
that, not to bear their Lies, and to rebuke their Slanders is accounted scarce
so tolerable as Railing; But with God the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth
do we leave our Cause, to be by him pleaded upon the Necks of that Crooked and
Perverse Generation.

. 8. Upon the Second Scripture, which he pretends we abuse, to wit, Page 94.
But what says it? The Word is nigh Romans 10. 3.
thee, even in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart; That is the Word of Faith which we
preach: and which, he says, we join with the first of John, In the Beginning
was the Word, etc. He observes thus much in short. The Apostle alludes to the
Words of Moses in Deuteronomy: But the Word is very nigh unto thee, in thy
Mouth, Deuteronomy. 30. 14.
and in thy Heart, that thou might do it; that is (says he) the Laws,
Statutes, and Commandments written in the Book of the Law, making the having
the Word in the Heart to be an having them without Book, or by rote, as he
expresses it.

But none of the most mistaken of our modern Socinians (the greatest
Contra-Spiritualists Men of our time) I am persuaded, could have given us a
more dark and carnal Interpretation of the place; for the Word of Faith, is the
Word which gives Faith, and in which Faith should be: It is called the Word of
Reconciliation and Regeneration; which can be no other Word, ^^en that which
was in the beginning with God; That, by which God uttered and declared his Mind
to the Sons and Daughters of Men in all Ages; That Word, whose Life was, and is
the Light of Men: To make the Apostle to have preached another Word, is as much
as in him lies, to render him no Gospel-Preacher.

Besides, that Word mentioned by Moses, could not be the outward Commandments
and Statutes; For the Question was not about them, but about the Commandment of
Commandments, and Word of Words, which he resolves thus: Let none say, who
shall ascend, descend, or go beyond the Seas, to fetch the Great Word and
Commandment; But the Word is very nigh thee (...), signifies the Innermost
parts of Men. Whereinto the Outward Fost. etc. Sckin. in lex.
Commandments could never come. Nay, I do affirm, and that with holy Boldness,
in the Spirit, Power, and Illumination of the blessed Gospel, that all the by
rote Learning of the Letter, of either Law or Gospel, as they are
con^^^-distinguisht, is of no more Value to the true Knowledge or Worship of
God, then the Cutting off a Dog's Neck, either to God's Honor or Man's profit,
without the Inward Living Word should powerfully write, and engrave upon the
Soul its Holy Precepts: neither could there be any Conviction in the
Conscience, concerning the Truth of those Statutes; nor indeed any Conscience
at all: since Conscience is no other, then that manifest Judgment Man makes of
the Truth or Falsehood of things, with respect to his own Soul, from the Word or
Light of God in his Heart, according to the Practice of the Apostle, who was
manifest, and desired to Commend himself to the Consciences of all Men: Not as
to a blind unsensible Thing; but that Judgment in Man, though not from him,
which was right, and not learned of Man, but received of God. Whereas J. Faldo
scoffs at such kind of Knowledge, the Perniciousness of which Doctrine ought to
antidote all sober Persons from ever adhering to it, or him that preaches it;
For I will be bound to make it appear, that by his own Principles, he is
assured of nothing, and must set down under the extremest Skepticism in the
World: Or if concludable by any thing, it must be by the way Rome takes to
resolve all Scruples, and that is Plurality of Votes. however directed; and
this too, rather for Peace sake, then any Certainty there can be in it. For who
bars out of all Inward Senses, Motions, Revelations, Inspirations or
Enlightnings, resolving only to insist upon what may arrive them from mere
Books, because of the Fallibility of Man, and Difficulty of the Matter they do
contain; which Way can there be to compass any tolerable Certainty to rest
Men's Souls upon? This is your once Phanatical, the other day Enthusiastical, now
Pragmatical and Scoffing J. Faldo. The first in the very beginning of
Independency in the World, the best part that belonged to it. I mean
Enthusiasm: but now deserted, by many as much as the true Religion is by the
Church of Rome.

. 9. The third and last Scripture he undertakes to secure us from Page 98.
all Share in, is that of Peter, We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy,
whereunto 2 Pet. 1. 19.
ye do well to take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark Place, until
the Day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts. By this more sure Word of
Prophecy (says J. Faldo) is meant those Prophecies written in the Old
Testament: which are called, Verse 20. Prophecy of Scripture, and are called,
the Light that shines in a dark Place.

I hope it will be always foreign to me, to detract from the holy Scriptures;
But the Truth I will take Liberty to defend. The whole Chapter is a very
weighty and zealous Recommendation of the Gospel to the Churches, pressing them
to call to Mind the Love of God unto them, and to mind their Duty to him, who
had so loved them; And as a great Ground, both of their Faith, Love and Duty,
the Apostle in the 16th verse tells them, For we have not followed cunningly
divised Fables, when we made known unto you, the Power and Coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ; But were Eyewitnesses of his Majesty: for he received from God
the Father Honor and Glory, when there came such a Voice to him from the
Excellent Glory, THIS IS MY BELOVED SON, IN WHOM I AM WELL PLEASED. And this
Voice, which comes from Heaven, we heard, when we were with him in the Holy
Mount; We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy, etc. Now that this cannot be
meant of the Scriptures (and take in the Comparison) I thus prove. If the
Reason of their Assurance, that what they delivered to the Churches, was not
Fabulous, but true, was their being Eyewitnesses of his Majesty, and Eye and
Ear-Witnesses of that Testimony God gave of his Son in the Mount, by that
Honor, Glory and Voice of Words, which were there uttered, and did in that
Plaee uppear; then the Scriptures not only were not a surer Word of Prophecy,
but not so sure, because they never heard nor saw them so delivered; nor yet
had any of the Prophets, so Glorious, so Transcendent, and Unquestionable a
Testimony to their outward Eyes and Ears that we read of (J. Faldo's most
infallible Way of true Knowledge (see page 91.) as was that which God gave to
the Disciples, when he testified, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased; But we may inform our selves from the Verses recited, that they were a
more eminent Ground for their Knowledge, Assurance, and Belief, then the mere
Scriptures; And consequently the Scriptures are not the more sure Word of
Prophecy. Again, the written Account of another's Revelation cannot be more
sure to me then that Revelation which I do immediately receive from God;
suppose it be from God: But this was a Revelation to the Disciples, and they
were sure it was from God; Consequently the written Account of another's
Revelation, as were the Prophecies of the Old Testament (so called) to the
Disciples, could not be a more sure Word of Prophecy. For it were to say, that
they were more sure, that he among them who was called Jesus, was the Son of
God from Isaiah's Testimony, That he would give him for a Light to lighten the
Gentiles, etc. then the Immediate Voice of God, when he pointed so clearly at
him, This is my beloved Son; He that is amongst you, whom you have followed,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: Then which, what could be
more demonstrable on God's part, and incredulous on their side, who should yet
subject that living Testimony, to any the best Tradition? Let me not forget to
add; That what the Disciples then saw and heard from God, and the Epistle,
Peter wrote by the holy Ghost, being made part of the New Testament-Writings,
and they accounted more eminent by far then the Old, with respect to the more
eminent Pouring forth of the Holy Ghost, in that Day, which the Prophets
foresaw, and they enjoyed, the Old cannot in any wise be reputed a more sure
Word of Prophecy, as J. Faldo asserts; therefore this more sure Word of
Prophecy, must be another thing.

. 10. What that is which may be reputed a more sure Word of Prophecy, will much
deserve our serious Consideration. If it was not the Voice in the Mount, which
we have invincibly proved, to be more Immediate, Living, Fresh, Convincing and
Confirming to the Disciples, then any the best written Prophecies they had; It
will follow, that it was meant of the holy Anointing, that Spirit, and measure
of the Grace, or blessed Light of Christ, which is Internal, and out of the
Reach of all Visible Things, to sophisticate, corrupt, mis-represent,
mis-render, or mis-translate, all which have greatly befallen the Scriptures:
For I do affirm, that Sense it self is not so certain as Reason, and what
clearly and fully occurs to the Understanding part of Man, is a more solid
Ground for Faith and Knowledge, then those External Sights and Visions, which
Man might be attended with to Confirmation. For what shall be the Rule for
trying the Certainty and Truth of any such Visions and Prophecies? It must be
some measure of that Anointing, which was afterward given more largely to
them, in order to try Spirits, and in all other Cases, which concern the
Gospel; otherwise they should not have believed with any Certainty, or upon
spiritual Conviction as to themselves; For if a Man has not something Divine to
direct and inform his Understanding as to the true Relish, Judgment, and
Application of what he may read in any Book, or externally might appear to his
Senses in the Way of extraordinary Vision, there could be no probable, much
less certain Ground for his Belief in, or Knowledge of the Truth of that thing,
however true in it self. In short, That which is Truth it self, which is able
to teach all things, to try all things, and to lead into all Truth (which the
Scriptures (though Truth) cannot do; for then, they would be Clear, Plain,
Perfect, incapable of Additions, Diminutions, Corruptions, Mistranslations
etc.) must be this more sure Word of Prophecy; But that the Anointing which the
Saints had received of him 1 John 2. 27.
was able to do, as says the Apostle John, but the Anointing which ye have
received of him abides in you, and need not that any Man teach you; but as the
same Anointing teaches you of all things, and is Truth, and is no Lie: And
even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him; Therefore this Anointing
thus able to do all things, must needs be that more sure Word of Prophecy; if
more shall be allowed. In short, The Law written in the Heart, is a more sure
Covenant. Law and Word; then the Law written upon Stones, or the Outward Book
of the Law; else, the Dispensation of the Law of Life within, the Gospel-State,
would be less Sure, and therefore less Noble, then the Law without, and the
Prophecies of the Old Testament (so called) more Certain, then the Scriptures
of the New, that belong to a more excellent Dispensation, and are an Account of
the fulfilling of those very Prophecies: Nay, it would be to assert, that the
Words of both Scriptures are more sure and certain, and our Regard ought to be
more eminently after them, then the very Spirit from whence they came; which
(at least in the Church of God) every one has received a Measure to profit
with, and so perfectly subvert the very State of the Gospel, which was and is
the Time of the Pouring out of the Spirit upon all Flesh, and bringing Mankind
to a more near, sure and living Word of Prophecy, then any Outward Writings
whatever, can possibly be.

. 11. But because he tells us in another place, that a little Skill in the
Original, would free us from many Absurdities; we shall a little examine both
what the Original Text will make for the clearing the Point in Controversy,
and what may be the sense of some Men of Learning (a thing he pretends to) and
Impartiality (which I hope, he has not Confidence enough to pretend to) I will
suppose then, the Prophecies of the Ancients to be intended; but deny any
Comparison at all to have been made between them, and that Voice in the Mount.

2 Pet. 1. 19. (...), etc. We also have a More sure Word of Prophecy as by our
late Translation rendered. I cannot perceive that Comparison in the Greek, so
hugged by the Priests, and insisted upon by our Adversary, with manifest Design
to prefer the Writings before the Spirit that gave them forth, the great
Evangelical Word of Prophecy, for the Words without any wrong, not only may,
which were enough, but ought to be rendered thus: Also we have a very sure Word
of Prophecy; which neither questions the certainty of the Voice, nor so much as
intends any the least Comparison at all with it; which I take to be the very
Ground of that Opposition which is made against us. The Reason why I so render
it, is ready: (...), Also, I know our Translation has, but it is commonly
understood by our Adversaries for (...), But, which is a great Injury to the
sense; for (...), Also, is conjunctive, and signifies only another
confirmatory Testimony, whereas (...), or But, is a word that mostly does, and
to be sure in that place would signify a Comparison and Opposition: Also then,
not being taken in the same sense with But, there is nothing therein that can
make for the Comparison, or any Opposition whatsoever; Now the Comparison it
self (...), lately rendered more sure, is in the ancient Translations more truly
interpreted, sure, and very sure; in which there is no room for any Comparison,
or Opposition in the least: And if J. Faldo has but Greek and Honesty enough,
he must needs acknowledge, that Positives, Comparatives, and Superlatives are
used promiscuously in the Greek. See Acts 25. 10. where (...), is rendered, as
thou very well know: whereas in J. Faldo's sense, (...) would be
interpreted, as thou know better then I; which certainly the Apostle Paul
never intended, when he spoke to Festus. And as (...), Also, is connective, and
joins the 19th Verse to the 18th Verse; so (...) the expositive and distinctive
Article, does not preceed, but follow (...). The Syriack, one of the most
approved Versions by learned Men, has it thus, We have over and above a true or
sure Word of Prophecy. The Arabic, We have beside, a very true Prophetic
Word. The Aethiopick has a Comparison, not respecting the Sureness, but the
Antiquity of the Voices: We have over and above an ancienter Word, or
Testimony, which is so respecting time: The French, German, Low Dutch, Swedish,
and several of our ancient English Traslations run thus; We have also the sure
Prophetic Word: We have also the right sure Word of Prophecy: We have also the
very sure Word of the Prophets. All which imports no more, then that they had
over and above their own particular Assurances of the Truth of the Christian
Religion, the Testimony of the Prophets, whose Prophecies were fulfilled by the
Coming of Christ, and the Pouring out of the Holy Spirit; but if it were more,
it was only so in point of Authority with their Adversaries: Not that the Voice
the Disciples heard in the Mount, was less sure in it self, or that Knowledge
of God and Christ, through the Operation of the Power of the Gospel in the
Hearts of those Believers, then the ancient Prophecies of the Prophets; But
perhaps they were not so effectual to persuade, as the words of the ancient
undoubted Prophets to confirm their Allegations. Thus Christ, in our
Translation, Search the Scriptures, not that they were a more sure Testimony
then what he himself livingly and immediately gave forth; But they so reputing
them, whilst they opposed him, his Direction to search the Scriptures, was for
Confirmation of the Truth, they seemed to gainsay from the Scriptures. What
then? Shall we say that the Prophets are a more sure Testimony, then what
Christ the Living Word of God himself declared, or the Saints became Witnesses
of? By no means; But rather, that the old Prophecies are also a true
Prophetical Testimony, like a small Light in a dark Night, they do show forth a
Prophetic Light, till the Day Star of fulfilling them (which some then knew,
and others pressed after) should arise in their Hearts, which is that Blessed
State of Witnessing, J. Faldo, and T. Hicks have bestowed so many impious
Scoffs upon.

To this agree many learned Men. I will begin with Parap, in Epist. 2 Pet. c.
1. v. 19.
Erasmus; If so be that the Prophets plain Oracles be in great weighty
Estimation among you, which Prophecy, by figurative dark Shaddows of Christ, of
much more Gravity, or Weight ought so evident a Declaration by the Father
himself of his Son be. They with their Prophecies, prepare the Minds of Men to
the Truth of his Gospel; In that they Shadow and covertly point out the thing
that the Gospel does preach. The Prophets agree with the Father's Voice, if a
Man do rightly interpret them: The thing that Men set forth by Man's Device,
may be perceived by Man's Wit; But the thing that is set forth by the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost requires an Interpreter inspired by the like
Spirit. A severe Check to the Contra-Spirituality of J. Faldo, and those other
of the Carnal and Apostate Professors of Religion in our time, who have forgot
the Ground of their Forefathers Revolt from the Idolatry of Rome, and
Superstitions of a degenerated Prelacy; as well as that is shows how much more
Erasmus inclines to give the Preference, if any there be, to the Voice of God
then to the Ancient Prophecies. He also quotes Aug. to his Defense.

Beza not only renders it, we have also a very firm Word of Prophecy, shutting
out all Comparison (the Priests Break-neck) but affirms, Bez. in loc.
if it should be accepted, as a firmer Word of Prophecy, it can only relate to
such, who might have entertained such an Extraordinary Belief of the Writings
of the Prophets; and not that in themselves they were a surer Word of Prophecy.

Vatablus in short tells us; that (...), or more sure, is a Comparative for a
Positive, more sure, for sure; usual Vat. and Clar. in loc.
with the Greeks. So says Clarius.

And Grotius, that great Man, thus renders this part of the Verse [(...)] that
is, says he, Grot. in loc.
the Writings of the Prophets have been always in Credit and of Force with us:
But now much more, because we have seen the Fulfilling of them by the Messiah,
and their Agreement with him. Certainly then, others besides the Quakers, must
needs have been Perverters of this place of the Scripture, in J. Faldo's sense:
But he may hear from Grotius, that the Scriptures are never the less valuable
by those who witness their Accomplishment; but the more: A Notion very rife in
J. Faldo's head.

Let it suffice, that we have stated and Vindicated the true Christ, to wit,
God manifest in Flesh. That we have attributed to God manifested in that
visible Body, what we believe to be congruous, and according to Scripture and
sound Reason. And lastly that those Scriptures, which he thought to disinterest
us in, are fully and clearly vindicated from his false Glosses; proving their
express Design perfectly destructive of those Ends, our Adversary endeavored
to bend them to, which were his own, and not the Truth's.

CHAP. XX.
Our Adversaries Charges denied. His Proofs fail him. The Quakers are True
Christians; and Quakerism True Christianity. We own and profess the only True
God that made Heaven and Earth.

. 1, HE has hitherto charged us, one would think, as home as ever Man did, for
what is beyond Denying the Lord's Christ, and that Love he manifested in the
World for the Salvation of Mankind: But it is our Happiness, that his Proofs
have been always found as Weak, as his Charge Desperate, and the little
Quarter promised us by the One, more then made up by the faint Performances of
the Other; else, how terrible would this Grim Character be to our selves, and
much more, to others, who do, and yet will, we hope, believe better things of
us. viz. The Quakers are gross Idolaters, and Quakerism Page 112, 113, 114.
gross Idolatry. And he assures us, if there be any such thing as Idolatry in
the World, he will prove us guilty in the highest degree.

The Way he takes to prove this heavy Charge is this. Those which own and
profess that to be God, which is not, are gross Idolaters; but the Quakers do
so. The second Proposition (the first being granted by all) he endeavors to
prove thus. Who own and profess the Light within, and the Soul of every Man to
be God, own and profess that to be God, which is not God. But the Quakers do
so; therefore Idolaters. The making good this Charge, will lie upon the
Testimony he brings out of our Friends Writings, since he pretends to no less
Demonstration, for every thing he has to lay against us. I deny in the Name of
all that abused People; first, that we ever owned or professed the Light within
every Man to be God (though we say, it is of God) much less that we worship it
as such: And secondly, we do forever renounce any such Principle, As that the
Soul of Man, simply as such, is the very Essence or Being of God: If he fails
in his Proofs, he must fall with Infamy to the Ground. The first Man he hopes
to make sure with, is G. Fox the Younger: The words, as he quotes them, are
these; P. 119.
I will make you know, that I the Light which lights every Man that comes
into the World, that all through me should believe, am the True Eternal God,
which created all things; that by me (the Light) all things are upheld; and
that there is not another beside me can save. Fox Young. p. 53. Although, says
he in this Passage, be does not call it the Light within, Page 50. You scorn me
the Light in you; p. 54. which will not own me the Light in them. They, he
says, that cannot from hence read the Quakers own and profess the Light within
to be God, are not like to be Page 120.
much the wiser, for what they read. This cuts off all Hopes of J. Faldo's
being wiser; for I suppose he read what he writ, as blind as he is: However,
for the sake of others, I will endeavor to reconcile this seeming Contrariety.

In the first Passage he grants, that within Man, was not mentioned; and by his
Silence, I suppose, I may conclude it Orthodox. For no Man that believes
Scripture, will dare to deny that God is Light; That every Man is enlightened by
Him; and that by Him, who is called Light, all things are upheld, and that He
alone is Savior. A Doctrine J. Faldo teaches page 84. 85, 89. To the other
Scraps of Matter I answer, That we never did, do, nor shall assert, the God
that made Heaven and Earth to be comprehendable within the Soul of Man; No, it
is more impossible, then that the Sun in the Firmament could be contained
within the Body of any individual Person. But that God, who is the great Sun of
Righteousness, does as truly cause his Light Spiritual to arise upon the Souls
of Men, as his Sun Natural upon their Bodies: and as what Knowledge we have of
the Natural Sun is by its Light, Operations and Effects upon the World, so our
Knowledge of the Eternal Sun of Righteousness, God (who is Light, and in whom
is no Darkness at all) is only and alone by his Divine Light, Operations, and
Effects in and upon our Understandings and Consciences: so that when we say
that the Light is within any, we do not intend the whole Being of Light, nor
was it in this gross sense that G. Fox the Younger ever meant it. But that He,
who is the Eternal Fountain of all Life, and Sun of Light, causes his Light to
visit the Hearts, and shine into the Consciences of all Mankind, as well of
such as Rebel against it, and scorn it, to reprove them, as those who Receive
it, and gladly submit to it, to direct and justify them: Wherefore we utterly
deny that the Manifestation in Man, strictly considered, is the most-high God;
but a Manifestation of, or from God, by the Inshinings of his blessed Light.
And we cannot be said to Worship the Manifestation, but that Eternal God, which
is Light, that is thereby manifested; and all Worship, otherwise founded, is
not of God, nor pleasing to him, but of the Invention of Men, which he will
confound; and this, Scripture and Reason are ready to defend. Scorning the
Light in them, and not owning the Light in them, by our Adversary so strongly
insisted upon; is no more then, scorning and disowning him who is the Light
that shines in them, and that gives Light to them. What very vanity then, is
all his Boast? And how does his Charge retort upon himself? But that we may
send it quite back, to the Pit from whence it came, lets hear how he proves our
Belief of the Soul, to be God; which he begins to do, with no small Show of
Assurance, that he shall cleaverly compass his End.

. 2. Every Man has that which is one in Union, and like the Spirit of Christ;
even as good as the Spirit of Christ, page 122. 123.
according to its measure. E. Buroughs True Faith, etc.

And what is this to the Purpose? Can any Man be so stupid as to think, that E.
Borough ever intended the Soul of Man, that purely and simply constitutes him
such? For he is speaking of that Universal Grace, Light and Spirit, which God
has given unto all whereby they may be led to Eternal Felicity. And unless he
will say, that a Measure of the Holy Spirit (a Scripture Phrase) which God has
given to every Man to profit with, is not in Union with Christ, nor as Good in
Kind, as the Spirit of Christ (which our Adversary says, is God) it will
evidently follow, that what E. B. writes, is found and Scriptural; however this
makes nothing for our Adversaries present Charge. But he ends not with him.

Now my Soul and Spirit is centered in its own Being with God, and this page
123.
Form of Person must return from whence it was taken. F Howgil. Test. of E. B.

This Expression is delivered to us by Francis Howgil, as Edward Burorghs's, a
little before his Departure, in that sensible Testimony he gave to the late
Life, Labors and Death of that worthy, painful and effectual Labourer, and his
Companion in the Gospel of Jesus.

But to help J. Faldo's Intellects, that they may no more look asquint upon
such weighty dying Words; Let him know, that E. B. spoke not of God as his
Souls Being by Nature, or as of that very Being (for so the Soul would be God
indeed, and yet subject to all those Pollutions and Punishments, which do and
will attend Wicked Men (Blasphemy with a Witness) but God, as that Being, which
by Regeneration, the New Nature, and Spirit of Adoption, all the Righteous
Souls are gathered too, and centered in, as their Everlasting Habitation and
Life Eternal. The World may perceive with ease, at what rate, and what Terms
J. Faldo swaggers over the Quakers: But let him boast that puts off his Armor.

. 3 The next Person he singles out, is G. Fox, thus answering a Priest. But p.
123.
God and Christ is in the Saints, and dwells in them, and he, (the Priest) is a
Reprobate, and out of the Apostles Doctrine. Great Mist. page 16.

I perceive, J. Faldo will rather quarrel Scripture, when he meets it in a
Quaker's Book, then not have something against them: But certainly if that be
the Way to prove that we believe, the Soul is God, to wit, that God and Christ
are in the Saints; what will become of the Scriptures? Will they escape J.
Falao's heavy Censures? who say, That Christ is in his Saints the Hope of
Glory. I in them, and they in me. The Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he
will dwell in them. Must every thing, that is in another, be necessarily of
that in which it is? But I hope, his Heat being abated, he may discern the
Weakness of his Attempts against us. To proceed.

I. Pennington he also brings in to make good his Charge: How serviceable he
may prove, will better appear, when we page 126.
have examined the Passage. That which the Lord from Heaven begets of his
own Image and Likeness, of his own [Substance] of his own Seed, of his own
Spirit and pure Life. Quest. 27. But J. Faldo has mist his Aim and mistaken his
Man; For I. P. is not now speaking of the Soul of Man, simply considered; but
of that Divine Life, Nature, Image, and Birth, that God by his Word of Life
creates or begets in the Souls of those who once lived not to God, but
themselves, bearing the Image of the Earthly; and do turn at his Reproof to
walk in the Way of Life. This will not move the Business one Jot further on the
behalf of our Enemies Charge.

. 4. We will close this Point with a Passage out of Samuel Fisher's Velata
quaedam Revelata. page 13. of which he is very cheery, page 127.
As to the Spirit of Man which concurs to the Constituting of Man in his
primitive Perfection; it is the Breath of Life, which God breathed into his
Soul, after he had formed him, as to his Body, of the Dust of the Earth;
whereby he came to be a Living Soul, a Soul, that did partake something of
God's own Life, -- This (Spirit of Man) is that living Principle of the Divine
Nature, which Man did before his Degeneration, and shall again after his
Regeneration partake of.

This Charge, says our Adversary, being of so black and horrid a Nature, I did
judge it meet to prove it by abounding Instances, and now Reader put on the
largest Charity, and give me thy Verdict, if I have not made appear, that the
Quakers are gross Idolaters, etc.

To answer which, briefly and to Purpose, and to close this Chapter, with a
contrary Conclusion, I say, That the Spirit of Man is not to be taken, as of,
or from Man, or that it is any part of Man's Nature, take Man in an Abstractive
sense: And had he been so fair, as to give us S. Fisher's Words at large, they
would have proved themselves of Age enough to answer for themselves. S. Fisher
is to be understood, of that Spirit, or Breath of Life, not that made Man
simply a Living Creature of a mere Reasonable Capacity, but that Divine Life or
Breath, which makes alive to God, and gives a kind of Heavenly Animation,
Motion, or Life, to live to him, which constituted Adam, not a mere Man, but a
blessed, holy, heavenly-minded Man, before his Degeneration. And that S. Fisher
did never intend it of the Natural Soul of Man, but rather of the Divine Life
of the Soul, without which the Soul is destitute of the Knowledge of the True
and Living God, his own Words very plainly show; For if S. Fisher intended that
Spirit, which is the Divine Principle, that Man did partake of before his
Degeneration; certain and clear it is, that since Man did under that
Degeneration partake of his own Soul, or else he could not have been a Man, S.
Fisher never meant the mere Soul of Man, but the Life of that Divine Principle
which regenerates and renews the Soul unto a Life of Purity and Blessedness.

So that we conclude, the Quakers not believing any such Strange and
Unscriptural Doctrine, as that the Soul of Man, is the God that made the
Heavens and the Earth (for so it would make it self, and what is greater then
itself) They are not those Idolaters they have been represented, and foully
charactered by J. Faldo: But Innocent and Free of all such Imputation; and he
their Accuser, most of all Condemnable; yea, and that for Idolatry too, who
professes no Knowledge of God; but from Outward Sense; by Hearing, Reading,
etc. p. 91. So that being destitute of the Revelation of the Son, that only can
make known the Living Father, what Apprehensions he has of God, are not
Experimental, but Imaginary; and worshipping such an Idea, he worshippeth not
the true God, but the Images of his own Brain, therefore an Idolater. See Bish.
Andrews upon the Command. and Pagnin. upon the word (...)

CHAP. XXI.
Our Adversary at a loss to prove his Charge. We own so much of the
Resurrection as the Scriptures express; more Curiosity Dangerous and
Condemnable. Eternal Rewards owned by us. J. Faldo's Book will prove it to Him,
and our Tribulations to Us.

. 1. THe two last Charges, of this second Part of his Discourse, are Page 132,
135.
our Denial of the Resurrection of the Dead (that is, Dead Bodies) and future
Rewards.

To the First; he brings in I. Pennington thus. We say, that Christ is the
Resurrection, to raise up that which Adam lost, and to destroy him who deceived
him, (viz. Adam) so Christ is the Resurrection unto Life, of Body, Soul and
Spirit, and so renews Man, etc. Princ. Elem. Peop. call. Quak. p. 34. Upon which
he comments, What is this Resurrection, but what they call Regeneration? (it
seems he does not) and the Resurrection of the Body is but in the same sense,
as the Soul and Spirit is raised.

I cannot help it, if J. Faldo has made so unapplicable a Quotation out of I. P.
to his Business. I hope, none are so Blind or Partial, as to be angry, that I.
P. did not write to his Purpose; it was sufficient that he spoke to his own, or
rather to the Truth's. Our Adversary falls down right upon us, with a Charge of
Denying the Resurrection of the Body, and is angry that the Place he produces,
helps not his Design. Certainly, with sober Men, the Blame will not lie at our
doors for not making good his Charge, but at his own, that he exhibited one he
could not prove. But will he deny the Resurrection in I. P's Words? If he does,
I pronounce him no Christian; nor indeed will a bare Confessing to it render
him One: And where he stands, I fear, he is but too far from both. Let it
suffice, that those Words are a modest, serious and full Answer to this
Caviller, since he does plainly acknowledge All that the first Adam lost, to be
restored by Christ the second Adam; and all that the Sin of one incurred, the
Righteousness of the other redeemed from. Now let his Notions of the Way and
Method of Effecting this be what they will, we desire not to be wise beyond
what the Lord sees convenient for us, as this busy Intruder into sacred
Mysteries has done, that lives in the Land, not of Light, but gross Darkness
within, and whose very borrowed, made, framed Light, from Reading, Art, Study
and his own Conceptions, is the very Blackness of Darkness.

. 2. But he affirms, that George Whitehead should say, being pressed in the
Matter, p. 136.
that he did not believe his Body should rise again after its Death, which he
can prove by many Witnesses.

I know not if ever G. Whitehead did so express himself; But I see, every
Expression must be treasured up to defend a decrepit Cause: Truth stands in no
need of such Watchings, that would make a Man an Offender for a Word. But what
if he did say so, and I should second him, would it follow that we deny a
Resurrection? I am sure I will deny all such Consequences. Does not the Apostle
say expressly, Thou Fool -- thou sowest not 1 Cor. 15. 36, 37.
THAT BODY THAT SHALL BE. Is Scripture grown into such mean Request with J.
Faldo; or does his Rage against the Quakers so transport him, that he knows not
Scripture, when he meets it from a Quaker?

But says our Adversary, upon a like place, and to this purpose, (viz.) We
shall all be changed: I would ask, if they would be content page 139.
to be refused their Debts, if contracted before Quakers, and demanded when
Quakers; I suppose they would believe that the Change in a Person, is not the
Change of a Person; and that they are the same still to whom the Money was and
is due. But how clever any may think this Simile, we will prove it Lame, and
Defective; For the Change was not of the Body any further, then as the Soul
governed it after a new Way of Living. I cannot think that J. Faldo will dare
to say, that a Man's Body is rendered ever the less Corruptible by any the best
Change the Soul can make in this World. The Question is about; what that Change
must be which makes a Corruptible an Incorruptible Body? I mean not by Corrupt,
Sinful, but that gross Elementary Matter, which is subject to those
Impressions, Influences, Mutations, and Passions which we see all Sublunary
Bodies are subject to. Either the Resurrection of the Body must be without that
Matter, or it must not? If it must, then it is not that same Numerical Body;
and so their proper and strict taking of the Word Resurrection, they must let
go. If it must not be without that same gross Matter it dyed with, then I
affirm, it cannot be Incorruptible, because it will carry with it that which
will render it Corruptible ad Infinitum.

And what can be more Unreasonable, then that Bodies compounded of this
Elementary World, which says our Adversary, shall and must by Nature have an
End, should out live their own Matter, and which is more, never end? I say, we
cannot see how that which is of Dust should be Eternal, whilst that from whence
it came, is by Nature but Temporal. And that which is yet most of all
Irreconcilable with Scripture and right Reason, is, that the Loss and Change
of Nature from Corruptible to Incorruptible, Natural to Spiritual should not
make it another Body. In vain do such dispute against the Popish
Transubstantiation as an Absurd and Impossible Thing, who themselves are guilty
in a Case of the like Nature. The Romanists affirm a Change in the Sacrament,
though our senses tell us it is the same thing that ever it was.

Our Adversaries in the Point of the Resurrection boldly affirm, that it is the
same Body, and yet Transubstantiated from Natural to Spiritual, or changed from
what it was, to something it never was. For my part, I think the Last not less
Impertinent, and the Former more expressly Scriptural.

But because such things run Men into Unprofitable Questions, various Searches,
and a Philosophical Way of Discoursing, no ways tending to God's Honor, nor
the Soul's Profit and Comfort, I will Conclude this Head with our Confession,
That every Seed shall have its own Body, and that such an one, as it will
please Almighty God to give; and Thou Fool, belongs most rightfully to him, who
acquiesceth not in an humble Contentedness with the good Will of God, and that
manner of Body he shall give. And I think it would make more for Love, Peace,
and Good Will, if our Enemies would leave those things with God, quicquid supra
nos, nihil ad nos, whose Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.

. 3. To the Second Head of the Charge to be considered in this Chapter; to wit,
Our not Professing of Eternal Rewards, needs no page 141, 142.
other Answer, then, That none ever read so, He quotes no such thing, nay, he
says, that he has searched, but to no Purpose; and I challenge him to name one
Person reputed by us, to be of us, that has ever affirmed so gross a Thing?
Well then may I call this the Last great Lie of his Second Part of Lies, and
Slanders too: such as he will be found much to weak to defend before the
Tribunal of our God, where we have whereof both to Answer, and justly Accuse
him before Angels, as well as that we have now plainly refuted him before Men.

But he makes this a Consequence of Denying the Resurrection, which is
obviously weak; since whatever we have scrupled of the common gross Notion of
the Resurrection of this Corruptible Body, we have ever held an Eternal State
of Recompense.

But so mean are his Proofs for this Conjecture, if I may give them that Name,
that they show far more of his Ignorance and Malice, then our Faith in that
Atheistical Opinion: However hear them. R. Farnsworth, said he, was not saved
by what Christ did at Jerusalem; therefore, says he, already saved: But can any
in their Wits think, he meant saved from Sin here, to be the whole of Salvation
and Blessedness? O weak Man! Well, but I Pennington says, Who forget God are to
be turned into Hell. What Hell? says J. F. only in this Life. A very Lie, and
Infamous Slander: J. Faldo's Book against us, unrepented of, will prove, we
believe, that Eternal Woe and Vengeance shall be the Wages of that Hellish Work.
We say, That in this Life, Men have an Earnest of Heaven and Hell, and some
Sense of both States, as they are Good or Bad; but never did we affirm Men to
enjoy that full Measure of Joy, or Torment they shall have as their Eternal
Reward or Recompense hereafter.

But E. Bourrough the Day he died, said, he was now putting off this Manner of
Person, and returning to his own Being. Those are not his very Words; but what
then? Is this to prove we deny an Eternal Recompense, to produce his own
Testimony to an Everlasting State of Blessedness, that he Himself was just
entering into? But W. Penn vindicates an Heaven within after his fashion,
against the Author of the Spirit of the Quakers Read Bishop Halls and Tho.
Brook's Heaven upon Earth.
tried. And what is this to denying an Eternal Heaven for the Righteous? Did
not the Saints enjoy Heavenly Places in Spirit, when on Earth? O Carnal Man!
Be-nighted by the Power of Darkness, whose Understanding the thick Fogs and
Mists of Ignorance, Malice and Revenge have over-cast; that thou call'st Good
Evil, and Evil Good; Light Darkness, and Darkness Light.

. 3. I shall here, after his Example, resume the Question, and collect all that
has been said, and made evidently to appear on the behalf of True Christianity,
and the Apostolically Professors of it (I mean the People of God called
Quakers) and so end this Discourse, respecting the main of the Book.

If QUAKERISM (so called) be not another Dispensation then that of Christ,
preached and settled by the Apostles.

If it deny not the Scriptures.

If it deny not all, nor any of the Ordinances of the Gospel.

If it deny not any Influence of Christ's Transactions, above 1600 Years since,
into our Justification, and Salvation, as he phraises it.

If it deny not Jesus the Son of Mary (after the Flesh) otherwise God over all,
to be the Christ of God.

If it own not false Gods, and be not Idolatry.

If it deny not the true Resurrection of the Dead.

If it does affect (an affected Expression of our Adversaries) or rather hold
forth a future Blessedness or Misery in another World, according to the Deeds
done in this;

Then Quakerism, in our Adversary's account, must be Christianity:

But all these things are true, and have been proved of Quakerism (so called)
Therefore Quakerism, so called, is true Apostolical, or primitive Christianity.
And this shall close our Chapter, and my honest and clear Answer to the second
part of his Discourse which makes up more then three parts of four of his
Uncharitable and Disingenuous Treatise.

AN APPENDIX.
Being A Reply to that last Part of his Book, which pretends to answer the
first of my Spirit of Truth Vindicated, entitled, An Examination of the first
part of W. P's Spirit of Truth, etc. with a Rebuke of his Exorbitances.
. 1. THough there has been no Adversary which has fallen to my share, that has
shown more Incivility, and less Learning, (a thing he pretends to) in Answer to
any of my Books, then J. Faldo has done in this last part of his Quakerism no
Christianity; yet how little soever I have, at least to bestow upon him, I
desire to manifest more Temper, Truth and Civility, then to recompense him with
that Ill-bred Language, those School-puns, and loose irreverent, if not
profane Sayings, amidst the most weighty Matters, it has pleased him to give
me, for a great share of his Answer to the first Part of my Book. I will rather
betake my self to single out the Strength of his Objections, if any there be,
and bestow my Time in Vindication of the Truth, then to rail, revile,
undervalue and stigmatize with, I know not how many disgraceful Epithites, a
Way that never yet reached into any Man's Conscience. And this Ken I have of J.
Faldo, That all his Discourse of Christianity, interlined with so much Babbling,
Prattle, and base Abuse, would never move a sober Turk; and a Banian is a Saint
to a Congregation of such kind of Christians.

. 2. He tells me he expected great Things, when first he set about to read my
Book, and began to stagger in his Mind, as to that Ingenious Piece, called,
page. 2.
The Spirit of the Quakers tried, or to that purpose: But knowing himself
better, I hope he will excuse me, if I do not believe him. He never had that
Opinion of any thing writ in Defense of a People he testifies such
irreconcilable Hatred to, which is none of the meanest Blots in his Scutchion.
Pen, the Answerer, if he were not furnished with Forehead and Tales beyond
measure, his Pamphlet would have had nothing remarkable in it; Whether this be
most a Lie or an Abuse, I know not, perhaps the Reader may; but sure I am,
there is more of both then stands with true Christianity to give a
comprehensive Under value of what he can never answer, which perhaps goes for
one among such as have Faith in him, or know no better.

. 3. But he is angry at my Stating the Question, thus, Whether God's Holy and
Unerring Spirit is or should be the proper Judge of Truth, Rule page 3.
of Faith and Guide of Life, among Men, especially under the Administration of
the blessed Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, or no. I affirm it,
and proceed to prove it by Scripture and Reason. Upon which be pleased to hear
his Reflection, and from hence make a Judgment, what that Spirit must be that
should so pretend to answer my Spirit of Truth, etc. Considering his Words
foregoing (which are too many and too worthless to transcribe) And what he
drives at in the handling of this Question, I never read one so lame and
deformed in my Life come forth with such State and Confidence, and such a train
and rout of Mediums as deformed as it self; There is in it neither Logic nor
Honesty: Certainly if he had not turned Quaker, and in that Fall put all out of
joint, he could not likely after such good Nursing have been thus lamentably
cripled in his Intellects, and somewhat besides.

One would think the Strain of this Comment were Answer to it self: Why so much
flourish, and little done? Must Noise supply the Absence of Reason? and base
Reviling go for Confutation? Shallow Man! what Lameness is there in the
Question? I profess I see none, nor has he so much as pointed at one Limb that
is defective in all this Rabble of Reflection. [I have neither Logic nor
Honesty] It had been to be wished that he had shown more of both in saying so,
or held his Tongue. [But my turning Quaker has put something out of joynt] But
what, I know not, unless the good Opinion I once undeserved had of such
Mountebank Priests. But give him his due, he is the first Man that ever
acquainted me with the Ground of Cripling. I was never yet wise enough to think
it a Natural Effect of Ill-nursing, only through Carelessness in Nurses, Falls
and the like have brought it. I perceive he is not only a Well wisher to Physic
by his hard Word, Ebullitions, but a small Pretender to Chyrurgery, by his
Term, out of joint; when he has given better Proof of his well-setting to
rights his own dis-joynted, or, if he will, dislocated Cause with that of
Chistianity, he may better set up for a Religious Bonesetter, and in the mean
time he can pass but for a Pretender.

[But I have no Logick] And why? [Because I say page 37. there is no more
Difference to me between a Judge, Rule and Gaide, then page 4.
essentially there can be in the Wisdom, Justice and Holiness of God; he should
have added, says J. Faldo, nor between Truth, Faith and Life amongst Men.]

I would know of any Man that can think himself capable of judging in the
plainest Case; if this be an Answer to my Argument; I said then, I do again,
that there is no Spir. Truth. Vin. p. 37. 31.
more Difference in them respecting the Principle, then essentially there can
be in the Wisdom, Justice and Holiness of God, which are but so many Words to
express the Perfection of one and the same Being, for he is all, and that in
all. Wise in being Just, and both in being Holy; They are inseparable, for That
which gives me a right Sense or Judgment of Truth from Error, is as well to me
a Rule what I should believe or dis-believe, and a Guide what I should practice
or not practice, as at first it was my Judge of what was Truth from what was
Error; All which sober, and indeed unanswerable Arguing he thought fit to
overlook, which is very Disingenuous. I say, that the same Spirit, which is a
Judge, is a Rule and Guide, even in that very Act, when it is a Judge, and that
unavoidably; Therefore to distinguish them is frivolous, and to maintain one to
be a Rule, and another a Judge, is absurd and heterodox.

For his Addition, it is not hard to answer, That there is more Difference
between Truth, Faith and Life; for one may be without the other two, I mean
Truth abstractly: But if it shall be understood of Truth received into the
Heart, I say, that there is so great an Affinity between Truth, true Faith, and
an Heavenly Life, that they follow each other almost at an instant, and cannot
be separated from each other.

. 4. But he is Angry that I should use these Words of Lord and Savior in my
Question. I thought page 5.
them sober; and I am sure I meant them of him that was before Abraham, that in
time appeared for the Salvation of his People, however he would disinterest us
in them; but indeed the Way he takes to do it will do us no harm: For that he
may insinuate we mean another thing, he calls it Playing at Blind-Man's-Buff,
which is worse then a Buffle headed Expression. Is this your Gospel-Minister?
Let him go Wrestle at Morefields, play Football Matches, turn Ringer, a
Practice he pleads for in his Book, and leave off Profaning the Holy Name of
God with such an unhallowed Mouth and unbridled Tongue. Some of my
Scripture-Arguments he pretends to refute, I shall mention, and what he
objects, that both may be weighed in an equal Balance.

. 5. The first Scripture by me urged is that in Genes. 6. 3. My Spirit shall
not always strive with Man, etc. From whence I infer, that page 8.
God's unerring Spirit both did so strive either for Conviction and Conversion,
or to prompt to further Seize, and that they were not at that time of the
World without an Infallible Spirit to Teach, Rule, Judge, etc. To which he
says, My Argument is a Thicket of Impertinences, that a Body had need of good
Arithmetic to number the Terms, that I am a nonesuch for Diving, if I can
fetch up from this Scripture what is mentioned in this Proposition.

What need there is of all this little Wit, a better Word for Pedantry, I know
not, and I believe more are of my Mind; but if my Consequences are so
Impertinent and so Numerous that ordinary Arithmetic will not serve to reckon
them, and lastly so Unnatural as the Scripture will afford me not one of them,
I am greatly to be blamed. But because what he says for me may be of more
Force then all that I can offer, let this Passage be weighed [It is more then
probable that the Spirit did strive with them to make them better then they
were, yet none of these Ends are expressed in the Text] An eminent
Contradiction to him, and which is more, to it self; For if the Spirit strove
to make them better, then since that better consisted in a Discovery of Good
and Evil, with an Election of the Good, and a Denial of the Evil, I would fain
know of J. Faldo, how that could be, and the Spirit of Truth not be what I have
instanced in my Argument. Was it not then a Judge of what was Good from Evil? A
Rule how to choose one and refuse the other? A Guide, to lead, direct, enable to
the Choice, and preserve in it? O Weak Man! Is this the Upshot of all thy poor
Insults? But why may not William Penn express the Scope of any Scripture in his
Argument, though he find not the very Words in the Text, if it will bear them,
especially since J. Faldo himself allows it, both in granting that the Spirit
strove to make them better, which is not verbally expressed, and by his Weekly
Practice of Preaching, where nothing is more frequent then his Exposition, and
after a sort too, which the Text many times will not bear.

But he tells me that my Question is, to prove the Spirit's Teaching
indefinitely, or without Difference of Persons; and my Proof speaks of the
Spirit's page 9.
Striving with Wicked Men. For this he cries out, that I wander from Truth and
Reason, and am Infatuated, questioning, if my Conscience have any Eyes; and has
Impudence enough to tell me, that I am beholding to him for giving no further
Discovery of my Vanity and Folly, etc.

How groundless his Cavil and Reflection are, and with what rude and unhandsom
Terms he is pleased to give them, I need not trouble my self to show; But
certainly if God affords Bad Men his Spirit to strive with them; then Good Men,
who cannot be such without it, but Sensual and Devilish rather, must needs have
this Holy Spirit, as well to preserve them, as that is made them such; if so,
then may we conclude our Adversary Weak, as well as Envious, who from that Text
denies my Proof of the Universality of God's Spirit. For what is it but to say,
that though all Wicked Men have the Spirit striving, Good Men have it not?
Whose Conscience wants Eyes at this time, will not be hard to determine; but
sure I am, it was his Wisdom to leave off where he did, since his reputing my
Sober Scriptural Argument Infatuation, Folly, etc, was the most evident Mark of
his own he could well have given us.

. 6. The Second Scripture I urge, and which he perverts, is that in Neh. 3. 20
Thou gave also thy Goo^ Spirit to instruct them, which, says he, without
being so Ingenuous as to mention, much less consider, and answer my Argument
upon it, is mainly the Spirit of God, which he put upon Moses and Joshua, for
which he quotes Numb. 11. 17. 27. 18, Psalm. 77. 20. But does he think us so
Credulous, as to receive this Stuff for Gospel? Certainly we must commit the
greatest Cruelty upon our Understandings to strain them to such a Fiction. He
might with as good Reason have said, that the Pillar of Cloud by Day, and Fire
by Night were seen of none but Moses and Joshua, as to grant, they had the
immediate and general Benefit of them, and at the same time deny them to have
had the immediate Benefit of the Spirit's Teachings. Beside had they not had
some Measure of the Spirit of God, they could never have known that Moses had
been so inspired, nor have so willingly bowed under Moses as they did, and have
shown themselves so well assured of his Conduct. Nor can the Objection of their
Rebellion at times, invalid our Reason, since it were to say, that they sinned
not against the Spirit of God in themselves, but in Moses only. But because
they did sin against the Holy Ghost in themselves, and that it was the greatest
Ground for Charging of Rebellion against them, we may well conclude that they
had the Spirit, that is, to Conviction.

The Scriptures he brings, are no more to his purpose, then the Story of Toby
and his Dog: For though there was the Gift of Spirit poured out upon Moses,
Joshua, and others, that was not common to the People; yet this proves not that
they were not without a Measure of the Unerring Spirit to teach them what was
acceptable with God; The Difference was not, that Moses, etc. had the Spirit,
and the People had it not, but that he and some others had the Spirit of
Government, and the People had it not. But what is this for him? Does not the
same Eternal Spirit that teaches to Rule, also teach People to be ruled? Nay,
I affirm, that as God did gift several by his Holy Spirit to Govern, and
consequently they had the Spirit; so did he bestow of his Holy Spirit upon the
People, to enable them to live according to the Government, and consequently
they had as truly their Measure of the Holy Unerring Spirit, as had Moses,
Joshua, etc. theirs.

. 7. The Third Scripture he would unconcern me in, is this, And the Inspiration
of the Almighty gives them Understanding. Upon page 11, 12.
this he asks me this Question.

But does this Encourage Men to cast off all External Means, and the Use of
their Reason? Nothing less, says he; Nothing less, say I too: And who can help
it, if he understands me so; But that he may be as base, as base can be, he
asks this Question as the Result of my Argument upon the Place, and never yet
answers it at all: But I cannot help it, if J Faldo will render me a Fool, that
he may show himself Wise, I confess he wants some such Fool for his Work, and
his own Weakness may tempt him to that Dishonesty. Only I would have the Reader
know, that Reason, Memory and Understanding are all useful Servants; we deny
them not a Place in the Heavenly Work, but as Instruments, not Agents; what
should not move of themselves to Religious Worship, but in and by the Motions
of the Holy Spirit of God.

. 8. The next Scripture he thinks I abuse, is this; Whither shall I go from thy
Spirit; or Whither shall I flee from thy Presence? Page 13.
From whence (says he) you can scribble thus. If God's unerring Spirit be so
nigh, and the Sense or it so certain, it must be either to Reprove for Evil
done, or to Inform, Uphold, Lead and Preserve, in reference to all Good: Now,
in which of the two senses it shall be taken, the Presence of God's Eternal
Spirit, and his being the Saints Instructor, Judge, Rule and Guide, are
evidently deduceable from the Words -- rudis indigestaque moles, worse then
ever Bear brought forth her Cubbs, says J. Falde: But this is not all; hear him
further, which with her Licking may be brought into some Shape, but your
Products are so defective, both in Truth, right Reason, and Syntax, and Sense,
that it is no Dis-reputation to your Adversary to be confounded by them. A
notable Excuse for no Answer but Silence, which is always counted Answer enough
by him, that has never another to give. Again.

It is an effectual (but an impudent) Course, to Silence all the World from
Opposing you, by writing such confident confused Nonsense: We may suppose then
that there is such a thing as confused Sense. Yet again

Were it not for the sake of many who conceit your Infallibility, which you are
here so blindly pleading for, I would as soon abandon my Time (Nonsense) to
dispute witha distracted Man in his Raving Fits, as with W. Penn, till he come
better to himself, then I find him in his Pamphlet.

And Reader, Can thou think that my Adversary has taken a fair or probable
Way to bring me to my self again, whose best Arguments are sordid, ill-bred
Names, downright Lies and Slanders? I challenge any Man that can soberly
pretend to Religion, to so much as abet this manner of Proceeding against me,
and the Way I profess: if this were to be Christian, as it is Antichristian;
were I a Turk, I should take great Care I came not within the very Suburbs of
so base a Profession. Where Is J. Faldo's Reading, Learning, Conscience in this
one Passage? I will not so much as attempt the Defense of my Argument; for it
were to say, it needed my Assistance, or that my Adversary had done something to
endanger its Security, who has so pleaded the Sobriety and Truth of it, by an
Opposition that could become none but a Creature as for-lorn of all Honesty as
himself, that it is a Credit to my Cause, almost equal with our Clearness, that
so much Rancour and Ignorance set themselves against it. This is no less Man
then your Vaunting, Struting J. Faldo his own self, who thinks as well of
himself, and deserves as little of it from other Men, as any Person that has
come within my Ken a long time. In short, whether I am out of my Wits, or he
out of all Bounds of good Sense or Manners, shall be left with the Reader to
determine. For my part; if this be the Way he intends to take to confute his
Opposers, he is like to answer himself; And give him his due, he is as good at
it as most Men I know; and it is not to be doubted but he may increase in that
Science.

. 9. But he tells me, that my main Fallacies are these two; First, from an
Infallible Spirit-Teaching. to the Infallibility of the Subjects page 20.
in which the Spirit dwells as a Teacher. Next, from the Spirit's Teaching, to
its Immediate and Peculiar Teaching. If the First be true, without any
Consideration had to the Obedience of the Creature, and his being guided by the
Holy Spirit, I will yield it to him that I am mistaken, though not fall
aciously, that implying a Design to do so, which I had not: And for the Second
I am content to stand by the Charge, not of a Fallacy, but our Faith, and such
as is Defensible both from Scripture and Reason.

For if the Truth of no Argument I have made, nor any Expression that has
fallen from me, does so much as imply his Charge, let him not be angry with me,
that I say, He is one of the basest Perverters among Men: And if that very
Passage by which he hopes to prove this great Deceit of mine, is found mute in
the Case, I hope no Reader will be so unjust as to refuse me the Censure of his
being an Unfair Adversary.

. 10. The first Place he thinks to make for him, is this; Quench not the
Spirit: On which I argued thus; Those to whom he gave the Caution had the
Spirit, if those could not quench it, that had it not, consequently the
primitive Churches were not without an Unerring Spirit. To which he says, but
suppose they had the Spirit, it is a miserable erroneous and weak Conclusion,
that they were Infallible. How far this makes for him, or rather how greatly he
has mistaken me is evident, if it may be considered that there is not one Word
of any Man's being Infallible in all my Argument; only that the primitive
Churches had an Infallible Spirit, not of their own, or from themselves, but
from God; and that they were only so in their Knowledge or Determinations from
the unerring Guidance of God's Spirit; unless they either were without the
Anointing, or that the Anointing was Fallible, both which are contradicted by
the Apostle John in that noted passage, 1. 2. 27. So that my Adversary is
manifestly guilty of that Fault He does with no small Aggravation charge upon
me, viz, That from my Arguing the Certainty of the primitive Churches, having
the Holy Spirit of God to direct them, from the Impossibility of their
Quenching what they had not, he makes me to conclude the Infallibility of the
Churches, whether they were led by it or no; As if I intended to plead the
Infallibility of private Spirits, and not rather of the Holy Spirit of God, and
such only as were conformable to it.

. 11. His other Cavil confirms the Truth of my former Argument, and his own
great Ignorance or Baseness. My words are these, If God sends forth his Spirit
into the Hearts of his Children, then are they not without an Infallible
Spirit, grounded upon that Scripture, Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth
the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts Gal. 4. 6. To which he says; Your
Adversaries have not so little Knowledge of the Spirit of God, as to say the
Spirit of God is Fallible, nor yet so Ignorant of your Spirits and of the
Scripture, as to say, you are Infallible. Now I have two things to desire of
the Ingenuous Reader; First to find me out so much as one Syllable in my
Argument, that infers or concludes the Spirits of such to be Infallible, into
whose Hearts God has shed abroad his Infallible Spirit, whether they are led by
it or not; or that I could intend a concluding of the Spirit of Man Infallible,
because God has given his own unto Men, that is unquestionably so? I am sure
such a Thought never entered my Mind, as fruitful of them as our Adversary may
be; Adversary I may well say, not only because he is one, but that he
acknowledges to me as much, which let him know however, I am not such to him.

The Second thing I have to desire of the Candid Reader, is, that he would
weigh with himself, how Unjust this Man is to me, to infer Infallibility to
Men, from my Affirming it to belong only to the Spirit of God; And as if he
feared, I should not be as Heterodox as his Envy would have me, to conclude on
my Account from what I urged to prove, That God's Children in all Ages had an
Infallible Spirit to Judge, Rule, and Guide them; the Affirmative of the very
Question debated (that is, God's Spirit) That every such one was Infallible in
and from his own private Spirit. Oh Monstrous Perversion! I would impute it to
his Mistake of me, it being far better to be Ignorant than Dishonest, but he
will not let me, who a little below has Impudence enough to write; but we are
NOT IGNORANT, that your Principles make no Difference, or Distinction between
the Spirits of God's People and the Spirit of God; manifestly intending, (not
that they are at variance, for so we should esteem his Charge a piece of
Justice, but) that the Spirit of the Creature and the Spirit of God are but one
Spirit; An Absurdity that never fell from us. How many times has J. Faldo been
guilty in his Discourse of plain Forgery and Dishonesty against us. So certain
as there is a God in Heaven, terrible will his Judgment be in that great Day of
Inquest, if he repent not.

. 12. He makes a great Stir about my Checking the late Socinian, for making
Christ the Head of a Fallible Body, saying If Christ page 21, 22, 23.
be Head to none but the Infallible, Woe to the poor Saints, who have trusted
hitherto they had a Head in Heaven who has Pity on the Ignorant, and those
that are out of the Way; and I am sure Christ is then none of your Head.

We have enough and leave his very Ill Language out. (1.) It is granted to us,
that Christ is Head to a Fallible Body, or at least to Fallible as well as
Infallible. I charge him to give us one Scripture for this, or he is gone, for
all his idle Puns, Shifts, and scoffing Flings at us. (2.) That a Man may be a
Saint, which if we take it strictly is one of that Number the Apostle prayed
the Churches might be of, I mean those which were sanctified throughout, in
Body, Soul and Spirit, I say, that a Man may be such a Saint, and yet be
Fallible or Erring. (3.) That the Saints are Ignorant and out of the Way;
Truly, this Doctrine very well becomes J. Faldo, I had rather it should be his
then mine; I will venture them in the Scale of Truth, without thinking I run an
Hazard in the Matter, especially when, if I err, that hinders not from being a
Saint and Member of Christ: But, J. Faldo, can a Man be a Saint, and yet
Ignorant of so much of God as is requisite to constitute him such? Or can he be
such, and yet out of that Way which renders him a true Saint? It is the first
time that I ever heard in so many words, that a Man might be a Saint, and out
of God's Way. Oh Doctrine of Devils! No Marvel so many Unclean Fowls flock to
this Carcass. What! Saints, and err from God's Way? Strange! Saints, and
ignorant of God's Mind? It seems then, that neither Ignorance, nor Erring from
God's Way, indispose any to be Saints. If this be not a plain Contradiction to
the whole Record of Scripture, none ever was, is, or shall be esteemed such to
the End of the World; How many, how grievous, and how sharp have God's
Complaints been against those who have left the Right Way of the Lord, which
has been the Way of Light and Righteousness, the Just Man's Path through every
Generation? No Wonder that such Doctrines are hoth greedily received and
furiously maintained, that sooth up People in the Belief of such Pernicious
Soul-murdering Doctrines. And the Truth is, and I do boldly affirm it, and that
in the Counsel of the Eternal God, it is our striking so constantly and
earnestly at this and such like Sin-pleasing Principles, that makes the Devil
thus bestir himself in his ready Agents, to raise up, and bespatter us with
such heavy Calumnies, as almost every one produces against us. But we lose not
an Inch of Ground nor a Dram of Courage, our Godly Resolution redoubles, with
our Adversaries On-sets; and whatever may befall us here, as our Hope, so our
Reward is from God, in that high and heavenly Place, which is above the Reach
of Time, and every Assault of our Implacable Adversaries.

. 13. He tells me, He might proceed to my fallacious Arguing from the Spirit's
Teaching indefinitely expressed (that is, by Scripture, Visions, page 24.
Providence, etc. means our Adversary) to its Teaching peculiarly, frequently
in my Pampblet, page 18, 29, etc. that is, to the Spirit's Teaching Men and
Women by its daily and Inward Discoveries, Motions and Operations. But he will
not; the Reason is, he dare not; For if the Spirit be not an Immediate Living
Teacher, and works not as such, to the Information, Conviction and Conversion
of Men to God in these days, let him for Shame relinquish all Pretense to
Gospel, or an Evangelical Dispensation, of which it is the peculiar Promise and
Privilege.

. 14. Though for want of better Language he is pleased to bestow upon this
Godly Proposition the Term of Beetle-headed Saying, page 27.
and affirms, that the Scripture knows nothing of it; For which I may more
reasonably affirm, that He knows nothing of it: For can this Man be so
besotted, as to think, that when a Measure of the Spirit was given to all to
profit with; and that the Children of God were led by the Spirit of God, and
the Spirit that was sent into the Hearts of the Sons of God, and the Anointing
that was in the Saints that was able to teach them all things, was any Measure,
Part or Parcel of the Prophets or Apostles Writings? I cannot yet think him so
Blinded, as Ignorant or Envious as he is. Either these Passages are no
Scripture, or that gross Absurdity must follow.

. 15. But he tells us that we may be mistaken, ever since some of us thought
Paul Hobson' s Mumbling through a Trunck, and an Hole in the page 27.
Wall to be the Voice of the Lord. But were it as true, as it is in many things
false, it shows the Profaneness of that Anabaptist, who dared to take the
Lord's Name in his Mouth, and counterfeit a Solemn Commission to a poor
whimsical Wretch; and as it happened, out of a Spirit of Covetousness and
Inhospitality, for he had no Mind to give him longer Entertainment; so that not
knowing how better to be rid of him then to forge a Commission, wickedly
contrived a Passage into the Chamber where the Man lay, and through a Trunk
profanely utterred a kind of Commission, to go to a certain place, where, I
cannot tell; but I am sure, as the Story goes, out of his House, to whom his
little Victuals had been a Burden; A Practice for the Avarice, Profaneness and
Abuse of it, to be abhorred and detested of all sober Men. And I think the Man
more excusable under his Mistake then Major Hobson, who ventured into so much
Wickedness, and that with Design to bring him into it. It Is true, that such a
Man there was, that he went to Major Hobsons House, that he dealt so wickedly
by the Man to be rid of him, that the Man had been among us; but as his
Practice showed him to be none of us, so was not any of his Imaginations
countenanced by us, but sharply rebuked; and therefore that part of J. Faldo's
Reflection a Lie: Yet, since he has gotten this Story by the End, I will see
how much better grounded J. Faldo would be upon his Principles against a
Quaker, should he be so Impious as to put the same profane Abuse upon him.
Suppose J. Faldo, either by a Trunk, or Hole through a Wall, or one of the new
invented Trumpets, that carry a Voice a Mile, should have as far as Words go, a
very solemn Commission to go preach the Gospel in any other Place then Barnet
(where I hear, he now lives) within this Isle, or some more remote Part of the
World, and that not only once or twice, but many times joined with Threats and
Promises; I will suppose his Inclinations will lie at home, unless more be to
be gotten (an Infallible Ground of Motion with many of his Tribe) But I would
know of him, which Way, or upon what Foot he would Receive or Reject such a
Commission? The Scripture makes no mention of any such thing in Particular; in
General it will not reach it, because this is no other Gospel, that he should
be required to preach, then that which he pretends to be according to
Scripture. I say, with what would he relish, savor, or try this Voice? Would
he reject it, because the Scripture did not particularly own it? There is the
same Reason why he should embrace it, because it does not particularly deny it.
How will he do then? Why perhaps he will go, because there is no General in
Scripture that withstands it. But how does he know, that so many good Words in
themselves were spoken from God, and not to deceive, tempt or abuse him? It Is
true, the Scripture has general Denials to False Spirits, and general
Testimonies to the Motions of the True One, but still here is but a Begging of
the Question; for how shall I know that the Voice or Spirit be True or False?
It is not Unscriptural, Unreasonable, nor Improbable. Alas for John Faldo! Have
all his Preaching, Praying, Writing, etc. no better Foundation then Hearsay,
Imitation, strong Fancy and external Sense? Can he not savor and relish
Spirits as well as Words? If not, he may truly be styled a Man of Words, but
void of that Spirit which tryes Spirits, and gives right Discerning to all that
believe in it, and are led by it; of those things that may concern them. I
might say much upon this Theme, but let this suffice to detect the Weak
Foundation of J. Faldo's Faith, Knowledge and Practice; and that such as he,
though pretendedly 2 or 3 degrees more refined then the present Protestants,
are miserably apostatized from the First Revolters from Romes Idolatries, who
asserted, none could understand the Scriptures themselves, much less benefit by
them, who had not the same Spirit that gave them forth; consequently the
Spirit, and not the Scriptures were the Principal Cause of Right Knowledge, and
Rule for our very Understanding of them. And truly though J. Faldo would have
the World think he both understands the Quakers Principles very well, and has
refuted them very clearly; yet whether he will give me leave or no, I will make
him speak the Language of the Quakers passing well in this particular of the
Spirits being the Judge, Rule and Guide of Faith, Worship and Conversation, the
thing aimed at in that First Part of my Spirit of Truth Vindicated, by him so
much quarreled at, perverted and scurrilously abused, or else I greatly
mistake his Mind. And, which will be much to my Defense, he must likewise have
done so himself. Hear him.

. 16. But Mr. Penn, do you deal fairly and honestly with your Adversaries to
imply in your Question that we deny the Spirit of God to be a page 15.
proper Rule of Faith, Guide of Life, Judge of Truth? You know that we own it
to be such; and that it does both IN THE CONSCIENCE and by the Scripture,
Creation and Providence perform such Acts, etc. and is to such Purposes, and
that of Right; What can we say more? Has he not strangly mis-understood us?
Again, Only we deny that the Spirit always performs these Acts without the Use
of the Scripture or any External Means.

Truly and so do we; For we daily enjoy the Benefit both of God's Spirit by the
Scripture, and public Worship, as Means. If this be the Grindstone my Nose is
to be held at, and by not mentioning of which (as he falsely says of me) I
abuse and trifle him and my unwary Reader, I am contented to abide here while I
live, as my Discourse at large upon the Scriptures must needs have informed
those who have read it. But I am of the Mind that J. Faldo will find it too
hot for him, and I am assured that so much Concession overturnes him for ever,
as to his present Basis; For that he should oppose my Discourse that intended
nothing more then to prove God's Spirit to be the Great Rule to Believers, and
yet himself, after much Opposition, to give it away, and accord as far as any
Man need to do, that would be of one Mind with us in the Point, savours of
great Weakness and Inadvertency; not, that he now speaks Truth, but that he
should so eager ly oppose it before.

. 17. There is one Passage more, which being to this Purpose, I will mention;
We value not the Sense (of the Scripture) for the Print's page 30.
sake, but the Print for the Sense sake, and the Blessings that attend that Way
of Conveying the holy and revealed Will of God, and so much as to correct your
Vapor.

This he speaks upon my Words, that the Intimate of a Prince needs not so much
an Edict because in Print, as because of his living and more immediate Touches
he may have had from his Prince. Now let any tell me if the Quakers have put
the Scriptures into any degree below that, wherein J. Faldo himself has placed
them. Do the Quakers say that true Christians have the Spirit; so says J.
Faldo too: Do the Quakers affirm that the Spirit of God is a Judge, Rule and
Guide and speaks forth the Mind of God into the very Conscience; Does J. Faldo
come one Jot behind them? But do they say, that it is the Sense of the Truth
declared of in the Scripture that puts a Value upon the Declaration? and that
written or printed Words are valued for the Matters sake they treat of, rather
then their part. 3. page 30.
own? yea, that the Scripture of it self can do little? It is J. Faldo's own
Doctrine. part. 1. page 108.
Very well! But does J. Faldo say, that God does not always speak in the
Conscience immediately by his Spirit, but sometimes by the Spirit through the
Use of Means, as the Scriptures, Preaching, Praying, Creator, Providence, etc.
and that by such ways he reaches into the Consciences of Men? so say the
Quakers too. Would the Man but be certain to himself, we needed no other
Advocate; But his Ignorance of our Principles, or Prejudice to mis-represent
them makes him at once oppose us, and contradict himself.

And now we are come to the Conclusion of the Matter, which he says, is, to
show me my self in the Glass of Sense, if I think my Eyes worth an Using.
Indeed I do, and am willing to behold all he has to show me^: Reader, hear him
soberly.

. 18. Foul Epithites, as Knave, Puppy, Fool, Rascal, Loggerhead, Cheat; This
you page 30.
say, was the Language of your Adversaries small Crier, but as you call it, of a
loathsome Sent. It seems J. Faldo's Nose calls it no such thing; A long
experienced Chaplin, a kind of a Religious Gentleman Usher, should have learned
better Manners.

So, says he, You blow it on the Author of the Book within five Lines. --
Tryers of other Men's Spirits, who have (it should be give) so little Proof of
the Knowledge of their own, as to be wanting in the very first Principles of
Cavility. This is not fair (says J. Faldo) to charge him with another Faults.

It is some Justice to us, that he will account such Language to a Quaker a
Fault. But I would have him know, that I never intended any such thing as be
basely infers, that is, to make H. Hedworth in the least guilty of usually
calling G. Fox those scurrilous Names; For though I think him Envious enough
against G. F. in particular, as appears by another sort of Language; and the
Quakers in general, yet I believe him to have more Civility and Regard to his
Way, whatsoever he thinks of me, then to dirt it with any thing so gross. But
for as much as T. Firman, the Author of that foul Language was his great
Intimate and Associate, that they have in common the same Creed, are jointly
interested against us, thereby earnestly endeavoring to promote their beloved
Socinianism or Bidleism in the World, and Men acted not by two distinct
Spirits, though one might lanch forth more extravagantly then the other; And
lastly that H. H. had shown other sorts of Rudeness and Injustice to us in
general, and many by Name in his Spirit of the Quarters tried. I did say, These
Men, and continue there still, the Method of their Proceed then and since,
especially that restless Calumniator Tho. Firman, being such as must needs
offend every Good Man; Knave and Fool being more in his Mouth still, then*
becomes any Man, that is not more of both then such he very frequently calls
so. Some think it a Shame, that so ill a Tongue should go unrebuk'd of those
whose Principles and Interest give them the Liberty of doing it in a way, that
if they know the Man, might be more effectual then all the Moderation and
Reason that can easily be shown to him. But says John Faldo in his, or their
Defense (for they love to claw one another) Compare this Civility of yours with
your own.

To all this I say, He obtrudes an arrant Lie upon our very Senses; Wretched
Scribler -- How Idle, how Frivolous, and how very Troublesome is he with his
Ridiculous Remarks! Very well; And is this the great Blow threatened? I fall not
from one tittle of it: It Is all true, all his due, I could not well have spoken
more plain and pertinent Words: No Knave. Puppy, Fool, Rascal, Logger-head,
Cheat, etc. No Impostor, False-Prophet, Liars, Trapans, and what not did we
accost them with. What! Must not we fling off the Dirt they cast upon us? Shall
it be accounted well-Phrasing to call us all to naught, and our earnest Refuse
of such base Epithites, and severe Censure of such Scurrility be reputed
Railing? Oh Unreasonable Men! Ought People therefore to be killed, because they
cry Murder? or lose their Reputation, because they are Zealous to maintain it?
But it was notably done of J. Faldo to provide for himself, whose Ill Languague
he thought might meet with as sharp Rebukes, as that of our other Enemies had
done. Nor indeed will we let slip this Opportunity of Collecting and Publishing
to the World, after what manner he has used us, throughout his Discourse, and
my self in particular, who never had any thing to do with him in all my Life.
If he has not said worse of us, with whom we have had so little, if any thing
at all, to do, then he pretends I have against those Men that gave such
Provocation, let me fall in the good Opinion of the Reader, and the Just
Witness in his Conscience condemn me; but if it appear, that this unprovoked
Person is far more guilty, then he can possibly render us by vilifying
Expressions against our Persons and Principles: I hope, and expect so much
Justice from the Reader, as that the Innocent may go free, and the Guilty only
be Condemned. That J. Faldo has not shown himself that Man of Moderation,
Civility or Religion he pretends himself to be, and which I hear, some few have
hitherto reputed, let the following Faithful and True Collection of but some
of his many Unchristian Reflections, Names and Epithites upon our Faith and
Principles be due weighed by the Impartial Reader.

. 19. Penn furnished with Forehead and Tales beyond measure] I am assured
that is a Lie. I think, my Forehead and Tales are 3. Part p. 2.
like other Men's; if not, I have this Satisfaction, they are unlike J. Faldo's.

His Post is the Quakers conceited Strong-hold of the Infallible Guidance of
the Spirit of God] A Post, his Post can never stand long by, and such Hold, as
all his Assaults can never enter or force; And we are glad it is ours indeed:
for as above all People, we need it most; so are we the only Sufferers in
Defense thereof: Satan's Bulwarks shall be broken down before it.

. 20. In debating of which he waves and tosses like a Man in a confused trouble
some Dream; page 3.
I thought meet to give some Account of his Forces, considering him to be a Man
of Noise, and no small People, the Quakers Cause, in their own Esteem.

I toss not beyond the Bounds of Scripture and Truth; my Arguments were short
and plain, and what I writ was in Conscience and Seriousness, little meriting
such rough and flashy Reflection from any Person pretending to seriousness, and
least of all, one that I never had to do with in my Life. Dreams I have none,
they lie on J. Faldo's side; He that calls Christ, Lord, and not by the Holy
Ghost; He that says, he is his Redeemer, Savior, etc. and knows not the
Internal Operation of his saving Power, nor that Virtue and Life to quicken to
God which comes therefrom, dreams of all these things, and that is J. Faldo's
Condition, who scoffs at Internal Knowledge without External Means, though to
his own Consusion he sometime reads another Lecture. I am no Man of Noise,
further then your Noise makes me. The Profession of the Way I am in, I came to
through Sorrow for Sin, Circumcision from the World, Desires after God, and
Life that is Everlasting; and ever since God has enabled me to his Service,
(and here I hope to stand while I live) My Life, Spirit, Power and Principle
wars against all yours that are embattell'd against us; and no Quarter I
proclaim, in the Name of the Lord, to that wicked Spirit that acts you all
against us, though to you Peace and Salvation, if ye Repent. Do you leave off
your Envious Endeavors against us, or else blame your selves, and not us, for
appearing on the Stage against us.

. 21. Deformed Confidence; neither Logic, nor Honesty: Certainly, if he had
not turned Quaker, and in that Fall put all out of Joint, he could not likely
after such Good Nursing, have been thus lamentably cripled in his Intellects.
Rankness of Quakerism. The latter Part of the Question, which expresses the
Administration of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is, PLAYING AT BLIND MAN's
BUFF -- your Guilt, etc. Baseness, confused Thicket of Impertinencies -- if
your Conscience have any Eyes; Infatuated; I have showed your Vanity, and made
your Folly a Spectacle to the World; you talk at a miserable lame Rate -- worse
then ever Bear brought forth her Cubbs -- confident confused Nonsense; I would
as soon abandon my Time to Dispute with a distracted Man in his Raving Fits, as
with W. Penn, till he come better to himself, etc. -- your pitiful Scribbling
(yet wretched Scribbler was my hardest word to H: Hedworth, he has observed
against me) not worth while to trace such a Trifler in all his Vagaries --
intaugled Bottom, Beetle-headed Saying, Audacious Lines -- he will daub his
Adversary, per fas, per nefas, Right or Wrong, and he that shall say the
Contrary, you will chastize him with Sarcasms as keen as a Badger's Teeth. The
next Book you write, let the Title be, The Spirit of Babel, from whence Babble
in English.

This, Reader, is a short Account of some of that unhandsom Entertainment I, a
Stranger to J. Faldo, have received at his hands. May my Soul never come within
his Habitation; Prejudice, Envy and Cruelty lodge with him; Vanity, Frothiness
and Incivility are like Veins through his Book, and serve to convey what Life
it has to such as please themselves with that base kind of Satyr. Strange that
it should be reputed so Criminal by J. Faldo, to check my Adversary for Abusing
me and my Friends by Name, when yet he exceeds in his Reflections upon us, and
that without any such Occasion given! But, if we were condemnable, sure I am,
it belongs not to J. Faldo to fling the first Stone. I am very willing to leave
it with all sober Readers, our Circumstances considered, which of us ought to
be accounted the Unfair Adversary. Oh, when will it fall to my Share to engage
a sober modest Adversary! But why do I wish for that, since such are our
Friends. Well, it will greatly become me to be contented with my Lot; Faith I
have, these things will not last long; and Patience will give to see the End of
that Belief. A little foul Weather, and our Enemies are for their Creeks again;
It Is natural with Insects to sting, and Frogs to croak in Summer; and therefore
it is, that our Best Actions are Evil in the Sight of these carping Zoilus's If
a Man be one of them, then a Saint, though a Devil: if gone from them, then a
Devil, though a Saint. Such is his Farewell to me, who in three Lines tells me,
he is a little pleasant, he cannot sweat about Cracking of Nuts, and yet that
he has had some Heart-akes for me. Miserable Man! Does Levity and Seriousness
go together? Froth and Sorrow keep Company? What would any Man give for such
Heart-akes, that bring true ones upon a serious Mind? But what are his
Heart-akes? Why, he bewails, that a Man of my Hopes should be thus left of God
(he fears for Pride and Giddiness) as to be made a Pillar of Salt, etc. It
seems then that there were once Hopes: But to what? To a Party. I know you very
well, you will few of you stand by all that I could say and prove of some of
you: I would advise such Opposers to be quiet, enjoy their Toleration, a
Kindness as great as they deserve, and mind their own Concerns, and now their
Hands are tied against the Powers, not employ them upon our Shoulders. But why
should God leave me, a Sufferer, from 14 Years of Age for Conscience sake (he
fears) for Pride and Giddiness? But the Cause of my leaving you, was that of
my once frequenting you, I mean Conscience; when some I then dissented from,
had as hard Names to give, for that Nonconformity. But the Truth is, when the
King came First in, at what time you were a little dejected, there was
something more Serious and Tender then ordinary revived among some of you,
which did begin to gather out of the National Pollution, and sit for a further
thing, but taking up a Rest, growing hard, gaping after Changes, looking back
like Lot's Wife, upon your Old Sodom, for-sworn Government, Kings and
Bishops-Lands, Rich Benefices, full and stately Livings, many of you grew dry
again, were turned to Pillars of Salt; my Soul wandered for Rest, and at last
found it, in that Tender, Holy, Pure Principle of Life and Righteousness, which
had been wont from a Youth to attend me, mollify my Heart, allay my
Affections, and preserve me out of gross Pollutions, which whilst such of you
in some Measure kept, that are now manifestly gone from it, there was another
Kind of Spirit that ruled in you; And it is to this First Love and Works we
desire your Return, such of you whose Day is not utterly past over your Head:
And what any shall think of me, as this uncharitable Adversary has expressed
himself, as that I should seek Credit, a Party, etc. I heed not, for what I am
at this Day I am by, through, and to God Almighty the Righteous Lord of Heaven
and Earth alone. It is basely done of any Man, that is a Professor, who
pretends to some Acquaintance with tender Conscience, and those Trials that
attend it, to censure another Man's Change and Afflictions for Counterfeit and
mere Design. Oh! The Righteous God will reckon with such Uncharitable,
Disingenuous, Perverse Spirits in the Day that hasteneth to Try all, and then
will he recompense this ungodly Censurer of an Innocent Stranger to him, who,
were I upon my Trial at the Bar of his own Party, there be of them enough to
give Evidence of another Spirit then that of vain Glory or Self; For where none
of these things have induced, but Sharpeness and Severities have met me, there
has been a Faithful Answering of Convictions, to some of their knowledge, who I
believe, to be better Men then to refuse me a full Testimonial, if sought for.
But as I shall not think my self so deeply engaged or my Reputation so shaken
in the Minds of Thousands, as to need or desire it by any Power or Force J.
Faldo can attacque me with; so shall I leave the Concern of God's Truth, the
Innocence of his People in General, and my own in Particular, to his Holy
Wisdom and Providence, who, we are well satisfied, will plead our Cause in the
Consciences of Ten Thousands to the Shame and utter Confusion of all our
Obstinate Adversaries.

A KEY,
Opening a Way to every Common Understanding, whereby to discern the Difference
betwixt the Quakers Faith, Doctrine and Practice, and the Pervertions and
Traducings of their several Adversaries.
Reader,
THere is not any thing more Indiscreet then for People to deny what they do
not understand. It has been our Unhappiness far more, then all that our
Adversaries have been able to say against us, that hitherto we remain unknown
by those who yet stick not to condemn us. I will confess, that our Principles,
as disguised, and misrepresented in the World, have given Offense, or rather
those who have so besmeared them; nor indeed can we be displeased that People
should refuse them Entertainment, under those frightfull Vizzards some make
them to wear: But it will be the Business of this little Key, to explain the
Difficulty, and give Entrance into so clear and plain an Understanding of the
Quakers Principles, from the Priests Perversions, as I doubt not, but with
Impartial Inquirers it may be an Ending of much of that Controversy, which is
now on foot between us, and our Opposers.

Priest. THe Quakers hold, That the Natural Light in the Conscience of every
Man in the World is sufficient to Save all that follow it; and so overthrow
Salvation by Christ.


Quaker. This is false; For our Belief and Assertion is, that Christ, who is
the Word, that was with God, and was God, and is so forever, has enlightened
every Man that comes into the World, with his own Light, as he is that true
Light; or such a Light, as there is no other to be compared to him, which is
the Meaning of the Emphasis, True; and that such as follow the Reproofs,
Convictions and Leadings of that Light with which he enlightens the
Understandings and Consciences of Men, shall not walk in Darkness, but have the
Light of Life; which Life is a State of Salvation, for which End he was given:
I will give him for a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and for my Salvation to
the Ends of the Earth. So that we assert the Light of Christ Sufficient; not a
Natural outward Light, which may be properly so called, in opposition to
Spiritual; nor yet that bare understanding Man has as a Rational Creature.


Priest. The Quakers hold the Light within them is God, Christ, and the Holy
Spirit: so that every Quaker has whole God, Christ, and Spirit in him; which is
gross Blasphemy.


Quaker. This is also a Mistake of our Belief. We never said, That every
Illumination in the Hearts of Men, was whole God, Christ, or the Spirit,
whereby to be guilty of the gross and blasphemous Absurdity they would fasten
on us: But that God, who is Light, or Christ, who is Light, the quickening
Spirit, and God over all, blessed for ever, has enlightened Mankind with a
saving Measure of Light. So that the Illumination is from God, or Christ; but
not therefore whole God, or Christ: There are no such harsh and Un-scriptural
Words in our Writings; it is only a frightfull Perversion of our Enemies, to
bring a Scandal upon our Faith: yet in a sense the Scriptures say, I in them,
and they in me: Christ in us, the Hope of Glory. Unless Christ be in you, ye
are Reprobates. I travel again a second time, until Christ be formed in you. If
they who denied his Coming in the Flesh, though high professing Jews, were
Antichrists; What must they be reputed, who as stiffly disown his Spiritual
Coming, Formation and Dominion in the Soul? Certainly, though called
Christians, yet no whit less Antichrists, then the obstinate Jews of old.


Priest. By the Quakers Doctrine, every Man must be saved; for every Man is
savingly enlightened.


Quaker. I deny that: For though the Light, or Grace of God, has, and does
more or less appear to all Men, and that it brings Salvation, to as many as are
taught by it to deny Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, and
Righteously, and God likely in this present evil World; yet it no way follows,
that Men must obey, and learn so to do, whether they will or not. God tenders
saving Light or Grace to all; he strives and pleads with all; but if they will
not hearken, his Spirit, Grace or Light is clear of their Blood. In short,
Though Men are Lighted or Visited with a saving Light or Grace; yet we never
Concluded, nor is rightly Concludable, that such Men must necessarily be saved,
whether they obey or Rebel.


Priest. By the Quakers Light or Spirit, they may be moved to Murder, Adultery,
Treason, Theft, or any such like Wickedness.


Quaker. This never was our Doctrine; For herein know we the Spirit of God, and
Motions of it, from the Spirit of this World, and its Fruits, that it condemns
all Ungodliness, and moves and inclines to Purity, Mercy, Righteousness, which
are of God: We deny and abominate that Ranting Spirit, that would charge the
Spirit of God with their Unholy Liberty; God's Spirit makes free from Sin, not
to Sin: Neither can we distinguish, as they wickedly do between the Act, and
the Evil of it; wherefore we say, that as the Tree is known, and denominated
from the Fruit, so the Spirits by their Motions, and Inclinations: and the
Spirit of God never did incline to Evil. So we renounce that Construction of
their esteeming Evil, no Evil, when any pretend to be lead to it by God's
Spirit; for that is not the Way and Method of his Spirit, that is Pure and Holy
forever.


Priest. The Quakers must be all Infallible and Perfect, if they have such a
Light.


Quaker. This also is a great Abuse of our true Meaning. We say, the Principle
is Pure, Perfect, Unerrable in it self; but we never did assert our selves such
merely, because it was in us; by no means: but that all, who are lead by it,
are so far Perfect, and Infallible, and no Jot further. Who can lay down a more
independent Doctrine upon Self, and hourly depending upon the Grace or Gift of
God? Let us not be mistaken, nor suffer for these things.


Priest. The Quakers deny the Scriptures; for they deny them to be the Word of
God.


Quaker. We own the Scriptures as they own themselves, a Declaration of those
things most truly believed, given forth in all Ages by the Inspiration of the
Holy Spirit; That they are profitable for Reading, for Exhortation, for Reproof
in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfectly furnished: They are the
Form of sound Words: We believe in them, read them, and it is the Work we have
to do in this World, and the Reason why we are so separated from it, and the
earnest Desire of our Souls to Almighty God, that we may witness the Fulfilling
of them; That God's will may be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: But to call
them the Word of God, which they never did themselves, but which they
peculiarly denominate Christ by, in Reverence to Christ alone, and no Slight to
them, do we, as in Duty and Reason bound, attribute that Title to him only.


Priest. They deny them to be any Means whereby to resist Temptation.


Quaker. This is a very Aspersion. True it is that we deny the Scriptures of
themselves to be sufficient to resist Temptation; But that we should deny them
to be any Means whereby to do it, when we allow our own Writings may be such,
is either great Ignorance or Malice. God has, does, and will make Use of them
for Reproof, Comfort and Edification.


Priest. The Quakers assert the Spirit of God to be the Immediate Teacher, and
that there is no other Means now to be used.


Quaker. We never spoak such Language, but perceive the Subtilty of the Devil
in this thing as in others; For since he cannot hinder the Exaltation of the
Spirit above all visible Instruments, and the Necessity of its Motions and
Operations in the Hearts of Men, and the great Suitableness of it to the
Gospel. Administration, he would spoil us by Overdoing, that is, by inferring
beyond that our Assertion will allow: For we never denied Means, but to this
Day from the Beginning we have been in the Use of them; But then they are such
Means, as are used in the Life and Power of God, and not in, and from Man's
mere Wit, Will, or Imitation; the thing we strike at. Strange! because we deny
all false Means, or Means not used in the Leadings of God's Power and Spirit;
that therefore we must deny all Means, however rightly employed. Behold the
Injustice of our Enemies! Wherefore be it known unto all, that Evangelical
Means and Order we love and keep; For we Assemble Our-selves together to
Worship God, where we Pray in the Motion of the Spirit, and Prophecy One by
One as any thing is revealed; Nor are we without Spiritual Songs, making Melody
in our Hearts to God our Redeemer.


Priest. The Quakers deny the two Great Ordinances of the Gospel; Baptism and
the Supper.


Quaker. What ever is a Gospel-Ordinance we own and practice. We know no such
Language in the Scriptures, as in the Calumny of our Adversary. It Is true,
those two Practices are found, but that is no Institution: That they were then
proper we believe; but that they were at most but Figures, and Signs you
acknowledge (that are called Protestants) Now prove to us that there ought to
be any Figures or Signs under the Gospel-Administration, when Christ, who is
the Substance, is come; It Is to overthrow the whole Dispensation, and to make
his Coming of none Effect. If it be said; But they were used after his Coming
and Ascension too? I answer, So were many Jewish Ceremonies, not easily
abolished. If any say, But Christ bid that one should be done till he came.
Very well, and he that said so, told his Disciples, that He would come to them;
Some should not taste of Death till they saw him come; And he that was then
with them should be in them: And he would drink no more of the Fruit of the
Vine, till he drank it New; that is, the New Wine that was to be put in the new
Bottel, which is the Wine of the Kingdom, as he expresses it in the same
place, which Kingdom also is within, Luke 17. 20. He was and is the Heavenly
Bread, that they had not yet known, nor his Flesh and his Blood, as they were
to know it. So that though Christ was come to end all Signs; yet, till he was
known to be the Substance to the Soul, as the Great Bread of Life from Heaven,
Signs were useful to show forth, and keep in hand, especially the People of
that Day, whose Religion was attended with a Multitude of the like Types,
Shaddows and Signs of the One Good Thing, and Substance of all: Hence it is,
that we don't deny them, that is too hard a Word; but truly witnessing the very
thing they signified to be come, we leave them off, as fulfilled, and
henceforth have but One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, One Bread, and but One
Cup of Blessings, which is the New Wine of the Kingdom.


Priest. The Quakers deny Christ's Transactions at Jerusalem, and the Shedding
of his Blood to be Beneficial unto them: It is the Light within only they
expect to be saved by.


Quaker. This is a wicked Suggestion against us. We do say, That the Appearance
of that Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the Quickening Spirit, in that Holy
Body prepared of the Father for him, was for the Salvation of the World, who
had fain in the First; That whatever he then did, both Living and Dying had a
great Influence for Good upon all that then believed, and has still for all
that now believe in him, as he manifests himself to us by his Light in the
Conscience. For we do affirm that to come to that, is the readiest, nay, the
only Right Way to come to true Faith in Christ as he then appeared, and to
receive any Benefit by him; And it is not another then that Blessed Light,
Power, Wisdom and Eternal Righteousness who then appeared, by whom we have
received any true Spiritual Benefit. How then can our ascribing particular
Salvation in this Age, to him, who thus now appears to our Souls, render him no
Savior in that, or invalidate his then Appearance, whose Doctrine pierced,
whose Life preached, whose Miracles astonished, whose Blood atton'd, and whose
Death and Resurrection confirmed his then Manifestation, to be no less then God
(who is Light) manifested in the Flesh.


Priest. The Quakers set up Works, and Meriting by Works, like the Papists;
Whereby Faith in Christ is laid aside.


Quaker. We say, That True Faith in Christ cannot be without Works, no more
then a Body can live without a Spirit; Nay, by the Comparison, if they were
separable, Works being compared to the Spirit, would have the better. The very
Believing of any is an Act of the Mind, and therefore a Work to God; and no
sooner is that Faith begotten, but it falls to Working which is both the Nature
and End of it: Nor do we say, that our very best Works, proceeding from True
Faith it self, can merit; No, nor Faith joined with them: All that Man is
capable of Believing or Performing, can never merit; There can be no Proportion
(as there must be in Merit) between the best Faith, and Works of three score
and ten, and Eternal Felicity. Wherefore all that Man can do, even with the
Assistance of the Holy Spirit, can never so merit, but that Right Faith and
Good Works (which will follow it) may, and do obtain that blessed Immortality,
it pleases Almighty God to give and privilege the Sons of Men with, who
perform that necessary Condition and that we groundedly and therefore boldly
affirm. So that we deny all Merit from the best of Works, especially by such as
the Papists are wont to conceive Meritorious: But as we on the one Hand do
stiffly deny them, so neither can we join with that lazy Faith which works not.
Let not Good Works make Men Papists because they make Men Christians; I am
sure, Believing and not Working, and conceiving a Salvation from Wrath, where
there is no Salvation from Sin, the Cause of it, is no whit less un-scriptural,
and abundantly more Pernicious and Damnable. Blessed is He that hears the Word
of God and does it; The Blessing is to the Doer.


Priest. They acknowledge no Resurrection, nor Rewards to come.


Quaker. In this also are we greatly abused. We deny not the Resurrection* but
are cautious in expressing the Manner. Are People angry with us for not
Believing or Asserting what is Hidden, and they know not themselves? THOU FOOL
is to the Inquirer: We shall be contented with that Body God will please to
give us; and think it to be both our Duty and Wisdom to acquiesce in that.

For Eternal Rewards, we not only own them, but above all People have the
greatest Reason so to do; for otherwise, who so Miserable? Do we inherit the
Reproach and Suffering of all that have separated from time to time? That is;
Are the Outcrys that have been against the Protestants by the Papists, and
theirs against Puritans, Brownists, and other Separatists fallen upon us? And
shall we hold Principles inconsistent with an Eternal Recompense of Reward? By
no means: It is our Faith; and the contrary both a Malicious and Foolish
Suggestion of our Adversaries.


J. Faldo's KEY Proved Defective.
I Was not willing J. Faldo's Key should go wholly Unconsider'd; The greatest
Part of which I here publicly acknowledge to have done us such Right, that if
his Explanation of many of our Words be not True. I am not ashamed to pronounce
that the Scriptures must be False; so agreeable to, and consonant with Scripture
has he spoken on our behalf: And not only with Scripture, but that Sense of it
too, which the Best, Wisest and most Learned both of the Fathers, and first
Reformers have unanimously had; and on which Foundation, in some measure, both
Puritans and Brownists began their Building, Low, Meek, Spiritual and Plain, as
is yet well remembered. But how grossly he has misrepresented us in other Parts,
and that the True may not give Credit to the False with any, I will observe a
few, with what Brevity I may.

J. Faldo. page 62. ASSEMBLING; says he, Meeting in Spirit.

W. Penn. This is not Ingenuous; For with such as know us not, nor our
Practice, it insinuates a Denial of Public Worship, which we ever owned, and
hope, shall to the End; It is well known who have most shrunk from that
Testimony: And if J. Faldo means, that they do not Worship in Spirit, because
he makes it Criminal in us, we have Reason to say, He and They are no
Gospel-Worshippers: For People must either worship in, or out of God's Spirit;
If out of his Spirit, then no Worship in Spirit and Truth, but the Device of
their own Hearts; If in the Spirit, then the Quakers assemble as they should
do, and J. Faldo is to be rebuked for little better then an Upstart Scoffer at
Assembling in Spirit: The once avowed Principle of the Ancient Brownists, now
called Independents.

J. F. page 69. THE WILL OF THE FLESH, says he, All that is chosen by Man,
though he be thereby disposed by the Will of God revealed in the Scripture.

W. P. This is false; Many things may be, and are daily chosen by Man, that is
not in the Will of the Flesh, nor by his own Will; much less, when any should
be disposed thereto by the Will of God revealed in the Scripture: An Abominable
Untruth, and so Notorious, that I need say no more; only Challenge him to
produce any of us in Proof of his Exposition, if he can; otherwise he has
Slandered us and our Principles: For the Will of the Flesh is that, which is
quite contrary to God, and inconsistant with the Good of the Creature.

J. F. page 69. STATE OF GLORY, says he, The State of Peace and Joy resulting
from the Witness of the Light within in this Life.

W. P. It is true, That Glory is revealed, from Faith to Faith, in this Life:
But to stint the State of Glory to the Peace and Joy of this Life only, may
justify his wrong Opinion of us, that we deny Rewards to come; but it cuts off
from our steadfast Faith in an Everlasting Mansion of Glory and Blessedness,
which (from the Light within, to all who obey it) shall spring as a River, and
flow as an Inexhaustable Fountain: And J. Faldo shall never know true Peace
another way; That is the Word of the Lord to him.

J. F. page 70. PREACHING FOR HIRE, HIRELINGS, says he, to have a Provision for
the Outward Man, as a Maintenance for Preaching, though no Bargain be made;
yea, though such who receive it, would Preach, if they had never a Penny Reward
in this World from those they Preach to.

W. P. This is done like the Fox indeed. He would suggest, because we deny
Hirelings, that is, Bargainers, Men that make it their Trade, that have no
other, will seek no other, and yet preach, perhaps but once a Week, if then;
and bestow the Six Days, that might be otherwise employed, to Study for that
Day, instead of Preaching most of those Days, that therefore we are such
Cruel, Hard-hearted People, that is, such as Preach, and are Poor, either
through a numerous Family, low Estate, many Losses, or a continual Attendance,
from Day to Day upon the Ministry they have received of God, we will not
minister to their Necessities; for such as so receive any Assistance are
Hirelings, and we should contribute to make them so. No, no, J. Faldo, the
Quakers are no such People; but for all that, they can, do, and I will renounce
Thee, and such as Thou art, for Hirelings: First, in that you have not received
the Living Heavenly Gift of the Ministry: And secondly, because you do
generally Bargain, will not preach without it; and can basely leave an Honester
People, for a better Allowance: This is Notorious; therefore stop thy Mouth.

J. F. page 72. THE LUST, says he, all Desires that accord not to the Light
within, and proceed not from thence.

W. P. What accords not with the Light within, is not of God; and so far we own
his Explanation: but to say, that all Desires about such ordinary things, as
are left to the common Understanding, Prudence, and Liberty of Man to do, or
not to do, are Lust, if they come not from the immediate Impulse of the Light
within, is his own Notion, and not the Quakers: We do not subject that heavenly
Principle to, nor concern it with every Inferior, and Frivolous thing belonging
to this World.

J. F. page 75. CHRIST, THE OFFERING, says he, the Light within.

W. P. This is no Quakers Expression; and unless we are to answer for J.
Faldo's Mistakes, we are unconcerned in it; Only his Malice is manifest, for he
would by this insinuate, that we deny Christ to be an Offering, as in the
Flesh, and the Body then offered up, to be concerned in our Belief of the
Offering: But I do declare it, to have been an holy Offering, and such an one
too, as was to be once for all: Therefore let none receive his Abuse of us for
our Faith.

J. F. page 79. MEN-PLEASERS, says he, They who comply with Men, though in
things not only Lawful, but also to Edification.

W. P. We Charge this upon him, as an Arrant Lie. We are so far from reputing
such Men-pleasers, that we account them Sober, Courteous, and Commendable
Persons: provided, he means by Lawful, and to Edification, what we do;
otherwise he is not Honest, to obtrude Matters in Question for our Meanings.

J. F. page 81. RAVENING BRAIN, says he, Studying and following after Divine
Knowledge.

W. P. This is not fair; The Word, studying, and following, we own in a sense.
Studying, that is, Meditating: Following, that is, Obeying the Light and Spirit
of God: But because we deny the Dark and Heathenish Metaphysics, the prolix
and abstruse Niceties of the Schoolmen, and affirm, There is no way to become
versed in the Things of God, but by being an humble Student, and diligent
Disciple in the School of Christ, that is, to be taught of his Light, Grace, or
holy Spirit; Therefore all right Study, and all right Ways to come to the
Knowledge of Divine Things, we must be charged with the Denial of: Disingenuous
Man!

J. F. page 86. TRADITIONS OF MEN, that is, says he, The Scripture, or Written
Word.

W. P. Show us that in any Book, that is subscribed by an acknowledged Quaker.
Tradition is a Delivering any thing down From one Generation to another; and as
such, the word is Inoffensive: but to say, They are the Traditions of Men, in
the sense Christ reproved the Pharisaical Religion, God forbid; I had rather my
Tongue were cut out of my Head. O Base Man! To abuse an innocent People thus
grossly. The Scripture is a Godly Tradition, or Writing, given forth by
Inspiration, and preserved through Generations, which we read, believe, and
desire to fulfill through the Power of God.

J. F. page 63, 82, 83, 87. BABYLON; Shaddows, Spirit of Antichrist, Outward
Court; that is, says he, all Ordinances, Worship, Faith, Obedience that have
any Form, though Christ's and Gospel Forms, being (with them) the Worship of
Heathens, not of Christians.

W. P. This Key opens into as many Forgeries as ever I knew one Key do in my
Life. Certainly, were not this Man left of God for his Enmity, he could never
run into such extravagant Dishonesty. What! Belie us in the Sight of all?
Indeed, it turns upon himself: For Visible Worship, the Form of Godliness,
Faith and Obedience to every Ordinance of God we own, profess, and practice
daily and publicly through the Power of our God; in whose Name we renounce his
Constructions, and trample upon all his Malice, black and enraged as it is.

J. F. page 89. THE VAIL IS OVER THEM, that is, says J. Faldo, the Belief of
the Man Christ Jesus, which was of our Nature to be the Christ, etc.

W. P. Let this be the Last (though several more might be observed) which at
this time shall be considered, in which we shall see that J. Faldo has done
like himself, and the Man we have all along taken him to be. The Vail is over
them, it is a Scripture Phrase, 2 Cor. 3. 15. used by the Apostle to express
the Darkness and Ignorance that to that time remained over the Understanding of
the Jews in reading the Law, and this Vail he makes us to interpret after this
gross and absurd manner, namely. That the Vail is the Man Christ. Wicked Man!
Did ever Quaker so irreverently express himself? Give us his Name, or tell us
in what Book we may find it. What greater Malice could thou have shown, then
thus unjustly to pervert the Scripture in our Name, belying and abusing both?
As if, because Christ's Flesh is called a Vail, and the Ignorance of the Jews a
Vail, that therefore the Quakers must of Necessity mean by Vail in the first
sense, Vail in the second sense; as if the Way to have the Vail rent, were to
deny the Man Christ Jesus; which were to make Christ rend and destroy himself,
who, as the Quickening Spirit, alone rends all Vails of the Hearts of
Unbelievers. Nor indeed have I met with one Term absurd, or un-intelligible,
unless the Scripture use such; therefore it is an Untruth to style them absurd,
and a Contradiction in him to offer at Explaining any thing, that is truly
un-intelligible.

And that all the World may behold the Spirit of J. Faldo, how Ill he governs
himself against the Quakers (which makes not a little for them) let his
following Epithetes and Expressions be well weighed. I think they are so naked
they want no Key; and glad we are he found no such Subjects from us to treat
upon in his. Horrid Imposture; Ditch of Grossest Delusion; Subverting
Christianity; their feigned Christ; Folly, Madness; It began in Blasphemies
against Christ; Gratifying Pride, Idleness, Giddiness; In Professors Profane;
Vanity; Folly; Nonsense; Error. Whether it smell more of the Fox or the Goose.
Imposture; Babble; Blockish Person. QUAKERISM ENTERED THE WORLD AS IF SATAN
BROKE LOOSE, and POSSESSIONS BY SATAN WERE TO MAKE WAY AND FIT SOULS FOR THE
QUAKERS SPIRITS; O the Hell-Dark Expressions of the Quakers Teachers! What
bitter Curses and Execrations. Dismal Howling; Horrible Roaring. Blasphemy;
Wretch; Vain Fictions; Quakers Glowworm; Deck their Idol; Real Nonsense; But
it is Pity not to lash a little; Idiots; Stark Blind; Steel Hard; Your Crooked,
Unholy Principles. Their Light grows wiser and wiser. Opium of Quakerism, The
Quakers Divine Spirit Dumb. Refreshments at Quakers Meetings, so there is at
Puppet-Plays. Impudent Foreheads; Non-such Ignorance; Proud, Dreaming,
Intolerable Notions; Ignorance and Delusion. Outstrip all in the Crooked Way.
Blasphemers of the Lord of Life and Glory. Surely God has given them up for
their Pride, Giddiness or Idle Ignorance, and that in Justice; and the Devil
has blinded their Minds with a Witness; Horrible Abomination; Gross and Dark
Conceits; The Rankness of Quakerism.

This Reader is a Taste of the Spirit of the Man, and since he contends for the
Scripture to be his Rule, I would fain have the Chapter and Verse that will
abet this Proceed. Is this J. Faldo's Religion, Gospel, Preaching, Praying,
Learning, Civility, or whatever may be reputed Sober and Commendable? Away,
away for Shame! It would stumble a Turk to hear such Language from one that
calls himself a Christian and a Minister too.

But is it after so great Abuse, so manifest Injury done us and the Truth too,
that thou dare say, as thou do, I have the Witness in my Conscience (who
have been thus long Under-valuing it for a Glowworm, and Idol, a poor
Creature, Uncertain, Fallible, Errable, and what not) that I have not in this
Key in any measure abused, or wronged the Quakers.

Had thou been half so Moral, as thou pretendest to be Christian, I doubt
not, but to have seen more Truth and Moderation. To belie any, is a great Evil;
but to do it with a show of Religion, to call God's Witness, to palliate such
Injustice, is the height of Blasphemy against God, and Wrong to thy Neighbor.
Never more abuse Religion with a Pretense to it, nor for Shame profess
Christianity, that art Inferior to a thousand Heathens, who rather then not
compass our Dis-grace, will endeavor it per fac, per nefas, Right or Wrong: I
am sure the Witness of God in thy own Conscience never suggested this
Unrighteous Proceed; though wonder we must, that one, who has said so many
detracting things of him, should now appeal to him. Certainly, if the Witness
of God be J. Faldo's Rule and Judge, as his own Appeal makes him, the Quakers
are the less to be blamed for Believing in him, and desiring to be Lead by him;
but we are well assured, that a Spirit of deep Prejudice has animated him to,
and through this Work, and not the Holy Witness of God, as both the Style and
Matter have abundantly testified. My Desire is; that before the Evil one
precipitate him into further Enmity against us, by a serious Retirement of Mind
to the Holy Witness of God, that gives a good Understanding, and brings just
Reproof for every Unrighteous Thought, Word, and Deed. He may come to a Sight
of his present Undertaking to be contrary to the Mind of God, and know true
Repentance for it, and find Mercy of the Lord God: Which I heartily desire, and
it is my return to him for all his hard Speeches uttered by him either against
us in general, or my self (though unknown to him) in particular.

God forbid, that I should Justify (him) I will not leave my Innocence, till I
Die. Job. 27. 5.
Who am a Lover of all Men; for I seek the Salvation of my Enemies, William
Penn.

THE END.

