THE Guide Mistaken, AND Temporizing rebuked: OR, A brief Reply to Jonathan
Clapham's Book, entitled, A Guide to the True Religion. IN WHICH His Religion
is Confuted. Hypocrisy is Detected. Aspersions are Reprehended. Contradictions
are Compared.


BY W. P. A Friend to the True Religion.

If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.

Mat. 15. 14. London, Printed in the Year, 1668.

To the READER.
AS nothing more imports the sons of men, than a judicious search after the
certain knowledge of that Eternal Truth, in which alone ability is placed to
free from those sins and entanglements the lustful eye and wanton mind have
naturally subjected them unto, and into which they are so deeply intricated; so
can there nothing prove more dangerous, than an implicit reception of such
Principles as daily steal out of the Press; Some are so very imbecile, as that
they crave a support from the Ingenuity of their Friends to vindicate their
Cause; whilst others better skilled, cunningly can insinuate their Sentiments
(however defective, being truly examined) under the plausibility of language,
and resemblance of reason: but though I am willing to acknowledge no Age more
shattered and in pieces about Religious concernments, than this we live in
(some splitting on the Rocks of Atheism, whilst others creep into the shallow
Creeks of bare Profession) yet with great confidence I can impeach Man as the
ground of his own distracted and miserable estate; for such has been and is
the curious and inquisitive mind of Man, that as he would be wise above what is
written, so is he most impatient in his search; and overlooking that
sufficiency given him of God, to act in his divine and humane capacity, is
either busily forming out of his brainsick fancies, rather what he would have
God, Man, and Religion to be, than what they really are; or else, being born
under some generally received apprehensions and Articles of Faith, Worship and
Discipline, (...) so entirely hurried away with the variety of earthly
pleasures, or diverted by fears, that they can find no leisure to enquire how
far they bear any proportion with sound Reason and true Religion: Both these so
much experimented evils, are the undeniable occasion of that inhumane
entertainment such have met withal, whom God at any time has sent to testify
against the invented ways, words, works and worships of this degenerated
world; looking on it as an intolerable affront, that not only they should be
exploded for Heretics, but that the Faith of their Zealous Ancestors should
come in question, it may be by Reformers of no better rank than poor
Mechanics; forgetting it was the Channel, through which God in all Ages has
been pleased to convey the streams of Divine Knowledge; and 'twas indeed most
congruous with God's Omnipotence, to let the lofty worldlings know, how able he
was by mean and contemptible Instruments to effect the confusion of them and
their Inventions.

This never was more expressly verified, than in the progress made by that
despised-Generation of Pilgrims, called Quakers, who notwithstanding all that
opposition of Powers Ecclesiastical and Civil, and their many Stratagems
imbattell'd to scatter and destroy them, are yet a People; and with no other
weapons, than a holy, inoffensive and suffering conversation, have valiantly
warred through the many Armies of their Enemies, and in the Wisdom of him that
called them forth, been able to undermine and circumvent their most
Machiavilian Conspiracies; which leads me to give thee an account of my thus
appearing in thy view: I can assure thee it is no forwardness to gain the
reputation of a Disputant, since that vain glory my Principle prohibits, and
should most willingly have left this for another, did not necessity lay it
strictly on me.

Amongst the many pevish Adversaries I have met with, who have ventured to
oppose and slander that Innocent People, I scarce know one who has more made it
his concern than my Antagonist; for besides what either this treats of under my
examination, or another anciently printed, under the protection of a large
Dedicatory Epistle to O. Cromwell, the acquaintance I have had with him by paper
and personal conference, as well as the punctual information I have received
concerning his practice through all our Revolutions (which I may term a
Touchstone for Integrity) will by no means dispense with my passing by this
Guide unanimadverted: for truly, Reader, I cannot but in sincerity assure thee,
that a Religious pity will not have me silent, since when I narrowly observe
the passages of his life, and then remark the very drift of his discourse
(abundantly confused, as will appear in this short Reply) I really find it is
to palliate his own nakedness, and if possible, not only to confirm all
Temporizers like himself, but also by his little insinuations of pretended
Christian Tenderness, to beguile the chaste minds of others into a defilement
of a cringing and conforming spirit: all which strongly excites me to present
thee with a Confutation of his Religion, a Reprehension of his Aspersions, a
Detection of his Hypocrisy, and Comparison of his Contradictions; that being
once unmasked, he may appear in all his Imperfections, and his Disguise never
prove injurious unto any.

CHAP. I. A Confutation of his Religion.
Sect. 1.
ALthough I easily shall confess Religion to be man's chiefest Concernment, and
that his eternal bliss does indispensibly depend upon the sound belief and
constant practice of the true one; yet when I retrospect upon that time I once
employed in a conversation with Books, and call to mind the excellent Defense
of Origin; and Apology of Tertullian on the behalf of those primitive
Christians, and also the Learning, Gravity and Reason of Du Plessy, Grotius,
Amiraldus, etc. who in their time were truly honorable, and Modern Writers on
the same subject, I cannot but acknowledge my self surpised, to find a
discourse so raw and undigested as Jonath. Clapham's, ventring abroad with no
less title than A Guide to the true Religion; thereby implying, either the
insufficiency of what already has been writ, or self-conceitedness, that the
abilities of none can better claim so great an office: whilst in very truth he
has but shown himself a Novice in the task he has undertook; which will but
draw the eyes of all those Infidels and Heretics (against whom he does so
zealously contend) from perusing that which carries with it more of Reason for
their Confutation and Convincement, to encounter him, a match of much less
consequence: so that his ignorance becomes their refuge, and his proofless
accusations, gross contradictions, and often tautologies, strong grounds for a
confirmation in their respective persuasions: and if that which he terms
Christian Religion had no better Champion than he seems to be, nor more Zeal to
suffer whatever comes, than Reason to defend it, he may as well turn Jew, Turk
or Heathen; as manifestly he has Presbyterian, Independent, Episcopal: but
lest I may be censured for condemning that in him which I allow in my self,
viz. bare Assertions without a proof, I shall descend to the examining of those
particulars, which may most deserve our consideration.

Sect. 2.
In his Epistle to the Reader, which must not slip my observation, he much
bewails the present state of the Churches of Christ in these Epist. p. 1.
Kingdoms, who for many years (he says) have been distracted: but I Will refer
it to thy judgment, Reader, whether this new Guide be little better, who dares
to call distracted people, Christian Churches, or Christ's Churches distracted:
Paul bore another record, when he describes the Church of Christ without spot,
wrinkle or blemish: but whilst he would seem to allow many dissenting parties
the title of Christian Churches, it must be remembered he else would have
excluded himself from being other than an Infidel, who as occasion served, has
been of four; yet how palpable a contradiction this will be, not only to the
Scripture, but the design of his whole Discourse, may appear upon the perusal
of its latter part, where he not only advises all to acquiesce in the present
constitution of the Church of England, but seems to lay it as a charge upon the
rest, pleading strongly (as he thinks) for their compliance, not considering if
they equally deserve the name of Christian, they consequently are independent;
and since he does allow the one to be no more Christian than the others, why
any should impose upon, or enjoin obedience from its Sister-Churches, I cannot
find any thing in sound Reason or Scripture to warrant it: to mend, or rather
mar the matter, he in so many words, calls those very Churches he owned for
Christian in one page, a reproach to the Christian Religion, and infamous
through the world in the very next; but how Epist. p. 2.
infamous his expression is, I beseech thee, Reader, to observe, that days
expose such foolish and irreverent terms to public view, calling what is
Christian, infamous, or rather what is infamous, Christian; methinks he should
better have consulted his own reputation, since having been a Minister to most
of them, his share has not been small in their reproach and infamy.

He marches on without fear, wit or wisdom, telling us, the intendment of his
Book, is to help against those evils, and to direct those who are apt to
miscarry through occasion of diversity of opinions, and Epist. p. 4.
ways found amongst us. But how improper this Magisterial Guide is to direct
three Nations which of these many ways they ought to walk in, will appear, if
we consider the wavering of his own mind, who as it consisted with his
interest, has been always ready to welcome every new Power with a leading
compliance; and if none would more concern themselves for his present opinion,
than he has for his past, his inconstancy would not deceive them in his
espousing the next Constitution that may come.

And that I may not be mistaken in my conjectures of the occasion of this
Treatise, read but a little further and thou will find a confirmation in his
own words, who does not only account those the best Christians, himself, which
have through all those great Revolutions Epist. p. 6, 7.
which have been amongst us, have exercised their Zeal for the maintaining the
fundamental Doctrines of the Gospel, and Practice and Power of Godliness, even
to a degree of Compliance; but has confidence to give it as his judgment, that
such shall appear the most approved and indicious Christians unto all. I shall
say little more in this place, than refer him to such Episcopalians as stood
faithful to their Churches constitution, during his compliance with Presbyter,
Independent, etc. and to the resentments of those parties, now he is become
Prelatical. And thus much for his Preface.

Sect. 3.
His Porch I cannot find to hold the least proportion or harmony with almost
any part of his confused building; for he tells us, the business of Religion is
the grand concernment that all of us are sent Book, p. 1.
into the world to mind, and therefore God has in the framing of man's nature
laid so deep an impression thereof in us, that there is no Nation so barbarous
and inhumane but does place this amongst the greatest matters they judge
themselves to be interessed in. It Is not my disposition to cavil at terms, and
therefore shall avoid the occasion he presents me, and rather take his matter
as expressed.

If God Eternal in the creation of Man, and infusion of his soul, gave him that
capacity (for what else can that impression signify) whereby he might know and
comprehend so much of that Divinity by which he was made, as to live in a due
and holy conformity to his divine pleasure manifested therein; what means his
many Exclamations against the Quakers Light, as natural and insufficient, since
his very words denominate^ this of God? Nor can he (I should think) so much
forget his Catechism, as not to remember and acknowledge the least Ray of that
Immense Fullness of glorious Light supernatural and perfect; besides, it were to
represent the All-wise most indiscreet, in communicating unto Man a proportion
of his Spirit to no purpose; if then, it will become us better to esteem, both
of what he has impressed, and of the end for which he did bestow that heavenly
favor; what remains, but those Inconveniences which have, do, and will attend
the world, rise from the over-looking its dictates, and giddily following the
blind imaginations and groundless conjectures of we know not who, transferred
to us from preceding generations: Nor will it serve the turn of any to reply,
That whatever sufficiency this might once have had, it becomes now invalid by
transgression: For though it will be easily granted that Man's Rebellion
against the Divine Capacity or Light, has plunged him into all the dark and
confused practices, with which the world is so universally infected, and
becomes thereby so entirely leavened into the nature of the wicked-one (not
minding the solid and weighty things of God, which most concern his eternal
peace, but rather sporting away his precious time in the variety of delights,
exposed to the enjoyment of his sense) yet to affirm that its virtue is lost,
or thereby can be rendered more insufficient to guide Man in all his
performances, than when first bestowed upon him, is to say, that because a lewd
Son will not take his Fathers good advice, therefore it was not the Son's
rebellion, but the insufficiency of the Father's counsel; or, because a Servant
his not improved the Talent given him by his Lord, but concealed it in a
napkin, therefore 'twas no Talent, or through the carelessness and idle practice
of the Servant, his Lord's Talent lost the possibility of improvement; I shall
confess his negligence might more indispose his mind to an industrious
employing of his Stock; but that it should thereby lose its virtue, nature, and
capacity of increase, can by no means be admitted, because incongruous both to
Scripture and good Reason -- He that tells man his thoughts, and the purpose of
his heart, this is the Lord of Hosts. But I shall see how this and what follows
will consist.

Sect. 4.
Although the beginning of his second page is manifestly opposite to his own
Assertions, and consequently but a further proof of my former Section; yet
since I am confident he never meant it so, it may be requisite to present thee,
Reader, with a Confutation in his own words: But as it is a thing all do
profess themselves interessed Page 2.
in, so there is nothing in all the world men are at greater difference about;
some taking up one Religion, some another, as pleases themselves best, one
serving Baal, another Dagon, some the Sun, others the Moon See p. 8, 14, 15.
or Stars, etc. If he would place the variety of Religions on the insufficiency
of that instinct or impression mentioned in his first page, and so imply a
necessity of something farther to act Man in that which may be pleasing unto
God, then will it manifestly follow, that the capacity given of God could not
discern nor rightly distinguish betwixt that Eternal, Living and Omnipotent
God, from whence it came, and Baal, Dagon, Sun, Moon or Stars; which very gross
absurdity I hope none will have the confidence to assert: But further, to
repute the authority of this impression, pray let these words of his have but
the Readers consideration (viz.) -- some of one Religion, some of another, as
pleases themselves best. Can a more Universal Answer be returned, or Catholic
Reason rendered, to evince the verity of the Quakers Principle to the
intelligible World? for what has been the original of those great Debates,
Contentions and Religious Duels through the World, but SELF? which being still
impatient to be taught, and nothing less abitious to be wise, has ever been
the ground of those Distractions, and Womb that has brought forth those
monstrous and misshapen Births, so common amongst the sons of men; and, as the
fallible spirit of a man, or selfish part could not produce a nature different
from its own, (which ever has been subject to fluctuation and incertainty) so
has their cross and various apprehensions in the zealous prosecution of them,
been like the impetuous billows of a raging Sea, that have dashed each against
the other to their irrecoverable foundring in the Ocean of eternal misery;
whereas if Mankind in that stilness, and reverent patience becoming a creature,
had but waited on the great Creator of all things, according to that impression
and measure of his Spirit bestowed upon him, to incline and guide him in the
well-pleasing path of Righteousness, he doubtless had received such infallible
instructions, as should have freed him from those otherwise inextricable
disquisitions, and knotty intanglements his dark inventions and self-exalted
opinions have perplexed the World withal.

Sect. 5.
In the same page he goes on thus; How greatly then does it behove every one to
make a wise choice of that God he intends to serve, and of that Tautol. ^ page
2, 4, 5, 6, 12, 13, 14, 15 16, 18, 22
Religion he means to profess in the world, and to live and die in it. In page
5. he thus tautologizes (a fault I find him very often guilty of, with many
other gross improprieties whilst he condemns the Quakers for illiterate) to
choose delibratly what God we will serve, or that Religion we will profess, and
then to labor to be established therein so as by no storms of temptations we
be removed. -- Will any God serve? a very large and Libertine admonition: but
he suddenly reprehends himself (the following lines of the second page flatly
withstanding that latitude of serving any God) for says he, first choose the
true God; and the rather because man's eternal happiness or misery depends
thereon: -- alas for him that has elected any God, or has by this giddy Guides
encouragement chosen what Religion he would profess, with a fixed resolution
that no storms should remove him: What contradiction is here? Can he be
esteemed a wise Counselor that advises to an undertaking, which by his own
acknowledgment shall never have a prosperous success? Surely his Fee was very
ill deserved; and much better were it to have no Religion, but live insensible
of all, than to become a very Zealot for a false one: nor is this the only
contradiction of the like nature, as the Chapter of his Contradictions will
more largely manifest.

Sect. 6.
I am now come to take a view of his Proposition, or Basis, on which his whole
Discourse is grounded, viz. That it is a great point of wisdom, to make a right
choice of that Religion he means to take up, and profess in the world, that he
intends to live and dye in, and to venture his eternal Salvation upon.

Since Paul who very well knew the mind of God, has left it as the Spirit's
record in the Scriptures, That the deep things of God knows no man, but the
Spirit of God; and looking on the true Religion to be what he intends by these
following expressions, [The Mysteries of God's Kingdom; Heavenly things; Hidden
Wisdom; Mat. 13. 11. 1 Cor. 2. 7. C^. 4. 1. Job. 3. 12. Heb. 9. 23 1 Cor 2. 7
Tit. 2. 13. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Col. 3. 1. Romans 14. 17.
Redemption from all Iniquity; All things to become new; To be dead with Christ
to the World, and risen with him to seek the things that are above; in short,
By the revelation of the eternal Spirit, to fathom the deep, and behold the
mysterious things of God, so as thereby to be translated from Darkness, into
his most glorious Kingdom of Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Spirit]
I can by no means subscribe my assent to this Guide's Proposition, That Man
with his tallest wisdom, distinct from that Light, or pure capacity, the
Quakers affirm God has enlightened and invested all men with, is able to wade
securely into the depths of Divine Mysteries, nor allow him that Arbitrium of
working out in his own strength, time and mediums, the knowledge of the true
Religion; much less can I concur with his esteeming any wise, in rightly
choosing what Religion they would embrace, since it does not limit him to what
is true, in which the choice can only be called right: but rather seems to give
him the liberty of choosing where he will, in which no election ought to be
judged true or wise. And lest I may be here censured by the Author of this
Discourse under my examination, let him peruse not only his Argument, but his
14th Page, where he affirms a necessity for a man to be of some Religion; which
by the following matter is manifest, as well as from the words themselves, the
exceeding space given in the search and espousing of a Religion; yet however
necessary he has made it there, and what liberty soever he has granted, it is
his advice in the 26th Page, to do it wisely, lest you be deluded, there being
such diversities of Religion, and so many false ways in the world, you had
need have your eyes about you, erring herein will not stand with the safety of
your souls, eternal happiness or misery depends upon it: which argues strongly,
(or else I know not what Argument means) against the choice being right in any
Religion, and that it only can be so in embracing the true one, let him but
peruse his 17th page, and tell me if he does not find this amongst the many
other contradictions that the Opinion or Dream, that every man may be saved in
his own Religion, if he be true to it, is more becoming Turks than Christians.
I must confess I p. 17.
have not met of late in any Author, with such palpable confusion, and can
assure thee, Reader, I do avoid, for brevity's sake, the recital of much more I
might instance in. What Superstructure it is possible for the best Artists to
erect, on a Foundation so imperfect and unsound, he need be no exact
Architecturist to determine: but notwithstanding his mistake in his way to the
true Religion, he may prove Guide sufficient to his many following errors and
defects.

Sect. 7.
I shall a little insist upon his second Chapter, the head is this: Showing
wherein the wise choosing ones Religion lys, and acts concurring Page 6.
thereunto. He needs must play the crack-Philosopher and imperfectly has
managed his little distinctions in the pedantick phrase of the canting Priests
and Accademists: He tells us, first, what Election is in general, and then
divides the right-chusing of Religion into three Acts, the Intellect
precedingly discerning, the nature of the thing that by the will is chosen: And
what in the 7th page he has defined, in the 8th he instances these following
words to confirm his definition, viz. Man being a Religious Creature, by
Whatever moves to worship God is God's Spirit.
the common instinct of his natural conscience, is moved strongly to worship a
Deity, as we see in all the Nations of the Earth, much more when he is stirred
up by a divine instinct.

Answ. It has been the unhappiness of many Ages, as it is of this, to darken
and confound matters of Religion (mostly) with terms, not more affected and
difficult than very often impertinent, of which this Guide is not a little
guilty, as must be obvious to such as will examine his most frivolous and
contratradictory distinction betwixt Natural and Divine. Not that I shall not
allow them to be terms proper in their place, but very improper where he puts
them: Let me persuade thee, Reader, to observe impartially the Confusion; I
have to do with one who characters himself a Christian, and not a professed
disciple of the Heathen Aristotle; and I should therefore think it may become
me best (as it had him) to use such a sound form of words as are warranted by,
and laid down in the Scriptures of Truth: and that he with all others may know
how far the Quakers are on all occasions ready to bring their Principles to be
tried by that which the Spirit there declares, I shall expose both his and
theirs to the judgment of them, and leave thee, Reader, to determine which
holds the greatest harmony therewith; although the contradiction of his own
words might have been confutation evident enough.

Religion is by James, a Prophet of the most high God, thus defined: Pure
Religion and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, Jam 1. 28.
to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world. Also, to believe, as Paul has it, in thy heart, Romans
10. 9.
and confess with thy tongue, in, and to the Lord Jesus. Or, as he has it in
another place, to wit, A subjection and obedience to that Spirit, Tit. 1. 11,
12.
Light or Grace manifested from God to all men, teaching them that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, they should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world. Taking these passages for the clear and complete
signification of that term Religion (as I shall till some more ample be
produced) and not the whimsical conjectures of men from their wresting of the
Scriptures, patcht up into a formal Creed by their eclipst understandings, as
this Guide must not deny, if he will own Scripture; then will it consequently
follow, that no man can be truly styled Religious, from a natural instinct or
cause: for since the one and true Religion, or Primitive, is divine, Religious
or the Relative must necessarily participate of the same Divine Nature; and if
by Natural Conscience, he means Reason abstractively, the Relative cannot
amount to more than Rational; for as what is simply Animal cannot generate
what is Rational, so is it altogegether impossible: for what is but simply
Rational to produce what is Spiritual: nor can I understand how he will secure
himself from gross impertinency in nominating Man a Religious creature from a
natural instinct; or to assert any thing but what is divine, can act Man to
worship a Divinity; How far he may, to save himself, extend the signification
of natural, I know not; but if he means it in the sense Paul often used it,
methinks the very letter of the Scripture should have barred his unsuitable
expression; for, says that Apostle, The natural man receives not the things
of the Spirit of God, neither can he, because they are spiritually discerned.
But if he will take Natura (...), pro generatione viventium sive animalium, id
est, nativitate: or, if he rather will accept it in the sense of him they call
Divine Seneca, that it imports a Deity, or Divine Reason sown in all parts of
the world, he would do well to let us know; for the incongruity of his
Assertion with good sense lies very palpable: He further confirms his opinion
of the universality of that (by him called Natural) Instinct, with his
Parenthesis, as we see in all Nations of the Earth, much more when he is
further stirred up by a Divine Instinct. I must confess to the universality of
it; but how disguised it is through the various trims of men's Inventions, and
forefathers idle Traditions, a person never so little spritualiz'd may see,
and easily discry the notorious foppery of most professions; the cause of which
universal darkness has been the Nations sacrificing their judgments to the
implicit Faith of their deceitful Priests; who have been and are a Monopoly to
the Souls and Bodies of the whole Creation. And what he ignorantly calls the
father stirring of a divine instinct, is not a difference from the former in
respect of its nature or quality, but measure or degree. In this only can
theunderstanding soundly judge, and the will rightly elect.


I have the longer insisted on this particular, because most material, as well
to detect his weakness and grand inability to the work he forwardly has
undertaken, as from his own expressions to elucidate and maintain the Quakers
Principles to be Orthodox: although it was against them he mainly did design
his Book; but with what success the end will manifest. I shall just hint upon
his three branches into which he has split the first act of his Election. (1)
He advises to take a particular view of the Principal Doctrines p. 10.
and Misteryes of Faith, and duty of Godliness taught in the Scriptures; but
does not tell us by what infallible Expositor we ought to peruse them, that
might unfold those Mysteries he speaks of (which imply a dubious, intricate and
obscure sense) does he mean the Instinct beforementioned? I fear he is scarce
so Orthodox, or will he have us give our own constructions as things present
themselves to our natural understanding, or must we walk by the Crutches of
some Commentators; for if he will at last send all to the Scriptures, or can
propose no better Expedient to reconcile these Breaches, and heal those
Religious Jars, than that which through men's blindness (and for want of the
infallible Spirit which guides all in the Truth that receive it, and are
subjected thereunto) has been the very rise and ground of them, the world will
little be beholding to this Guide.

His second Branch advises to discern the verity and certainty of those
Doctrines that he may venture his soul upon them, as if 'twere P. 11.
possible a man could take a particular view of the principal Doctrines and
Duty of Godliness, and not discern both Certainty and Verity.

His third is like his second, that a man must know the excellency thereof, as
if he could view those Mysteries, behold hoth, and yet not see their
excellency. Thus Priest-like has he spoild paper, in saying the same thing in
differing expressions (as in the case of the hourglass) that he may hold out.

Sect. 8.
Act the second, he goes on thus; After the understanding does thus P. 11.
present the true Religion before us in the certainty, glory and excellency of
it, then the next act is for the will to elect, it is that I am resolved to
profess whatever disgraces, reproaches, losses, persecutions I may meet with:
But besides his putting man upon Religion, instigating him to run and strive of
himself (A state the Scriptures declare shall never enter, because unlawful)
and points him not to such a Guide as can infallibly direct unto the true
Religion, he has been so very bad an example for constancy, that he and his
fellow-Temporizers have stumbled more into a sneaking Conformity, and downright
Atheism, than all their Prayers, Preaching, Printing, will ever regain without
a miracle on both.

His third act is little more than a repetition of the former (a crime he is
very guilty of, as my marginal in some place does observe.)

Sect. 9.
His third Chapter chiefly consists of considerations, to evidence P. 14.
it a principal point of wisdom for a man to make a right choice of that
Religion he would profess: his first is drawn from the necessity of a man's
being of some Religion: indeed I cannot understand wherefore he should be so
often earnest in pressing men to be of some Religion, who plainly tells them in
several other places there is no Salvation out of the true one; unless he thinks
the employing their Talent to the service and adoration of a false god, be more
excusable then to worship none: but to enforce this consideration, he does the
Quakers the advantage of farther instancing a proof for them, and against
himself: says he, in the very framing of the Nature of P. 15.
Man there are such Pinciples of Religion engraven on him that cannot be razed
out, that have taught the very Heathens to worship a Deity -- Come judge
impartial Reader, betwixt this Guide and the so much condemned Quakers, who has
here repeated what he had before acknowledged, with this material addition,
that cannot be razed out, I would gladly be informed, whether, if he allows the
Eternal God to have created and formed man in body, soul and spirit, that it be
not reasonable to conclude no other could invest Man with Religious Principles,
and a propensity to worship a Deity? and can it be admitted by any sober
person, the Principle God has bestowed on man should be natural, and yet
religious; imperfect, and yet the gift of God? surely there can be none so
dimsighted as not to discern these very gross contradictions: for if God has
impressed on man such a Religious Principle, to teach him to adore a Deity (which
must be himself, or else it would not answer the end for which it was given)
what is it less than to declare that God has distributed unto every man such a
proportion of his pure Spirit, and measure of his Grace, as might enable him in
thought, word and deed to perform that good, that acceptable and perfect will
of God? and that the ground of those divisions in Religion, fallibility in
Judgment, cruelty in Disposition, and all other A bominations that like a
deluge overflow the World, is not the Insufficiency of that Divine Principle,
but from neglecting and disregarding the Righteous Dictates and Instructions of
it: And let him not deny it to be the same it was, who bears this Testimony
that it cannot be razed out, so deeply (is it his opinion, as well as truth)
has the infinitely divine Sculpter engraven the characters of his eternal Law on
the hearts of all Nations, that no time or alteration amongst men can possibly
obliterate or deface it.

His second Consideration is from the many Religions which are in Page 16
the World, as Heathenism, Mahometanism, Judaism and Christianity: But in his
last he sums up the many Sects and Persuasions that commonly are known therein:
he has divided them into such as differ doctrinally or circumstantially; and
those which err fundamentally: The first are Lutherans, Calvinists, Arminians,
Anabaptists, Episcoparians, Presbyterians, Independents, etc. to whom P. 18.
he boldly allots Salvation. But how far his etc. may concern us, he in a few
lines after particularly lets us understand, wherein he has not more expressed
his Cunning than his Cowardice; for as he is willing to allow all those
Persuasions to be Christian, who are most likely to have the Civil Power in
their hands, (that come any of those seven, with his large etc. he hopes to
secure himself Priest of Wramplingam, without being condemned for temporizing)
so does he manifest himself exceeding bold, in fighting such for Infidels and
Heretics, as either cannot or will not practice external violence on those
Powers that protect such Caterpillars); and that he may the better insinuate,
he ventures at this juncture of his plenty to own his quondam Brethren in their
adversity, calling them all Children of the same Father, dressed up in different
habits; but that his Wardrobe was better furnished than the rest is evident,
from his variety and change, yet more penurious, for that he never wore a Coat,
he has not turned.

His last consideration I rather call the sequel of the former, Because, says
he, if one should happen of the true Religion, he would P. 18.
never be true unto it, unless he took it upon such a Right Choice as before
was spoken of.

-- What Choice of Religion he has made, or what Arguments he has used to
confirm it, I shall refer unto thee, Reader: But fain I would entreat this
Guide once to be serious with himself, and ask his heart if ever it had any?
and whether it has not through all Revolutions discovered it self very
deceitful and unsound? Alas, why will he thus nakedly expose his Ignorance and
Hypocrisy to public censure, unless he would confess? stiling a Conformity to
the Constitution of the Church of England, a Right Choice of Religion, methinks
it had been rather his discretion to be silent, contenting himself with his
Stipendium or Hire, and hiding his Inabilities in the Rusticity of his own
Parish; for he must be a very Child that does not see his weakness and
temerity, that comes abroad reeling and interfering through every Chapter of
his Treatise; nor is his impudence less condemnable, who takes upon him to
encourage others to Fidelity, that has himself ever relinquished that
persuasion which has sunk under the growing power of a new opinion; and this is
so notorious, that though I have reserved the relation of his carriage for
another place, yet I could not let these expressions slip my Animadversions.

Sect. 10.
The business of his fourth Chapter is to invalidate the Religions professed by
Heathens, Turks and Jews; and upon better grounds to p 29, 30 31, 32.
extol the Christian. It Is far from me to justify the opinions or practices of
those acknowledged Infidels, but I must also say, If the Christian Religion had
no better Defendants, and its Adversaries no stronger Opponents than this Guide
with his proofless Affirmations, it would have as little reason to owe him its
acknowledgments, as the others their il-will and prejudice: -- And one thing
let me tell him, the false Christian (for such is he who takes upon him that
profession, and lives not the holy life of Him whose Name he bears) is more
intolerable than Heathens, Turks, or Jews, and whilst the idle gormandizing
Priests of England run away with above fifteen hundred thousand pounds a year,
under pretense of being God's Ministers, (who never sent them, but are
Preachers of their own chaffie inventions, not having known his power, nor seen
his shape) the equal conversation of those Infidels should make both Priests
and People blush; and in the day that God Almighty shall judge the works of men
by Jesus Christ, it shall be found more tolerable for them to enter into rest,
than the outsidewasht Christian: but, left I may be censured by thee, Reader,
for too severe, let me beseech thee to enquire throughout the story of the
world, where any kind of Religion has been, or is established by authority, and
thou will doubtless find upon a diligent search, that the Peoples judgments
have ever been and are fast chained in the Priests Inquisition, and that no
sort of people have been so universally through ages the very bane of soul and
body to the universe, as that abominable Tribe, for whom the Theater of God's
most dreadful Vengeance is reserved to act their eternal Tragedy upon.

Sect. 11.
The scope of his fifth Chapter is to direct People how to choose the safest way
amongst the variety of Sects that are to be found in Christendom (so called):
But before I shall examine the force and verity of his Fundamentals, I must
take this passage along with me, which is a contradiction both to Scripture and
other parts of his own discourse: -- Know (says he) that notwithstanding these
diversities of Sects and variety of Opinions which are found amongst
Christians, from which they are not privileged, as neither are those Page 34
other three Religions, Heathenism, Judaism, Mahometanism, nor shall be fully
whilst we be imperfect, and know but in part, and are in part carnal, as well
as spiritual, whilst the envious one shall sow tares in the Field of the
Church, and it shall please God to suffer these things to be, that they which
are approved may be made manifest.

-- I shall not object against the long-suffering of God toward the sons of
men, who waits that they might return and not be consumed; and till they are
reformed from their gross darkness, they will not only live (but as enemies
too) amongst the true Circumcision, and those who worship God in spirit; but
how an impossibility Gal. 4. 29.
of perfection in such as do believe, can be argued from the acknowledged
imperfection of those who never knew the blood of sprinkling, and are not come
to Jesus the Savior from all iniquity, will scarce hold any agreement with the
very resemblance of Reason. I well know, that if the world consisted of a
thousand men, and but one hundred of them were separated from its
unrighteousness, or had embraced that pure Religion which keeps unspotted, the
whole World cannot be esteemed perfect, since the greater number remains
Infidel; however, that which is Spiritual, is as certainly perfect, as that
which is carnal is imperfect: but to Contrariorum eadem est ratio.
insinuate the necessity of imperfection in the particular, from the allowance
of it in the general; or to deny it attainable by some, because of the confessed
improbability of being attained by all, is false and sophistical: For though
all the individuals of mankind may not probably be perfect, yet since the
powers, faculties and nature of mankind is as well in the individual as the
species (there being a possibility of his perfection) the capacity is in all.

And for those two expressions of Scripture quoted by him, they both are
wrested beyond their genuine sense: I can allow the best of men to know but in
part, and not submit to his imperfect apprehensions; for not to mention many
Scriptures, nor tediously to argue, there is a Perfection which consists in an
entire separation from the pollutions of the World, as absolutely necessary and
Respectu termini a quo.
congenious to the second Adam's state, or qualification of a true Christian;
and a Perfection relating to that more ample and eternal enjoyment of all
divine knowledge and celestial ravishment, Respectu termini ad quem.
when these earthly tabernacles shall be dissolved: I shall in short say, that
as this place was urged to overthrow the doctrine of Perfection, and
consequently insinuate that popularly pleasing opinion of sin for term of life,
so could he never have found a more express parable to vindicate it by. If
Christ's interpretation ought to be of most authority, which is this; The
Field's the World, the Good Seed are the Children of the Kingdom, but the Tares
are the Children of the wicked-one, he will be greatly disappointed of his end,
which also the very Parable refutes from the nature of the Tares and Wheat: for
as I have already said, if he will not argue an imperfection to Believers, from
that which is already granted to Unbelievers, there needs no more dispute about
the matter; but if by a confessed non-perfection in that greater number of Tares,
or unrighteous men, he therefore will conclude there is no perfect Wheat or
godly men, this were to contradict the express end and very purpose of the
Parable: but since the nature of the Wheat admits no mixture with the Tares
parabollically, it follows really that the Children of the Kingdom should have
no relation or fellowship with, but be separated from the nature of the wicked
one, and conversation of his children, which is more particularly confirmed in
those places where it is said, He which sins is of the Devil, but he that is
born of God sins not, because the Seed of God 1 John 3. 7, 8, 9.
abides in him: As is the begetter, so is the begotten. It may be further
observed, that into the Kingdom, of which they are called Children or
Inhabitants, other places will not allow an entrance Rev. 21. 27.
for any thing that is unclean or makes a lie: nor is it congruous with
Scripture and common sense, the same Temple should hold God and Mamon, Christ
and Belial, or that any can witness a being dead, and crucified with Christ,
whilst living in that which has no share in him. And though he would imply a
Salvo or Defense for the admission of all sorts to Sacraments (so called) under
the notion of the Field's being the Church, yet if he well observes it is
called the World, out of which the Church of Christ, both as to Doctrine and
Conversation, was always gathered; (otherwise those Heathens, Turks, Jews, etc
whom he would exclude, must be members of his Church;) and whilst he would
intrude Tares or the whole rabble of unrighteous persons, as members of Christ's
Church, he has forgot the Testimony born by the Apostles concerning that
spotless, blamless, and perfect Body, of which Christ Jesus was the Head. And
if he would from Christ's words, of letting them alone, cover his practice of
admitting all, as being ignorant, who is a Believer, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26,
(since none knows, but in plucking up the Tares he may pluck up the Wheat
also) for this Guide's a Latitudinarian) what need his whole discourse for a
particular constitution? he might I am sure a let that alone as knowing it
would be of little force; yet may he better understand the passage if he please
of Persecution; for they were known to be Tares, (else how could the servant
say, Sir, did Matthew. 13. 27.
not thou sow good Seed in thy Field? from whence then has it Tares? if he had
not rightly discerned their nature, and that the Wheat was to hold no
communication in any religious sort with them? nor were they to express
severity or force, but (leaving them in supernatural cases to the determination
and punishment of the great Judge) live a self-denying example to the world: --
In this sense Imperfection is granted, I mean to the carnal and unregenerate;
but to the Redeemed of God, and Children of the Kingdom, Perfection. I am now
come to the examination of the essentials of his so much recommended Choice.

Sect. 12.
His first Article is, concerning the nature of God, and what of him is to be
believed by those that would be happy; his words are these, That there is one
God, of an infinite perfect and spiritual nature, Page 36.
subsisting in three most glorious persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
who is the Maker, Preserver, and Governor of all things, and intends his own
Glory in all his Works; That the greatest concernment of reasonable creatures
is to know and acknowledge this God, fear, love, adore and glorify him; and
their chiefest felicity stands in his love and favor, in fullest conformity to
his Image, and in no earthly good separate from him.

-- Taking the former part of his Definition for granted, to wit, the
perfection, infinity, and spirituality of his Nature, how very unsuitable
herewith is the Religion and practice of this Guide, first in denying that
Revelation by which only a knowledge of this glorious and invisible Deity can
be obtained, which was the Testimony Christ bore concerning him, that no man
knew the Father but the Matthew. 11. 27.
Son, and him to whom the Son revealed him; so that if such Revelation as gives
to behold the Father, see his shape, and contemplate the excellency of his
Nature, be wholly rejected by this Guide, methinks it is either arrogance to
intrude into things he does not know; or folly, to tell a tale received from
other people for infallible truth, without a demonstration in himself.

Next; If there be no other way to have communion with this invisible God, that
thereby the Conformity he talks of may be known, (for being a Spirit, it is
preposterous to imagine a knowledge of him obtainable by other mediums (than
what are aedequate to his Divine Nature) but by this Revelation of Himself
through his Son Christ (in us, except we are Reprobates); it will necessarily
follow that he must either deny Christ's Doctrine, or else confess himself
ignorant of what he writes: and since the God he would advise all to know, fear
and love, is that perfect Spirit, I fain would know what Worship can be termed
suitable thereunto, but the internal and spiritual one? which is altogether
void of those Ceremonies, Formalities, Will-performances, and perishing
Observations, once used as condescending signs to the weakness of some seasons,
which at this day fills up the Sacrifices, and in which stands the Religion of
those called Christians through the World; whose ignorance of God's once
dispensing with beggarly elements, for their sakes whose understandings were
veiled and too weaksighted to behold at first the glorious Light, has put many
upon the imitation of past generations, though void of their spirit, and not
answering the end for which they were then practiced, vainly conceiting them an
offering acceptable to the eternal Spirit, when it were as well-pleasing to
present a dogg's neck, as anciently was said. Isa. 1. 13, 14. 15. chapter 66. 3


What shall I hence conclude, but as the Almighty God is a Spirit, so cannot he
otherwise be known or served; and since he has required homage from his
creatures, and yet's so purely just as to but expect what he has impow'red them
to do, how absolutely necessary is it that all Worship Godward should stand in
the ability given of him thereunto, and reasonable to believe that the occasion
of all the Apostasy, Darkness, Inventions, and whole variety of Forms and
Constitutions of Religion, has been from the neglect of that pure spiritual
capacity, once given of God to act and order them in all things that did
concern their duty both to God and man.

As for his strange distinction of the Deity, which he inforces on the faith of
all that value their eternal welfare, I cannot find one Scripture that will
bear him out; and if they had been of so much credit with this Guide as to have
been by them led into their undeniable form of sound words, he would not have
intruded Tradition for Scripture to the creed of any, but rather have inserted
the Text or phrase it self, whose Authority might have commanded an assent: And
it had more become him to give the world a Reason for his requiring a
submission to, and credence of his Doctrine, rather than barely to draw up so
many Articles, and thus impiously to call on all for a subscription as they
would be saved; especially since he cannot but know how strongly these very
points have been debated in ancient Councils, and not less controverted by
modern persons of Reputation and Learning: Some owning one Eternal God, void of
all personal relations, as Arrius, with many Prelates, and some Emperors, in
former Centuries: F. Socinus, L. Socinus, Crellius, Slictingius, etc. of later
days. Others contend for the existence of this Divinity in the relative
persons of Father and Son, as Macedonius of old, and many in these times, to
say nothing of particulars; both which may properly be called
Anti-Trinitarians, or opposers of this Guide's Trinity: But because the
Scriptures do not warrant that division into, and appellation of three persons,
and that he slightly passes over this weighty matter; recommending it for an
Article of Faith, but never arming him with Reasons that receives it for his
defense against the strength and great subtility of his Adversaries; I here
shall offer him by way of Query what every sober person would desire
satisfaction in before he entertains his principle.

Query 1. Whether that Eternal and Almighty Being called GOD, implies more than
one pure and simple Act?

2. Whether He can be said to subsist in three Persons?

3. Whether any thing can rightly be called GOD, that is not Infinite, and
without beginning?

4. Whether if God did beget a Son, that Son had not a beginning? and if the
holy Ghost proceeded from both, whether he was contemporary with the Son, and
both coeternal with God? since the Begetter precedes the Begotten, and that
the Begotten cannot exist before it is?

5. Whether these three Persons are indistinguishable, or distinct from the
Godhead, and each other, by incommunicable properties?

6. Whether if GOD, implies the Fullness, Perfection and Glory of all; and that
no addition can be to his Greatness and Delight, but what was in his most Pure
and Perfect Self from all Eternity, as that one pure Act; the successive acts
of those personal relations can soberly be predicated of him, unless they all
are coeternal; which seems in terminis to confute a conception, progression
and perfection of the distinct relations?

If he will tell me it is a mysterious Point, and therefore did forbear a
farther discussion of it. I answer, it did the more require his explanation;
for that I conceive a Religion, or hope, will do a man but little good, for
which he has not a reason in himself; and to believe things by rote, is quite
as ineffectual as not to believe at all: If he shall say, That Reason is not to
be consulted or rendered in this case; I answer, That either it is what deserves
silence, and so condemns himself amongst those fools that will be meddling; or
if it is to be pried into, then to be understood before believed; or else his
three Philosophical Acts of Election are defeated.

Sect. 13.
His second fundamental Principle to be received, runs thus, That God made man
at first in a very holy and happy state, from which he soon fell through Satan's
temptations, and all mankind became plunged into sin and misery; that we are
all heinous offenders against the P. 37.
God of Heaven, under his dreadful wrath, and the curse of the Law, barred out
of Heaven and happiness, and liable to eternal torments, if not speedily
reconciled to God, and pardoned, and by renewing grace sanctified and
converted; which neither we nor any mere creature is able to do for us.

He has here drawn up an Article out of Scripture-Record, but never tells us
what he has experienced in the matter, confidently bidding all embrace and
believe it, without any farther examination of its verity or conviction from
the Spirit of God, whose office it is to convince the World of sin. And I shall
boldly affirm, That this forward putting people upon the entertainment of
Notions, (though of Truth it self) whilst the Spirit of the Living God is not
at work, or moves not on the Waters, is but the forming up that very
Righteousness which is the second office of the eternal Spirit to convince of,
and condemn the World for; A confutation John 16. 8, 9, 10.
to his own Principles and Practices, is apparent in the latter part of this
second Fundamental; for if they who are sanctified and convicted are no heinous
offenders, then will it reasonably follow, That such as are heinous offenders
are not sanctified and converted: But this Guide, with all his Tribe, that are
daily crying, They do the things they ought not, and have no health in them,
are heinous offenders; therefore they never knew the saving health of all
Nations, nor yet have felt the Blood that purges, that Spirit which sanctifies,
that Word which converts to God. Again, the Holy God is perfect, and has no
fellowship with one unfruitful work of darkness; but this Guide allows that man
must be reconciled, or else he lies under the curse of the Law, therefore there
is a possibility, nay a necessity of man's being perfect, which to deny, is to
contradict his allowed reconciliation, unless he can tell where to fetch a
proof, That the most pure God will have fellowship with, or be reconciled to,
whatever is not of his most perfect Nature; nor is it sense to say, the
Creature can be reconciled, whilst in the commission of that the curse for ever
lies upon. His terms Sanctify and Convert, imply as much, especially if he be
of Paul's 1 These. 5. 23.
mind, that prayed the Primitive Saints might be sanctified throughout: and if
he has an art to make convert imply more or less than a being changed, turned
from, or made new, he would do well to let us know it; for how a man in good
sense can be changed, and the same, sanctified and polluted, turned from his
way, and yet in it reconciled, and under the curse at the same time, is a kind
of Antitheses I never understood. But I haste to his third.

Sect. 14.
His next great Principle he recommends, is this, That the Lord Jesus Christ
the only begotten Son of God; Coessential and Coeternal Page 38.
with his Father, upon the appointment and designation of his Father,
voluntarily undertook the office of a Savior and Redeemer to mankind, and
being made Man, took upon him our sins, and the curse of the Law, and giving
himself up a Sacrifice and an Offering to God for us, purchased by his death
all things conducing to Grace and Glory; and having by his own power risen from
the dead, and ascended into Heaven, he is become an all sufficient Savior, and
will effectually confer Pardon, Grace and Salvation on all those who shall
truly believe in him, and that there is no other Name under Heaven to be saved
by but the Name of Jesus Christ.

O the confused babble of the World, the by-rote ca^^ing of this Guide! how
does he wander in the bypath of vain tradition and invention! Romancing, over
the weighty must (...) of eternal life: And from the dark results of several
factions and (...) Councils, has prec'd up a Fundamental to recommend, as,
dispensibly to be embraced by all: He tells us, Christ is the begotten Son of
God: And in his next words, says him, Coeternal. I am as far from questioning
Christ's Eternity, as ready both to scruple and reject his praise, it carrying
manifest opposition to it self. A little further, he says, Upon the Fathers
designation of the Son, he voluntarily undertook the Office of a Savior, to
effect what after follows on the behalf of distressed mankind. If the Father
did appoint the Son, than 'twas not voluntary, or an Act springing from his own
arbitrium, (for that is the strict and true signification of it) but the
Fathers; so that by consequence, Christ was not the cause, but the effect of
Gods love to man, which contradicts the ground of that satisfaction many have
conceived themselves secure by, and interessed in.

But because this Doctrine has been much controverted, and that the World of
called Christians are bearing hard hereupon, according to their variety of
apprehensions, as the only support; I shall a little query in the matter,
leaving it to this Guide to direct unto the end of what I ask; for barely to
lay down a Doctrine, without the least proof, is so irrational, as I know none
but would be rather forward to reject it, (though in measure true) because void
of a Reason to maintain it. He says, That Christ took upon him our sins, and
has given himself a Sacrifice; or in other terms, has satisfied the justice of
the Father displeased with man.

Query. 1. Whether he satisfied as God or man?

If as God,

(Because no mere Creature can) Then,

Q. 2. Whether this does not split the Unity of the Godhead? which (says this
Guide) is the same in Father and Son; and make a duality in Natures as well as
in Persons; since the one is the Appointer, the other the Appointed; the one
Designer, the other Designed; the one Satisfier, the other Satisfied.

Q. 3. Whether since the Godhead is but one pure Act, it is not to say the
Father sent the Son, the Son the Father; the Godhead, the Godhead?

Q. 4. Whether the conception of the appointment preceeded not the (...) of
obedience in the appointed?

Q. 5. Whether Relatives are predicable of a Diety, having their Primitives,
which supposes priority, in time as well as Nature? Or how commanding, and
obeying Acts can be soberly affirmed of the Divine Being?

Q. 6. Whether it is harmonious with reason, or according to Scripture,
warrantable, to say, That Christ, as God, satisfied his Father? Since it is to
make God resolved to have satisfaction somewhere, and none Gal. 3. 20.
being of ability, that the same Godhead should pay it; that his Mercy should
pay it his Justice, that one Attribute (so called) should deny an Acquittance,
till to there had solved the Debt; God the Father standing off in high
displeasure, and on his terms, and the same Godhead in the Son designed to
satisfy?

Q. 7. Whether if there be not distinct properties and attributes in the Father
and Son, but are one pure Being and Godhead, concurring in the Conception,
Progression, and Perfection of all Acts, it is less reasonable and necessary
that the Justice of the Son should have an infinite satisfaction paid it, than
the same attribute in the Father?

If as Man,

Q. 8. Whether if the Justice of God be infinite, his satisfaction ought not to
bear a proportion therewith?

Q. 9. Whether Christ Jesus, as Man, could offer up an infinite Sacrifice, to
satisfy the infinite displeasure of his Father? (paying all due respect to his
very great afflictions, which were sustained by him in his fulfilling his
Fathers Will, and really were toward the Salvation of mankind, as a pleasant
offering.

If as God and Man,

Q. 10. Whether if two mediums be singly inconsistent with the Nature of the
end for which they were propounded, the conjunction of them does not rather
augment than lessen the difficulty of atchieving it?

Q. 11. Whether it is not to depaint the merciful God most revengful, that not
being able to have his satisfaction where 'twas owing, would take it where it
was not due?

Q. 12. Whether it were not more suitable to Truth, and Scripture Record, to
avoid all dark conceits, Schoolmens quiddities, and vain janglings, and to
believe, That God was, and is in Christ (who is in us except we be Reprobates)
reconciling the World, or men, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Chapter 5. 9.
unto himself, by removing that unrighteous and self-exalted nature, which
ruled as God in their hearts, and by his Glorious Light, giving them to know
the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ?

Then must not Reader from my querying thus conclude, We do deny (as he has
falsely charged us) those Glorious Three which bear record in Heaven, the
Father, Word, and Spirit, neither the Infinity, Eternity, and Divinity of Jesus
Christ, for that we know he is the Mighty God; nor what the Father sent his Son
to do on the behalf of lost man, declaring to the whole World, We know no other
Name, by which Atonement, Salvation, and Plenteous Redemption comes; but by his
Name, are according to our measures made sensible of its mighty Power: but
rather to let thee see how unsatisfactorily he has imposed Religion on the
World, and how exceeding open he lays his Principles to the objection of every
reasonable Inquirer; for whilst he undertakes to dress up a Religion that shall
excel all others, and boldly recommends it to such who are resolved to be of
some Religion (as if there did accompany it such undeniable evidence, that
though it might effect little upon the loose and dissolute Atheist, to fix his
moving mind, yet questions not the good success it might have upon the
Religiously inclined) he in reality has not brought a Proof or solid Argument,
as encouragement for any to embrace them.

Sect. 15.
His last Cardinal Doctrine I am come to, after which it had been more proper,
some may think, to have inserted the preceding Caution; but since this may not
give so much occasion to such P. 39.
as watch for opportunities to raise their misty suspicions, and that it might
be too remote from those passages, for the better explanation of which it
purposely was mentioned, I have the rather placed it here; and now for the
examination of this his last Fundamental.

That our Redeemer, the Lord Jesus Christ, having all power in Heaven and in
Earth given to him, has made (...) (...) and caused it to be proclaimed to the
World, wherein he promises Pardon and Salvation to all that shall sincerely
accept him for their Savior.

He boldly calls him his Redeemer, not observing how unsuitable his Life and
Doctrine is with the Redeemed: of the Lord; for whosoever is redeemed by
Christ, is perfectly so, inasmuch as all his Works are perfect; but as this
Guide's conversation manifests the contrary by his very great miscarriages, so
does his Book; for Paul testifies to all, That Jesus Christ was sent to redeem,
not only from iniquity, (which might admit of a distinction by froward and
unclean Spirits) but all iniquity; therefore this person has spoke Tit. 2. 14.
too largely in calling the pure Jesus his Redeemer, for such imperfect works
would very much disgrace their Author; nor is there any thing so much stumbles
Infidels, and brings a reproach upon the Christian Religion, or dishonor to
the Holy God, is Priests and People, writing, talking, and fighting hard for
Christ as Redeemer, whilst every eye finds them as polluted, and deeply engaged
in dishonest and immoral practices, as those against whom they contend.

And truly repenting of their sins, shall rest on his death and merits alone
for life, and love him above all things, and sincerely obey his Gospel, Laws,
and Commandments, and shall persevere in this duty to the end.

I hope by this time Reader, thou art sufficiently convinced this Guide is
leading thee to a state of perfection, notwithstanding he would make thee
believe it is unattainable in this life; for he concludes we ought to love God
above all; and is it possible for any mind, but that which walks with God, is
born again, and entirely translated from the Kingdom of darkness, into the
Kingdom of Gods mavelous Light, to be so entirely divorced from all, and
espoused to God, as to love him above all; and sincerely (which implies no less
than the strongest activity of an upright Soul) obey his Gospel, Laws and
Commandments, and persevere, which excludes all commission or omission to the
contrary.

In short, if Christ's Law be imperfect, then must its Author be so too; but he
is purely perfect, so must his Work or Law: And if the Law be perfect, then is
the observer also perfect, but the Law and Gospel is proved undeniably perfect,
therefore must the observer also. And lest this Guide should offer to retort,
that none can observe it, let him answer for me, who says, We ought not only
to observe and obey it, but with sincerity, and perseverance in fulfilling the
commands of it to the end. Finis coronat opus, The end'd perfection.

He follows on to this effect, And after he shall have sent his Holy Spirit, to
work Faith and Conversion in his Elect, he will certainly come again, and by
his mighty Power raise the dead, and convene both quick and dead before his
Judgment, and then such as obey his Gospel he will adjudge to eternal Glory,
but Unbelievers to eternal Torments.

He has here jumbled many things of moment up together, scraps picked out of
more ample discourses. Succirctness is commendable, but not in his abrupt way;
cramming and stifling matters for want of room to open and explain themselves
to the convincement of the understanding: and whilst he loudly does exclaim
against the Quakers, for slighting the Scriptures; who is there found more
guilty than himself? that though his Book treats of nothing less than such a
Religion, as he assures all must embrace that would be saved, it is rare he
cites one passage of them for a confirmation of his very Fundamentals; He tells
us of the necessity of believing God will send his holy Spirit, as being
otherwise void of Faith and Conversion, and yet denies the very office of the
Spirit, which is to reveal the Mysteries of God, and to convert from fallen Adams
state to that glorious second Adam's, which never fell; And if he did believe
in that Eternal Power which raises from the dead in trespasses, it would be to
him according to his faith; for God is faithful that has promised: but being
wholly ignorant of Christ Jesus the Power, no wonder if he never knew the
Resurrection, and the 1 Cor. 1. 24. Joh. 11. 25.
Life: And how absurd it is for one to draw a representation of a thing he
never saw, or venture to challenge an assent to what he ignorantly has fancied
to himself, without one Argument to induce, or so much as an Observation to
explain the obscurity of his Doctrine, I leave the sober Reader to determine.

Thus having endeavored an enervation of his four Fundamentals, I shall hasten
to the examining the force of his Accusations against my Friends; but in my way
thither I shall a little turn my eye upon some passages of lesser moment.

Sect. 16.
His sixth Chapter mainly intends the recommending to our consideration some
religious matters of a secondary nature, as a preparative to Conformity; for
though he seems to express a tenderness toward doubting Consciences, yet if we
follow him through his 8th and 9th Chapters, it will evidently appear, to be no
other than a more facile and probable way to insinuate the same conforming
spirit to the minds of others he stands branded with himself; and by his plea
for a Conformity (as Christian) he palliates his own wicked temporizing, and
would so far prevail on others, that none may be left to accuse him of
Inconstancy: And if he were the man he pretends himself to be, what needs he
busy himself in scribbling, who has tenderness enough he says to overlook
Nonconformity, and that allows the Nonconforming-Churches to be Christian:
Does he afford the Church of England more? time was he would not have
acknowledged her so much.

Sect. 17.
His 7th Chapter is an application of his preceding discourse, bringing all
Ways amongst the Christians (so called) of these Nations under two, either
such an establishment, as has the sanction of the Law to warrant and protect
it, or those persuasions as are estoused by private men. Reader, thou may be
sure he is not of the last; the first wears the Cap of Maintenance: but he
distinguishes amongst those many ways he fathers on private spirits; some he
endites of holding principles that overturn the very Foundation of Christian
Religion, whilst he more heartily dismisses others with the approbation of
sound Fundamentals, although he lays it as a home charge, that they should not
neglect the using such means as Page 56 57.
might better inform their Schismatical Judgments concerning the Church of
Englands constitution.

Those great Impostors or dangerous Heretics, whom this Guide P. 18, 58, 59,
60, 61, 62.
esteems it a foolish charity to flatter with the hopes of Salvation, are
Papists, Socinians and Quakers, by which he has at once damned millions of poor
immortal souls, however strict, serious, and sincere in what they knew, through
many generations; whilst if defective, they owe it to the idle, lying, covetous
ignorant, and murdering spirit and practice of the Priests, whose interest it
has ever been to inslave and obscure the peoples understandings, by their many
cursed Inventions, and terrifying punishments; framing and trimming a Religion
with such variety of external Ceremonies, as probably best might take and
influence the carnal multitude, enacting most severe Laws against such as
should at any time decry their Fopperies, and testify against their abominable
Inventions; Letting their Canons play, or rather plagne, to the destruction of
Lives, Families and Estates: -- It Is not my business to apologize for Papists,
I am not of their kin; but look upon Rome Pagan to have been much inferior to
the Impieties of Rome (called) Christian; and the latter greatly transcending
the former in all sorts of abomination, capable to be invented by the wicked
one. -- As for the Socinian, I know him to have wit and learning enough to
encounter a more redoutable Adversary than mine; and however he has exposed
himself to the just censures of some, his exemplary life and grave deportment I
must acknowledge to be very singular; and if his cause receive no greater foil
than this person's bare reproaches, at least assertions without proof, the
discreet world will soonet acquiesce in the stronger Arguments of Socinus, and
his quaint Adherents, than this unreasonable and slandering Guide: Nor does a
wrong opinion gain more credit or life, than when opposed by persons indiscreet
and incompetent.

CHAP. II. Aspersions reprehended.
Sect. 1.
IT is an Art this Guide is curious at, to purchase the esteem of such whom his
miscarriages may justly have incensed, at the inhumane rate of forward and
invective slanders, on such who has for conscience sake stepped aside from the
established Ministry of the Nations; but more especially the Quakers, against
whom he ever has been bold to write and speak, being withdrawn from every Form
and Constitution (to wait for life from God, and not from beggarly elements)
and therefore made a prey to all parties, against whom he knew every hand has
been lifted up, (distressed by, and forsaken of all Civil Power) and
consequently secure in his undertaking: He was not slothful under former
Powers, nor has he been less diligent since, employing all his wicked wits to
render us a people unfit to hold society with men, being not only destructive
to Religion, but Government: Nor will the character he has given of us in page
62. speak much less, where enveighing against Sects, he begins with us in this
manner: I shall only instance in one more of such as err in Fundamental Points,
who in respect of their want Page 62
of learning and outward accomplishments are contemptible, yet in respect of
their number, and singular obstinacy in their way, whereby they amuse the
vulgar, are not to be past by, viz. the Quakers: Although Quakerism cannot
properly be called a Sect of Christians, but rather a total Apostasy from
Christianity; for excepting they have the Name of Christ in their mouths, they
scarce retain any Article of the Christian Faith.

Reader, thou needst not be a man so very judicious, (although our Cause, being
by most perused with a prejudiced eye, desires thee to be impartial) rightly to
taste what the ingredients and infusions are that do compose this Spirit, who
at the very entrance manifests himself thus intoxicated, that he has already
over-shot both verity and good manners; thereby preparing the minds of such as
read him, to entertain his Falsities the most he can for the disadvantage of
our persons and principles: This front of his Impeachment, calls for my Answer
in these respects; (1.) We stand charged as to our want of Learning and
external accomplishments. It is our joy and matter of rejoicing, and many times
with unutterable thanksgivings in sincerity I can say, that the everlasting God
should now, as frequently at other times, display the Riches of his Love and
Grace to the mean and despised amongst men; herein is it transcending in our
eye, that he should abscond these things, and leave them still as mysteries to
the wise world, whilst in extreme love he has so plentifully vouchsafed the
revelation of them unto babes; and therein made good that ancient observation
of Paul, in 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28
our times, Not many Wise, not many Noble; not that we thereby do exclude any,
only we can affirm, that the entrance of God's everlasting Gospel of Salvation,
or whatever he has had to do amongst the sons of men, has been with very
seemingly despicable attendances. This ought not to be dubious unto any
intelligent person that has but given himself a moderate acquaintance with
History. If I should go no further than the Scriptures of Truth, let it be
there examined, and 'twill appear if such whom God called at any time (from the
beginning to the end) were not Handicraft, Laboring, and Husbandmen, persons
inexpert in the Scholastic Adages, Disputations and Opinions of the Heathenish
Philosophical World. But lest that may not be of sufficient authority, let them
but read the account that is largely given in this matter by Herald. Animad. in
Arnob. l. 3 p. 137
Heraldus, who declares the primitive Christians general disgust to all humane
Literature, and Philosophy in particular, the only Tertul. lib. de Idolatria.
accomplishments of that Age; which occasioned the Gentiles continual
upbraiding of the Christians for Idiots and illiterate persons. And Origin in
so many words gives this account of the very Propagators of the Gospel, that
they were, (...), Orig lib. 30, Adv. Cel.
(...), Weavers, or Combers of Wool, Cobblers, Fullers, and illiterate and
exceeding rustic.

But lest it may be objected, that though God at first was pleased to use such
illiterate Preachers, thereby to manifest the greatness of his Power, yet
afterward the means of Literature were not to be neglected, as necessary
ingredients to an able and orthodox Minister; Let such but read the Ordinance
of the fourth Council of Carthage, where it is ordained, Let every Clergie-man
get his livelihood Con. Carthag. cap. 51, 52, 53
by some Artifice or Husbandry, without prejudice to his Calling; and, let
every Clergie-man, though learned in the Word of God, have some Artifice or
Handicraft; and, let all Clergymen that are able to labor, learn some petty
Handicrafts.

And Gaudentius expressly says, that we do not read that ever Gauden. de
morsecul. Justinian part 2. c. 26. p. 89, 90.
the Ancients did teach Philosophy since, they did rather abhor it; I fain,
says he, would see any man that could show that the Christians either before,
or in the time of Justinian, did openly teach Philosophy. And as the Waldenses
of old answered the Academian Papists (as Warnerius and others, who said
concerning their Preachers, Doctores ipsorum sunt Textores and Sutores, their
Teachers are Weavers and Cobblers.) So we return to this Contemner of the
Quakers for their unacquaintance in Learning; We are not ashamed of our
Ministers because they labor with Usher. de success. c. 6. p. 28.
their hands, procuring thereby a livelihood to themselves, according as they
are able, because both the doctrine and example of the Apostles does lead us to
such apprehensions.

And if this Guide were either learned himself, or but impartial, he may
remember, that there was not one at the Nicene Council (whose Creed is so
famous in Europe) who understood the Hebrew tongue: not to make any comparison
between John's Greek, and the Quakers English; or to instance the great
difference betwixt Isaiah and Jeremiah in the old Testament; And therefore be
it Libanus protem. p 13. ed. Goth.
known to all those who shall in Libanus his scoffing style say, Let us not
hear what these men speak concerning Heaven, God, and Goodness, who come forth
black and sooty from the Smith's Forge and Anvil. That it is not in the power of
man's reason, wit, study, or wisdom to unseal the Book, see, hear and
understand the deep things of God, nor to give the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ: But as the Apostles said, so say
we, Everlasting praises to our God, by the revelation of his eternal Spirit he
has given us in measure that Divine Science, truly so called: And this Light we
are not ashamed to 1 Cor. 2. 10.
own for our Teacher in the fight of Nations, but by its Supreme Authority to
declare, There is not another Leader by whom Salvation Isa 49 6. and 60. 19
Rev. 21. 24.
is attainable, and in obedience to whom the Nations of them that are saved
must walk.

Although I needs must say, this objection of our Ignorance had much better
become a person whose abilities surpass this Cantabrigian Sizer's education,
whose inexpertness in Story, Tongues and Opinions might have barred him from
these uncivil as well as untrue reflections; and so much of Literature is to be
found amongst the Quakers (though it is not their strength) as does, and very
likely will remain unanswered by Scholars of a higher Form than this conceited
Guide.

Sect. 2.
2. His charge of obstinacy we deny, nor am I much solicitous to enlarge in our
vindication, since it is the sense I know he has of all who withstand a
Conformity to that Establishment his Interest leads him to embrace, and bow not
with him to the Rising-Sun: In this sense we own his Epichite, and adjunct of
Singular also, being indeed most so in sufferings; having by all Powers (since
we were a People separated by the Lord from their Inventions) been killed all
the day long in Reputation, Liberty, Estate, and sometimes Life: but in all
other respects (our Consciences excepted) we are always ready to express
complacency and willingness to assist our very enemies.

Sect. 3.
3. He does accuse us with a total Apostasy from Christianity; but if the
definition Paul gives of a Christian ought to decide the case, then he is one
in whom Christ reigns, and by the fruits of his Romans 8. 9 Gal 5. 16 John 15. 13.
Spirit manifests to the world he is redeemed from it, and from fulfilling
those lusts which once had absolute dominion over him: But whether this Guide,
or the so much calumniated Quakers, are fullest of self-denial, most separated
from the World, or in greatest subjection to that pure Spirit of Grace which
teaches to deny all unrighteousness, and to live soberly in this present World,
impartial Reader speak? For if the preceding qualities denote Titus 2. 11, 12.
men truly Christian, and that a pious, diligent, and inoffensive Conversation,
is the most express Character of Christ's Followers; I make my appeal to thee
and the whole World, if there lives among the Sons of men a people less
deserving to be called Apostates, and consequently any that so visibly carry
with them the badg of true and primitive Christianity as they. And whereas he
says we scarce retain any Article of the Christian Faith; We do in so many
words reject his aspersion, being made partakers of that Divine Faith in Jesus,
which sanctifies, and is held in a pure Act. 15. 9 1 Timothy 3. 9.
Conscience.

Sect. 4.
4. His next accusation is, That they extol the Light in all men, as the only
sufficient Rule to walk by, to the apparent slighting of Scriptures, and
Preaching.

Reader, If yet thou art a stranger to this Light he thus explodes and
vilifies, let me beseech thee once to observe it in thy self, and tell me then
if it has not that Divine quality to discern betwixt the Precious and the Vile,
and manifest every Thought, Word, and Act? whether it is well-pleasing, or the
contrary, to the great God? If it be criminal to own those Scriptures he falsely
says we slight, the case is changed, otherwise we all confess that Jo. 1 9. 1
Jo. 1. 5, 7.
God is Light, and that he has enlightened every man; by heeding, and obeying
the Dictates of which, we may be preserved in that capacity, as the same
Scripture says, shall bring us into the pure Fellowship, and that the Blood of
Jesus shall cleanse us from all sin. Nor do they own a Principle in the Clouds,
but above all people have demonstrated the power and authority of their
Principle by that Redemption it has wrought for them, and alteration it has
made from that condition which nakedly exposed their immortal Souls to the
snares and entanglements of this Worlds perishing glories, to experiment the
Blood which cleansed from all iniquity, the unspeakable peace of perfect
reconciliation with God.

And for his confident affirming we slight both Scriptures and Preaching; I
have this to say, That as there is not any who discover more respect for them,
by a conformity of life to what they require, so do they both read, and as
often quote them in Preaching, or Declaration, as any who profess them for
their Rule. And Reader, that thou may the better be informed concerning the
esteem we have them, in taking but the pains to visit our Assemblies, and that
shall be a sufficient vindication of our innocence, Helps the other wanted.
which also may answer him as to the advantage, that is confessed, the Jew had
above the Heathen.

5. His fifth reflection is, Our openly denying the Doctrine of the Trinity:
but me thinks it would become him who is reproving others for not paying that
respect they ought unto the Scriptures, to be a little more exemplary in using
their unquestionable phrase, and sound expression, for I am altogether ignorant
of any Scripture that mentions that word Trinity; and it is his own Opinion, that
Fundamentals should not be drawn from dubious and obscure places, but rather
that the Scriptures were evident and perspicuous, as to what was necessary to
be believed; yet if by Trinity he understands those three Witnesses in Heaven,
Father, Word, and Spirit, he should better have acquainted himself with what we
disown, than ignorantly thus to blaze abroad our open denial of what we most
absolutely credit and believe.

6. His next slander runs thus, The Person of Jesus Christ, as to his humane
Nature, with all his Offices assigned to him by his Father, they utterly
reject, (though this is an Arcanum that is kept hard from their Novices.)

Fain would he here insinuate to people, by his most invective impostures, hard
thoughts concerning an inoffensive people, whilst in reality they own no other
name by which Salvation is obtainable than the Christ of God; and all the
Offices that ever were assigned him by his Father, are by them acknowledged;
and so remote are they from hiding their sentiments, or being jealous of
exposing them to all, that whosoever will but give himself the time of
frequenting their Meetings, or perusing their Books, will soon perceive how
very far this Character is wide of Truth.

7. His next report is, We call not upon God in the Name and Mediation of Jesus
Christ. But Reader, that thou may not thus be dogmatized upon, and better
satisfied in thy sober inquiries, assure thy self, the Quakers never knew an
other Name than that of Jesus Christ, through which to find acceptance with the
Lord; nor is it by any other, than Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, by
whom they expect Redemption, and may receive the promise of an eternal
Inheritance. Heb. 9 15


Sect. 5.
He farther says, They trust not in his death for Pardon and Salvation, but in
a pretended sinless perfection.

They are so far from disowning the death and sufferings of Christ, that there
is not a people in the Earth that so assuredly witness and demonstrate a
Fellowship therewith, confessing before Men and Angels, that Christ died for
the Sins of the World, 1 John 5. 18. Rev. 21. 22. Mat. 13. 33. 1 These. 5. 23.
Mat. 5. 48. 2 Cor. 13 11. Ephesians. 4. 13. Phil. 3. 15. 2 Timothy 3. 17. Heb. 13. 2^.
1 Pet. 5. 10. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Heb. 6. 1, 3.
and gave his Life a Ransom. Perfection from sin they hold attainable, because
he that is born of God sins not, and that nothing which is unclean can enter the
Kingdom of God; no Crown without victory; the little Leaven leavens the whole
lump; the strong man must be cast out; Paul prays they might be sanctified
Wholly: Be ye perfect as God is perfect; be perfect be of good comfort; unto a
perfect man; as many as be perfect; that the Man of God may be perfect: The God
of peace make you perfect in EVERY good Work; the God of all Grace make you
perfect; let us cleanse our selves from ALL filthiness of flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God; leaving those things behind, let us go
on unto perfection; and this will we do if God permit. If perfection were
unattainable, it would be strange that the Scriptures should speak of such a
state, and very preposterous, that Paul, Peter, etc. should so solicit and
pray for the ancient Saints, that they might come thither, even to the spirits
of just men made Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24
perfect; nay, he positively avouches to have arrived there, at the Heavenly
Jerusalem, at the Church of the first Born, etc. And notwithstanding that this
excellent State should never be enjoyed, seems to me no less than a giving the
Apostles Doctrine the lie, and tacitly impeaching them of gross dissimulation
and contradiction. But Reader, it is not only my Opinion that Perfection is
attainable; for if thou please to remember the many passages of his Discourse
already past my observation, as well as to remark the following Chapter of his
contradictions, thou certainly will find Perfection an Article of this Guides
Creed, without the least violation to his matter.

Sect. 6.
They deny any necessity of special Grace of the Spirit to Conversion and
Sanctification, saying, The Light within is sufficient hereunto, and scoff at
them that pray for more. -- His malice and his lies run parallel; Are there
amongst the Sons of men any that so contend for that Grace which brings
Salvation, and so strongly plead, as well with sufferings, as otherwise, the
absolute necessity of Faith therein, subjection thereto, and sanctification
thereby, to this blind professing World? And for his distinction between the
Light and Grace; Reader, if thou do well observe the Apostle Paul's
description of their properties and effects, I question not but thou will soon
condemn this Guide for ignorant, and very inobservant of the Scriptures: For he
to the Ephesians writes, That whatsoever Ephesians. 5. 13, 14, 15
makes manifest, is light, and bids them thereby to walk circumspectly. So that
the Apostle sets it as the distinguisher between good and evil, as a Guide or
Leader: And thus was Jesus Christ the fullness of Light nominated by the
Prophet, -- A Light unto the Isa 49. 6.
Gentiles, a Leader unto the People, and for Salvation unto the ends of the
Earth; who by the Evangelist, is said, to have enlightened every man; John 1.
9. Rev. 21. 24.
and by the Prophet it is determined, as well as by the same John in his
Revelation, That the Nations of them which are saved must walk in that Light;
and how it can be different from that Grace, whose properties are the same, in
teaching to deny ungodliness and worldly Tit. 2. 11, 12.
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World,
cannot be rationally supposed; for says the Apostle John, If ye 1 John 1. 5,
7. Gal, 5. 16.
walk in the Light, as God is in the Light, ye shall be cleansed from all sin;
which Paul expresses thus, If ye walk in the Spirit, ye shall not fulfill the
lusts of the flesh; and says Christ, I am the Light of Joh. 8. 12.
the World, he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
Light of Life: It must be therefore evident to every common understanding, that
this (so much blasphemed) Light, Spirit, and Grace, spoken of, (leading to the
same condition, and bringing to the same end) are one in essence and virtue,
though diversely denominated, according to the variety of its operations; and
who is it can be thought a Christian that denies the sufficiency of this
Glorious Light, which graciously is given of God as a Leader to the Nations,
and for Salvation to the ends of the Earth? And surely had this Guide but ever
been acquainted with its pure instructions, and walked therein; the benefit
that would have certainly accru'd, had better taught him the excellency of its
Nature, and the reverent observance he ought to pay it, and not to make a scoff
at it, as he most wickedly says the Quakers do at Grace, (who generally are
known to be no mockers, but have been made a laughing stock by all Persuasions;
being reviled, they bless; persecuted, they suffer; defamed, they entreat;
accounted the offscouring of all things unto this day, and made a spectacle
unto the 1 Cor. 4. 9, 12, 13.
World, Angele, and Men.)

Sect. 7.
10. He follows on much at the same rate, Sabbaths, and Sacraments, and all
instituted Worship they cast off, the great Doctrines of the Resurrection, Last
Judgment, Heaven, and Hell, they turn into Allegories, etc.

How long will thou immagine, write, and utter lying vanities to bespatter,
defame, and expose to vulgar rage the innocent People, and royal Inheritance of
the most high God? Can thou expect thy days shall terminate in peace, and
that the Judge of all will not account with thee for all thy slanders? yea,
Clapham, be it known unto thee, the dreadful God shall recompense it on thy
head; nor shall thy peevish malice (surpassing all I know) escape a pledge of
Gods displeasure on thee, ere thou take thy farewell of this Earth; he will
rebuke thy unclean Spirit, too full of nasty venom and lies, ever to have
admittance where nothing enters that defiles or makes a lie: It Is not a rage I
am in, as thou may think, and willingly would have others to believe, God
bears me record, but the infallible sense I have upon my Spirit of thy deep
ensnating hypocrisy to betray (if possible) others more moderate and faithful
into the same wicked yielding spirit with thy self; and also (I fear) thy
immortal enmity to us, the innocent People of the Lord, provokes to a holy
indignation; and judgement's for that unrighteous nature to eternity.

But that I may not leave the Reader unsatisfi'd as to this last most
impudently wicked aspersion, know in the name of all true Quakers, the Sabbath
that is reserved for the People of God, is so far from being by them rejected
or denied, that they admonish all to the exact and punctual observation of it,
not to think their own thoughts, speak their own words, nor do their own works;
-- for the word Sacraments, it is no where scriptural; and till he explains his
meaning, I am not bound to find him one; but for such Worship as is of
Scripture-institution, and performed by the Spirit of God, they own and
practice, disowning (as there is good reason) all other Institutions.

The Doctrine of the Resurrection, of the just and unjust, Last Judgment,
Heaven and Hell, as future rewards; they believe and confess: -- And, as my
faithful Testimony both to their Life and Doctrine, I am necessitated to
declare (and be it known to all that ever knew me) that when the unspeakable
Riches of God's eternal Love visited me, by the call of his glorious Light,
from the dark practices, wandering notions, and vain conversations of this
polluted world, and that my heart was influenced thereby, and consequently
disposed for the more intimate and sincere reception of it; those very habits,
which once I judged impossible, whilst here, to have relinquished, (as well as
I was unwilling) and did allow my self a liberty therein, because not openly
gross or scandalous I thought my self excusable) became not only burdensome,
and by that Light manifested to be of another nature than that which I was
called to the participation of; but in my faithful adherence to its holy
counsel and instructions, I was immediately endued with that power and
authority as gave dominion over them, and being in measure redeemed from that
to which the Curse is pronounced, I sensibly enjoyed the Blessings that attend
a Reconciliation; And never since I have been conversant with their Principles,
(thus odiously described by him) have I found one Article that did not receive
a full and satisfactory assent from that very Grace, Spirit, or Light of God,
which first called me from the gross impieties, vain entertainments, tempting
glories and will-worships of this generation: And as I have the seal of God's
eternal Spirit of Love upon my soul, as an infallible Assurance; so, since my
first frequenting of them and their Assemblies, I have observed that holy,
innocent and righteous conversation, which harmonizes with the severity,
circumspection and self-denying life of the Gospel; and testify (as revealed
from God) that since those Centuries, in which the Apostasy eclipst the beauty
of the primitive Light, there has not been so glorious a discovery of
Spiritual, Pure and Evangelical Worship, Life and Doctrine, as God has in his
Lovingkindness raised the so much despised Quakers, to own, practice and
declare amongst the Nations; as the good old way of Holiness, that leads from
Intemperance, Vanity, Pride, Oppression, and the love of this World's perishing
glories, to that everlasting Joy and Rest which is reserved for the People of
the Most High God. In short, they are found in Principles, zealous for God,
devout in Worship, earnest in Prayer, constant in Profession, harmless and
exemplary in their Lives, patient in Sufferings, orderly in their Affairs, few
in Words, punctual in Dealings, merciful to Enemies, Self-denying as to this
Worlds Delights and Enjoyments; and to sum up all, Standards for the God of
Heaven, against the Pride, Cruelty, Lust, Avarice, etc. of this Godless
Generation; -- whom the unborn shall call Blessed, when their Testimonies be
finished, and they gathered into the unspeakable Solace and possession of God's
eternal Presence; -- yet are they concluded by this uncharitable Guide, not
company for Christians: but I am Page 64
persuaded, that the more discreet will not relax their good Opinion for his
slanderous reflections, but rather thence renew occasions of further expressing
their Candor and Humanity: And I hope their discreet and inoffensive deportment
will persuade all people, they are not as deserving their ill thoughts, as
envious and self-interessed Priests have endeavored to insinuate.

CHAP. III. His Hypocrisy Detected.
Sect. 1.
THough manifold are the Stratagems of Satan that old Serpent, by which he does
surprise the immortal Souls of men with most deplorable woes, and everlasting
misery, yet is there none that proves so generally effectual as Hypocrisy; Its
his Mysterium Maximum, A study and employment fit for none below the form of
his Archangels; such make his Archest Emissaries, and most subtle Meanders;
Sublime Devils, masqu'd with the vizard of Sincerity, palliating themselves
from what they really are, by seeming what as really they are not: outside
washed Platters; Wolves in Sheeps clothing; Inside rotten, but outside
whited-Sepulchres: In short, the muddy Sensualist refined to a counterfeit
Fidelity, and imitation of the form of Godliness, the more unquestionably to
deceive, and securely to insinuate candid apprehensions of his purpose; who is
the most impudent dispiser of God, destroyer of Souls, contemner of Laws,
perverter of Truth, and treacherous to the end; against whom the sharpest woes
are denounced, and punishments reserved to eternity: -- How far this Guide has
rendered himself obnoxious to the character of a Hypocrite, it is our business
mainly in this Chapter to discourse; But lest his dissimulated Condescension,
and pretended Christian Instructions, (as inducements to Conformity) should so
far prevail upon the unacquaintance of any with his spirit, and notorious
practice through all Revolutions, as to believe they may deserve my observation
and reply, (since it is irrational to argue the unsoundness of a Principle from
the confessed imperfections of its Defendants) I shall a little hint at the
chiefest of his Reasons; as well to manifest 'twas not so much a general as an
individual concern that interested him in this undertaking, as to prevent (if
possible) his ingratiating his Motives to Conformity, with the minds of such as
are inclinable to temporizing: he states his Question thus.

Sect. 2.
Whether it be a duty for Christians to hold communion with the P. 68.
Church of England, according to her present Administrations?

Had this Guide the least honesty, it should not be a question with him now
(although I fear he is scarce so honest as to make it one, my Paradox is
Orthodox) or been conscientious in his former persuasions; but having ever
forfeited the reputation of a sincere person, and not being esteemed other than
a gross Temporizer, I easily shall grant it very requisite for him (whose belly
is his god, and that minds earthly things) to commune with the Church of
England in her present Administrations; but as for Christians I shall not ask
his leave to dissent, unless he can produce better Arguments to warrant his
confident Assertions: his first runs thus: It will not be denied by all
dissenters (that have understanding and sobriety in them) but that here is a
clear profession of all those Page 69
fundamental points of Faith, which are accounted amongst Christians necessary
unto Salvation; yea such a pure confession of other points of a secondary
nature, that there is scarce any other Church in the World that God has blessed
with a greater purity.

What strange confusion, and unusual impertinency is this! would not
half-witted people blush to venture abroad in print with such expressions?
Surely this Guide was grossly fond of writing Books, that rather than be quiet,
should with such greediness expose his ignorance to vulgar censure; for if the
Dissenters he writes against, confess the Church they separate from to be
greatly pure in Fundamentals and things of a secondary nature, how is it
possible, according to good sense, they can be termed Dissenters in Religious
matters? I shall appeal to the intelligent Reader, if this blind Guide is not
fallen into the ditch, that ascribes to such the title of Dissenters, whom he at
the same time characters for absolute sons of the Church; for, do the highest
Conformists to the Church of England acknowledge more, than that she is pure in
Fundamentals and things of a secondary nature, and yet that such who confess
her to be this, should by this silly Guide be styled Dissenters! away with this
apparent Nonsense, since none can properly be so esteemed that differs not in
one or both; And how inconsistant, as well as saucy, his expression is, that
will not allow Dissenters to be sober and intelligent (when none are such in
his account, that allows not the Church of England what they can never do, and
properly be counted for Dissenters) sufficiently appears, in his admitting
these very Dissenters to be Christian Churches, and Children of the same
Father, though now he seems to represent them void of both understanding and
sobriety. Where his were when these rash and unadvised words were writ, I leave
for the Reader to determine.

Sect. 3.
He speaks largely of the public Worship, loudly extolling the Constitution of
the Church of England, professing a separation there from to be unwarrantable;
and that corruption in manners, Page 72. 73.
both of Ministers and People, should be no reason for disserting their
Assemblies, etc.

Contrary to the whole current of Scripture-record, and the best accounts that
have been transmitted through Ages of the Primitive Christians, who ever have
withdrawn themselves from such as held the truth in unrighteousness; and let
the world judge if Paul 2 Timothy 3. 5.
was not thus persuaded, when he strictly enjoined separation from (not only
Schismatics, Heretics, and Apostates, but) such as held the form of
Godliness, which consisted in profession and external performances, without the
everlasting Power, which alone could bring into true Obedience, and give the
possession of that eternal Life, which rightly denominates people Christians,
or a Christian Church: But as two strong Pillars, to maintain and underprop his
Assertion, Page 82.
he tells us, otherwise God would have no Public Worship; As if an Assembly in
a House, Field or Barn, was not as capable to worship God in spirit, as those
who frequent the Parish Steeple Houses; if not, it is fit this Guide should pay
his acknowledgements to the Roman Society (he calls Antichrist) for his public
Worship; But be it known to him and all the world, that as God's Spirit is not
tied to places, so all Worship standing therein is truly Catholic and Public
Worship, in Field or House, whether three or three thousand; convenient places
being circumstantial, not essential, to God's Worship.

Sect. 4.
His second Pillar is the example of Zecharias, who (says he) disserted not
his station in the Jewish Worship, notwithstanding those many Page 75.
Corruptions that were innovated, by which he would excuse his continuance in
his Priestly Office in Wramplingam Parish: But if this Guide will be informed,
he soon may see his error in this particular, (as upon occasion formerly was
expressed to him) the Jews were selected from all other Nations, and
impriviledged as God's peculiar People, by an external Law and Ordinances (all
which were typical) over whom he ordained Magistrates, and a Priesthood, which
had no relation to any other Constitution that was contemporary, or should
succeed, but were to continue till the times of Reformation, and then to be
abrogated; yet inasmuch as Antitypes are represented by their Types, it must be
granted, that many Legal Institutions did signify and shadow-forth what
afterward should follow; since therefore it must needs be granted, that the
Jewish State relates no further to us than typically, it will not be
unnecessary to examine how far this Guide can secure himself, and justify his
many turnings, from the confessed constancy of faithful Zicharias.

Consider (1.) that the Jews were a People separated from among the Nations, as
his visible Church, to whom he gave that intituling sign of Circumcision.

2. That their Temple, Worship and Laws, moral, judicial and ceremoninal, were
indisputably of Divine Institution.

3. That as those who were their Priests, were by the high Priest anointed
thereunto; so being once dedicated, were to officiate with integrity and
constancy at the Altar.

4. That no addition was to be admitted to what God had so punctually ordered,
in any Circumstance. Now unless this Guide can prove the Church of Engla^nd the
Antitype;

1. In being the Circumcision in Spirit, by which she is rightly entitled to
the Privileges of the Spiritual Jewish Church.

2. Can as infallibly and unquestionably prove the Divine Institution of her
Faith, Worship and Discipline.

3. That her Ministry is the spiritually Anointed of God, by that one
High Priest after the Order of Melchizedek, and by him commissionated to preach
the everlasting Gospel.

4. And that in Faith, Worship and Discipline she remains as clear and single
from all Inventions, Traditions and Ceremonies (those only allowed as have
their footing in the Divine Appointment and Order of God) unless I say this be
made good, 'twill declare great weakness in any to allow this Guide to argue
from Zecharias's case to his own; -- I grant that whosoever is anointed by
Jesus Christ to preach his everlasting Salvation, ought to do it incessantly,
not mattering the opposition or revolution of Powers; and that NO defect in the
generality can or ought to unminister him, but rather that he faithfully should
decry those Impieties, and keep his station on God's behalf, which righteous
Zecharias did, whose bold withstanding their Inventions, and honest desire of
preserving that Law pure, of which he was instituted Priest, procured no less
than his Martyrdom, from the Cruelty of those vain Superstitionists. But what is
this to Clapham's case? Zecharias was anointed by the High Priest; whence was
Clapham's Ordination? Zecharias was murdered for opposing their unrighteousness
and wicked Traditions: where did Clapham do so? but has he not preached for and
against what he at times has owned to keep his Parish. Zecharias would not
dispense with their Additions to God's Institutions; has Clapham done so too?
how comes he then to call the Church of England, Pure in secondary matters, to
wit, her forms of Prayer, Anthems, Responses, Litanies, Baby-Baptisme, Crosses,
Altars, Steeple Houses East and West, Bowings, Organs, Quiresters, Surplices,
Caps, Rochets, Hoods, with much more such like trash than my memory will serve
at present to insert, which fills up the English Worship, and are known by
persons moderately read in Story, to have been brought forth by the womb of
dark Popery, that sink of Antichristianism: -- But as there ought to be one
Temple, Worship and Priesthood to make Clapham's case resemble Zecharias's, so
that his may approach this Guide's, let us suppose amongst the Jews three
several Temples, Worships and Priesthoods, called Presbyterian, Independent,
Episcopal: If Zecharias had first been of the Presbyterian-Priesthood, and as
that should decline in esteem, embrace the Independents, till by revolution of
Government both were violently suppressed, as to the exercise of their
Consciences toward God, by the Episcopal; and then that Zacherias should
divorce his Independent Spouse, crying All Hail unto the new Establishment, as
Clapham undeniably did, he might have quoted Zacherias with more honor, to his
now shameful retreat: but his constant keeping of his station in faithfulness
to God, sharply rebukes this Guide's manifest Infidelity both to God and Men.

Sect. 5.
His next great Argument to enforce Compliance, is that Sovereignty P. 104.
bestowed on Rulers, who (says he) in particular Circumstances undetermined by
God, have power to order and settle things according to the general Rules laid
down in the Word; Instancing in several Jewish Kings: Although I need not
farther trouble thee nor my self, than barely to recommend the foregoing Page
to thy perusal; yet lest the matter may not be so evident, I shall a little
observe his very great self-contradiction; his words are these: There is not
the like reason to determine all Circumstances in the Christian P. 103.
Churches, as was in the Jewish Church, the one being in its minority, the
other grown up to a state of greater liberty. A Boy when he goes to School, in
every particular he is stiuted to his work; but when he goes to the University,
he only has general Rules for his study, and is left to his own disposition
for order and manner of his studies. Is it not obvious that he does confute
himself, and so has saved me the pains of making any other Answer than what
arises from his own Assertion and Similitude to prove it; He says the
Christian-Church is grown to greater liberty; How so, if still subject to be
imposed upon by Civil Power? is not the slavery greater, since that the Jews
were stinted by God himself, but we by men, and that according to their
fallible apprehensions? yet with such severity is obedience enjoined, as
Nonconformity costs nothing less than the price of Liberty and Estate. But
since by Boys at School he means the Jewish Church, and by those sitted for
the University he intends a state of liberty in secondary matters, what follows
but that our Schoolmasters the Magistrates are dismissed, and we being under an
Evangelical Constitution, are in those matters left to that greater liberty
relating to the Gospel-state; which flatly contradicts that power he in other
places does ascribe unto them: Nay, if I should make the most of his Similitude
for my advantage, how apparent would it be that the very Rulers in the
Jewish-State were Boys, and stinted in all Religious Circumstances, and
consequently not to be our Schoolmasters under a dispensation of greater
freedom, for then the change would be to our apparent loss and injury; so that
others being free as well as Rulers, for them to command is gross usurpation; and
for any to yield obedience is nothing less than High Treason against the King
of Conscience, and a betraying of themselves into the Schoolboys state again.
-- Sometimes he says the Scriptures are clear in this particular; in other
places, promiscuous; but his best Argument is the Magistrate, for never wanting
a ready compliance to their commands (come what will) he has better learnt
Interest than to set his Opinion in Competition; -- However, I shall propose
these Queries, which he may answer if he please, or any else.

Qu. 1. Whether if seven Powers make seven distinct interpretations of
Religious Principles, and erect seven distinct Modes of Worship, according to
what they apprehend from the Scriptures; they all may be submitted to
notwithstanding their contrariety?

Qu. 2. Whether these seven different Principles and modes of Worship, enacted
to be conformed to, in these seven Dominions can be rightly said to proceed
from the Spirit of God, the Unity; and not their erroneous apprehensions?

Qu. 3. Whether any Prescriptions concerning Faith and Worship, should be
allowed or obeyed, if not from that unerring Spirit in which God's true and
only Worship stands?

Qu. 4. Whether any Magistrates now in being, do or can pretend to that
Infallibility?

Qu. 5. Where is that Gospel-Scripture, which impowers Magistrates to concern
themselves in Religious matters?

Qu. 6. Whether it be congenious, or suitable to the second Covenant and times
of Reformation, when the Law is written in the heart, and the Spirit put in the
inward parts; where there is but one King, and one Lawgiver; where the Offices
and assistance of Sun, Moon and Stars are no more required, but the Lamb
Christ Jesus is their Light, their Knowledge, their Guide, their All in All;
for Rulers to interpose their Civil Authority to pull down or set up Religion?

Qu. 7. Whether the first Institution of Magistracy proposed a Jurisdiction
over Consciences, or only the preservation and prosperity of the People in
civil and external matters?

Sect. 6.
Many are his Cautions, and as many his Contradictions, too many for my
observation: In short, the end of all his tenderness to Dissenters, and kind
titles of Christian Churches, Children of the same Father, etc. I find, is a
persuading of all into an acknowledgment of the Church of England. But Reader,
if thou will know the reason why this person Now appears so earnest in his
discourse for all to march in his conforming steps, and thus confidently
imposes himself a Guide on all to the true Religion, as if we had been at a
loss till now both for the true Religion and a Guide, I ask thy patience and
thy credit in the perusal of this notorious (tho contracted) story of his life,
which a necessity is upon me to insert, that such who otherwise may let his
Hypocritical Insinuations gain their esteem, may (if they please) be furnished
with an Antidote against the infection of their nature.

It is not long since (being in those parts) I had some hours converse with
this person, and amongst the many things we touched upon, I charged him with
his retreat from a certain People to whom he formerly had a Religious relation:
upon which he sent me this, with other particulars, by Epistle, in a way of
Apology; That he never had professed himself of any party, nor would come under
any distinguishing denomination of Presbyterian, Independent, Episcopal, owning
no other than that of a Christian, avowing, that whatever apprehensions people
had concerning the Church of England, and notwithstanding several went as far
as New England to enjoy purer Ordinances, yet for our parts (including himself
as a constant son of the Church) we can witness the Lord's presence is amongst
us.

To all which I then answered something, though not so amply; that since he
seems to list himself so early amongst the members of the Church of England,
where has he been during the time of her Captivity and Exile? did he for
Conscience Sake (opposing Covenant, Engagement, etc.) quit the Land, contenting
himself rather in the quality of a poor begging Priest beyond the Seas, than to
embrace the persuasions of those Powers, which had reduced the residue of his
Brethren to extreme poverty? or turned he Trencher-Chaplin, Tutor, etc? did he
traverse the Country, Sprinkling, Marrying, Churching, Burying, the common
trade of those ejected Priests? And can he say, that whilst the King and
Bishops were incapacitated by Exile to act as Officers in the Church and State,
he owned the one for Supreme in matters Civil and Ecclesiastical; and the
others, for so many Apostolical heads in Christ's Church? Did he protest
against the Cruelty of those Powers, in the clear subversion of both? What
Prison was he in? what Bonds did he endure, what Loss sustain, Testimony bear,
and Loyalty express, on the behalf of his Episcopal Faith, and its Defender? --
Alas! But was he not in all those strange occurrences of times, and variety of
changes, to be found Priest of Wramplingam in Norfolk? At the beginning of the
Wars, a most precise Stickler for a Reformation, extolling the great Necessity
as well as Righteousness of the Solemn League and Covenant, encouraging others
thereunto, both by his example and doctrine: Bold for the Directory, and busy
at choosing Elders; and so went under the notion of a Presbyterian: But 'twas
not long before the Independents, through their greater Courage and Policy, had
undermined and vanquished to others Interest, and when possessed of the Authority,
he saw 'twas folly to expect a Sallery as Guide, in that way the
Governing-Party of the Nations had rejected, and therefore was obliged to list
himself a Volunteer in Jo. Munny's Independent Congregation; it was then the
beheaded King was by this Guide both preached and printed, as a Toe Ston smi.
the Im. on the feet. p: 16, 17.
of that Image the little Stone, cut out of the Mountain without hands, was to
smite; and therefore says, the fall of the ten Kingdoms was begun, the Lord is
risen out of his habitation, gainsay not; for who sees not the alteration is
of the Lord? And in his Answer to an Objection, that this Prophecy was
accomplished when this Nation fell from P. 23.
Popery, says he, Doctrinally it was, but not Politically; the Government has
continued the same, yea and hard enough to the Saints (alias NONCONFORMISTS)
none can deny it. Now the Change this Prophecy speaks of respests the
Government. In another place, says P. 15, 16.
he, There can be no clearer evidence that God is about this work of breaking
down this great IMAGE, and smiting the very Feet and Toes thereof, than this
present Victory over the Scottish Forces at Dunbar, (which we are now to render
Thanksgiving to God for) the cause of this War being, Whether this IMAGE shall
be upheld, or the Feet and Toes be broken; In short, O ye Honored Worthies,
whom the Pref. p. 3.
Lord has raised up to effect these great Changes, carry on the Lord's Work;
That your People may not have cause to say, We have changed Pref p 5. Page 24
our TYRANTS, not our TYRANNY; Although Providence seems to put an
Impossibility of settling Government in the Former way: But time has proved him
both a Temporizer, and a false Prophet. 'Twas also then he sought, if possible,
to ingratiate himself with the Powers and People of the Land, by his most
invective and false discourse against the harmless Quakers, with a large
Dedicatory Epistle to O. Cromwell, allowed by him of England, Scotland, Ireland
etc. Protector, to whom, amongst other extraordinary Complements, I cannot let
pass these expressions, where he invites him as God's Delegate, in honor to
Jesus Christ, and out of love to the Churches of Christ, for whose welfare you
have this Great Power committed to You, to stop these Seducers, etc. concluding
thus; The Lord of Heaven and Earth bless your Highness with the continuance of
his gracious Presence with you, that as you have done valiantly in the high
places of the Field, (that is, fought against King and Bishops) so you govern
as righteously and happily in the Gates of the City. O gross dissimulation! Now
it is he turns Engagement-man, and is employed by the several Churches in
Norfolk, to R. Cromwell on the Death of Oliver, as their Representative about
that Petition or Address made by the Priests in general, which terms the Father
Moses, and the Son the Joshua that should conduct them to the Holy Land; But he
being by the Projections and angry resentments of the Long-Parliament, divested
of his usurped Authority, this Guide finds out a very honorable Epithet for
it; which had not long tasted of Power, before another Revolution took its
place: but I must needs confess, that when 'twas noised A King was coming in,
and the Church of England to be restored to all her ancient Emoluments (so
called) this Guide grew seemingly dejected, and very forward in expressing his
dislike against their Spiritual Lordships, and not less contumeliously (as he
now would think) both of her Worship and Discipline, hoping the Presbyterians
Testimony of Allegiance, in their zealously assisting to facilitate the King's
Return, would so far interest him in their concerns, as not wholly to be
excluded from the exercise of their Religion in the Land; But when 'twas
manifest that nothing under an open Conformity would purchase the enjoyment of
their Parishes, (whatever becomes of them) this Guide slinks from his
Independent Church, and Presbyterian hopes, reads the Common Prayer Book,
subscribes the Articles, changes Oliver, Richard, or Parliament, for Charles
(once a Toe of the Beast, that the little Stone was to smite) of England,
Scotland, Ireland, etc. And in the place of Christ's Churches, the Church of
England, with the whole Tribe how ever dignified or distinguished; the beheaded
King (once the first broken Toe of the Image, now) he commemorates with an
Anniversary Sermon; and, as the top of all, boldly renounces his so
solemnly-taken League and Covenant; -- What temporizing's this! O what
unheard of Hypocrisy is here! But Reader, what is thy opinion of the matter?
Can Oliver be Moses? Richard, Joshua? and Charles, Defender of the Faith,
altogether? whose Interests were so opposite, as the last to be exiled, and
kept so by both: With whom was God's presence in all these times? the Church of
England? If so, then not with those that turned her out, where Clapham had his
Parish: How plainly have his actions unmaskt the gross dissimulation of his
heart, and these corrupt fruits explained the poisonous nature of the tree that
brought them forth? But lest I may be thought to wrong him, as if it were
impossible for one who pretends himself a Christian Minister to be guilty of
such abominable time-serving, Reader peruse these passages, where he
confidently affirms such to have been, the best, wisest, and most judicious
Epist. p. 6, 7. B. p. 98.
Christians, who under all those great Changes and Revolutions, amongst us of
latter times, have endeavored the maintaining the Fundamental Doctrines of the
Gospel, even to a degree of compliance in things of a lower nature; in which he
positively concludes all persons, (from Canterbury to the meanest Curat in the
Nation, as also Seculars in their respective places) have been to blame, both
as to their understanding and wisdom, in not yielding with Clapham in those
smaller matters, (viz. an expulsion of the Church of England, a disowning of
Monarchical Authority, or right in the Stuarts Family; Preaching and printing
it a Toe of the Beast, extolling the Covenant, taking the Engagement, being a
Presbyterian, an Independent, a Millenary, etc. praying, and swearing for
Parliament, Protectors, Parliament again, at last King and Bishops) since those
who have left King, Bishops, Common Prayer, etc. and espoused the Interest of
those other Powers, who established other Methods both in Church and State, were
the best and most judicious Christians; but to excuse this brazen Impudence and
Hypocrisy, he concludes, Let not any Principles you have inconsiderately taken
up so far P. 106.
engage you, as to make you loath to return to ways of truth and soberness;
But it would be considered, it is no disgrace for the wisest, holiest, and most
learned men to retreat, in some controversal principles and P. 108.
practices. Reader, will this fig-leaf garment cover the shame of this Guide's
nakedness, from thy discerning and censure? I hope not; but does not his
covering stand in need of one, who says the holiest, wisest, and most
learned men may still be such, and yet walk not in the ways of truth and
sobriety: What weakness, what ignorance, what strange confusion's here! from
which I also must infer, that since he is but here of late returned to the
ways of truth and sobriety, he all his lifetime before walked in the way of
error and madness; Judge then how fit he was to preach others into the
knowledge of the truth, and a sober life: Have not the people given him money
for that which was not bread? And further, I would observe, 'twas in that time
of error and madness he writ those wicked slanders against us who are called
Quakers.

Sect. 7.
I would observe before I finish, that the entendment of his Book is not to
press Conformity to any one in opposition to all other Constitutions, otherwise
than in a temporary sense; for since it is his principle that such are the most
wise and judicious Christians, that have in all Revolutions complied in lesser
matters; it follows, that the Church of England is no further concerned in this
discourse, than whilst she keeps the Power and Magistracy on her side; for
which of the seven sons, viz. Lutherans, Calvinists, Anabaptists, Arminians,
Episcopalians, Presbyterians, Independents, (being of the same P. 17, 18.
Father) with that known, or unknown, etc. shall gain the Prerogative, he by
his own principles stands ready to embrace him; so that no longer than any of
them have external Force to warrant their Commands and Impositions, no longer
should they be acknowledged; but any other of them (though remote in smaller
matters, holding the same Fundamentals) is quite as esteemable in this Guid's
account, and those injudicious that concur not with his sentiments; by which he
does at once commend rather than excuse his past Compliance with those several
persuasions, and palpably discovers his readiness to do the like, as otherwise
conceiving it unwise, (they being the most wise, and best Christians, that
yield in lesser matters) -- But that which renders such Alterations suspicious
to sober men, is the never finding them convenient till change of Government
makes them so; for amongst the many transactions of this person's life, I
should not forget, that when the fifth-Monarchy Principle was in esteem, which
would by no means dispense with any Earthly Monarch (as belonging to the great
Image) J. Clapham prints a discourse in the vindication of it, but the potent
Argument of Cromwell's assuming it under the specious title of Protector,
clearly confuted this great Millenary, as he at large acknowledges in his
Epistle Dedicatory to him before his Book, anciently writ against the Quakers;
-- so that the only constancy I can remarque of J. Clapham, has been the
keeping of his Parish through his very great inconstancy, in his persuasions.

I hope by this time, Reader, thou have well considered and narrowly inspected
the qualities of this Guide, which surely manifest themselves as detestable as
any I have ever met withal; his Ignorance, Impudence and Hypocrisy, but above
all his hackney, mercinary spirit; which doubtless needs must leave such strong
impressions as shall for ever make thee disesteem his undertaking, And that the
Quakers Innocence, who he has so unworthily slandered, without a proof to
warrant his Aspersions, shall not appear the less deserving favor and
encouragement from thee; however he has not been remiss in putting all his
stratagems on foot to render them obnoxious to the fury and displeasure of such
who have power to execute the resentments of their minds, but rather let them
have thy countenance, as a people whose upright and industrious conversation
renders them not less serviceable than exemplary.

Thus have I finished my third Chapter, and hasten to my fourth, which is a
short Comparison of some of his Contradictions; that whilst he runs insultingly
upon us for ignorant, erroneous, and contemptible, it may appear that his
discourse requires an Errata.

CHAP. IIII. His Contradictions Compared.
Sect. 1.
GOD has in the framing of man's nature laid so deep an impression of Religion,
that there is no Nation but does judge themselves interessed therein. Page 1. BUt
as it is a thing all profess themselves interessed in, so there is nothing men
are at greater difference about; some worship the Sun, others the Moon or the
Stars, and almost any creature from whence they received any benefit. Page 2.
In the framing of the nature of Man there are such Principles of Religion
engraven in him, as cannot be razed out. P. 8, 15, 16. We read in the story of
the Israelites, the vanity of man's nature in matters of Religion. P. 3, 4, 5.

Is God's impression divided, or the capacity he gave man so Observe.
blinded as that it cannot discern betwixt Himself, Sun, Moon, or Stars? and is
it possible that man's nature should be religious, and its principles not to be
razed out, and yet vain in those matters? and what spiritual benefit did any
ever receive from Sun, Moon or Stars, that induced them to worship and adore
them?

How greatly then does it behove every man to make a wise choice of that God he
intends to serve, and that Religion he means to live and die in? P. 2. Man's
eternal happiness or misery depends on the right knowing God, or his mistake
about it. P. 2. There is a necessity men should be of some Religion. p. 14. On
the right choosing ones Religion, or our mistake about it, eternal happiness or
misery, life or death depends. p. 16. To choose deliberately what God we will
serve, and then resolve to cleave unto him. p. 15. The dream that every man may
be saved in his own Religion, if he be true to it, is more becoming Turks than
Christians. p. 17.

O strange contradiction! has man a liberty given, nay, advice grounded on
necessity to be of some Religion, and not only to choose Observe.
what God he will, but also to live and die in his service; and yet damned if
he hits not on the true one? What Is this more, than to say it is necessary man
should do somewhat, though he be damned for it? And if it is a dream to expect
Salvation in being true to some Religion, is it not a lethargy of impertinency,
that it is necessary to be of some Religion, and to live and die in it?

There are many false Religions in the world. p. 15. It Is a mistake to think
that there is such a multitude of Religious in the world. p. 27. There being
such diversities of Religions, you had need to have your eyes about you. p. 26.
There are, to speak properly, but four Religions. p. 28.

These cross sayings must needs be manifest to the weakest capacity; for if he
speaks properly on one side, he speaks very improperly Observe.
on the other.

Sect. 2.
Its not sufficient that it be delivered to you by tradition from Ancestors, by
education from Godly-Parents, commended by the practice of wise and pious
persons, -- but make a wise choice for your selves. p. 25. Man must discern the
verity and certainty of these doctrins, that he may venture his soul upon them;
for which end its exceeding necessary to be conversant in those treatises which
prove the verity of the Christian Religion. p. 10. Those that take up Religion
because it is professed in the Country, and commended by example, how slight are
they therein? p. 19. I add one Rule of Caution more against a common, but
dangerous mistake: Take heed of setting up your own apprehensions of the sense
of Scripture: though Fundamentals are plainly laid down, yet points
controverted are hidden from ordinary understandings, that know not the
Languages and proper Idioms of Scripture, and other advantages of Learning. p.
109.

In one side this Guide is for every individuals choosing from a Obser.
reason in himself; in the other, that he should accept things from the
apprehensions and greater skill of others.

But it is unseasonable to be contending about things not so clearly revealed in
Scripture; p. 44. Search the Scriptures, and look well to them, they are your
Chard and Compass to steer your Course by; try all things by them. p. 47. But
darkly laid down. p. 47. Take heed of that great mistake, that nothing is to be
admitted, in and about the Administrations of the Church of Christ, but what is
held forth in Scripture. p. 99, 100.

O strange confusion! A Rule, and no Rule; revealed, and not Observe.
revealed: Is it not unreasonable to suppose that Christ, instead of rendering
his Church more glorious and infallible than ever; should leave her destitute
of information in those things which concern her peace, since contrary
apprehensions about them have been the ground of all Division and Persecution
through Ages, and will be yet with most, notwithstanding this Guide's
directions? -- Can the Scriptures be clear in deep, and not in shallow matters?

God has committed the care of Religion, and the settlement of it, to those in
Authority, in their Dominions, in such a way as they judge most agreeable to the
Rule of the Word. p. 68. It Is not sufficient that it is commanded by the Laws of
the Land, but make a wise choice for your selves. p. 25. p. 53. They are to see
all be administered according to the same; and in the particular circumstances
undetermined by God, they have a power to order and settle things according to
the general Rules laid down in the Word. p. 104. And men that act according to
Reason will look into the Oracles of God himself, wherein God has revealed his
Will concerning Faith and Worship. p. 9.

If God has invested Magistrates with the power of Interpretation, and
settlement of Religious matters accordingly; is it not Observe.
absurd to bid men choose for themselves, since they are to be concluded by
another choice? and how the Oracles of God should be perspicuous to all
understandings, and yet need an Interpreter, (I mean the Magistrate) I would
fain understand.

Sect. 3.
The Christian Religion was confirmed by many signs; by the means of
propagation of it by weak and unlearned men, by whose preaching it overspread
the world. p. 31. The Quakers in respect of their want of learning and outward
accomplishments, are contemptible. P. 62. The Fundamentals of Christianity are
so plainly laid down in Scripture, that the weakest Christians may understand
them. page 110. Controverted points are hidden from ordinary understandings
that know not the Languages, and proper Idioms of Scripture, and customs of the
Church, and other advantages of Learning, that its ordinarily impossible they
should find out the mind of God therein. p. 111.

What Contradiction is here! that what he designs to have been Observe.
proof or argument, to have recommended the more unquestionably the belief of
the Christian Religion in old times, to the primitive Christians, he here
should make the reason why he rejects and reviles the Quakers and their
Testimony; -- and that he should tell us, the Spirit they received perfectly
informed them, and yet that Learning is to be the only means of knowing God's
mind in these days, whilst he confesses at the same time, the weakest
Christian may understand the Fundamentals of Religion.

God is to be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth -- p. 70. p. 71. For who is
there that knows not that forms of Prayer have been of exceediag long
continuance in the Christian Church. p. 91. To pray, is part of God's Worship,
but whether it be in a Book or out of it, is no part at all. page 109.
Set-forms, are not only used and prescribed in the Old Testament, but also in
the New. p. 94.

How! Worship in Spirit, and yet by words of man's prescription! Observe.
Can any man bring the Spirit to so many words, to begin with I, and end with
R? or who knows the Spirit's mind so punctually as to prescribe for Generations
to come the words it will use, for all persons and conditions that may be in
the world? who can pretend to know all states, that he may write prayers for
each? Why not forms of sighs and groans? -- Was it not a Spiritual-Worship
Christ Jesus set up, above sixteen hundred years ago, in opposition to the
Jewish one, and all other particular Worships in the World? which are known to
have been forms, and such as this Guide pleads for, at least the Jewish; and
produce me a Form put forth and established by any of the Apostles, who were
faithful in God's House; -- But did not Forms creep up when the primitive Power
and Spirit was lost, imitating Prayer, but not Praying? And did not Tertullian
in his Apology, (who is generally rank't in the beginning of the third Century)
write, that the Christians prayed not by Book, but as they were moved by the
Spirit of God, or to that purpose; And I challenge this Guide, or any living,
to make appear that a Form of Prayer was established till sometime after his
death; And this Guide himself acknowledges in his Stone smiting the Image on
the feet, that the Apostasy was began, the Empire Ston smi. the Ima. on the
feet. p. 29.
yielded up to the Papacy, the primitive purity of Christian Worship, failed,
and became corrupted: and let him tell me if the Worship of the Church of
England had not its beginning there, at least those things he calls Additaments
and Modes; so that they are not concluded as necessary by any Light or
Prudence, but innovated by a vain, formal, and superstitious nature: Besides,
examine the contradiction of his own Assertions, God must be worshipped in
Spirit, and yet in Form: Forms are not only of Legal, but of
Gospel-Institution, and yet whether Prayer be within Book or without Book it
matters not.

Its a vain delusion to think that the Spirit should discover all deep
Mysteries. p. 111. Wherein you are otherwiseminded, He will REVEAL the Truth
[the Mystery] unto you. page 46. The Spirit of God teaches not by such
immediate Enthusiasms [or Revelations] p. 111. God will REVEAL his Secrets to
such as fear Him, and lead you by his Spirit. p. 46, 47.

If it be a vain delusion to say the Spirit only can discover all deep
Mysteries, pray what is it to say it shall reveal the Truth, Obser.
which comprehends all? and that it will reveal God's Secrets, (what are they
but Mysteries?) And if God's Spirit does not teach immediately, why does Clapham
say that it will REVEAL God's Secrets, and lead us? which implies the
familiarity and constancy of his presence. What contradiction's this!

Sect. 4.
For who is there of the highest Form of Christians that are ascertained that
in every particular doctrine and practice, that these be in the right, seeing
the best of men are imperfect, and may and do err. p. 53. Let the Doctrins and
Mysteries of Faith you receive, influence your hearts and lives, sanctify and
change them. Rest not in the Form of Godliness without the Power of it. p. 27.
p. 70. Who is in all things free from error? What Church or Person upon Earth?
p. 65. p. 81. In the Church of England is a professed renunciation of the
Devil, the World, and the Flesh, with ALL their sinful works and lusts. p. 70.
The Quakers trust in a pretended sinless perfection. p. 63. Let this Truth
influence your hearts and lives, so as you sincerely obey the Gospel, and live
in the daily expectation of the coming of the Lord, and give diligence to be
found of him without SPOT, and BLAMELES. p. 40.

Here Is the perfection of his contradictions; -- 1. Is it sense Obser.
to affirm that Societies are sanctified and changed, and yet imperfect,
corrupt, and erroneous? 2. If God is to be sanctified of all that come near
unto him, then such as cannot sanctify him, cannot approach him; but Clapham,
and such as cry, They have no health in them, and consequently unsanctified,
cannot sanctify the Lord, therefore cannot they approach him. 3. He asks the
question, What Church is without corruptions? and as patly answers it, The
Church of England (for she) renounces the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, with
all their deceitful works and lusts. So that perfection is an Article of
Clapham's Faith, as being of that Church. 4. And why should he be angry that
the Quakers trust in a sinless perfection, as that which will exceedingly
rejoice at the appearance of their Lord? Since he has found so suitable a
defense, that in so many words admonishes all to give diligence to be found of
him in peace, without SPOT, and BLAMELES.

And Reader, though he never did intend by his Discourse a Vindication of the
Quakers Principles, yet may thou easily perceive how he is left of God in
this conceited undertaking, to manifold gross contradictions; and whilst he
would be thought competent to enervate such Opinions as don't quadrate, or
agree with his, his Book is made his confutation: -- Nor have I hinted at the
moity, because I would avoid prolixity, professing in sincerity, I scarce have
ever read such a compendium of absurdities, although, when first I saw his
Treatise, I was in expectation of some essay, or new Atlantis in Religion, as
might (if not) deserve an approbation of its Doctrine, at least have manifested
the ingenuity of its Author; but to find the gleanings of some moldy Authors,
and dark suggestions of unwarrantable Tradition, venture to put a cheat upon
the World, under the specious Title of a Guide, (who had not gone a page before
he lost his way) at once expressed more ignorance and impudence than any piece I
have met with since I have held the least intelligence with Books; and I hope
what has been already writ, will by thee be esteemed a sufficient answer to
this Guide, and so unvizard his designs, as neither thou or any else from
thence shall take the least encouragement to embrace his Religion, or give
entertainment to his false Aspersions, but rather am willing to believe, that
persons ingenious and deliberate, will never look upon a time-serving Priest,
thus circumstantiated with great variety of misdemeanors, or any thing his
parts and malice can suggest, so favorably, as to accept his sentiments to
the apparent prejudice of such, whose carriage and correspondence amongst men,
are in the general confessed to be discreet and friendly; for if the Persons
invested with Authority shall once admit of implicit apprehensions for their
Rule, and that from one whose very actions carry such undeniable malignity with
them, those differing Persuasions against whom he may have treasured up
revenge, must certainly expect the effects of their severity and displeasure,
let them in other matters, where public preservation is concerned, appear
never so ready and contributory.

But such procedures relish rather of Romish bigottry, and inhumane
inquisition, than Christian tenderness and humane prudence: For as a gentle
treatment of Dissenters has ever been the most effectual way for uniting
differences in Religion, (at least preserving of the peace) so should all
Magistrates remember (if they please) that their Authority cannot reasonably
extend beyond the end for which it was appointed, which being not to inthrone
themselves Sovereign Moderators in causes purely Conscientious, and relating to
a World in which they cannot pretend the least Jurisdiction, but only to
maintain the impartial execution of Justice, in regulating civil matters with
most advantage to the tranquillity, enrichment and reputation of their
Territories, they should not bend their Forces, nor employ their strength, to
gratify the selfseeking spirit of the Priests, or any private interest
whatsoever; -- An Exercise below the dignity of their Office, and much too
narrow for that universal influence it should have upon the Public.

Sect. 5.
But to conclude, judicious Reader, hold not so slight an esteem of the Quakers
Principles, because decri'd by such as either don't know them, or well know an
entertainment of them would put a period to their gain: But soberly examine if
there be any other way to perfect Victory over those corruptions and fleshly
lusts, to which we naturally are addicted, and most infallibly occasion that
disorder and confusion we see all Nations subject to, than what they Preach up,
Write for, and Walk by, even that Grace of God which brings Salvation, (from
all iniquity) which says this Guide, is the sum of all, viz. The Grace of God
which brings Salvation P: 43.
has appeared unto all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World:
Which being really attended on, its instructions cordally embraced, and holy
motions entirely resigned unto, with that noble, but necessary resolution, of
despising all shame, and patiently enduring the Cross; shall make thee a
Righteous Magistrate, a Reformed Priest, or a Holy Citizen of the New
Jerusalem: It leads into circumspection, and pure conformity to the Divine
Pleasure: Doubts and Fears, Sighs and Tears, shall fly away, and in that
faithful stayedness of heart on God, We can, according to our respective
measures, say, He makes the Rivers of his Peace to overflow, and
never-failingly bedews with the refreshment of his glorious Presence: Which
Reader, that thou may, and all men really experiment, is the very earnest
desire of him, that God in everlasting love has made a Friend to the True
Religion, but an enemy to every false Way.

W. P.

ERRATA.
Page 3. lin. 24. for they read he. and l. 23. f. are r. his P. 7. l last, r.
denominate. P. 9 l. 24. f. r. ambitious. P. 11. l. 29. f. mawy, r. many. P. 23.
l. 3. f. impiousy, r. imperiously. P. 32. chap. 2. r. His Aspersions. P. 36. l.
35 f. cleansed, r. cleanses. P. 37. l. 6. r. have them in, take etc. and l. 25.
f. hand, r. hid.


