THE Christian-Quaker, AND HIS DIVINE TESTIMONY VINDICATED BY Scripture, Reason
and Authorities; AGAINST The Injurious Attempts, that have been lately made by
several Adversaries, with Manifest Design to render HIM Odiously Inconsistent
with CHRISTIANITY and Civil Society.

In II. Parts. The FIRST more General, by William Penn. The SECOND more
Particular, by George Whitehead.

Veritas fatigari potest, vinci non potest, Either. and Beat. lib. 1. Thus says
thy Lord the LORD, and thy God that pleads the Cause of his People; Behold I
have taken out of thy Hand the Cup of Trembling, even the Dregs of the Cup of
my Fury, thou shall no more drink it again: But I will put it into the Hand of
them that Afflict thee, Isaiah 51. 22, 23. Printed in the Year 1674.

TO THE Noble Bereans Of THIS AGE.
WHen our dear Lord Jesus Christ, the Blessed Author of the Christian-Religion,
first sent forth his Disciples, to proclaim the Happy Approach of the Heavenly
Kingdom, among several other Things that he gave them in Charge, it pleased him
to make this One of their Instructions; Into whatsoever City or Town ye shall
enter, enquire who in it is Worthy; foreseeing the ill Use Unworthy Persons
would make of that Message, and with what Unweariedness the implacable Pharisee
and subtle Scribe would endeavor to Pervert the Right Way of the Lord, and
thereby prejudice the Simple against the Reception of that Excellent Testimony.

This being our Case, who above every Tribe of Men are most Maliciously
Represented, Bitterly Envied, and Furiously Oppugn'd by many of the Scribes and
Pharisees of our Time, for as Impious Wretches as Those of that, reputed our
Blessed Savior and his Constant Followers, it becomes us in a Condition so
desperate, to provide our selves with some Worthy Readers, Men that dare trust
their Reason above Reports, and be Impartial in an Age as biased as this we
live in; whose Determinations shall not wait upon the Sentence of Ignorance nor
Interest, but a Sincere and Punctual Examen of the Matter.

And since there are None recorded in Sacred Writ, on whom the Holy Ghost
conferred so Honorable a Character, as the Bereans of that Age (for that they
both searched after Truth impartially, and when they found it, embraced it
readily) for which they were entitled Noble) Therefore it is that to you, the
Progeny of that Worthy Stock, and Noble Bereans of our Age, We, the so much
Calumniated Abettors of the Cause of Truth, choose to dedicate this Defense of
our Holy Profession from the Injurious Practices of a fort of Men, who not
unlike to the Jews of Thessalonica, that, Envying the Prosperity of the Gospel
among your Ancestors, made it their Business to stir up the Multitude against
the Zealous Promoters of it. And no Matter what it be, provided they can but
Obtain their End of fixing an Odium upon the Quakers: They do not only boldly
condemn what they esteem Worst in us (how deservedly we will not now say) but
slyly insinuate what is Best, to be Criminal.

The Sobriety of our Lives, they call a Cheat for Custom; and our Incessant
Preachings and Holy Living, a Decoy to Advance our Party: if we say Nothing to
them when they interrogate us, it is Sullenness or Inability; if we say
Something to them, it is Impertinency or Equivocation: We must not believe as
we do believe, but as they would have us believe, which they are sure to make
obnoxious enough, that they may the more securely bait us for it; Nor must our
Writings mean what we say we mean by them, but what they will have them to
mean, lest they should want Proofs for their Charges: It was our very Case that
put David upon that sad Complaint, Every day they Wrest my Words, all their
Thoughts are against me for Evil; But to David's God we commit our Slandered
Cause, and to you the Bereans of our Age.

Degenerate not from the Example of your Progenitors; if you do, you are no
longer True Bereans, and to such only we inscribe this Work; if you do not, we
may assure our selves of the Justice of a Fair Enqui^y and an Equal Judgment.

The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ augment your Desire after Truth,
give you clearer Discerning of the Truth, and enable you both more readily to
receive, and with greater Resolution to maintain the Truth. We are

Rickmersworth, the 16th of the 10th Month, 1674. Your greatly Traduced, but
truly Christian Friends, William Penn, George Whitehead.


THE PREFACE.
THe Insatiable Thirst of Men after Religious or Civil Empire, has filled
almost every Age with Contest: But for Pure Religion scarcely has any one
contended.

To mention the Disorders within the first Six Read Eusebius. Evag. Socr. Ruffin.
Coun. Trent. Simps. Full. Perr. Bak. Dan. Trus. Daval. Clark. Morl. Milt. etc.
hundred Years from Christ (who have been by far worse succeeded) were to write
the Ecclesiastical History; But such as are not ignorant in it, must needs
know, that Religion so early, became a Cloak for Dominion, and Truth a Pretense
for Revenge.

What better has happened since, Modern Stories tell us. Certainly the
Separation of most Parties from former Institutions, however rightly begun,
have basely degenerated into Self-Promotion, and when there, to the Exercise of
that Power over Consciences, which, when it was their own Case ^o suffer from
others, they esteemed most Cruel.

I well know, that there is something in Man, that prompts to Religion, and
such as stands not in the Traditions of Men, nor any mere Formality: But Man,
that he may not wholly lose the Honor of a share, or be reputed sloathful; with
an unwarrantable Activity so adulterates, and by an Intermixture of his own
Conceptions with those Divine Dictates, and purer Discoveries, so
sophisticates, that they last become more his own Workmanship then the Truth's.
And so fond is he of this Child of his Brain, that like some ancient Tyrants,
he will rather cut his way to the Throne by a Violence upon all other
Consciences, then not put an Earthly Crown upon its Head.

They that know not the Truth of this, have scarcely looked back to their
Great-Grand-Father's time. Two Centuries have not past as yet, since See Book
of Mar. Luth. contr. Ecc.
Bold and Honorable Attempts were made against that Apostate Church of Rome,
which proved so Successful, Zuing. Calv.
as to win many Kingdoms from her Tyranny: Beza etc.
God certainly blessed the Endeavors of those Conscientious Persons, who spent
their Estate, Time and Blood in that truly Holy, but Passive War.

But this has been the Misery, that they being intercepted by Death, their
Successors, who acted not in the same Simplicity, and upon like Convictions as
they did, began to think it no small Testimony of their regard to their
martyred Ancestors, to invest what they called their Religion with Worldly
Majesty, and then make use of the temporal Sword to establish it, with their
own Additio^s, as the most Hayl. of Reform.
true, certain and infallible Way; Employing that Force, those Mulcts and cruel
Penalties to extort Conformity, or else perish who dissented: which rendered
Rome's Actions so detestable to the very Martyrs, and indeed without which they
had not been Martyrs.

The Work was now to promote Religion by Power, who had so lately overcome It
by Suffering. Leagues, stately Embassyes, great Conventions, raising of Armies,
War with one, and Peace with another took up the Minds of most, how to defend
the Stateliness and Pompous Grandeur of their Religion, though they by so
doing, gave Testimony, they had lost much of the true Sense of that very
Religion they pretended to advance.

'Twas now that some appeared dissatisfied with such Proceedings, decry'd that
Superstition and Formality Cambd. Life of Q. E.
which had been unadvisedly detained by the English Church as Decent; for the
Invention of that Rush. Hist. Collect.
Church, the Protestants themselves styled Antichristian. They believed men's
Lives were much corrupted, and laid the fault upon the Pride, Avarice,
Voluptuousness and Ignorance of the Clergy; they stripped themselves of most
Superfluities, and seemed to promote a streighter Way, then what was then
generally professed; these they called Puritans.

But such sour Resentments had both the Powers Cambd.
and Prelates of their Procedure, that Laws were enacted, and executed to
Blood, as well to hinder Religion from being more refined, as they had for
preserving it from being again more gross. Surely, this looked more like Care
for Power, Faction and Interest, then Religi^. For without doubt, the Plea of
those Puritans was thus far unanswerable by their Adversaries. By this time
almost all People were taken with their Complaints, especially those, who
seemed more Religiously inclined, which at last had so leavened the Gentry, as
well as the Commonalty, that when that memorable Parliament was chosen, and for
their Sitting, called afterward, The Long-Parliament, the Sream clearly run on
the Puritanical-side.

The Church of England disdaining their pretended Reformation, and as resolved
to abate in nothing of Her Splendour, Wealth and Preserment, in e^ther Civil or
Ecclesiastical Matters, makes Head against th^se supposed Disturbers of the
Peace of both Church and State: And as the blind Wrath of Heathens taught the
Papists, and the Papists the Protestants; so the Protestants by their Coercive
Power for Religion, taught the Puritans to be resolute and fierce in the
Defense of their Separation. The Complaints of the one, meeting with strong
Denials from the other, they came to Big Words, and from thence to Heavy Blows.
Such Feud, such Hist: Wars of Engl.
Hatred, such War, Spoil and lamentable Slaughter, as for many Ages had not
been known, were the most deplorable Effects of that Contest for Religion. By
this time Victory turning to the Puritanical Party, now degenerated into harsh
Presbytery; they who before did fasten Anti-Christianism upon the Church of
England, for offering to act Coercively toward them, in what concerned
Conscientious Separation, become themselves the most Narrow in Religion, and
Vigorous in imposing upon the sharpest Penalties (known to those times) what
they Synodically agreed to be Scripture-Faith, Worship and Discipline;
forgetting or denying to leave that Liberty of Examination to others, they had
so earnestly contended for against the Prelates of the English Church. So
partial is Self, so blind is Interest.

But neither does our Story end here; for these Men forgetting their Primitive
Tenderness, and that lowly Spirit, which justly charged the English Clergy with
some Degeneracy, as had that done the Romish, were quickly Reminded by the
timely and honest Zeal of those they call Independants and Anabaptists: who
having a clearer Sight of things, as I believe, and more Regard for
Reformation, at once charged them with neglect, and endeavored to push things
a Step further. They lowdly exclaimed against the Looseness of their Parishes,
and their too free Administration of the Sacraments to mixed and unqualified
Persons; They decry'd the Absoluteness of their Church-Monarchy, with the
Necessity of Humane Learning to Ministerial Qualification: And lastly, with
great Earnestness they disclaimed against the Imposition of any Faith or
Worship, or punishing with Corporal Penalties, such as dissented for the sake
of Conscience. One would have thought, these Men had set the last bounds to the
Spirit of Superstition and Revenge, and that having seen the Rock on which
their Predecessors split, they should have learnt Safety by their Destruction,
and Construed those foregoing Calamities Landmarks for their preservation, as
was anciently said -- -- aliena pericula cautum. that is, having beheld so many
fair Adventures for Reformation (begun certainly from an inward sense of the
corrupt, and Un-Christ-like State of things) to issue in Fullness, Pride,
Superstition, and base Coertion upon Conscience, they should have lived in an
holy Subjection, and awful Regard to that holy Spirit of Truth, that had given
them some farther Illumination, which would have taught the Denial of those
Worldly Lusts, that Covetousness and Revenge whetted their desires after, and
have preserved them in the Way of Meekness, Patience, Long-suffering and
Holiness, without which none shall ever see God. But alas! as Reformation from
Popery and Prelacy was soon overrun by Party-Asperity, and Self-Promotion; so
truly these Men made as little Conscience to employ the old Weapon of external
Force to advance themselves, and depress others, as had those that went before
them.

It Is true, the Presbyterian, who showed them the Way, as had the Protestant
him, and the Papist the Protestant, being so considerable in Number, and these
Peoples Maxim so narrow (viz.) Out of a Church, out of the Faith; Not Dipped,
not Christian'd: That too great Division might not perish the whole Affair, of
continuing the Government in its present Channel of incredible Advantage unto
them, they much against their Will, admitted the Presbyterian into a share with
them, especially of Parochial Churches, as they are called, and did not wholly
exclude the more Moderate of them, a part in the Administration of the Civil
Government.

Thus then (though with regret, and no small Jealousy) being tollerably well
agreed, like as he that from a poor Priest to a Pope, was wont to be remembered
of his Original, by a Net (because several of the Apostles were Fishermen)
which he commanded to be brought to his Table, when Pope, cried, Take it away,
Take it away, the Fish is caught; So they having caught the Great TwoHeaded
Fish of Civil and Ecclesiastical Power, and upon one a Crown, upon the other a
Miter, Laodicea-like, Full, Rich, and wanting nothing, and willing to forget
their small Original; their Fathers House, those Heavenly Convictions, and
their humble frame of Spirit, their early Sense in some good measure had reduct
them to; O! Into what Falsness, Cruelty, Covetousness, and Folly did they not
precipitate themselves! To violate Faith with Men, and break the most Solemn
Covenants that any Age have ever made with GOD himself, to sail to Security
through Blood, and establish their Church in Persecution; not un-like the
Ottoman Emperors, that never think their Imperial Crowns better settled, then
in the Murder of their Brethren. But above the rest, to decry Tyranny and
Persecution, and yet to be the Authors of both ^s if they could not have used
their Power without abusing it, is unworthy the Name of true Men. I will
believe succeeding times may have outdone them in Debauchery; but I can never
think (unless better informed) that any Age has so much as equaled them in a
Treacherous Hypocrisy: though (that I may be just) several among them were not
wanting to express their utter Abhorrence of such Procedure, which has thus
far aggravated the others Apostasy, that they were worse treated then such
that were reputed their Public Enemies; as if not to be Treacherous, had been
to be Disaffected: concerning which I refer the Reader to the first and second
Narratives, printed in the Year 1659.

Certainly, it was now time, that God should arise, and that his Enemies should
be manifest; who, under the Splendidst Show of Reformation, that almost any Age
for 1400. Years could parallel, had Crucified the Holy Life of Religion,
stifling the Spirituality thereof by reformed Formality, empty Shows, and mere
tinckling Cymbals of Sin-pleasing Doctrines: And their Primitive Tenderness
being worn off by Time and Preferment, none grew more Superstitious and
Persecuting then those who once seemed most averse from it (I charitably
forbear the mention of particular Persons) In short, Pride, Self-Seeking, and
Self-Establishment, in Glory, Wealth, and Worldly Prosperity having undermined
the Worthy Honesty, that was at first stirring in the Hearts of some of them:
Behold a Glorious, but Empty Trunk of Profession! as lofty as the Jews
themselves, pretending to be Children of Abraham, and Heirs of the Promise, yet
Servants to Sin; Christians by Imputation, but not by Qualification; saved in
Christ, though lost, through Sin, in Themselves; pray by the Spirit, yet their
Duties unholy Things. Behold Babylon in one of her best Trims!

But it was at this time, serious Reader, when Religion was so much talked of,
and so little practiced, that it pleased the Eternal Wise God, who is
unsearchable in his Goings, to appear, and manifest the Knowledge of Himself,
by a Way contemptible to the World (as indeed, when did he otherwise) showing
himself first to Shepherds, and Men of mean Rank, whose, outward Abilities were
as incapable to gain Applause from Men, as their Meanness to invite them: Men,
Plain and Simple, who desired of long time above Worldly Treasure, they might
be acquainted with the true and unchangable Way of God. All the Religion they
were taught of Men, or the strength of Memory could collect from Books, joined
with their own Simplicity and Zeal, was not able to overcome the Enemies of
their Souls, for whose Redemption God appeared, and they often groaned in
secret; being truly willing to undergo any cross, that might but help them to
this Knowledge, after which they had daily thirsted more then for appointed
Food.

Thus, that no Flesh might glory in his Presence, did the Almighty God,
according to his many Precious Promises, break in upon the Spirits of a poor
despised People, by his terrible Power, which caused the old Foundations to
shake, and begat holy Terror and Dread, because of the Glory of his Majesty,
who had revealed Himself. Judgment overtook for Sin, and Righteousness was laid
to the Plummet, and a true Scale was erected, wherein all the Profession in the
World was lighter then the Chaff, which is blown away of the Tempest. This Day
of Judgment for Sin, and Consumption upon all the pleasant Pictures of
Religion, that Tradition, Education, or Imagination had drawn in the Minds of
Men, they were constrained to Declare, and the very Utterings thereof were
astonishing, both to Professors and Profane; For being Witnesses of a nearer
thing, then an Outside Religion, however refined, in which the whole World was
adulterated from God, and that the Time of the Kindling of the Indignation of
the Lord God Almighty was come, because of Iniquity and Unrighteousness that
covered the Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea (which made the Controversy
Essential; Not to consist about exterior Order, Church Government, or mere
Articles of Faith; But that Inward Principle of Righteousness, which reduces
the Soul to the Heavenly Order, and that Faith which overcomes the World.)
Therefore in the Name of the Lord, and by the alone Arm of the Almighty, did
several of these poor Men go forth into Towns, Cities, and Countries,
proclaiming the Day of the Controversy of God with Men, by the pleadings of
his Holy Light, Power, or Spirit in their Hearts and Consciences, decrying all
Notions of Christ above Possession; calling the lofty Cedars to bow, and the
sturdy Oaks to bend before the Heavenly Appearance of the Lord, by his Light
within: that all Knowledge of God, not gotten through inward Judgment, and
Experience of the Operation of his saving Hand, was accursed of God: And that as
the Earth of Wickedness in Men's Hearts should be consumed by the Refiners Fire,
so the Heavens of lofty Knowledge should by the fiery heat thereof, be wrapped up
as a scrole, that a new Heaven and a new Earth, in which dwells ( not
IMPU^ATIVE, but) Real, Inherent, and Everlasting Righ^ousness, might be known
to be created by the Word of God, nigh in the Heart.

I say, these Men alarming the Nation with the Sound of this harsh and terrible
Trumpet, who had taken so long a Nap in Pleasure, Ease, and Fleshly Religion,
caused very strange, and differing Apprehensions.

Some pricked to the very Heart, cried out, What shall we do to he saved? whilst
the Wolf and the Fox lay in wait to intercept the blessed Work of the Lord, by
several ways of Cunning and Cruelty. The Priests (who were degenerated as well
as the People, basely Teaching for Hire, and Divining for Money: The best
accounted of them making Bargains, how much a Year to preach the Gospel, as
they call it, and so is it to this Day) like Foxes seeing their Kennel found
out, into which they had so long hid their Prey, and fearing that the Turning
Men to the Light in the Conscience, and their so resolutely Testifying, That no
Man could be at Peace with God who went condemned thereof; and that all
Knowledge of the things of God, which has not been received through the holy
Subjection of the Creature to God's Heavenly Appearance Within him (for
whatever may be known of God, is manifested within, says the Apostle) was
above the true Teacher and the Sufferings of the Cross of Christ: They posted
to the Magistrates, Saul-like, with whole Packets of Lies, Slanders and
Invectives, on purpose to beget a Wolf fish Nature in them, to put a stop to
the Progress of this blessed Manifestation of the Eternal Light of
Righteousness; but the Exercise of a Merciless Power. Some few would not be
prevailed upon; but the Generality, seeing their Worldly Honor, and which to
some of them was dearer, their beloved Easy Religion was struck at, Root and
Branch, they, as an Armed Man, furiously employed their Strength to the Relief
of the Priests, and Subversion of these poor Men: Some were Imprisoned, others
Whipped, several Bruised, not a few Murdered, and many Robbed and Spoiled of
their Goods.

And that the Priests might show themselves; some of them thinking it to long
to wait the Magistrates Leisure, turned their own Pay-Masters upon Heads,
Shoulders, and other Limbs of Men, and Women, not distinguishing in either Sex,
or Age.

The Cry of these Innocent People came up to the then Supreme Authority, but
Relief could not be had. One Book came out upon another, conjuring the
Magistrates to employ their Power, to the utter Extirpation of these Seducers,
and commanded the People that they should not so much as have any common
Intercourse with them, but avoid them as the Pest, and fly them as Witches and
Sorcerers: It were to irksom to tell the moity of their Stratagems. O the
Mercys of these Men were Cruelties! But yet farther, many things were writ by
us in Vindication o^ our Innocence. Some that sought for the Redemption of
Israel, and the Right Way of God, believed; here and there a Simeon, a
Centurion, a Priest, a Lawyer, a Physician, a Customer, and Fisherman, and
abundance of Handecrafts, for the Poor received the Gospel. But Alas! Neither
our Apologies, nor grievous Sufferings, were enough to allay that swelling
spirit of Cruelty; nor in the least affect the minds of Priests or Rulers with
the Deploredness of our Condition, so as to redress all these grievious
Sufferings: perhaps, sometimes a little show of Favor there might be, but
usually attended with a more terrible Storm. They at last (I mean the
Magistrates) by the detestable Suggestions of the Priests, not having any Law
in force, by which they could just^fie the Rigor of their Carriage toward us,
enacted first, that no Man should Travel on the Sabboth-Day, thereby to punish
us as Criminals, for going to our Assemblies to Worship the living God; and
next, that such Persons as should be found above so many Miles from their own
Homes, not being able to give a good account of themselves, should be whipped as
Vagabonds; by which Laws, they miserably oppressed our Friends, many Men of
considerable Estates, being worse used then very Vagabonds. Thus covering the
one over with Devotion, for the Day of rest, and the other, with prudent care,
for the Good of the Commonwealth.

Nor was this all; but as if they would outdo the Ages of cruel Popery and
degenerated Prelacy, they received both the Oath of Queen Mary, made against
such Protestants as came to decry the Idolatrys and Superstitions of the Romish
Worship in the time of their Service, thereby to justify themselves in the
Exercise of Cruelty and Revenge upon us, for bea^ing our faithful Testimony
against their Formal and Hypocritical Preachments; and that Oa^h of Abrogat^on
of Popery, that by the Advantage they took of our not Swearing at all, they
might the better fasten upon us the Character of Papists, as Men Jesuited to
that Interest, with plain Design to render us odious, and cover their own
Cruelty; Well may I say OUTDONE, when pretended reformed Protestants,
endeavor the Security of their Religion by the enaction of those Laws, which
were made by Inhuman Papists, against such as in good measure we can say, were
truly reformed Protestants; thereby condemning that in the Papists, which they
vigorously acted themselves: and basely sought to entrap us by a colorable
Oath, wickedly forecast, because they knew we could not Swear at all, to punish
us for not swearing against the Papists. This was their Cloak they had to cover
their Malice, but it is grown to short, scanty, and out of date. The Bruises,
Bloodshed, grievous Beatings and tedious Imprisonments which followed this
procedure, are now seen with detestation of almost the very multitude it self,
and after Generations shall have it in utter abhorrance.

O what did not the Blood-thirsty Spirit in its Day? These were the great
pretending Presbyterians, Independents and Anabaptists, Fighting, Knocking,
Kicking, Robbing, Imprisoning and Murdering an Innocen^ People, whose whole
Business was to Deny the daw^g Doctrines of the Times, and to Direct People to
a certain Holy Principle in themselves, unto which being Obedient, they should
experience Sin conquered, and Peace with God; preferring this above all the
Traditions of Men, or utmost Power of Human Ministry.

But, as many of us saw in the Eternal Light, that such Obstinacy in both
Priests and Rulers, to the Heavenly Truth, would provoke the Just God, to
overturn them forever (which though we did once and again tell them by
Writings, and by Word of Mouth, they slighted our plain-Dealing, turning it
upon us, that we should vanish in a little while) So within very few Years God
wrought the wonderful Revolution; and those who had been Inflicters The King's
Return.
of Heavy Punishments upon us, became the Objects of their greatest
Dis-pleasure, whose Power and Estates they had so long usurped: I can call it
no otherwise, for not the Country, but Self was wickedly advanced thereby.

Behold the Justice of the Almighty, such as refused us our Liberty, after
their Solemn Oaths to God and Men, for the Preservation of Liberties, Civil
and Religious, became destitute of their Own; and who spoiled us, were spoiled
by Others, and we just now under their Fee^, came upon Equal Terms with Our
Adversaries: At what time, though both They and We, used our Endeavors to
prevent Coertion upon Conscience, yet whether they prevailed or no, some were
in Hopes, that the Edge of their Spirits, by this Change of Affairs, had been
so doubled, as never more to cut, or wound a People that had never wronged
them; and that their Retirement would have been rather employed in hearty
Sorrow, See Annab. Decl.
for their Abuse of Government, in their Unjust Severity, toward us as well as
others, then a Continuance of the same Enmity. But thus far such failed in
hopes, their Displeasure against us surviving their Power to inflict it; for
though it is true, that in time of Persecution, they would inquire out of their
By-Holes, of our Welfare ( for who had so long reigned showed they were most
unfit for Suffering) and like People upon City-Walls or from other conven^ent
standings, would diligently observe the State of things, and by their
Observation, or Inquiry, carefully acquaint themselves with the Success ( for
our Overthrow had been the End of them) and as one of themselves said, We were
the Bulworks that received the Shot) Yet, so unabated has their implacable
Malice been; at the King's first coming in they thought to do great Matters by
letting the Powers know they were no Abettors of the Quakers; which indeed
stood us in great stead, least we might have been taken for those Tumultuous,
Blood-thirsty, Covenantbreaking, Government-destroying Anabaptists: and that
they might prove to the World, we were not of them. No sooner those Storms of
Persecution have been over, but like forgetful Mariners, they have fallen to
their Old Work of bitter Envying: Either some one of their Church leaves them;
or the Quakers are prosperous in their Labors; or any thing else that is next
for a Cover, to palliate their Emulous Spirit in all its base Detractions from
us, and the blessed Truth.

Which truly when I have beheld it, Grief has overwhelmed my Soul, and a Pity
for their sakes has risen in my Heart, that all those Trials, which rightly
understood and improved, would have turned to great Advantage, should be as
water spil'd on the Ground.

Many Instances we have had, of this, since their Descending the Throne of
Power; Particularly in the Years 1668, 1669. which time; there being some
respit, from any violent Persecution of men, upon the account of Conscience.
What preaching was almost in every Meeting against the Dangerous Errors of the
Quakers, as they pleased to traduce them, and how were they slandered upon
Several Stationers Stalls? we could scarcely walk the Street, but our Ears must
be disturbed, with the Cries of the Antidote against Quakerisme; the Synopsis
of Quakerisme; the Damnable Heresy of the Quakers, with the like virulent
Expressions, bestowed upon us in their Title-Pages, to be-speak their Sale more
easy, with Persons Inquisitive or prejudiced.

Nay, whilst they commended the King's Indulgence to their own Parties, and
publicly rendered him their Acknowledgment of his Clemency, they sedulous
endeavored my Imprisonment, in particular, and did not stick, both to
character me the most wretched and enormious of Men, for a Book, they (I may in
a manner say) extorted from me, and at that time too, when both my Body was
straightly imprisoned, and my Life greatly endangered; and as the Completement
of their Wickedness, they maintained the Justness of my Confinement.

But to pass over this, and observe the Consequence of succeeding Troubles; The
former Acts receiving New Life, from one more sharp and Cruel, what could we
hope, but that this Act executed, were enough to make these Professors forever
out of Love with Persecution, who are yet too warm Abettors of it.

For, though their Vain Boasts of Standing, quickly vanished at the Rattling of
a few Muskets, and that God, by his Almighty, Invisible Power upheld us,
through all those Hardships, of Bruises Bloodshed, broken Limbs, tedious
Imprisonments, and Great Spoi^ing of our Goods (enough to melt the Hearts of
Infidels) And I cannot say, but then they would Nicodemus-like give us their
Night-Encouragements; some Blessing God that we were set to blunt the Edge of
Persecution, and so be as a Bulwark for them) yet so quickly did their Kindness
cool, upon a Relaxation of such Procedure against us, that their Tenderness
seemed to Dye with the Hardness of our Persecutors; For no sooner were we out
of Prison, but instead of Congratulations, we were Saluted, or Affronted
rather, with an Imposture from Lincoln, and a Lie from Dover; the Former stamped
by R. James, the Latter by T. Hobbs, both Anabaptists, as they are commonly
called, to their own Infamy, and the great Disgrace of their Profession.

These Beginnings, Reader, were followed by the pressing Endeavors of Our
Dissenters in general, whether by Preaching, Disputing, Writing or other more
secret Traducings, both in Cities and Country, but more especially in London:
where the greatness of our Sufferings from the Powers, seems outdone by the
Malicious Practices of Dissenters. Nay, so Restless are they in their Attempts
against us, that they will Disturb themselves rather, then let us be Quiet; and
care not whom they molest, if the poor Quakers may but be rendered Odious;
witness among others a Libel, called The Spirit of the Quakers Tried; A Letter,
subscribed J. G. and a Dialogue, T. H. (the two Last of the same Fraternity
with those before mentioned.)

Behold, what Use these Men make of Tolleration! with which since Authority
has oblieg'd them, their Gratitude, or their P^licy has turned the torrent of
their virulent Hammer against us; whom they daily wreak under their ungodly
Hate, as if they were resolved to interrupt the King's Indulgence, with their
Persecution: and by a kind of Revenge upon us for our Liberty, suffer it to be
a time of Calm with none but themselves. But, what makes the Matter worse, some
Emulous Spirits among them wished, as I heard, for an other Storm, that the
Quakers might but be shipwrackt by it. O strange Impiety! that Men should lay
our Prosperity so to Heart, as therefore to wish our Ruin; and rather, then not
effect it, run the Bold Hazard of their Own: Unless they resolve to keep their
Old Haunt of Creeping into Garrats, Cheese-loifts, Coale-holes, and such like
Mice-walkes, and using more Equivocation to hide a Meeting, then a Romish
Priest has been wont to do, to conceal his Function.

Well may we take up a Lamentation for these things, that Men should so
fearfully rend Religion from Charity, and Faith from the good Works of
Patience, Mercy, and Universal Love, as if to Quarrel about Religion were to be
Religious, and to call Names, and Jeer a Mark of Zeal and Wit.

To Conclude, and sum up what I have said; This has been the Misery of almost
every Reformation, that its Authors have Degenerated from their first Sense
(which placed Religion in a clean Conscience, not in a full Head: in Walking
with God, more then in Talking of Him) to Self-Promotion, and Persecution of
all Dissenters from their Establishment: and the Cause of it is briefly this; a
(...) from that He^venly Illumination in themselves, setting up their Own
Contrivance, before they had pulled down all Contrivances of Men; and their
Covetousness, to advance their own Inventions; and Impatience, to see them not
assented to, ^ave promoted Crue^ty, and with this very Cup have the Nations
been Drunk, as well Refined, as more Gross Professors of Religion. That God
therefore first Appeared to, and Empowered, and Sent forth Plain Men, to
declare the Plain Truth, to turn Men from that Darkness, which covered their
Hearts, notwithstanding their splendid Profession, to the Light that has
shined therein uncomprehended, which obeyed, was sufficient to Salvation; that
they were first Slandered, then Persecuted, and that by most Sorts: But their
Persecution not always continuing from the Powers, they have been, and now are
diligently followed by their old Adversaries, the Separatists, with their Cries
of Heresy, Error, Blasphemy, and the like, if possible, to make them a Burden
upon Earth, witness their many printed Books and Impostures, particularly, The
Spirit of the Quakers Tried, The Letter, The Dialogue betwixt a Christian and a
Quaker, Qu kerism no Christianity, and The Controversy Ended; unto all which
from Beginning to End, so far as concerns CHRIST, THE TRUE LIGHT, ENLIGHTENING
ALL MEN, THAT EVER CAME, AND DO, OR SHALL COME INTO THE WORLD, WITH A SAVING
LIGHT; and WHAT IS THE GENERAL RULE OF FAITH TO CHRISTIANS, I here present the
World with our plain and full Defense, having thoroughly considerd them, with
what other Objections, I thought to carry any weight against Us: Which being
our Fundamental Principle, if proved, the common Notion of Satisfaction for
Sins past, present, and to come, Justification in the strictest Sense, without
inherent Righteousness; their fearful Tale of Predestination, and their P^eas
against Perfection will tumbleto the Ground.

And I earnestly beseech the Reader in the Love of God, not to believe every
wandering Book or Story that is out against us, but hear us before he passes
Judgment against us, and then let his Conscience tell, if We are not the True
Apostolical Christians, promoting the Interest of the Pure Spiritual
Apostolical Religion. For, what we believe and assert, we Witness; We don't
Steal, nor Robb our Neighbors, God has brought it to us, beyond all Imitation:
Our Religion He has made our Own through his internal Operations; And against
Convictions there is no standing, as well as without them there can be no solid
Knowledge: the want of which makes the World miserable, and renders us unknown.

Having thus Historically introduced my present Discourse; and my Witness is
with God, the Rightteous Judge of all, not out of Ill Will to any, but in
perfect Love to all, that the very Truth of things may be brought to Light, in
order to a more clear Understanding of that Controversy, which is now on foot
betwixt the so much despised Quakers and their Adversaries. For this let all
know, I Write not for Controversy, but truly for Conscience sake, that not
empty Conquest, but sound Conviction may be the End of all my Labors for the
Lord my God, who is over and above every Name, worthy of Eternal Praises and
Dominion. I shall conclude, with these Earnest Desires in uprightness of Soul
to God; that Truth, Righteousness and Peace may prevail to the more plain
Detection of Error, and utter Confusion of all Envy and Prejudice.

THE CONTENTS OF THE First Part.
CHAP. I. The Occasion of the Discourse. The unhan^some Dealing of T. Hicks,
with respect to the Invented Weak^ess (...) charges upon the Quakers, as the
strength of their Cause. Page 1. CHAP. II. The Gross Lies Tho. Hicks tells in
the Name of, or fastens upon the Quakers. Such Proceeding, full of Envy, Folly,
and Ungodliness. page 4. CHAP. III. That he does not only make us impertinent
and Lie; But he mannages the Whole profanely. That he who is an Anabaptist,
has forgot the Scorn once cast upon his own Persuasion. Men are not to be mocked
out of their Religion. page 7. CHAP. IV. That a Right-Relish of the Manner of
the Dialogue is a sufficient Antidote against the Matter of it. His Questions
stated. His feigned Answer. A True Answer to the First. What is Salvation? To
be saved from Sin and Wrath; not Wrath without Sin. page 10. CHAP. V. The
second Question stated. Particularly what is meant by Light. It is more then an
Act; It is a Principle that discovers the Sat of Man. page 12. CHAP. VI. That
the Light Within manifests Sin; yea, all Sin. That Apostasy, or Sin in any, is
no Argument against the Light, but rather for it. That the Additional Services
of the Jews show No Imperfection in the Light, but the People, whose Minds were
abroad. If Insufficiency against the Light should be admitted of, because of
Reb^llion and Wickedness in Men, the same would be objected against the
Scriptures, which overthrows our Adversary's Assortion concerning their
Sufficiency. page 13. CHAP. VII. Another Objection against the Light's
Sufficiency to manifest what ought to be done, though it were able to discover
what should be avoided. It is answered. The Light's not telling (...) all it
knows, or man may know in time to come, is no Argument to prove, it knows not
all things. Men know more then they do, let them first obey what they know, and
then what is convenient will be further Revealed. It is proved from the Reason
of Contraries; because it show^ what ought not to be done: From Scripture at
large, that (...) instruct what to do; and that there is Virtue in it to the
Salvation of all that Believe and Obey it. That there is no ^ssential
Difference between the Seed, Light, Word, Spirit, Life; Truth, Power, Vnctio^,
Bread, Water, Flesh and Blood; only so denominated from the various
Manif^stations, Operatio^s, and Effects of one and the same Divine Principle.
page 17. CHAP. VIII. An Objection against the Light's (...) Being to Christ's
Coming. It is proved to have been known to be a saving Light from Adam' s Day,
through the Holy Patriar^s and ^rophets time down to Ch^ist's, from the
Scriptures of Truth. page 25. CHAP. IX. Another Objection, that though the Jews
had it, it will not f^llow that the Gentiles were so illuminated. It is
Answered by several Scriptures. In this Chapter quoted to prove, that they were
not exempted; but had a measure of Light, some Divine Seed sown in their
Hearts, some Talent given, and that it was sufficient. T. Hicks' s Challenge to
give an Instance of one that by the Light within was reproved for not believing
that Jesus was the Christ, is answered. Such as believed in the Light, and
walked up to it, did receive Christ when he came. The high Pretenders were they
who to Scriptures Opposed, and Crucifi^d him. The Light from Scripture
concluded Universal and Saving. page 31. CHAP. X. That the Gentiles Believed in
one God. That he enlightened all Men with a saving Light. That Men ought to live
piously. That the Soul is immortal. That there is an Eternal Recompense. The
Whole called Gentile-Divinity. The first Point proved by sixteen Testimonies.
page 41. CHAP. XI. The second Fundamental of Gentile-Divinity, viz. That God
has Imprinted the Knowledge of Himself on the Mind of all Mankind, Proved from
twelve pregnant T^stimonies, as well of whole Societies, as particular Persons.
Compared with Scripture. page 52. CHAP. XII. That this was not only the
Doctrine and Faith of the Gentiles; but the very primitive Doctors or Fathers
both so held, and so expressed themselves: Eight Testimonies produced for Proof
thereof. page 60. CHAP. XIII. The Third Part of Gentile-Divinity, viz. That
they were Men of Virtuous Lives, and taught the Indispensibleness thereof to
Life Eternal. Proved by Numerous Instanc^s. page 66. CHAP. XIV. That the last
Point of Gentile-Divinity, to wit, Immortality and Eternal Rewards, is also
very clearly and positively held forth by the ancient Heathens: Six Testimonies
from them, to prove it. Socrates' s Great Faith in particular; and the lofty
Strain of the Pythagoreans. page 76. CHAP. XV. That the Heathens had a Sight of
the Coming of Christ: That, and not Swearing, proves the Sufficien^y of the
Light. page 80. CHAP. XVI. It is granted that the Jew, and much more the
Christian, has the Advan^age of the Gentile; yet that the Gentile had enough
to Salvation. page 84. CHAP. XVII. A great Objection stated; Answered. The
Light both Law and Gospel; not in the same Discovery, but in it self. A Way to
reconcile the seeming Difference about it; The Light still defended. page 86.
CHAP. XVIII. The second Part of the Objection, that Christ was not anciently
called the Light; Answered. And the Contrary proved from Scripture and Reason.
page 91. CHAP. XIX. The third Part of the Objection: If Christ was enjoyed
under the Law, as he was; If the Light be Christ, why was he typified? is
proved of no Force. The Type and Antitype in some respect may be at one and
the same Time; This is proved by plenty of Scripture. Our Adversaries
Opposition and Cavil weak and insuccessful. page 94. CHAP. XX. The fourth Part
of the Objection stated and considered. Christ' s Death and Sufferings
confossed to, and respected; They were Beneficial. The Light of Christ within
is the efficient Cause to Salvation. page 99. CHAP. XXI. A Confession in
particular to Christ' s Redemption, Remission, Justification and Salvation.
page 104. CHAP. XXII. That Christ is the Light; or, the Light is Christ, proved
from Scripture, and so concluded; notwitstanding two Objections, which are
fully answered. page 114. CHAP. XXIII. The Universality of the Light proved by
Reason. page 120. CHAP. XXIV. The Sufficiency of the Light proved by Reason.
page 122. CHAP. XXV. The Question, Who He, or They are that obey the Light,
etc? considered and answered; being a Character of (...) true Quaker. page 124.
CHAP. XXVI. The Discourse hithero summed up and concluded with an Exhortation
to all Professors of Religion, especially our Opp^sers. page 128.
APPENDIX.
Of the Rule of Faith and Life. page 135. Of the Judge of Controversy. page
155. The Conclusion. page 160.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Second Part, Entitled, The CHRISTIAN-QUAKER, and his
Divine Testimony Vindicated: Which consists of several Treatises.
The Contents of the First Treatise.
To the Unprejudie^d Reader, an Epistle, from page 3. to page 9. Some of the
Doctrines and Contradictions of T. Hicks, declared at a Discourse between him
and some of the Quakers ( so (...)) in Aldermanbury, London, the 20th of the 3d
Month, 1672. p. 10, 11. Christ's Light Within asserted, as it is Divine (and
therefore a sufficient Rule of Life unto Salvation to all that truly obey it)
and vindicated from Tho. Hicks' s dark Exceptions, fallacious and Impious
Arguments (consisting of manifest Ignorance, Confusion and Ranterism) which are
here inserted, as they were exhibited in a Paper, afterward owned and signed
by him, from p. 13. to p. 23. Section 1. (In Answer to his Dialogue) The Light
within proved Divine and Saving, etc. p. 24.. 2. The Life, which is the Light
of Men, not a Creature or mere Effect, etc. p. 27.. 3. The Baptist' s Quarrel
grounded on his Mistakes about the Light, and our Testimony of it, p. 29.. 4.
Christ guides to Salvation by his Inward Light; and the Baptist Confounded in
his Opposing it, p. 31.. 5. The Dipper proved a Blind Guid^, and in gross
Confusion, in undervaluing the Light Within, p. 32.. 6. His Ignorance of the
Divine Principle, p. 34.. 7. His Madness and Self-Contradiction about the
Light, p. 35.. 8. Christ, as the Rock of Ages; and the Intent of his Coming in
the Flesh not known to the Baptists, while they Oppose his Light Within, p.
37.. 9. The Dipper plunged in a Labyri^th of Self-Contradictions; and the Light
within proved a Rule above the Scriptures, p. 39. Sect. 10. The Subject,
Understanding and Obeying the Light Within, unknown to the Cavilling Baptist,
page 41.. 11. Concerning the Soul of Man, as under diverse Considerations and
States; and G. Fox' s words so considered; with Eight Queries added, from page
43. to page 47.. 12. The Neck of the Baptist' s Cause broken by his own
Concession to the Light Within, in which Christ and his Testimonies are
effectually received, p. 47.. 13. The Baptist's impious Forgery upon the
Quakers, about the Scriptures, which are in reallity owned and used by them, p.
49.. 14. His impious Abuse about Revelation, Light Within, Scriptures, etc.
from p. 50. to p. 56.. 15. His partial Relation against John Story, p. 59.. 16.
The Baptist' s Dispargement of the Light within, contrary to his own Pretense,
p. 61, 62, 63, 64.. 17. His Slander about the Person, Offices, Sufferings and
Blood of Christ, and continued Abuse of the Light Within, p. 65, 66, 67, 68..
18. The Baptist' s Quarrel against S. Crisp removed p. 69, 70, 71, 72.. 19. The
End of Christ's Coming, Example and Suffering more truly owned by the Quaker
then the Dipper, p. 73.. 20. The Baptist' s Ignorance and Cavil about
Redemption, and the spiritual Discoveries of Christ and his Seed, p. 74, 75,
76.. 21. The Baptist' s imperfect Work against Perfection, p. 77, 78, 79, 80..
22. Thomas Hicks' s groundless Calumny and malicious Railing against George
Whitehead, p. 81, 82, 83, 84.. 23. The Baptist' s Abuse against G. W. about a
Meeting with them at Devonshire-House, London, p. 85, 86. The Contents of the
Second Treatise [ entitled, LIGHT SPRUNG UP in the Despised Quaker, etc.] are
inserted next after the Title, before page 87. The Contents of the Third
Treatise [ entitled, THE ANGRY ANABAPTIST proved Babylonish] follow after the
Title, before page 121. The Contents of a Bill of Excommunication exhibited by
the Baptists at Chichester; together with a brief Answer thereunto, from page
159. to page 166. Some Confessions concerning the Baptized Churches, made by
their own Messengers in their Bewailing Epistle from Tiverton, from p. 167. to
p. 170.
The Fourth Treatise [THE PRESBYTER's ANTIDOTE TRYED] in Answer to Stephen
Scandret.
The Contents: Chap. I. A comprehensive Account concerning the Rule, the Light
and Scripture, explaining both Our Sense of the Terms, and Stephen Scandrets:
Together with the Assembly' s Confession about the Scriptures, from p. 173, to
p. 180. Stephen Scandret' s Sense about the Points in Controversy examined, p.
181, 182, 183, 184, 185. Chap. II. About JUSTIFICATION and IMPUTATION, from p.
185. to p. 209. Chap. III. About Christ's Justifying Righteousness, the best
Robe; the Necessity of its Inherence (or being inwardly enjoyed) not to
invalidate, but to fulfill the blessed Intents and Ends of his Suffering, in
Reply to S. S. from p. 210. to p. 224. Chap. IV. Of SATISFACTION; some serious
Considerations, farther opening the Doctrine and Sense of our Opposers, from p.
225. to p. 238. An Appendix, wherein the Controversy is summed up and resolved
partly by way of Question and Answer, with a plain Intimation of my Sense
thereof, as relating to the second, third and fourth Chapters before, fromp.
239 to p. 249. The Difference between our Opposer's Gospel and OUR's, briefly
stated, p. 250, 251. Chap. V. Concerning ELECTION and REPROBATION, from p. 252.
to p. 290. The Contents thereof follow. A brief Introduction, with the
Assembly' s Opinion, and Stephen Scandret' s uncertain Proposition for it, p.
253. Section 1. His Abuse of diverse Scriptures in his State of the Case sor a
Personal Election answered; the Way of Goa's Choosiag resolved, p. 255.. 2. The
Weakness of his two first Arguments touching Gods Decree and Promises, p. 257..
3. His gross Ignorance of those Names written in the Lamb's Book Arg. 3. His
Impertinency and ignorant Allegation, and Misunderstanding of diverse
Scriptures, concerning God's Choice and Ordination; and the Cause of men's
Destruction opened, against Arg. 4. Persons being chosen, proves not their
Eternal Election, as Persons, p. 260.. 4. Concerning Jacob and Esau; Christ's
Sheep, those that come, ^ome drawn and given unto him of the Father, Arg. 5 and
6. p. 262.. 5. Election explained; God's Loving Jacob and hating Esau; their
Posterities concerned therein; and how far the two Births were figured in Jacob
and Esau, p. 265.. 6. Our Opposer's blasphemously placing a partial Resolution
upon God (as creating Persons with Intention to leave them to Destruction)
contrary to his universal Call and Tend rs of Salvation, p. 268.. 7. The
Unchangeableness of God's Election, in what State; and our Opposer's Ignorance
and Error concerning God's Purpose, p. 269.. 8. My Unanswered Objection of
setting Life and Death before men, and Warning them of Destruction, p. 271.. 9.
The Cause of God's Hardening Pharaoh, Judas and others, not grounded upon mere
Will and Pleasure, but for their Rebellion, p. 272.. 10. Touching the Fall of
particular Angels and Men; the Tendence of God's Long-suffering toward the
Wicked; and my Opposer's Confession to Truth, to the utter Overthrow of his
Opinion, p. 273.. 11. Presbyters Mockery in their Warnings, and setting Life
and Death, Conditional Promises and Threats before People, contrary to their
Partial Opinion of an Eternal Personal Election and Reprobation, png. 275.
Sect. 12. The sad Consequence of their Accusing God with decreeing to deny
Saving Grace to particular Persons, yea, to the greater part of Mankind,
showing, that Divine Justice it self has not so decreed, page 277.. 13. Grace
differing from Debt: The Reason why God finds Fault with Men: The Question, Who
has resisted his Will? resolved, p. 278.. 14. Their urging all to forsake Sin,
contradictory to their Opinion, and not in true Faith: Their flattering many
with fair Pretenses, contrary to their own Intentions: The poor Encouragement
and cold Comfort, that their Doctrine of a Personal Reprobation yields to the
greatest part of Mankind, p. 279.. 15. The Wise God, the Just Judge, is the
Ordainer of the Punishment, not of the Fact; nor the Author of Sin, or their
Wickedness who persecuted Christ, p. 281.. 16. Hypocritical Priests, making and
strengthening Hypocrites by deceitfully daubing them up in their Sins, and
flattering them with a [YOU ARE NOT FALLEN FROM GRACE] while they are guilty of
gross Wickedness, p. 283.. 17. Concerning God's Covenant with David and his
Seed, and the Mystery typified in him, p. 284. To all which is added a Short
Postscript concerning the WILL of God in its Manifestation; 1st, as
Unresistible; 2dly, as Resistible, p. 286, 287, 288, 289. Chap. VI. Whether
PERFECTION, that is, a State freed from all Sin, be attainable in this Life?
from p. 290. to p. 312. The Fifth Treatise, about the RESURRECTION, beginning
at page 315. to the end of the Book. The RESURRECTION owned by us, and
Scripturally asserted, with the Future and distinct Beings of Men and Angels;
and the Eternal Advantage, Glory and Felicity of the Righteous or Saints after
Dissolution: The Scriptures spiritual Teftimony thereof, being owned and
vindicated by us, in Opposition to our OPPOSER' s CARNAL THOUGHTS about the
Resurrection and future State, particularly in Answer to Tho. Hicks, W. Burnet
and Thomas Danson. Unto which is annexed Thomas Vincent' s Illustrations about
the Resurrection, as partly an Explication of the Sense of the rest of our
Opposers therein. Finally, Some Passages of Hen. Moor' s, for the SPIRITUALITY
of the Resurrection-Bodies, viz. the Body of Christ, and the Bodies of Saints.
The Intent of all this Fifth Treatise being both to remove Groundless
Objections, Unnecessary Questions and Fruitless Disputes about this Weighty and
Mysterious Point of the Resurrection.
THE CHRISTIAN-QUAKER And his DIVINE TESTIMONY VINDICATED, etc. Viz. The
Universality and Sufficiency of Christ's LIGHT WITHIN, through all Ages to
Eternal SALVATION: fully Stated and Defended.
CHAP. I.
The Occasion of the Discourse. The Unhandsome Dealing of our Adversary, with
Respect to the Invented Weakness he charge upon the Quakers, as the Strength
of their Cause.

THere is a Book lately come to my Hands, entitled, A Dialogue between a
Christian and a Quaker; which with several others lately published against us,
has given Occasion for this general Undertaking.

I was very curious to peruse that Discourse, which should make a Difference
between them, having in my diligent Search after Religion, ever desired to
understand and profess That, which upon true Convictions, I had Reason to
believe was the most Christian: But as upon Impartial View I found the Weakness
of that Book more favorable to us, then the Uncharitableness of the
Title Page, which seemed to dis interest a Quaker in Christianity; so most
unexpectedly I found my Name, among others, often used, and as often
undeservedly abused by the Author. I was not willing that any else should
answer for my Faults, if any there were; and if Innocent, I esteemed my self
both sufficient and obliged to my own Relief, which will not be hard to do: and
the Reason is, because so little Reason, and so much Railing, have been by him
employed against me, as if he intended to scold rather then confute me; and to
let the World know, how much better skilled He is in Scurrility then Argument.

This I confess, drew me first into any Willingness of considering his
Discourse at large: Not, that the Truth was not first in mine Eye; but because
I know the Person most concerned with him, to be both able and resolved to
reply, I thought my Endeavors (at least for this time) might have been very
well excused.

But so many Outcries coming upon the Neck of another, if possible, to expel
us the World, I found my self pressed in Spirit, to buckle my Mind to this
Enterprise, notwithstanding that my late Concernment with some other
Adversaries had left the Wearisomness of a Combat upon my Spirit, and the Hopes
I had of being spared, by the ingenuous Acknowledgment of our Enemies, from the
like Necessity of further Controversy.

But as it fell out with the People of Syracuse, that several very Bad Tyrants
were succeeded by Worse; so truly it has done with us: The Confutation of one
Adversary, redoubling Envy, Prejudice, and almost every evil Quality in the
next; as if to be overcome were more intolerable to them, then to find the
TRUTH by it, would be Acceptable. Oh Lamentable Use that these Men make of our
Love and Pains! But we have some Cause to think, that failing of that Reason,
which is necessary to prop so infirm a Cause, they would, if possible, supply
the Want of it with the LAST WORD, which at Billings Gate, I hear, goes a
Great Way to Advantage, and turn the Scale in all Disputes.

And truly, if the Temper of this Adversary be but considered, with what Help
he himself has given us to do it; For my part, I should stand amazed that any
Sober, Civil or Christian Man, could refrain passing severe Sentence against
him, as one that writes of Religion, out of all Sense of either Religion, or
good Manners; and that only took Occasion, thereby to prove eminently to all
Impartial Men, he really has neither.

But to let that pass, I leave the Book to speak, for or against it self: I
shall only premise, that though I have particularly observed the Manner of his
Dialogue, as an apt Introduction, and that my Discourse has been occasioned by
this and several late Attempts made against the Truth; Yet my Answer, to avoid
their Accusation of Personal Heat, is not Immediate, Direct, or Particular to
any one. The Matter of our Judgment, both with respect to the Light, and Rule
(comprehensive of all) I have positively stated, and so defended by Plain
Scripture, Sound Reason, and Universal Consent of former Ages: and what Force
any Books, Argument, or Objections (present with me) whether from our
Adversaries, especially T. Hick's, or my own Remembrance, I shall by the way
Faithfully, and I hope, Effectually consider: To the end I may avoid the great
Vanity, of Bragging of a Victory obtained against a Man of Straw, and Enemy of
my own making, As T. Hicks has done.
and that Detestable Sin, and Dis-ingenuous Practice, of charging those Lies,
and that weakness upon my Antagonist he never thought, nor could be guilty of.

In short, what I have against the Book in general, and for the Truth and My
self in particular, I shall in their proper Places produce; And now descend so
to do, with what convenient Brevity I can.

First then, he has taken a very Unfair Way of Opposing our Principles (if we
may yet call them ours) since instead of collecting what truly are so, and
those most forceable Arguments We have been wont to offer in their Defense, out
of our own Writings (which in Honesty and Justice he ought to have done) he
presents the World with a Dialogue between a Christian and a Quaker, which we
may truly say, are both of his own making, at once abusing both himself and
that People; For neither has he truly represented the Quaker, nor much more
honest is his Character of a Christian: And whilst he does most partially
render, his own Opinions to be those of a true Christian, rather then a true
Christians to be his, he brings in the poor despised Quaker, saying any thing
that may be most Ridiculous, Weak and Impertinent to the Matter; which Way of
Confutation is so far from being truly Manly, much less Christian, that the
Wisest Man may be so disguised into the Greatest Fool, and Truth it self seem
vanquished by the weakest Forces of her Enemies. It was by Ways not less
Injurious, though more Ingenious, that the esteemed best Heathen of his time,
was by some of his Emulating Contemporaries brought into utter Disgrace, with
that only People, which once most of all deservedly admired him; as they who
will take the pains to read the Comical Abuses of Anytus and Aristophanes, upon
Socrates may easily inform themselves: Whose Life being Blameless, and Virtue
unparalled in his Day, did by his strict Precepts, and Example, so influence
the People into a dis-like of those Comedians, and their loose Adherents, that
till the frothy Spirit of the Multitude became revived, by their ridiculous
Representations of that worthy Man in a Play, it was impossible for them to
work his Ruin.

Methinks, this Man's Dialect savours of the same Spirit, though its Grossness
tells us, It has not the same Wit. Let me never have so infirm a Cause to
manage, and grant me but Leave to make my Adversaries Answers, and I will never
fear the Consequence of such Encounters. But, who will yield to this, that does
not first resolve to be Overcome? Let T. Hicks but permit me that Liberty
against his Water Baptism in Defense of Childrens, and I will warrant him a
Rebel to the Church of England. But does he do as he would be done by? If this
be the Ne plus ultra, or Upshot of our Adversaries Strength, to feign Weakness
for Us, that he may appear Some Body, I think, we need say no more, but leave
it with every unprejudiced Conscience to guess at the Meaning of such base
Designs. Certainly, We have not been justly dealt with, nor our Cause weighed
in the Equal Scale of Righteousness; and indeed, this Imperfection is most of
all incident to that Way of Writing.

CHAP. II.
The Gross Lies Tho. Hicks tells in the Name of, or fastens upon the Quakers.
Such proceeding, full of Envy, Folly, and Ungodliness.

NExt, he has as well made us to Belie Our selves, and Principles, as to appear
Impertinent; a thing so foully Uncharitable, indeed very wicked, as methinks,
every Sober and impartial Mind may have just occasion to be scandalized at his
whole Enterprise. What! not only make us to answer in his own Language, but Lie
in it, and that against our very Principles and Consciences too; This is an
Aggravation, at once, of his own Enmity, and the Imbecility of his Cause.

For can any believe, that knows us well, that when we are asked, as he
fictiously does in his Dialogue, Do you believe the Scriptures to be true
sayings of God? We should answer Page 66.
him thus; So far as they agree to the Light in me. For, though it be thus far
true, viz. that the true Light within is the same in kind with that which
shined in the Hearts of the Holy Penmen, and therefore may rightly be said, to
agree both in it self, and in the several Testimonies of Diverse Ages; and
consequently it may truly be allowed to judge of what are the sayings of God,
from what are those of Wicked Men, etc. Yet has he disingenuously obtruded
those Words by Way of Answer upon us, which he cannot find so laid down by any
of us, much less all the Quakers.

Again, in another place of his abusive Catechism, he thus Queries.

Q. Then may I not conclude, that the Reason why you so freely Page 72.
Rail against, and Reproach your Opposers, is only to Secure your Credit with
your own Proselytes? which he thus makes the Quaker to answer.

A. I cannot deny, but that there may be something of that in it. O Impudent
Forgery! Whether this Invention becomes a Man that has the least honest
pretense to Christ's Pure Religion, or one who would be thought as Serious as
an Anabaptist-Preacher ought to be, judge all you that read us? I cannot
believe, but Many who go under that Name, have more Tenderness and Conscience,
then to abet this kind of Proceed against us. In short, It was an uncharitable
Spirit asked the Question, and from that became a Lying one to answer it. Our
Witness is with God, as to our Innocence in this very matter. But he proceeds.

Q Will you be so Liberal of your Revilings, whether your Adversary Page 73.
gives occasion or not? he answers for us.

A. It concerns us to render them as Ridiculous as we can, and to make our
Friends believe they do nothing but contradict themselves.

Again to the same Unrighteous Purpose,

Q. But does not this signify a very Dishonest and Malicious Mind in you? He
makes us return.

A. We care not what you think, provided our Friends think not so.

And to conclude his Slanders of this kind, hear him once more.

Q. Does not W. P. in his Book against the Author of the Spirit of the Quakers
tried, manifest great Displeasure against the Man for concealing his Name;
Suggesting, that if he knew it, then probably they (...) have something, to
detect him? etc.

I shall omit in this place making mine own Defense; but be pleased Courteous
Reader, to observe the Man's Answer, which he would have the World to believe
was ours.

A. Whatsoever thou or others may think of our Writings, we will give it out,
that we have both answered and consuted our Adversaries, and our Friends will
believe what we say in this matter, which is enough to us. O Lies, Madness, and
Folly.

Certainly Reader, By this time thou can not but with me believe, I had
Reason enough to make this General Exception against the Dialogue, as neither
becoming what I am so tender as to think, our bitter Adversary upon more
serious Considerations might esteem a Right Christian; nor yet that Character
of a Quaker, which the more Sober Sort of Men, carry in their Minds concerning
us: and in the fear of Almighty God, we do appeal to the Consciences of all
People, that shall ever read us, whether we have been treated by this Man in
his Dialogue and Catechism with that Spirit of Meekness, Righteousness and
Truth, which is, or ought to be the Rule and Guide of Christian-Men in their
undertakings, more especially in and about the very weighty matters of
Religion. Indeed, we need no other Apology in this case, then the Folly of his
Answers; For all the World will think, we had least need of seeking the
Good Will of our Friends which we had already, and rather conclude it our
interest, to care after, and not to slight what others say or believe
concerning us. It Is true, I perceive our Adversary is a great Slighter of
Conscience, and that Light of Truth which should be the Instructor thereof, and
therefore no wonder if we find so little of it in his Dialogue: but however, he
sets little by it, preferring his most defective Head-Conceits before the holy
certain DICTATES of the Heavenly Light in the Consciences of Men, as his
Unconscionable Dealing with us sufficiently testifies; yet is it our Desire to
act suitably to that in our selves, and to seek the Approbation of it alone in
others, rather then by a disingenuous way of Writing, obtrude our own Fictions
for Christian-Faith, much less mere Impertinencies and very Lies, for the only
and best Answers of our Adversaries.

CHAP. III.
That he does not only make us Impertinent, and Lie; But he mannages the Whole
profanely. That he who is an Anabaptist, has forgot the Scorn once cast upon
his own Persuasion. Men are not to be mocked out of their Religion.

BUt, He has not only made us to say what he pleased, Impertinently and
untruly, but he has done it, with a manifest show of Profaneness, by a Light,
Taunting and Inapplicable Use of those Expressions, which in a way of
Seriousness and Simplicity, may have been sometimes uttered by honest and
Religious People. Such are these, that he makes us to give, in Answer to his
Questions, which we refuse not to render a distinct account of, to any Sober
Man at any time, viz. Page 2.
Thou runnest into many Words and carnal Distinctions, and would have thy
fleshly Wisdom satisfied, but I tell thee, that Dust is the Serpents Food. To
his Answer against the Sufficiency of the Light, he makes the Quaker Reply, I
see thou art a Poor Dark Creature, as by thy talking is manifest, yea it is
manifest in Page 13,
the Light. To the like Purpose; Thou art a wicked Creature, Blackness of
Darkness is reserved for thee; Thou art a Serpent, and 14,
the Curse of God is eternally upon thee. Again, Thou manifests 15,
thy Darkness, and that thou art still in the Imagination. Again, 20,
Thou lookst for Words, but thy Flesh must be silenced. Again, 25,
We witness it; Poor Creature, Thou runst to the Letter, what do thou witness
in thy self? Again, I command thy Flesh to be 44,
Silent; I bear Witness against thee. At other times, in Answer 45,
to such like Questions, Yea, Verily. Alas for thee, These 49,
are thy own Dark Imaginations. Now thou runst to Meanings, 54,
66,
We deny Meanings. Thou manifests a Perverse Spirit. We are 76.
dead to Distinctions. We deny Dispositions, Thou suggests thy own Imagination.

These, Impartial Reader, with more of the like tendency, he is pleased to set
down as our Strongest Answers to his Questions, several of them such, as have
received, and yet may, very Rational and Satisfactory Returns from many of us:
However, if any such kind of Answers have been given to the Unseasonable
Queries of Airy and Entrapping Persons, neither is it more Ridiculous, then
Christ's Immovable Silence to Inquisitive Herod was judged of old; Nor did he
Manfully, to assault our Weakest Part, if such he thought it.

But least of all is he excusable, that one who is reputed an Anabaptist; the
very next in Religion, that seems exposed to the Scoffs of Libertines, should
take so much pains, not only to render a Sober People Ridiculous (though it
will return upon himself) but with the common Taunts of Prophanenists, to
venture to give their Serious Language in a Jeer: An Employment, that had much
better become a Comedian, then a Christian, and the Entertainment of Loose,
then Religious Persons. Certainly Reader, We must be at a very great Loss for
Religion before we could embrace it from such a hand; supposing us to be as
mere Heathens, as he would have others to think us: For, how can we believe
him, to have any Sincerity to God, who so far seems to have forgotten the
Reproach, which his own Separation from others has been attended with, as to
make that of ours, a Subject for his Mockage and Scorn. Let him call to mind
some of the Infamous Plays of those Comical Wits, Sylvester, Shackspeer,
Johnson, etc. with too many of our own days, wherein the Preciseness and
Singularity of Puritans and others, are abusively represented, and exposed to
the Life, for the Entertainment of Vain, and Irreligious Persons. If this then
be a Crime in an unconcerned Wit, can it be excusable in a Christian, for such
he would have us think him to be? No certainly; but will be a great Aggravation
of his Account in the Day of the Lord, unless it be wiped out by unfeigned
Repentance, as well as that it must needs deter all Persons, that are in
earnest about the weighty Life of the true Religion, from countenancing his
ungodly Attempts against us. And methinks, it is no small discovery of the
exceeding Vanity of his Mind, that instead of putting away Foolish Jesting, he
should entertain base Mockage and Derision, and that about Religion it self.
What? Is he grown so hardy, that he can handle Holy Things without Fear; and
make bold with tender Conscience, so far as to abuse it self? Is Singularity
become so offensive in a Quaker, as an Anabaptist must show his little Wit in
Deriding it: But certainly, Reader, it can be no small Advantage, that both his
Bitterness and Lightness, give us against a Man of his high Pretenses to
Religion. However, our Conquest here will be our Patience, Innocence, and
Truth; Not that I will believe, he thinks I want Words (to whom, he more then
once makes the having of them Criminal) and all that read him may see, he has
furnished me with Matter GROSS enough: But I delight not to spend my time upon
Invectives, did I, perhaps I might bestow a Tragic Comedy upon a Railing
Anabaptist, in return of that Ridiculons Dialogue, he disingenuously would
fasten on an unconcerned Quaker: But my God forbid, that I should Sport about
Religion; or make so much as any Man's pretended Religious Dissent, a Theme for
my Railery or Abuse; for I think it an ill way to Laugh men out of their
Profession, as well as I can never esteem that any sincere one, which men are
Jeered into: and as Conviction is the most Serious Ground, on which to receive
Faith; so, to detract, or deal disingenuously with any man, may harden, but can
never Proselyte; and this is our very Case, with respect to T. H. Yet I would
have him know, That our so much reproached Light Within, he so little concerns
the Government of his Life withal, incites us not to an Eye for an Eye; but
teaches us that Forbearance and Forgiveness, which we have some Reason to
believe, his Principles are wholly Strangers to; else, what can mean his greedy
Endeavors, To pluck out others Eyes, that never yet assaulted so much as one
of his, either by Word or Writing. Well may we take up the Complaint of God's
Prophet of old, We Jer. 20. 7.
are had in Derision daily, and almost every one Mocketh us. But let the Carnal
Christian-Mockers, have a Care; for though their Cruel Mockings be our Portion
in this Life, yet also, for a Recompense, shall their Bonds be made Strong, and
a Consumption from the Lord of Hosts is determined against them, that persist
therein.

Having now rendered with all convenient Brevity my just Exceptions against the
manner of the Dialogue, and spirit of the Man in general; I shall proceed to
offer something against the distinct Doctrines of it, in my particular
Vindication of the Truth, viz. The Universality and Sufficiency of the Light
Within, and Demonstration of the General Rule of Faith.

CHAP. IV.
That a Right Relish of the Manner of the Dialogue is a sufficient Antidote
against the Matter of it. His Questions stated. His Feigned Answer. A True
Answer to the First. What is Salvation. To be saved from Sin and Wrath; not
Wrath without Sin.

WHat I have already said, being duly weighed, may be an apt Introduction to
what follows; For he that relishes the Unsavouriness and Rancour of His Spirit
in the Mannagement of his pretended Christian-Dialogue, surely can have but
little Appetite to feed upon, a Dish cook't up with such Poisonous Sauce.
Enmity and Truth were never Companions; and where there appears so great a
share of the one, as has been truly observed, we may, I hope, without Offense
conclude, there can be but very little, if any, of the other. However, let us
see, with Reason and Sobriety, whether the Matter of his Dialogue be more
commendable, then the Manner of it, writ with so much Railing and Immoderation.
For Reader, this know, I writ not for Conquest, but for Conscience sake: and
what I can grant, I shall; and what I must oppose, I hope, to do it with Truth
and Meekness; being only desirous to approve my self to God, who will Reward
all men according to their Works; and to that Measure of Divine Light in every
Conscience, with which I shall begin, and which, as the Lord God shall enable
me, I will endeavor to maintain against the Angry and Undervaluing Reflections
of its Adversaries.

To overlook then many unnecessary Queries, that are set down, either to Abuse
us, to fill up Corners, or make the Dialogue glide the better, no ways true in
themselves, and wholly impertinent to the Matter, I receive and prosecute the
Main Questions, which he propounds, thus: Page 2.


1. What is that SALVATION, which the Light leads to? 2. What is this LIGHT
that leads to It? and 3. Who this HE, or THEY are, that Obey this Light, and in
Obeing attain Salvation?
Sober Questions, I grant, and as necessary to be known; but I am willing first
to set down the Answer he makes the Quaker to return, before I give mine own,
that the Sober Reader may judge, how different the Reason of a True Quaker is
from T. Hicks's Fantastical one.

(...) Thou runnest into many Words and Carnal Distinctions, and would have
thy Fleshly Wisdom satisfied; but I tell thee, that Dust is the Serpent's Food.

Is this to act the Christian, or the Scoffer toward the Quaker? It Is not to
be doubted but T. H. knows better, and that he has not herein done to us as he
would be done by; For all his Pretenses to Christianity, he is thus far Debtor
to, and Criminal by the LIGHT he vilifieth: But the Truth is, he therefore
makes his Quaker to render him no better Reason, whatever he knew, because
indeed it was inconsistent with his Design that he should. But I will see if I
can supply that voluntary Defect, in Rebuk to his Disingenuous Practice, on the
behalf of the poor Abused Quaker. I answer:

I. By SALVATION we understand, as by Scripture is delivered to us, A being
saved from Sin here, and the Wages of it, which is Wrath to come: Whereby we
are taught utterly to renounce and reject the common Acceptance of it, as the
full and complete Force of the Word, viz. barely to be saved from Punishment
hereafter: In which Security, through a vain Expectance of Salvation, whilst
not really and actually saved from the Power of Sin and the Captivation of
Lusts, through the invisible Power of Christ, Thousands dye; and T. Hicks is
one of those that not only is inthroal'd himself, but earnestly contends for
that Beggarly Faith and Religion, to be the most Christian, which is so unable
to deliver both himself and others that believe in it. In short, We call
Salvation, Christ's making an End of Sin, Destroying the Works of the Devil,
Finishing of Transgression, Binding the Strong Man, and Spoiling of his Goods
in the Hearts and Consciences of Men and Women; and bringing in his Everlasting
Righteousness into the Soul, whereby to Cleanse, Wash, Regenerate, Renew and
Refresh the Soul; in one Scripture Phrase, to Save his People from their SINS.

These are the Times of Refreshment, and this is the Day of Restitution; and
thus is HE King, to Reign; Prophet, to give Vision; and High Priest, to Anoint
with the Holy Unction, that leads into all Truth; whose Lips alone preserve
Knowledge; and therefore is it the Unchangeable Gospel-Rule to Believers: And
those who are thus freed or saved here from the Power, Nature and Defilement of
Sin, are the alone Persons, that are or shall be hereafter saved from Eternal
Wrath and Vengeance, the heavy Recompenee of Sin. All this we understand by
that Word Salvation; and in this center the Great and Glorious Prophecies and
Performances of Christ.

CHAP. V.
The Second Question stated: Particularly what is meant by Light. It is a
Principle that discovers the State of Man, and leads to Blessedness.

THE second Question runs thus: What is that LIGHT which leads to Salvation?
and if he pleases to give me leave, I will add to this Question, How does It
Lead to Salvation?

By Light I understand not the frequent Metaphorical Use of the Word; as when
Christ said, (...) the Lights of the World; or as the Apostle Speaks, Now are
you Light in the Lord; neither the mere Spirit or Reason of Man; but, that
Glorious Sun of Righteousness, and Heavenly Luminary of the Intellectual or
Invisible World, represented of all Outward Resemblances, most exactly by the
Great Sun of this Sensible and Visible World, that as his natural Light arises
upon all, and gives Light to all, about the Affairs of this Life; so that
Divine Light arises upon all, and gives Light to all, that will receive it,
about the Concerns of the other Life: Such a Light I mean by That Light which
inlightneth every man coming into the World, and that leads those that obey
it to Eternal Salvation; The Scripture says no less, John 1. In the Word-God
was Life, and that (very) Life was the Light of Men, that inlightneth every
man, etc. But to demonstrate it the most obviously that I can, to the lowest
Capacities, I shall evidence the Nature and Virtue of this Light by the Holy
Effects of it, which is the HOW, or the WHICH WAY it leads to Salvation: This
is so necessary in order to explicate the other, that as the Tree is known by
his Fruits, so the True Savior, by his Salvation. If then I can make it
appear, that the Light, as obeyed in all its Discoveries and Requirings, is
sufficient to Salvation, the Debate will end, and T. Hicks must yield to the
Efficacy of the Light within.

I shall then by the Properties of the Light, prove it Saving: In order to
which I shall begin with the first Step toward Salvation, namely, A Sight of
the Cause of Damnation; and from whom this most necessary Beginning must be
taken, viz. The Light within; which I thus prove by Scripture.

CHAP VI.
That the Light Within manifests Sin; yea, all Sin. That Apostasy, or Sin in
any, is no Argument against the Light, but rather for it. That the Additional
Services of the Jews show No Imperfection in the Light, but the People, whose
Minds were abroad. If Insufficiency against the Light should be admitted of,
because of Rebellion and Wickedness in M^n, the same would be objected against
the Scriptures, which overthrows our Adversary's Assertion concerning their
Sufficiency.

THE Light with which Christ inlightens all Men, manifests Sin, as these Words
import; for every one that does Evil hates the Light, neither comes to the
Light, lest his Deeds should be Reproved: Implying, That if they would have
brought their Deeds to the Light, the Light would have detected them, and tried
them. To which the Apostle Paul bears express Testimony, in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, That whatsoever is Reproveable is made Manifest by the Light; where
the Universality of the Apostle's Assertion shows, that nothing that is
Reproveable, is, or can be excluded from the Search or Knowledge of this Light;
which takes in as well Thoughts, as Words and Deeds. So that nothing being
Reproveable, which the Light does not first Manifest: How obvious is it to
every Understanding, that if our Adversary believes all Men to have committed
Sin, and so, as that they know it (which is Reproveable) the Light must needs
have been, and be in all Men, in order to such Manifestation and Conviction. It
is as much as if the Apostle had said, That is the Cause.
Sin is that which Damns all Men; now it could not Damn, if it were not
Reproveable; and it could never be Reproveable, if the Light did not Manifest
and Condemn it as such. So that our Adversaries affirming the Light not to be
Sufficient to Discern all Sin, is a flat Repugnancy, Page 8, 9.
and a downright giving of the Lie to the Apostle; For says the Apostle, All
things that are Reproveable, are made Manifest by the Light. But says Tho.
Hicks, All things that are Reproveable, are not made Manifest by the Light.
Sober Reader, dwell here a while, and after a little paws tell me, Who deals
most Unworthily with the Apostle and the Holy Scriptures of Truth, T. Hicks or
the Quakers?

Obj. But T. Hicks objects, with some others, If there be that Light in all
Men, how comes it, that all Men are not Convicted of their Disobedience and
Duty, as the Heathens of old, and many Infidels at this day? Did the Light in
Saul reprove him for Persecuting the Church?

I Answer, That this no way impugnes the Light, although it greatly aggravates
their Evil that so Rebelled against it. But that there were Heathens, who
became a Law unto themselves, through that Light they had, by which they did
the things contained in the Law, and were preferred far before the Circumcision
that kept not the Law: The Apostle Paul himself is very express in that known
Passage to the Romans. Romans 2.
Nor are other Histories silent, but loud in their acknowledgment of very
Divine Seize, which by this Light several Famous Gentiles arrived at; and
for their Belief of One Eternal Being, his Communication of Divine Light to
Men, and of an Immortality, with their Strickt Conformity thereto, are left
upon Record. by Credible Historians; and their Praises not a little added to by
after Ages, even of those called Christians too. Such are Reputed, Pythagoras,
Timeus, Solon, Bias, Chilon, Anaxagoras, Socrates, Plato, Antisthenes,
Xenocrates, Zeno, Antipater, Seneca, Epictetus, and others.

But what if Jews and Gentiles at any time did Apostatize, and particularly?
What if Saul persecuted the Church of God, putting Disobedience for Duty,
Murder for Service? Will it follow, that the Light was Insufficient? By no
means; but rather that Saul was Rebellious, Stiff-necked, Resisting the Holy
Ghost; as did his Fathers, so did he; and thus much the Words themselves show;
for he kicked against the Pricks. Then it seems there were Pricks; And where
were they, if not in his Conscience? And what were they, if not the Light of
Christ within him, which Manifests Evil, and Reproves the Deeds thereof:
otherwise called that Son of God, that to the Galatians he said, It had pleased
God to reveal in him? though Paul knew him not, nor his Voice of a long time;
his Eye being darkened, and Ear stopped by the God of this World, who had crept
into the Outward Forms of Religion, then, as now, and in that employed many
Emissaries to decry that Pure, Heavenly and Invisible Life of Truth and
Righteousness, which was then, and is now begotten in the Hearts of many, to
the ending of the Idolatries of the Gentiles, and Formality and Outward
Services of both Jews and Carnal Christians.

And I affirm in the Name of God, and with the Reason of a Man, That it is most
preposterously absurd, for any to charge the Rebellion of Men, to be
Insufficiency in the Light: For if men are Wicked, not because they will not be
better; but because they neither see nor know, nor are able to do better; How
Heavy, how Black, and how Blasphemous a Charecter does the Consequence of these
Men's Opinion fasten upon the Righteous God of Heaven and Earth; since it
supposes him, Not to have given either Inwardly or Outwardly unto Men Means
sufficient to do that which he requires from them; and for the not doing of
which, they are to be sentenced to Eternal Misery. But I confess, How deep
soever this may stick with Impartial Spirits, I almost despair of entering our
Adversaries, whose Souls are pinched up within the narrow Compass of a most
Detestable Kind of Predestination, making the Eternal God, as Partial as
themselves, like some Ancients, That because they could not Resemble God, they
would make such Gods as might Resemble them.

I say, what else can be the tendency of this kind of Doctrine against the
Sufficiency of the Light Within, then that the Gift of God is not Perfect, or
able, because Men don't Obey it: and that the Talent God has given to all, is
therefore Insufficient for the End for which it was given, because Man hides it
in a Napkin?

Again, Let them tell me, Would it be a good Argument, that if the same Corn
should be sown in a Fertile and Barren Soil, that growing in one, and not in
the other, the Fault should be in the Seed, and not rather in the Ground?

Who knows not, how Tradition and Custom have eaten out much of Conviction,
blinded the World, and that it is through Lusts and Pleasures become stupefied,
as to the Invisible Things of God. Alas! there had never been so much Need of
many Exterior Dispensations and Appearances in reference to Religion, so much
preferred by the Professors of this Day, had not Men's Minds been departed from
the Inward Light and Life of Righteousness; so that they being abroad, God was
pleased to meet them there with some External Manifestations, yet so, as to
turn them home again to their first Love, to that Light and Life, which was
given of God, as the Way to Eternal Salvation: Nor could any of those cleanse,
as concerning the Conscience; wherefore God still, by his Servants and
Prophets, admonished and warned the People of Old, To Put Away the Evil of
their Doings, and to Wash themselves, and to Cleanse themselves; for that all
their Exactness in Outward Services, was otherwise but as the Cutting off a
Dog's Neck, a Sacrifice equally pleasing: wherefore the Abrogation of all
Outward Dispensations, and Reducing Man to his first State of Inward Light and
Righteousness, is called in Scripture, The Times of Refreshment, and of the
Restitution of all things.

In short, Though there have been External Observations, and Ordinances in the
World, by God's appointment; either to prevent the Jews from the Outward
splendid Worship of the Idolatrous Gentiles, that he might retain a Peculiar
Soveraignity over them; or to show forth unto them a more Hidden and Invisible
Glory; this remains sure forever, That Light there was, and that the Ancients
saw their Sins by it, and that there could be no Acceptance with God, but as
they walked up to it, and were taught to put away the Evil of their Doings by
it; suitable to that Notable Passage, The Path of the Just is a shining Light,
that shines clearer and clearer unto the Perfect Day. What was this Day, but
complete Salvation? Can there be any Imperfection or Darkness in the Day?
Surely no: What if their Light was not so large? Was it not therefore Saving?
Yes surely. But as where much is given, much is required; so where little is
given, but little is required. If the Light was not so Gloriously manifested
before the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in the Flesh, less was then required
at that time, then since; yet it follows not, that there was Two Lights, or
that the Light was not Saving before the Visible Appearance of Christ, to as
many as lived in an Holy Conformity to it.

And if it be agreed, that Blindness in Men can be no Argument against the
Light of the Sun; neither is the Light Insufficient, because the People of any
Nation remain Blind through their Vain Customs: Nay, should any such Doctrine
be admitted, what would become of our Adversary's Opinion, That the Light of
Scripture is Sufficient of it self to give Men the Knowledge of God? For if
those People, who have the Scriptures, do not so Know, Believe and Obey God, as
T. Hicks says, they ought to do; will it not follow upon his Principles, that
the Defect is not in such, as if they were Ignorant and Rebellious, but in the
Scriptures? Certainly the Consequence will hold as well against the Scriptures,
as the Light: If then such wrong the Scriptures, who so dispute, Let T. Hicks,
I entreat him, endeavor to Right the Light, and not longer maintain a
Position, that being admitted, would equally overturn his Notion of the
Scriptures, without Belief of the Light Within.

CHAP. VII.
Another Objection against the Lights Sufficiency to manifest what ought to be
done, though it were able to discover what should be avoided. It is answered.
The Lights not telling man all it knows, or man may know in time to come, is no
Argument to prove it knows not all things. Men know more then they do, let them
first Obey what they know, and then what is convenient will be further
Revealed. It is proved from the Reason of Contraries; because it shows what
ought not to be done: From Scripture at large, that it does instruct what to
do; And that there is Virtue in it to the Salvation of all that Believe and
Obey it. That there is no Essential Difference between the Seed, Light, Word,
Spirit, Life, Truth, Power, Unction, Bread, Water, Flesh and Blood; only so
denominated from the various Manifestations, Operations, and Effects of one and
the same Divine Principle.

BUt there is a Second Objection; That there seems to be a manifest
Insufficiency in the Light: For, though several things are Revealed by it, yet
several necessary matters are not, nor cannot; So that though it should
manifest all that is Reproveable, yet cannot it Discover all that is Necessary
to be either Believed or Done.

I Answer, this is but a piece of the former Objection already considered; I
perceive the Pinch lies here; that because Men do not Do what they should, or
don't Know all that may be Necessary to be known, therefore the Light is
Insufficient. The first will be answered by what I have already said; the
Reason being the same for the Sufficiency of the Light, against such as charge
it with Defect, because they do not do what they should, as against those who
so impeach it, because they do those things which they should not. As for not
knowing all that is to be known, I deny it utterly, For things are necessary in
reference to their proper times; That may be requisite to morrow which is not to
day. It is fit for Children to learn to read, yet it is most necessary, that
they should begin to spell first. If a Schoolmaster should be charged with
Insufficieney, because he tells not little Children, all that he knows, as soon
as he initiates them in the first Principles of Learning, he would think
himself unreasonably dealt with. What must we then conclude, but that the
Master may be very capable, were his Scholar so? that if the Scholar observe
and obey his Master, he will increase in his Learning, that the Defect of the
Scholar should not be laid upon his Master; that to tell or amuse him about
things unsuitable to his present Capacity, were the ready Way to overcharge and
wholly Spoil him: And Consequently that the Tutor, not telling his Pupil, all
that is fit to be known, at once, implies no Defect in, or Ignorance of those
things in the Tutor; which to apply Scripturally, in short thus: If you do my
Will, you shall know (more) of my Doctrine; I have John 12. 16.
yet many things to say, but you are not able to bear them now. In short, If
for a Man to say that the Light of the Gospel (for so T. Hicks thinks Paul's
was) to be charged with Insufficiency, because it discovered not to every
Believer, all those ineffable things, revealed to the Apostle, would be both
False and Antichristian; to what an Extremity does Tho. Hicks's Zeal lead him
in his passionate Endeavors against the blessed Light of the Son of God as he
is the Inlightner of Mankind, who charges it with Insufficiency, because it
Reveals not to every Page 14.
Individual, in every Age, what HE shall ever know it self, or shall be known
in future times. The Light then is not Insufficient, though it tell not all at
one time, which may be a Duty to the End of the World; especially in
extraordinary Cases, whilst it informs me, or any Man, of Daily Duty. Yea, the
Light is Sufficient in Point of Discovery, whilst it shows unto any Person
something more, then they do, and which they ought to perform. If T. Hicks will
say, and can prove, that he is come to the Upshot of the Light's Teachings,
that he has Learnt whatever it is possible for the Light of Christ to Teach
him, and yet is able to make appear, that there is some thing further wanting,
he will prove himself not only above Men, but God also, who is the Fountain of
all Light; that searches the Hearts, and tries the Reins of Men by the
Inshinings of his manifesting Light, and which, as obeyed, leads to God, who is
the Fullness of all Light and Life: But indeed, this Light is the Savor of
Death ( the Wages of Sin) to all that Rebel against it, and the Savor of Life
to those only, who are Obedient to it; For, Such shall not walk in Darkness,
but have the Light of Life. But, whilst he pleads against a Sin-less State, and
shows so Sin-full an One in his Scribles, let him cover his Face for Shame, for
all his Attempts against the Lights Sufficiency; for in that State he shall
never know the Life and Virtue of the Light.

To conclude, If the Light be allowed to Manifest all things that are
Reproveable, then by the just Reason of Contraries, should it be Sufficient to
Discover all things that are Approveable, with respect to Man's Faith,
Salvation and Duty. If the Light tells it is Evil, not to Believe in God, it
follows, that to Believe in God, is according to that Light Within. And if it
Reproves T. Hicks for being Passionate, it consequently Teaches him, that he
ought to be Patient: If the Light Condemns Theft, it necessarily Instructs to
Honesty: If it Reprove me for doing my own Will, it implies I ought to do his
Will to whom I ow all: and if it Reproves for Sin, it Instructs to Holiness,
without which none shall see God. In short, If it Manifest Reproveable Things
to be such, at the same time It Condemns them, and Teaches Things quite
Contrary; The Unfruitful Works of Darkness are judged by the Light, that the
Holy Fruits of the Light may appear: ^e Ephesians. 5. 8.
were Darkness, but now are ye Light in the Lord; and The Job 32. 8.
Reproof of Instruction is the Way of Life. He that comes out of the Reproved
Darkness, walks in the Approved Light; and who so answers the Holy Reproof,
unto Such is Sealed up THE INSTRUCTION OF THE WAY OF LIFE. And this brings me
to the third Property of the Light, with respect to Men; and that is, It does
not only Manifest and Condemn Sin, and discover and incline to Purity; but as
adhered to (or rather that Principle which is this Light) it is able, in Point
of Power and Efficacy to Redeem from Sin, and Lead to a State of Highest
Felicity. I am the Light of the World, (said Jesus himself) he that follows me
shall not walk in Darkness, John 8. 12.
but shall have the Light of Life. In which it is very evident, that, The same
Light, which Manifests Darkness, Redeems from it, unto a State of Light and
Life: that is to say, Those who confidently believe in Christ, as he manifests
himself a Light, to condemn Sin in every man's Flesh (whom he has therefore
illuminated) and obediently follow the Holy Requirings, and yield to the
Heavenly Discoveries of that Blessed Appearance, relinquishing the Pleasures of
Sin, which last but for a season, and taking up the daily Cross; such shall
most assuredly find that Divine Principle, which in reference to the Dark State
of Men, and that Discerning and Conviction it brings, is rightly denominated
Light, to have also Power and Efficacy, to Save from that which it manifests
and condemns, and to bring unto that Glory, which it gives a true Revelation
of: For, that same Word of God, who is called the true Light that inlighteneth
all Mankind, is also the Life, Power, Wisdom and Righteousness of the Father,
in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom, and unto whom all Power both in
Heaven and in Earth are committed, who is Heir of all things: who also said,
While ye have the Light (for their Day of Visitation Joh. 12. 36, 46.
was almost over) or, as some Translations more truly have it, While you have a
little Light IN YOU, believe, or walk in it.) believe in the Light, that ye may
be Children of the Light: Again, I am come a Light into the World, that
whosoever believes in me should not abide in Darkness: So that a Sincere Faith
in, and Obedience to the Light of Christ, as it shines in the Heart, whereby to
give the Living and Experimental Knowledge of the Glory of God unto the
Creature, is the Way to be Redeemed from Darkness, and to be made a Child of
Light; or that there is Power and Virtue Sufficient in the Light, to Ransom the
Souls of such as diligently adhere to it, from under the Power of Darkness. For
as the true Knowledge of God is Life Eternal, so, whatever may be known of God
is manifested within, Romans 1.
which Manifestation cannot properly be without the Light, whose peculiar
Property it is to Discover, Reveal or Manifest the Mind and Will of God to
Mankind; as says the Apostle, For whatsoever does make Manifest is Light. In
him was Ephesians. 5.
Life, and that Life was the Light of all Men: But not therefore John 1.
the Life of all Men, Spiritually and Unitedly considered; That was the
peculiar Privilege of those who Believed in it, and walked up to it. There is a
great Difference, not in the Principle, but in its Appearance to Man, as Life,
and Light. Such as believe in it; IT, What? the Word-God, who is that true
Light, as he appears to Discover or Illuminate the Heart and Conscience, do
really know and enjoy a new Nature, Spirit and Life; And in that Sense it may
be said, As the Life became the Light, so the Light became the Life again. Who
so follows me shall not walk in Darkness, but have the Light of Life. Not, that
there is a Difference, or so much as a Descent in Kind from Life to Light; only
in Operation with respect to Man: For as it is the very Life of the Word, in
the Word, it is the Light of Men: and so much it is, let them reject the Virtue
of it, if they will. But as it is received, and believed in, It begets Life,
Motion, Heat, and every Divine Qualification, suitable to the State of the New
Birth. And thus the Life of the Word, which is in common the Light, becomes the
Life of every such Particular, by communicating to, or ingenerating Life in the
Soul; so that no more he lives, but Christ (the WordGod, whom he has now put
on, and who is become his very Life, as well as Light) that dwells in him.

Let not Men then in their Dark Imaginations, with their Robbed Knowledge from
the Letter of the Scriptures themselves, contend against the Sufficiency of
what they obey not; neither have seriously tried the Power, Virtue, and
Efficacy of it, which brings Salvation to as many as are turned to it, and
abide in it.

And indeed, so express are the Scriptures in Defense of the Sufficiency, and
Necessity of the Light to Salvation, that it seems to have been the great
Intendment of our Lord Jesus Christ in delegating his Disciples, to preach his
Everlasting Gospel, viz. That they might open the Eyes of People, and turn them
from Darkness to the Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, that they
might receive Remission of Sins, and an Inheritance among them that are
Sanctified through Faith, that is in Me; who, ME: that am both the Light of the
World, and the Power of God unto Salvation. Now certainly, the Eyes that were
then blind, were not the Natural, but Spiritual Eyes of Men (and such must the
Darkness and Light be also) blinded by the God of this World, who reigned in
the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience: No Wonder then if the Light was not
comprehended of the Darkness, and that blind People did not see the Light; John
1. 5.
but it plainly proves, That Light there was, though not seen. Now the Work of
the Powerful Ministry of the Apostles was, To open the Blind or Dark Eye, which
the God of the World had blinded, and then to turn them from that Darkness, to
the Light; the Darkness was within, so must the Light have been; since the
Illumination was there necessary, where the Darkness had been predominant;
Consequently, The Way to be Translated from Satan's Power to God, to have
Remission of Sins, and an Inheritance with them that are Sanctified, is, to be
turned from the Darkness in the Heart, unto the Marvelous Light (that had long
shined uncomprehended) to wit, the GOSPEL, which is called both the Light and
Power of God.

The same Apostle in his Epistle to the Romans, is more express concerning the
holy Nature and Efficacy of the Romans 13. 12, 13, 14.
Light to Salvation, when he thus exhorts them; The Night is far spent, the Day
is at hand; Let us therefore cast off the Works of Darkness, and put on the
Armor of Light: Let us walk honestly as in the Day, not in Rioting and
Drunkenness, not in Chambring and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envy; but put
ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the Flesh, to fulfill
the Lusts thereof. From whence I shall briefly remark three Things, greatly to
our Purpose, and the Truths Defense in this Matter.

1. That there is an absolute Opposition, betwixt Light and Darkness; as
Darkness can only Vail the Light, from the Understandings of Men; So Light only
can Discover and Dispel that Darkness. Or thus, That the Light Manifests and
Condemns 2 Cor. 6. 14.
the Works of Darkness; for, what Communion has Light with Darkness.

2. That in the Light there is ARMOR, which being put on, is able to Conquer
the Darkness, and Secure the Soul, from the evil of it; otherwise it would be
very strange, that the Apostle should exhort the People to put it on.

3. That putting on the Armor of the Light, and putting on the Lord Jesus
Christ ( the Light of the World) are Synonimous, or one and the same thing; for
it is for one and the same End, as may be observed from the Words, Let us put
on the Armor of Light, and walk Honestly, as in the Day, not in Rioting and
Drunkenness, not in Chambring and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying.

But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the Flesh, to
fulfill the Lusts thereof.

I hope then, Neither will it be disallowed, that Christ is that Light, with
which Men are Enlightened (but more of that anon) nor is that Light, Men are
exhorted to Obey, a Naked and Insufficient, but a Searching, Expelling,
Powerful and Arming Light, against Darkness, and all its Unfruitful Works, and
consequently SAVING.

Thus the Beloved Disciple testifies very emphatically, in his first Epistle,
where he gives us a Relation of the Apostolical Mission: This then is the
Message which we have 1 John 1. 5, 6, 7.
heard of him, and declare unto you; That God is Light, and in him is no
Darkness at all; if we say, we have Fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness,
we Lie, and do not the Truth; But if we walk in the Light, as he is in the
Light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his
Son cleanses us from all Sin.

Here is a brief Stating of the whole Great Case of Salvation: (1.) What God
is; Light. (2.) Who can have no Fellowship with him; such as walk in Darkness
(that is Sin.) (3.) Who have Fellowship with him; such as walk in the Light, as
he is Light. (4.) the Reason why, is given; because such as walk in the Light,
are there sure experimentally to feel the Virtue of Christ's Blood, to cleanse
them from all Unrightcousness; Where observe, that the Light's leading out of
Darkness, that is, Unrighteousness, is the same with the Blood of Jesus Christ
cleansing from all Sin; Sin and Darkness, and to be cleansed from the one, and
to be translated from the other, is equivalent; otherwise, a Man might be
delivered from Darkness, and walk in the Light, and not be cleansed from Sin,
which is that Darkness; a thing Absurd and Impossible: In short, they go
together.

By this it is evident, that the Light being walked in, does directly lead to
God, and Fellowship with him, who is the Saving Light and Health of all
Nations; and consequently, that the Light leads to Eternal Salvation.

Many are the Denominations that are given in Scripture to one and the same
Being, or Condition; Christ is called, The Word, the Light, the Savior,
Emanuel, a Rock, a Door, a Vine, a Shepherd, etc. A State of Sin is sometimes
called, Darkness, Death, Disobedience, Barrenness, Rebellion, Stiff-neckedness,
Eating of Sour Grapes; And Wicked Men, Briars, Thorns, Thistles, Tares, Dead
Trees, Wolves, Goats, etc. On the contrary, a State of Conversion, is sometimes
expressed, by such words, as, Purged, Refined, Washed, Cleansed, Sanctified,
Justified, Led by the Spirit, Baptized by one Spirit into one Body,
Regenerated, Redeemed, Saved, Bought with a Price, etc. And Persons so
qualified, The Children of God, Children of Light, Heirs of Glory, Lambs,
Sheep, Wheat; And that by which they become or continue thus, Light, Spirit,
Fire, Sword, Hammer, Power, Grace, Seed, Truth, Way, Life, Blood, Water, Bread,
Word, Unction, that leads into all Truth; All which respectively, is but one
and the same in Nature: That is, Sin or a Sinful State is so variously
denominated from the diverse Operations and Discoveries of the Nature of it in
Wicked Men. The like may be said of the several Virtues in Good and Holy Men,
and so of that one Divine Principle, which so qualifies and preserves them; For
as the Primitive Saints felt the Operation of the One Holy Principle, so they
denominated it: to men in Darkness, they called it Light; to such as believed
and obeyed, It became a Leader; and those who witnessed their Sins conquered,
their Lusts cut down, their Hearts broken, and their Souls Washed, Redeemed and
daily Nourished, they called that Divine Principle, a Sword, Fire, Hammer,
Water, Flesh, Blood, and Bread, and Seed of Life. In short, The same Heavenly
Principle became Light, Wisdom, Power, Counsel, Redemption, Sanctification, and
Eternal Salvation unto those who believed in it: So that the Variety of
Expressions in the Scriptures, must not be taken for so many distinct things in
kind, no; nor sometimes in Operation. And indeed, notwithstanding that Light,
T. Hicks would have lodged in the bare Scriptures, exclusive of the Spirit, all
the Men of the World met together, would be confounded, to give a true Account
of the Matter therein contained, if they were not Living Experimental
Witnesses; For as he is not an Evidence sufficient in Laws Humane, that was not
an Eye or Ear Witness; neither are they Evidences for God and Christ, who are
not Eye and Ear Witnesses of the Light, Spirit, Grace and Word of God in the
Heart. And I boldly affirm, the Scriptures speak no more for such, as are not
Inheritors of that Blessed Condition, they declare of in some Measure or other,
then any Deed of Gift would do for a Person no ways Named or Interested
therein. It is time then for T. Hicks and his Partners to look about them, lest
the Midnight-Cry overtake them, and their Professing Lamp be found without Oil:
For I must needs tell him, in the Beloved Disciple's Language, He that says,
he is in the Light; and (...) his Brother, is in the Darkness even until now.
And in my own Language, That I take that to be their State, who show so much
Envious Displeasure against an Harmless People, and those in particular, that
never yet Offended, much less Justly provokt them. But would they bring their
Thoughts, Words and Deeds to the Light in their own Consciences, and let true
Judgment pass upon them, and patiently undergo the Heavenly Chastisements for
their Disobedience to, and Vilifying of the Light, they would come to witness a
turning from the Darkness to the Light, and continuing therein, as that Holy
Way, in which the Ransomed of the Lord always did, do, and shall walk through
all Generations, they would know the Enjoyment of Eternal Peace: Yea, such is
the Excellency of Christ, the true Light, that as He was First, so shall He be
the Last, when all Outward Performances, Writings, Worships, yea, the whole
World shall be at an End; the Use and Excellency of the Light will remain
forever; as says John the Divine, And they shall see his Face, and his Rev.
22. 4. 5.
Name shall be written in their Foreheads, and there shall be no Night there,
and they need no Candle, neither Light of the Sun, for the LORD GOD GIVES THEM
LIGHT, and they shall Reign forever and ever, Amen.

CHAP. VIII.
An Objection against the Light's Antecedent Being to Christ's Coming. It is
proved to have been known to be a Saving Light from Adam's day, through the
Holy Patriarchs and Prophets time down to Christ's, from the Scriptures of
Truth.

HAving then plainly proved from Scripture (1.) That Gal. 4. 16.
the Light is Saving, since the time of Christ; beginning Tit. 2.
with its first Appearance, as Manifesting John 14. 6.
Sin. (2.) Condemning of It. (3.) Redeeming from It, as John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 9.
obeyed. And that the same Principle which is called Light, 1 Cor. 15. 45, 47,
and 1. 24.
is the Seed, Grace, Truth, Word, Spirit, Power, Unction, Water, Way, Life,
Flesh and Blood; and therefore not a Distinct Being from that, which T. Hicks
himself, if he will 1 John 2. 27. and 5. 6, 7, 8.
own plain Scripture, must confess does Save; I call it the LIGHT OF SALVATION,
OR THAT LEADS John 6. 51, 52, 53.
TO SALVATION.

But there remain yet several Objections to be Answered, which done, we shall
immediately proceed to give Judgment upon the Question, Who, or What this Light
is, with respect to all our Adversaries Cavils.

Obj. Though you have thus far evinced the Universality of a Saving Light from
the Scriptures, since Christ's Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension; yet
that which is the Pinch of the Controversy will be this, Where was this before
Light? Had any this Saving Light (they had a Light) before it came in that
Eminent Manner above One Thousand Six Hundred Years since; It is generally
believed, that Christ's then coming benefitted the World with it, in case the
World universally has such a Saving Light?

To which I shall give my Answer, both from Scripture, History and Reason.

The first Scripture I shall quote, is in the first of Genesis; So God created
Man in his own Image, in the Image of God Genesis 1. 27.
created he him. From whence I draw this Argument, That if Man was made in
God's Image, then because, God is Light, Adam must necessarily have had of the
Divine Light in him, and have been the Image of that Light, so long as he walked
and remained in It: Since no man walks in the Light, but he becomes the Child
of Light. And as the Apostle Paul expresses it, of such as were converted to
that Light they had once erred from; Ye were Darkness, but now are ye Light in
the Lord; That is, Through Obedience to the Light of the Lord. For any man then
to say, Adam had not Light, were to suppose his Innocent State to be that of
Darkness, and instead of, and being God's Image, who is, and ever was, and
always will be Light, he would have been wholly ignorant of him, in whose Image
he is said to have been created.

II. This Moses directed the Children of Israel to, when he in God's stead,
recommended and earnestly pressed the keeping of the Commandment, and Word in
the Heart; as we read in Deuteronomy. For this Commandment which I Command
Deuteronomy. 30. 11. 12, 13, 14, 15.
thee this day, is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off: It is not in
Heaven, that thou should say, Who shall go up for us to Heaven, and bring it
unto us, that we may hear it and do it? Neither is It beyond the Sea, that thou
should say, Who shall go over the Sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we
may hear it and do it? But the Word is very nigh unto thee, in thy Mouth, and
in thy Heart, that thou may do it. See, I have set before thee this day, Life
and Good, and Death and Evil.

From whence I cannot but observe these Three Things,

1. That the Commandment, and the Word, are so called by way of Excellency and
Pre-eminence, to all written Commandments or Words. 2. That this Commandment or
Word is Nigh, even in the Heart of Man it self: none need plead Distance or
Ignorance. 3. That the Setting Life and Good, Death and Evil was and could only
be in the Light within, since without the Light, how could they have Seen it
Set before them: And that it was in their Hearts, the Lord so set those States
before them, the Verse immediately follows that wherein the Word is by Moses
argumentatively proved, as well as affirmed to be in the Heart of Man. Now I
hope, it shall not be injuriously done of me; and I know who will bear me out,
if I say, This Commandment is that which David spoke of, when he said, The
Commandment of the Lord is pure Inlightning the Eyes; and this Holy Word, the
same with that Word, which he said, was a Lamp unto his Feet, and a Light unto
his Path, and not an other Word, then what Paul called the Word of Faith, which
he preached, by which the Just live; consequently a Saving Commandment, Word or
Light it was, and is to such as Believe and Obey it.
III. The next Scripture I will urge shall be this: For thou 2 Samuel 22. 29.
art my Lamp O Lord, for the Lord will Lighten my Darkness. Now if God was the
Light and Lamp of that Day, to such as regarded the Light, cerainly then they
had a Light and such an one as was Saving too; unless we should Blasphemously
Deny, God to be either a Light, or a Saving One, who is most certainly both.

IV. Wicked Men were not without Light to Condemn them, as Good Men ever had
Light to Preserve them: They are of those that Rebel against the Light, they
know not the Job 24. 13.
Ways thereof, nor abide in the Paths thereof, said Job. In which Passage it
is very obvious, that Wicked Men have Light, otherwise it would have been
utterly Impossible for them, to have Rebelled against it; Nay, against THE
LIGHT, implying, that it is the same Light in Nature, with that, which
Righteous Men are guided by, answerable to another Emphatical Passage in the
same Book of Job, Is there any Number Job 25. 3.
of his Army, and UPON WHOM DOES NOT HIS LIGHT ARISE? Certainly, this
Universality strongly pleads on the behalf of our Belief of the Light; And if
our Adversary would but venture to let it come close to his Conscience, I
cannot be so Uncharitable as to think he should not make some Acknowledgment to
its Universality, antecedent to the Coming of Christ. I omit to say much of its
Efficaciousness at that time (though one would think that Light always gives
to Discern a Good Way from a Bad one) referring it to another place: Only I
shall observe, how that Job expressly tells us, and that when he was in his deep
Troubles of Spirit: O that I were as in Months past, in the Job 29. 3.
Days when God preserved me, when his Candle shined upon my Head, and when by
his Light I walked through Darkness; where it is most apparent, that Job
attributes his Salvation from the Darkness (which stands both for Sin and
Affliction) unto the Light, wherewith God had Enlightened him. And certainly, It
had been utterly Impossible for those weighty things, that are delivered in
that Book of Job, as well from others, as from Job, to have been known, had not
they been Enlightened, and received very great Discoveries from that Light and
Candle of the Lord in their Hearts; For in all the whole Book I find not one
Verse expressly cited out of any other Writings, but what purely proceeded from
Immediate Impulse, and Inspiration of the Almighty, which says the same Book,
gives Men Understanding.

V. To this Doctrine David was no Stranger, who so very often commemorates the
Light, and the Divine Excellencies of it; some few places I shall mention of
those many that I might offer.

The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? the Psalm. 27. 1.
Lord is the Strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid?

This weighty Passage of the Prophet is a lively Testimony to the True Light,
wherein David confessed what John called his Evangelical Message, viz. That God
is Light. Next, that not only God is Light, but which doubtless was most of all
to his Comfort, HIS LIGHT; The Lord is MY Light, and MY Salvation: As much as
if he had said, Because the Lord is become my Light, I have known him to be my
Salvation, or him by whom my Salvation has been wrought. In short thus, That
God is My Salvation, as he is My Light; or, as I have Obeyed the Lord My Light,
I have witnessed Salvation. O! that such Professors of Religion, in whom there
is any Moderation, would but be pleased to weigh, What was David' s Light; What
his Salvation; and Who must needs have been his Rule at that time of the World,
of which he further speaks:

God is the Lord, who has showed us Light. Thy Word is a Lamp Psalm. 118. 27
119. 105, 102.
unto my Feet, and a Light unto my Paths. I have not departed from thy
Judgments, for thou have taught me. This made him far Wiser then his Teachers
in the hidden Life and Mystery of things, whereby David had long seen beyond
all Types and Shaddows of the good Things to come, to the very Substance it
self, from whence came his excellent Prophecies: agreeing with that passage,
The Path of the Prove. 4. 18.
Just is as the shining Light, that shines more and more unto the perfect Day,
said the wise Man. This strongly implies, that David, and not he alone, but the
Just of all Ages, were attended with the Discoveries and Leadings of a Divine
Light; which as obeyed, did make Just, and always lead in the Way of
Salvation: unless the Just Way was not the Saving Way; and if it was, certainly
it is still: for it is the Lord himself, whom in Samuel's History, he is
recorded also to have called a Lamp, as he here does the Word, which Moses
said, was nigh in the Heart, that Men should obey it and do it. This was the
Word of Reconciliation in every Generation, whose Holy Water washed their
Consciences from Sin, who heard, andobey'd it.

Again, that this Light was not confined to David, or such Good Men, take these
two Passages.

T. Hicks. Psalm. 50. 19, 20, 21.
Thou give thy Mouth to Evil, and thy Tongue frames Deceit; Thou sit and
speak against thy Brother, thou Slanderest thine own Mothers Son: These
things have thou done, and I kept Silence, thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such an one as thy self, but I WILL REPROVE THEE, AND SET THEM IN
ORDER BEFORE THINE EYES (says the Lord) Again, His Lightnings enlightened Psalm.
94. 4.
the World, the Earth saw, and trembled. In which two places it will appear
upon impartial Consideration, that God has enlightened the World, and that as
Light (Difcovering the Works and Workers of Darkness) he does reprove the
Inhabitants of the World, set their Sins in order before them, and cause such
Guilty ones to Tremble at his so appearing, which is expressly confirmed in that
notable passage of the Prophet, For Lo! He that treads the Mountains, and
clears the Wind, Amos 4. 13.
that makes the Morning Darkness, and treads upon the High Places of the
Earth, and DECLARES UNTO MAN, WHAT HIS THOUGHTS ARE, THE LORD, THE GOD OF HOSTS
IS HIS NAME.

This the Psalmist was well acquainted with himself, when he uttered these
Words, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or Psalm. 139. 7.
whither shall I flee from thy Presence? which plainly shows to us, that the
Spirit of the Lord, and his Presence was everywhere, and that as Light,
discovering Darkness with respect to Mankind: For the Question was not, whether
God by his Spirit was not everywhere, for that our Adversaries grant, or he
could not be God? But whether it was possible for David to withdraw himself
into any place, where his Mind could not be sensible of the Eternal Spirit and
Immediate Presence of God (who is Light it self) either as a Reprover,
Exhorter, or Informer; as the foregoing Words intimate? O Lord thou have
searched me, and known me, -- Thou understandest my Verse. 1, 2, 3.
Thoughts afar off -- Thou art acquainted with all my Ways. Which however God
might know them, it stands firm, that David could never have known God so as to
see and behold them, but from that Light and Spirit of which he says in the
7th verse. following (which I have already cited) Whither shall I go from thy
Spirit? In short, it must needs be evident, to all unprejudiced Readers, that
David had this Light within, or Spirit of God present with him, as a Reprover,
Informer, or Comforter, since it was impossible for him to be any-where without
it. Which may prove to us, that however he lived above a thousand years before
the Apostle Paul, he very well knew the meaning of that Doctrine he preached to
the Athenians, God is not far away, or at a Distance from every one Acts. 20.
of you. Which truly known and experimentally witnessed, not only as a
Reprover, but by an humble and holy reception of him into the Heart, as King
and Lord, is the Glory of the Evangelical Dispensation, where God dwells in his
People as an Holy Temple, and Tabernacles with them. This is the blessed 2 Cor.
6. 16.
Emmanuel-state God with, and God in Men.

I might here to sub-joyn the Account we have of the great Illumination of
Daniel, and the Gentiles clear Acknowledgment of the same, which they could
never have done, with that Seriousness and Conviction, but from some glimps of
the same Divine Light; but that I shall pass over with several Passages of
other of the lesser Prophets; and conclude this Scripture Proof of the Gift of
the Light and Spirit, antecedent to Christ's coming in the Flesh; and from
Stephen's Testimony, Howbeit the Most High dwells not in Temples made with
hands, as says the Prophet: Heaven is my Throne, and Earth is my Footstool,
what House will Acts 7. 48. 49. 50, 51.
you build me, says the Lord? or what is the Place of my Rest? Has not my
hands made all these things; Ye Stiff-necked and Uncircumcised in Hearts and
Ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, as your Fathers did so do ye.

And lest it should be objected, that it was only in Stephen then, and the holy
Prophets of Old, that both they and their Forefathers resisted the Holy
Spirit, Remember Reader, that weighty Passage in Nehemiah, Thou gave also thy
Neh. 9. 20.
Good Spirit to Instruct them, and withheldst not thy Manna from their Mouth;
by which it is most evident, that the Light of God's Spirit, or the Spirit of
God, was given as well to the Rebellious as Obedient; that it might as well
condemn for Sin, as lead into all Righteousness; And since we are to suppose
God's Spirit, and the Light thereof, to be sufficient to Salvation, ( for God's
Gifts are perfect in themselves, and are given to accomplish their Ends
perfectly) from that Sin and Iniquity which the contrary Spirit draws into, we
may without any offense, I hope, conclude, that during those many Ages before
the Coming of Christ in the Flesh he did Illuminate Mankind with a sufficient
measure of his Divine Light and Spirit.

CHAP. IX.
Another Objection, that though the Jews had it, it will not follow that the
Gentiles were so Illuminated. It is Answered by several Scriptures. In this
Chapter quoted to prove, that they were not exempted; But had a measure of
Light, some Divine Seed sown in their Hearts, some Talent given, and that it
was Sufficient. T. Hicks's Challenge to give an Instance of one that by the
Light within was Reproved for not believing that Jesus was the Christ, is
Answered. Such as believed in the Light, and walked up to it, did receive Christ
when he came. The high Pretenders were they who to Scriptures Opposed, and
Crucified him. The Light from Scripture concluded Universal and Saving.

Obj.BUt here I expect this Objection, having run our Adversaries unavoidably
to it: Very well, Taking it for granted that what you have said in reference to
a Saving Light or Spirit, universally bestowed upon the Jews, THAT WERE A
DISTINCT PEOPLE from the rest of the World, under very many peculiar Rights;
yet cannot we think it good Arguing, to infer the Gifts of God's Light and
Spirit to the Gentiles, that make far the greatest part thereof; from these
Scriptures, that only seem to prove it the Privilege of the Jews.

To which I Answer, That I conceive I have urged those Scriptures already, that
afford a plain Conviction, and Evincement of the Truth of that general
Inference; but because I am desirous from my very Soul, in perfect Love to
theirs, that shall read this Discourse, of removing what Objection I am able to
foresee it may meet with, after it shall have past my hand, I will endeavor
to make appear, first from SCRIPTURE, and next from the Best Account we have of
the DOCTRINES and LIVES of HEATHENS, and lastly from REASON; That God's Love in
the Illumination of his Spirit or Gift of a Measure of his Divine and Saving
Light was Universal; or that Mankind was (and consequently is) antecedently to
Christ's Coming in the Flesh, enlightened with such a Measure of Light, as was
Saving in it self: And to all such, as received the Light, and obeyed it, in
the Love of it. In order to this, I shall briefly insist on a few Scriptures,
some of which have been already quoted, though not so directly to this Matter.

I. My Spirit shall not always strive with Man. Here observe, Genes. 6. 3.
That no one Nation was interested more then another, but Man stands for the
whole Adam, or Mankind; from whence I do very truly Conclude, that Mankind was
not destitute of the Spirit, or Light of the Almighty, though it might be known
in no higher Degree, then that of a Convincer and Reprover of Sin: yet it
follows not, But if man had yielded to the Striving of it, doubtless he had
been thereby redeemed from that Spirit of Iniquity, that was the ground of his
grievous Resistance, which I call Salvation from sin.

II. They are of those that Rebel against the Light, they know Job 24. 9. 13.
not the Ways thereof, nor abide in the Path thereof. Here is no mention made
of the Jews, in this Chapter, nor in many foregoing or following it, if at all
in the whole Book. For Job is here giving the Character of wicked Men in
general, that is, not with respect to any. Neither is it our Construction only,
but the Judgment of Men famed in the World, for their Exactness in the Original
Text, or Letter of the Scripture. They interpret it, to be the Light of the
Divine Wisdom, the Fountain of Light, yea, God himself: That Rebelling against
the Light, is against God. (...), the Light of Israel; alluding to the
Psalmist, The Lord is my Light and my Salvation. Nay, to the Light mentioned by
the Apostle Paul, Ye, who were sometimes Darkness, are now Light in the Lo^d.
And that very Light, which is said to have sprung up to them that sat in
Darkness, which is the Light of Truth (and by our Adversaries, allowed to be
the Evangelical; and spoke of Christ's Manifestation) Also, that the Ways of
Light, are Light, leading to the Light it self, which Wicked Men turn from, and
spurn at. That this is the Light, which there is none, but it rises upon,
whereby to give them true sight of themselves. See Munsterus, Vatablus,
Clarius, Castellio on the 17th Verse, but especially Drusius and Codurcus, who
say, All Men partake of that Light, and that it is sufficient to Manifest and
Drive away the Darkness of Error; and that it is the Light of Life; Nay,
Codurcus calls it, an Evangelical Principle, and seems to explain his Mind by a
Quotation of the Evangelist's words, John 19. That was the True Light, that
inlightneth all Mankind coming into the World. Chap. 25. 3.
Munster. Vatabl. Clar. Castle. Drus. and Codurc. Crit. in 24, 25. Chap. Ver.
13, and 3. (...), P. 3283. to 3308.
particular Nation; so that we may well infer, neither did he understand, the
Light whereof he spoke, should be limited (as to its Illumination) or any
particular People. In short, I argue thus; If such as pluck the Fatherless from
the Breast, and take a Pledge of the Poor, as (the Context relates) are those
that Rebel against the Light, and walk not in its Way; then because that Vice
was never limited to the Jews, but other Nations worked that Wickedness as well
as they, it will plainly follow, that the Light, against which such Offenders
Rebelled, also was not limited to the Jews, but extended to the Gentiles also;
unless it should be said, That what was Rebellion and Wickedness in the Jews,
was not so in the Gentiles. But because, Sin was, and is Sin, all the World
over; Light was, and is Light, all the World over, whether Men bring their
Deeds to it or not.

III. But again let us hear the same Book speak, Is there any Number of his
Armies? and upon whom does not his Light Arise?

This Question carries in it a strong Affirmative of the Universality of God's
Light, as much as to say, Who is there among all the Sons and Daughters of Men,
that can say, I am not Enlightened by Him? If then none can, it must needs
follow, That all are Enlightened, as well Gentiles as Jews.

IV. Thus much these two Notable Parables teach us of the Sower, and the Lord
that gave his Servants Talents. They who believe Scripture, must acknowledge
them to represent God's Dealings with Mankind, in reference to Gift, Duty and
Reward. Observe the first Parable.

The same Day went Jesus out of the House, and sat by the Sea Mat. 13. 1, to
10.
side; And great Multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he went
into a Ship, and sat, and the whole Multitude stood on the Shore. And he spoke
many things unto them in Parables, saying, Behold, A SOWER WENT FORTH TO SOW,
and when he sowed, some Seeds fell by the Way side, and the Fowls came, and
devoured them up; Some fell upon Stony places, where they had not much Earth,
and forthwith they sprung up, because they had no Deepness on Earth, and when
the Sun was up, they were scorched, and because they had not Root, they
withered away; and some fell among Thorns, and the Thorns sprung up and
choack'd them; But other fell in Good Ground, and brought forth Fruit; some an
Hundredfold, some Sixty-fold, some Thirty-fold. Who has Ears to hear, let him
hear.

It is granted by all that I know of, that the Seeds-Man is God; the Scripture
says, the Seed is the Word of the Kingdom, Verse. 19.
which must needs be the Spiritual Word nigh in the Heart, suitable to the
Heavenly Kingdom Christ said, was within, other-wise called Light, that is said
to be sown for the Righteous; or the Grace, that appears unto all-Men, and
brings Salvation to them that are taught by it: And lastly, common Sense tells
us, that the several Grounds comprehend Mankind; for they must either include
the Bad with the Good, or the Good only must be benefited: But the very
Scripture expressly distinguishes betwixt the Good and Bad Ground, yet affirms
the one to have been sown with the Seed as well as the other; Therefore Gods
Gift is Universal, however Men by Wicked Works may have rendered their Hearts
Stony, Thorny, or otherwise defective and incapable of bringing forth Fruit.

The other Parable is also very weighty, and much to our purpose: For the
Kingdom of Heaven is as a Man traveling Mat. 25. 14; to 34.
into a far Country, who called his own Servants, and delivered unto them his
Goods; and unto one he gave Five Talents, to another Two, and to another One,
to every Man according to his several ability, and straightway took his
Journey. Then he that had received Five Talents, went and traded with the same,
and made them other Five Talents; and likewise he, that had received Two, he
also gained other Two; But he that had received One, went and dug in the
Earth, and hid his Lord's Money. After a long time, the Lord of those Servants
comes and Reckons with them: And so he that had received Five Talents came
and brought other Five Talents, saying, Lord, Thou deliveredst unto me Five
Talents, Behold, I have gained besides them Five Talents more. His Lord said
unto him; Well done thou Good and Faithful Servant, thou have been faithful
over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things, Enter thou into the
Joy of thy Lord. He also that received Two Talents, came and said, Lord, Thou
deliveredst unto me Two Talents, Behold, I have gained Two other Talents
besides them, His Lord said unto him; Well done Good and Faithful Servant, thou
have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things,
Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord. Then he which had received One Talent,
came and said, Lord, I knew thee, that thou art an hard Man, Reaping where thou
have not sown, and Gathering where thou have not strawed; and I was afraid, and
went and hid thy Talent in the Earth: Lo, there thou have that which is thine.
His Lord answered, and said unto him, Thou Wicked and Slothful Servant, thou
knew that I Reap where I sowed not, and Gather where I have not strawed,
Thou ought therefore to have put my Money to the Exchangers, and then at my
Coming I should have received mine Own with Usury: Take therefore the Talent
from him, and give it unto him which has Ten Talents; For unto every one that
has shall be given, and he shall have Abundance, but from him that has not
shall be taken away even that which he has: And cast ye the Unprofitable
Servant into utter Darkness, there shall be Weeping, and Gnashing of Teeth,
when the Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all the Holy Angels with Him,
then shall He sit upon the Throne of his Glory, and before Him shall be
gathered all Nations, and He shall separate them one from another, as a
Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats, and He shall set the Sheep on his
Right Hand, but the Goats on the Left.

Serious Reader, I have the rather repeated the Scripture at large, because of
that great Strength it carries, methinks, to the Conviction, at least Confusion
of that Narrow Spirit, which confines the infinite Goodness of God, and renders
him, whilst he is an Universal Creator, but a particular Benefactor, shutting
up his Gifts within the straight compass of a FEW; representing him thereby, as
partial, as some Parents, who they know not for what, beside their own unequal
Wills, do frequently bestow their Favor (indeed the whole of their Affection)
upon an Elected Dareling, to the manifest, though causeless Neglect of the
rest. But to speak the Truth of the matter, the Over-fondness some bear to
their own Opinions, joined with the Envy raised toward those who conform not
to them, has so emptied them of all natural Affection, that looking upon God in
that condition they dare to think him as unnatural as themselves; For my part,
I have not a great while believed, but that it rather rise from an
Unwillingness in some, that Dissenters from them should be saved (thereby
endeavoring a Compliance upon Necessity) then that God had not been propitious
unto all his Creatures. For who sees not, who can or will see, that God is this
Sovereign Lord, that he made Mankind to be his Servants, that these Three are
representative of the whole, and to the End they might not be Unprofitable
Ones, that he gave them Talents to improve against his Return, that is, against
the Day of Recompense; for which they are accountable, that who improve their
Talents may be rewarded, and they who make no improvement of their Talents, may
be punished with Eternal Separation from the Presence of God, and all his Holy
Angels.

I will conclude with these Five Observations:

1. That God (though it be his Sovereign Prerogative, what he will give) has
given a Talent out of his Celestial Treasury unto every Man and Woman. 2. That
this Talent is in it self Sufficient; but as the best Corn, so this Talent, put
up into a Napkin, must needs be Unprofitable; yet, that the Fault is in the
Party Neglecting or Hiding of it, not in it self. 3. That those who improve not
their Talent, are most apt to charge God with Reaping where he Sows not, as do
those Professors we have to do with; who make God to require an Account of all,
and yet deny, in order to rendering up this Account with Joy, that he has given
all a Talent Sufficient thereunto. 4. That the Eternal Estate of Men and Women,
as Sheep and Goats, purely depends upon their Improving, or not Improving of
that Heavenly Talent wherewith God has indu'd them.
Lastly, Neither is there any Shelter for these Parsimonious Men, or their
Hide-bound Faith, under the Inequality of the Number of the Talents; for it is
not, how many Talents are given, but what Improvement is made of what is given:
Wherefore greater is his Reward, who makes one Talent Three, then his who of
Ten, advances but to Fifteen; since the one makes but Half, whilst the other
makes Treble Improvement. Blessed therefore are you all, and will you assuredly
be in the Day of the Lord's Recompense, who disregarding the Vanities,
Pleasures, Cares and Fleshly Religions of the World, diligently mind your own
Talent, and are in the Pure Wisdom and Holy Counsel of the Lord, making your
daily Improvement of the same, laying up Treasure in the High and Heavenly
Place, that is Durable and Everlasting.

V. This reasonable Truth is yet further manifest, from the weighty Words of
our Lord Jesus Christ; For every one that John 3. 20.
does Evil hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should
be reproved: To which I would add that of the Apostle, Whatsoever is reproved
is made manifest by the Light. Certainly Ephesians. 5. 13.
then, unless Men will be so Unjust to God, as to think (contrary to Scripture
and Reason) He should let Millions of Men, and Scores of Generations live in
Sin, without a Light to show it them, or a Law to limit them; it must be
yielded, that they had Light and Law in their Hearts and Consciences, by which
they were Convicted of Sin; and such, as obeyed it, led to work Righteousness,
since their Refusing to bring their Deeds to the Light, was not an Act of
Ignorance, but Design; because they knew their Deeds would be Condemned, and
they for them; which loudly asserts, that they both had a Light, and knew they
had it, though they Rebelled against it. And if I should grant, that whatever
was reproveable, was not made manifest unto them; yet this will no ways hinder
the Capacity of the Light to do it. It Is evident, That some things which the
Gentiles did, were reproved, therefore they had the Light: And if they had it
not in all the Extent of its Revelation, the Light was no more to be blamed,
then that Guide, whose Passengers therefore could not arrive at their Journey's
End, because they never would begin, at least proceed. Had the Heathens been
Faithful to what they had of God in themselves, and not been blinded by the
Vain Idolatries and Superstitious Traditions of their Fathers, they had more
fully known and learned the Mind and Will of their Creator; which some of those
Gentiles notwithstanding did, as will yet further appear.

VI. Thus the Apostle Paul teaches us to believe, in that remarkable Passage of
his in the first Chapter to the Romans: For I am not Ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ: For it is Romans 1. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 28.
the, Power of God unto Salvation, to every one that believes, to the Jew
first, and also to the Greek. For therein is the Righteousness of God revealed
from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the
Truth in Unrighteousness. Because that which may be known of God is manifest in
them, for God has showed it unto them. For the Invisible Things of Him from
the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the Things that
are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead, so that they are without Excuse;
because that when they knew God, they Glorified him not as God, neither were
Thankful; but became Vain in their Imaginations, and their Foolish Hearts were
Darkened. And even as they did not like to Retain God in their Knowledge, God
gave them over to a Reprobate Mind, to do those things which are not Convenient.

These Notable Lines of that Great Apostle, give an apparent Overthrow to all
Objections against, either the Universality or Sufficiency of the Light within;
which will be further manifest, if the Reader be but pleased to observe these
few Particulars. (1.) That in the Gospel of Christ is the Righteousness of God
revealed, and that from Faith to Faith. (2.) That this Faith the Just have ever
lived by, for he quotes a Time past, as it is written, which Writing was about
700. Years before he wrote that Epistle. (3.) That many had degenerated from the
Righteousness of God, to wit, the Gentiles, into Ungodliness, against which the
Wrath of God was revealed from Heaven. (4.) That they however, once knew the
Truth. (5.) That they came to the Knowledge of this Truth from the
Manifestation of God (who is Light) within; since what might be known of God
was manifested in them, because God had showed it unto them. (6.) That the
Cause of their after Darkness, was their Rebelling against that Manifestation
or Light, not Glorifying the God that showed it to them, when they both saw it,
and knew him so to do. Consequently, that God had given them Light Sufficient,
both to know and obey him. And since they liked not to retain God in their
Knowledge, the Deficiency was theirs, and not the Light's. (7.) If therefore
their foolish Hearts were darkened, that is, by Disobedience, it follows, that
therefore that Darkness came by Sin into their Hearts, they had Light in their
Hearts, or a Light within. 8) Lastly, If the Wrath was therefore revealed,
because the hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, and when they knew God by that
Manifestation of Light within, they glorified him not as God, but became vain
in their Imaginations, and their foolish Hearts darkened; Then certainly, had
they kept to that Principle, called the Truth, and the Manifestation of God
within, and preserved their Faith in God, as he had revealed himself to them;
So glorifying him as God, and delighting to retain him in their knowledge; Not
Wrath, but Mercy and Peace had been revealed from Heaven, as says the same
Apostle in his following Chapter, to them, who by patient Chap. 2. 8.
continuance in well doing, seek for Glory and Honor and Immortality, ETERNAL
LIFE.

In short; This we may safely conclude, that the Righteousness (...) (in the
Gospel of Christ, of which Paul was not ashamed) from Faith to Faith, by which
Faith, he (...) the Just Ancients lived, or were accepted, is One in Nature,
though not in Degree with that TRUTH the Gentiles Apstatized from, and
therefore lived without Faith, Righteousness or God in the World; for which the
Wrath was reveal^d; which had they lived up unto, glorifying God, as God,
according to the Manifestation of himself in their Hearts and Consciences, they
would have had, not the Revelation of Wrath, but of the Righteousness of Faith,
by which the Just in all Ages have lived ^cceptably with God: For without Faith
can no Man please God, in any Age; as without Holiness (that flows from true
Faith) to Man shall ever see the Lord.

VII. And Lastly, I do earnestly entreat the Unprejudiced Reader, to observe
these two notable Passages, which with my Consideration of them, shall conclude
the Scripture-Proofs I have urged for the Universality of the Light, and Spirit
of God, antecedent to Christ's Appearance in the Flesh.

Then Peter opened his Mouth, and said, Of a Truth, I perceive that God is no
Respecter of Persons, but in every Nation, He that fears him, and works
Righteousness is accepted with him. For not the Hearers of the Law are Just
before God, but the Doers Romans 2. 13, 14, 15, 16.
of the Law shall be justified: For when the Gentiles which have not the Law,
do by Nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a
Law unto themselves, which show the Works of the Law written in their Hearts,
their Consciences also bearing Witness, and their Thoughts the mean while
Accusing or Excusing one another, in the Day when God shall judge the Secrets
of Men by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel.

These Scriptures are a severe Check to our Adversaries undervaluing
Apprehension of the blessed Light of God, and that will appear in several
particulars.

1. God is no Respecter of Persons in any Nation; from whence I honestly
conclude, that all Persons and Nations were enlightened, as well Gentiles as
Jews.

2. That here are Men (not of the Circumcision made with hands) who fear God,
work Righteousness, and are Doers of the Law, not from any outward Obligation
(^or they had none) but the inward Work of the Law writ upon (...) Hearts;
which is a Demonstration, that they had not only (...) Light as a Reprover, but
as a Teacher and Leader, whereby they came to fear God, and work Righteousness,
which is elsewhere said to be Eccles. 12, 13, 14.
the Sum of the Matter, and whole Duty of Man: (...) then no (...) that fears
God, works Righteousness, and keeps the (...) Law of God, as the Scriptures
testify some Gentiles to h^ve done, can be said to do so, and yet worship
false Gods, or not ri^htly Worship the true one, be void of the true Light, the
most part of T. Hicks his 9th page, where he objects the (...) Ignorance of the
true God, against the Sufficiency of the Light within, and a Challenge to us to
produce one Instance amon^ the many Thousands of Mankind that from the Light
within, has been reproved for not believing Jesus to be Christ, (...) as the
smoke; For though perhaps he thinks, he may have done a great deal, in making
that bold Demand of (...), yet I shall briefly tell him, that such as lived up
most sincerely to the Light in their own Consciences, acknowledged most
readily, that glorious Appearance of Light in that Body then in the World. They
were the great Pretenders to Scriptures, that would not come to Christ, the
Traditional, Literal and Ordinance-Men that Rejected and Crucified him; and
that had not both, Cornelius and the Centurion, with many others, been upright
Livers to the Light within, neither (...) Peter been so received by the one,
nor Christ so followed by the other. But that measure of the Divine Light,
which they had thitherto obeyed, as the more sure Word of Prophecy, lead them
naturally, unto the Rising of the Day Star, which, though a more glorious
manifestation, yet not of another Light, Life, or Spirit, then had ever been;
for there are not two Lights, Life's, Natures or Spirits in God, he is ONE for
ever in himself, and his Light one in kind, how ever variously he may have
declared himself or manifested it at sundry times of the World; His Truth is
one, his Way is one, and his Rest one forever. But last of all, that which
greatly joys, is this, that the Narrowness of some Men's Spirits in this World,
will not be found able to exclude virtuous Gentiles from their Reward in the
other: But maugre all the Heat, Petulancy, Conceitedness, and Fleshly Boasting
of Carnal Christians; such as fear God, and Work Righteousness, and are Doers
of the Law, we are assured, shall be accepted with, and justified of God, in
the Day that he will judge the Secrets of all men by Jesus Christ, according to
Paul' s Gospel; and if any man bring another, let It be accursed; Amen.

I have here on purpose overlookt many very pregnant Instances both in the Old
and New Testament (so called) for Brevities sake, in which the Righteousness of
the Gentiles has in several Cases more evidently appeared, then that of some
of the Jews, and which undeniably testifies to the Sufficiency of that Light,
they had, both to manifest that which was Good, from that which was Evil, and
give an Ability to such as Genesis 20. 4. and 21. 22.
truly minded its Illumination, whereby they were enabled to do the one, and to
reject the other. Such were Abimelech, Cyrus, Darius, 2 Chronicles 36. 23. Ezra 1.
2, 3, 4, 5, 13. and 6. 3, 12.
the Ruler that came to Christ, and many others, which I shall omit to mention
more particularly; the chief Bent of my Mind being, to demonstrate the Truth of
my Assertion, Dan. 6. 26, 27.
from their own Writings.

CHAP. X.
That the Gentiles Believed in One God. That He enlightened All Men with a
Saving Light. That Men ought to live Piously. That the Soul is Immortal. That
there is an Eternal Recompense. The Whole called Gentile-Divinity. The First
Point proved by Sixteen Testimonies.

HAving proved briefly, but truly from the Scriptures, that the Gentiles in
general, were Illuminated with a Divine Light; I shall now make it my Business,
to evidence the Truth thereof by most undeniable, particular Instances, out of
their own Writings. And because I am willing, my Defense of both, the Light
within, and Those of them, who obeyed it, should turn to the clearest and best
Account, I will endeavor to resolve the Whole into as plain a Method, as the
Matter, and their Way of delivering it will allow me.

First then, from their own Authorities, I am taught to affirm, that the
Gentiles Believed in One, Holy, Infinite and Eternal God.

Secondly, That they did therefore so believe, because God had imprinted the
Knowledge of himself in their Hearts; or in our Language, that he had
Illuminated all Mankind with a Divine Light which, as conversed with, and
obeyed, would lead to Eternal Happiness.

Thirdly, That they held, and practiced high Sanctity of Life.

Fourthly, That they affirmed an Immortality of Souls, and Eternal Rewards of
Felicity, or Misery, according to Man's Obedience to, or Rebellion against the
Eternal God his Creator: which Excellent Principles, true and clear, being the
Result of their Discourse, on those Subjects, do worthily deserve, in my
esteem, the Style of DIVINITY, which shall be the Denomination, I hope, I may
without Offense bestow upon them in this Discourse.

That the Gentiles did acknowledge and believe, There was but One Supreme God,
that made all things, who is Infinite, Almighty, Omni-present, Holy and Good
forever: I shall produce some of those many Authorities that aver the same; and
accommodate it to such Scripture, as the Truth of them, as well as Practice of
very Ancient Fathers will bear me out in.

I. ORPHEUS, as Old, as more then One Thousand Two Hundred Years before Christ,
thus expresses his Belief Clem. Alex. Strom. L. 5.
of God: His Hand reaches He stretched-out his Hand over the Sea, Isa. 23. 11.
-- Sing Praises unto the Lord, to Him that Rides upon the Heavens of Heavens,
Psalm. 68. 33. -- For the Lord your God, he is God in Heaven above, and in the
Earth beneath, Josh. 2. 11. Rev. 22. 13.
to the End of the Sea, his Right Hand is everywhere, and the Earth is under
his Feet. He is only One, begot of himself, and of Him alone are all things
begot; and God is the First and the Last.

Hereby not only telling us, there was a God, but attributing that Almighty
Power and Omni-presence, which show, he meant no Statuary Deity, but the God
that made the Heavens and the Earth.

II. HESIOD, Of God is God of the Living, and not of the Dead, Mat. 22. 32. --
Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the Only Wise God, be Honor
and Glory forever and ever, Amen, 1 Timothy 1. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 16. -- Thy Throne, O
God, is forever and ever, Psalm. 45. 6.
Clem. Alex. Strom. L. 5.
all, which do not Dye, thou art King and Lord; none can Contend with Thee
concerning Thy Power.

This Emphatically proves God to have been but One, and Omni-potent in their
Belief.

III. THALES, a very Ancient Greek Philosopher, tells Clem. Alex. Strom. L. 5.
us; That there is but One Thou art Glorious in Holiness, Exodus 15. 4. -- God
had Glory before the World began, John 17. 5. -- The Lord Searches the Heart,
and Tries the Reins, Psalm. 7. 9. -- And tell unto Man his Thoughts, Amos 4.
13 -- God is from Everlasting to Everlasting, God, Psalm. 90. 2. -- Without
Beginning of Days, or End of Life, Heb. 7. 3.
God, that he is Glorious forever and ever: And he openly confesses, That he
is called (...), HE WHO KNOWS HEARTS.

Thales being demanded what God was, That (says he) which has NEITHER
BEGINNING NOR END.

Another asking, If a Man might do Ill, and conceal it from God?

How, (says he) WHEN A MAN THAT THINKS IT, CANNOT.

Men ought to believe, says DeLeg. 2.
Cicero, in his Name, that God sees all things.

IV. SIBYLLA, There I alone am God, and besides Me there is not another. There
is none other but One God, 1 Cor. 8. 5.
Clem. Alex. Strom. L. 5.
is One God, who alone is Infinite and without Beginning. --

Again, Who can see No Man has seen God at any time, 1 John 4. 12. -- Heaven is
my Throne, Acts 7. 49. -- The Lord's Throne is in Heaven, Psalm. 11. 4. And
hear thou in Heaven, thy Dewlling Place, 1 King. 8. 30.
with Fleshly Eyes the Heavenly, True and Immortal God, whose Seat is in the
Highest of Heaven?

This Sibyll is Aged above Two Thousand Years. The Question implies her Faith;
that God was a Spirit, as Christ himself also testifies.

V. PYTHAGORAS, a Modest, but Diligent and Jamblich.
Retired Man, in his Search after Heavenly things, says, That it is Man's Duty
to believe Thou must believe that God is; and that he is a Rewarder of them
that fear him, Hebr. 11. 6. -- For thine is the Kingdom, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11. Mat.
6. 13. -- Thou art Lord of Heaven and Earth, Acts 17. 24 -- And the Government
shall be upon his Shoulders, Isa. 9. 6 -- Again, God is Light, and in him is no
Darkness at all, John 1. 5 -- I am the Way, the Truth and the Life, John 14. 6
-- God is all, above all, and in all, Ephesians. 4. 6.
of the Divinity, that it is, and that it is in such a manner, as to Mankind,
that it overlooks them, and neglects them not; for we have need of such a
Government, as we ought not in any thing to Contradict; such is that, which
proceeds from the Divinity: For the Divinity is such, that to it does of Right
belong the Dominion of all. Again, God resembles LIGHT and TRUTH. In another
place, God himself inhabits the Lowest, and Highest, and the Middlemost; there
is no Being nor Place without God. Just. Mart.


God is One; HE IS NOT (as some conceive) OUT OF THE WORLD, but entire within
himself, A God nigh at hand, Acts 17. 27. Jer, 23. 23 -- One God, who is above
all, through all, and in all, Ephesians. 4. 6 -- God is Light; and upon whom has
not his Light arisen? 1 John 1. 5. Job 25. 3 -- One God and Father of all, 1
Cor. 8. 6 -- Now to the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the Only Wise God be
Glory, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 17.
as in a Complete Circle, surveying all Generations. HE IS THE SALT OF ALL
AGES, the Agent of his own Powers, and Works; the Principle of all things; One
Heavenly Luminary or Light, and Father of all things; Only Wise, Invisible, yet
Intelligible.

Which very Pathetical Account of the Divine Being, so correspondent with
Scripture (yet he a Stranger to it) I mean the Words only; for the Matter in
this Point, he weightily hits, deserves very Serious Consideration and
Acknowledgment, from all, especially those who would not Narrow God's Mercies
to their own Time or Party.

VI. To the same purpose speaks HERACLITUS, that sensibly Afflicted
Philosopher, for the World's Impieties and Idolatrics, whose very Sorrowful,
yet sound and smart Expressions, show they came from a Mind deeply touched: In
one of his Epistles to Hermodorus, his Friend, he thus seems after a while to
address himself to Eutycles, and the rest of his Enemies, that Impeacht him for
being an Enemy to their Stony Gods: Thus I shall be condemned of Impiety by the
Impious. What think thou? Shall I seem Impious to them for Dissenting from
their Gods? If Blind Men were to Judge of The Heaven of Heavens cannot contain
Thee. 1 Kings 8. 27. 2 Chronicles. 6. 18 -- What House will ye build me? Acts 7. 49
-- God dwells in the Light, 1 Timothy 6. 16 -- To whom will ye liken God? what
Likeness will ye compare unto Him? Isa. 40. 18, 25 -- God is a Spirit, John 4.
24.
Sight, they would say that Blindness were Sight: But O ye Ignorant Men, teach
us first, what God is, that when ye declare us to be Impious, you may be
believed. Where is God? shut up in Temples? O Pious Men! (he speaks Ironically,
or by Contraries) WHO PLACE GOD IN THE DARK. You Ignorant People! KNOW YOU NOT
THAT GOD IS NOT MADE WITH HANDS?

This is a most Clear, and Ample Testimony against their Idols, mixed with a
Religious Derision; yet qualified by a kind of Lamentation: Surely Heraclitus
believed in God, yea, and that he was Light too, and such a one as should Clem.
Alex. Strom. L. 2.
never set; by whom he elsewhere says, He had overcome the Enemies of his Soul.

VII. ANAXAGORAS, esteemed Noble by Birth, Lact. Falls. Rel. 1. 5.
but more Noble for his Knowledge and Virtue, who was Master to Socrates,
taught thus concerning God; That Cic. de Not. Deor. 1.
God is an Infinite But to us there is but One God, the Father of all, of whom
are all things, 1 Cor. 8. 6. Where August. cir. Del. 8.
wast thou when I laid the Foundations of the Earth? read on, Job 38. 4 -- And
the Earth was without Form: read the Chapter, in which is declared, God's
Making and beautifying Heaven and Earth, and all Living Creatures therein, Genesis
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and so to the end. -- Thou Lord made
the Heavens and the Earth, and all that in them is, Acts 4. 24.
Selfmoving Mind; that this Divine, Infinite Mind is the Efficient Cause of all
things; every thing beingmade according to its Species, by the Divine Mind;
who, when all things were confusedly mingled together, CAME AND REDUCED THEM TO
ORDER.

Which doubtless is so true, that Anaxagoras had no small Share of true Light,
to give this Account, of both God and the Creation: And indeed, his Memory was
Celebrated by the Greeks, for having very much improved that Discovery, they
had concerning God and Immortality.

VIII. SOCRATES, that Good Heathen (if without Plat. phaed.
Offense, to the Professors of Christianity, I may say it) not only confesses
to ONE God, but I am of Opinion, they will think he gives good Reason why he
does so. He first lays down, That the Mind, which they frequently call God by,
is the Disposer and Cause of all things.

Or in other words of his thus, God To these Notable Arguments urged for the
Proof of a Divine Super-intelligent Being, and his Creation and Providence, may
well agree those Pathetical Expressions of Job, the Psalmist, and several
Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles; concerning, God's Creating the World, and
upholding it to this day, his laying the Foundations thereof; his Providence
over the Lillies and the Sparrows; his bringing forth Fruits in due season; his
Lights by Day, and by Night; that the Disciples should take no Thought what
they shall Eat, and Drink, or put on; That there is a Spirit in Man, and the
Inspiration of the Almighty gives Understanding; and lastly, Can any hide
himself in secret Places, and I not see him, says the Lord, Jer. 23. 24 -- No;
If I take the Wings of the Morning and flee to the uttermost Part of the Earth,
thou art there, Psalm. 139. 9. -- And by me Kings Reign, and Princes Decree
Justice, says God, Prove. 8. 15 -- And is everywhere, Josh. 2. 11 -- And
orders all, Wisd. 11. 20. and 12. 15 -- There is but One God, and none else
besides him. Ephesians. 4. 6 -- In the beginning God Created the Heaven and Earth,
Genesis 1. 1, 2, 3 -- In him we Live, Move, and have our Being, Acts 17. 21 --
Thus he Sees and Hears all, and is Everywhere, Psalm. 34. 9, 10, 11.
is ONE, (...), PERFECT in Him-self, giving the Being and Well-being of every
Creature.

And this he gives his Reasons for: Xen. memor. 1.
That GOD, Not CHANCE, made the World and all Creatures, is Demonstrable, from
the Reasonable Disposition of their Parts, as well for Use as Defense, from
their Care to preserve themselves, and continue their Species; that he
particularly regards Man, in his Body from the Excellent Upright Form thereof,
from the Gift of Speech; from Allowance (...), in his Soul, from the Excellency
thereof above others, both for Divinations, and Praedicting Dangers; that he
regards Particulars, from his Care of the whole Species; that he will Reward
such as Please him, and Punish such as Displease him, from his Power to do it,
AND FROM THE BELIEF HE HAS IMPRINTED IN A MAN, THAT HE WILL DO IT; professed
by the most Wise and Civilized Cities and Ages. THAT HE AT ONCE SEES ALL
THINGS, from the Instances of his Eye, which at once over-runs many Miles; and
of the Mind, which at once considers things done in the most distant Places.
Id. eod.
That God knows all things, whether they be SAID, DONE, or SECRETLY DESIRED.
Id. 4.
That God takes Care of all Creatures is demonstrable from the Benefits he
gives them, of Light, Water and Fire, Seasonable Production of Fruits of the
Earth; That he has particular Care of Man, from the Nourishment of all Plants
and Creatures for Man's Service, from their Subjection to Man, though they
Exceeded him never so much in Strength; from the Variety of Man's Sense,
accommodated to the Variety of Objects, for Necessity, Use and Pleasure; from
Reason, whereby he discoursed, through Reminiscence, from sensible Objects from
Speech, whereby he communicates all that he knows, gives Laws and governs
States. That God, notwithstanding he is Invisible, has a Being from the
Instances of his Ministers invisible also, as Thunder and Wind; AND FROM THE
SOUL OF MAN, WHICH HAS SOMETHING WITH, OR PARTAKES OF THE DIVINE NATURE, in
Governing those that cannot see it. Finally, THAT HE IS SUCH, AND SO GREAT, AS
THAT HE AT ONCE SEES ALL, HEARS ALL, IS EVERYWHERE, AND ORDERS ALL.

So that here is both Socrates his Faith in God, and his Reasons for it; drawn
from the outward Creation, and the inward Divine Sense, that from the Divine
Instinct, or Nature, he received, in which he lived, and for which he willingly
died, as afterward may be related.

IX. TIMAEUS Locrus, in his Work of Nature, thus Argumentatively expresses
himself in; One Principle of all, is Unbegotten; for In the Beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, all things were made by
him, etc. John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4
if it was Begotten, then were it no more that Principle, but that of which it
were Begotten would be the Principle.

Suitable to this says CLEMENS ALEXANDRINUS, Clem. Alex.
TIMAEUS affirms,
namely, Hear, O Strom. L. 5.
2 King. 19. 19. -- Mark 12. 32. -- 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Israel, the Lord thy God is One, and him only shall thou Serve.

Thus did he endeavor to Refute the Gentiles, and prove the Scriptures out of
their own Writings. But again, That God is, and that he is a Spirit, De Anim.
and that he is the AUTHOR Mund.
God is a Spirit, John 4. 24. -- God said, Let there be Light, and there was
Light, Gen 1. 3 -- He is the Father of Lights, Jam. 1. 17.
of all Light. Which how Sober and True it is, let the Scriptures here inserted
testify.

X. ANTISTHENES, one of Socrates's School, expressing himself, as it were,
Clem. Alex.
Strom. L. 5
That thou may know, that there is none like Me in all the Earth, says God,
Exodus 9. 14. and 8. 10. -- Who in Heaven can be Compared unto the Lord? who
among the Sons of the Mighty can be Likened unto the Lord? Psalm. 89. 6.
by way of Paraphrase that Prophetic Saying; Whom have ye likened me unto,
says the Lord? thus speaks, He is like none, because no Man can know him from
a Likeness or Image.

By which we may perceive he did not believe him to be an Image, who could not
be known by an Image, nor any thing that could be seen with Carnal Eyes: a Step
beyond the Romanists, that teach the Knowledge of, as they darkly Fancy, by
Images.

XI. PLATO, also Scholar to Socrates, and whom the Greeks for his Heavenly
Contemplation, and Pious Life, surnamed, Divine, gives us his Faith of God in
these words, God is FIRST, ETERNAL, I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and
the Last, Rev. 22. 13. Thou art the Everlasting God, Isa. 40 -- The Way of the
Lord is Perfect, Psalm. 80, 30. He is a Rock; his Work is Perfect; for all his
Ways are Judgment; A God of Truth, and without Iniquity, Just and Right is he,
Deutr. 23. 4 -- For I am the Lord, Isa. 45. 5 -- I Change not, Mal. 3. 6.
INEFFABLE PERFECT IN HIMSELF; that is, needing none, and ever Perfect; that
is, absolute in all Times; and every way perfect; that is, absolute in every
part, Divinity, Essence, Truth, Harmony, Good: Neither do we so name these, to
distinguish one from the other, but rather by them all to understand one. He is
said to be GOOD, because he bestows his Benefits upon all, according to their
several Capacities, and so is the Cause of all Good; FAIR, because he is in
Essence, both More, Better and Equal; TRUTH, because he is the Principle of all
Truth, as the Sun is of all Light.

Moreover, God not having many Parts, can neither be locally moved, nor altered
by Qualities; For if he be altered, it must be done by himself, or some other;
if by some other, that Other must be of greater Power then he; if by Himself,
it must be either to Better, or to Worse; both which are Absurd.

From all these it Follows, That God is Incorporeal; and by all which it is
evident, how True, and how Reasonable, and how Firm a Belief Plato had, of One
Eternal Being and Father of all.

XII. And Lyricus MELANIPPIDES, praying says: Clem. Alex.
Hear me, O Father, thou Wonder of Strom. L. 5.
Exodus 1. 15, 11. -- Psalm. 136. 4, 5, 6.
Men, who always Covernest the Living Soul.

This plainly preaches to us their Belief of One Eternal God.

XIII. PARMENEDES Magnus, as says Plato in Clem. Alex.
Sophista writes concerning God, on Strom. L. 5.
Thy Throne is established of Old, thou art from Everlasting, Psalm. 93. 2. --
Jehovah is Everlasting, Isa. 26. 4.
this wise, He is not Begotten, neither is he liable to any Death; like a
Chain, whose Links are Whole and Round, and always Firm, and Void of a
Beginning.

What was this, but the Eternal God, by whom all things were made, the First
and the Last.

XIV. ZENO, a Grave and Wise Philosopher, who instituted the Way of the
Stoics, but not of Virtue; both the Cynicks and Stoics, mostly teaching such
Doctrine as tended to good Life, may well be said to have been the Followers of
Socrates, the ExcellentMan of his time, only they a little differed themselves
by some particular Severities too Voluntary, which the Mild, Serious and
Unaffected Piety of Socrates gave them no Encouragement to, though none of them
trod in a more Self-denying Path, then History tells us, he walked in. This Zeno
and his Disciples, were Vigorous ^sserters of One Infinite and Eternal God, as
by their Doctrines may appear.

Zeno tells us, That God is an Immortal Being, Rational, Laert.
Perfect or Intellectual in Now to the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the
Only Wise God, be Honor and Glory forever, 1 Timothy 1. 17. -- The Rich and Poor
meet together, the Lord is the Maker of them all, Pro. 22. 2. Come now let us
Reason together, says the Lord, Isa. 1. 18. -- Be ye Holy, for I the Lord your
God am Holy, Levit. 11. 44. -- One God and Father of all, of whom are all
things, Ephesians. 4. 6. 1 Cor. 8. 16. -- Who is a God like Aristot. de Xen.
unto thee? Exodus 15. 4. -- The Almighty is Excellent in Power, Job 37. 23. --
And his Kingdom rules over all Psalm. 103. 19.
Beatitude, void of all Evil, provident over the World, and things in the
World; Not of Humane Form, MAKER OF ALL, AS IT WERE, FATHER OF ALL. Again, God,
and the Power of God, is such, as that it governs, but is not governed: It
governs all things; so that if there were any thing more Excellent, He could
not possibly be God.

This was Zeno's Faith of God, which I cannot believe, that Tho. Hicks himself
has so far abandoned all Reason, as to censure for False, or Idolatrous, that
he Taught It as well as Thought It. Let us hear some of his Followers,

XV. CHRYSIPPUS, also avers, as his Belief of a Laert. de Ira Dei c. 10.
God, that the World was made by him; consequently he believed there was one:
For if Lord, thou art God, which have made Heaven and Earth, and all that in
them is, Acts 4. 24. God that made the World, Psalm. 90. 2. -- All Nations are
unto God, but as a Drop to the Bucket, and the Dust to the Balance. Isa. 40.
11, 15.
(says he) there be any thing which can procr^ate such Beings as Man endued
with Reason is unable to produce, that (doubtless) must needs be Stronger, and
Greater, and Wiser then Man; but a Man cannot make the Celestial things,
therefore that which made them transcended Man, in Art, Counsel, Prudence and
Power; And what can that be but GOD?

Thus far Chrysippus, the Stoic, in reference to God. But again,

XVI. ANTIPATER, a Famous, Serious and Accute Stoic, in his Discourse of God
and the World, declares Plut.
himself to us after this manner: Plat. phaed.
God is a Spirit, John Antip. de Mund. l. 7.
4. 24. -- In whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2..8
-- Of the Incorruptible God, Romans 1. 23. The Lord is Good to all, and his
tender Mercies are over all his Works, Psalm. 85. 9. -- God is not far away from
every one of us, Acts 17. 27.
We understand by that which we call God, A SPIRIT, full of INTELLIGENCE or
WISDOM, a Living Nature, or DIVINE SUBSTANCE, Blessed and INCORRUPTIBLE, doing
good to Mankind, PRESENT THROUGH THE WHOLE WORLD; receiving several
Denominations from the DIVERSITY OF HIS APPEARANCES, and the various Operations
and Effects of his Divine Power shown therein.

Which kind of Evangelical Definition may very rightly induce us to believe
him, to have been at least of those who knew God; but we hope, not of those,
who when they knew him, Glorified him not as God.

Indeed, what we have hitherto produced of them all, may worthily be accounted
DIVINITY; and not the worse for being Gentiles, since God is also therein to be
Admired; so Forceable, so True, and so Conspicuous are their Assertions, and
their Reasons for them; that who will yet believe, there was not a Measure of
the Eternal Fullness of all Divine Light shining in the Hearts of these
Heathens, to give them the Knowledge of the Glory of the Only True and
Invisible God; must not think it strange, if upon their own Principle of
Incredulity, after all their Protestations for, and Professions of the
Christian-Religion, any should believe them to be very Mahometans or Infidels;
and that they are over-cast with the darkest Clouds of Envy and
Uncharitableness: For my part, I am of the mind, that many Thousands of
Christians, at least so reputed (I mean not of the Rabble neither) believe not
God so clearly, nor are able to give better Reasons for what they do believe of
him, then these exhibited in this first part of the Gentile-Divinity.

Thus much concerning God, with respect to Himself, his Creation and Providence.

CHAP. XI.
The Second Fundamental of Gentile. Divinity, viz. That God has Imprinted the
Knowledge of Himself on the Mind of all Mankind. Proved from Twelve Pregnant
Testimonies, as well of whole Societies, as particular Persons. Compared with
Scripture.

IT will be now requisite, that I give an Account of their Belief in God, with
respect to that Discovery he is pleased to give of himself unto Mankind, how,
and where; which amounts to what is laid down in my Second Assertion. viz. That
God Imprinteth the Knowledge of Himself in the Mind of Mankind; or, that God's
Way of Manifesting Himself to Mankind, is by Enlightening the Soul with his own
Divine Light, which Obeyed, leads to Blessedness.

That this was their Doctrine, and the Ground of the Knowledge they had of God,
be pleased to weigh these their following very plain, yet very weighty
Expressions.

I. The Mind, says PYTHAGORAS Tim. de De Anim. Mund.
The Pure in heart shall see God, Mat. 5. 8. -- He dwells in Immortality; no
Mortal Eye can approach or behold him, 1 Timothy 1. 16. One Thing have I desired
of Thee, O Lord, to behold the Beauty of the Lord, Psalm. 27. 4 -- The Things
of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God; but God has Revealed them to us by
his Spirit 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. and 1. 13. -- Is Christ divided? 1 Cor. 1. 13 --
And I heard a great Voice saying, THE TABERNACLE OF GOD IS WITH MEN. He that
Overcomes shall Inherit all things: I will be his God, and he shall be my Son,
Revel. 21. 3, 7.
and his Disciples, only sees the ETERNAL GOD, the Ruler and Father of all
things. -- What greater Pleasure then to behold the Serene Aspect of God? --
What things are agreeable to God, Jambl.
cannot be known UNLESS A MAN HEAR GOD HIMSELF. They mutually exhorted one
another, not to Divide asunder the Jamblich.
GOD THAT WAS IN THEM; for that it ought to be their Care, to Preserve their
Union with God, and one with another. -- Again, says De Anim. Mund.
Timaeus, one of the Exactest of that School; The most Excellent Thing the Soul
is Awakened to, is her Guide, or Good Cenius (that is, a Measure of the Divine
Light and Spirit) but if she be Rebellious to it, it will prove her Demon, or
Tormentor. But having overcome these things, says Pythagoras, (to wit, Evils)
thou shall know (...), the Co-habitation or Dwelling together of the IMMORTAL
GOD AND MORTAL MEN; whose Work is Life; the Work of God is Immortality, Eternal
Life.

Thus far the Pythagoreans, and certainly far enough to prove the Assertion;
for next to Hearing and Seeing God himself, his Dwelling in, and Tabernacling
with Men, what is there of greater Spiritual Intimacy or Union? O the Folly and
great Uncharitableness of those Professors! that exclude both such Men, and
such Knowledge the Kingdom of God, because it is not delivered in absolute
Scripture-Phraise, whilst it imports much of the very Substance of them, as to
Divine Vision, Union with God, and Eternal Life. But to go on.

II. HIERON, that Ancient Philosopher, entitled the Universal Light shining in
the Conscience, which witnessed, by its Reproof, against Evil; and if obeyed,
led to Immortality, A DOMESTIC In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, and the Word was God, John 1. 1. -- The Word is nigh thee, in thy
Heart and in thy Mouth, Romans 10. 8. I dwell in the High and Holy Place, with
him also that is of a Contrite and Humble Spirit, Isa. 57. 15. -- Ye are the
Temples of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you, 1 Cor. 2 16. --
Whatever may be known of God is manifested within, for God shows it unto them,
Romans 1. 19.
GOD, or GOD WITHIN the Hearts and Souls of Men.

The Eternal Mind is God, MANIFESTING HIMSELF IN EVERY PARTICULAR OF US. God is
that which in Mortal Men gives them to Know aright concerning God.

Certainly these Gentiles had an high Veneration for that Light which
manifested Darkness, who made it their Rule, their Guide, their Domestic God;
they set him not at a Distance without them; but believed in him as God, the
WORD; speaking to them in their own Consciences. In which respect the Minor
Poets notably expressed themselves.

III. BYAS, Prince of his Country Pireen, being invaded Valor. Max. 7. 2.
by Enemies, and several of the Inhabitants put to flight, with their greatest
Wealth; and He being asked, Why he also carried not his Choicest Goods with
him, he answered, I do carry MY Lay up Treasure in Heaven, where neither Moth
nor Rust can Corrupt, nor Thief break through and Steal, Mat. 6. 20. -- This
Treasure has God put into Earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4. 7. -- Fear not, for the
Lord thy God it is that does go with thee; he will not fail thee, nor forsake
thee, Deuteronomy. 31. 6. -- In all their Afflictions he was Afflicted, Isa. 63. 9 --.
The Lord is a present Help in the time of Trouble, Psalm. 46. 1.
GOODS with me. HE BORE THEM (says Valerius Maximus) IN HIS BREAST, not to be
seen by the Eye, but prized by the Soul, enclosed in the narrow Dwelling of the
Mind, not to be Demolisht by Mortal Hands; WHICH IS ALWAYS PRESENT WITH THOSE
WHO STAY, and NEVER DESERTETH OR FORSAKES THOSE THAT FLEE.

Certainly then, they thought this Divine Principle the greatest Treasure, the
surest Companion, the best Comforter and only Sanctuary of the Soul in greatest
Extremities, induing it with Piety and Patience, and as what gave that
Contentment, which was able to wade through the deepest Calamities.

IV. SOPHOCLES is also of that Number, that * Oedip. Tyr.
bears Testimony to Divine Illumination. Shall not the Uncircumcision that is
by Nature, if it fulfill the Law, judge thee, who by the ^etter and Circumcision
do transgress the Law. For he is not a Jew that is one Outward, implying such
as keep the Law is one Inward, Romans 2. 27, 28. -- And the Word of God (nigh in
the Heart) shall abide forever, Isa. 40. 8.
God grant (says he) that I may always be so happy, as to observe that
Venerable Sanctity in my Words and Deeds, which is commanded by these NOBLE
LAWS (speaking of the Laws written in Men's Consciences) which were made in
Heaven; GOD IS THEIR FATHER, NOT MORTAL NATURE, neither shall they ever be
Forgotten or ABROGATED: for there is in them a Great God, that never waxes Old.

This is (says he again) with respect to Man's Conscience, a Divine, a Sacred
Good, God the Overseer.

Certainly in themselves, very Seraphick Epithites, fraited with strong Faith
of a God, and that Way of Inward Discovery, he is pleased to make of himself to
Mankind. For Clem. Alex. Strom. L. 5.
it was he that said, Truly there is but One Only God, who made the Heavens
and the Earth.

V. It is frequently said of SOCRATES, He had the Plutarch. de Genesis Socr.
Guide of his Life Within him (which, it was told his Father Sophroniscus,
should be of more Worth to him then 500. Masters) he called it, His Good Angel
or There is a Spirit in Man, but the Inspiration of the Almighty gives
Understanding. Job 32 8. 2 Timothy 2. 22, 25. -- For as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, are the Children of God, Romans 8. 14.
Spirit: that it suggested to his Mind, what was Good and Virtuous, inclined
and disposed him to a Strict and Pious Life; that it furnished him with Divine
Knowledge, and very often impuls'd or MOVED HIM TO PREACH (THOUGH IN THE
STEETS) TO THE PEOPLE; sometimes, in a way of Severe Reproof; at other times,
to Information; and otherwise, gently to diswade them from Intemperance, Vanity
of Life, particularly, from seeing of Plays, and to exhort them to Repentance,
Reformation, and Self-denial, in hopes of Immortality.

VI. PLATO In phaed.
is not wanting to bring in his Vote, for further Confirmation of our
Assertion, on the Behalf of the Gentiles: The Light and Spirit of God, says
he, are as WINGS TO THE God is Light 1 John 1. 5. -- In thy Light (...) we see
Light, Psalm. 36. 10 -- God is not far from every one of us; for in him we
live, move and have our ^eing; for we are also his Offsping, as certain of your
own Poets have said, Acts 17. 27, 28. One of whom was Arabus, whom the Apostle
quotes as speaking Truth, and imployes it against them, to prove a True God,
and to introduce his Gospel; which if it showed their Apostasy, it also
implies, that there had been Heathens, rightly apprehending of God; else
surely, the Apostle would never have cited the Poets Saying, for a Confirmation
of his own Doctrine.
SOUL, or as that which raises up the Soul into a Sensible Communion with God
above the World, which the Mind of Man is prone to slug or bemire it self
withal. And adds Enead. 1. cap. 1.
PLOTIN, a Famous Platonist, God is the very Root or Life of the Soul.Again,
Man has a Divine Principle in him, which makes the true and good Man. And the
Platonists in general, held Three Principles to be in Man; the first, they
called, (...), Mind, Intellect, Spirit, or Divine Light. The Second, (...), the
Soul of Man. The Third they called, (...), the Soul's Image, which, say they,
is her vital Energy upon the Body, and the Feminine Faculty of the Soul.

By all which it is evident (though I could more abundantly prove from their
many Writings) that they believed and held Divine Illumination and Inspiration,
and that such a Principle resided in Man, even the Eternal (...), or Mind;
which is to say in proper English, God Himself, by which alone the Soul could
become, what it ought to be to God.

VII. CLEANTHES, the Stoic, allows not Mankind to be governed of right by
the Dictates of their own Nature, which barely renders them Men, but by that
Divine, Infinite and Eternal Nature, which is God, universally defus'd or sown
through the whole Race of Man, as the most sure and infallible Guide and Rule.
To live (says he) according to this Knowledge and Direction, is truly to live
according to Virtue; not doing any thing For the Lord God is a Sun and a
Shield: the Lord will give Grace and Glory: no good Thing will he withhold from
them that trust in him, and walk uprightly, Psalm. 84. 11, 12. -- For God has
showed it unto them, Romans 1. 19.
that is forbidden. The Virtue and Happiness of a Man depends upon the close
Correspondence of his Mind, with the Divine Will of him, who governs the
Universe.

Again, says the same Cleanthes, THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD IS IMPRINTED UPON THE
MINDS OF MEN.

VIII. MENANDER, signifying God to be Good, Clem. Alex.
says, Every Man has a good Demon as soon as he is born, Strom. L. 5.
an Holy Instructor in governing A Manifestation of the Spirit is given unto
every one to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7. -- One God, and Father of all, who is
above all, and through all. -- The Lord is Good unto all, Psalm. 145. 9.
of the Life; as that I may confess him to be an Evil Demon, who hurts the
Life of a Good Man. Then subjoyns he, That a Good God is in all, that God is
perfectly Good, and that he is Good in all. Again, on another Occasion says
he, God, who is always near, sees this; for God is not a God afar off.

IX. PHILO, though a Jew born, yet a very Serious Leg. Alleg.
and Refined Philosopher, gives us his Judgment in this Particular L. 1.
very positively, and to purpose: How should the Soul of Man (says he) know
God, IF HE DID NOT INSPIRE HER, AND TAKE HOLD OF HER BY HIS DIVINE POWER? The
Things of God knows no Man save the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. -- I will
put my Law in their Minds and write them in their Inward parts; I will be their
God, and they shall be my People, Heb. 8. 10, 11.


Again, That the Divine Reason we have from God, is an Infallible Law, not a
Mortal Rule given, by this or that Mortal; NO LIFELESS PRECEPTS WRITTEN IN
PAPERS, OR UPON PILLARS, BUT IMMORTAL, being engraven by the Eternal Nature IN
THE MINDS OF MEN.

This is an undeniable Testimony to the Law written in the Heart, as a more
Excellent Dispensation, then that which is written in Paper, or engraved on
Pillars, But further,

X. Nor is PLUTARCH wanting to the Proof of this Assertion, on the behalf of
the Gentiles Divinity, who thus delivers himself, speaking of the Principle of
God in the Conscience: It is a Law (says he) not written in Tables Plut. Dion.
Prus.
or Books, but dwelling in the Because whatever may be known of God is manifest
within; for God has showed it unto them: but because they liked not to retain
God in their Knowledge, God gave them up to vile Affections, Romans 2. 19, 26, 28.
Mind, ALWAYS AS A LIVING RULE, which never permits the Soul to be destitute of
an interior Cuide. Again, To debase this Ancient Faith of Mankind, and Natural
Belief, which is planted in all Reasonable Souls, is to Overthrow the Strong
and Everlasting Foundation of Virtue.

Doubtless very Peremptory, Zealous and Sensible, does Plutarch show himself on
the behalf of an Internal, Divine Principle.

XI. But be pleased to hear what * EPICTETUS Dis. lib. 1. cap. 14.
says in this Matter, whose Virtue was admirable in its time, and whose Memory
is preserved in great Respect among many, who would think themselves much
wronged, if they should not be accounted Christians. When you have shut your
Gates (says he) and made it all Dark Within; that is to say, are retired to
your O Lord, thou have searched me, thou understandest my Thoughts afar off.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, Psalm. 139. 1, 2, 7.
own Dwelling, as alone, do not say that you are alone, for you are not alone,
but GOD IS WITHIN: What need then is there of outward Light, to discover what
is done, or to light to good Actions, who have God or that Genius, or Divine
Principle for your Light, as the following words do further import.

But above all the Gentiles that have been mentioned, I mean in Point of plain
and Positive Expression ( for I will prefer the Life of none before that
Self-denying Martyr Socrates) let us hear with great Attention, what kind of
Lecture SENEC A will read us upon the Subject handled; truly something very
weighty.

XII. The Multitude (says SENECA) is the worst Argument; Let us inquire what
is best to be done, not what most usually is done, and that may settle us in
the Possession of Everlasting Happiness; not what is allotted by the Vulgar,
the worst Interpreters of Truth; I have (says he) a clearer and more certain
Light, by which I may judge the Truth from We have a more Sure Word of
Prophecy, 2 Pet. 19. -- The Lord has shewedun to thee, O Man, what is Good,
and what he does require of thee, Micah 6. 8. -- In him we Live, Move, and have
our Being, Acts 17. 28. -- Such as Men Sow, such shall they Reap, Gal. 6. 7. --
That was the true Light, which Inlightneth all Mankind, John 1. 9.
Falsehood, that which appertains to the Felicity of the Soul, the Eternal Mind
will direct to; that was the Light doubtless Seneca meant -- Senec. Epist. 41.
Again, It is a foolish thing for thee to wish what by thee cannot be obtained.
God is near thee, and HE IS IN THEE. The Holy Spirit SITS OR RESIDES WITHIN US;
the Observer of our Good and Evil Actions; as he is dealt with by us, HE DEALS
WITH US -- But yet further, we have this great Gift, says Sene^, De Benef. c.
17.
That Virtue (meaning the Principle, or God) has sent her Light before into
the Minds of all; for even they that follow her not, SEE HER. Where observe,
Reader, how he confesses to the Universality of the Light; yet lays the Fault
of Rebellion against it, not (as T. Hicks does) upon the Light, but such as
refuse to follow it; implying their voluntary Rejection of its Heavenly
Discoveries. -- (...) (...)
Again, Wonderest thou that Men go Behold, the Tabernacle of God is with Men,
Rev 21. 3. -- He that d^clareth (...) Man his Thoughts, the Lord, the God of
Hosts is hi^ Name. Amos 4. 13. -- W^ite ye have the Light walk in the Light,
that you may be the Children of the Light. God is Light, John 12. 26. 1 John 1.
5.
to God? God comes UNTO Men; nay, which is more near, he comes INTO MAN; and
he makes the Heart of every good Man his Habitation. -- Yet again hear him;
^pist 8.
Nothing is closed from God, he is within our Souls, and he Comes INTO THE
MIDST OF OUR THOUGHTS. -- And lastly, Epist. 31.
Every Man (says he) has God endued with that, which if he forsake it not, HE
SHALL ARISE LIKE GOD.

How much more weighty, O Sober and Impartial Reader, are these inward
Doctrines of the Virtuous Gentiles, then the Vehement Clamours, and
Uncharitable Exclamations of Empty Christians against them. Men, that seem as
if they were a^raid of nothing more, then inherent Holiness, though of Christ's
working; reputing it a kind of Undervalue of his Blood, to feel the Only ( I
mean the Inward) Benefit of it: accounting us the greatest Heretics, for
assenting to the greatest Truth; to wit, The Sufficiency of his Universal Light
in the Hearts of Men to Salvation; challenging us to prove it by Scripture, or
any Credible History; objecting the Heathens Ignorance and Idolatry against the
Truth of its Discoveries and Efficacy of its Power. If we had not desended the
Light's Sufficiency from these Authorities, then our Assertion had been
declared infirm; with no small Show of Triumph and Insult; and now we have made
good our Ground against their Objections, the next News I expect to hear from
such as are Perverse among them, will be our Heathening, ^r turning Heathens.
But as all they could do, would not make us Christians, if Heathens; so neither
can their Prejudice (being True-Spirited Christians) render us in their Sense
Heathens with Sober and Impartial Persons.

CHAP. XII.
That this was not only the Doctrine and Faith of the Gentiles, but the very
Primitive Doctors or Fathers, both so held and so expressed themselves. Eight
Testimonies produced for Proof thereof.

BUt as I have hitherto made evidently appear, both that the Gentiles Believed
in One God, and had a very clear Apprehension of the Light, or Divine Principle
placed in Man, from whom all Heavenly Knowledge was to be derived; and that
this Divine Light, or Spirit, or Principle was by them asserted to be the most
certain Guide, and infallible Rule of Faith and Practice: And further, that the
Scriptures produced abundantly verify their Doctrines, as that due Comparison
of them will evidence; so to the End these angry Men I have to do with, should
not count it a Profaning of holy Writ; or think that I am the only Man, that
ever had that favorable Apprehension of these Gentile-Doctrines; I am willing
to instance some of the most Primitive and Approved Fathers of the
Christian-Church. And by a short view of what they believed in reference to the
present Subject, with their way of phraising such Belief, we may the more
clearly perceive, how far those Gentiles are by them Reprehensible, either with
respect to their Soundness in Judgment, or Expression; that if it be possible,
we may remove all Pretense for Objection against the Universality and
Sufficiency of this Blessed Light.

I. JUSTINUS MARTYR, whom * If Angry Tho. Hicks will please to inform himself
of the Reasons that induced Justin to turn Christian, he will find the Light
Within acknowledged to be the Efficient Cause thereof; for it was the Principle
of God in his Conscience that continually pleaded the Christians Cause within
him, and who at last overcoming. Justin Believes in Christ, and Dies for him
too. Now what Disgrace is this to the Light Within?
Lived after Christ Ann. 123. 1543. years since.
I therefore choose to begin with, because from a Learned Philosopher, becoming
an Honest Christian, and Constant Martyr (from whence he was surnamed, Martyr)
he could the better tell us the Difference of the Change: But so far was he
from reputing the Principle of God within Men Hetrodox, or Inconsistent with
the Purity of the Christian Religion, that with no small Earnestness, he
therefore pleads against all Coercive Power upon Conscience, and the Pompous
Worship of the Heathens, in their Temples (as his Apologies will inform us)
because says he, GOD HAS BUILT TO Apolog.
HIMSELF A NATURAL TEMPLE IN THE CONSCIENCES OF MEN, as the Place wherein he
would be Worshipped; and that there Men ought to look for his Appearance, and
Reverence and Worship him; or to that purpose.

II. To this does CLEMENS ALEXANDRINUS, Lived after Christ 190.
that Earnest Contender against the Apostate Gentiles, plainly assent, who
often, but more particularly in these few Places following, recommends to us
the Light, or Word Within. It is the Voice of Truth (says he) that Light will
shine out of Darkness. Therefore does it shine in the hidden Admon. ad Gent.
Part of Mankind, that is, in the Heart; and the Rays of Knowledge break
forth, making manifest, and shining upon the inward Man, which is hidden. --
Christ's Intimates and Coheirs, are the Disciples of the Light,

He further expresses himself in another Place; Man cannot be void of Divine
Knowledge, who Naturally, or as Strom. L. 5.
he comes into the World, partaketh of Divine Inspiration; as being of a more
Pure Essence, or Nature, then any other Animals.

And as assenting to the Doctrine of some Ancient Philosophers and other
Heathen Authors (for against the Gentiles of his time, I suppose, he may make
use of no less then about Two Hundred and Fifty) he does very frequently
attest, the Truth of the Doctrine of the Divine Light in Man, as Man's
Concomitant, to all good Works; as one Passage eminently proves. I earnestly
exhort thee, because I would have thee saved, and that would Christ also, who
Clem. Alex. in Admon. ad Gent.
offers thee Life in one Word: But thou may say, What is it? IT IS THE WORD
OF TRUTH, THE INCORRUPTIBLE WORD, WHICH REGENERATES MANKIND, AND LEADS HIM
AGAIN TO TRUTH; the Spur that pricketh on to Salvation, who expels the
Destruction, chaseth away Death, and has BUILT A TEMPLE IN MANKIND, THAT IT
MAY PLACE GOD IN MAN.

I know not any of the Ancients more profoundly read in the Doctrines of the
Gentiles, then this Clemens Alexandrinus; and who to prove the Verity of the
Christian-Religion against them, does numerously cite, and insert the Writings
of the more Venerable Heathens, and with the very Books of their Admired
Ancestors, does he accutely argue the Unreasonableness of their Opposition to
Christianity, the very top of Virtue, and Perfection of Goodness; as did
Christ, to prove himself the True Messiah, urge the Scriptures to those
(pretended) great Believers in them, as an Aggravation of their Incredulity.

III. TERTULLIAN, then whom there was not any I ever read more sharp against
the Dissolute Gentiles of his Lived Ann. 195.
time (as his most quaint Apology for the Christians, and in it his severe
Charge against their Enemies does particularly assure us) thinks it to be
neither Heresy nor Heathenism, as it is commonly understood, to believe and
assert, That a Life, subject to the Holy Guidings of the Universal Light in the
Conscience, is a kind of Natural Christianity, or, to be Naturally a Christian.

And though in his Apology he stabs, with the sharpest Points of Wit, Reason
and Truth, the Cause of Degenerated Philosophy, or rather those that were
unmeritedly called Philosophers; yet he lays it still on the side of their
great Apostasy from that Noble Principle, which worthily Renowned their
Predecessors; the Being of whose Stock, and Assuming whose Titles alone, they
Vainly esteemed Warrant enough, for their so great Pretensions to Real Science;
not unlike the Pharisees of the Jews, as has already been observed.

IV. ORIGIN, who I may say was twice a Christian; Lived about Ann. 203.
first, by Education, and next, by Choice; a strong Defender of Christianity,
as his notable Books against Celsus and others, do abundantly witness; treating
of that Divine Light, with which God has illuminated Mankind, as his Universal
Endowment, calls it, AN IMMUTABLE LAW, WHICH WITH THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD AND
EVIL, IS ENGRAVEN UPON THE HEART, AND GRAFTED INTO THE SOUL OF MAN.

V. LACTANTIUS, Scholar to Arnobius, who writ Lived about Ann. 315.
smartly against the Apostate Gentiles, esteemed a good and acute Man, thus
delivers himself about the Matter in hand: De Cult. Ver.
THE LAW OF GOD (says he) is made known unto us, WHOSE LIGHT, like the STARS
TO THE MARINER in the Night Season, clearly discovers to us THE PATH OF WISDOM:
That Law is Pure and Unspotted Reason (not inconsonant with, nor unintelligible
by Nature) DEFUSED THROUGH ALL THE WORLD; in it self UNCHANGEABLE and ETERNAL;
which, that it may deter Man from Vice, does faithfully by its INJUNCTIONS and
PROHIBITIONS, DECLARE UNTO MAN HIS Lib. de Ira cap. 2.
DUTY. -- Again, The Way to ascend up to the House of Truth, IS TO BEHOLD
WITHIN US, THAT THERE IS ONE MOST HIGH GOD, who made, and governs all things;
that Christ is God's Ambassador and Builder, sent unto Men, and as they
receive him INTO THEIR HEARTS, HE BUILDS A DIVINE AND IMMORTAL TEMPLE IN THEM.

VI. But let us deliberately read, what the so much Lived about Ann. 325.
admired ATHANASIUS says to the Gentiles, who did frequently cast out that
(Vulgar) Objection to the Christians; How know you that yours is the Right Way?

The Way, whereby to attain to the Knowledge of God, IS WITHIN US, which is
proved from Moses; Athanas. cont. Gent.
who says, THE WORD OF GOD IS WITHIN THY HEART; and from this Saying of
Christ, THE FAITH AND KINGDOM OF GOD IS WITHIN YOU. If then, says Athanasius,
the KINGDGM OF GOD BE WITHIN US, likewise are we able to understand the WORD or
VOICE OF THE FATHER.

Which Solid, Ancient and Great Truth, could not but highly aggravate the Blame
of such, as were Infidel to it; because it was but the Doctrine of their Famed
Philosophers more clearly and Scripturally expressed; as it does abundantly
testify to us, upon which Ground it was, the Primitive Christians believed,
and practiced their Religion. Not Tradition, however Holy; but Sound Internal
Conviction and Revelation; from no Words Without, BUT THE ETERNAL WORD OF GOD
IN THE HEART; the great Discoverer of the Will and Way of God to Men: He that
knows this Word or Divine Principle to reign in his Heart, knows the Kingdom
of God come there, and his Will done, even the Sanctification of the Soul.

VII. CHRYSOSTOM also, is not wanting to ascribe Lived about Ann. 3 80.
some Honor to this Holy Light, we contend for; who not only confesses the
Light mentioned in the first of John, to be Christ, the Word-God, who
inlightneth all Mankind coming into the World, but also avers it to be of a
Saving Nature unto all who believe in it, and follow it; wherefore, says he,
Let none blame the Light they are not Saved, but their own Rebellion, who
refuse to be saved by it. This he very solemnly calls, A TEACHER OR INSTRUCTOR,
DWELLING IN MAN's NATURE, or that no Man is without a Teacher, to Instruct,
Inspire, Help and Assist him in what leads to Eternal Life

I will conclude these Christian Testimonies with a Passage out of AUGUSTINE,
not unsuitable to the Business in hand.

VIII. AUGUSTINE, in his Discourse on John, has Lived about Ann. 393.
this very notable Passage, viz. THAT GOD IS PROPERLY KING OF MINDS OR SOULS,
because when he is received in, he governs by his Divine Power and Spirit in
the Heart; therefore is not his Kingdom after the Manner of this, World, BUT
WITHIN; and much to this purpose.

Again he Distinguishes upon the Word REASON; There is a Superior and Inferior
Reason, says he, the Inferior is a mere Rational Creature, or that
Understanding which distinguishes a Man from a Beast; but the Superior Reason
is a LIGHT, or, as it were, a POWER in Mankind, DICTATING, REVEALING and
INJOYNING DIVINE, ETERNAL and ENTIRELY GOOD THINGS, as for Example, when it
shall say, This is Sin, thou ought no to commit, but AVOID it; Why? Because
it offends God.

Thus far of Primitive Christian-Divinity, from about 132. years after Christ,
to about 400. years after Christ; by way of Confirmation, of that Part of the
Gentile-Divinity, which might with least Credit be embraced; for to cite never
so many Primitive Christian Authors, to prove a God, Holy Life, and the
Immortality of the Soul, the other Points of Gentile-Divinity would look like
Labor in vain, since none that believes them to have been Christians, ought to
doubt of their holding these very things, which in a great measure charactered
them such; but that which is (though it should not be) the Wonder, is, to quote
them in the Language of the so much, yet so undeservedly decri'd and abused
Quakers, viz. That not only the best Gentiles, but most approved Christians of
the Primitive Times, Confess to a Divine Light, Principle, Word or Spirit in
Man, whose Inspiration gives infallible Understanding, and as Man is guided by
it, he shall be Recovered out of that Mire, Sin has stuck him in, and it will
Free him from the Snares of Pleasures, Inlighten his Eyes, Inspire his Soul,
and Lead him gently by the hand in the Way of Eternal Righteousness; whose
Reward from God will be Immortality and Eternal Life.

CHAP. XII.
The Third Part of the Gentile-Divinity, viz. That they were Men of Virtuous
Lives, and taught the Indispensibleness thereof to Life Eternal. Proved by
Numerous Instances.

IT may be now time, that I dispatch the other two Parts of the
Gentile-Divinity, which I shall endeavor with all convenient Brevity.

There are many Instances of their Pious Doctrine, and singular Examples of
their Virtue; I will instance in a few, to convince, if I can, such as scarcely
believe any Good of them, (and the rather (I fear) that they may not charge the
Bad upon the Light) that their Doctrines and Practice, with respect to Good
Living, were, and are very Commendable and Approveable of all Good Christians.

I. PITTACUS Mitilenaeus, one of the Seven Wise Lived about the Year of the
World, 3313. before Christ, about 630. years which is 2330. years since.
Men of Greece, as they were called, his Apophthegms were these:

What thou take Ill in thy Neighbonr, Thou therefore which teach another,
teach thou not thy self? Romans 2. 21. Love thy Neighbor as thy self, I am
the Lord, Levit. 19. 18. Finally Brethren, whatsoever things are True,
whatsoever things are Honest, Just, Pure, Lovely, and of Good Report, think on
these things, Phil. 4. 8.
DO NOT THY SELF. -- Reproach not the Unhappy; for the Hand of GOD is on them.
-- Restore what is committed to thy Trust. -- Bear Stob. 28.
with thy Neighbor. -- LOVE THY NEIGHBOR. -- Reproach not That Is more then
Tho. Hicks seems to do.
thy Friend, though he recede from thee a little. -- Acquire Honesty; Seek
Obsequiousness; Love Discipline, Temperance, Prudence, TRUTH, FAITH,
Experience, Dexterity, Society, Diligence, Economy and PIETY.

II. CHILON, another of them, he was so Just in all Lived at the same time.
his Actions, that in his old Age he professed, He never had done any thing
contrary to the Conscience of an Upright Man, Laert.
only that of one thing he was doubtful; Having given Sentence against his
Friend, according to Law, he advised his Friend to Appeal from him (his Judge)
so to preserve both his Friend and the Law. Agellius relates it Lib. 1. c. 3.
thus; When his Lise drew toward an End, ready to be seized by Death, he spoke
thus to his Friends about him: My Words and Actions in this Long Term of Years
have been (almost all) such, as I need not Repent of, which perhaps you also
know; TRULY, EVEN AT THIS TIME I AM CERTAIN, I NEVER COMMITTED ANY THING, THE
REMEMBRANCE WHEREOF BEGETS ANY TROUBLE IN ME, unless this one thing only,
which, whether it were done amiss or not, I am uncertain: I sat with two
others, as Judge upon the Life of my Friend; the Law was such, as the Person
must of necessity be condemned, so that either my Friend must lose his Life, or
some Deceit be used toward the Law; revolving many things in my Mind, for a
Relief of a Condition so desperate, I conceived, that which I put in Practice,
to be of all other the most easy to be born: Silently I Condemned him, and
persuaded these others who judged to Absolve him: Thus preserved (in so great a
Business) the Duty both of a Judge and Friend; but from the Act I receive this
Reader, this Reflection was not without Light, nor this Man void of a very
Tender Conscience.
Trouble, The Gentiles, who had not a Law, became a Law unto themselves, doing
the Things contained in the Law; their Consciences bearing Witness, and their
Thoughts the mean while Accusing or Excusing, Romans 2. 14, 15.
that I fear it is not free from Perfidiousness and Guilt; in the same
Business, at the same time, and in a public Affair, to PERSIVADE OTHERS,
CONTRARY TO WHAT WAS IN MY OWN JUDGMENT BEST.

Of his Apophtegms, or Sayings, these few are delivered to us by Laertius. He
said, Providence of Future Things collected by Reason, is To Depart from
Iniquity is a good Understanding, Job 28. 28.
the Virtue of a Man. Being demanded, wherein the Learned differ from the
Unlearned? And the Hypocrites Hope shall Perish, Job 8. 13.
he answered, In a Good Hope. What is hard? Why do you not rather take Wrong? 1
Cor. 6. 7.
To conceal Secrets, to dispose of Leisure well, and be able to bear an INJURY;
therefore said Chilon to his Brother, I CAN BEAR INJURIES, THOU CAN NOT; nor
Tho. Hicks, I am sure, sor he is Angry where he sustains none; HIS WATER HAS
NOT WASHED HIM SO CLEAN, AS THE LIGHT DID CHILON.

III. The Precepts of the Seven Sophists of Greece, in general; THALES, SOLON,
PERIANDER, CLEOBULUS, CHILON, BIAS, and PITTACUS (called seven Wise Men)
collected by Sosiades, about 2300. years old.

FOLLOW GOD; Obey the Law; WORSHIP Stob. 28.
GOD; Reverence thy Parents, Suffer for Justice; Know thy self; Consider Mortal
Reader, these weighty Sayings are very Scripture it self, and that as well of
the New, as Old Testament (so called) especially where Christ says, SWEAR NOT
AT ALL: though spoke about 700 years before he came into the World.
things; Respect Hospitality; Command thy self; Honor Providence; USE NOT
SWEARING; Speak well of that which is Good; As Tho. Hicks, John Bunion, J.
Grigg, and other Railing ^eparatists do the Quakers.
Disparage none; Praise Virtue; Do what is Just; Abstain from Evil; Instruct
thy Children; Fear Deceit; Be a Lover of Wisdom; Judge according to Equity;
Curb thy Which T. Hicks cannot do, neither to his Wife, and Family at home, nor
his Friends, much less other People abroad
Tongue; Examine without Corruption; Do that whereof thou shall not Repent;
When thou have sinned, be Penitent; Confine thy Eye; Perfect quickly; Pursue
what is profitable; Be in Childhood Modest, in Youth Temperate, in Manhood
Just, and in old Age Prudent; THAT THOU MAY DYE UNTROUBLED.

Thus far the Wise Men, which were therefore so called, because of their
Extraordinary Virtue, and truly deserved the Name of Christian, and Virtuous,
more abundantly then they, who have it.

IV. PYTHAGORAS very truly tells us, The Discourse Stob. Sermon. 80.
of that Philosopher is Vain, by which no Passion of a Man is Healed. What
serves the much Preaching of T. H. J. G. and J. B. then, who have not yet Cured
themselves?

All which is determined to be done, should aim at, and Jamblich.
tend to the Acknowledgment of the Deity.

Endeavor not to Conceal thy Faults with Words, but to Amend them by Reproof.

This is the Principle, (says Pythagoras) and the whole Life of Men consists
in this, THAT THEY Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole Matter: Fear God,
and keep his Commandments; for this is the whole Duty of Man, Eccles. 12. 13.
FOLLOW GOD, and this is the Ground of Right Philosophy.

Purity is acquired by Expiations, and by Refraining Pure Religion and
Undefiled is, to keep himself Unspotted from the World, Jam. 1. 27.
from Murder and Adultery, and ALL POLLUTION.

We ought either to be Silent, or to speak things that are better then Silence.
In this sense I fear, we may say, that Thomas Hicks has no Light in him.


Temperance is the Strength of the Soul; for it is the Light of the Soul, clear
from Passion.

It is better to Dye, then to cloud the Soul by INTEMPERANCE.

^ythagoras returns not Reproaches Who when he was Reviled, Reviled not again,
1 Pet. 2. 23.
for Reproaches. Tho. Hicks and John Bunion Reproach, when they are not
Reproached. Behold the Difference betwixt an Heathen, and two Scolding
Christians, but therefore no True Christians.

V. ANAXAGORAS held, That CONTEMPLATION Laert.
OF GOD was the End of Li^e, and that Liberty, which proceeds from such
Heavenly Meditation

To one who blamed him for neglecting his Country;

WRONG ME NOT (said he) MY GREATEST CARE IS MY COUNTRY; pointing to Heaven.

Suidas says,

That he was cast into Prison by the Athenians, for Introducing a New Opinion
concerning God, and Banished the City,

though Pericles undertook to plead his Cause. Josephus says,

That the Athenians believing the Sun to be God, which he affirmed to be
without Sense and Knowledge, he was by the Votes of a Few of them condemned to
Death.

However thus they writ upon his Grave, as Englisht by T. Stanley.

Here lies, who through the truest Paths did pass O'th World Celestial,
ANAXAGORAS.

Which was an high Testimony to his Good Life, and their Belief of his arriving
at Immortality

VI. SOCRATES, Right Philosophy is the Way to Plat. Phaed.
True Happiness; the Offices whereof The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of
Wisdom, Psalm. 111. 10.
are two, To Contemplate God, and to Abstract the Soul from Corporeal Sense.

To do Good is the best Course of He that will deny himself, let him take up
his Cross, and follow me, Luke 9. 23.
Xen. Mem. 3. p. 780.
Life.

Virtue is the Beauty, Vice the Deformity Clem. Alex. Strom. L. 5.
of the Soul.

Nobility is a good Temper of Soul Stob. 218.
Reader, These sententious Expressions to have every one of them a Scripture,
would be tedious and superfluous; for they are almost Word for Word Scripture
it self, as who knows Scripture may plainly see.
and Body.

The Best Way of Worshipping God is to Xen. Mem. 4. p. 803.
Do what he Commands. An hard Saying to Professors.

Our Prayers should be for Blessings Id. Mem. 1. 722. 4. 804.
in general; for God knows best what is good for Us. GOD CONSIDERS INTEGRITY,
NOT MUNIFICENCE. This judges Formal Christians, with their Exterior Worship.

The Office of a Wise Man is, to discern what is Good Id. Mem. 3.
and Honest, and to shun that which is Dishonest.

They who know what they ought So says Christ, Mat. 7. 2. 62. 7.
Ibid.
to do, and do it not, are not Wise and Temperate, but Fools and stupid.

Of all things which Man can call his, Apolog.
Libanius says, Socrates considered
the SOUL to be Chief; and that HE ONLY IS TRULY The Pure in Heart shall see
God, Mat. 5. 8.
HAPPY WHO PURIFIETH THAT FROM VICE.

He taught every where, That a Just Man and a Happy Clem. Alex. Str. 2. 417.
Man were all one.

He said, He wondered at those who carve Images of Laert.
Stone, that they take such Care to make Stones resemble Men, whilst they
neglect, and suffer themselves to resemble Stones. He meant, they had Stony
Hearts, as the Prophet expresses it.

Being demanded, who live without Perturbation? he answered, Stob. 46.
THEY WHO ARE The Fruit of the Spirit is Peace, Gal. 5. 22. Acts 24. 16.
CONSCIOUS TO THEMSELVES OF NO EVIL THING.

Being demanded, whom he thought Richest? he answered, Stob. 40. HE WHO IS
CONTENTED But Godliness, with Content, is great Gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6.
WITH LEAST; for Content is the Riches of Nature.

Being demanded, what CONTINENCE is? he answered, Stob. 48.
GOVERNMENT OF CORPORAL PLEASURES.

Good Men must let the World see, THAT Stob. 114.
THEIR MANNERS This answers T. Hicks's Challenge about the Light's showing that
State, if Christ had not said so.
ARE MORE FIRM THEN AN OATH. Then there is a State of Integrity above Swearing,
that by the Light Socrates had, he preferred before Swearing, as I may again
observe. But to proceed, let us hear the Charge of his Enemies, and his Defense.

Melitus, Son of Melitus, a Pythian, accused Socrates, Son of Sophroniscus, an
Alopecian: Socrates violateth the Law, not believing the Acities which this
City believes; BUT INTRODUCING ANOTHER GOD. HE VIOLATES THE LAW LIKEWISE IN
CORRUPTING YOUTH; THE PUNISHMENT, DEATH.

The Charge is the same to this day; Good Men are made Offenders for a Word.

Soon after Anytus (who caused that Bill to be preferred Liban. Ap: p. 644.
by Melitus, in that Socrates industriously assayed his Overthrow, and the Rest
of his Comical Associates; for they Nothing they could do was able to draw him
out of his Endeavors to detect the loose Comedians, that sought therefore his
Ruin.
were Comedians) sent privately to him, desiring him to forbear the mention of
his Trade; and assuring him, that he would thereupon withdraw his Action. But
Socrates returned him Answer, THAT HE WOULD NEVER FORBEAR SPEAKING TRUTH SO
LONG AS HE LIVED; That he would always use the same Speeches concerning him;
That this Accusation was not of Force enough, to make him refrain from speaking
those things, which he thought himself before oblieg'd to say. Again observe
his Resolution.

It is likely, God in his Love to me, has ordained, that I should Dye in the
most convenient Age, and by the Gentlest Means; for, if I dye by Sentence, I am
allowed the Benefit of the most easy kind of Death; I shall give my Friends
the least Trouble: Further, If, when I give an Account of my Actions toward
God and Men, the Judges think fit to condemn me, I will rather choose to Dye,
then to beg of them a Life worse then Death.

Yet that I dye unjustly, it will not trouble 1 Pet. 3. 14.
me, it is not a Reproach to me, but to those who condemned me; I am much
satisfied with the Example of Palamedes, who suffered Death in the like manner;
He is much more commended, then Ulysses the Procurer of his Death: I know, both
future and past Times will witness, I NEVER HURT OR INJURED ANY, but on the
contrary have Advantaged all that conversed with me to my utmost Ability,
communicating what Good I could gratis, and not for Gain.

I think it most Unbeseeming a Philosopher to Sell his Advice, and extremely
contrary to my Practice; sor ever since by God's Command, I first entered into
The word Philosophy has been otherwise appropriated since those days, as many
other words have been; for it then signified a Love of Wisdom given by
Pythagoras, which Wisdom was the Way of Holy Living, not Vain and Untoward
Contests about Inpracticable Things.
Philosophy, I was never known to take any thing, but keep my Exercises in
public, for every one to hear that will; I neither Lock the Door when I Teach,
nor go abroad to the Multitude, and exact Money of the Hearers, as some
heretosore have done, and some in our times yet do.

Was not Socrates then beyond the Priests of our Day, I mean as well some
Creeping Non- Conformists, as any other, who make a Trade of it, and indeed it
is their best. The Righteousness of this Heathen condemns their Mercenary
Practice, who pretend to be Christian-Ministers; and gives Proof of an higher
State, then they have yet attained.

VII. ANTISTHENES, Institutor of the Cynicks, Laert. and Suid. in vit. Antish.
as they were called, and Scholar to Socrates, taught, That Virtue was the
truest Nobility, Ye are an Holy Nation, a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 9. -- And
you shall be Kings, and Reign, etc. Rev. 1. 6. -- Blessed are they who hear the
Word of God, and keep it, Luke 11. 28. -- Where is the Wise? where is the
Scribe? where is the Disputer of this World? 1 Cor. 1. 20.
that PIETY WAS ALONE NEEDFUL TO LASTING HAPPINESS. -- That true Virtue stood
not in Saying, but Doing that which was Good. -- Not in much Learning, or many
Words, but upright Actions. In short, that the Principle of Virtue is
sufficient to what Wisdom is needful, and that all other things ought to have
reference thereto. That PIETY IS Put on the Breast - Plate of Righteousness,
Ephesians. 6 14.
THE BEST ARMOR, and Virtuous Persons are always Friends. That Virtue is an
Armor, none can either pierce, or take from Good Men. He prefers a Just Man
before his Neighbor, and good Women's Souls the same Privilege to Virtue,
with Men's. He accounted Pleasures one of the greatest Mischiefs in the World;
and being asked, what LEARNING was best? he answered, That which Unlearns Men
Evil; for those, says he, who Stob.
would Live forever, must The Just shall live by Faith, Hab. 24. -- Without
Holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14.
have a Care that their Lives be Holy and Just in this World.

IX. From DIOGENES, his constant Scholar and Friend, take this one very true
and notable Saying. Of Spiritual Exercitation Laertius makes him speak to this
purpose, in his Account of his Doctrine: That where Men's Souls are deeply and
frequently employed in that Spiritual Retirement, and waiting for Divine They
that wait upon the Lord shall renew their Strength, Isa. 40. 31. -- The Secrets
of the Lord are with them that fear him, Psalm. 25. 14.
Strength; and are often exercised in Meditation upon the Eternal Mind; HOLY
REVELATIONS OR ILLUMINATIONS WILL OCCUR, WHICH ENLIGHTEN THE SOUL, AND ENABLE
IT, THE BETTER TO LIVE, AND ACT VIRTUOUSLY.

X. Nay, so greatly were the Piety and Wisdom of Valor. Max. 2. 10.
XENOCRATES reverenced at Athens, about Four Cic. pro Bal. Laert.
Hundred Years besore Swear not at all, was spoken Mat. 5. 34.
by our Lord Jesus, that the Judges of that Place would not offer to put
Xenocrates upon his Oath in an high Matter of Evidence, in case he would have
Sworn; because they thought it an Affront to his Integrity, that his bare Word
should not be preferred before all the Oaths of other Men; Dispensing, says
Valerius Maximus, with that to him, they would not have Excused in one another.
Which is no small Proof, that the LIGHT among the Heathens, impeacht Oaths in
Evidence of Imperfection, as being but only Supplemental, or in the Place of
Remedies, against want of Honesty; and obviously esteemed it an higher, and
more noble State, to arrive at the Integrity, which needs not the extraordinary
and a frighting Obligation of an Oath, where mere Fear of the Curse, entailed
upon Perjury, and not an innate Faithfulness, most commonly extorts true
Evidence; which is a sufficient Answer to T. H. how, and by what LIGHT we could
have aimed at that Perfection, or have known that Doctrine, had not the
Scriptures been.

XI. The Chief Good therefore, said ZENO, is to Cic. de Fin. 2.
square our Lives according to the Knowledge given Romans 2. 14, 15.
us from the Eternal Being, when the Soul, entering into the Path of Virtue,
walks by the Steps and Guidance of right Reason, and follows God. Which
brings to my Remembrance these Stoical Maxims delivered by Laertius, Cicero,
Quintilian, etc. and collected by T. S. for us; charged upon Zeno, and his
Disciples: some of which I had formerly an Occasion to mention in another
Discourse. They are these:

A Wise Man is void of Passion. (Remember T. H. Laert.
and J. B. unless you will renounce Patience, because an Heathen preferrs it)
-- A Wise Man is Sincere. -- A Wise Ibid.
Man is Divine; for he has God Stob.
with himself: but a Wicked Man The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of
Wisdom, Job 28. 28.
is an Atheist -- The Wicked are contrary to the Good; God, he Laert.
The Rulers take Counsel together against the Lord, Psalm. 2. 2.
is Good, so against God. -- A Stob.
Wise Man is Religious, he is Humble, He only is a Priest. -- The Wisdom which
is from above, is first Pure, then Peaceable, Jam. 3. 17.
He only is a Prophet. -- He Loves Laert.
and Honors his Parents. -- A Wise Man only is Free. -- A Wise Man is void of
Sin.

Upon which I query, whether this amounts not to as much as what the Scriptures
teach, and these here inserted tell you; That the Fear of the Lord is the
Beginning of Wisdom, and to depart from Iniquity a Good Understanding?

But further, to the same Purpose; A Wise Man Id.
is Innocent. -- A Wise Man is Free; Wicked Psalm. 111. 9, 10.
Men are Slaves. -- Again, A Wise Man is Cic. Parad.
only Perfect; for he wants no Virtue; a Wicked Stob.
Man is Imperfect, for he has no Virtue.

Whereby it is evident, that the Wisdom they meant was Virtue, in Opposition to
Vice, which they esteemed Folly, as does the Scripture frequently; as much as
to say, those who are thus Good, are only Wise.

Again, A Wise Man never Lies. -- A Wise Man is Id.
Peaceable, Meek, Modest, Diligent, Virtuous, Constant, and only is Incitable
to Virtue; Fools are not.

Where it is obvious, that by Fools they meant Wicked and Indocible People, who
are Stiff-necked, Rebelling against God, not delighting to retain God in their
Knowledge.

XII. PLATO thus, To be like God, is to be HOLY, Theatr. cap. 3. 10.
JUST and WISE, Be ye Holy, for I the Lord your God am Holy, Levit. 11. 44, 45.
which is the End of Man's being born, and should be of his studying
Philosophy; that Virtue and Honesty are all one; as says Clemens Alexandrinus
out of him.

This, Reader, was the Doctrine; this the Study; and which is best of all, this
was the Practice of many of the Virtuous Heathens; who became a Law unto
themselves, bounding their Appetites, whether Corporal or Mental, within the
approved Limits of an Inward Holy Guide, like Careful Mariners, steering the
Course of their Lives by the Direction of that Heavenly Star, which in the
Gentile-Night rise in their Consciences, to guide them unto a Blessed
Immortality; which will be the Last Point of their Divinity, and then we close
this Discourse with respect to them.

CHAP. XIV.
That the Last Point of Gentile-Divinity, to wit, Immortality and Eternal
Rewards, is also very clearly and positively held forth by the Ancient
Heathens. Six Testimonies from them, to prove it. Socrates's Great Faith in
particular; and the Lofty Strain of the Pythagoreans.

THat the Gentiles believed there was an IMMORTALITY, and that all Men should
hereafter be Accountable for the Deeds done in the Body (a Point, but obscurely
laid down, among the Jews themselves) be pleased to take these few ensuing
Authorities, as a Proof of what is asserted.

I. PYTHAGORAS, and the Pythagoreans, that they all held the Immortality of the
Soul. Consider his and their Doctrine in the Point.

First, he said, That the Soul is Immortal. Plut. plac. 4. 7.


Next, That the Soul is Incorruptible, it never Dies; Stob. Phys.
for when it goes out of the Body, it goes into Rev. 20. 12, 13, 14. Chap. 21.
7, 8.
the other World, THE PURE TO GOD, THE IMPURE BOUND BY FURIES IN INDISSOLVABLE
CHAINS.

Here IMMORTALITY and REWARDS are asserted.

But when a Man, who has lived Justly, dies, his Plat. phaed.
Soul ASCENDS TO THE 2 Cor. 5 8.
PURE ETHER (or Heaven) and lives in the Happy Aevum (or Everlasting Age) with
the Blessed.

II. Ad Amph.
HERACLITUS, If my Body be over-press'd, it must descend to the destinate
Place; Nevertheless, MY SOUL SHALL NOT DESCEND, BUT BEING A THING IMMORTAL,
SHALL FLY UP ON HIGH TO HEAVEN.

III. EURIPIDES, a grave Tragedian, whose Work Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 3.
was to undo what Wanton Comedians had done to undo the People, speaks thus:
Who knows, 2 Cor. 5. 8. Philip. 1. 21.
whether to Dye be not to Live, and to Live to Dye.

Surely he said so not out of any Distrust of Immortality, but in Belief of it,
and that Reward which would attend Good Men.

IV. SOCRATES, The Body being Compounded, Plat. Phaed.
is Dissolved by Death; The SOUL being Eccles. 12. 7.
Simple, PASSES INTO ANOTHER LIFE INCAPABLE OF CORRUPTION.

THE SOUL OF THE GOOD AFTER Idem.
DEATH ARE IN A The Sheep on the Right Hand, and the Go^tes on the Lest, Mat.
25. 31, 32, 33.
HAPPY ESTATE, UNITED TO GOD IN A BLESSED IN ACCESSIBLE PLACE; THE BAD IN
CONVENIENT PLACES SUFFER CONDIGN PUNISHMENT.

This puts the Case, of the Sufficiency of the Light, to discover Immortality
to the very Heathen, out of all doubt, and not only so, but Rewards too; since
we have them, here, believing, THE RIGHTEOUS SHALL BE SAVED, AND THE WICKED
DAMNED. This made Socrates so cheerful at his Death, something of which I think
fit here to insert.

Truly, did I not believe, I should go to the Just God, and to Men better then
any Living, I were inexcusable 1 Cor. 15. 28, 29, 30, 31.
^or contemning Death; BUT I AM SURE TO GO TO GOD, A VERY GOOD MASTER, and hope
to meet with Good Men; AND AM OF GOOD COURAGE, hoping that SOMETHING OF MAN
SUBSISTS AFTER DEATH; AND THAT IT IS THEN MUCH BETTER WITH THE GOOD THEN WITH
THE BAD.

When he had made an end of Speaking, CRITO (one of his Followers) asked him,
what Directions he would leave concerning his Sons, and other Affairs, and if
they could do any thing that might be acceptable to him? I desire no more
(says he) then what I have often told you, If you take Care of Your selves,
whatsoever you do, will be acceptable to me and mine, though you promise
nothing; if you Neglect Your selves and VIRTUE, you can do nothing acceptable
to us, THOUGH YOU PROMISE NEVER SO MUCH. That, answered CRITO, we shall
observe; But how will thou be Buried? As you think good (says he) IF YOU CAN
CATCH ME, and that I give you not the slip. Then with a Smile applying himself
unto us, I cannot persuade CRITO (says he) that I am any thing more then the
Carkase you will anon behold; and therefore he takes this Care ^or my
Enterment: It seems, that what even now I told him, that as soon as I have
taken the Poison, I SHALL GO TO THE JOYS OF THE BLESSED, has been to little
purpose; He was my Bail, bound to the Judges ^or my Appearance, you must now be
SURETIES to him, that Observe Socrates his Distinction betwixt being Dead and
Departed.
I am DEPARTED; Let him not say, THAT SOCRATES IS CARRIED TO THE CRAVE, OR LAID
UNDER GROUND; for know, dear CRITO, such a Mistake WERE A WRONG TO MY SOUL; be
not dejected, Tell the World, MY BODY ONLY IS BURIED, and that after what
manner thou please. Yet (says SOCRATES) I may pray to God, and will, That my
Passage Acts 7. 60.
hence may be Happy, which I beseech him to grant; and in the same instant
drank it off easily, without any Disturbance.

This (says Plato) was the End of the Best, the Wisest, and most Just Men. A
Story, which Cicero professes he never read without Tears.

This ends Socrates upon the present Subject; and Happy Man was he, to make so
happy an End, as to Dye for the only true God: he had great Reason to believe
(maugre the Envious Uncharitableness of T. H.) that he would Reward him, when
it shall be said to many Bawling pretended Christians, Depart from me; I know
you not: for as Men Sow, so shall they Reap in the Day of God.

I need not to tell the World, that Plato, and other Heathens, have written
accurately upon that Subject, when it is so Notorious: Wherefore to close up my
Testimonies upon this Head, and whole Discourse of Gentile-Divinity, I will
present the Reader with two short Passages, one of the Pythagoreans; the other
from Virgil, thus tran^lated to H. Mor. Des. Phil. Cab. c. 3.
my hand (only a little varied) by an Ingenious Author.

V. Donec long a Dies perfecto temporis Orb Concretam exemit Labem, purumque
reliquit Aethereum Sensum, atque aur ai simplicis ignem.

In English thus:
Till that long Day at last be come about Revel.

That wasted has all Filth and Foul Desire,
And leaves the Soul CELESTIAL THROUGHOUT,
Bathing her Senses in pure liquid Fire.
To which agrees that Golden Distick of the Pythagoreans, as it has been
called.

VI. (...) Rev. 22. 5.
(...)

To this purpose:
Who after Death once reach the Heavenly Plain,
BECOME LIKE GOD, and never Dye again.
The Greek has it, as Immortal Gods. Which Hierocles interprets thus: Herein
shall Good Men resemble the Deity, that they shall be Immortal, like God
himself.

Thus Reader, have I given thee a very true Account of the Gentile-Divinity,
what was the Faith, what the Practice, and what the Prophecy and Hope of many
Gentiles through this Light Within, each of which had numerous Followers.

Observe, They began where Jews and Christians begin, that is, WITH GOD; and
they end with what they confess to be theirs, namely, a State of Immortality,
in which every one is Rewarded according to their Works: Only they are thus far
to be Commended before either of them, (if we consider many of our Times) That
they were more Certain, Plain and True in their Acknowledgment of a Divine
Light, Law, or Principle in Man, which obeyed, supplied then with daily Wisdom
and Strength, and finally led to God: And also were more Just to their Faith,
by a Life excelling theirs in Virtue and Self-denial. And certainly, in that
Great and Terrible Day, when God will judge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ,
according to Paul's Gospel, will such Pious Gentiles, who knowing God, they
Glorified him as God, and Conscientiously did the Things contained in his Law,
be finally Acquitted and Rewarded.

CHAP. XV.
That the Heathens had a Sight of the Coming of Christ. That, and not Swearing
prove the Sufficiency of the Light.

OVer and above what I promised, being rather willing to Err on that End, if
yet it be Erring; I shall briefly observe two things greatly importing our
Defense of the Light, and the Satisfaction of our Adversaries, if it be true
that they query to be satisfied.

1. That the Testimony of Socrates and Xenocrates about Swearing sufficiently
prove to us, that by the Light they had, they saw a State above Swearing, or a
Righteousness excelling that of the Legal Jews, which manifestly corresponds
with what Christ said; who above Four Hundred Years after them taught, as what
Purely became the Evangelical Righteousness, SWEAR NOT AT ALL.

2. That though their Light did not tell them the express Names Christ should
be called by, yet they Foresaw and Prophesied of his Coming, and how he should
come of a Virgin, and what both he was, and the Work he came to do; which the
Names given of the HOLY GHOST did strictly import or signify. Neither is it
the knowing so many Letters, Syllables, or Words that gives true Knowledge, or
Salvation, but the Experiencing him to be that which he is, and wherefore he is
so denominated: for to that End came He into the World. Christ signifies
Anointed; with respect to that peculiar Manifestation. Jesus a Savior, for he
should save his People from their Sins. Emanuel, which is to say, God with us,
etc. that in this Sense he was Prophetically held forth by the (...) through
that Measure of Light they had: Hear Plato and Virgil.

Marcil. Ficinus, who writ the Life of that Great Gentile, tells us among many
other things, that, Being very seriously asked by some that visited him, as the
last thing they had a Mind to be informed about, HOW LONG MEN SHOULD ATTEND TO
HIS WRITINGS? Of which he seemed so cheery, Living and Dying in the Belief of
what he recommended to the World, He solemnly answered; TILL THAT MORE HOLY AND
DIVINE PERSON SHALL APPEAR TO VISIT THE WORLD, WHOM ALL MEN OUGHT TO FOLLOW. At
once, both believing such a one to appear, and then forbidding all to prefer
that lesser Discovery he had given the World, through the Improvement of his
Talent of Light, to that greater Manifestation, which that Divine Person would
bring with him into the World; as if he had said: Mine may help you with
respect to that Knowledge which is your Duty in this Generation, and so direct
to him that afterward shall come; but I am not He, neither do I believe this
the most excellent Discovery that can be made: but as the lesser Light may
point to the greater, and is at last swallowed up of it; so can I only point at
him, and when he is come, all I have done must yield to him: for I declare,
that all ought to follow him; for, in following him, they will obtain Eternal
Blessedness.

Let us now see what Virgil will add to this Matter, as See Constable. Orat. in Eus.
translated in Eusebius.

Jam nova Progenies Coelo demittitur alto. Isa. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5.


Now is from Heaven high
Descend'd a new Progeny.
And in his Bucolicks:

Sicelides Musae paulo majora canamus.

Ye Muses, with a lofty Wing,
Let us of higher Matters sing.
And what be they?

Ultima Cumaei venit jam Carminis aetas.

Who lives this Age, will clearly see,
Cumea's Vers's accomplished be.
This Cumea (so called of her City) was a Sibyl, who lived about 600. Years
before Christ, and prophesied of him.

Virgil writ these Verses about Forty Years before Christ was born. I query if
the Jews themselves had so positive a Sense of the Messiah's Coming. But to
proceed.

Magnus ab integro seclorum nascitur Ordo: Isa. 7. verse. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.

Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia Regna.
The Integrity of Times shall now renew again,
A VIRGIN also shall bring back old Saturn's Reign.
This is a direct Prophecy of the Mavelous Conception, that he should be born
of a Virgin, and the Good that would redound to the World thereby, as he
further adds.

Tu modo nascenti Puero, quo ferrea primum
Desinet, ac toto surget Gens aurea Mundo,
Cast a fave Lucina --
Hoc duce, si qua manent sceleris vestigia nostri,
Irrita perpetua solvent formidine terras.
The Birth of that most happy CHILD, by whom The Iron Age shall end, and Golden
come, Chap. 9, and 10.
Chaste Lucina favor --

HE SHALL THE POWERS OF WICKEDNESS 1 John 4. 5, 6.
DESTROY,
AND FREE THE WORLD FROM FEAR AND ALL ANNOY.
Yet again:
Ipsae lacte domum referent distenta Capellae Chap. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Ubera: nec magnos metuent armenta Leones.
The Goats shall bring their Udders Milk-fill'd home, And the gentle Flocks
great Lions shall not shun.

Yet further:
Ipsa tibi blandos fundent cunabula flores,
Occidet and Serpens, and fallax herba veneni
Occidet: Assyrium vulgo nascetur amomum.
Thy Cradle fairest Flowers shall send forth still, Jer. 23.

Which shall have Power, THE POISONOUS HERBS TO KILL,
The SERPENT HE SHALL TO DESTRUCTION BRING,
Assyrian Amomum shall each where spring.
Hinc ubi jam firmata virum te fecerit aetas.

When thou shall attain at length
To Years of Manhood and firm Strength.
Now let any tell me, if this be not a most Pathetical Account of the Virtue
and Power of Christ, and the very End of his coming into the World, as by a
Comparison of it with Scriptures in the Margent will plainly appear.

Et durae quer^us sudabunt roscida mella.

From the hard Oak there shall
Sweet Honey sweat forth and fall.
To Conclude,
Cedet and ipse mari vector; nec nautica pinus
Mutabit merces: omnis feret omnia tellus.
Non rastros patietur humus, non vinea falcem,
Nec varios discet mentiri lana colores.
Sponte sua sandix pascentes vestiet agnos.
O mihi tam long maneat pars ultima vitae,
Spiritus and quantum sat erit, tua dicere facta!
The Sea shall then be quiet, no Ship shall range
Abroad her Wares with others to exchange;
Then every Land shall every thing produce,
And then to plow the Earth they shall not use:
Vines by the Hook shall not be rectified,
Nor Wool with diverse Colors shall be died;
Fair Fleeces voluntary shall proceed,
And clothe the Lambs while they do gently feed.
O might my Days be lengthned, so that I
Might sing of thy great Deeds before I dye!
Thus, to say no more, though much more might be said, of this kind, have
Heathens by the LIGHT, we have been hitherto defending, not only foretold
Christ's Appearance, but the very Work, for which he did come, and from whence
he received those peculiar Names of Christ, Jesus, Emanuel, the Restorer of
Breaches, Redeemer, Savior, etc. So that I hope, our Adversaries will either
disprove these Writings, or confess that the Light God gave to the Gentiles,
they receiving it, was sufficient, and that by it they had some of them a Sight
of Christ, with respect to the great Performance, for which he was so named.

I have omitted any mention of those Sibylls, so much believed in by Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, and abundance of the Ancients, for
David Bloudell's sake, an accurate Frenchman, who endeavors to prove the
Books that go under their Name, to be an Imposture writ since Christ, by some
affected to ^hristianity, to promote it with the Gentiles; and therefore no
true Prophecyes of his Coming; though he grants, Sibylls there were of old, and
Excellent Things they wrote, but that they were burnt in the Capitol of Rome
several Hundred Years before Christ came in the Flesh, and scattered Remnants
only extant, yet among them enough will be afforded, as Virgil from the Cumean
already mentioned, whereby to prove the great Foresight some of the Gentiles
had of Christ's being Conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of a Virgin, and
finally, Coming in the Flesh for the Salvation of the World: And which is more
then any before Virgil had done; the Time when? namely, WITHIN THAT AGE, which
was the Reign of Augustus Caesar, in the beginning of which Virgil wrote, and
about the End of which Christ was Born.

CHAP. XVI.
It is granted that the Jew, and much more the Christian has the Advantage of
the Gentile. Yet that the Gentile had enough Salvation.

BUt that I'may provide against both Ignorance and Malice: Let none unworthily
infer from hence, that I prefer the State of Gentilism before the State of
Christianity; No, nor yet so much, as that I intend to equal it to that of the
Jews, to whom pertained the Adoption, Glory, Covenant, and the giving of the
Law, whose were the Fathers, and of whom Christ himself came after the Flesh,
who is God (the only God) over all, Blessed forever, Amen.

For this let all know, that far greater were the Privileges that both Jew and
Christian were blessed with, then those of the Ancient Gentiles. God gave the
Jews what the Gentiles had, but he was not pleased to endow the Gentiles, with
all that he freely bestowed upon the Jews: Yet that he gave them what was
sufficient to Godliness is altogether as certain; For the Difference lay not in
the Root of the Matter, but only in some Extraordinary Helps, and several
visible Services, Figurative of a further Glory.

The Word nigh in the Heart (of which Moses testified) was not the only
Privilege of the Jew, but of the Gentile also. The Spirit of God strove as
well against the Gentile as the Jewish Man; And God himself declared Isa. 1.
12, 13, 14, 15.
their New Moons, Solemn Assemblies, Sabbaths, etc. to be an Abomination; and
bid them, cleanse themselves, and put away the Evil Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32.
of their Doings; and that they would make them a new Heart, and a new Spirit:
intimating, that though he did attend their Childhood with many Helps that were
wanting to other Nations, yet he required Fear, Purity and Righteousness, as
the most essential thing of all other; which, because it was required of the
Gentiles as well as Jews, and that many Gentiles believed so, and accordingly
lived, unto which, declaring they were inclined by that Spirit, which (Job
says) is in Man, and that Inspiration of the Almighty which gives
Understanding; I cannot in Justice but conclude, they wanted not the
Groundwork any more then did the Jews. So that the Sum of what I have been
urging is but this; and thus much it is, That though God was more Beneficent to
the Jew (especially to the Christian) then the Gentile; and consequently that
as the Jew had those Assistances the Gentile had not, so the
Christian-Dispensation is the Perfection of the Divine Light, Life and
Immortality, more weakly seen, both by Jew and Gentile; Yet also, That God did
communicate to the Gentiles such a Measure of his Divine Light and Spirit, as
diligently adhered to, and faithfully sollowed, was sufficient to their
Salvation, from Sin here, and confequently from Wrath to come: And that they
themselves did so Believe, Teach, Live and Dye, in perfect Hope and full
Assurance of Eternal Recompense, in a State of Immortality. And though I will
not be so strict in my Opinion of the best Gentiles, as to deny there might be
some Self-Mixtures from Temper, Education, or otherwise; yet I will also boldly
affirm, that as the Light they had was sufficient in it self to their Salvation
(of which their Life and Doctrine are a notable Demonstration) so they had some
of them a glimmering Prospect and bold Belief of as high a State of Purity,
Glory and Immortality, as Man's Nature is well capable of attaining to. Let
thus much suffice (whether T. Hicks be pleased, or not pleased) in Defense of
the Universality and Sufficiency of the LIGHT, at least with respect to the
Gentiles Divinity; and a round Answer to the Clamours of our many Adversaries
against the Light's Sufficiency to discover Sin, and convert from it.

CHAP. XVII.
A great Objection stated; Answered. The Light both Law and Gospel, not in the
same Discovery; but in it self. A Way to reconcile the seeming Difference about
it. The Light still defended.

BUt because I am yet to expect Doubters about the Light, who rather strive how
to oppose it by their Notions, then believe and obey it. I will suppose that
some may (as indeed does T. Hicks, J. G. and almost all who have writ against
us) yet object:

Certainly this Light Within can be at most but the Objection.
Law in the Conscience, answering to the First Covenant; For here is scarce any
mention made of Christ in this long Discourse; and if this Light were Christ,
as is affirmed by you Quakers, then how comes it, that he was not so called of
Old by the Jews and Greeks? and why typified out to come, when he was come
before, and whilst typified? And further, In what Sense can he be understood to
bear our Iniquities, and Men and Women to be saved by his Blood, if this Light
be the Savior, Messiah, Christ, etc. as you believe, and endeavor to maintain
now in the World?

This Objection, I suppose, the Reader will allow to be the most weighty made
against our Principle, and that I have dealt more fairly by our Adversaries
(especially by that Unjust and Malicious Man T. Hicks) then they have dealt
with us in his abusive and impertinent Dialogue; since I have here laid down
the Strength of their Objection, and the whole Scope and Intendment of his 8,
9, 10, 11, and 12. pages against the Light. To all which I thus answer, in the
Fear of God and Spirit of Moderation. The Objection consists mainly of these
Four Parts; The First, relating to the Light's being but the Law, not the
Gospel. The Second, to the Light's never being called Christ by Jews or Greeks.
The Third, to Christ's being typified, and yet in Being at the same time. The
Fourth, to Christ's Blood, the Bearing our Sins, and which way this could be
appropriated to the Light, and not do Injury to the Holy Manhood.

First then, I shall answer to that Part of the Objection which concerns the
Light's being but, or no more then the Law.

I do thus far agree, That the Light is the Law; but that it is not therefore
in any sense the Gospel, I also deny, yet not in that Capacity wherein it is
the Law; for as in that state it cannot justify, so it would be to say, it is
the Law, and it is not the Law. I say then, that the Light may be both, in
reference to a twofold Manifestation.

Where there is no Law there is no Transgression. It might as well have been
said (since they themselves confess it to be the Law) That where there is no
Light, there is no Transgression; and the rather, because whatever is reproved,
or Sinful, is made manifest by the Light; therefore, since all have transgrest,
all have Light, and ever had: In this State then it is a Law, which justifies
none; for whoever is in that which is reproveable, is under Condemnation from
the Law, or the Reproving Act of the Light. But again, Such as by unfeigned
Repentance come to turn unto the Light, they are herein justified in a twofold
Sense (and I so speak for the sake of the Simple, beguiled by a wrong
Apprehension of the Word) First, In that God acquits for his Name's sake, who
is Merciful, Pardoning Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, all that Repent with
Unfeigned Repentance. Secondly, In that he accepts upon the Renewal and
Conti^uance of the Creature's humble and sincere Obedience. Neither are such
properly come to the complete Sonship; they are but on their Journey, they must
give good Proof of their Fidelity, Diligence and Loyalty to God, as Servants,
before there be a Receiving of them into that excellent State of Sorship which
never goes out of the Father's House (...). This is clearly distinguished, and
weightily expressed by the Apostle Paul to the Galatians, The Heir, says he,
whilst (...) Age, differs not from a Servant, but is under Tutors until the
time ^pointed of the Father; even so we, when we were Children were in Bondage,
under the Elements of the World: therefore the Seed came, that by Faith in it
the Adoption of Sons might be known. This is the Perfection of the Brightness
of the Light, which is all along still the same in It self, though not the same
to the Creature. The outward Sun is the Cause of the early Dawnings, and is at
that very time in it self the same Glorious Body of Light, as when in the
Meridian; but if Men either through Natural Weakness, or the many Fogs and
Mists of Tradition, Education, Ignorance or Prejudice suffer an Eclipse, they
must not blame the Light, but themselves. He that follows the Light, which was
ever the Just Man's Path, shall meet with Blessedness at the End of his
Travels; But such as let the World of Wickedness get between, are over-taken
with Night. Abraham saw Christ's Day; What Day? The Dispensation of Sonship, as
Heir of all things, the Day of perfect Restitution; which he could never have
done, had he not had Light, by which to have seen it. So several of those Holy
Ancients obtained a Degree above many, and arrived at a Growth, yea, the
Benefit and Enjoyment of a Dispensation, that was not general, through the
Weakness of the Age: Such really saw beyond the Offerings, Types, Figures and
Shaddows, to a State more Inward, Spiritual and Substantial, by taking good
heed to the Heavenly Light. And this was the End of all External
Administrations, to drive the Creature in, and point out unto it some more
hidden Mystery that Man's Wandering from God had caused him to neglect; yet
still was Christ, the Word. God, a saving Light in that State. And the Light of
the Law was as a SchoolMaster, that led such as diligently obeyed it, to that
more excellent Discovery of the same Light, which is now called the Gospel, or
Glad-tidings, as certainly it was and is, after so Black and Cold a Season, as
has tediously overcast the Heavens, to have that Sun of Righteousness appear
in that Body, prepared and anointed for that Purpose, in a transcendent Manner
to all former Manifestations of Himself. Thus it was that such as had lived up
most faithfully to the Law of God, or Light of that Dispensation, gladly
received Christ, believed in him, became his Followers, and the Companions of
his Sufferings; so that he, who was the Light of the Law, is also the Light of
the Gospel, though not in one and the same Degree of Discovery, as the Light is
not one in Condemning and Justifying, though it be one in it self; nor in the
Degree and Growth of little Children, young Men and Fathers, yet one Pure,
Eternal, Unalterable Light of Life and Righteousness in it self. If therefore
it does the Office of the Law in any, to be sure such one is yet under a State
of Condemnation for Evil, and he is not yet come to know the fulfilling of the
Law, as becomes every Follower of Christ, yea, every one that would come to
Christ. Christ indeed fulfils the Law for us; but how? The Light in us, as we
are subject to it, and led by it, administers an Holy Power, by which we are
enabled to do that which is Good and Acceptable in the Sight of the Lord; and
so obeying the Light, we fulfill the Law: Thus he works his Works in us and for
us. And so far was Christ from Dis-ingaging his Followers from an indispensible
Necessity of keeping the Law, as outwardly engraven on Stones, that he set them
a far harder Task, by how much it is more easy to restrain from Acting then
Thinking. Thou shall not Commit Adultery, says that Dispensation of Moses;
Whosoever looks on a Woman, to lust after her, has committed Adultery already
with her in his Heart, says that more Excellent Dispensation Mat. 5. 27. 28.
of Christ. Certainly then those Men, who fancy themselves upon the easy Terms
of being excluded the Fulfilling of the Law, or Performing good Works, as a
Condition to Justification, must basely abuse themselves, and dangerously
adventure the Well-being of their own Souls. In short, He was the True Light,
who said, He that looks upon a Woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery
with her already in his Heart: But so was he also that said of old by Moses,
Thou shall not commit Adultery; Therefore should we conclude two Lights, and
not rather two several Manifestations, or gradual Discoveries of the self-same
Eternal Light?

To conclude, The Law (as I may say) is the Gospel begun, and the Gospel is the
Law finished; He that would be justified must first be condemned, and who would
be healed, must first be wounded: The Law is as the Sword, the Gospel as Balm;
The one Duty, the other Love. And that which alone is needful to attain unto
the highest Discovery, is, to be humbly subject, and constantly obedient to the
lowest Appearance of it: The faithful Servant becomes a Son by Adoption.
Would thou know the Word a Reconciler, thou must first witness it an Hammer,
Sword, Fire, etc. The Way to arrive at Evangelical Righteousness, is first to
perform the Righteousness of the Law: By Law, I mean not that of Ceremonies, or
the External Order of the Jews; but that Moral and Eternal Law, which is said
to have come by Moses, and is accomplished by Christ. And there is great Hopes,
that who Conscientiously keeps the Beginning, will compass the End. Such as
have Conquered bad Doing, if they be faithful in what they have received of
God's Light and Spirit it will enable them against bad Saying, till at last
they overcome evil Thinking too; and witness that Scripture fulfilled; Judgment
(the Law) is brought forth into Victory (the Gospel) He that follows me (the
Light of the World that inlightens all Men coming into the World) shall not
abide in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life. I make not this
Distinction of Law and Gospel to distinguish in Kind, but Degree, and for the
sake of the Weak accustomed to it. And if the Son make you free, then are you
free indeed: For as it is a Condemner it may be called the Light that brings
Death, in that it slays by the Brightness of it is coming into the Conscience,
the transgressing Nature; like unto that Expression the Day of the Lord is a
Day of Darkness, because of the Judgments and Terrors of the Lord for Sin; But
to the Obedient it is the Light of Life.

Thus is Christ as the Word-God, and Light of the World through every
Dispensation, ONE in himself, though to Mankind he has variously appeared, not
by Differing Lights, but Manifestations only, of one and the same Eternal Light
of Life and Righteousness.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Second Part of the Objection, that Christ was not anciently called the
Light; Answered. And the Contrary proved from Scripture and Reason.

TO the Second Part of the Objection, If the Light in every Man were Christ,
how comes it that the Jews and Greeks never called it so? I answer, We do not
say, that the Light in every Man is Christ, but of Christ; He is that Fullness
from whence all receive a Measure of Divine Light and Knowledge; but not that
every Individual has the whole or complete Christ in him; such an Absurdity
never fell from us, nor our Doctrine, though the Malice of our Adversaries has
charged it upon both. But as the External Sun darts its Light upon the Organ of
the Eye of the Body, by which it conveyes true Discerning to act, how, in and
about Visibles; so does the Internal Sun of Righteousness shine upon the Eye of
the Soul, giving it the Knowledge of those invisible Things, which properly
relate to the Nature of the Soul; So that we are the less obliged to give a
Reason, why others called not the Light in Man, Christ, since we renounce all
Share in such Belief our selves: Which is Answer enough to T. H's dis-ingenuous
Inference, that because G. W. affirmed, the Light, with which Mankind was
enlightened, was God, therefore says T. H. Every Man his whole God in him, or
to that Purpose, p. 5, 6. Yet thus far I will tell those Men, that Christ was
called Light, before ever he was in the World, though not before he was Christ.
I will give him for a Light to lighten the Gentiles, etc. Now if any will say,
that this Light was not Christ, let them tell us so in plain words: But if it
will be allowed, then T. Hicks had best ask, why the Prophet by the Holy Ghost
should call Christ, Light, even as soon, if not before he was called Christ;
and why in that very State, in which he was called Christ, he should be called
Light. Certain it is then, that by Him, the Light, we are to understand Christ,
which is one and the same thing, as if he had said, I will give Christ for a
Light to enlighten the Gentiles; or, who is the Christ, is the Light; or, the
Light is Christ: So that it will follow, that the Gentiles were enlightened by
Christ, which is the Whole of what we understand by our Assertion, as to the
Light in Man.

Again, John expressly calls that Light with which every Man is enlightened, the
Word; and the Word is said to have taken Flesh: If then he that took Flesh was
Christ, and consequently that Body, Christ's Body only, as none, I think, will
dare deny, but Muggleton, and his Credulous Followers, it will follow, That
Christ, who took, or appeared in that prepared Body, is the Light, with which
every Man is enlightened.

Further, Christ himself says, I am the Light of the World; which is as much
as if he had said, I have enlightened the World: therefore the Light, which
shines in the Hearts of Mankind is Christ, though, not every particular
Illumination the entire Christ; for so there would be as many Christ's, which
were Absurd and Blasphemous.

But Lastly the Apostle himself calls him Christ before his Coming in the
Flesh; or that Christ was Christ before his Appearance in that Body at
Jerusalem, which clears that Point in Controversy: for the Stress of T.
Hicks's Objection, as to this Particular, lies here, Christ, as Christ, was not
before he took Flesh; therefore though I should grant (might he say, and he
does say as much) that as the Word-God all are enlightened by him, yet, says
he, not as he is Christ before that visible Appearance: One would think he were
a very Socinian by his Arguing; not that I write so in Slight, Abuse or
Reflection; but if Christ was not before, then the Manhood, that was taken in
time, must be the Christ; and what should materially hinder their Conjunction I
know not? But I would fain know his Reason for it, if it be Lawful to expect
what I fear he has not to give; however, if he dare, he would give you his
Interest in lieu of a Reason for his so holding, but that I shall do for him,
and with Impartial Minds it will be a Reason against him. The Dilemma in short
is this, If he denies Christ to have been Christ before that Coming, he thwarts
as plain a Text as the Scriptures have; and if he should allow of it, his whole
Fabric (now a Fortification, he thinks) would fall like a rotten House about
his Ears. Well, but I will tell him, and all concerned, for his base
Opposition, That since Christ, as the Word-God, has illuminated all Men
antecedent to his Coming in the Flesh, as confesses T.H. J.G. J.F. and many
more of them, and that the Apostle says, that the Word was Christ, or Christ
was before he came in the Flesh; for Christ was in the Wilderness a Rock to
Israel, unless Christ and the Word are two distinct Beings, or that there be
two distinct Christ's: Christ was that Light, with which Mankind was
illuminated, or that Light, Mankind was enlightened with, was the very Christ,
and consequently, the Light has been called both expressly and implicitly Christ
before that visible Appearance at Jerusalem. Nor is the Allegation of that
Scripture pertinent to the Matter in hand (viz.) Which none of the Princes of
this World knew, etc. brought by T. H. for that was spoken in reference to the
Wisdom which had been hid, and not the mere Manhood of Christ; But suppose it
had deeply concerned it, we have this to say, that such as rejected, much more
those that crucified him in his outward Appearance, had first despised and
slain him within, They were of those who Rebel against the Light, and Love not
the Ways thereof. And I affirm against all Opposers, that it was by that Sight
the Light within gave to Simeon, Peter, Nathanael, and all others, who believed
in him, that they Confessed him, and Suffered for him; such as had not so
Out-sinned their Day, Defiled their Conscience, Clouded their Understandings,
and Hardened their Hearts, as others by Wicked Works had done; but through the
Light of the Lord, had in good measure kept their Consciences void of Offense,
they received and embraced him. The Light knew its own; The Lesser led to the
Greater, and the Greater Light as naturally attracted the Lesser, as we may see
Fire do every day. To conclude this Particular, let me add, that they were not
the Princes of this World that put him outwardly to Death; for it came by the
Envious Accusations and most Inveterate Suggestions of the Jews (a Broken
Conquered People) to Pilate, but Governor of a Province; therefore, since I
believe what the Apostle says to be true, I have rather Reason to infer, that
it was meant of Christ Mystically, then of that Visible Body. However it be,
that part of our Adversaries Objection about the Light's not being called
Christ, antecedent to his Coming in the Flesh, can be of no Weight to the
Matter under Debate, since we have so evidently made the Contrary appear.

CHAP. XIX.
The Third Part of the Objection; If Christ was enjoyed under the Law, as he
was, if the Light be Christ; why was he Typified? Is proved of no Force. The
Type and Antitype in some Respects may be at one and the same time; this is
proved by (...) of Scripture. Our Adversaries Oppostion and Cavil Weak and
Insuccessful.

THe Third Part of the Objection, and what seems at first sight to carry
something of moment against us, is this; If the Light Within be Christ, and the
Jews and Gentiles had it from the beginning of the World, how can Christ be
said to be typified out, as not come, and Prophesied of to come, when by your
own Principle he has been always come? I answer, This part of the Objection is
in some respect built upon the same Mistake as was the second, namely, that the
Light within is entirely Christ; concerning which I have plainly and truly
expressed my self before; I will therefore faithfully state the Question for them
thus: Well, but still you say, Christ enlightened Jews and Gentiles before that
visible Coming; if so, then was he come by your own Principle, whilst his very
Coming was typified out, and Prophesied of: Does not this seem a Contradiction?
But to this I say, that the supposed Contradiction arises from the Mistake of
the Dispensations; for it takes for granted, that there was no Difference in
the Degree of Illumination before, and at the Coming of Christ after that
visible Manner into the World, which all must needs confess: For as I would be
understood, when I call the Light before, and after Christ's Coming in the
Flesh, Light, to mean but one and the self-same Light in Nature; So let none
apprehend, that we make not a Difference by the Acknowledgment of a more
eminent Manifestation of the same Light. What follows then? Why thus much most
clearly, That under the Enjoyment of the Lesser Manifestation of Light, suited
to the then Childish State of the Jews, God was pleased to allure them after an
Expectation of, at least a Belief in higher things, by Types and Prophecyes of
that far more Excellent and Exceeding Glorious Dispensation of the Light and
Love of God in after Ages. The End of God's giving the Israelites that outward
Prophet and Leader Moses was, to bring to the Inward, which though they through
Carnality and Weakness were not then sensible of him, so as to stay their Minds
upon him, yet Moses prophesied of him; and all the External Dealings have been
with respect to bring to the Seed within, which is able to bruise the Serpent's
Head, and did so in some measure through all Ages. So that in good Reason and
Truth may we assert, Christ the Light, was the Rock that followed Israel in the
Wilderness (who is the Rock of Ages, and Foundation of all Generations, who
ever enlightened all Mankind, the same yesterday, to day, and forever) yet a
greater Manifestation of that Divine Light might be typically preached forth
under the Enjoyment of the Lesser: And that we herein are not without the
Suffrage of the Scriptures to our Defense, I would fain know of T. Hicks, or
who else that is concerned against us, If notwithstanding all those outward
Washings of those Times, God did not frequently press the very Substance it
self, namely, a Clean Heart and a New Spirit; accounting all short thereof but
as the Cutting off a Dog's Neck? And whether Christ himself did not with his
own Hands give the Bread and the Wine to his Disciples, and yet bid them do it
till he came? Whence it is easy to observe, that unless Tho. Hicks, and the
rest of those Contenders, say with the Papists, The Bread and Wine are very
Christ (and so make Christ giving Christ, thereby destroying the Nature of a
Sacrament; and instead of doing it till he come, that he should come whenever
they do receive it (which Ignorance I will not suppose him or them guilty of) I
say, unless then that they were of one Mind with the Romanists in the Matter of
the Supper, it must be granted to us, that Christ present gave them a Figure of
Christ to come; therefore to figure out Christ to come, destroys not Christ's
being come; especially with our most necessary Distinction of the lesser
Manifestation from the greater, which nevertheless divides not the Light, but
that remains in it self one Pure, Eternal Being of Light, and Sun of
Righteousness through every Dispensation.

This, that Passage I have already observed from the Apostle Paul, in Answer to
the second part of the Objection plainly clears to us; For if Christ typified
out was their Rock, or the Rock of that Age, even when the Brazen Serpent the
Type was in being, I cannot see, but the Type and the Thing typified might be
at one and the same time; not as to Degree, but Nature; for so I would be
understood.

Before I conclude take this notable Saying of Christ to the Jews, and what may
be collected from it to our Purpose; BEFORE ABRAHAM WAS I AM -- ABRAHAM Joh. 8.
56, 57, 58.
SAW MY DAY, AND REJOICED -- which affords us briefly thus much: That though he
was not so visibly come, yet it was the very same HE that came about One
Thousand Six Hundred Years ago, who was with the Fathers of Old; and that
Abraham, Helv. Chron.
who lived One Thousand Nine Hundred Years before that outward Appearance, saw
him, and his Day. If this be not the Import of the Place, I know none; For the
Jews not believing him to be the Messiah, thought it high Presumption sor him
to compare with Abraham; Art thou Greater then our Father Abraham, who is dead,
and the Prophets are dead? Whom make thou thy self? said that Unbelieving
People; Unto which he answered (that he might prove himself to be the true
Messiah, the Christ of God) ABRAHAM SAW MY DAY, and rejoiced: They still
harping upon that Visible Body, not Thirty Three Years old, replied, Thou art
not yet Fifty, and have thou seen Abraham? Taking that to be the Messiah, the
Christ of God, and Savior of the World he meant, which they saw with their
Carnal Eyes. To which he rejoined with a Verily, verily I say unto you, before
Abraham was I am; then took they up Stones to cast at him, etc. By all which it
is most clear, that unless our Adversaries will deny him that so spoak (which
yet T. Hicks's Anti-scriptural Opinion does imply) to be Christ, who singled
and distinguished himself, as the Messiah, the Christ of God, and Savior of the
World from that Visible Body, not Fifty Years old indeed; both Christ that then
spoak must needs have been long before Abraham's Time; and that such Holy
Ancients were not without a Sight and Prospect of him, and the Day of his
Glorious Appearance, or that most Signal Manifestation of himself in that Body
prepared for that Great and Holy Purpose; witness the exceeding Clear and
Heavenly Prophecyes, that were as so many Forerunners, or Introducers of the
Evangelical State.

And this is unquestionably confirmed unto us by that known and very weighty
Expression of the Apostle Paul to the Romans: Whose are the Fathers, and of
whom as concerning Romans 5. 9.
the Flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever, Amen. Since here
both Christ is distinguished from the Body he took and made one with that God,
who is over all, blessed for ever, Amen; As much as to say, of whose Flesh
Christ took, therefore Christ was before he took it; or his taking it did not
constitute him Christ, which Christ is God; And if God ( which cannot be said
of mere Flesh or any Corporal Lineage) then must he have been from all
Everlasting.

To conclude, As Abraham Outward and Natural was the great Father of the Jews
Outward and Natural, whose Seed God promised to bless with Earthly Blessings as
Canaan, etc. and that they were figurative of the one Seed Christ, and such as
he should beget unto a lively Hope through the Power of his Spiritual
Resurrection, it will consequently follow, that this Seed must be Inward and
Spiritual; since one outward thing cannot be the proper Figure or
Representation of an other: Nor is it the Way of holy Scripture so to teach us;
The Outward Lamb shows forth the Inward Lamb; The Jew Outward, the Jew Inward.
As God attended the one with many singular outward Mercies (to say no more)
above other Nations; So the Jew in Spirit does he benefit above all other People

I have these two short Arguments to prove, what I believe and assert as to the
Spirituallity of the True Seed; and a clearer Overthrow it is to the Opinion of
our Adversaries to the True Christ. First, Every thing begets its like; What is
simply Natural produces not a Spiritual Being; Material Things bring not forth
Things that are Immaterial. Now because the Nature, or Image, begotten in the
Hearts of True Believers, is Spiritual, it will follow, that the Seed which so
begets, and brings forth that Birth, must be the same in Nature with that which
is begotten, therefore Spiritual; then Christ's Body, or, what he had from the
Virgin, strictly considered as such, was not the Seed.

Secondly, it is clear from hence; The Serpent is a Spirit: Now nothing can
bruise the Head of the Serpent, but something that is also Internal and
Spiritual, as the Serpent is; But if that Body of Christ were the Seed, then
could he not bruise the Serpent's Head in all, because the Body of Christ is
not so much as in any one, and consequently the Seed of the Promise is an Holy
and Spiritual Principle of Light, Life, and Power, that being received into the
Heart bruiseth the Serpents Head: And because the Seed, which cannot be that
Body, is Christ, as testify the Scriptures, the Seed is one, and that Seed
Christ, and Christ God over all, blessed forever, we do conclude, and Gal. 3.
16.
that most truly, that Christ was, and is the Divine Word of Light and Life,
that was in the beginning with God, and was, and is God over all, blessed for
ever.

And this may yet more evidently appear, let it but be seriously weighed, that
before ever that visible Appearance, the Seed bruised in good measure the
Serpent's Head in the Holy Men and Women of all Generations, otherwise they had
not been Holy, but Serpentine and Wicked; And if the Seed, was before, and that
Seed be Christ; because there is but One Christ, as well as but One only Seed,
it does clearly follow, that Christ was Christ before that Outward Appearance;
and consequently, it could but be a more Excellent and free Manifestation of
his Truth, Righteousness, Salvation, Wisdom, Power, Glory and Dominion, as
indeed it was.

For notwithstanding that this Heavenly Seed was in some measure known, and
what was wrought of Inward Deliverance in that Day, was by and through the
Power and Virtue of it, as the Minds of People were retired to that Word of God
nigh in the Heart to cleanse and redeem; And though particular Persons might
arrive at great Seize, even to a Beholding the Day of the Seeds complete
Redemption, and Conquest over all it is Oppressors (when what was but in the
Condition of a Seed, or Newborn Child, should become the only Son, the
Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father and Prince of
Peace, of the Increase of whose Government there should be no End, as speaks
the Prophet) Yet it is granted, through that good Understanding the Lord has
given us in these weighty Things, that the Generallity were but Weak, Dark and
Imbondaged, as says the Apostle, under Carnal and Beggarly Elements, not
clearly seeing through those outward Services, which, if I may so speak, God
held them in hand with, condescending to their Weakness, that he might both
keep them from gadding after the Pompous Invention, and Idolatrous Worship of
other Nations, and point out unto them under their great Carnality that more
Hidden Glory and Spiritual Dispensation, which should-afterwards be revealed,
to wit, The Complete Redemption of the Soul, and Reign of the Holy Seed, from
the Child born, and the Son given, to the Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God,
the Everlasting Father, and Prince of Peace, of the Increase of whose
Government there shall be no End.

So that then we ought, and we do by absolute Force of Truth conclude (1.) That
the Seed, which Seed is Christ, was in all Ages with Abraham, with the
Israelites, with the Prophets, Therefore he was as well before he came in that
prepared Body, as then and since. (2.) Yet it is confessed, That He was not so
clearly revealed, perfectly brought forth, and generally known before his so
Coming as then and since, but more darkly figured out by Types and Shaddowy
Services; which though they Cleans'd not, Saved not, Redeemed not, yet did show
forth a more Hidden and Spiritual Substance, that was able to Cleanse, Save and
Redeem, and did all that received it, and were truly subject to it. (3.) That
it therefore is not at all Absurd, that the more Excellent Manifestation of
Truth should he Typified and Prophesied of, under the Enjoyment of the Lesser,
since the Reason of the Thing, and the Testimonies of the Scripture are so
express for it, which ends our Answer to this Particular.

CHAP. XX.
The Fourth Part of the Objection stated and considered. Christ's Death and
Sufferings confessed to, and respected; they were beneficial. The Light of
Christ within is the Efficient Cause to Salvation.

HAving thus considered the Third Part of this great Objection, I am now come
to what chiefly stumbles People, with respect to the Light within, at least, as
I apprehend; and that is this Fourth and Last Particular, viz. But if the Light
in every Man be Christ, how does it bear our Sins, and are our Iniquities laid
upon it? and how can we be said to be Justified, Redeemed or Saved by its
Blood, since all these things are spoken by the Holy Penmen of the Man Christ,
or Jesus born at Nazareth? Surely you wholly invalidate his Life, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension and Mediation by this Belief in the Light.

This I take to be the very Stress of the Matter, collected out of the most
Forceable Writings of our Adversaries; To which I Answer, and let him that
reads understand.

It must be considered in this Last Part of the Objection, how those Questions
can be applicable to the Light, and yet be reconciliable with those Scriptures
that seem to attribute all to his Bodily Sufferings. I hope to make appear,
that as we exalt the First, so we dare not by any means to slight the Last.

The Light, or rather He that is Light in Man (for I have always desired so to
be understood: Light being a Metaphor or word taken from the outward Day, and
chiefly so termed, because of Man's Darkness, which is thereby discovered) has
been as a Lamb slain since the Foundation of the World; that is, the World had
not been long created, before the good Order of it, and every thing therein,
being envied by the Fallen Angels, that Spirit of Iniquity betrayed Man of his
Innocence; and Sin by Disobedience prevailing, the Light or Principle of Life,
under whose Holy Leadings Man was placed, became Resisted, Grieved, and as it
were Slain (which word Slain is also Metaphorical) that is to say, the Innocent
Pure Life was as Wounded unto Death through Man's Disobedience and Lamb-like
Image, in which Adam was created, by him through Rebellion lost: Thus that Holy
Principle, which God placed in the Heart of Adam, in which was true Light, Life
and Power, bore the Sin, was pressed under it, as a Cart under Sheaves, grieved
exceedingly, and as it were quenched with Iniquity. This has been the Condition
of that Precious and Elect Seed, Spirit, Light, Life, Truth (or whatever Name
equivalent any may please to give it) ever since that first Rebellion, to this
very Day: And as in Wicked Men God's Holy Light and Spirit, or that Principle
which is so called, has been deeply Wounded, yea, as one Slain; so in Good
Men, that have had a Sense of the World's Abomination, has it also born many
Burdens and Weights; for the Light and Life is One in All. And those who have
been reformed by it, and joined to it, have been as One Spirit, and have not
been without their Share of their Lord's heavy Sufferings, from the Ungodly
World, which was as well a filling up of Christ's Sufferings that were before
his Outward Coming, as what to this Generation are behind.

And as at any time Disobedient Men have harkened to the still Voice of the
WORD (that Messenger of God) in their Hearts, to be affected and convinced by
it, as it brings Reproof for Sin, which is but a Fatherly Chastizement; ^o upon
true Brokenness of Soul, and Contrition of Spirit, that very same Principle and
Word of Life in Man, has mediated and attoned, and God has been propitious,
lifting up the Light of his Countenance, and replenishing such humble (...)
with Divine Consolations. So that still the same Christ, Word-God, who has
enlightened all Men, by Sin is grieved, bearing the Iniquities of such as so
sin, and reject his Benefits: but as any hear his Knocks and let him in, he
first Wounds, and then Heals; afterward he attones, mediates, and re-instates
in the holy Image. Behold this is the State of Restitution! And this in some
Measure was witnessed by the Holy Patriarchs, Prophets and Servants of God in
old time, to whom Christ was substantially the same Savior, and Seed bruising
the Serpent's Head, that he is now to us, what Difference s^ever there may be
in Point o^ Manifestation.

But notwithstanding the same Light and Life, with that which afterward
clothed it it self with that outward Body, did in measure inwardly appear for
the Salvation of the Souls of Men; yet, as have often said, never did that Li^
^eminently put ^orth it self for that End, as in that (...) and prepared Body;
so that what he then suffered and did in that transcendent Manisestation, may
by way of Eminency assume the whole Work unto it self, that he ever did before,
or might do afterward. For doubtless that very Light, Life and Power, which
dwelt in that Flesh^y Tabernacle, eminently was the Convincer, Condemner,
Savior and Redeemer; yet not only as confined to that Body, but as revealed in
the Hearts of Men, as he was in Paul, who not consulting with Flesh and Blood
against the Lord of Glory willingly receive him in, to bind the strong Man,
spoil his Goods, and cast him out, that He might Reign. And that the Divine
Life, Light, Spirit, Nature of Principle, which resided in that Body was the
efficient Cause of Salvation, observe the Title that is given from the great
Work he was to do, namely, To save his People from their Sins; there is not one
Word of Wrath, but consequentially: Therefore, since that Sin is in the Heart
and Conscience of Mankind, nothing but a Divine Light, Spirit or Power can
reach Immaculation into those inward Parts; and consequently that must be the
Redeemer and Savior. But indeed, those who have a Mind to Naturalize that
strange Figure into the Language of the Holy Truth; I mean, to understand that
to be saved, is to be saved from Wrath, and not from Sin (whose assured Wages
is Wrath) may have some Interest, though no Reason for their implacable Enmity
against an Inherent Holiness.

But I farther confess, that his Righteous Life, with respect to its Appearance
in that Body, was grieved by Sin, and that the Weight of the Iniquity of the
whole World, with the Concernment of its Eternal Well-being, lay hard upon him,
nor was his Manhood Insensible of it: Under the Load of this did He travel, he
alone trod the Wine Press; that is, All others were then Insensible of that
Eternal Wrath, which would be the Portion of Impenitent Persons, as well as
that it was his great Care, and deep Travel, that the Holy, yet Oppressed Seed
might arise over the Pressures of Iniquity in the Hearts of Men, to bruise the
Serpent's Head in all; And as outwardly he gave his outward Life for the World,
so he might inwardly shed abroad in their Souls the Blood of God, that is, The
Holy Purifying Life and Virtue, which is in him as the Word-God, and as which,
he is the Life of the World.

This was it which gave that visible Part the Understanding it had, which
fitted it for so great an Embassy, by whose Power alone it Fasted, Prayed,
Preached, Cast-out Devils, Wrought Miracles, Lived that most Unblemisht Life,
Patiently Suffered Death, was Raised for an Holy Confirmation, maugre all the
Military Opposition of the Jews; and this it was which accompanied the Ministry
of his Followers, rendering it Efficacious to Conviction and Conversion: So that
the Invisible, Spiritual and Divine Life, Principle or Nature, was the Root and
Fountain of all which is sometimes asscribed in Scripture to the Body, by that
Common Figure, or Way of Speaking amongst Men, the Thing containing, which was
the Body for the Thing contained, which was the Eternal Power, Wisdom, Life,
etc. Not that we would irreverently rob the Holy Body of whatsoever
Acknowledgement is justly due, nor yet separate that God joined; though I
confess with holy Fear, I dare not attribute to an External prepared Being,
which is the Natural, Proper and Only Work of the Divine Light and Life to
operate and effect: But certainly, if some Men in Scripture are entitled
Saviors because of the Contribution of their Trials, Travels and Labors
toward the Salvation of Mankind, of much more Right is that Honor ascribable
to him who had the Spirit without Measure; For I do freely acknowledge it to
have been in some sense a Co-worker and Partner with the Divine Life in many of
its Trials, Weights, Sufferings and Travels for Mankind: Yet as it was the
Divine Power in them that made them serviceable in that great Work, so was it
the Divine Power in him which made that what it was, and therefore ought we
chiefly to appropriate the Salvation to Christ, as the WordGod, and to the Holy
Manhood not any otherwise then Instrumentally, or by the same Divine Power in
and through it; I mean, as it was a Chosen Instrument or Vessel, in and by
which God declared the Blessed Glad-Tidings of Love, and his Message of
Reconciliation to the World, in which he gave the most Heavenly Example of
Purity, and through whose whole Life, Doctrine and Death did shine forth the
clearest Evidences of Truth, Goodness, Mercy, Patience, deep Travel for the
World, Self-denial, Holiness and Triumphant Matyrdom. No Wonder then, if he be
called a Savior, who not only came on an Embassy of Salvation, and when come,
did draw many after him, who were struck with the Authority of his Sayings,
when he allowed for a time to have their Eyes and Hearts upon him, as in that
State present with them; But afterward, he let his Disciples know, of how much
Benefit it would be to them, that he should leave them; How? Forever: In all
Capacities? No; but as with respect to his outward Appearance, that being
scattered in that Day to their own Measure of Light, Pon er and Life, they
might know him NO MORE AFTER THE FLESH, but witness him come into their Hearts
a Comforter, who could not leave his true-hearted Disciples comfortless. He
that is with you shall be in you. Joh. 14. 17.


To be brief, that I may yet again express our reverent Sense of Christ's
Manifestation, so far as relates to that Holy Thing that should be born of
Mary; take these few particulars in my next Chapter.

CHAP. XXI.
A Confession in particular to Christ's Redemption, Remission, Justification
and Salvation.

I. WE do confess, that though the Eternal Power, Life and Light which
inhabited that Holy Person, which was born at Nazareth, was and is chiefly and
eminently the Savior (for there Hos. 13. 4.
is no Savior besides me says God yet that it was Instrumentally a Savior,
as prepared and chose^ o^ the Work which Christ had then to do i^ it, which was
actually to the Salvation of some, and intentionally of the whole World then,
and in Ages to come; suitable to that Scripture, Lo, in the Volumn of the Book
it is written, I come to do thy Will (O God) Hebr. 10.
a Body have thou prepared me, etc.

II. That as there was a Necessity that one should dye for the People, so
whoever then or since believed in Him, had and have a Seal or Confirmation of
the Remission of their Sins in his Blood, and that Blood, alluding to the
Custom or the Jewish Sacrifices, shall be an utter Blotting out of former
iniquates, carrying them as into a Land of Forgetfulness. This grand Assurance
of Remission (from the Wrath due upon the Score or former Offenses) do all
receive in the Ratifying Blood of Christ, who Repenting of their Sins, believe
and obey the Holy Light with which he has Illuminated them. For Paul's being
turned from Darkness to the Light in his Heart, was one with his believing in
the Son of God revealed in his Heart.

III. This more glorious Appearance ended that less glorious Service of the
Jews; the Figures being completed, the Shadows they fell. He in that Body
preached, and lived beyond those Beggarly Elements; He drew Religion more
Inward, even into the Secret of the Heart, and made it to consist in an higher
State o^ Righteousness, called Evangelical, and at once became both the Auth^ro
(...) Heavenly Dispensation, and therein an Example to all, as well Jews and
Gentiles; sealing such a Common and General Religion to both with his Blood, as
would forever end the Difference and slay the Enmity, that they might be all
one in Christ. Thus did he end the Jews External Services, and overturn the
Gentiles Idolatries by his one most pure and Spiritual Offering and Worship.

IV. It plainly preaches thus much to us, That as Him, whose Body the Jews
outwardly slew, we by Wicked Works have crucified in the Streets of Sodom and
Egypt, spiritually so called, our polluted Hearts and Consciences. So, unless
we come to know the Benefit of the Inward Life, answering to, and expressed by
that Outward Life he gave for the World, it will avail little; For so it is,
and very Marvelous in our Eyes, that the Life of the Crucified can only save
those who may well be reputed the Crucifiers. O Mystery! And because those that
did not actually slay him Outwardly, have slain him Inwardly, therefore must
every such one really know that Life Inwardly raised and shed abroad for
Sanctification and Redemption. O how great was his Love! Truly larger then
Man's Cruelty; who whilst he dyed by Wicked Men, he would Dye for them; and
when dead, they could not hinder him from Rising to do them good, who had done
their worst for his Destruction, thereby showing Mercy to those, who showed
they had no Mercy for themselves. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! how often would I
have gathered thee, and thou would not, etc?

V. That Expression of his is greatly worth our Notice, I lay down my Life for
the World. All he did was for the Good of the World, and particularly the
Laying down of his Life, that he might both express his Love and our Duty. Had
he not desired Man's Salvation, and for that purpose prepared a Body, in which
to visit him, and by his daily Labors among Men to further their Eternal
Happiness the Jew had never been able to put him to Death: But being come, and
when come, so hardly used, herein did he recommend his great Love to us, that
besides the Inward Weights of Sin he bore with his deep Concernment for Man's
Eternal Well-being, he cheerfully offered up his Bodily Life, to recommend and
ratify his Love for the Remission of Sin, and give us an Holy Example to
follow his Steps. But these Words will bear another Sease too, as John 6. 51,
52. 53, 54, 62, 63.
do those he spoak to the Jews, Unless ye eat my Flesh, and drink my Blood, you
have no Life in you: Where we may plainly see, that as the Jews vainly and
carnally fancyed, he meant his Outward Body only, to which they opposed the
Impossibility of the thing; so Christ declares their Mistake of his Meaning to
his Disciples, in these few, but deep Words, The Flesh profits nothing: it is
the Spirit that quickens. So that the Words are true, and weighty in both
Senses.

VI. And we further acknowledge, that in that Holy Body the Divine Principle of
Light and Life did discover the Depth of Satan's Darkness, encounter Hell,
Death and the Grave, every Temptation it was possible for the Serpent, with all
his Power, and Subtilty to beset him with (in which Sense he was made like unto
us in all things, Sin excepted, that he might be sensible of our Infirmities)
the Divine Life traveled and supported under all, administering Strength to the
outward Man, that it might answer the End of its Appointment, and in the End
utterly defeated, and forever overcame the Power of the Tempter, bruising the
Serpents Head in general, as Prince of Darkness, and God of the World, and in a
plain Combat giving him that Foyl, which in good measure shook his Foundation,
divided his Kingdom, chased away his Lying Oracles, and proved a very Fatal
Blow to his whole Empire: Which holy Conquest obtained by Sweat of Blood, and
deep'st Agonies with Holy Patience, may not unfitly be compared to that of some
Worldly Prince maintaining a Righteous Cause against an Usurper of his
Territories, whom he puts to rout in open Fields; by which I understand the
General Conquest; yet many Towns, and Cities and Cittadels remaining strongly
guarnison'd (by which I understand, particular Men and Women enslaved by Sin)
they are not thereby overcome, though the Approach be easier to them, and they
be truly more endangered then before.

The One Seed, who is Christ, who is God over all, blessed forever, having
given that Proof of his Everlasting Arm, that it has brought a general
Salvation by a plain Overthrow of the God of this World, the Enemy of his
Glory, and thereby weakened his Power in himself (which is the single Battle
fought in Garments rould in Blood, between the two Seeds, Spirits, Natures and
Powers; God and Mammon; Christ and Belial) had many Towns, Cities and Cittadels
to vanquish, who lay strongly guarnison'd by this God of the World; which
Places, as I said, represent the Souls of particular Men and Women inbondaged
by him. So that though their Hearts were, or are more accessible by that
general Victory over the very Spirit of Darkness it self, and Light may be more
clear d and broken up; yet unless those particular Places or Persons are
besieged and taken, their Goods spoiled, and Houses sacked of all the strange
Gods, and so redeemed from under the Yoke of that Pharaonian Task-Master,
reclaimed, renewed, sanctified and naturalized by way of an Holy Subjection to
him, who is Lord from Heaven, the Right Heir of all things, to receive his
Mark, and bear his Image; Those Places or Persons must needs have yet been, and
be Subjects of the Prince of Darkness, the God of this World, who reigns and
rules in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience.

To conclude; We, though this General Victory was obtained, and holy
Privileges therewith, and that the Holy Body was not Instrumentally without a
Share thereof; yet that both the efficient or chiefest Cause was the Divine
Light and Life, that so clearly discriminated and deeply wounded this Mystery
of Iniquity, and that none can be thereby benefited, but as they come to
experience that Holy Seed of Life, and Mighty Arm of Power revealed to effect
the same Salvation in each Particular Conscience, which none can fail of, who
receive it first as a Light, that manifests and reproves every Evil Way, and
continues to walk up to all its holy Leadings.

VII. But there is yet a further Benefit that accrueth by the Blood of Christ,
viz. That Christ is a Propitiation and Redemption to such as have Faith in it;
For though I still place the Stres^ of particular Benefit upon the Light, Life,
and Spirit revealed, witnessed in every Particular; yet in that general
Appearance there was a general Benefit justly to be attributed unto the Blood
of that very Body of Christ, to wit, that it did propitiate: For however it
might draw Stupendous Judgments upon the Heads of those who were Authors of
that dismal Tragedy, and dyed Impenitent; yet doubtless it thus far turned to
very great Account, in that it was a most precious Offering in the Sight of the
Lord, and drew God's Love the more eminently unto Mankind, at least such as
should believe in his Name, as his solemn Prayer to his Father at his leaving
the World, given us by his beloved Disciple, does plainly witness.

For how can it otherwise be, but that it should render God most propitious to
all such, as believe in Christ the Light of the World, when it was but a
letti^g of his only begotten Son's Sufferings turn to their account, that
should ever believe in him. Yet doubtless greatly did it influence to some
singular Tenderness, and peculiar l^egard unto all such, who should believe in
his Name among other of his weighty Performances, for the sake of that last and
greatest of all his External Acts, the resisting unto Blood for the Spiritual
Good of the World, thereby offering up his Li^e upon the Cross through the
Power of the Eternal Spirit, that Remission of Sin, God's Bounty to the World,
might be preached in his Name, and in his very Blood too, as that, which was the
most ratifying of all his Bodily Sufferings. And indeed, therefore might it
seem meet to the Holy Ghost, that Redemption, Propitiation and Remission should
be declared, and held forth in the Blood of Christ unto all, that have right
Faith therein, as says the Apostle to the Romans; Whom God Romans 3. 25.
has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood: and Ephesians, 1.
7.
to the Ephesians; In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, the
Forgiveness of Sins, etc. because it implies a firm Belief, that Christ was
come in the Flesh, and that none could then have him as their Propitiation or
Redemption, who withstood the Acknowledgement of, and Belief in his Vi^ible
Appearance, which John tells us, some denied and withstood. 2. That he came in
order to the Remission, Redemption and Salvation of the World. 3. That his so
Dying was both an evident Token of his Love, and strong Argument of
Confirmation of his Message and Work. 4. That it might the better end the Jews
Services, by an Allusion to the Way of their Temporary and Shadowy Sacrifices,
as the whole Epistle to the Hebrews shows. 5. And that by bringing (through
the holy Light in the Partic^lar) i^to the Acknowledgment of, and Belief in the
Blood, which was ratifying of that whole Appearance, Men might be brought unto
the knowing Christ after a more Inward and Spiritual Manner, suitable to
Christ's own Words, It is the Spirit that quickens; and Hebr. 9. 14.
the Apostle avers, that the Lord from Heaven is that quickening Spirit; by
which Eternal Spirit he offered up himself without Spot. Nor can any reasonably
suppose, that when Christ so spoak to his Disciples explanatorily of what he
had obscurely and in Parables said to the Jews, that he meant not something
more hidden and Divine then what they and the Jews saw; Yet that which hindered
those Jews from the Knowledge or Benefit thereof, was their Stumbling at him
without a Confession, unto whom they co^ld never come into the Beholding or
Experiencing of his Divine Life in them.

To conclude, That Body was the Divine Life's, a Body have thou prepared me;
therefore all that was done by that Body toward the Redemption of Mankind,
was eminently the Divine Life's; yet because many times Actions are denominated
from, or appropriated to the Instrument as the next Cause, though not the
Efficient, or most Eminent Cause; therefore the Scripture speaks forth (as
indeed is the Propriety of both the Hebrew and Greek Tongues ( Parabol cally,
Hyberbolically, Metaphorically) the inward Substance and hidden Life of things,
by things more Exterior and Obvious to the Sense, to the End that such
Mysteries might be the better accommodated to Vulgar Capacities. Consider what
I say with this Qualification, that ultimately and chiefly, not wholly and
exclusively the Divine Life in that Body was the Redeemer: For the Sufferings
of that Holy Body of Jesus had an engaging and procuring Virtue in them, though
the Divine Life was that Fountain, from whence originally it came. And as the
Life declared and preached forth it self through that Holy Body; so who did
then come to the Benefit procured by the Divine Life, could only do it through
an Hearty Confession to it, as appearing in that Body; and that from a Sense
first begotten by a Measure of the same in themselves.

This is the main Import of those Places: Whom God Romans 3, 25.
has set forth to be a Propitiation, and in whom we have Redemption through
Faith in his Blood. For who is this H E, whom God has set forth, and in whom
is Redemption? Certainly the same H E, that was before Abraham, the Rock of the
Fathers, that cried, Lo, I come to do thy Will (O God) a Body have thou
prepared me: which was long before Hebr. 10. 5, 7.
the Body was conceived and born. But may some say, How is it then his Blood?
Why, just as the Body is his Body.

Those who had Faith in that Blood believed his Visible Appearance, inasmuch as
they acknowledged that great Seal and Ratification of it, to wit, the Shedding
of the Blood of His Body, who came to save the World, and who alone is the
Propitiation, Redemption and Salvation of all who had right Faith in that
Appearance and Message so confirmed, and therefore so often expressed by it, as
inclusive of all his whole Life and Sufferings beside. And this is my Reason
for it, that it was impossible for any Man in that Day to confess to, and
believe in that Divine Light and Life, which appeared in that prepared Body,
but from the Inward Discoveries and Operations of that Light, with which Christ
the Word-God who took Flesh, had enlightened him.

However, though the Apostles might then so express themselves, thereby to
assert and recommend unto the Faith of all that most Heavenly Manifestation,
and the great Love of Christ therein, as the Visitation of the Heavenly Life
through that prepared Body, and the deep Sufferings of both for the World,
being True and Spiritual Witnesses thereof; yet it was never intended, that any
should barely rest in that, but press after the Knowledge of Christ by Faith in
something farther, and beyond that Body, in which he appeared, not excluding
our Belief in that too: They who knew Christ after the Flesh, were to press
after some more Spiritual Discovery of Him; and who almost doted on his outward
Manifestation, it was expedient, that they should be weaned from it, to the End
his more interior, and indeed beneficial Revelation of himfelf might be
witnessed.

Faith in his Blood was requisite, that they might confess him, whose Body and
Blood it was to be Christ, who is God over all, blessed for ever; The great
Question with the Jews, Whether God was truly manifested in that Body of Flesh
which they saw? So that the Stress lies in Confessing to the Divinity come in
the Flesh; otherwise they would have rejected not only the most signal
Suffering of the whole Manifestation; but consequently that It self. To
conclude, we confess, HE who then appeared, was and is the Propitiation, etc.
and in Him was Redemption obtained by all those, who had such true Faith in his
Blood: But still it is to be understood, that there must be a Witnessing of a
measure of the same Light, Spirit and Power to appear for Redemption in each
particular.

VIII. That Justification came by Faith in his Blood, is clear in a Sense; for
by the Law could no Flesh be justified: That is, the Law being added because of
Transgression, certainly the Transgressor could not be justified, whilst such,
by that Law which condemned him for being such. Which puts me upon
Distinguishing betwixt Justification, as it is sometimes taken, viz. for
Remission, Pardon or Forgiveness of Sin past upon Repentance; and that
Justification, which implies an Acceptance with, and an Access to God, as a
Keeper of the Law of the Spirit of Life, which is to be made Inherently Just.

In the first Sense, Since all have sinned, no Man can be justified by the Law
he has transgressed: Therefore that great Favor and Mercy of Remission, Pardon
and Forgiveness was only then generally preached in the Name of Jesus, that such
as believed in his Message should obtain. Thus by the Works of the Law shall no
Flesh be justified; because, all the Righteousness Man is capable of, ca^ot
make Satisfaction for any Unrighteousness he has committed; since what he daily
does is but what he daily ows. But still such as keep the Law, are justified:
for that a Man should be condemned both for Transgressing and Keeping the Law
too, would be very hard. What shall we say then, but that Justification in the
first Sense, since Adam's Day to this, has been God's Free Love upon
Repentance; and above all, that by Christ's visible Appearance, and in his Name
was Remission, Pardon, or Forgiveness preached or held forth to the whole World,
upon their believing therein, more eminently, then ever,

But in the last Sense, No Man can be justified, but as he is made Just, and is
found actually Doing of the Will of God; That justifies, that is it gives
Acceptance with, and Access to God: In this Sense it was, that the Apostle
said, Such as are the DOERS of the Law shall be justified; and not from the
Guilt of what they formerly did against it, by then keeping it; for that is the
free Love of God alone, upon the Repentance of the Creature, (which has been
in all former Ages, but never so eminently held forth to the World, as by the
Coming of Jesus Christ in the Flesh.)

So that thus far we can approach the Honester Sort of Professors of Religion,
or rather, we never were at a Distance from them, viz. That Men may be
reconciled, and in a Sense justified, while Sin may not be totally destroyed:
That is, God upon their Repenting of past Sins, whilst not then clearly purged
from the Ground of Evil, may, and we believe, does remit, pardon or forgive
former Offenses, and is thus far reconciled; that is, h^ cease to be Wrath,
or at a Distance from them, as whilst they went on in a State of Disobedience
to the Light. Yet forever we affirm, that no Man or Woman can be ^ade a Child
of God, but as the New Birth, Regenerat^, and the i^vine and Heavenly Image
comes to be witnessed through the putting off the Old Man and his Deeds, and
being baptized by the Holy Ghost and Fire into the one Holy Body, of which
Christ, the ^maculate Lamb of God, is Head and Lord. So that all those who
apply to themselves, or others the ^romises due to this State, unto that
beforementioned, heal themselves or other deceitfuly; and God will judge for
those things. So let all People consider with Sobriety and Moderation, i^ the
things we a^ert are not most agreeable with Scripture, and that Light of Truth,
which is in their own Consciences, unto which we most of all desire to be made
mani^est.

IX. Nor is this all the Good, the Life and Sufferings of that Blessed Manhood
brought unto the World; For, having been enabled so effectually to perform the
Will of God Living, an^ so patiently suffered the Will of Wicked Men Dying,
therein freely offering up his ^ost Innocent Life for the World; He certainly
obtained exceeat^g great and precious Gifts, which, as every Man comes to
believe in the ^ight, wherewith Christ (...) has enlightened him, and to be
lead by it, he shall assuredly f^el a particular Benefit to him accruing from
that general one procured by him, who so laid down his Life for the World.

In short, As we cannot but acknowledge him a Savior in That very
Manifestation, or Coming in that prepared Bo^y, who appeared so extraordinarily
to visit the World with h^s marvelous Light and Truth, to turn their Minds from
Error and Darkness, and actually converted and reclaimed many, and endued his
Followers with his own Heavenly Light, Life and Power, whereby to supply his
exterior Absence with a most lively, piercing, and effectual Ministry for the
completing the rest from Generation to Generation; so must we needs attribute
this chiefly to the Divine Light, Life and Power, that through the Manhood. of
both Lord and Servants, put forth and revealed It self to the Salvation of the
World.

Nor are we yet, as has been often hinted (to speak strictly) to asscribe the
particular Salvation of every Man's Soul, to the Appearance of that same Light
in Nature, in either Lord or Servant, albeit many were reached into their very
Hearts and Consciences at that time, and great and mighty things were generally
procured, and Christ in that Manifestation became the Author of Salvation unto
many; but rather, as he is the Light of Men Individually, both then did, and
now does appear in the Hearts and Consciences of Men, unto the awakening of
whom, and turning their Minds from that Darkness of Tradition, Formality and
Sin, which had and does overcast the Soul, unto that blessed Light in the
particular, that thereby (as to them) suffered, and does yet suffer so great
and tedious an Ecclips; ^say, this is the Efficient of Salvation, and all other
Exterior Visitations, Ministries or Assistants, though from the same Light,
are in respect of the Light in every single Man or Woman but Instrume^al: In
this Sense then Man is only a Savior Instrumen^ly, but Christ both, whether
with reference to his own Bodily Appearance, or in the Ministry of his
Servants, he is the most excellent Instrument; and the only Efficient Cause of
Salvation, as revealed and obeyed in the Consciences of Men. So that it is not
the Question, Whether do the Quakers deny any Benefit to redound by Christ s
Bodily Sufferings^ but Whether the Professors allow and acknowledge the Main of
the Work to the Divine Life and Light?

In short, He was the General Savior in that eminent Appearance at Jerusalem,
in which he did so many great and good things for Mankind; and a Particular
Savior, as we find him in our Hearts an holy Light showing Sin, reproving for,
and converting from it into the Holy Nature of the Light, to be Flesh of his
Flesh, and Bone of his Bone.

Thus have I declared, according to my Understanding grounded on Experience,
and that Illumination God has given me, in Moderation, the very Truth, Weight
and Tendency of the Outward Coming of Christ, and his deep Sufferings by and
for the World; And also the Nature of his Inward Coming into the Souls of Men
to expel the Darkness that lodges there; In both which respects, I confess him
to be the Savior of the World in general, and the Savior of each Man in
particular: But that the Benefit accruing to Men from Him as the general
Savior, is known and received only, where he is witnessed a particular
Savior, and that I will abide by; For Christ in Man, becoming the Hope of
Glory, and Man's being changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even
as by the Spirit 2 Cor. 3. 18.
of the Lord, is the Salvation and Perfection of every True Christian.

CHAP. XXII.
That Christ is the Light, or the Light is Christ. proved from Scripture, and
so concluded; notwithstanding two Objections, which are fully answered.

THat which remains to complete our Scriptural Discourse of the Light, is to
pronounce it that which H. H. J. Faldo, Tho. Hicks, and a Multitude of other
Barkers at it, despise to call it, and don't a little undervalue both us and It
because we do; I mean CHRIST: Not that the Manifestation of Light in every
Conscience is the Entire Christ, but that Christ, the Word-God, is that Light
of Righteousness, which inlightens all Men; for which the Scripture is most
express in that so well known (but little believed) Passage delivered to us by
that beloved ^isciple, who best knew what his Lord was, and stood in no need of
any of their Information, how to denominate, or rightly character him; although
they and others implicitly accuse him of Weakness, Obscurity, nay Error, if
not Blasphemy too; who make it all this (and if it were possible more) in a
poor Quaker, for only Believing on pure Gonviction, this one weighty Passage,
THAT WAS THE TRUE LIGHT WHICH INLIGHTENS Joh. 1. 9.
ALL MANKIND COMING INTO THE WORLD.

I have so thoroughly handled this Matter in a late Book, entitled the Spirit
of Truth Vindicated, that I need the less to enlarge at this time, to which I
refer the Reader for Satisfaction concerning some Objections raised against the
place. However, I will briefly consider it here that our Believing Christ to be
an Universal and Sufficient Light, and that to be Christ, may stand in the View
of the World, upon so good Foundation, as the Testimony of that Divine and
well-beloved Apostle.

Two things are commonly urged against our Understanding, of the first Nine
Verses of John, as they respect the Light.

1. Some say, that the Light here spoken of, is not a Super natural, and
consequently no Saving Light, but the Light of common Reason; Others call it of
Nature, decayed by the Fall, and what Conviction arises thence is only the
Imperfect Remains of that Natural Light, which these Men, who thus speak, grant
all to have, as well before as after Christ's coming in the Flesh.

2. Others say, that this is indeed an Universal and Saving Light, but they
restrain it to that Visible Appearance, and make the ALL to be, all those that
will believe; and the World to be that New Spiritual World Christ came to
create by Saving Knowledge, which Believers come into.

I will briefly answer both, and therein as well all the pretended
Anti-Socinians (viz) J. Owen, R. Baxter, T. Danson, J. Clapham, J. Bunnion, S.
Eaton, J. Grig, T. Imner. T. Hicks, and abundance more who hold the former; as
those who are reputed Socinians, who hold the latter.

It is agreed by the First, in the beginning of this Chapter, that Christ's
Eternal Divinity is declared by the Evangelist, since some of them, and
particularly J. Owen tells us out of Eusebius, that it was written on that very
Occasion; one Cerinthus then denying any such thing.

This Word which was with God, and was and is God: Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 9.
This God, the same Person tells us in his first Epistle, is Light; By Him all
things were made, among the rest Mankind. He then tells us that This Word had
Life, and from thence descends to inform us, what the Word was with respect to
Man; In Him, the Word was Life, and the Life the Light of Men; as such, He was
that True Light, and not John, who only came to bear Witness of that True
Light, which inlightens all Mankind coming into the World.

That this Light is Divine, and no otherwise Natural, then as it is Christ's
Nature, or Natural to the Word, I shall thus prove.

Man is here supposed to be before he was enlightened, therefore what ever was
proper, and connatural to Man, as Man, he had before he was enlightened, that
is, he had a reasonable Soul, endued with intelligent Faculties, and that
clothed with a Body, fitted with sensible Organs; The Latter differed him from
Inanimate, the Former from Irrational Creatures. But still the Light, with
which this Soul is enlightened, in reference to God, and things appertaining to
its Eternal Well being, belongs not to Man, as Man: Surely then, this Light
must be superadded, that is, over and above Man's Composition, as a mere
Understanding Creature; and consequently, it must descend from above, and in
this Sense be Supernatural. Thus the Word created all things, and among them
made Man, enlightened Man with a Supernatural Light.

That this Light was not only over and above Man's Nature, but is also of a
Divine and Saving, One in it self, (...) prove from its being the Life of the
Word; for if the Life of the Word be the Light of Men, here is no such thing as
descending to an Effect, to prove the Light Divine, a that the Life should
bring forth a Light, and therefore this Light is Divine, because the Life of
the Word that Product it is so: I say, without going to an Effect for a Proof
of the Light's Divinity, I thus Undeniably prove it from the Life it self. for
that very Divine LIFE is the LIGHT, not that it creates or brings forth a
Light, as a Cause does an Effect, but is that very Light it self; so that
unless they will make that Life Natural (I mean as they do) Created (though
very improperly; for a Divine Life is Natural to Christ) they cannot conclude
the Light which is not the Product, but that very same Life it felf, to be a
mere Natural Light.

If then the very LIFE of the Word, be the LIGHT of Men, unless the LIFE of the
Word be NATURAL, the LIGHT of Men must be SUPERNATURAL, DIVINE and INFINITE, as
it becomes the LIFE of the WORD (which is GOD) to be.

And this roundly checks the dull Ignorance, or base Malice See Dial. page 3. 4.
of Tho. Hicks, who either could not, or would not understand G. Whitehead,
when he said The Light must needs be Divine, because the Life from whence it
came is so, and the Effect is always of the same Nature with the Cause, in any
other sense then this, That because, says Tho. Hicks, God is the Cause of
Beasts and Trees, by G. W's Argument, therefore they are God; For says he, G.
W. asserts, that such as is the Cause such must the Effect be: Which strange
Construction of G. W's Words, bewrayes either great Stupidity or Disingenuity.
I would ask that very Angry Man; Is there no Effect of Power, besides that of
Nature? Did the Father of T. Hicks get a B^ast or a Man when he begat him?
Surely, unless he has abandon^d all Understanding, methinks, ^e that makes in
his Book ^o notable a ^istinction betwixt Reason and Railing, by using so
little of the one, and so much of the other, should put one betwixt a Natural
and Potential Effect; I mean such an Effect as proceeds from Nature, and one
that comes from mere Power: The Divine Life can naturally produce nothing that
is not as Divine as it self; b^t its Power has made all that is not o^ itself,
as well Inanimate as Animate Beings. B^t enough of this at this time, and till
this be proved not enough by those that are bet^, as willing then proving it so.

The Life of the Word being then the Light of Men, and that without any
Diss^nt, and consequently (...); I have no need to prove it SAVING, till that
^able Man has singled out Saving from ^ivine which is not so absurd, but for
all his great Skill in Divinity, he may venture at, and in my Judgment, such an
Enterprise shall be sufficient to renown the Light, and ba^ him in the thoughts
o^ all that forbid not Understanding in their Religion, without any further
Apology. However, let me briefly say, that It being a Measure of the Tru^
Light, by way o^ Excellency, ^ar transcending John (^or as such is he
preferr^d, who is the Inlighte^er) and that it was through John all should
believe i^ him; and lastly, that to these who received him as the Universal
Enlightener, or True Light, He gave Power to become the Sons of God, it (...)
(...) follow, that the Light is Saving: and indeed I have with multiplied
Arguments and Testimonies (...) made appear from Scripture and Story the
Universality and Sufficiency of that Divine Light. Such then that say, it is
decayed, because they are themselves, methinks, resemble those at Sea, who,
being under Sail, fancy the Shore moves. The Fault is in the Eye, blinded by
the God of the World, and not in that blessed Light, which shines unprofitably
upon the Blind (through their own Blindness got by Disobedience) Let them by
unfeigned Repentance be unscaled, and the Sun will give good Proof of its
Light; Darkness ought not to charge the Light, but it s^f that it sees not.
Tho. Hicks confesses All are enlightened, but denies the Sufficiency thereof:
yet refuses to be ruled by it: Let him first obey it, before he despises it,
and prove himself above it, before he throws it so far below a Christian: He
may be allowed then to blame the Light as Impotent, when he can live
Uncondemned of it, or Experience can tell us its Insufficiency to Well-Living:
It Is vain to undervalue That which charge both with Duty omitted, and Sin
committed. Happy Man were he, if leaving Prejudice, he obeyed the Light within,
it would not teach him to write Lies, Slanders and Forgeries, nor to call Men
Knave, much less to threaten them with Blows whom he scurrilously named so. But
Our Religion is to Bear and His to Abuse.

However, this stands sure, that the Life of the Word is the Light of Men, and
consequently Divine; and (to say nothing of the Absurdity of their Phraises)
there I will leave this first Sort of Men, and their fruitless Opposition.

To the Second Interpretation given, destructive of that Scope we testify the
Light to have, I return thus much.

That because the Light of Men was the Life of the Word, which Word was God, by
whom all things were created, and that all Men are mentioned in that place
controverted, which presupposes no further Qualification in order to have this
Light, then being born one of that all Men into this World; I conclude, that it
is not only a most False, but Injurious Notion, to assert the Commencement or
being o^ that Light, to be from the Coming of Christ in the Flesh.

Besides, since this relates to the whole Man, which Word begins with Adam, and
ends with the last of Man's Race, I cannot conceive how that Exposition can be
valid; for then John would have been before Christ, instead of See Origin,
Chrysostom, Greg Erasm Drus. Zeger. Came. Grot. B. Sand. Dr. Ham.
Christ's being before Abraham; whereas, therefore is John denied to be that
Light, because that true Light by Way of Excellency was the Enlightener of all
Men, yea, of John himself, and therefore called that true Light, that is, the
Fountain of all Light, Light it self, from whom all derives, but he derives
from none.

And to say nothing at this time of the miserable Estate those of Mankind must
labor under antecedently to Christ's Coming in the Flesh, let it be
considered, that these first Nine Verses in John, relate not in the least to
his Fleshly Appearance, from whence those Men would date both his Original, and
Man's Illumination, but are a continued Series of the highest Proofs of a
Divinity, that we might as well know what He was before He came, as when He did
come; and the one was an Introduction to the other. Neither is it fair for
these Men to a^egorize Christ out of his Divinity, and yet deny us any Allegory
to prove it. If they deny Meanings elsewhere, let them do so here; It unbecomes
Men that have their Wits, to rack them, to prop mere Fancy.

Further let me add, that as He who then came into the John (...).
World, was the same that created that World, into which he came, and therefore
Previous, or before such Coming ^o neither can it hold that the World, into
wa^ch M^ comes, is the New Creation, since it is not said, who believe, which
is usually joined to things of that importance ( believe and be saved, etc.)
Nor can such as don't believe, be totally excluded from being lighted, (...)
the Wicked could not Rebel against it, if they had (...); (...) (...) Evil
Actions be Reproved without it: So that all such (...) is foreign, both from
Scripture, Reason, and indeed Probability also.

We shall conclude then, that Christ, the Word-God, is the Light of the World,
that all are enlightened by Him, the Eternal Sun of Righteousness; therefore
the Light of Men is Christ: For to Him, that is, Christ, or True Light, John
testified, who gives Wicked Men to see their Unrighteousness, and who leads
Good Men on in the Way of Holiness, which, persevered in, brings unquestionably
to Eternal Happiness: and without which all Imputation of general Acts of
Righteousness by another, will avail nothing in the great and terrible Day of
God's Inquest: when J. Faldo, J. Bunion, J. Grig, and that malicious T. Hicks,
with the rest of their Omnious Fraternity in Notion, shall be judged, not by
the Deeds any other has done for them (wholly without them) but according to
the Deeds done in their own Mortal Bodies.

This Subject I shall conclude, with a few Reasons for the Universality and
Sufficiency of the Light within, that we may not only be seen to have
Scripture, and other Authorities, but Reason, which is more universal, of our
side too.

CHAP XXIII
The Universality of the Light proved by Reason.

THat there is an Universal Light, the Universality of all Ages have
plentifully restified unto. There is nothing more constant now that can plead
either such Antiquity, or general Consent: Not a Nation in the World ever knew
an Age, in which it was destitute of such a Discovery of Internal Light, as
gave to (...) Evil from Good, That Virtue was ever most commendable, and Vics
above all things pernicious and damnable; This is matter of Fact, which I have
already proved, and the most Barbarous of Nations now inhabited, are a clear
Demonstration of what I say: conclude therefore, that since both Wicked and
Good in all Ages have acknowledged to Well and ill Doing, and that this depends
upon the Discovery of that Divine Light which manifests every Reproveable
Action; that none of Mankind are exempted from this Illumination.

But again, it is highly consistent with the Goodness of God, and Order of his
Creation; since it seems unreasonable, that Men should have the Benefit of a
Natural Sun which shines on the Just and Unjust, by which to direct their
Steps, and securely transact all corporal Affairs; and yet their Souls be le^t
destitute of a Spiritual Luminary; or Sun of Righteousness, when unto the
Salvation of a single Soul, Christ counts the World of no value. The Soul then
has Eves as well as the Body; and as Men may see, if they please, when the Sun
is in the outward Firmament, unless they on Purpose close their Eyes, so may
all rational Souls see, if they will, by their Eye of Reason, that Spiritual
Sun, which gives as true Discerning and Direction to the Mind, how to think and
desire as the Natural Sun does the Body, how to act and walk aright.

Were not this true, here would be a falling into a miserable Charging of God
with Neglect to his Creatures; For since it is to be supposed that God made
nothing but with a Design it should acknowledge a Creator, after its respective
Nature; and that Man's Duty was peculiar, namely Divine Homage and Worship,
expressed generally by a (...) correspond^nt to that Being which made him, it is
just that we believe God has endued Mankind with something that is Divine, in
order to it; since oth^, (...) (...) be destitute of what only co^ld enable him
to (...) that Duty, without which he co^ld not, please nor acknowledge God. If
then all Mankind ought to Worship, Fear, and Reverence God, Certainly all
mankind have an Ability from God so to do, or else perfect impossibilities are
expected; because (otherwise) a most impotent Creature: But it can never stand
certainly with the Rectitude or Righteousness of the Eternal God to expect that
from Man, he never gave him Power to do; or the Improvement of a Talent he
never had. In short, if we ought to think that God is to be reverenced and
worshipped, we must agree that he has (...) Mankind with a Divine Light and
Knowledge in order to that End, or say with the Man in Matthew, God is as hard
Master, an Austere Lord, he reaps where he never sowed, But I am almost of the
Mind, that the Principles and Pre^dice of some incline them rather to think
hardly of God, then favorably of the Light. How ill does it become th^se to
object an Impossibility of the Light's bearing their (...) (...), who are daily
wounding it with their Rebellions?

But they object, Some deny they have it, and others by their (...) Lives show
they are void of it. To which I say, It is not impossible for a Life of Worldly
Care, or Pleasures and ^right Debauchery, to darken and quite blind that Eye
which only sees the Light of Truth (and being kept single, preserves the Body
full of Light) but this makes no A^eration in the Light; if through Repentance
and Contrition the Scales fall off, the Light refuses not it self to the Eye
that can and will see it; the Light remains unaltered, it is Man that changes.
Would the Running Mad of some Men be a good Argument to prove Mankind
irrational? neither is it any Demonstration against the Universality of the
Light within, because some have by the Stupifyings of Sin rendered themselves
I^sensible of it.

Nor does Ill-living disprove the Light, enough improve Disobedience to it; Is
it good (...) that (...) Wicked Man will not receive good Advice, therefore he
never was well advised? And what better Reason can it be to say, Men disobey
the Light, therefore they never had it; whilst that proves they had it, at
least as a Condemner? A Man may be said to be enlightened, when he knows and
does not his Duty; but rather I confess, when he becomes embettered by such
Illumination: In the first Sense, All are illuminated, in the last, only such
as having the Light, join to it, and obey it; for they will find their
Understandings illuminated to that Degree, which the Disobedience of others
shuts them up from. In short, All have Light to Reprove, unless they have quite
put out their Eyes; but such only have it beneficially, as their Teacher and
Director who receive it (as well as have it) in the Love of it.

Since then the Consent of Mankind, the Goodness and Justice of God, and Reason
of the thing it self plead so strongly for the Universality of this Light, I
need say the less, and shall descend to consider its Sufficiency.

CHAP. XXIV.
The Sufficiency of the Light proved by Reason.

BEcause as well the Sufficiency as Universality of the Light, is struck at by
our Adversaries, it shall not, I hope, seem amiss, if I say something briefly
to it, though much of what I have said in the former is referrable to this.

That the Universal Light is also Sufficient, is a Belief so Reasonable and
Necessary, that the Opposite Opinion must needs impeach God of Want of
Rectitude. All grant, that God has made Man Rational, capable of a measurable
Knowledge of his Creator, which his bare Capacity will never give him, unless
God please to make some Discovery of himself suitable to that Created Capacity
in the Creature: Certainly then, since God desires not that the Creature should
receive a wrong Impression of him, and yet he requires Universal due Fear and
Reverence, he must needs have given some Certain and Sufficient Discovery, in
order to it, by those Lively Manifestations, and most Sensible Touches of the
Light to and upon the Soul, which cannot but be true, clear, and if minded,
efficacious; For that God should require Men to serve him, and not give them
what is sufficient, is worse then not to give at all, since Man's not Obeying
such Discoveries, is not so great an Aggravation of his Neglect, as the
Imperfection of them is, either of his Insufficiency, or Unwillingness that
made them to do otherwise. What is this but to say, God expects Homage from Men
as their Sovereign Lord, and that they live uprightly in the World, yet he has
given them no Ability, in order to do it? He pronounces such Miserable who
conform themselves not to an Holy Life, but gives no Power to avoid the Curse?
In short, though Reason tell us, he made none purposely to Destroy them, but
rather that he might be glorified in their Salvation, which he is also said to
invite Men to; yet that he designs nothing less, by leaving any, or all Mankind
under the Fa^ntings of an Impossible Success. But, as such Dismal Consequences
belong not to the Truth (what ever share such kind of Calvinistical
Predestinarians may have therein) so we are well assured, that the Light of
which we speak, has ever been Sufficient to the End for which it has been given
in every Age, both to Manifest Evil, Condemn for it, and Redeem by the Holy
Inclinings and Operation of its Power, those who are the Diligent Disciples of
it; For it seems most Unreasonable, that the Spirit of Darkness should be
sufficient, to draw into, and Destroy by Sin, and yet the Spirit of Light not
be sufficient to Redeem and Save from it. Since therefore we cannot admit of
any Insufficiency in the Light within, but we must suppose, that whilst God
would be rightly worshipped, he has too darkly discovered the Way how to do it
aright; that bis Gift is Impotent, that Man is required to do what he has no
Power to perform; and that, whilst God requires Man to serve him, he has not
so much as shown him what way he ought to do it; All which Consequences are
most Unworthy of God: We rather choose to sit down contented with this Belief,
that God, who made Man, and has given him a Soul Capable of Knowing and Serving
his Maker, has also endued him with Divine Knowledge, by a SUPERADDED LIGHT
AND POWER, and enabled him thereby, to live subservient to that Knowledge; That
God's Gift is perfect and sufficient for that Work; and that such as are led by
it, must needs be led to God, unto which, that Divine Light naturally tends,
and attracts, as that from whom it came: which is certainly a State of blessed
Immortality.

In short, accept these few Arguments Comprehensive of these two Chapters, and
indeed most of what goes before.

1. God requires no Man to do any thing, he has nog given him first to Know,
and the^ Power to Do. But God requires every Man to fear him, and work
Righteousness; Consequently, He has given every Man both a Discovery of his
Will, and Power to do it. 2. No Man ought to worship the true God Ignorantly:
But every Man is commanded to worship God; therefore, He is to do it Knowingly.
3. No Man can know God, but He must ^over it to him, and that cannot be without
Light; therefore, every Man has Light. 4. This Light must be Sufficient, or
God's Gifts are Imperfect, and answer not the end for which they were given;
But God's Gifts are perfect, and can perform what they are designed to;
therefore, since the Light is his Gift, it must be Sufficient.
The Sum is this;

Every Man ought to Fear, Worship and Obey God. No Man can do it a^ight, that
knows him not. No Man can know him, but by the Discovery he makes of himself.
No Discovery can be made without Light: Nor this Light give that Discovery if
imperfect ^r Insuffecient in Nature; Therefore, all have a Sufficient Light to
this great End and Purpose, viz. To Fear, Worship and Obey God.

CHAP. XXV.
The (...), Who He, or They are that obey the Light, etc? Considered and
Answered; being a Character of a true Quak r.

AS I took Occasion to begin this Discourse from the late Dialogue, so shall I
end so much of it as immediately concerns the Light with my Answer to Dial.
page 2.
the third Query made by T. Hicks, W^o this He, or They are that obey this
Light, and in obeying attain S^lvation'

If I should take his Question as personally directed, I mean, what Man or Men
they be, I should decline to answer; for the Controversy is not now of Person
but Principles. I rather take this to be his Meaning, What are the
Qualifications of those that obey this Light? Not what are their Names; but
what kind or manner of People are they? In short, what is it to obey the Light?

I think I have so fully expressed my self already in this Matter, that with an
(...) Adversary I might be saved the Pains of any further considering it; But
that nothing may be thought to be (...) as Unanswerable, which is so easy to be
answered, I tell him and all Men, and that not without some Knowledge
experimental of what I say, That such (...) the Light, who (...) all that it
manifests to be Evil, and inclines to perform all that it requires to be done;
For Example: When the Light shows that it is Inconsistent with a Man fearing
God, (...). (...).
to be (...), (...), Proud, Covetous, Backbiting, Envious, (...). 5.
Wrathful, Unmerciful, Revengeful, Profane, Drunken, Romans (...).
Voluptuo^, (...), which with such like are called in Scripture, the Fruits of
the Flesh, and Works of Darkness; and Persons so qualified, the Children of
Wrath, such as delight not to retain God in their Knowledge, etc. I say, when
the Light discovers these things to be Inconsistent with a Man fearing God, He,
who truly Obeyes the Light, denies and forsakes them, however Cress it be to
Flesh and Blood, and let it cost him never so dear: Though Relations do both
threaten and entreat, the World m^ck, and he be sure to become the Song of the
Drunckard, and a De^ision to his Ancient Companions, No, he dare not conform
himself any more to the Fashions of the World which pass away, and that draw
out the Mind Jam. 5. 6.
into vain and unprofitable Delights, by which the (...) in 1 John 2. 15. 16.
him had been (...); neither to gratify the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the
Flesh, and the Pride of Life, which are not of the 1. Pet. 1. 18.
Nature of his Father, who has begotten better Desires in him: He rejects the
Conversation he once had in the World, and in the Eye of its Children seems a
Man Forlorn and Distracted; he takes up the Cross, desp^ses the Shame, and
willingly drinks o^ the Cup of bitter Mockings, and yields to be baptized with
the Baptism of deep Trials Christ Jesus, his Lord, (...) of, and was baptized
with.

He is as well taught to deny the Religions, as Cares and Pleasures of the
World. Such as prosess Religion from what they have either been taught by
others, or read and gathered with their Carnal Minds in the Scriptures,
intruding into the Practices of either Prophets or Apostles as to External and
Shadowy things, not being led thereto by the same Power they had, he can have
no Fellowship with; He counts all such Faith and Worship Imagination made of
Men, or a mere lifeless Imitation; He prefers one Sight begotten from a Sense
of God's Work in the Heart beyond the longest Prayers in that State; He leaves
them all, walks as a Man alone, fearing to offer God a Sacrifice that is not of
His own Preparing; He charges all other Faiths and Worships with Insufficiency
and mere creaturely Power, which are not held and performed from an holy
Conviction and Preparation by the Angel of God, the Light of his Presence in
the Heart and Conscience; therefore goes he forth in the Strength of his God
against the Merchants of Babylon, Woes and Plagues are Rightly in his Mouth
against those Buyers and Sellers of the Souls of Men: He is Jealous for the
Name of the Lord; And therefore dares not speak Peace unto them, neither can be
put into their Mouths, but testifies against all such Ways; Freely he
received, freely he gives.

Thus is this Man Unravel'd, Unreligion'd, Unbottom'd as to his former State,
wherein he was Religious upon Letter, Form, Men's Traditions, Education, and his
own Imagination; He is as a Man quite undone, that he may be made what he
should be. Thus is he convinced of Sin and of Righteousness too; and the Joy he
once had when he girded himself and went whether he would, is now turned into
Sorrow, and his Rejoicing, into Ho^ling: He has beheld God in the Light, and
abhors himself in Dust and Ashes; Sin, that was pleasant once in the Mouth, he
finds bitter in the Belly, and that which the World esteems worthy their Care
he flies as a Man would do a Bear robbed of her Whelps; Sin is become exceeding
Sinful to him, insomuch that he cries out, who shall deliver him? He labors
greatly, and is very heavy laden: He is not willing to fly in the Winter, but
is resolved to stand the Trial; For this Man not only brings his former Deeds
to the Light, and there suffers Judgment to pass upon them, but patiently takes
part in that Judgment, who was so great an Accessory to them. Nor does his
Obedience conclude with the Sentence given against past Sins, and himself that
committed them; but most patiently endures the Hand of the Lord till his
Indignation be overpast, and till that which condemned Sin (the Fruit) has
destroyed the very Root of it, which has taken so deep hold in his Heart, and
the same Spirit of Judgment that condemned Sin, be brought forth into perfect
Victory over the very Nature and Power of Sin. This Judgment is found in the
Light, therefore do the Sons of the Night reject the Knowledge of its Ways,
and the Children of the Day joy greatly in its Appearance.

But neither is this all that makes up that Good Man, who obeys the Light; For
a complete Son of Light, is one that has conquered and expelled the Darkness?
It Is true, he was once Darkness, but now Light in the Lord, because Ephesians. 5.
he has been turned from Darkness to the Light, and 1 John 1. 5, 6.
from Satan's Power unto God, who is Light it self, and with him is his
Fellowship continually.

This is the Man who in the Way of the Light has met with the Inward
Cleansing; for having been purged by the Spirit of Judgment, and the Spirit of
Burning (otherwise called the severe Reproofs, Strokes and Terrors of the Light
in the Conscience he has ever a Watch set up in his Heart; A Thought must not
pass which has not the Watchword, but at every Appearance he cries, Stand, if
a Friend, and owned o^ the Light (who is the great Leader (given of God for
that Purpose) then he lets It pass; otherwise, he brings It to the Commander of
the Conscience, who is to sit in Judgment upon It. Thus is Christ the Light,
King, Judge and Lawgiver; And by this he grows strong, and increases with the
Increases of God: Yet he often reads the Scriptures, and that with much
Delight, greatly admiring the exceeding Love of God to former Ages, which he
himself witnesses to be true in this; and many things are opened to his
Refreshment. So is the Light the Just Man's Path, that in every Age still
shined brighter and brighter, in which the cleansing Blood of Jesus Christ is
felt to cleanse from all Sin; Thus does he bridle his Thoughts, Jam. 3. 1, 2, 3.
so that his Words and Actions offend not. Above all, he is often retired to
the Lord, loves Fellowship with him, waits for daily Bread, not in his own
Words, Strivings or Will, but emty of Thoughts, or the Peace or Comfort that is
drawn or imagined from thence, he silently waits to feel the Heavenly Substance
brought into his Soul, by the Immediate Hand of the Lord, for it is not
fetching in this Thought, or remembering the other Passage in Scripture, or
calling to Mind what has been formerly known, but every Immediate Word that
proceeds from out of the Mouth of God, that can satisfy him. In short, He that
obeyes the Light, is thereby taught to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and
to be Sober Righteous, Patient, Humble, Meek, Upright, Merciful, Forbearing,
Forgiving, Peaceable, Gentle, Self-denying, Constant, Faithful and Holy,
because the Lord his God is Holy.

Thus have I given a brief Account as well what HE is not, as what HE is that
is Obedient to the Light within, which is Christ's Appearance in the Heart,
whose Holy Blood is felt to Cleanse, Atone and Save all those who believe and
abide therein.

CHAP. VI.
The Discourse hithertoo (...) up, and concluded with an Exhortation to all
Professors of Religion, esp^cially our Opposers.

I Will sum up the whole of this Discourse into these few Heads.

I. That Salvation is to be saved from Sin first, and Wrath consequentially; He
shall save them from their Sins.

II. That Christ, the Word-God, has enlightened all Mankind, not only after his
Coming in the Flesh, but before: And that the Light has ever been Sufficient as
well as Universal to lead to God all such as have obeyed it, as by its
Properties and Effects is demonstrated.

III. That the Difference betwixt the Time of the Law and that of the Gospel,
as generally distinguished, was in Manifestation not in Nature. God might be as
much more propitiou^ and bou^ti ui to the last Ages (be it, that they were
better able (...) receive such extraordinary Discoveries, or that it wa^ the
alone good Pleasure of his Sovereign Will) as he was to the former Ages, yet
that he gave them a Sufficiency of the same Divine Light to conduct them
through the World to Eternal Blessedness.

IV. That Jews and Creeks, Heathens and Christians agree in this.

V. That still the Pre-eminence is given to Christ's Manifestation in Flesh,
both generally and particularly, that being both the Fullness of Time, and
Fullness of Discovery, which put an end to the Types and Figures and Car^al
Commandments, by showing forth an Abrogation and Consu^tion of them all, in
the Substance it self: In which State they are not needed; but in Comparison
thereof, they are (though once they were as Calenders, for weak People to read
some mystically Glory by) but Beggarly Elements.

VI. That not only in that Flesh did the Eternal Light preach forth it self the
End of these Things, by Revealing and becoming the Author of a more plain and
perfect Way (though less easy to Flesh and Blood) placing the Stress of all
upon an Eva^gelical Righteousness, whereof he became the first Mi^er, and our
most Holy Example) but he also appeared in that public Body (so peculiarly
prepared) a General Savior, by his Life, Doctrine, Miracles, Death of the
Cross and Resurrection; in and by all which he obtained a Name above every Name.

VII. That nevertheless not to the Body, but holy Light of Life therein, is
chiefly to be asscribed the Salvation; and to the Body however excellent, but
Instrumentally: for that it was the Eternal Light and Life, which gave the
Weight to all the Actions and Sufferings of the Body.

VIII. That the Benefit then procured is not witnessed by any, but as they come
to believe in Christ the Light, as he does appear in the Heart and Conscience,
to save from Sin, destroy the Works of the Devil, finish Transgression, and
bring in of his Everlasting Righteousness: Wherefore to fancy one's self
entitled to a State of Salvation, whilst in Rebellion against the Light within
( which is Christ's inward Knocking and Appearance) must needs be a Delusion
most pernicious, and destructive to the Souls of men.

IX. That upon the whole it is determined and concluded, that Christ is that
Light which shines in the Conscience.

X. That the Light is proved by Reason both Universal and Sufficient; The first
from the Consent of Mankind, the Goodness and Rectitude of God; the second from
both Experience, and that it were inconsistent with God, to give a Light to his
Creature insufficient for the Work for which he gave it.

Thus in short have I given the Heads and Results of most of the Matter
contained in the whole Discourse upon the Light; and I entreat our Adversaries,
they would seriously weigh the Whole, before they either reject it, or
endeavor to reply to it: But let them be advised to try the Virtue of the
Light, before they sentence it to have none; And in the Love of God be once
prevailed upon to consider, if something in them does not really Condemn them,
amongst other things for these brisk Attempts against it.

Oh! Why should Men covet to Know so far beyond what they do faithfully
Practice? Let them first outlive the Just and Holy Requirings of the. LIGHT,
before they put these Barbarous Affronts upon it, of a WILL IN THE WISP, A DARK
LANTHORN-LIGHT, T. Jenner. T. Tailor. J. Faldo. T. Hicks. H. Grigg. etc.
NATURAL, INSUFFICIENT, IGNIS FATUUS, THE QUAKERS IDOL, and abundance of such
like Frothy, Profane, and indeed Blasphemous Epithetes, which they wickedly
bestow upon IT, as if they were Its P^per Names; when the Scriptures they would
oppose to it, plainly tell them, that the whole Work of the Apostolical
Ministry was, To turn People from Darkness to the Light, from the Power of
Satan unto God, that they might have Remission of Sins: As much as to say,
Such as are turned to the Light, are turned to God, who is Light; and those who
abide there, both have Remission of the Punishment, and Purgation from the
Defilement of Sin.

And whatever any may think of us, we both believe, assert, and will maintain
against Men and Devils, that God is LIGHT; and that out of the Light, or void
of his Divine Illumination, no man can Know him, and consequently not Worship
him, unless they should worship an Unknown God: That such as receive this
Illumination, and rebel not against it; but improve this Heavenly Talent, they
have Fellowship with the Pure Eternal God, and experience the Blood of Jesus
Christ to cleanse the^ from all Unrighteousness.

If any think to arrive at Glory another Way, and will not be admonisht, let
them proceed; we speak what we know, and can but declare what we have felt of
the Work of God in our Hearts. The Scriptures we highly value: But we believe
not the things we often quote thence, to be true, Only because there, but for
that we are Witnesses of the same Operation, and bring in our experimental
Testimonies to confirm the Truth of theirs: and such truly honor the
Scriptures; all others are at best but empty Scribes, and Pharisaical Babblers.

So with God I leave my Labor in this Particular, desiring, that his Heavenly
Light may yet more abundantly arise upon the Dark Hearts of Mankind and awaken
them to Repentance, that since IT has so long shined in Darkness
uncomprehended, till even Darkness it self is grown so impudent as to interpret
its Inability, to see the Insufficiency of the Light, he would be pleased to
cause it to shine out of Darkness, that IT might plead the Excellency of ITS
own Divine Nature in the Consciences of Men and Women, against the daily
Scorns and base Detractions, that even great Professors of Christianity stick
not to fling upon It; so ill are they principl'd, and so un-Christianly
employed, which proves to me, how little they are Profess^rs of the True, Pure
and Undefiled Religion, what ever Place their cunning Devices may have given
them in the Hearts of Weak and Simple People. My Soul pittyeth their
Opposition, and fears the Consequence of such Resistance; and desires they
may see the very Vanity of their Endeavors against the Light, Repent of them,
and be Converted, that God may yet Heal them: which sincere Desire is my Return
for all their Hard Speeches and Ungodly Sayings against us in general, and my
self in particular.

W. Penn.

AN APPENDIX To the First Part; being a Discourse OF THE GENERAL RULE OF Faith
and Life, AND Judge of Controversy. Greatly importing all those who desire to
take Right Measures of Faith; and to Determine (at least to themselves) the
numerous Controvers^es now on foot in the World.

By the same Author.

For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but a NEW Creature: And as many as walk according to THIS Rule,
Peace be on them, and Mercy, and upon the whole Israel of God, Gal. 6. 16. But
God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all
things, yea, the deep things of God -- The Things of God knows no Man save
the Spirit of God -- He that is Spiritual judges all things, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11,
15. But ye have an Unction from the Holy One; and ye know all things, 1 John 2.
20. Printed in the Year 1673.

OF THE GENERAL RULE OF Faith and Life.
SInce there be so many Faiths in the World, and perplexed Controversies about
them; and that it greatly behooves every man (if to Contend for, then first) to
Know the True Faith that overcomes the World, It may not be unnecessary to say
something of the General Rule of Faith and Life, and Judge of Controversy, at
this time. And indeed I am pressed to it from this weighty Consideration, that
Men perish for Want of it, and can no more arrive at Truth without it, then the
distressed Mariner can gain his Port who sails without either Star or Compass.

I shall begin with an Explanation of the Terms, Rule, and Faith, of which we
shall first treat, that we may as well express what we intend by the one, as
what we mean by the other, which will be a proper Introduction to the whole
Discourse.

By General Rule, etc. we understand, that Constant Measure or Standard by
which Men have been in all Ages enabled to Judge of the Truth or Error of
Doctrines, and the Good or Evil of Thoughts, Words and Actions.

By Faith we understand an Assent of the Mind in such manner to the Discoveries
made of God thereto, as to resign up to God, and have Dependence upon him, as
the Great Creator and Savior of his People, which is inseparable from good
Works.

That Men in all Ages have had a Belief of God, and some Knowledge of him
(though not upon equal Discovery) must be granted from that account that all
Story gives us of Mankind in matters of Religion; several have fully performed
this: Ofold, Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Augustine, and others; of
later times, Du Plessy, Grotius, Amiraldus, L. Herbert, with many more: And
indeed the relics we have of the most ancient Historians and Authors, are a
Demonstration in the Point. Now the Scripture tells us, that no Man knows the
Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him: And Mat. 11. 27.
as none knows the things of Man, save the Spirit of Man; so the 1 Cor. 2. 11.
things of God knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. Hence we may safely
conclude, that the Creating Word that was with God, and was God, in whom was
Life, and that Life the Light of Men; who is the Quickening Spirit, was He, by
whom God in all Ages must have been revealed; consequently, that Light or
Spirit has been the General Rule of men's Knowledge, Faith and Obedience, with
respect to God. And thus much Pythagoras (that lived about Six Hundred Years
before those Words were spoak or writ) laid down for a Maxim, viz. That no man
can know what is agreeable to God, except a man hear God himself, that is,
within; for that was his Doctrine: To which the Apostle and Prophet thus agree;
1. In that whatever makes manifest is Light. 2. That Ephesians. 5. 13.
whatever might be known of God was manifest within; for God (who Romans 1. 19.
is Light, 1 John 1. 5.) had shown it unto them: And God has Mic. 5. 8.
shown unto thee, O Man, what is good and acceptable, etc. which could not be
without his Light shining in Man's Conscience; Therefore the Light of God in
the Conscience must needs have been the general Rule, etc. It was by this Law,
that Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Melchisedeck, Abimeleeh, Job, Jethro, etc. walked
and were accepted, as says Irenaeus and Tertullian, They were Just Jren. l. 2.
c. 30.
Tertul. con. Jud. p. 184.
by the Law written in their Hearts; then was it their Rule to and in that just
State.

Obj. It seems then you deny the Scripture to be the General Rule, etc.

Answ. How can they be the General Rule, that have not Quakerism a new nickname
for old Christianity, p. 54. 55.
been General? That which was both before, and since they were in being, must
needs be more general then they: But that was this Light in the Conscience, the
Law and Guide of those Patriarchs (for the Scriptures began long after in
Moses) consequently that must be the general Rule, etc.

Obj. But granting that the Light within were so before Scripture was extant,
yet since the Writing of holy Scripture, the Scripture, and not the Light, has
been the general Rule.

Answ. That cannot be, unless Palestina or Canaan, a little Province of Asia,
was the whole World; and the Jews, a particular People, all Mankind: For at
what time the Writings were among the Jews, other Nations were only left to the
Law and Light within; This the Apostle confirms in that Passage, For the
Gentiles, which have not the Law (that is, the outward Law, or Law written) do
by Nature the things contained in the Law, which shows the Work of the Law
written in their Romans 2. 14, 15.
Hearts. And the Gentiles themselves called it, the immutable Law, the
everlasting Foundation of Virtue; no liveless Precepts, but immortal; a sacred
Good, God the Overseer; the living Rule, the Root of the Soul; that which makes
the Good Man. Thus Thales, Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Plotin, Hieron, Philo,
Plutarch, as cited: And says Sophocles, God grant that I may always observe
that vener^ble Sanctity in my Words and Deeds which these noble Precepts (writ
(...) Man's Heart) requ^re; God is their Father: neither shall they ever be
abrogated; for there is in them a GREAT GOD that never waxes Old. More
reverent Epithetes then John Faldo and T. Hicks can afford, as their Books too
openly witness; yet would go for Christian-men, though manifestly short of
Heathens.

Thus is it evident that the Scripture was not the general Rule, after it was
given forth.

Obj. But has it not been since; and is it not now the general Rule, etc?

Answ. There has been since, and is now the same Impediment; for before
Christ's coming in the Flesh, and since, where the Scriptures never reach d,
there has been the same Light: And though Nations ( through not glorifying God
as God, when they have known him) have bin so given up to all manner of
Impieties, as that their Understandings have been greatly veiled; yet did not
the Light within so wholely loose its Ruling Exercise among them, as that they
lived without any Sense of such thing; Therefore still the Scriptures have not
been, neither are the General Rule, no not so much as of any Age; since in no
Age can it be proved, that the whole World was furnished with them: But had
they been so for some one or two Ages, as they never were; yet the granting it
will not reach our Question, where the Word General, implies the Nature of the
Thing it self, respecting Mankind from the Beginning to this Day, and so to the
End.

Obj. But is not the Scripture the Rule, etc. of our Day?

Answ. If The Rule, then the General Rule; for whatsoever is The Rule of Faith
and Life, excludes all other from being General, they being but particular in
respect of it self; Therefore not The Rule of Faith and Life.

But besides their not being Cenetal, I have several Reasons to offer, why they
cannot be The Rule of Faith and Life, etc.

1. If now the Rule, then ever the Rule: But they were not ever the Rule; and
therefore they cannot now Justin Martyr says, That all are Christians who live
with Christ, as Abraham and Elias; and amongst the Greeks, as S^crates,
H^raclitus, etc. See Scult^tus on him, ^ho also says, That some at this day
are of his Judgment, who have taught that Melchizedec^, Abimel^ch, Ruth,
Rachab, the Queen of Sheba, Hiram of Tire, Naaman the Syrian, and the City o^
Ninive, are in the Catalogue of Christians.

Eusebius Pamph. in his Ecclesiastical History, says, That Abraham and the
ancient Fathers were Christians: And defines a Christian to be, one that by the
Knowledge and Doctrine of Christ ^xcels in Moderation of Mind, in Righteousness
and Continency of Life, and Strength of Virtue and Godliness toward one only
God; see Scultetus on him.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, The Law of Nature and of Discipline is one. And
Moses seems, to call the Lord the Covenant: For he had said before, the
Covenant was not to be sought in Scripture; for that is the Covenant, which
God, the Cause of all, sets, whence his Name in Greek is derived. And in the
Preaching of Peter, thou may find the Lord called the Word or Reason, and
the Law. See his 1 Book Strom at the end. And before page 353. he says, The
Law and the Gospel is the Operation of one lord who is the Virtue and Wisdom of
God: And the Fear which the Law had bred, is mereiful to Salvation: And the
Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom. That she (that is, Wisdom) that
administreth Providence, is Mistress and Good; and the Power of both procures
Salvation: the one Chastizing as Mistre's, the other being bountiful, as a
Benefactor; for on must pass from Darkness to Life; and applying his Ear to
wisdom, first be a Servant, then a faithful Minister, and so as^nd into the
Number of Sons, and be brought into the elect Adoption of Sons. That the Law
works to make them immortal, that choose to Live temperately and justly. And
Again, Evil men do not understand the Law; but they that se^k the Lord, do
understand in every good thing. And the whole first Book of the Stromat^ is
especi^ly to prove the Antiquity of the one true Religion, or Philosophy, a^ he
calls it.


be the Rule. That they were not ever the Rule is granted; But that they are
not therefore now the Rule may be by some denied, which I shall prove. If the
Faith of God's People in all Ages be of one Nature, then the Rule but of one
Nature: But clear it is, Heb. 11. The Faith has been but of one Nature;
Consequently, the Rule but of one Nature. In short, If the holy Ancients had
Faith before they had and wrote Scr^pture, they had a Rule before they had or
wrote Scripture; for where Faith is, there is a Rule for that Faith; And if the
Faith be of one Nature, the Rule is of one Nature: And since the Faith is
Inward, Spiritual, begotten of the Immortal Word, in which is Life, and that
the Light of men; and that this Word, Life and Light was the Rule, then no more
Book, Writing or ingraving on visible and perishable Matter can be the Rule now.

Again; Such as the Faith is, such must the Rule be: But the Faith is as
before, Inward and Spirual; therefore the Rule must be Inward and spiritual,
which no mere Book can be.

2. If the Scriptures were the Rule, they must have always been a perfect Rule,
ever since they were a Rule: But this is impossible, since they were many
hundred years in writing and are now imperfect also, as to Number; How then the
perfect Rule?

That they were not the Perfect Rule before they were written must be granted;
and that they were many hundred Years awriting, must also be allowed; and that
they are imperfect now, as to Number, I prove.

First, Enoch's Prophecy is mentioned by Jude, but not extant in the Bible; the
Books of the Wars of the Lord, Numb. 21. 14. The Book of Jasher, Josh. 10. 13.
2 Samuel 1. 18. The Book of Nathan, 2 Chronicles. 9. 29. The Book of Shemaiah, 2 Chronicles. 12. 15. The Book of Jehu; The Epistle of Paul to the Laodiceans, Collos.
4. 16. and several others, mentioned in the Scriptures, not now extant: And
lastly Luke says, That many took in hand to relate from Eyewitnesses the
things most surely believed, etc.

Now it is taken for granted that John wrote many Years after Luke; Some think
Luke wrote before Mark: However, Matthew and Mark were not many; and to this
day we see no more then those four in our Bibles, and therefore many such
Writings lost; and if lost, then the Scriptures not perfect; and if imperfect,
how can they be the Rule of Faith, since the Rule of Faith must be perfect?

3. My third Reason is this; The Scriptures, however useful to Edification and
Comfort, seem not in their own Nature and Frame to have been compiled and
delivered, as the Rule and entire Body of Faith; but rather upon particular
Occasions and Emergencies. The Doctrines are scattered throughout the
Scriptures, insomuch that those Societies who have given forth verbal
Confessions of their Faith, have been necessitated to toss them to and fro,
search here and search there, to lay down this or the other Principle; and then
as like the original Text as their Apprehensions are; whereas, were it as plain
and distinct as the Nature of a Rule requires, they needed only to have given
their Subscription for a Confession. Besides, here they are Proper, there
Metaphorical; in one place Literally, in another Mystically to be accepted:
Most times Points are to be proved by comparing and weighing Places coherent;
here to allude aptly and not wrong the Sense is difficult, and requires
infallible Discerning, notwithstanding the Brawlers of our times against
Infallibility: Now from all this, with abundance more that might be said, plain
it is, that the Scriptures are not plain, but to the spiritual man; but, as
Peter said of Paul s Writings, in many things hard to be understood; therefore
not the Rule, which ought to be plain, proper and intelligible.

4. Again, the Scripture cannot be the Rule of Faith, because it cannot give
Faith; for Faith is the Gift of God, which overcomes Ephesians. 2. 8.
the World: neither of Practice, because it cannot distinguish 1 John 5. 4.
of it self in all Cases what ought to be practiced, and what not; it
containing as well what ought not to be practiced, as what ought.

This was the Case of Christ's Disciples, who had no particular Rule in the old
Testament Writings, for the abolishing of some part of the old Testament
Religion; on the contrary, they might have pleaded for the Perpetuity of it,
because Christ said unto them, Do as they say, that sit in Moses' s Chair, more
reasonably then many make that a Plea now adays for their invented Worships:
What guided them in their declaring void and relinquishing those things? For
Instance; God gave Circumcision as a Sign for ever; And Paul Genesis 17.
tells the Galatians, That if they be circumcised, Christ should profit Gal. 5.
1, 2.
them nothing: Was not this the Spirit of Truth that leads into all Truth, that
they made the Judge and Rule of their Doctrine and Practices? So James and the
Assembly of the Apostles, when they said, It seem^th good to the Holy Ghost and
Acts 15. 28.
to us, etc.

5. These very men that say, it is the Rule of Faith and Life, deviate in their
Proof from their Assertion; for the Scriptures no where say so of themselves.
He that flies to Meanings and Interpretations; The Question arises not about
the Truth of the Text, for that is agreed on on all hands; but the Exposition
of it: If then I yield to that Man, do I bow to the Letter of the Text, or to
his Interpretation? If the Latter, as manifestly I do, is the Scripture or that
Man's Sense of it my Rule? Nay the Person so interpreting makes not the
Scripture his Rule but his own Apprehension, whatever he may say to gain Credit
to his Conceptions in others; then Mine it must needs be, I consenting thereto.

6. How shall I be assured that these Scriptures came from God? I am bound to
try all things: If all things, then Them amongst the rest. I would fain know
what I must try them with? with the Scriptures? Then the Scriptures must be the
Rule of my Examination, and Faith concerning themselves; which is improper: If
with the Spirit that gave them forth (that searches the deep things of God, a
measure of which is given to me to profit withal) Then is it most congruous to
call the Spirit, and not the Scriptures the Rule.

7. If the Scriptures are the Rule, they are so either in their Original or
Copies: If in their Original, that is not extant, then no Rule in being; for
the last of it that was extant, was John's History at Ephesus, not seen these
thousand Years: If the Copies must be the Rule, it were to be wished, we knew
which were the nighest to the Original, there being above thirty in Number:
This is undetermined and for ought we see indeterminable. And that which makes
good what I say, are the Variety of Readings among those Copies, amounting to
several thousands: And if the Copies cannot, how can the Translations be the
Rule so differing from the true Sense of the Copies in many things, and one
from another? Besides, I would fain know of those of our present Age, who thus
contend for the Scriptures being the Rule, etc. in Opposition to the Spirit,
upon what foot they receive them into this Place and Authority; Is it by
Tradition, or Revelation? I mean the Internal Testimony of the Spirit; or the
external Award and Avouchment of Men: If the former, they inavoidably come over
to us; for then the Spirit will, and must be both Rule and Judge? If the
latter, I ask, how are they assured that they are not miserably abused by
Carelessness or Design; since we see (that using utmost Diligence) both
Translation, Transscription and Printing, are subject to numerous Mistakes, and
those sometimes very material, against which the Scripture can be no Fence?

But admit there were no Ground for any such Objection, I further demand of our
Adversaries, if they are well assured of those men that first collected,
embodyed and authenticated them by a Public Canon, which we read to have been
in the Council of Laodicca, 360. Years after Christ (though not as they are now
received) during which time they had bin tossed and tumbled; some received,
some rejected, doubtless many hundred times transscribed; and it is not
improbable that they were also abused: If they miss in their Judgment here,
they are gone, till they come to us. I say, how do they know that these men
rightly discerned true from sp^rious? Either their Judgment was infallible in
the Matter, or it was not: ^f it were, then there was such a thing as
Infallibility since the Apostles Days, which is a Contradiction to your
selves. But be it so that they were infallible; how came you to be assured they
were so? Not by Inspiration; that is dangerous Doctrine with you: Which way was
it then? Not by Tradition. Was it by the Scripture? That were to say, that the
Scripture tells you that those men that collected it for true, were right in
their Judgment: but we are yet to find any such place, and that is to beg the
Question. I cannot see any other Ground, besides your very great Kindness to
their Choice, which you call Popery, and believing as the Church believes, in
other Folks. But if these men were fallible, as your own Principle makes them,
and their own Determinations prove them; what then? doubtless your Condition
will be desperate.

Now, certain it is that some of the Scriptures taken in by one Council for
Canonical, were rejected by another as Apocryphal; and that which was left out
by the former for Apocryphal, was taken in by the latter for Canonical. Now
visible it is that they contradicted each other, and as true that they both
erred, respecting the present Belief; for your Canon and Catalogue varies from
theirs, and, let me say without Offense, from any Catalogue you can produce.
Behold the Labyrinth of Incertainties you run your selves into, who go from
that heavenly Gift in your selves, by which the holy Scriptures are truly
discerned, relished and distinguished from the Inventions and Abuses of Men!

8. Furthermore, If the Scriptures were the Rule of Faith and Life, etc. then
because they cannot be the Rule in their Translations, suppose the ancient
Copies were exact, it cannot be the Rule to far the greatest part of Mankind,
indeed to none but Learned men; which neither answers the Promise relating to
Gospel times, that is universal; nor the Necessity of all Mankind for a Rule of
Faith and Life.

9. That the Scriptures are not the Rule of Faith and Life, is proved from
those voluminous Discourses of Cases of Conscience that are extant among us:
For had the Scriptures be^ as sufficient as the Nature of the Rule of Faith and
Life requires, there had been no need of such Tracts; every man might have
read his own Condition laid down in Scripture without those numerous
Supplements. Does not your own Language and Practice prove its Insufficiency to
that End, at what time you both exhort to, and go in secret to seek the Mind of
the Lord in this or that important Affair? Why do not you turn to Chapter and
Verse for Satisfaction, if the Scripture be appointed of God for a Rule?
Strange! That what is so common in the Mouths of all sorts, viz. God direct you
(that implies Inspiration and Revelation, or immediate Council or Guiding from
God) should There Is not laid down in Scripture any general Rule how to answer
before Magistrates; and to act in Times of Sufferings. Thus said a Baptist in
print, o^ to that purpose.
not be known, much less acknowledged by you in our Writings; but overrun with
such scaring Epithetes, as Enthusiasm, Familism, Fanaticism, Quakerism, etc. In
short, there are a * thousand Cases, and not a few occurring almost daily, in
which the Scripture cannot be our plain and distinct Rule and Guide; yet has
not God left himself without a Witness in every Bo^om; for his Grace has
appeared unto all Men, teaching them that believe in it, to deny Ungodliness
and wo^ldly Lusts, John 1. 9.
and to live sob^rly, righ^eously and godly in this present evil World. Tit. 2.
11, 12.
And Christ Jesus the eternal Word, has for that End enlightened every Man
coming into the World (viz.) to discover, reprove, and instruct ^or Faith and
Life. But it may be, and is objected by some;

Obj. If this Law and Light in the Conscience had been enough, what need had
there been of Scripture?

Answ. The same Argument will hold against God, Christ, his Spirit and Grace,
all which are sufficient, notwithstanding the Use and Benefit of Scripture. The
Case was this: Man's Mind being estranged from the Light and Spirit, through
its wanderings after visible and perishing things; and in as much as the Light
became thereby veiled from him, the Spirit as quenched, and the Law as defaced,
God in peculiar Mercy to the Jews, according to his Covenant with faithful
^braham, super-added, or repeated (as Ur^n terms it) the Law inward, by a
Declaration of it outwardly; that both God might not be without an outward
Witness, as well as an inward (they having so much lost the Feeling thereof)
And more deeply to strike their Minds, by their Senses (into which their Minds
were gone) and to meet them abroad, whether they were roving and wandering from
the Law and Light within.

As it is great Vanity and Weakness to infer Insufficiency to the Light from
the Imbecility and Darkness that are in Men (occasioned through their
Rebellion to the Law and Light within) so from God's superadding Scripture, and
other external Assistances to Men in that State: What would such have God, his
Light and Spirit appear to, and converse with Peoples outward Senses? That
cannot be: the one is too Spiritual; the other too Carnal for any such thing. Or
are they Insufficient, because they converse with Men through these exterior
things, suited to that imbecil State? Or tell me, if the considerablest part of
Script^re be any more then the declared Knowledge and Experience o^ such as
were come to a more improved State in the Teachings of that Light and Spirit,
which is therefore given forth, that others loytering behind, might be the more
prevailed with to follow them, as they had followed the Lord in the Light of
his Spirit? Certainly, it can never be, that Scripture should impeach the Light
of insufficiency, when it is but the Mind and Teachings of the Light in others,
declared or recorded. Does the Declaration jarr or make weak that from whence
it came? Or because of God s (ondescension for a time to Externals, shall they
turn the Light and Spirit out of the Office of Rule and Judge by being
perpetuated the Rule and Judge? Or is it to lay down instituted Religion (as
some ignorantly talk) to press after that which was before, and ends those
temporary things? The Law outward, as a Rule, was but as Moses till the Son
came. The Servant abides not in the House forever. The written Law held its
place but till the inward rise in more Glory and Brightness; o^ rather, till
they became more capable of being turned to it, and living with it? In those
Days I will write my Law in their Heart, etc. They who say otherwise of
Scripture, do pervert and abuse it; for there is nothing more clearly laid down
in it, from Beginning to End, then the Rule and Reign of the Spirit. My
Kingdom, said Christ, is not of this World. Again, The Kingdom of God is
within: I will write my Law in their Hearts, and place my Fear in their inward
parts. All thy Children shall be taught of the lord, and in Righteousness shall
they be John 18. 36.
established. I will pour out my Spirit on all Flesh. The Grace of God Isa. 54.
13.
that brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men, teaching, etc. Joel 2. 28


Obj. But if the ^aw engraven and delivered to Moses, was a Rule to the Jews;
why should not the Law deliverd by Christ, and written by his Apostles, be the
Rule to Christians?

Answ. Christ left nothing in writing as the Rule that we hear of; and it is
not to be thought he was less faithful in his House then Moses: And doubtless,
had he intended the Rule of his Followers to have been a written Rule, he would
have left it upon record with all Punctuality, This must be believed, and that
done, on Pain of eternal Death. Nor did his Followers write in the Method of a
Rule, as the Law was written; nor did they so call or recommend what they writ.

But this leads me to my 8th Reason why the Scriptures cannot be the Rule under
the New Covenant, etc. For admitting the Law written by Moses were the Rule ( A
Rule I grant it was) to the Jew outward; yet Christ the spiritual Leader, of a
spirit^al Israel writes his spiritual Law in the Heart, as Moses, the outward
Israel's Leader writ the Law upon Tables of Stone. This was God's Promise, the
Privilege Jer. 31. 33.
and Blessing of the new Covenant, that as the outward Jew had an outward Law,
for a Directory, the inward Jew should have an inward Law for his Directory:
And as the outward Jew had an outward Priest at whose Mouth he Mal. 2. 7.
ought to seek the Law; so the Jew inward, and Circumcision Heb. 7. 24, 25, 26,
27.
in Spirit, has an inward and Spiritual High Priest, whose Lips preserve
Knowledge; at whose Mouth he is to receive the Law of Life. And this is his
Rule, who is the Ruler of his People Israel, who reigns in Righteousness,
Isa. 9. 6, 7.
and of the Increase of whose heavenly Government there shall be no End. The
King, Ruler, Judge, Lawgiver, Highpriest, Law, Rule, Temple, are all
Spiritual: so the Scriptures inform us; My Kingdom said Christ, is not of this
World. Again. Luke 17. 20, 21.
The Kingdom of God is within: I will write my Law in their Hearts, and place
my Fear in their inward Parts. They shall Heb. 8. 10.
be all taught of me; and in Righteousness shall they be established, Rev. 21.
3.
The Tabernacle of God is with Man; He will dwell with them, Joel. 2. 28.
I will pour out my Spirit on all Flesh. The Grace has appeared to Tit. 2. 11,
12.
all M^n, teaching, etc. A Measure of the Spirit is given to all Men to profit
withal. The Inspiration of the Almighty gives Understanding. Job. 32. 8.
Whatsoever may be known of God is manifest within. Romans 1. 19.
walk in the Spirit: If ye walk in the Light, etc. Come let us walk Gal 5. 16.
1 John 1 7.
in the Light of the Lord. And there needed neither Sun nor Moon Is^. 2. 5.
to shine; for the Glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb was Rev. 21. 23.
the Light thereof. As many as walk according to this Rule, Peace Gal. 6. 15,
16.
be on them and the whole Israel of God, etc. What Rule? Not that of the old
legal Creation that passed away; but the Rule of the (...), or new Creation as
it may be rendered: And as Drusius cites one to have interpreted it; and Grotius
also interprets it; which is the Galat. 6. 16. (...) in this Rule; as it is
translated Phil. 3. 16. which is spoken of the Measure of Attainment: and
Grotius says, in the Manuscript, Rule is not; so it must be understood, let us
walk in the same Attainment; as also in 2 Cor. 10. 13, 15. in which three
Places that word is only found: See Erasmus, Vatablus, Zegerus, Cameron. Ja^.
Capellus and Grotius, on those places, none whereof can be drawn to the
Scriptures. Zegerus interprets this Place of Gal. 6. 16. thus, They that have
^ollowed this Form of Life, or Rule of the new Creatur^, having turned away
from the invalid Cer^monies of the Law; Peace, etc. Drusius explains it from
Chap. 5. 6. The new Creation. i. Faith which works by Love. Grotius says,
Rule here is a Way made as to a Rule that is plainly Right; such is that Way of
the new Creation, which was foretold Isa. 42. 9. And signifies the State of the
new Man, of which Paul Speaks, Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 2. 15. Romans 6. 4.
Way of Life Isaiah spoak of, An Highway there shall be, and it shall be
called the Way of Holiness; the Unclean shall not pass over it, and wayfaring
Men, though Fools, shall not e^r therein: There shall be no Lion there, nor
ravenous Beast go thereon, but the redee^d shall walk there; which Way, Teach^,
Guide, Rule, Light, Spirit, andholy Unction that directs and keeps in steady
Paths of Truth, is Christ Jesus our Lord.

Obj. But do you not tur^ the Scriptures off, sor an uncertain and un^rviceable
Writing, and as good as reject and deny them altogether?

Answ. There is a late Author or two, who to depaint us as ugly as their Malice
could invent, have rendered themselves so ridiculous, as so to infer: But it is
not my Business at this time to meddle with particular Controversy; that
follows in the second Part, and shall therefore attend to answer the general
Objection.

The Scriptures are uncertain upon your Foundation, but not upon ours. Does our
mani^esting your Faith concerning them to be grounded upon your own
Imaginations or human Traditions, make void or render uncertain the Scriptures?
By no means; but we would have you come to receive them upon the Spirit's
Testimony and Evidence that gave them forth: And though we cannot allow them to
be the Rule of Faith and Life under the Dispensation of the Gospel, which is
Power and Life it self; yet are they to be read, believed and fulfilled under
the Gospel. For notwithstanding the Law written upon Stone, was not Paul's
Rule, after the Son of God was revealed in him; yet the Son of God taught Paul
to fulfill the Righteousness declared by that Law: If it were to deny and reject
(as some Persons enviously say of us) yea, to vilify the Scripture, because we
cannot allow it to be the Rule, etc. Paul must be said to deny, reject and
vilify the Law written, at what time the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus became his Rule. There is a great Difference in asserting, that the
Spirit is the Rule, and casting away and vilifying of Scripture: And indeed it
is but an old Fetch of the Devil's, to pretend Honor to the Letter, that he
might the more unsuspectedly oppose the bringing in of the Dispensation of the
Spirit; which the Letter it self testifies to. They that come to be led of the
Spirit, arrive at the End for which Scripture was given forth; the Apostle John
did as good as say the same thing, when he told them to whom he wrote, That the
Anointing which they had received and abode in them, would lead them i^to all
Truth; and that they needed not that any man should teach them: To deny this to
have been the Saints Teacher, is to deny as plain a Proposition as is in the
whole Scripture; and that one Age of Christianity should have one Rule, and
another Age another Rule; that, the Spirit; we, but the Letter; is more then
any Man can prove: yet did John's so writing invalid the Scripture, or vilify
his own Epistle? Certainly, none will talk so idly. How then does our lifting
up the Light and Spirit of Christ, which fulfils the Scriptures (by bringing
such as are led thereby to enjoy the good things therein declared) reject and
vilify the Scriptures? Does our living up to them by an higher Rule make us to
deny and reprobate them? Erasmus and Grotius think them, then most to be
valued, when men are Witnesses of them: see on 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20. I do
acknowledge they contain an Account of several heavenly Prophecies, godly
Reproofs and Instructions that ought to be obeyed.

Obj If so Then how are they not a Rule of Faith and Life.

Answ. A Rule and the Rule, are not one and the same thing. By the Rule of
Faith and Life, I understand, the living, spiritual, immediate, omnipresent,
discovering, ordering Spirit of God: And by a Rule, some Instrument, by and
through which this great Rule may convey its Direction: Such a subordinate,
secondary and d^claratory Rule we never said several parts of Scripture were
not; yet the Reason of our Obedience, is not merely because they are there
written; that were legal; but because they are the eternal Precepts of the Bp.
Rob. Sand. de Reg^. ConsProel 4ta. sect. 31.
Spirit in Men's Consciences, there repeated and declared. I^ is the T^stimony
of the Spirit that is the true Rule for believing and understanding of any or
all the Scripture; therefore not the Scripture, but the Spirit of Truth must be
the Rule for men's believing, understanding, etc. Thus held the Ancients.

T^rtullian says, Worldly Wisdom the Lord calls Foolishne ss he Tertul. de
Prescript. Heraetic. page 204.
has chosen the soolish things of the World to the confounding of Philosophy;
for that is the Matter of Worldly Wisdom, a divine Interpreter of the divine
Nature and Disposings.

Justin Martyr in Exposit. ^id. The Interpretation of the Dell. Confut. of
Symps. p. 89, 90.
Scriptures is to be a commodated to the Will of the Doctrine of the Spirit;
and not to human Reasonings.

Hieron says, The Scriptures ( mus^ be) opened with spiritual Exposition.
Hieron Tom. 4. 70.


Epiphanius says, Only ^o the Children of the holy Ghost all the Bp. Jewel, p.
532.
Scriptures are plain and cle^r.

Nor were the most approved Protestants of any sort (who have been so reputed
in Opposition to Popery) of another mind. It is the Substance of the sourth
Article exhibited Po^ano. (...). (...). (...). page 150
against the Lutherans in the Council of Trent, as an Erroneous Doctrine they
held, That to understand the Scripture, neither G^oss nor Comment is necessary;
but only to have the Spirit of a Sheep of Christ's Pasture.

Erasmus tells us, What Man sets forth by Man's De^ice, may be E^sinus on 1
(...). 1. 19. Ib. (...) 1 Cor. 2.
received by Man's Wit: But the thing that is set forth by the Inspira^ion of
the Holy Ghost, requires an Interpreter inspired with the like Spirit; and
without the Inspiration of it the Secrets of God cannot be known.

Luther gives us his Mind thus, The Scriptures are not to be Luther Tom. 3.
fol. 169.
understood, but by that very Spirit by which they were writ.

Peter Martyr, that famous Italian Protestant, teaches us, Peter. Martyr, Com.
loc. p. 1. c. 6.
The Spirit is the Abettor, by which we must assure our selves for
understanding of the Scriptures, that thereby we must discern between Christ's
Words, and a Strangers (quoting Christ's Words) My Sheep know my Voice, and
several other places of Scriptures.

Again, The Spirit of God rev^aleth the Truth in the Scriptures. Ibid. p. 2. c.
18.
H. Bullinger Decad. 4. Sermon. 8. Men ^etch the Understanding of Heavenly
Things, and Kno^ge of the Holy Ghost from NOWHERE ELSE, but from the same
Spirit.

John Bradford answered to the Archbishop of York thus, Book of Martyr 3 vol.
p. 298.
We know the Scriptures, as Christ's Sheep, by the same Spirit that wrote and
spoke them, being thereby assured, etc.

Calvin teaches thus in his Institutes: It is necessary the Calvin. Instit
lib. 1. cap. 8.
same Spirit that spoke by the Mouth of the Proph^ts, should pierce into our
Hearts, to persuade us, that they faithfully delivered that which was committed
to them of God.

Beza says, That the Way of understanding Prophecies, and referring Beza on 2
Pet. 1. 19.
them to the right Scope, must be sought or fetched from the same Spirit, which
dictated them to the Prophets themselves, and more to that purpose.

W. Tindal, called the English Apostle by J. Fox, says, It is Tindal. works,
Page 319. and 80.
impossible to understand in the Scriptures more then a Turk, for any that has
not the Law of God writ in the Heart to sulfil it.

Bp. Jewel thus against Harding, The Spirit of God is bound neither Jewel
against Harding, page 532, 534.
to Sharpness of Wit, nor to Abundance of Learning: Flesh and Blood is not able
to understand the Holy Will of God, without SPECIAL REVELATION: Without this
SPECIAL HELP and PROMPTING OF GOD's SPIRIT, the Scripture is to the Reader, be
he never so Wis^ and well-Learned, as the Vision of a sealed Book.

D. Ames, a great Father of the Independents, says upon D. Ames against
Bell^m. l. 1. c. 5. These. 32.
Bellarmin's word^; The Anointing of the Holy Spirit does teach the Faithful,
to understand those things which they received of the Apostles; therefore to
understand the Scriptures in those things which are necessary to Salvation,
with more to that purpose.

Vatabl^s on Job 32. 8. with Drusius, Clarius and others, speak to the same
effect.

G. Cr^dock, a famous Independent- Preacher, preached, That G. Cradok divin.
drops, page 217.
the Scripture is a Speechless thing without the Spirit.

Chapter Goad, an eminent Separatist's Works, styled B. D. of C. Goad Refr. drops,
page 12.
K. College in Cambridge, and an Independent Pastor, thus ta^ght, There is no
Knowledge of Christ, nor of the Scripture, but by Revelation.

D. J. Owen, a man of greatest Fame among the present Independents, Excrcit. 2,
7, 9. against Quak.
says, The public, authentic and infallible Interpreter of the holy
Scripture, is HE who is the AUTHOR of them; from the BREATHING OF WHOSE SPIRIT
IT DERIVETH ALL ITS VERITY, PERSPICUITY AND AUTHORITY.

So that we see upon the Judgment of many considerable Persons, the Scripture
is no Rule for our believing and understanding of it self; therefore not The
Rule of Faith and Practice, concerning the things therein declared.

I will give a short Instance in Christ's words, about Regeneration; He taught
(and strange it was, no doubt, to wise Nicodemus) That unl^ss a Man be born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. This is as plain a Proposition as can
be laid down, and may be credited Historically; But what is that to any ^s New
Birth, that they are never like to (...) ^formed of there? Nor can that
Scripture be my Rule in that Heavenly Travail, respecting the many and
wonderful Trials and Exercises, that are to be met with in it; neither can any
other Writing whatever: This only is the Office of that Spirit and Word
immortal, by which I am anew begotten; Who then is my Rule to inform, order,
strengthen and lead through the whole Experience, but the same Spirit? All
Doctrinal Scripture was experienced before written; or they had not been true
Witnesses who wrote it.

Now that which was their Rule can only guide us into the same Experiences; nor
are they to be known before experienced: John 7. 17.
Do my Will, and you shall know more of my Doctrine, says Christ. I read the
History of such things; This saves not: Neither can the History be the Rule
leading into the Mystery; That belongs only to the Spirit, that searches the
deep things of God. Consequently the Spirit, and not 1 Cor. 2. 10.
the Scripture, is the Rule for so believing and living.

Obj. But is not this to make void the Protestants Plea against the Papists,
That the Scriptures are the Rule of Faith and Practice?

Answ. No such matter: For the Question was not, Whether the Spirit of Christ
or the Scripture was the Rule, But, Whether the Scripture, God's Tradition, or
Popish Traditions, were the Rule to measure the Truth of Doctrines and
Practices by? We grant, that particular Scriptures, rightly understood, may
measure what is agreeable or disagreeable to them; that is, such Doctrines and
Practices as are contrary to that part of Scripture more particularly relating
to our days, are questionable by the Scripture; especially since all Parties
pretend what they say and do is according to Scripture: Yet this concludes not
the Scripture to be the General and Evangelical Rule.

Obj. But if God had not revealed those things that are in Scripture by it to
us, ^ow could they have been known by us?

Answ. They were known by the Light and Spirit of Christ before written (from
whence they are called Scripture) Therefore it is said, That the Prophets
searched diligently what, and what 1 P^t. 1. 11.
manner of Time the Spirit of Christ, that was in them, did signify, when it
testified beforehand of the Sufferings of Christ. Nor are they ever the more
revealed to the blind and dark Mind, because there written: The Mysteries of
Regeneration are as puzling to Natural Wit and Earthly Wisdom, as before;
Therefore well said Epiphanius, Only to the Children of the Holy Ghost all the
Holy Scriptures are plain and easy. Men's going to hammer out Principles,
without that infallible Guide and Rule, has been the Cause of that great
Confusion that is over Mankind about Religion.

Obj. But how could you have known those Prophecies to be true, for that is not
matter of Witnessing, but Foretelling?

Answ. That is an extraordinary Revelation, not falling within the ordinary
Discoveries absolutely necessary to man's Salvation; but to show his Power and
Faithfulness, that he is God, and can and will foretell, and bring to pass:
But therefore must there be an Extraordinary Light or Spirit, and not rather an
Extraordinary Sight and Se^ne from one and the same Light and Spirit in them?
Besides, That which gives me to believe and savor it to be from the Spirit,
and not by Imposture, is my Rule for believing it. Now that the Spirit so does,
Calvin and Beza too, as before cited, assert for me, viz. The same Spirit, that
spoke by the Mouth of the Prophets, must pierce into our Hearts, to persuade
us, that they faithfully declared that which was committed to them of God.

Obj. But this Light you speak of could not tell you which way Sin came into
the World; That there was an Adam and Eve, that they fell after that manner,
and that Sin so entered the World; That Christ was born of a Virgin, suffered
Death and rose again; That you ought not to Swear in any case, etc. if the
Scriptures had not told you so.

Answ. That is boldly said: But consider well; Moses (says the vulgar Opinion)
had that Account above Two Thousand Years after the Creation, by Revelation,
which we find in Genesis. Now that there could be no Revelation without this
Divine Light or Spirit, which is the Life of the Eternal, Creating Word, must
needs be granted: For the Spirit of God knows only the Things of God; and
whatever 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11.
Ephesians. ^. 13. ^
makes manifest is Light: And that the Spirit and Light are one, though two
Names, has been sufficiently evidenced. If then it was this Light of the
Eternal Word, that delivered these past things to Moses, and gave that Prospect
of future things to the Prophets, as no doubt it was (if Scripture be
indubitable) then to say, the Light or Spirit could not do it, is Blasphemous.
Again, To argue, because the Light does not reveal every Circumstance of
History to each Individual that has already an Account, that therefore it
could not, is ridiculous: Were the History of the Transactions of Christ and
his Followers wanting, as before Moses, was that of Adam and his Posterity; and
that the Lord saw it needful to acquaint Mankind therewith, no doubt but the
Light and Spirit, which revealed the Account of the Creation above Two Thousand
Years after to Moses, and foretold several Hundred Years many of those
Transactions of Christ, by the Prophets, would also have supplied that Want:
But inasmuch as an Account is extant, and therefore not needed, it is vain to
make that Objection.

Again, It does not follow, because every man has a Measure of Light to inform
and rule him, that therefore he must needs know all which that Light knows, or
is able to reveal to him: I return that Argument thus upon our Adversaries.
They say, they have the Spirit of God; Then they know all that the Spirit of
God knows, or can reveal to them: If the latter be absurd; then the former.
Again, say they, The Light within did not reveal Christ to the Gentiles; that
Christ should be born of a Virgin, etc. therefore insufficient: I return upon
them thus; The Spirit of God, given to the Children of Israel, Neh. 9. 20. did
not acquaint them that Christ should be born of a Virgin, nor much more of his
Life and Bodily Transactions; therefore the Spirit of God was insufficient. The
like may be concluded against the Spirit in the Prophets: For it is manifest
from 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. that the Spirit had not revealed to all the Prophets the
Time of Christ's Appearance and Sufferings; was the Spirit therefore an
insufficient Rule to them? But that which falls heaviest upon our Adversaries
is this, That the Scriptures, by their own Argument, are a most imperfect
Account themselves of what was done, not relating the hundredth part of things;
therefore as insufficient in not relating what is behind, as they would weakly
render the Light or Spirit in not revealing to every Individual those things
already related: Nay, they may as well infer Insufficiency to the Spirit, or
the Light within, in that it does not now show all that shall be to the End of
the World, which in their proper Seasons there will be a Necessity to know, as
to reflect insufficiency upon it, etc. because it did not foretell things now
past, to ^ormer Ages, or needlessly reveal them over again to us in this Age.
Neither is History, or can it be the Rule of that Faith and ^ife we speak of,
which are absolutely necessary to Salvation; which is the Faith that not
History, but God gives, that works not by History, but Love, and overcomes the
Wo^ld; which Millions of Historical Believers are overcome by, and wallow in
the Spirit and Practice of; And the Rule must be answerable to the Nature and
Workings of the Faith: so in Point of good Life, which is Duty done. Now
History, though it inform me of others Actions; yet it does not follow, that it
is the Rule of Duty to me. since it may relate Actions not imitable, as in the
Case of Adam and Eve in several Respects, and Christ's being born of a Virgin,
dying for the Sins of the World, etc. wherefore this cannot be the Rule of
Duty: The like may be said of the Jewish Story, that was the particular Concern
and Transaction of that People.

Obj. But these things ought to be believed.

Answ. I say so too, where the History has reached, and the Spirit of God has
made a Convict^on upon the Conscience; which, says D. J. Owen, as before,
gives them Authority, Verity and Perspicuity: But where this History has not
reached any People, or they dye ignorant of it, they are not responsible for
not believing any such Passages, as Prelect. 4.. 21, 22.
says Bp. Sanderson. It Is one thing to say, The Scriptures ought to be read,
believed and fulfilled; and another thing to say, They are the Evangelical Rule
of Faith and Life: For when I read, believe and witness them fulfilling, I must
needs have a Rule to read, understand, believe and witness them fulfilling by;
which being the Divine Light and Spirit of Christ, that, and not themselves
must be my Rule for so Reading, Understanding, Believing, etc.

And surther, to prove that the Light and Spirit within the Heathens was
sufficient to discover these things: It Is granted on all hands, that the
Sibylls had divine Sights; I mean not those made in their Name by some
Professors of Christianity, as is charged on them, to gain Authority upon the
Gentiles, against which Blundel writes; But those acknowledged, Who prophesied
of a Virgin's bringing forth a Son; and that he should destroy the Serpent, and
replenish the Earth with Righteousness, as is before cited out of Virgil, who
took it out of the Remains of Cumaa's Verses, then among the Romans.

And for the Practical Part of the Objection, viz. How should we have known it
had been Unlawful to Swear at all in any Case, if Mat. 5. 34. had not been
(which is of most weight in this Case, because matter of Duty, and called
particularly by some, an Evangelical Precept, being a Step above the
Righteousness of the Law outward among the Jews) I have this to say in Solution
of my Adversaries Objection, Reprehension of his Ignorance, and for Proof, by
his own Argument of the Light's Sufficiency.

There were among the Jews themselves, long before Christ came, an entire
People, that would not Swear, Jos^phus, Wars of the Jews, l. 2. c. 7.
to wit, the Esseni: They keep their Promises (says Josephus) and account
every Word they ^peak of more Force then if they had bound it with an Oath: And
they shun Oaths worse then Perjury; for they esteem him condemned for a Liar,
who without it is not believed.

Philo writes to the same purpose; and taught himself, that Philo, de spec.
leg. and decalog.
it was best to abstain from Swearing; that ones Word might be taken instead of
an Oath.

And Pythagoras, in his Oration to the Crotonian Senators, exhorted Lae^t.
Hermip. and Orig. con^. Cells.
them thus, Let no man attest God by Oath, though in Courts of Judicature; but
use to speak such things that he may be credited without Oath.

The Scythians are said to tell Alexander of themselves, ^uint. Curtiu^, ni
vit. Al^x.
Think not that Scythians confirm their Friendship by Oath; They Swear by
keeping their Word.

And Clinias, a Greek, and Follower of Pythagoras, rather H. Grotius on. Mat.
5. 34.
chose to suffer the Fine of Three Talents (which make 300 l. English) then to
lessen his Veracity by taking an Oath: Which Act was greatly commended of
Bafilius, who upbraided the Christians of his time with it; Thereby (after our
Adversaries Way of drawing Consequences) preferring the Light of the Gentiles
before the Light of the Christians: though indeed the Light was and is always
one in it self; but the Christian did not live up so closely to it as the
Heathen did, and therefore had a greater Liberty, and walked in a broader Way.

I would now know of our Opposers, if they can yet think the Light that
preached in the Mount, that Doctrine was one with that Light that shined in the
Consciences of those Gentiles, so many Hundred Years before that Sermon was
writ or preached; who so plainly believed, practiced and taught it; yea, or
nay. Perhaps some of them, through the abundance of their Envy, Pride and
Passion, will yet stick out, while the more moderate may submit to such
Evidence, and conclude Ignorance and Folly to have made all this Opposition
against us, and that of a Truth, The Voice which cried, Prove. 8. 4, 6. Unto
you, O men, I call, and my Voice is to the Sons of men; hear, for I will speak
Excellent things, was heard by the Gentiles: and that what concerned Doctrine
to Holy Living, was not hid from them; I mean, evangelically so, provided
Christ's Heavenly Sermon upon the Mount, related by Matthew, may be esteemed
such; for their Writings flow with Amens thereunto.

But admitting to our Adversaries, that the Voice was then so low, and the
Manifestation of the Light so small, as it discovered not many of those things
beforementioned; could that give any reasonable men Ground to conclude,
Therefore the Divine Wisdom or Light was insufficient; or that the Divine
Wisdom or Light was not then, and should not in other Ages, become the Rule and
Guide of the Children of men, however promised? Yet such false Consequences
have been the Cornerstone and Foundation of our Adversaries Building against
us; And no reasonable man, I think, will clear it from being a Sandy one.

OF THE Judge of Controversy.
I Shall explain what I mean by the Terms:

A Judge, is one that has not only Power to determine, but Discerning to do it
rightly.

Controversy, is a Debate between two Parties about the Truth or Falsehood of
any Proposition to be determined by that Judge.

From whence I am led to assert, that The Judge of Controversy must be
Infallible.

And though this may seem strange to some, it is nevertheless true in it self:
For if the Judge be fallible, however he by his Authority may determine the
Persons controverting into Silence; yet it does not follow, that he has given
true Judgment, since he may as well, nay, rather, determine falsely, then truly:
so that Controversy can never be rightly determined by a fallible Judge,
therefore no true Judge of Controversy. Indeed it is absurd, and a
Contradiction in it self to think otherwise; since he that is uncertain can
never give a certain Decision; and if not a certain one, then none to the
Purpose. Nor ought any Person, no otherwise judged, that is persuaded of the
Truth of his Cause, to let fall his Belief upon so fallible a Determination;
since he not only moves without Conviction, but against Conviction; And which
is worse, he is not ascertained of the Truth of what he is required to submit
to: Therefore of all People they are most condemnable, who keep so great a stir
about Religion, and that sometimes use coercive Means to compass their designed
Uni^ormity, and yet acknowledge to us, they are not certain of their own Faith;
unless it be those who notwithstanding yield to such uncertain Imposers.

Since then the Judge must be infallible, it will be worth our while to
consider, where 'this insallible Judge is to be found. There is none Good but
God, said God himself, when manifested in the Flesh, that is, originally, or as
of himself; so truly there is none infaltible but God, as of himself, yet as
the supreme Good, is communicated unto man according to measure; so (well says
Bp. Lati^er) is there infallibility, Book Martyr. vol. 3. p. 475.
Certainty or Assurance of the Truth of things given to man according to
Capacity; otherwise men should be oblieg'd to believe and obey, and that upon
Damnation, those things, concerning which there can be no Certainty whether
they be true or false.

Immanuel, God with men, as he is their Rule, so their Judge; he is the
Lawgiver, and therefore the best Irterpreter of any Point that may concern his
own Law: and men are so far infallible as they are subject to his Voice, Light
or Spirit in them, and no farther; for, humanum est errare, Man is Errable. Nor
can any thing rescue him out of Error, or preserve him from the Infections of
it, but the sound or certain Judgment God, by his Light or Spirit within,
assists him with.

Obj. But is not the Scripture the Judge of Controversy?

Answ. How can that be, since the Q^estion most times arises about the Meaning
of Scripture? Is there any place tells us, without all Interpretation, whether
the Socinian or Trinitarian be in the Right, in their differing Apprehensions
of the Three that bear Record, etc? also the Homousian and Arrian about
Christ's Divinity; or the Papists or Protestants about Trans-substantiation? If
then things are undefined and undetermined, I mean, expressly in the Scripture;
and that the Question arises about the Sense of it, does the Scripture
determine which of those Interpreters hit the Mark? As this is absurd to think,
so must it be acknowledged, that if Interpretation decide the Matter in
Controversy, not the Scripture, but the Interpreter is the Judge.

Now this Interpreter must either interpret by his own mere Wisdom or Spirit,
called by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. II. the Spirit of a Man; who by weighing the
Text, consulting the Intent of the Writer, comparing places together, gives the
Judgment, which the Scripture cannot do; or, from the Spirit of God, which
gives Understanding, as Job 3^. 8. and as the same Apostle says, searches the
deep things of God: If the first, then a Fallible; If the last, then an
Infal^ible Judge.

I would sain know, whether it was the Scripture or the Holy Ghost that
presided among the Apostles, when they were come together, Acts 15. when they
said, It seems good to the ^oly Chost and to us, etc. If the Holy Ghost, give
us a plain Scripture to prove we are to have another Judge now; If not, then we
must have the same, and consequently an Infallible Judge.

Obj. It Is granted that the Spirit is Infallible: But how shall I know that any
man determines a thing by this Spirit, and does not rather obtrude his own
Sense upon us, under that specious Pretense.

Answ. By the same Spirit; As well said Gualt. Cradock. Gual^. Cr^. Divine
Drops, p. (...).
The Way to know whether the Spirit be in us is its own Evidence; And that is
the Way to know it in others too: and the man hat has the Spirit, may know the
Spirit in another; There is, says be, a kind of Sagacity in the Saints to this
Purpose. Which is also true in the Sense of abundance of P^otestant Writers;
For as they held, That no man could know the Scriptures, but by the same
Spirit; so consequently that the same Spirit only could assure him of the Truth
of the said I^terpretation. And Peter Martyr, as before quoted, tells us, The
Holy Ghost is the Arbiter or Judge. Also D. J. Owen s^ith, That the Holy Ghost
is the Only Authentic Interpreter of the Scripture: I^ Authentic, then
Infallible; if Infallible, then the Judge of the Mind of Scripture is both an
Only and an (...) Judge. But to wave this; Does not the same Objection lie
aga^st the Sense of Scripture, since one says, this is the Sense, and another
that? To know God's Mind, men must come to God's Spirit, else Difficulties of
that sort are unsurmountable.

In short; It were greatly to be wished, that all men would hold themselves
unconcerned in disputing about what they have not received an Infallible
Dictamen from the Holy Spirit upon; since they beat but the Air, and obtain no
solid Satisfaction, neither can they: God never prostrates his Secrets to Minds
disobedient to what they do already know: Let all practice what they assuredly
know to be their Duty, and be sparing in their search after nice and unknown
Matters. Weighty and seasonable was and is the Apostle's Saying, Nevertheless,
Phil. 3. 16
whereunto we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule; where he
both limits to the present Knowledge communicated, and exhorts to live up to
that; and if any thing be further necessary, God in due time will reveal it by
his Spirit, that gives to know, discern and judge of the things that are of God.

Obj. But how will this determine the Controversy, and allay the Fury of
Debates on foot?

Answ. Nothing like it, if man adhere to it; and if he does not, there is no
way left, but the Wrath that is to be revealed: But most Persuasions are agreed
about the absolute Necessaries in Religion, from that Witness God has placed in
man's Conscience, viz. That God is; That he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him; That the Way of God is a Way of Purity, Patience, Meekne
ss, etc. without which no man can see the Lord: Nay, they accord in some
considerable Matters superadded, as some of them speak, to wit, That God
manifested himself extraordinarily in the Flesh; that he gave his Life for the
World, that such as believe and obey his Grace, receive Remission of Sins and
Life Everlasting. Now, I say, since these things men generally submit to, let
them live up hereunto; and forbear wanton Scrutinies after Things or Notions
that gender to Strife and Contention, and leave not Mankind better, but rather
worse then they found them; and the World would be soon rid of Controversy:
Holy Living, and not Disputing, would be the Business of Mankind. What more
excellent Judgment can be given, then that men quit their Contentions about
Notions and Opinions, and betake themselves to the Practice of that which God
has already shown unto them; as spoke both the Prophet Micah 6. 8. and the
Apostle Paul, Romans 1. 19. And if any thing be revealed to one more then
another, let the rest judge in the Spirit, or be silent till God manifest more
to them, in order to Right Judgment.

It Is good to try all things; but we must have something to try them by; and
what ought that to be, but the Spirit that searches, and the Anointing that
teaches all things, which is Truth it self. Here Mankind will live in Love,
having at least Natural Affections (now lost, by the B^rbarity of some of their
cruel Religions) and a Judgment o^ things will be made, not from the Rash,
Partial, Short sighted a d Froward Mind of man, but that eternal Light and
Spirit that never erred; which, however disgustful to some Protestants in this
Age, was no False Doctrine in the Account of John Philpot and Bp. Latimer, two
great Founders of the Reformation:

The first in his Answer to the Bishop of Chichester, reproving B. Mart. vol.
3. P 577.
his Confidence about true Faith in Christ; saying. These Heretics take upon
them to be sure of all things they stand in. Let him doubt (says John Philpot)
of his Faith that lists; God give me always to believe that I am sure of
true Faith and Favor in Christ.

The second, in his Answer to a Knight, objecting the B. Mart. vol. 3. P. 475.
Uncertainty of Man in what he calls Truth, thus recorded by J. Fox; Your
Friends deny not, but that certain Truths are communicated to us according to
Capacity: But as to my Presumption and Arrogance; either I am certain or
uncertain that it is Truth that I preach; if it be Truth, why may not I say so?
if I be uncertain, why dare I be so bold as to preach it? And if your Friends
be Preachers themselves, after their Sermon, I pray you ask them, Whether they
be certain and sure they preach the Truth or no; and send me word what they
say, that I may learn to speak after them. If they say they be sure, you know
what follows; if they say they be unsure, when shall you be sure, that have so
doubtful and unsure Teachers.

Let not Protestants for Shame judge us for owning a Doctrine, that is
confessed to and confirmed by some of the Worthiest of their own Ancestors,
viz. That an Infallible Judgment in things necessary to Salvation, is both
possible and requisite; and that God communicates it by his Spirit to the Souls
of men.

The Conclusion.
TO Conclude; Immanuel (a word suited not only to that Appearance, but whole
Dispensation) imports, God nigh to or with men; The Tabernacle of God is with
men; he will Rev. 21. 3, 7.
dwell in them, and walk in them; they shall be all taught of me, and in
Righteousness shall they be established: And this Isa. 54. 13.
admits not of any Book, or literal Rule or Judge to come between that
in-dwelling Light, Life and Wisdom of God, and the Soul, as its Rule of Faith
and Life.

And because it is the unutterable Goodness of God to People in these latter
Days, as the Sum of Scripture-Prophecy, thus to make known himself; we are
incessant in our Cries unto them, that they would turn in their Minds (now
abroad, and taking up their Rest in the Externals of Religion) that they may
hear his Heavenly Voice and Knocks, and let him in, and be taught of him to
know and do his Will, that they may come to be experienced and expert in the
School of Christ: For never Man spoak and taught, as he livingly speaks and
teaches in the Consciences of those who diligently hear him, and are willing to
be taught of him the Knowledge of his Ways: The Priest was Outward, but he is
now Inward; the Law Outward, but it is now Inward: And he is no more a Jew that
is one outward; nor that Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh; Romans 11.
28. 29.
but he is a Jew who is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart, in
the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose Praise is not of Men, but of God.
Which is so far from lessening the Scriptures of Truth, that unless this be
man's Rule and Judge in the reading and believing of them, he can never, either
understand them, or keep the things therein contained aright. And indeed, as
before I have expressed, I cannot but say, That Man, whilst unregenerated,
setting his Wit and Wisdom to fathom and comprehend the Intention of the Holy
Ghost in many of those Writings, has occasioned that Confusion, Darkness and
perplexed Controversy, that now so lamentably pesters the World; In which
State, for all the External Imitations of the Ancients in some temporary and
visible Parts of Worship, I am to tell such from the Spirit of the Lord God of
all Truth, they will never be accepted.

The utmost of that literal Knowledge, historical Faith, and outward Religion,
is at best but the Old Heavens that are to be wrapped up as a Scroul, the Old
Wine and Bottle that belong not to the Kingdom, and Man's holding true Words in
an unregenerated and unrighteous Nature, where he may cry, Lord, Lord; but
shall never enter into the Rest that is Eternal: For under such a Faith and
Religion, Envy, Wrath, Malice, Persecution, Pride, Passion, Worldly-Mindedness,
etc. may and do live; yea, and are cloaked, as with a secure Cover from the
Stroke of God's Spirit; insomuch, as when any are moved of the Lord to decry
such fair and hypocritical Shows of Religion, they are reputed Rash and
Censorious, and presently a Plea must he made on this wise; Do not we follow
the Commands of the Scripture? Did not such and such do so and so? Never
regarding from what Grounds the Performance springs, whether it be according to
the Rule of the NEW or OLD Creature; bu^ abuse and vilify us for making such
Distinctions, as if the Prayers, Preachings, Singings, outward Baptizings and
Suppings, etc. of Men in their own Spirits, Strength and Will were required and
accepted of God for Evangelical Worship: Thick Darkness and dangerous
Presumption! Thus are Men out of the Way concerning both Faith and Practice,
and the true Rule and Judge of them: They make the former to lie in an Assent
of the Understanding to such Propositions, and in the performing of some
visible Parts of Religion in their own Spirits and Wills (which is far from the
Immanuel-State) And the latter to be the Scriptures, which is but an Account of
those Things, which others were ruled to and directed in by the Holy Spirit,
before they were ever recorded or made Scripture; and not another Rule or Judge
can so regulate: For as the Faith and Experience, so the Rule and Judge of that
Faith and that Experience must be one: God by his Spirit begets Faith; God by
his Spirit rules Faith, and governs the Life of his Children; for as many as
are Children of God are led by the Spirit of God. The Scripture, Rom (...). 14,
15.
much of it, is but a Declaration of Faith and Experience; therefore not the
Rule or Judge: For as Faith and Experience were before Scripture, so the Rule
and Judge before Scripture; because, as I said before, there is a Rule and
Judge as soon as there is Faith; therefore the Scripture is not that Rule or
Judge: And before that Declaration be answered by any, they must come to the
Faith, Rule and Judge of which that is a Declaration: So that Faith is yielding
up to the Requirings of God's Spirit in us, in full Assurance of the Remission
of Sins, through the Son of his Love and Life Everlasting, from whence daily
flow Works of Holiness well-pleasing to God, and not a mere Assent of the
Understanding to a verbal, though a true Proposition. The Life of a true
Christian stands not in Bodyly Exercise; that, says the Apostle, profits
little: nor in an Imitation of the Ancients in temporary things, which as well
the Hypocrite as the Saint can do; But in Self-denial and walking in the
Spirit, to 1 Timothy 4. 8.
bring forth the Fruits thereof unto all Godliness, which is the pure Col (...)
20, 21, (...), 23.
and spiritual Obedience, resulting from the living spiritual (...) (...) 38
Faith of God's Elect, and the Rule and Judge thereof is their (...) (...)
(...) (...), (...)
Author or Begetter, even the Spirit of Truth, which alone gives saving
Understanding, and searches the deep things of God.

O you Professors of Religion, that you would but seriously weigh these things,
and examine your selves in God's Sight, who respects none for their fair
Outsides, If this saving Faith be your Faith, and this Heavenly Life be your
Life, and if the holy Spirit be your Ruler and Leader; if not, you are but
legal, formal, in the Oldness of the Letter, and Runnings in your own Will,
which obtains not: in which State, not the Wisdom from above, but that which is
from below, of the old Creature, is your Rule; in it you read Scripture,
expound it, pray, preach, sing and perform all your Duties: and this is not to
walk according to the Rule of the New Creature; but in a legal (...) (...) 16.
Spirit to make a Gospel-Profession, the End of which, from the Lord, I am to
tell you, will be a Bed of Sorrow. Therefore (...) (...) 23.
resist not the Light and Spirit within, but turn at the Reproof thereof, that
you may come to walk in the Way of Life, daily Life to your Souls, that so you
may be quickened and made alive to God, and live to him in that Life, which is
hid with Christ in God; that being thus born again, and become (...) (...).
renewed in your inner Man, you may perform that pure and spiritual Worship,
which is of a sweet Savor with the Lord; so shall he bless you with his
Heavenly Blessings, and daily replenish your Souls with the unspeakable Joys
of his glorious Salvation: This I heartily desire, and through all Difficulties
incessantly travail for in Body, Soul and Spirit, that the al-wise, omnipotent
God may be known, served, obeyed, to and by you, to your Comfort, and his
Eternal Honor, who alone is worthy to receive it, now and forever,

Amen
William Penn.

Errata for the First Part.
REader, Several Errors have escaped the Press, partly through the Author's
frequent Absence, and the Printer's many other Occasions; but the most
considerable of them are here noted, and thou art desired hereby to correct
them.

Contents -- Chap. 9 line 3. dele (,) after Scriptures.

Preface -- Page 1. Margent dele Milt. p. 2. l. 1. read at last. p. 5. l. 2 and
3. for Ab. rogation r. Ab^uration. l. 25. for the read that: p. 7. l 2: read in
their Hopes. l. 14. read that at. page 9. l. 10. for disclaimed read declam d.
line 19. read -- faciunt. page 10. line 32. for reduct read reduced. page 19.
line 8. for but read by. line 31. read too irksom. page 22. line 4. for Hammer
read Humor. page 24. line 19. begin a Parenthesis at ( And my] and conclude it
line 30. after [ Dominion)

Book -- Page 8. line 42. b^ot out self. p. 13 l. 38. for paws read pause. p.
17. l. 12. for without read with our. page 18. l. 25. read was to be. l. 31 for
it self read himself. p. 20. l. 40 for these read those. p. 21. l. 34. for Who,
Me? read Who? Me, p. 23 l. 26. for is read are. p 26. l. 7. for this before
Light? read this Light before? page 28 l. 10. for at that time read at thi^
time. p. 30. l. 2. read forms, creates. l. 39. for here to read hereto. page
33. l. 2. read not with respect to any. l 4. dele the whole line. l. 9. for of
read to. l. 37. for heart he read hear the. p. 39. l 2. for bold read ^eld. p
40. l 20. read or be void. p. 43. Margent l. 19. for tell read tells. p. 44. l.
37. read bits) page 45 l. 7. Marg. read Civ. Dei. 8. p. 47. Marg. read Id. p.
711. for Id. 4. read Id. mem. 4 p 48. line 2. dele in line 22. read on that
line 32. read of him. page 50. line 32. read Idolatrous. That line 33. Thought
it, let. Margen: dele Aru^t. de Xen. Ma^gent for Laert. de read Lactant. de.
page 51. line. 12. for Accute read Acute. Marg. Plat. Phaed dele. p 53. l. 25.
read of the. p. 54. l. 12. for Pireen read Prienc ^in. 14. and He de^e. l. 15.
dele He at the end of the line. page 55. l. 13. for Good re^d Go^d. p. 56. Marg.
for Enca^. read Aenead. p. 59. l. 6 and 7. dele p. 61. Marg. l 3. for 1543.
123. read 123. 1543. p. 62 l. 24. for accutely read acutely. p. 65. l. 13 for
no read no^ p. 66. read CHAP XIII. l. 12. dele not. [70. Marg. l. 3. dele o. l.
12. dele ibid. p. 71. Marg. l. 2. for 48. read 84. p. 73. l. 5. read and
gives. p 78. l. 30. read of Men. p. 79. l. 24. dele Prophecy and. l. 35. for
then read them p 80. l. 12. for End (...) hand. p. 81. l. 29, 30. for what
Virgil will add to read what Eusebius will have Virgli t^ have added in. p. 82.
l. 35. read Occidet serpens. p 83. l. 22. for Iandix read ^anilix. page 84.
(...) 32. read enough to. p. 87. l. 4 read Hicks, then he has dealt. l. 5.
read Dialogue) page 91. l. 11. add after ( him) so as to be no where else. l.
20. read the Manifestation of Light. p. 92. l 34. for dar^st read durst. page
94. l. 15. for Light read ^llumination. p. 79. l. 6 read not only. p 98. l. 8.
read And that. page 101. l. 35. read (...) willingly. p. 103. l. 26. for when
read whom. p. 106. l. 33. for endangered read accessible. l. 4^. for
guarnison'd read garrisoned, p. 107. l. 2. for inbondag'd read ^nbondag'd. l 5.
read clear and broken forth. l. 15. read We say, l. 17. for not instrumentally
read instrumentally not. p. 110. l. 30. read Jews, viz. p. 112. l. 23. for
suffered read suffer. p 115. l. 17 for In^ner read Jenner. page 116. l. 11. for
Saving, One read saving one. line 16. for Product read produced. p. 1^7. l. 11.
for better, as read better at. line 25. read true Light. p 119. l 27. dele
Omnious. p. 122. l. 37. r. Aggravation. (...). 126. l. 1 for Si^ read Sigh. p.
28. read CHAP XXVI. p. 131. l. 4. for Inability, to see the read (...) to see,
the. p. 136. l. 26. r. Scriptures. p. 136. l. 34. for were (...). wa^. p. 137.
l. 6. for Good read Goad. l. 29 read such a thing. p. 138. l. 27. for more read
m^er. l. 39. Marge^t for on read one. p^ge 140 l. 29. for He that flies read
They ^at fly. p. 148. l (...). for (...) read per^eived. p. 149. l. 24. read
in his Works. p. 54. l 34 after M^unt de^ (,) and put a (,) before was. p. 156.
l. 30. r. but as the

THE CHRISTIAN QUAKER AND HIS Divine Testimony VINDICATED, Against the
Adversaries of the True LIGHT; BEING THE Second Part, Containing A more
particular Answer to the Baptists (and others) Arguments, Exceptions, Errors
and Falasies herein specified.

By a Servant and Follower of Jesus Christ through Persecutions and Reproaches,
G. Whitehead.

The vile Person will speak Villainy, and his Heart will work Iniquity, to
practice Hypocrisy, and to utter Error against the Lord, Isa. 32. 6. Printed
in the Year 1673.

To the Unprejudiced READER.
IF it had not been the Lord who was on our side when Men rose up against us;
Now may we (with Israel) say, then they had swallowed us up quick, when their
Wrath was kindled against us.

Had our Separation and Testimony been of Men, or by Man's Will, we ha^ fallen
long since (as many of our Adversaries have falsely prophesied) we had not been
sustained through our many Trials, nor born up above the Floods of Enmity, if
the Lord h^d not been with us; but he who has gathered and chosen us to
witnes^ forth his Name and Truth in the Power and Spirit of it, h^th preserved
and given us Strength to persevere therein, blessed be his Name for ever.

And this I (with my Brethren) must give Testimony of, that as God has in
these last Days been pleased to visit us by his Eternal Power, and in his Love
and Kindness to open the Eyes of our Understanding, to see his Goodness both to
our own particulars, and to Mankind in General, in extending Saving Grace or
Light to all.

So it is by his Power that he has raised up, and set forth Witnesses of the
same; the Sense we have of the Love of God, and his Glorious Light revealed,
induces and moves us, even in the Spirit of the Gospel, to call others out of
Darkness, and to direct their Minds to the Appearance of the true Light in
their Hearts and Consciences (in what degree soever it shows it self) which
God in his Goodness has universally afforded for Good to Mankind, that they
might both know him, and their Duty to him: God did stretch forth his Hand, and
reach unto us by his Power, for this very end, to gather us unto his divine
Light or Shining in our Hearts, that thereby we might receive the Knowledge of
his Glory in the Face of Christ Jesus, as his former Witnesses did.

And although we must still confess to the Love and Good Will of God to Man, in
affording Divine Light universally, throughout all Ages; yet Transgression and
Darkness has been such in the Earth, that has in many Ages much veiled and
obscured the Light, that the Knowledge and Manifestation thereof has be^ much
wanting, even because of Man's Transgr^ssion and I (...).

Wherefore Light being now sprung up, an^ Truth arisen out of Darkness and
Obscurity; we must faithfully testify thereof, and own the least degrees and
lowest Dispensations of divine Light (...) Man, as his Duty to observe, and not
to slight, nor despise^ (...) any; for we know, that as Light has risen, and
shined out of Obscurity, and Truth has risen up out of the Earth, it has been
from a less Appearance and Degree to a greater, (...) from that Degree of
shining in a dark Place, unto the perfect Day: And as all the Promises of God
are yea and Amen in Christ; so all his Glorious Dispensations and Promises do
center in a Divine and Unchangeable Principle of Life and Light, (...)
gradually discovered to and in Man: Therefore the (...) Appearance or
Manifestation in any (while it is of the same Principle) cannot be extinguished
nor lessened by the greater in others, in that the highest Seize of
Divine Knowledge were always gradually obtained by the Holy Men of God.

Moreover, This we assert, that God that made Man for his own Glory (whose
Mcrcies are over all his Works, and who wills not the Death of Sinners, but
rather that they should return and live) He has not only throughout all Ages
universally afforded an Unchangeable Principle of Divine Light, which he has
placed in man, to direct him his Way out of Darkness and Sin; but also he
signally visits him at times with Living Appearances, Motions and Opperations
of his Light and Spirit, to his Reproof and Conviction, thereby often warning
and calling Man out of Iniquity; as the Spirit of God did strive with the old
World that had corrupted us Way before him, and was destroyed by the Flood, for
its Flood of Iniquity; and he gave his good Spirit unto the Rebellious Jews,
which they grieved and vexed, until he became their Enemy, and fought against
them: He by his Lightnings enlightened the World, and the Earth trembled and
s^ke, and upon whom does not his Light arise? although they that rebel against
the Light know not the Ways of it, because they abide not in the Paths
thereof: yea, he that causes his Sun to arise ^n the Evil and on the Good, and
sends his Rain on the Just and the Unjust; he has not left himself without
sufficient Witness in the Earth, both inward and outward, as namely, his Divine
Immediate Light in man appearing to the Soul, and his Works of Creation which
are obvious to the Light, and Universally declaring his Wisdom, Power and
Greatness to be inwardly (...), and ^nderstood, as his Inward Light opens Man's
Understanding and the Eyes thereof.

Howbeit Man having transgressed this Divine Principle, and his Mind being
alienated from it, and blinded by the God of this World: God having Bowels of
Pity still remaining, he has been pleased so far to commiserate poor lost
Man, as to afford and extend those precious Promises, as the more eminently to
declare, show forth and renew his Love Light and Power, for man's Recovery out
of his Lost and Dark Estate: As that the Seed of the Woman should bruise the
Serpents Head; and this did Christ in general (and does in particular) by the
Power of the Father, which can no ways lessen nor detract from his Light
within, nor be any Inconsistency with its directing Men to the same Power of
God, for the subduing and bruising Satan under their Feet, which in their own
particulars they must experience, whoever attain to Deliverance or Salvation
from the Power of Sin and Satan.

As also God has promised to make a New Covenant with his People; Its new, not
as opposed to the Light within, as implying its waxing old (but new) as that
the old Covenant without, (which the Jews broke) was to decay and vanish, this
New Covenant being a Covenant of Light, Life and Peace, a Covenant whereby he
takes away and forgives Sin; This they only have a Part in, who obey the
Universal Light of the Son of God within, which no Way differs in Nature from
the Covenant it self, nor can it oppose the Ends of it; but is a Light of the
same Life and Fullness that is enjoyed in the Covenant or Agreement with God,
moving and conducing to the very same End and Agreement as ob^ed and waited in;
and as the Jews outward had a Rule directory, and Law in the Letter without
(though that alone could not give Life) so the Jew inward has his Rule
directory, and Law inward in Spirit which can give Life.

And this New Covenant is the last Dispensation of God in Christ to Man,
wherein his Highest, Spiritual and Saving Knowledge is to be received, by all
that truly obey his Light; and though this be new as to his renewed glorious
Discovery herein; yet he who is the Life of this Covenant, and given for a
Covenant and Salvation, is the first and the last, the Rock of Ages, whom God
has decreed to anoint or set up upon the Hill of his Holiness, even the Holy
Hill of Sion, that he may subdue and rule the Nations, and be the Salvation of
God to the Ends of the Earth, more abundantly to be manifest in these last
Ages, wherein his Church comes out of the Wilderness, and the Holy City New
Jerusalem is discovered from Heaven as a Bride prepared for the Bridegroom, and
the Lord God and the Lamb (as promised) is the Light thereof, and the Nations
of them that are saved shall walk in the Light of this City, and for this End
is the Gospel made known and preached again, after a long Night and Reign of
Antichrist, Beast, false Prophet, Dragon and Whore, whose Judgment is
revealed, even against all the dark Whorish Spirits, and Hypocritical Envieus
Agents of Antichrist and Satan, who do not only envy, oppose and gainsay the
Truth, and undervalue the True Light, as its an Universal Principle in man, but
also resist and strive against the Glorious Breaking forth and Discovery
thereof in our Days; for which the Lord will rebuke them, and he that sits in
Heaven has them in Derision.

And all such Babylonish Builders, and Envious Agents; as diverse of these Men,
called Anabaptists, or Dippers, now show themselves to be, whose Malice,
Madness and Folly shall be manifest to all Men; why do they rage, and fret, and
revile, but because the Light is sprung up, and the Over-spreading Day of God
is broken forth, who has said, as truly as I live, all the Earth shall be
filled with the Glory of the Lord, Number. 14. 21. The Stone cut out without
Hands, that s^ites the Image shall become a great Mountain, and fill the Earth;
the God of Heaven is setting up his Kingdom which shall never be destroyed, as
is prophesied in Daniel: Yea, Truth is sprung out of the Earth, which strikes
at Satan's and Anti-christ's Kingdom, and again bruiseth the Serpent's Head,
who has lodged and covered himself under their empty Forms, Shaddows and
Liveless Professions (as he did among the persecuting Jews of old) The Lord
has lifted up a Standard against their Hypocrisy and Deceit, who have been
covering an Envious Spirit with a Pretense of Christianity; And he is exalting
his Gospel Dispensation, in setting up his Light above their Darkness, his
Power above their empty Forms, the Substance above the Shadow, the Spirit
above the Letter, and his Worship in Spirit and Truth above Will Worship in
Hypocrisy.

At this Satan is offended, and his Agents are angry; These our present
Opposers vent forth their Confusion, Envy and Strife, though it be against the
Stream; they are wearying themselves for very Vanity; the Fire (which they have
kindled in their Envy against the Lord's Heritage, wherein they are laboring)
shall devour them.

1. These Anabaptists Babylonish Confusion greatly appears about the Light,
which is in every Man, as Men whom Enmity has blinded, and whose Minds are
alienated from it into gross Darkness; Though the Controversy between us is
not upon the Question, Whether there be a Light, or any Light in every man (for
thus far we both agree in the Affirmative) but whether God has given a Divine
or Sufficient Light to every Man, to show and direct him out of Sin and Evil,
to God who is Light, and the Giver of Light for Life and Salvation? which we
affirm, but these Dippers deny, especially such of them who are particular
Electioners or Predestinarians, whose partial Doctrine does not really place
the Cause of Men's Condemnation upon their Neglect (or Disobedience) of the
Light given them; but originally upon God's secret Decree against them, and his
withholding saving Light or Grace from them (as they both falsely and partially
imagine) however its confessed to be tendered to all, in preaching the Gospel
without Exception or Respect of Persons.

But under what Terms or Names do these our Opposers represent this Light,
which they confess is in every Man to prove it Insufficient, either for a Rule
or Guide to Salvation. Sometime they call it a Creature, sometime a Natural
Light, sometime the Substance of the Law, or first Covenant, which they grant
ought to be improved. Sometimes, after a more gross manner, they blasphemously
represent it as a Mis-guiding Light, directly opposing the Covenant of Grace,
and to be rejected; but how well this agrees with its being a Light given of
God to be improved (surely sor a good End) I leave to the Serious Impartial
Reader to judge, of which he may see further about in the following Answer to
Thomas Hicks.

And as touching these Men's Envy against us called Quakers, as being offended
at our present Liberty and Prosperity, H. Grigg endeavors to clear them, in
his Epistle (to the Baptists, not Babylonish) by this Passage, viz. I have not
the least Enmity nor Hatred in my Heart against the Persons of any of these
People called Quakers, nor are we offended or troubled at their present
Liberty, (as he seems to charge us) though we cannot deny but their Principles
and unsound Doctrines tend to the wounding and grieving of our Souls, because
we see daily more and more the dangerous and damnable Nature thereof.

Mark, that while hypocritically they pretend to clear and quit themselves from
having the least Enmity against our Persons, or Offense at our present Liberty;
It appears they would be gratified or pleased, if the Powers would do them that
Favor, as suppress us, and restrain our Liberty for them, as their bitter
Invectives and invet crate Clamours plainly import and intimate their
persecuting Spirit and Implac^ble Ma^ice, as while they are complaining against
our Principles and Doctri^es as ^amnable, and (...) us Cheats, Impostors,
Romish (...), etc. Th^ugh their Charge herein they have never proved against
us, nor can they; this does not only bespeak a Willingness or ^esire to have
our Principles suppresse^, but our Persons likewise: As also T. Hick's
proclaiming to the World, p. 62; that the Quaker's Religion is a mere Cheat
calculated to the Service of the Devil; and wickedly infianating against our
Sufferings, that the Satisfaction of our Wills and Lusts, the promoting our
Carnal Interest, Respect only to something to be enjoyed here, Carnal
Advantage, Outward Gains, etc. may be our chief Motive, Inducement and
Encouragement to do and suffer as we do, Dialogue p. 75. And he questions,
whether we are not really acted by some Romish Emissaries, to insinuate
covertly many of their own Heresies, to distract, deform and declaim the
Protestant Profession, etc. p. 76.

Judge, Candid Reader, whether these malicious and false Insinuations do not
savor of a persecu^ing Spirit, though they would not be seen to envy our
Liberty; yet how do these Invectives tend to stir up Persecution, and to
incense the World, and instigate the Rulers against us sor our Suppression?
(Their pretended Alegations sor them are hereafter answered and refuted) and
how absurd they are in these Accusations.

1st, To insinuate that our Sufferings have been either for Carnal Advantage,
Temporal Gains, or to satisfy Lusts; whilst in our resigning up our selves to
these many and deep Sufferings, we have often offered up our Lives, and
consequently (with them) all our Temporal Enjoyments and Advantages, us many
this Day can testify, together with those many Innocent Person's Lives that
have been laid down among us in and by Imprisonments, Exilements and other
Sufferings.

2ly, How ill it does become these Anabaptists to endeavor to make the World
believe, that we are either influenced or acted by Romish Emissaries, either to
distract, deform or defame the Protestant Profession, which is not only a
Popular and deceitful Insinuation against us (as if the Dippers had the chief
Care of Protestant Religion, or were the most Catholic therein) but most
notoriously false and wicked; and I challenge Thomas Hicks, and all therest of
his Fratcrnity to prove it, or else forever to be ashamed thereof. Have they
not more cause to look back at home, and reflect upon themselves, since that
diverse of their Brethren (even some of their Preachers) have turned Papists of
late Years, whose Names being so well known, I need not now mention them; but
when or where did any Preachers owned among us turn Papists, or were any such
Emissaries?

Oh the great Enmity that's in these our Opposers, and their great Disingenuity
and Immoderation that appears among them (as will further be manifest to their
Shame, and the Lord will certainly rebuke them, and all their feigned Coverings
will be too narrow for them, and they shall see and be ashamed of their Envy at
his People.

But I must proceed to give the Reader a short view of some of Thomas Hicks
Doctrines that past at a Dispute, and in a Paper of his, before his Fictitious
and Unchristian Dialogue came forth as some Introduction to my following
Answer, which was writ quickly after the said Dialogue came forth.

London the 4th. 1st. Month 1673. I am a Well-Wisher to all Men, even desiring
my Enemies Repentance, G. W.

Some of the Doctrines and Contradictions of Thomas Hicks declared at a
Discourse between him and some of the Quakers (so called) in Alderman-Berrey
London, the twentieth of the third Month 1672.
FIrst, He owned the Baptists above other People.

That is no Honor to them.

2ly, That he did not own Water Baptism to be necessary (or of Necessity) to
Salvation.

True, but contrary to many of his Brethren.

3ly, That the Quakers err in Fundamentals, denying the Person of Christ,
denying the true Christ and Resurrection.

These are Impudent Slanders.

4. That the Life or Light spoken of, John 1. 4, 9. is not supernatural,
because it is the Light of the Word as Creator.

A Blasphemous Inconsistency.

[This was noted down at the Interim of the Discourse before him, but snacht
away by one of his Companions] So that h^ concluded, the ^ight in every Man is
but Natural, and not sufficient to guide to Salvation.

False Doctrine, the Light of the Eternal Word is supernatural and sufficient

5ly, That the Life which is in God, which is the Light of Men, John 1. 4. is
divine as it is in God, but natural as it is in Man.

Blasphemy, that Life is Immutable because Divine.

6ly, That the Light that is given in common to Men is not able to apprehend
things supernatural.

A false and inconsistent Doctrine. Contradiction.


And yet able to apprehend (and bring Men clearly to see) the Invisible things
of God, even the Eternal Power and Godhead, Romans 1. 19, 20.

A true Concession, but a Contradiction to the former.

7ly, [Evasion] That it is able to discern the Eternal Power and God head, but
not the things that are supernatural that are in God.

A gross Contradiction, the Eternal Power and GodHead are supernatural.

8ly, That it was a Natural Light, a Light of Conscience, and a depraved
renewed Nature, by which the Gentiles did those things contained in the Law,
Romans 2. 14.

Absurd Inconsistencies and Falsehoods.

9ly, That the Light in the Heathen, in Philosophers and others was able to
apprehend God and his Divine Power, but not those things that are in God.

A gross Inference; are those things higher then God?

10ly, That it cannot discover the human Nature of Christ, or the Body that he
took upon him, nor his Suffering nor Death; And yet it can discover the divine
Attributes of God, his Wisdom Contradiction.
Power, Goodness, Love, and direct Men to love him.

A manifest Contradiction; can it discover the greater, and not the lesser?

11ly, But the Light in the Quakers cannot discover the Person of Christ, nor
his human Nature, Sufferings, Death, etc.

Yet it is the Life and Light of Christ.

12ly, That the Quakers deny the Person of Christ, his Offices, Satisfaction,
and the Resurrection of the Body, etc.

Lies and Slanders forged and brought forth in Envy and Darkness.

13ly, That its their Principle that whosoever believes in that Christ that
suffered at Jerusalem, and expects Salvation by him, they are deceived in their
Faith, and shall be damned, etc. This he spoke of James Nayl^r's Love to the
Lost, near the Beginning of the Discourse.

This is an Abuse, the true Christ is but one, and the same yesterday to day
and forever.

14ly, Also at the Beginning he said, that the Baptists and Presbyterians agree
in Fundamentals, and there are good People among Presbyterians; therefore they
might join against the Quakers, for they err in Fundamentals.
Answ. First we thought that Water Baptism had been a fundamental Point with
the Baptists; and do they and Presbyterians agree therein? 2. Have not the
Baptists, whom Presbyterians call Anabaptists, been accounted Heretics by the
Presbyterians? Why do they now join against the Quakers (so called)? 3. Dare he
say there are no good People among the Quakers, that he makes good People's
being among Presbyterians a Reason of his joining with them against us? Is it
not easy to see a manifest Dissimulation and feigned Confederacy therein among
these our Opposers? If our Opposer says, we have not inserted his Explications
upon his Assertions. Answ. That's his Work, he has Liberty to do it himself.
[But he has not done it, nor vindicated these his Assertions in his Pamphlet.]

Christ's Light within asserted, as it is Divine (and therefore a sufficient
Rule of Life unto Salvation to all that truly obey it) and vindicated from
Tho. Hicks his dark Exceptions; fallasious and impious Arguments (consisting of
manifest Ignorance, Confusion and Ranterism) which are here inserted as they
were exhibited in a Paper, afterward owned and signed by him.
HIs harge against G.W. That George Whitehead affirmed, that there was that
Light in every Man, if followed, that was sufficient to Salvation.

T. Hick's Assertions against this.
1. In Answer to which it is asserted, that the Light in every Man could not
understand the Doctrine of Instituted Worship. 2. That the Light in every Man
could not understand the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, concerning his coming to
save Sinners. 3. The Light in every Man could not bring him to the
Understanding how Sin came into the World. 4. The Light in every Man cannot
acquaint him with the Knowledge of the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the
Dead.
Reply, G. Whitehead still affirms, that God has graciously afforded that
Light to every Man, which he ought to follow, and is sufficient to guide him to
Salvation.

To his four first Assertions, I query, Is that Life which is the Light of Men,
John 1. 4. divine in it self? the Light of Jesus Christ as the Eternal Word?
able to apprehend and bring Man clearly to see the Invisible things of God,
even his Eternal Power and Godhead? (as confessed from Rom, 1. 19, 20.) And yet
is this Light neither able to understand the Worship that is due to him, the
Doctrine of Christ Jesus concerning his coming to save Sinners, how Sin came
into the World, nor yet to acquaint Man with the Knowledge of the Resurrection?
can the Light apprehend or bring men to see God's Eternal Power, and yet
neither bring them to understand the Cause of Man's Separation and Death from
God, nor his Duty or Restoration to God again? How manifestly in consistent and
contradictory are these? and how plainly does he charge men's Ignorance (and
Defects for want of Obedience) upon the Light within? And then, what is it
given for, and what can it do? But these Assertions are grounded upon his
taking it for granted, that it is not a Light of Grace, but of Nature, when
that Life which is the Light of Men is granted to be divine in its own being,
able to discover the Eternal Power and Godhead, then which there is not a
higher Power; but how this divine Light should become Natural as a Creature, we
are still to enquire, as that which neither T. H. ^or his Brethren have ever
yet proved.

That the Light within every Man could not be a Rule, for it His 1st. Argum.
must be a Light of Nature or of Grace; This Light cannot be understood the
Light of Grace, because the Scripture does suppose a time when Men are without
it: It is said, after those Days I will put my Laws in their Hearts, and they
shall know me; that must be the Light of Grace.

Answ. Where does the Scripture say, that the Life of Christ, which was with
and in the Father, which is the Light of men, is the Light of Nature, and not a
Light of Grace? The man in taking this for granted most filthily begs the
Question, and that contrary to his own Concession before; neither does the
Scripture suppose a time wherein Men have no Light of Grace in them, as he
insinuates; but a time when they are out of the New Covenant, and Strangers in
their Minds to it, as not being come into that Agreement with God or Union with
his Light, which this Covenant does import. And because the State and Tenor of
it is both the having God's Laws written in his People's Hearts and Minds,
their knowing him to be their God, and they to be his People; and its a
Covenant of Mercy and Forgiveness of Sins past; It does not therefore follow,
that none of his Law is in them before they come to this Holy Attainment and
Blessed Agreement; though his Laws are not so universally written or deeply
engraven in their Hearts before, for its now granted by diverse of our Opposers,
who are of the more moderate.

1. That the pure or holy Law which God placed in man's Hearts before
Transgression, was never wholly abliterated, though much clouded by man's
Disobedience.

2. Some of these Anabaptists do confess to a Light in man which reproves for
Evil and excites to good, which they say is the Substance of the morral ^aw, or
first Covenant, which enjoins Man truly to love and worship God, and to love
our Neighbors equally with our selves, to do justly, etc. That this the very
Heathens or Gentiles have in them. And then I ask, if this Law does not
appertain to the New Covenant as one principle Law thereof also? and never
intended to be destroyed by Christ, but fulfilled and renewed in his Followers,
who have Union with it, as having a more deep impression, and being more fully
discovered in the Hearts of Men, when become Children of this Covenant then
before: Was not Love the fulfilling of the Law? and was not this preached by
Christ's Ministers? and was not love one to another both the Old and New
Commandment; yea, the Old Commandment renewed and established?

If not a Light of Grace in every Man, then it must be the His 2d. Argum,
Light of Nature; but the Light in every Man cannot be sufficient to Salvation,
Acts 11. 18. When they heard these things they held their Peace and glorified
God, saying, then has God also to the Gentiles granted Repentance to Life;
then they had it not before.

Answ. His Argument still depends upon his former Fallacy, that it is not a
Light of Grace, but a Light of Nature that is in every Man, as also in putting
Repentance for the Light of Grace, he puts the Effect for the Cause, as if no
man had saving Grace or a Light thereof before Repentance or Conversion;
whereas his Argument does not at all prove that those Gentiles who received the
Word of God, had not a Light of Grace, but only of Nature in them, before Peter
preached Jesus Christ to them; but rather the contrary, that it was a Light of
Grace, a Light of Jesus Christ and secret Power of God that moved in them, and
opened their Hearts, and seriously inclined them to hear the Gospel preached,
and which Light in them closed with the lively Testimony thereof, which did
concur with the Light to the opening their Understandings, and turning their
Minds from Darkness and Sin to the Light shining in their Hearts, and when
those of the Circumcision heard how well the Gentiles were prepared to receive
the Gospel, and the Effect of it, Act. 10. and 11. Chap. They were then
convinced of God's Graciousness to those of the Uncircumcision, as well as to
themselves, their contending with Peter for going unto, and eating with men
uncircumcised was then stopped; when they heard these things they held their
Peace, and glorified God, saying; then has God also to the Gentiles granted
Repentance unto Life.

And its evident, that Cornelius and the rest that received the Word as
preached, had a Work of saving Grace in their Hearts before, which prepared
them, and begot true desires in them after Life and Salvation.

Also when Barnabas come to Antioch, and had seen the Grace of God, he was
glad, and exhorted them all, that with Purpose of Heart they would cleave unto
the Lord, Act. 11. 23. So this Light of the Grace of God both to and in them
was great Encouragement to him so to exhort them; but if there had been no
Saving Grace in their Hearts, what Effect could such Exhortation or Preaching
have been of unto them?

If the Light within be sufficient to save Men, then it renders His 3d. Argum.
Christ's Coming and Suffering needless.

This is a blind Inference, still opposing the Light of Christ within (yea, and
all that is of God in Man) as Insufficient, and so as neither discovering
Christ's Coming, nor the Effect of his Suffering; or as i^ Men might be saved
by his Coming and Suffering, without Respect to his Light within, which shows
gross Darkness; as if there were not a Concurrence between the Light within,
and the End of Christ's Coming and Suffering; and he might as well say, that if
the Ingrafted Word which is within be able to save the Soul, then Christ's
Coming and Suffering was needless; he should rather have sai^, that Christ's
Coming and Suffering without, was because men were turned from his Light
within; for if all had walked in his Light within, he had not been persecuted
and murdered; but this man's Argument supposes Christ's Coming and Suffering
to be for the Supply of some great Defect or Insufficiency of his Light within;
That, Life which is the Light of men is Divine, Unchangeable, and Infinite, and
therefore preferred before (and is above) all Sufferings which are temporary
and finite.
as if man had so well improved it, and found it too scanty or Insufficient;
and therefore (by this) Christ must suffer and die for his own Light within to
supply it; whereas Christ dyed for the Ungodly, for all men that were dead in
Sin, who had disobeyed and transgressed his Light within; and though there be a
Reconciliation by his Death, yet, the being saved is by his Life, whose Life is
the Light of men, which for men to be turned to in themselves, and therein to
live to God, varies not from the Blessed End of Christ's coming and Suffering,
while he works in man by his Light and Power within, both in showing him Sin,
and saving him from it, as he believes in the Light, becomes a Child of the
Light thereof, as Christ exhorted, and if we walk in the Light (of God) the
Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin.

The Light within cannot be a sufficient Rule, because then there would be no
certainty of Truth or Error, of Sin or Duty; for His 4th. Argum.
that which one Man makes Light to Day, the same Man will call Darkness to
morrow; one Man calls one thing a Sin, another calls it a Duty, by this
there will be no such thing as Sin, but only in the Opinions of Men.

Answ. 1. If there can be no Certainty of Truth or Error, Sin or Duty by the
Light within; how is he certain that there is any real Light at all in him.

2. His placing such uncertainties and those various and contrary Opinions of
men upon the Light within, and rendering it an Insufficient Rule, either to
distinguish between Truth and Error, Sin or Duty; this is contrary to both
Christ's and the Apostles Testimony; as namely, that it is a manifesting Light
both of good and Evil, both of those deeds wrought in God, and those that are
reproved, Joh. 3. 20, 21. Ephesians. 5. 13. wherefore the Light of Christ within is
a sufficient Rule.

3. And what Proof is it against the Light, if one man calls it Light to day,
and the same call it Darkness to morrow? or that one man calls one thing a
Sin, another calls it a Duty? does this therefore prove the Light not a
Sufficient Rule? Or does it prove any more then that there are those that put
Darkness for Light and Light for Darkness, and that call Evil good, and good
Evil, Isa. 5. 20. or those that call that a Sin which others call a Duty; If it
must ^om hence be argued, therefore that there is no such certain Discovering
Light or Rule in man to distinguish these; may it not as well be argued, that
therefore there is no such thing as Truth or Duty to be distinguished from
Error and Sin? And does not this directly lead into Ranterism, and finally into
Atheism? let the Serious Reader judge.

If the Light within be a sufficient Rule, then I have a sufficient His 5th.
Argum.
Rule within me, because you say every Man has it, and I am bound to obey it:
In Obedience to this Rule, I oppose your Errors, and in opposing your Errors
one of our Lights cannot be a sufficient Rule, because such a vast difference
between us; then one of us has not a sufficient Rule.

Answ. However he hereby grants the Light in one of us to be a sufficient Rule,
pretending that he obeys this Rule, and here he has found another Rule for a
Christian besides the Scriptures, and then they are not the only or sole Rule
of Faith and Practice; though its evident he does not obey the Light within,
while he represents it so variable and uncertain, and the Opposition and
difference between us to arise from Light in both, whereas the Light is but
one, and changes not; that divine Principle of Life which is the Light of men
is immutably pure, and cannot err, however the Creature does; therefore it
follows that both of us cannot be led by the Light in such direct Opposition;
for its Darkness that opposes the Light.

After his so grossly and impiously slighting and invalidating the Light within,
he does not at all tell us what good it can do or understand, nor what good End
or Use God has given it for to Mankind, nor what shall be the End of them (of
what Nation soever) that walk up to the Light within them, nor what Condition
or End do the Dictates and Leadings of it tend to; this he has not at all
resolved; but (in his Darkness) dealt most corruptly and disingenuously against
the Light within; but I ask T. H. if the Light within him does not at some
times reprove him for his Passion, Envy and Railing, which ill becomes a Man
professing the Patience and Sufferings of Christ?

No Man can have a sufficient Light to guide him to Salvation, His 6th. Argum.
that has not the Spirit of God, because no man can understand the things of
God, but he that has the Spirit of God; but all men have not the Spirit of
God; therefore all men have not a sufficient Rule to Salvation, because all Men
have not the Spirit.

Answ. By this he has granted the Spirit of God and Light of it to be a
sufficient Guide and Rule to Salvation, and to bring man to understand the
things of God; but how well this agrees with their Doctrine [ That the
Scriptures are the only Rule of Faith and Practic^, and not the Spirit nor
Light in man, and that the Bible is the means of knowing God] I refer to the
understanding Reader to judge of: And what though all men have not the Spirit,
either in the Union or Possession of it as their Rule, can no man have it that
thus has it not already? Seeing he concludes, that no man can have a
sufficient Light to guide him to Salvation that has not the Spirit; what, can
no man have it? Is it not then to be had? and yet it is granted to be the
Saint's Rule; whenas that which is the Saint's Rule ought to be every man's
Rule, because every man ought to be a Saint; wherefore God has afforded some
divine Light to every man, whereby he may be led out of Darkness, call upon
God, obtain Life, receive the Spirit (which he gives to them that ask) and
become Saint; for God is ready to give the Spirit to them that truly ask it,
which only man can do by a Light of it.

His Argument, that all men have not the Spirit, is no Proof that every man is
not enlightened by Christ; for those are said not to have the Spirit, who live
not to God in it, but in Sensuality, Jude 19. and yet such were said to be
twice dead, ver. 12. which they could not have been, if they had never been
quickened, yet being twice dead, plucked up by the Roots, they are become
sensual having not the Spirit, i. e. in the Knowledge, Rule, Exercise and Union
of it; But whether shall I go from thy Spirit? or whether shall I flee from thy
Presence, Psa. 139. 7. and upon whom does not his Light arise, when every man
that comes into the World is enlightened by Christ.

The Light within cannot be ae sufficient Rule, because it is His 7th Argum
made the Character of a wicked Man, to do what is right in his own Eyes, and
to walk after his own Imaginations; then that which they do account their Duty,
may be their Wickedness, and highest Wickedness, and an Argument of God's
severe Curse upon them; its said, he gave them up to strong Delusions to
believe a Lie.

Answ. Does then the wicked man follow the Light within him, as his Rule in
doing, what is right in his own Evil Eyes, and in walking in his own
Imaginations? Or does God bring such a severe Curse upon any (as the giving up
to strong Delusions) for walking after or following the Light within? How
horribly blasph^mous is it either to suppose or imply these things against the
Light within, to prove it an Insufficient Rule, as this man argues; placing not
only Uncertainties, the various Opinions, Thoughts and Imaginations of wicked
men upon the Light within, but their Wickedness, and highest Wickedness (if
they own it their Duty) his Argument blasphemously places it upon the Light
within, most blindly confounding wicked men's Imaginations and Wickedness which
the Devil is the Author of) with the Light in every man, without distinction,
wherein Ranter like, he puts Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness, which
woe is to them that does, Isa. 5. 20. Whereas they that follow their own vain
Imaginations, and are given up to strong delusions to believe a Lie (as T. H.
does) are such as have rebelled against the Light rejected the Truth, have not
glorified God as God, nor liked to retain him in their Knowledge, see Job 24.
13. Romans 1. 21. 28. because they obeyed not the Gospel, no^ received the Love
of the Truth, that they might be saved, God gave them over to strong Delusions,
and took Vengeance on them, 2 These. 1. 8. and Chap. 2. 10, 11. Therefore God
did afford both a sufficient Light, Rule, and tendered the Love of the Truth to
them, as he does to all, else how should they be left without Excuse; seeing it
is a Righteous thing with God to recompense and render Vengeanc^ on them that
know him not, for their disobedience? It cannot be consistent with his
Righteousness in Judgment, to bring Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul
that does Evil, or to judge the Secrets of Men by Christ, according to the
Gospel, without ever affording them a Lght of the Gospel, or Gospel Nature
sufficient to discover Evil, and direct to Good; and how can Indignation and
Wrath come upon them that are Contentious, and obey not the Truth, but obey
Unrighteousness, if the Truth did never reach to, or enlighten them? or how
should their not obeying the Truth, but Unrighteousness, be charged upon them,
if the Truth were never afforded them? Therefore by the same Reason that its
confessed that God will render to every man according to his Deeds, and that there
is no Respect of Persons with God; it ought to be also confessed or owned, that
he does afford to every man a Light of Truth and Righteousness sufficient for a
Rule to escape Sin and Evil, and the Wrath that is due for it, and to direct man
unto patient continuance in Well doing, to seek for Glory and Immortality, that
he might obtain eternal Life and Glory; see and consider, Romans 2. throughout,
which sufficiently signifies; 1. The Goodness of God to Man; 2. His dispencing
of his Grace and Truth to all; 3. How Impartial he is and Righteous in his
Judgment against the disobedient and rebellious, who despise his Goodness, and
thereby bring Wrath upon themselves; 4. The acceptance of the Gentiles, who
obeyed that Law or Light given them, though they had not the Law in the Letter
of it.

Wherefore now, moderate Reader, take notice that the very Ground of our
asserting the universal Extent of Saving Grace and sufficient Light to
Mankind, is; 1. The unspeakable Love and Goodness of God, as in himself, he
being Love in the highest. 2. His unwillingness that Man should either live or
die in Sin, he having no Pleasure in the Death of Sinners, but rather that they
should return and live. 3. That he so loved the World, that he sent his Son
into the World, that whosoever believes in him might not perish, but have
Everlasting Life; and in that he sent not his Son into the World to condemn the
World, but that the World through him might be saved. These weighty
Considerations we have all along respect to in our asserting sufficient Grace
or Light to be afforded of God to Mankind.

If the Light within be a sufficient Rule, then no Man ought to repent His 8th.
Argum.
of his Ignorant worshipping of the true God, or of his worshipping a false God;
Nor ought men to repent of their Acts of Cruelty against the Saints, wherein
they think they do well, and act according to their Light; Nor ought the Quakers
to repent of their Inhuman Actions of walking naked; for they think in so doing
they do well, and act according to their Light; therefore the Light within is
not a sufficient Rule.

Answ. Still the man goes on in an absolute Strain of apparent Ranterism, gross
Inconsistencies and Blasphemous Inferences against the Light within, while he
renders it neither a sufficient Rule to discover Truth or Error in matter of
Worship, nor to lead men to repent of Idolatry, Wickedness or Acts of Cruelty
against the Saints; but their thinking they do well therein, this he deems
according to their Light; and all this to show that the Light within which the
Quakers preach, is an insufficient Rule; But its then Nonsense in him to
account it any Real Light at all by those his Discriptions of it before, which
one while renders the Light within so defective, so mutable, and so
insignificant, as a mere Nullity, another while no better then Darkness it
self, another while, the Author of Sin and Wickedness, as being according to
their Light. What horrible Madness and gross Darkness has the Devil led these
Opposers into?

His accusing the Quakers with Inhuman Actions of walking naked. 1st, As its in
general its falls, ^or its neither a general Practice among us, nor the constant
Practice of any; It was only some few particulars that have had a peculiar
Burden laid upon them to go naked for a Sign to such Hypocritical Professors
(as oppose and rebel against the Light within, and are covered, but not with
the Spirit of the Lord) that God would rent their false Coverings, and discover
their Shame and Nakedness, as it is manifest at this Day: So that its evident,
that some who have been made such Signs, as before, were therein true Prophers
against a Generation of Envious Hyppocrites and Persecutors.

2. His asserting that walking naked is an Inhuman Action; as his Charge is
general, its not true that all going naked is Inhuman (but where corruptly
intended for some Evil or Inhuman Act or End) for,

1st. Were Adam and Eve Inhuman in their being naked, when they were not
ashamed, being Innocent? Genesis 2. 25. for the Shame came after Transgression,
from which came the Inhumanity. 2ly. When the Spirit of God was upon Saul, its
said, he stripped of his Clothes also, and prophesied before Samuel, and lay down
naked all that Day, and all that Night; wherefore they say, is Saul also
amongst the Prophets, 1 Samuel 19. 23, 24.
It appears then that going naked was not counted such an Inhuman Action among
the Prophets; see also how Esaiah was made to be a Sign and a Wonder upon
Egypt and Aethiopiah, Esa. Chap. 20. and so what know you but that the Lord
has made some of his Servants Signs and Wonders against many in Spiritual
Egypt and Bondage? however covered with a Profession and Pretense of being
redeemed, as true Jews, Partakers of Gospel and Church Privileges, of
Spiritual Canaan, whilst yet in Spiritual Sodom, Egypt and Babylon, where both
our Lord has been Spiritually crucified, and the Blood of his Prophets sound.

Here follows T. H. his after-Charge.
1st. And that the whole Religion and Principles of that People, called
Quakers, wherein they difference themselves from others, is of the Devil,
witness my Hand, Thomas Hicks.

This Charge is not only General but also very dark and most disingenuous: For
if by [ OTHERS] he means ALL OTHERS, he should have specified those Principles
wherein we differ from all others, and produced his Proof. But if (by others)
he mean only his own Sect, called Anabaptists, then he has made a very rigid
Conclusion against all others differing from them, that their whole Religion
and Principles (wherein they differ from Anabaptists) are of the Devil.

2dly. They that deny the Resurrection of that Body that was committed unto
Dust overthrows all Religion (he says)

To which I say, these Baptists that affirm it of the same Carnal Body, after
turned to Dust, and yet that it cannot be a New-Created Body, and that the Body
which God gives to every Seed is the same Body (as T. H. in his Dialogue does,
Page 58. 59. with others of his Brethren) they affirm they know not what, and
that which they can never give a reasonable or a convincing Demonstration of
(being also contrary to that Scripture, 1 Cor. 15. 37, 38, 40, 50.) and while
they make this their Opinion the Ground of their Religion and future Happiness,
their Religion is Carnal, and their Opinion Non-sensical, and their Foundation
Sandy, being grounded upon Dust, and they themselves are very Ignorant of the
Mystery of the Resurrection, as will further appear hereafter upon the full
Disquission of this weighty matter.

THE CHRISTIAN-QUAKER AND HIS Divine Testimony VIDICATED, In a more particular
and direct Answer to the Baptist's Dialogue.
Section I. The Light Within proved Divine and Saving, etc.
FIrst, That there is a divine Light in every man, which is of a saving
Property in its self; and therefore sufficient to guide and direct man to God,
and so to Salvation. And for its being a divine Light, I have urged Joh. 1. 4.
In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men.

Secondly, That this Light is the certain Guide and Rule to true Believers in
matters of Faith, Spiritual Worship and Obedience to God [and therefore that
which can give a right Understanding of the Holy Scriptures.]

These our Assertions are chiefly quarelled at by T.H. and some of his
Brethren, though he very smoothly pretends, not to cavil, but that he may
understand the Truth, as desiring to know.

First, What this Salvation is? 2dly. What this Light is? 3dly. Who they are
that do obey this Light, and in obeying attain Salvation? page 2.

To which I answer, It both has appeared, and will appear against thee T. H.
that thy Envy and Cavilling has kept thee from the right Understanding and
Knowledge of the Light and Salvation, that thou art now to seek at this time of
Day: And yet say, that all thou intendest is my Conviction and Recovery, as
in thy 10th p. when as yet the Darkness covers thee, and keeps thee from the
right understanding of Truth. But if thou had obeyed the Light of Christ
within thee, thou would have known both its Power and Sufficiency unto
Salvation, and that this Salvation which it leads to is Christ, who is both
Redemption and Salvation to them who follow him in his Light, from Darkness,
Sin and Defilement of Conscience (and so consequently from Wrath) which thou
art yet highly guilty of, and from which thy Water Baptism has not washed thee.

T. H. You express your selves with great Varity; sometimes you say it is
Christ, Let the Reader observe this by the Way; thou maystremember, that the
Controversy between us, was not, whether the Light as in every man be the
Christ or no? but whether it be a divine Light of Christ (which I affirm) or
but a Creature? (which I deny) this is enough to my Intention.
another time its only a Measure of Christ, anon its only of the Divine
Essence; this is a very uncertain Sound, p. 3.

Answ. Thou show thy self a dull cavilling Baptist; must we be tied up to
one Word to express a Principle by, when the Scriptures allow of Varieties for
Demonstration to diverse Capacities, which does not alter the Matter? This
divine Light in man is expressed in the Scripture with as much Variety of Words
as we do.

As its called the Life, the Light, a Gift, Manifestation, Seed, Kingdom of
Heaven within, a measure of the Gift of Christ, the Grace of God, etc. yet one
and the same spiritual and divine Life or Light.

T. H. Notwithstanding thy most diligent Attendance to the Light in thee, that
which thou callst the Light in thee has in many things mis-guided thee, p. 3.

Answ. Now thou beginnest to be mad again the Light within; that which I call
the Light within, is the very same that Christ and his Witnesses did witness to
(to wit) In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of men; therefore thou
have blasphemously accounted this a misguiding Light.

And in thy 7th. page have plainly contradicted thy self herein, where thou
appealest to the Light in me, and grantest it ought to be obeyed: See how thou
have broke the neck of thy corrupt cause; if it were a mis-guiding Light, how
do thou for Proof appeal to it (as Rule) and grantest it ought to be obeyed?
ought that which is mis-guiding to be obeyed? But the Light within ought,
therefore it will not mis-guide.

T. H. says, G. W. in his Discourse upon it urged that text Joh. 1. 4. In him
was Life and the Life was the Light of men. If the Life (said he) be the divine
Essence (my Words were, If that Life be of the divine Being) the Light must be
so also.

Answ. This Argument thou did never answer to purpose yet, but cavillest, and
draws what Absurdities thou please upon thy own Forgeries, as will further
appear, only sillily thou argued against it thus, viz.

T. H. That the Life or Light spoken of, Joh. 1. 4, 9. is not supernatural,
because it is the Light of the Word, as a Creator.

Answ. To which was answered, that its false and inconsistent Doctrine; For the
Light of the Eternal Word is supernatural, because the Light of the Eternal
Word the Creator. See here the Reason thou rendrest for its not being
supernatural, proves it supernatural; for because its of this divine Relation
it must be divine. And thou shifts but very sorrily to come off here, when thou
tellest me, that the Life and Light commnuicated to every man from that Eternal
Word, is not supernatural, Eternal and Divine. But for this, we have only thy
Say-so, contrary to what thou have granted before, to wit, as being the Light
of the Eternal Word. Neither could thy other Shift serve thy turn, viz.

T. H. That the Life which is in God, which is the Light of Men, Joh. 1. 4. is
divine as it is in God, but natural as it is in man.

Answ. The Conclusion of this is Blasphemy; for that divine Life is Immutable
because divine, it did not loose his Divinity by being given to man; for being
divine, it is no more subject to mutation than God is. Remember here, how thou
wast nonplust, and how thou art in a Laborinth; and of this thou do not clear
thy self in all thy perverse cavilling against us.

Sect. II. The Life which is the Light of Men, not a Creature, or mere Effect,
etc.
WHereas on the Behalf of God's immediate Illumination or Shining in man's
Heart; for the Divinity thereof, I alleged, that the Cause thereof being
divine, this Effect thereof must needs be divine and supernatural, as in my
Narrative. But instead of taking notice of the Words, his Immediate
Illumination or Shining, thou art pleased to quarrel upon the Words, such as is
the Cause, such the Effect must be; and thus thou proceedest upon it, viz.

T. H. From this kind of Reasoning we may conclude not only the Light within,
but every Creature both Beasts and Trees are God, these being the Effects of
Infinite Wisdom; do thou not tremble at this Consequence, p. 4.

Answ. How causlesly do thou quarrel? Are both Beasts and Trees Immediate
Effects of God's Power? Did he not cause both Plants and Trees to grow out of
the Earth? 2ly. Were these Immediate? To be sure I never affirmed so many Gods
as there are Effects of Infinite Wisdom.

But be it remembered, that I never called the divine Life, which is the Light
of men, a mere Effect, but admitted of the Word Effect with reference to the
Immediate Illumination or Shining of God in the Heart, as being of a divine
Nature, because God is the Enlightener and Shiner: And thou denying the Light
to be of the divine Essence, because communicated, I urged this Argument; That
if the Life be divine, or of the divine Being, then the Light in man must be
divine, because the Life that was in God was that Light; and such as is the
Cause, such is the Effect, in some sense holds true, in all the Effects of
Infinite Wisdom, true in all Creatures as they were made good; God, the Cause
being the chiefest Good, who beheld all that he had made, that it was very
good, And God who is Light is the Fountain of Life and Light, whose divine Life
or Light it self (which is the Light of men) I never intended to be a mere
Effect, strictly taken as an Act of Power or thing made or created; but as the
Illumination or Immediate Shining in man, immediately and naturally flowing
from God the Fountain of Light, (its Envy makes thee carp and cavil) and was
not the Effect of the Law written in the Gentiles Hearts, of the Nature of the
Law.

Can think thou art Ingenuous? Do think that I do not own Varieties of
Effects from the Infinite Wisdom and Power of God, as not only supernatural but
natural, both mediate, providential and immediate Effects, as well as
Increated, Immediate Products of Life, Light and Virtue, flowing naturally from
him? Yet though divine Illumination as manifested in man, be an Immediate Act
or Effect; the Light or Life which does illuminate is greater; for it is the
Cause which is more then the Effect, though this Illumination has a Living
Virtue and Resemblance of the Cause in it, and they are inseparable: So that
the Life which is the Light of Men, Joh. (...). 4. being divine, and of the
Being of God himself, who is Light, it is not proper to call it, a mere Effect,
as a thing made, or a Creature as thou blindly calls it, and would have it;
wherein thou do merely beg the Question and builds a false Structure
thereupon.

Again thou leavest out part of the Controversy between us, whichw as thus. viz.

T. H. The Light in every Man cannot be the divine Essence in God; for God is
in Heaven, and his Divine Essence is not communicable, etc.

G. W. What is this but to deny the Omni-presence of God, and to endeavor to
confine him (...) is Infinite and not limitable. We ask if the Holy Ghost, or
the Eternal Spirit be not God? And if this Holy Spirit be not communicable?

This Question in the Narrative T. H. is willing to wave, as that which pinches
him, and thus does he reply to the Words before, viz.

T. H. Then it seems that the Lightwithin and the Omni presence of God is one
and the same thing. Is this your Champion. a. 4.

Answ. Thou scoffs, but durst not answer. God's Omnipresence divine Light and
Spirit are inseparable; God is Light, whose Presence fills Heaven and Earth,
and upon whom does not his Light arise? And in what Country or People does not
his Spirit come, if an Infinite Spirit? Whether shall I go from thy Spirit? Or
whether shall I flee from thy Presence? Psalm. 139. 7, 8, 9, 10.

His Infinite Spirit is not tied up to a few Predestinarian Electioners, who
only conceit they are elected, and saving Grace only free for them, though in
Virtue and Uprightness they be far short of many called Heathen, who were a Law
to themselves in Truth and Uprightness toward God and man.

Sect. III. The Baptist's Quarrel grounded on his Mistake about the Light, and
our Testimony of it.
T. H. THough it be granted, that God is an Infinite, Immutable and Perfect
being; will it therefore follow, that every thing he created and communicated
is his own being? What man but a Quaker would dare affirm this?

Answ. Thou wrongst the Quakers (as thou callst them) its none of their
Argument, that because God is Infinite, therefore every thing that he creates
is so: But because of his Infiniteness and Omni-presence he is near unto all
men, even shining in their Hearts.

But it is thy gross Error to take for granted, that his Light in every man is
Created; See 2 Cor. 4. 6. God has shined in our Hearts, and that Christ that
enlightens every man that comes into the World is God, in worshipping of whom
we do not worship a Creature, as thou falsely insinuates against us, p. 6.

But thou show thy self against the Light, as an Agent of the Son of
Perdition, who exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; so that he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God, 2. These. 2. 4.

Is not man this Temple of God by right? And has not this Son of Perdition or
Mystery of Iniquity been exalted in Apostates above all that is called God? And
what was that that was called God and that was worshipped, above which this Son
of Perdition exalted himself? Was it not a Manifestation of the divine Life and
Light? And what was the Apostles Rule to try and reveal this Son of Perdition
by, when he wrought in a Mystery, and as God did sit in the Temple of God,
showing himself to be God? Is it not the Day of Christ that reveals, and so God
himself that makes manifest this man of Sin? And is not God then the Saints
Rule to discover this Mystery?

T. H. Let me tell thee that thy Light is very imperfect, forasmuch as it has
not yet instructed thee by what Name to call it, whether Christ, or only a
Measure or Gift of Christ, p. 6.

Answ. Thou have wronged my Light; sor God is my Light and my Salvation; and
Christ is my Life and Light who is perfect; and this Christ we preach, as the
Light of the World, that enlightens every man that comes into the World; though
we do not say that he is revealedly or manifestly the Light in every man, or by
Way of Union, nor yet that Christ (considered as thou describes him, p. 11.) as
to his outward Birth and Person is in any, much less in every man; Yet this
hinders not, but that as God, or as with Relation to his divine Life and Light,
he is Infinite over all, and through all, and in all; yet to those only
revealed and united, who truly obey and follow him in the Measure of his Light
which is universally given unto Mankind.

T. H. The Apostle did needlessly exhort the Corinthians to examine themselves,
whether Christ were in them or no (viz. If he were in every man) p. 7.

Answ. Nay, he bad them examine themselves whether they were in the Faith; for
says he, know you not your own selves that Jesus Christ is in you except you
be Reprobates.

And if thy Mind were not reprobated and estranged from his Light in thee, thou
might know him revealed in thee. But as Christ the anointed is a Mystery, he
is hid from thee and many more, though his Light be in thee and others that is
sufficient to reveal Christ, and leave you without Excuse, and to condemn you
for Iniquity.

Sect. IV. Christ guides to Salvation by his Inward Light, and the Baptist
confounded in his opposing it.
T. H. I Grant that every man is enlightened, has a Light in them; but this
does not prove that this Light in every man is Christ, nor yet sufficient of it
self to guide to Salvation; Christ is sufficient; but I say the Light in every
man is not sufficient, p. 7.

Answ. First, If Christ has given to every man a sufficient Light to leave
them without Excuse (as he has) then it is sufficient to guide and direct them
unto Salvation; for if they could justly charge this Light with Insufficiency
for this end, this would be an Excuse.

Secondly, That Light which is sufficient to convince of Sin, and lead out of
it, is sufficient to guide to Salvation; but such is the Light of Christ in
every man.

Thirdly, God offers a good end to man, in giving him Life and Grace, Job 10.
and this Grace tends to his Salvation, if obeyed; otherwise man's Destruction is
of himself for his Disobedience, and not Designed by the Lord in his giving him
Life and Grace.

4thly, Thy denying the Light in every man to be sufficient to guide to
Salvation, is plainly enough contradicted by thee, in thy confessing Christ to
be the Life and Light of men, p. 22. whose Life and Light is sufficient. And
for what end is his Light in every man given, if not to direct unto Salvation?
Thou art not so ingenuous as to relate, though thou both appealst to it, and
grantst it ought to be obeyed; this will stand in Judgment against thee, for
thy false Judgment given against it in other Places, as also what thou further
acknowledgest, viz.

T. H. There is something within that checks for many Evils, and excites to
many good things, and that I ought to shun those Evils, and to do that good, p.
8.

Answ. If thou did obey this something, or Light within (thus acknowledged by
thee) in shunning those many Evils thou art checked for, and performing the good
to which it excites thee, thou would both know and speak better of it then
thou do, as that which both moves and leads in the Way to Salvation, which is
from Sin here, and from Wrath hereafter, and so unto Christ, who is the Giver
of it.

But it is probable thou think thou art an elect Person, and so in thy
Presumption slites the Light within, as not only Insufficient of it self to
guide unto Salvation, but also as a mis-guiding Light: And this Doctrine herein
opposes thy Maker, and his Universal good to Mankind; How then think thou,
that the Rebellious can be left without Excuse, or God be known to be clear,
when he judges?

Sect. V. The Dipper proved a Blind Guide, and in gross Confusion in
undervaluing the Light within.
T. H. DId the Light in Saul reprove him for persecuting the Church? Does not
he himself confess that he verily thought he ought to do many things against
the Name of Jesus? Yea, does not Christ tell his Disciples, that some would
kill them, and yet think they did God Service? But how could they think so, if
this Light in them did reprove for it? p. 8, 9.

Answ. Thou having asserted, that there are some Sins which the Light reproves
not, among these thou instancest, namely, persecuting the Church, doing many
things against the Name of Jesus, killing the Disciples, and therefore
concludes it no sufficient Rule.

O! thou blind Guide, how dare thou thus accuse and undervalue the Light of
Christ within, contrary to thy many Concessions elsewhere? Is Christ the Life
and Light of men? And yet does not his Light reprove Persecution and Murder?
If it reprove not these, what are the Evils it checks for? What rational Man
cannot see thy manifest Folly herein, thus to confound Persecutors, evil
Thoughts with the Light within, and to conclude the Light within no sufficient
Rule, because of some men's Wickedness, who have rebelled against the Light; and
therein thou have put Darkness for Light.

And what were the Pricks that were hard for Saul to kick against? And where
was that Holy Ghost which the Persecutor always resisted, Act. 7?

Their Envious and superstitious Minds, and dark Thoughts were not the Light,
but such as clouded and obscured the Light in them, yet the Kingdom of Heaven
was in those Jews; and so much divine Light in those Heathen as showed them,
that there was a true and unknown God to be worshipped (with sincere Hearts and
pure minds) and that in him we live and move and have our Being, had they
waited in that Light, and listened to it, they would both truly have known
God, his Way and Worship, as some did.

If all things that are reproved, are made manifest by the Light, how do thou
exclude those gross Sins of Persecution and Murder from being reproved by the
Light? And why do thou argue against it, from men's persecuting and murtherous
Thoughts, which arise from their Enmity and Rebellion against the Light?

But further I argue against thee on the Behalf of the Light, viz. That its
manifesting all things that are reproved, is in order to guide men out of all
reprovable Ways; which if they be guided out of, they are in their Duty; For
where man is not reproveable for any thing, he is in his whole Duty, and so in
the right Way.

T. H. Did the Light in the Heathen-Philosophers check them for multiplying
their Deityes? and for not believing that Jesus is the Christ? Or did it
reprove them for their manifold Superstitions? And were they thereby directed
to the right Way of worshipping the true God? I demand an Instance among the
many Thousands of Mankind, etc. p. 9.

Answ. That which might be known of God, which was manifest in the Heathen, and
which did open the Eyes of many clearly to see the eternal Power and God head,
Romans 1. that was able to direct them into the right Way of worshipping the true
God; for the reason why many run into Superstition, and to multiply Gods, was
because that when they knew God, they Glorified him not as God, but became
vain in their Imaginations, Romans 1. which was their Sin, and not any Defect of
the Light given them from above; for that Light which gave them the Knowledge
of the true God, was therefore able to direct them into the right Way of
worshipping him.

And whereas thou demandest an Instance, among the many Thousands of Mankind
that has been convinced or reproved for not believing Jesus to be the Christ,
by the mere Light within, before any Light of Revelation was brought unto them.
p. 9.

Thou still persists in thy dull course of begging the question, while thou
take it for granted, that the Light within is but a Creature or natural, and
so not any absolute revealing Light: But this I cannot grant thee, while it is
revealing God and his eternal Power to man, that waits in it; However, thou
slites it under thy frequent Phrase, Mere Light within, though it be neither
opposed to the Spirit nor Revelation, as thou would have it, while it is
Divine and Spiritual.

And that thousands of Mankind are reproved for not believing in the Son of
God, is evident by the Spirit of Truth, reproving the World of Sin, because
they believe not in the Son of God, in that they do not believe in his Life or
Light within, they do not believe in him, who is the Giver of it, and therefore
reproved by the Spirit; and surely many Thousands are comprehended in this
World of Unbelievers.

Sect. VI. His Ignorance of the Divine Principle.
T. H. I Grant that the Light in thee may reprove for those Sins the common
Light in all Mankind will not, because thou have borrowed much Light from the
Scriptures, p. 9.

Answ. Its evident thou understands not the Principle of divine Light within,
from what thou have borrowed from the Scriptures, with thy Imaginations
perverting them, wherein is thy great Darkness; thou egregiously mistakeest a
litteral Notion and Historical Faith, for the divine Light within (which is
given to all) which is a pure, Incorruptible and Unchangeable Principle of Life
and Truth; immediately given, and shining from Christ the Eternal Word; and not
men's acquired Notions from the History of Christ's outward Manifestation in the
Flesh.

But in thy gross Ignorance thou exalts such Acquirements of men above the
Principle of Light within: And so men's Historical Profession of the Scriptures
as their only Rule, though they much differ in their meanings therein, which
they make their Rule many times above the Scriptures, and above the Gift of
God; this is a great Error of you, Litteral Professors.

Thou would not be pleased, should I allege your various Opinions upon the
Scriptures, to prove them no sufficient Rule, though thus thou art pleased
contradictorily to deal with the Light within.

Had the Princes of this World obeyed the Light of Christ within, they would
not have crucified the Lord of Glory; for it would have given them a Sense and
Knowledge of him; there were those that grieved and vexed the Holy Spirit
within; would it therefore be a good Argument to say, that his Spirit was no
sufficient Rule?

And to what thou say of Jesus Christ, as come in the Flesh, a Person
prophesied of, born at Bethlehem, p. 11. we never said the Light in every man
was Christ under these Considerations, though Christ considered as the (...),
enlightens every man Spiritually and Divinely.

Both John the Baptist and John the Evangelist gave a higher Proof and
Testimony of Christ, then this you Baptists give. When John Baptist said, he is
preferred before me, for he was before me; and John the Evangelist says, In
the beginning was the Word, etc. this was Christ.

Sect. VII. His Madness and Self-Contradiction about the Light.
TOuching our obeying the Commands of the living Word in us; for this thou
accuses us with a mental and mystical Reservation, which thou say, indeed is
no other then a mere mystical Romance, p. 10. For which the Lord rebuk ethy
Profaneness and Irreligious romancing against the Word and Light within.

Also thy Blasphemy is very manifest, in accusing what we said of the Light
within, as to the Miracles, Wonders or Works wrought by it, to be no more then
what the Apostle spoke of the man of Sin, 2 These. 2. 9. and also, what may as
well prove Mahomet to be the true Christ, as the Light in us, p. 11, 12.

Here again thou actest the Part of a Bedlam against the Light in us, which
elsewhere thou have confessed to be Christ, for that he is the Life and Light of
Men; and is not this Christ the Messiah?

They that have believed in his Light within, and so truly made Trial of it,
do know that wrought by it, which never was wrought either by the man of Sin or
Mahomet; for to believe in this Light, is the Way to become Children of it; the
Way to see Darkness and the Power of it to vanish, and so to have Satan
overcome by the Power of Christ received in the Light, and this did never the
Man of Sin nor Mahomet; therefore thy Instance herein is most Blasphemous.

And if we be accountable for every Dispensation of Light, according to its
kind and degree, p. 13. of what kind is this Dispensation of Light that's given
in common unto Mankind, thou have sufficiently answered to thy own utter
Overthrough in page 36. viz.

T. H. Yet all this is no Disparagement to the Light within, to say, that God
does make any thing more known of his Will, than is or can be known by this
mere Light within; for it is but to say that each degree of Light is serviccable
to its End.

Reply. Where now Mark, that the Difference about the Light that is given in
common to all (and more peculiarly manifest to some) is not in the Nature and
Kind of it, but in Degree, and surely the Degrees of the Light do not alter the
Property of it; The divine Light is one and the same Throughout all Ages, both
in the time of the Law and Prophets, and of Christ coming in the flesh (which
was to exalt his mannifestation in Spirit) And now in the fullness of time,
shining forth in a more glorious and powerful Manifestation, the same Light
has shined forth more and more, throughout the several dispensations of God,
which were all for the Exaltation and bringing forth of the Light in its
degrees and Manifestations of Glory and Power.

But what Account will thou give to God, for thy so much undervaluing that
Degree of Light that he has given unto all Mankind, as thou have done.

One while in judging it a misguiding Light, another while comparing our
Tstimony of it to the man of Sin, Mahomet, etc. Another while, it is so
dis-esteemed by thee, as not sufficient to discover or reprove Persecution, and
killing the Disciples, and yet we must be acountable to God for it. What mean
and confused Thoughts thou have of it, the Impartial Reader may easily judge by
the tenor of this thy most contradictory Discourse.

But they who experienced the Increase of Light in them, the Superaddition of
divine Revelation, p. 12. the shining of the Light more and more unto the
perfect Day.; and their being changed from Glory to Glory, it was through the
diligent Improvement of that Degree of Light, that sure Word of Prophecy
shining in their hearts; and not by opposing and disparaging of it, as thou
have done in thy Pride and Darkness, which covers thee, who art one that
stumbles at the Ingrafted Word through thy Disobedience; In which thou would
have us to believe the Light within to be not sufficient to guide unto
Salvation; while thou have not followed it, to experience the good End of its
Guidance, as we have done.

Thou pretends to know what it cannot do, but ^elst us not what it can do, and
to what end it will lead if truly obeyed? Nor what will become of those that
improve it, who have not the Scriptures or Historical Relation of Christ, as
come in the Flesh; wherein thou art deficient and difingenuous in all thy Work.

Sect. VIII. Christ as the Rock of Ages, and the Intent of his coming in the
Flesh not known to Baptists, while they oppose his Light within.
T. H. JEsus Christ was a Person of whom there were many Prophesies, which
should be fulfilled in him, p. 11. If this Light within be the true and only
Christ; then why was there so many Sacrifices in the time of the Law tipifying
Christ to come, since Moses and the rest of the Children of Israel had a Light
in them? If you say, the Light within was not the Messiah, then you deny your
Principle; If it were, what Significancy could there be in those Types,
respecting Christ to come, p. 12.

Answ. Thou think thou have caught us in a learned Dilemma here; but what
amounts the tenor of it to, but to tell us, either that the true Christ was
not in being in Moses and Isreal's time, or that he was not in them; for if he
were, thou questionest what Significancy could there be in those Types.

But here thou art very dark; for though Christ's Manifestation did differ both
in degree and manner of Appearance; and though, when in the Fullness of time he
came to fulfill the Prophesies and Types of him; the Power and Glory of the
Father was more fully and eminently and signally manifest in him, then in any
before; and the Light more shone forth exemplarily in him; yet it follows not,
that the true Christ was not in being in Moses and in the Prophets time; or
that his Light was not in some Degree manifested, both before, under, and since
the Law.

If the true Christ was in being, and in any degree manifest, his Light needs
must; but the true Christ was in being from Everlasting, and in time
universally shining and manifest in some degree throughout all the Generations
of the Righteous, since the World began, being the Rock of Ages, that spiritual
Rock whereof all Israel drank, 1 Cor. 10. 4. who said, before Abraham was I am;
this great and most eminent Prophet God promised to raise up unto Israel of
their Brethren, which was in a more familiar Appearance, even in the Flesh,
though his spiritual Outgoings were before from of old, and he was called the
faithful and true Witness, the beginning of the Creation of God, Rev. 3. 14.
who faith, behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my Voice and
open the Door, I will come in to him and will sup with him and he with me, ver.
20. Now I ask, what and where is that Door that he so universally knocks at?
And is not this the true Christ that thus knocks? And was not his Light or
Word in Isreal's Hearts, and his Spirit in the Holy Prophets, by which they
foresaw his Coming in the Flesh, his Sufferings and Glory that should follow?

Now though the pure Light and Glory of the Father was more fully, eminently
and signally then ever before manifest, and shining forth in him, as coming in
the fullness of time to consummate and end the Types and Shadows of the first
Covenant; whereby he gave a more eminent and signal Testimony of God's
Universal Love and Power to man; this is no Argument to prove that either the
true Christ or his Universal Light was not in being, and in some degree
discovered before; for without this no Soul could ever be saved; it was his
divine Light that could minister Life unto the Soul, and not Shadows.

Sect. IX. The Dipper plunged in a Laborinth of self-Contradictions, and the
Light within proved a Rule above the Scriptures.
T. H. IT will be our Wisdom, yea our Duty, not only to attend the Light
within; but specially to those Revelations of God's Mind and Will in the Holy
Scriptures, p. 13.

Answ. In thy granting its part of our Duty to attend to the Light within; thou
have plainly contradicted thy Blasphemy in opposing it in other places as a
mis-guiding Light; and comparing it with the Man of Sin, Mahomet, etc. and
judging our following its Conduct as a subverting and anihilating the Covenant
of Grace, and that this Light does directly oppose it, and ought to be
rejected, as appears, p. 38.

Is it part of our Duty to attend upon that that subverteth and opposes the
Covenant of Grace. O! that thou would consider and see thy Blasphemy, and
what a Laborinth of Contradictions thou art fallen into; as also in thy
Concession of attending to the Light within, thou art defective, whilst thou
do not place the special Attention to be upon it, but upon the Scriptures;
whereas the Light within is specially to be attended to, as that which both
opens the Understanding in the Scriptures, and discovers the several Conditions
which they relate to; otherwise men are apt to pervert and mis-apply the
Scriptures to their own Destruction, turning the Truth of God into a Lie, as
they did who turned their Backs upon the Manifestation of God in them, Romans 1.
19, 21, 25.

T. H. I conceive enough has been said to evince, that the Light in every man
neither is the true Christ, nor a sufficient Rule to guide us unto Salvation,
p. 13.

Answ. While Thou are following thy own Conceptions, thou do not follow the
Guidance of the Light of Christ within, and therefore conceivest amiss of it;
for it is a true and perfect Rule, unto which he that loves and does truth
comes and brings his Deeds that they may be manifest that they are wrought
in God, Joh. 3. 21. it is a convincing Rule, that pure and inward Law or Light
which converts the Soul; It does not only convict man of Sin, but upon
Repentance evidenceth unto him Remission: And this does not the Scriptures
without, to men particularly, though they testify of the several Conditions,
which the Light guides the Soul through. The Scriptures testify against all
Sin, but do not show unto men their particular Sins; many read the Scriptures,
who overlook the Deceits of their own Hearts; but if they Eye this Light of
the Son of God within, it will manifest unto them their particular Evils, and
show them their Thoughts, Motions and Actions, and the Tendance of each; so do
not the Scriptures, they cannot of themselves convince any, as the divine Light
can. And this divine Light within discovers all the Temptations, and mysterious
Workings, and Depths of Satan to that Soul that waits in it, as they are met
withal, and as Satan attempts to ensnare, that the Soul may shun his Snares
and Wiles upon all Occasions and in all Trials; and this does not the Letter
without.

This Light within also, as a perfect and immediate Rule of Faith, directs the
Soul in all the Operations of Faith, against all the Innumerable Temptations,
and Trials, and Besetments of the Enemy, and it opens an Inward Eye of Faith,
and is the Immediate Guide to see him who is Invisible through all, but so is
not the Scripture: All which being seriously considered, the Light within is
the Rule of Faith, and not the Scripture.

But if it be objected, That the Scriptures being the Rule of Faith, is not
intended without the Help of the Spirit or divine Light in the Soul.

I answer, This grants that the Scriptures are not the Rule of Faith alone,
therefore that they are not to be taken as the Entire Rule of Faith, they not
being effectual without the Spirit, whereas the Spirit is effectual without the
Scriptutes, and able of it self to lead into all Truth.

The Spirit or Heavenly Unction considered as a higher Degree, Gift or Effusion
of divine Life than that degree of Light that is given in common to all, is
attained unto only by those that faithfully improve the Life or Light in its
less Appearance, which in some degree appears in every man's Conscience.

T. H. I query, whether all the Generations of Christians, since Christ's time
until within these very few Years, be not eertainly lost and damned, forasmuch
as they acknowledged not this Light within as the true Christ, p. 12.

Answ. This shows, thou have very little Sense of all the Christians, and their
Acknowledgments, who thus queriest of them. Did not they acknowledge Christ in
them, the Immortal Word of Life and Light in them? And was not Christ both
their Life, Light and Salvation? And was not the Apostle Paul sent to turn the
Gentiles from Darkness to Light? And did not all the true Ministers preach
Christ as God's Covenant, given for a Light and Salvation to the Ends of the
Earth? But in thy dark Thoughts, thou see not the Drift of rheir Testimony;
but queriest whether all the Generations of Christians till within these few
Years be not certainly lost and damned? And yet thou would be accounted a
Christian in this thy Unchristian Work.

Sect. X. The Subject Understanding and Obeying the Light within, unknown to
the Cavilling Baptist.
T. H. WHo or what is it that obeys this Light, and in Obedience of it is
saved? Or if this Light be the Rule, it does suppose a subject capable of
understanding it, and of yielding Obedience to it, p. 4.

Answ. Its placed in the Heart and Conscience of man, that he (with his whole
Soul, Mind and Spirit) may understand, and obey it, and come to Life and
Salvation in Christ, being guided by his Light in the Conscience.

T. H. What then is the Principle? Either the Light must obey it self, or
Darkness must obey it?

Answ. Thy Darkness makes thee talk thus darkly and scribble thus
nonsensically, the Spirit of man is to obey every degree of this divine Light
given of God, that the whole man may be in Subjection; for which End God has
given man a spiritual Capacity and Power to obey by the Virtue of Grace, that
the reasonable Soul in believeing in the Light, and obeying it, may find Relief
and more Power from God, comfortably to subsist in the Way of Life and Peace
with him.

And though it be not a Scripture Phrase to tell of two such Lights in every
man, as thou mentions, p. 14. Yet as the Light of the Body is the Eye which
sees the object of Light, and there is a single Eye which causes the whole
Body to be full of Light; So in man has God placed the Eye of the
Understanding and Mind, and a Conscience in the reasonable Soul, which is
capable of receiving the divine Light, as both the supreme Rule and commanding
Light; and they that are translated out of Darkness into it, are become
Children of the Light.

And if thou were come to this Estate, thou needst not question who is the
subject of Obedience to the Light, whether the whole Person or only a part, for
the whole man ought to be the subject; and where the Eye of the mind is single,
the whole Body is full of Light, and no part dark: But for the whole person to
be subject to the Light, is inconsistent with thine and thy Brethrens Doctrine
for Sin and Imperfection during Life. Why then do thou now suppose the whole
Person to be the Subject, when thou art not real in what thou implyest of the
whole Persons being obedient? p. 15, 16.

And thou do but play the Fool and Caveller, whilst thou art drawing such a
Conclusion upon us, as that by our Principle, the Light must obey it self; and
in so doing be saved; this is only inferred from a Fiction of thy own Framing,
or a Quaker of thy own making, to speak as thou please; for the Light is
given for the Benefit of Mankind, that they that truly follow it and thoroughly
obey it, with Subjection of both Soul, Spirit and Body, may know Salvation from
Sin here and Wrath her^after. And so man (in his spiritual being, both in Soul
and Body spiritual) as changed or translated from a State of Mortality, may
forever enjoy a State of Immortality in Glory hereafter; as they who are led by
the Counsel of God shall afterward be received into Glory; for man as
translated into that Celestial Spiritual State, is most capable of the full
Enjoyment of Glory with God hereafter.

Sect XI. Concerning the Soul of man, as under diverse Considerations and
States, and G. Fox' s Words so considered with; ^ight Queries added.
COncerning the Soul of man, thou vehemently accusest us with Fancies,
Conceits, Absurdities, Nonsense and Error, p. 16. Thy Instance for this is, viz.

That G. F. mentions in his great Mystery, etc. p. 68. and 100. That the Soul
is part of God and of his being, and that it is without beginning, p. 91. and
also infinite. p. 29. Whence thy Inference is, viz.

Which is as much as to say the Soul is God -- then God sets up a Light in
himself, which he himself is to obey, and in so doing he shall be saved, p. 16.

Answ. We cannot expect any impartial or fair Dealing from thee, while
Prejudice and Envy do possess thee, who have both falsely and ignorantly
represented G. F. and both curtayled and perverted his Words and the Sense of
them. And all these things mentioned by thee, he does not speak of the Soul or
Spirit of man, as made or formed in him, though composed of Spiritual Parts,
nor use these Expressions, that the Soul or Spirit of the Creature Man, is a
part of God without beginning; neither was the Phrase (part of God) originally
G. F's but his Opposers, only admitted of by him by Way of Question, as plainly
appears, p. 100. with Relation to that which came out from God, that immediate
Spirit of Life, which gives Being Life and Subsistence to the Soul, and he does
distinguish between the Soul and Christ the Bishop of it, between the Soul and
the Savior of it, as plainly appears in many places of the said Book, and the
Soul could no otherwise be deemed infinite, then as Man is said to be the Image
and Glory of God, namely by a Participation thereof; so he speaks of the Soul
in a twofold Sense; as,

First, With reference to that which came out from God (which is the Original
Life or Soul of every Man's Soul) Secondly, With Respect to man, as being made
a living Soul by Virtue of the Spirit of Life proceeding from God.
And so with Relation to the first, he questions; Is not that of God, which
comes out from God? Great Mystery, p. 68. But with Relation to the latter, viz.
Man, he speaks distinctly of the Soul, as neither God nor Christ; neither does
he confound the Being of man with the Infinite Being of his Creator, as is
employed in our Opposers angry Charge; for as every Spiritual Being or Existence
is not divine; so the Spirit or Spiritual Parts of Man are not God, though a
divine Light and Capacity is placed in them.

And G. F. does not only speak of the Soul in a twofold Sense, viz. with
Relation to its original Life, and with Relation to man in his Spirituality,
but of the Soul of man as in several States; as,

First, Of the Souls being in Death in Transgression, man's Spirit
unsanctified; the Soul being come into Death, transgressing the Law, etc. Great
Mystery, p. 91.

Therein he cannot intend the infinite Essence, Being or Life of God or Christ,
which is immutable, and unchangeably pure and holy, though thereby the Soul is
upheld in its Being and Immortality, whether in Comfort or Misery.

Secondly, Of the Soul and Spirit of Man as sanctified, living to God in his
Life, through a diligent hearkening to the Counsel and Voice of God, and
feeling of his Hand, which brings up out of Death, and restores the Soul, that
it may live in Christ the Preserver and Overseer of it, to praise God the
Savior, being one Soul (in that State) as they that are joined to the Lord are
one Spirit.

As also G. F. adds, viz.

Every Man that comes into the World having a Light from Christ Jesus, the Way
out of the Fall, the second Adam; receiving the Light, they receive Redemption
and Sanctification, whereby their Spirits, Bodies and Souls are sanctified,
Great Mystery, p. 91.

Note here still, that he plainly distinguishes between the Soul and him that
redeems and sanctifies it; so that the Soul or Spirit of Man, is neither God
nor Christ; but as much inferior in Subordination to God and Christ, as the
Creature Man is to the Creator, or that which is saved and redeemed to him that
saves and redeemeth.

The sum of what is said amounts to this candid Account about the Soul, viz.

That the Soul and Spirit of Man is not the very Being of God, nor a part of
God, though the original Life of the Soul which came out from God is immutable
and infinite; there is a divine and infinite Life in the Soul of Man (which we
would have you be sensible of.)

This is the Life of Lives, the Soul of Souls, the Being of Beings; by which
the Soul of man is made to subsist in its Being and Immortality, whether in the
Kingdom of Glory or Pit of Darkness; although this original or divine Life in
the Soul stands clear and free from both the Guilt, Torment and Anguish, that
comes upon every Soul of Man that does Evil.

Every Soul must appear before the Lord in its own proper Image and Nature,
which it has born, been under, and received while in the Body (having been
subject either to the Spirit and Power of God, or to the Spirit and Power of
the wicked one) wherein its capable of either being a Vessel of Mercy and Love,
or a Vessel to hold Wrath and Anguish, according to what it does here love and
effect, and contract to it self whether Good or Evil.

Therefore as its commanded, Take heed to thy self and keep thy Soul
diligently, etc. love the Lord thy God with all thy Soul, etc. and then thou will know Christ to be the Salvation of it.

The Scripture speaks variously of the Soul, and as in diverse States and
Conditions, viz. 1. Of the Soul of God which is Immutable. 2. Of the Soul of
Man, and that, 1. Of the Righteous, which really partake of the divine Nature.
2. Of the Wicked, which partake of the Nature of Enmity: And these differ in
their Affections, the one being to Good, and the other to Evil.

Mention is made of the Soul, as under the Power of Sin, Death and the Grave by
man's Disobedience and Fall, and of the Soul as quickened, raised up, and
delivered or saved by the Power of Christ, the living ingrafted Word.

Sometimes the Soul is mentioned, as including the whole man; sometimes, as
distinguished from the Body; sometimes its esteemed as the Life, and sometimes
the Spirit or Breath of Life, and an active Soul inspired, and there is a State
wherein the Word of the Lord is said to divide asunder betwixt the Soul and
Spirit.

Now if you do not own a divine Seed, or unchangeable Principle of Life in the
Soul; I query of you.

1st. Do you, or did you ever know your own Souls? 2ly. What the Soul is in it
self, and distinct from the Body. 3ly. What and where is that to be known, that
is to change the Souls, and so the whole man's Affections from Evil to Good,
while man remains in this Life? 4ly. Do you own the Souls Immortality, that it
does not dye with the Body? Do not some of you Baptists hold that the Soul
dies with the Body and sleeps in the dust of the Earth until both arise
together. 5ly. Whether Man does not subsist in his spiritual Being and Parts,
with a spiritual Capacity and spiritual Senses, having a Sense of perpetual
Gain or Loss when his Earthly Tabernacle is put off? 6ly. Whether the Spirit of
Man does not return unto God that gave it, to receive its Judgment and Reward?
7ly. Whether Man must not be born again here of an Immortal and Incorruptible
Seed in him, if ever he enter into God's Kingd^m, or enjoy Glory hereafter?
8thly, Whether it be not more necessary for you to wait in humilily, to know
this immortal Seed in you, and to be born thereof; then to puzzle your Brains,
and to busy your Thoughts, either about the Quest^on how and with what Body
are the Dead raised? Or how your Souls shall be invested hereafter?
If you remain here in the Enmity, slighting and contemning the Light within,
or the immortal Principle, or incorruptible Seed within (as T. H. does scoff
and ridiculously droll at our Testimony for it) you will be clothed with
perpetual shame and Contempt hereafter: God knows how to reserve the Unjust to
the Judgment of his great Day to be punished; as both Devils, fallen Angels,
and wicked men are reserved.

You need not question in what Bodies or Vessels; for that you shall be vessels
fit to hold inevitable Wrath, if here in time you repent not.

But if you repent and return to the Lord God, and love and serve him with all
your Souls, it will be well with you hereafter; God will provide well for you;
And the Glory wherewith his sanctified Ones shall be invested; And of that
House wherewith Righteous Souls shall be clothed upon, is beyond the reach of
humane Capacities Thoughts or Imaginations of men.

And you who are contending and quarrelling about your carnal Bodies, have not
had so much as a Vision of the Glory of the Saints hereafter, nor of the
Gloriousness and Spirituality of their Body, who are as the Angels of God in
Heaven.

Sect. XII. The Neck of the Baptist's Cause broken by his own Concession to the
Light within, in which Christ and his Testimonies are effectually received.
T. H. HOw could you call the Light within Christ, if some Scriptures had not
mentioned Christ in you, and that he is the Life and Light of Men? Give me an
Instance of any Person in the World (that never had Acquaintance of the
Scriptures) that ever called the Light in every Man by this Name: If none can
be produced, then the Scriptures must be your Rule for this, p. 22.

Answ. Thou have said enough in not only granting the Light within to be
Christ, but also in confessing that he is the Life and Light of men, which
while he is really so to men, this is sufficient for them, to call him as he is
(and appears) to them: Is it not therefore great Ignorance to imply him an
insufficient Rule, for men to give Testimony of him while he is a sufficient
Rule and Light to them, for their Supply and Life in him?

And what if they cannot call him by all those Names by which he is called in
Scripture, while they feel him in Virtue and Power to be really what he is
called, according to their Enjoyment of him. Its true, we having the Knowledge
of him as our Life and Light; we must needs reverently own and make use of
those Testimonies in Scripture which concur with our Knowledge of him, and that
to evince the Truth concerning his Light to them that pretend a Belief of the
Scriptures, while yet they are opposing his Light testified of therein.

As there are those that pretend to believe Moses and the Prophets, and think
to have Eternal Life in the Scriptures, while yet they really oppose that Life
and Light testified of in them. And such profess the Scriptures to be their
Rule, while yet they are perverting them against the Life and Light from whence
they came; and this Hypocrisy many of you are guilty of; and therefore with
Abraham we refer you to the Scripture Testimony in this Case, which if you
believe not while you profess them, you will not believe if one rise from the
Dead.

The Scriptures are not our only Rule for our refusing to swear, our not
breaking Bread with you, etc. for which thou falsely accusest us of arguing
against the Institutions of the Gospel, p 23. for,

1st. We stand for the Reputation of Christianity, and that Love which injures
no man, in our res^sing to swear, which the Prohibition without us did not
bring us to, but the Power of Christ when it begat us into that Love, wherein
we know the fulfilling of Christ's Command. 2ly. O^r Experience of Christ Jesus
the Living Bread which comes down from Heaven, has showed us the Uselesness of
your breaking Bread, as being but a Shadow; while we are come to the Substance
(to wit) Christ Jesus, the Bread of Life come down from Heaven, which if thou
know him so come, as that his Flesh and Blood were thy Meat and Drink, thou
would not be doting about the Shadow.
We do not grant that Christ is so come and revealed in all men, and yet own
some degree of this Light to be in all: Thou have no Reason to accuse us for
Liars in this matter, as in p. 23. But thy slanderous Tongue and Pen is at
Liberty in this and many other things.

Thy Malice also plainly appears, in charging us of denying the Person of
Christ, whereas we have fully confessed the Man Christ according to the
Scriptures, both with respect to his Sufferings and Glory.

Sect. XIII The Baptist's Impious Forgery upon the Quakers about the
Scriptures, which are in Reality owned and used by them.
AFter thou have erroniously accused that of God in us, as not sufficient to
direct, thou proceedst in thy false fictitious Dialogue thus, viz.

Chr. Is it ingenuous and honest in you to deny the Scripture to be a Rule to
others, and at the same time you make it (though by mis-interpreting it) a Rule
to your selves? Are not you ashamed of this Deceit and self-condemned of plain
Partiality.

And then he most falsely personates the Quaker.

Qua. Thou mistakest us; for when we make Use of the Scriptures, it is only to
quiet and stop their Clamors that plead for it as their Rule.

Reply, Who but an Ungodly Man would have brought forth such a lying Forgery as
this in the Sight of the Sun, as the Quakers Words, which is not the Speech of
any real Quaker so called, but one of thy own making to speak as thou please
for thy own wicked ends; and thy Lie upon the Quakers is manifest herein: Is
this the Way thou proposest for our Conviction, to make Lies thy Refuge? Was it
not known unto the World, that we have a better and more serious Esteem of the
Holy Scriptures then here thou represents, as knowing them to be profitable to
the man of God, who is come to know that eminent divine Rule of the Spirit
which opens them, and to make use of them in Subjection thereunto.

As also our denying that they are the Rule of Faith is no Proof that we deny
them to be any Rule at all, while in Subserviency to, and Proof of the greater,
we make use of them as the Spirit of God teaches, and for the Information and
Conviction of them that have a Belief concerning them; for the End still that
they may eye that Light and Spirit of Truth which gave them forth, and come to
know that Inspiration of the Almighty which gives the Understanding.

As for Deceit, Impudence and presumptuous Conceit, which thou T. H. accusest
us of, thou art highly guilty thereof thy self, or else thou could never
forge such Lies against us as thou have done. And we wish thou did in Reality
own the Scriptures, as (feigndly in Words) thou pretend'st: So far are we from
strenuously endeavoring to take People off of the Scriptures (as falsely thou
accusest us) that we desire all might come to know the Righteous Ends for which
they were given forth, by that divine Light which opens them.

Much of thy dirty stuff is gathered out of other dirty lying Pamphlets, which
have been long since answered.

Sect. XIV. His impious Abuse about Revelation, Light within, Scriptures, etc.
ANd why do thou quarrel against us for owning Revelation, or Perfection as
attainable? What have thou against Immediate Revelation? Instead of confuting
the thing it self, thou tellst us of some personal Mistakes or Weaknesses of
some particulars, as,

First, Of one being mistaken by Paul Hobson's speaking through a Trunk [though
that was no Quaker who was thus cheated.] 2ly. Of others being mistaken about
the Persons to whom they should have declared some Message. 3ly. Of a notorious
Falsehood being taken for a Revelation. 4ly. Of the Opposition of some
professing the Light and Revelation, p. 26, 27. together with several other
Stories, and Personal Reflections, which I have very much Cause not to believe.
But suppose many of these Stories were true against private Persons: Have thou
herein dealt ingenuously, thus no inveigh against Principles, from personal
Failings of such as professed them; Is there no such thing as divine Revelation,
or the Guidance of an Infallible Spirit to be known, because some do err or are
mistaken that profess them? Or no such thing as an infallible Light, because
some have differed in some particular Cases that have professed it? Would thou
thus be dealt by concerning thy Water Baptism, or pretended Gospel-Institutions?

If it should be argued, that because the Dippers are greatly divided among
themselves, and that about Principles and Doctrines; and some of them have been
grossly corrupt and debaucht in their Lives, therefore their dipping or
Water Baptism is no Institution of Christ: would thou look upon this as a
good Argument?

Nay further, Do you not much differ among your selves in several principal
matters? As about personal Election and general Redemption, and so about the
Death of Christ, whether for all or some, and about Free Will, the seventh Day
Sabbath, and laying on of Hands, and about the manner of administering your
pretended Lord's Supper, and about the Immortality of the Soul; as also some
affirming Water Baptism to be of Necessity to Salvation, others not, with
several other things; and yet most of you that thus differ, profess the
Scriptures to be your Rule.

If then I should from hence argue, that therefore the Scriptures are not the
Rule, because you that profess them to be so are so repugnant one unto another,
thou would readily reflect Absurdity upon me, though to the undermining of
thy own Cause. Why do thou so much slite the Light within, and insinuate
against Revelation, or Perfection from personal mistakes, Weaknesses or
Failings of some particulars, supposed.

Nay, I may further except against thy Impertinency herein, who durst not
produce one Argument against the Principle upon this Occasion when thou wast
desired; for that an occasional Mistake, Slip, or circumstantial Difference is
no general Argument to prove a man a false Prophet or Minister never called of
God; seeing that,

An Eli and a Samuel might be mistaken, 1 Samuel 1. 13, 14. and Chapter 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8. and Chapter 16. Verse 6, 7.

A young Prophet seduced by an old, 1 King. 13, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 24.

A Paul revoking his Reflection, Acts 23. 5.

A Paul and a Banabas in a Contest, Acts 15. 39.

A Peter withstood by Paul, Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14.

Yet these are no Arguments, that therefore these men were never called of God,
nor had divine Revelation to prophecy or preach.

Neither on the other Hand does it argue that they fell short of Perfection or
Infallibility, when they came to see into the Depths of Satan, and how any of
them have been overtaken; for through that which is perfect they out-grew
Imperfections and Weaknesses.

I must yet take notice of what thou speaks of a Revelation that came from Paul
Hobson, who on Purpose to try them spoke through a Trunk, yet could they not
distinguish his Voice from the Immediate Voice of God, p. 27.

Reply, Thou have herein grossly belyed the Quakers, neither were they either
thus tried or cheated; howbeit do thou think that this adds to the Credit of
thy Cause? Was not Paul Hobson an eminent Dipper, or Brother Baptist of yours,
who (when he grew weary of a poor shattered whimsical man in his House, who was
no Quaker) your Brother Paul did feign a Call as from God through a hollow
Trunk to the poor man to get rid of him; as I have also heard the Story
credibly related in the County of Durham.

Now was not this a horrible Deceit and Cheat of your Brother Paul to presume
such an Invention, as in the Name of God; whether was he the Deceiver or the
poor man deceived most to be blamed? Let the ingenuous Reader and thy own
Conscience judge.

And so how dully and sorrily thou have come off, to bring this as an Instance
either against the Quakers or Revelation? How have thou manifested thy Folly
herein? And would thou and thy Brethren be thus dealt by, to be all reflected
upon, or disparaged by the Miscarriage of any particular Persons supposed among
you, thou would be ill pleased if I should speak in earnest; behold what
Deceivers the Baptist Preachers are, seeing Paul Hobson their Brother did so
impiously deceive and cheat the poor shattered man. And so what Advantage has
thy envious Reflection upon us, been to thee or thy Cause.

Again thou bring'st an Instance against the Light within, thus,

T. H. Above all, that eminent Difference may not be omitted between J. N. and
G. F. at or after J. N's public Entrance into Bristol, when they called each
other the Children of the Devil, and departed from the Light; A great Party
adhered to both in this Opposition of their Lights and Revelations, p. 27.

Answ. First, This is a false Relation, the Words were not so between them, nor
was the Opposition at Bristol. 2. Nor was the Opposition from the Light in
both. 3. Its true, that J. N. was witnessed against by several for turning
aside from the Light at that time; and therefore it is most unjust in thee to
cast his Failings upon the Light, or instance it as an Argument against us. 4.
J. N. came by the Light to a Sense of his Loss and repented of it; therefore
unjustly imputed either to the Light, to G. F. or us. 5. Seeing there was
Opposition between them, it is a most malicious Conclusion of thine, from hence
to call us Cheats and Impostors, p. 28. as also in thy 17. page thou calls our
first fundamental Principle a mere Cheat.

Thus thy wicked Design is not only against the Persons, but against the
Principles; whereas our first fundamental Principle is the true Light, against
which thou have thus blasphemed; for which God will rebuke thee, not only as an
impertinent but a most malicious Opposer.

And to prove thy Lie, that we endeavor to beget in the minds of men an ill
Opinion of the Scriptures, thou do instance my Saying, that which is spoken
from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great Authority as the Scriptures and
greater. p. 28. But leavest out my Explication, viz. as received, and
immediately proceeding from the Spirit and spoken in the Sense thereof; that
is, in the living Demonstration of the Spirit to the Conscience.

This I still testify is of greater Authority then the mere Letter or Writing,
though containing the same Words so spoken as I did then instance and explain
thus, viz. As Christ's Words were of greater Authority when he spoke, then the
Pharisees reading the Letter, etc. But do not you Baptists deem your Preaching
of equal Authority with the Scriptures, when you say, what you preach is the
Word of God, (however intermixed with your own uncertain Meanings.)

In thy 35. page to prove thy calling me a Knave, a false and deceitful Man;
thou say, I give not the least hint of thy Explications of thy Positions;
whereas I writ thy Doctrines for thee to give thy own Explications, least thou
should say I wronged thee; yet to this Day I must confess, that some of thy
Positions were so absurd and incongruous that I could not hear thee give the
least rational Explication upon them, as those mentioned upon Joh. 1. 4. viz.

First, Of the Light being natural, because the Light of the Eternal Word.

Secondly, That it is divine as in God, but natural as in man; for this thou
did not show so much as the least Color of Reason or rational Explication.

And must I be accounted a Knave, guilty of Deceit, a false deceitful Fellow
for not writing all thy Impertinencies? And yet thou take the Liberty to
leave out my Explication which was most material to my Position (for the
powerful Demonstration of the Spirit) while it was set down in Print before thy
Eye. Oh! what gross Hyocrisie art thou guilty of, thus to rail and revile such
as wish thee no Harm, when thou have no Occasion given thee; and yet art guilty
of that which thou falsely accusest another for.

An other dark Accusation of thine is, of a Servant Maid, that should say the
Bible is a good honest thing, but she liked our Friends Books better, p. 29.

If thou had mentioned the Name of this Maid, and proved the Accusation, what
is this to the Body of the Quakers? Though I suspect this Accusation not true;
but if it were, does thy inference follow, that our Proselites are thus taught?
O abominable Wickedness! Where or when did we ever preach such Doctrine? We
utterly deny it, and never heard any of our Friends held or owned it; knowing
in our Conscience, the eminent and reverend Esteem we have of the Scriptures or
Bible, as the principle Book extant in the World, though we may not slite but
esteem all other Books dictated by the Spirit of Truth in their Places, and for
the good ends intended.

Another Accusation is, that Fox and Hubberthorn said, the Scriptures are no
standing Rule and that it is dangerous for ignorant People to read them, p. 29.

Reply, First, As for being the only and standing Rule, they no where call
themselves so, but refer us to God and Christ or Spirit within.

2ly, Thou have wronged and mis-cited their Words in a more general terms then
they are; their Words not being it is dangerous for ignorant People; but to
their Adversary they say, The Letter which kills is dangerous; for thou
take it here to war withal against the Saints, giving out thy carnal
Expositions upon it -- you read with Danger who make a trade of Scripture --
but blessed is he that does read and understand, etc.as in the same page and
Book cited by thee, Entit. Truth's Defense.

Mark here, they neither slite nor oppose the sincere reading and perusing of
the Scriptures: Now seeing thou abuses and mis-renders (as hinted before) such
Passages as we find apparent in our Books to correct thee: Its no Wonderment if
thou do abuse diverse of our Fri^nds in thy Stories upon mere Reports and
private Discourses, as thy manifest Deceit in mis-citing our Words, which
renders thee very suspicious in many of those Stories. Now let the ingenuous
Reader take notice of thy Abuse herein. B^t,

3ly, That it is dangerous for some ignorant or unlearned People to read them,
is evident, while unstable and prejudiced in their Minds, not regarding the
Spirit or Light that gave them forth to learn by, and give them the right
Understanding; for it is such as are unlearned who wrest them to their own
Destruction.

Is not this dangerous for any to pervert them to their own Destruction? Is it
therefore just in thee to compare them to Jesuits and Romanists who thus
intend? Yet it is not dangerous but useful and profitable to read the Scriptures
in Honesty and Simplicity of mind, having regard to that divine Light and
Inspiration of the Almighty that gives the true Understanding of them.

Another Story is of one Holbrow that should say, that the Scriptures were no
better to him then an old Almanac.

Answ. This verifies the old Saying, that the Devil will play at a small game
rather then stand out. But we utterly deny any such gross Comparison concerning
the Scriptures. I am credibly informed of a Ranter that spoke these Words above
twenty Years ago; what is that to the Quakers? And we have heard of some Ranters
that have thus grossly slited the Scriptures, but never any real Quaker. Howbeit
thou art not wanting in Envy to brand us with such Calumnies, how utterly
soever the things be disowned and abhorred by us: Some Baptists have turned
Ranters, and others have mantained Ranterism, and others of them Poligamie;
others again, eminent among them (as namely of their Leaders) have turned
Papists.

Now would thou take it well, if I should endeavor to render you all odious
upon their Account? It Is probable when they turned Ranters they had a very mean
Esteem of the Scriptures. And if I should take this Course of arguing against
the whole Body of you Baptists and Dippers; I might make a large Narrative of
the gross Wickedness of many that have been eminent among you; but that is not
my Way of confuting men's corrupt Principles, though sufficient to spoil the
Credit of the guilty, and to render them unmeet Guides to others. Yet far be it
from me to asperse all amongst you therewith, believing many called Anabaptists
to be far more honest and sincere then thy self, or diverse of thy Brethren.

Elizabeth Marshal says in answer to the Dialogue, page 27.
THat about sixteen Years ago I was pressed in my Spirit to v^sil the People
called Baptists in Taunton, and at their Meeting which was then in Taunton
Castle, I spoke amongst them what was given me of God, which the Meeting with
Attention received, and many of them came forth with me lovingly to a
neighboring House, this is true; but that I should ever say or pretend I had a
Message from the Lord to deliver only to Thomas Mercer at Taunton, this is
utterly false.

And also that Thomas Mercer as an old Acquaintance has been several times to
visit me, this is true; but that I should say to him or any other person, that
it was revealed to me that he was come to deny his Principles, this is also a
false forged Lie; and I think when I shall speak with Thomas Mercer, he will
not abuse me with such a Lie, not did he ever reprehend me for such a Saying;
So it is a Lie proceeding from the Father of Lies, who through his Servants
would suggest such things on purpose to render the Truth and those that profess
it odious, but the Pit the wicked has dug for others, they fall into
themselves, and the Truth is Clear, and I am Innocent therein, who am yet alive
to give this my Testimony under my Hand.

Elizabeth Marshal.

Sect. XV. His partial Relation against John Story.
AGain thou give a very scanty and partial Relation concerning John Story
about the Sufficiency of the Light in every Man, to guide to Salvation without
any other Counceller, upon their excepting against the Priest's Book, out of
which the Position was read, and refusing to be catechized by thee, etc. p. 30.

As for that Contest between thee and John Story, I have heard a more full and
impartial Account then thou give, and how thou wast sufficiently baffled at
it, and proved a false Accuser of the Principle of the Quakers, as leading from
Christianity to Heathenism, which could not be supposed to relate to those
Gentiles that walked up to the Light or Law of God in their Hearts (for that
was really pious and therefore Christian) but to the impious idolatrous Part:
And though John Story and his Friends might justly except against the Priest's
Book, as being an Adversary to us, perverting our Principles and representing
them to our disadvantage; yet John Story never receded from the sufficiency of
that divine Light of Christ in every man, to guide them to Salvation who
believe in it and are obedient to it; not excluding the Counsel of such
faithful Ministers where they are sent, so to direct and turn men's minds from
Darkness to the Light, wherein they still submit to the Light of Christ, as the
Ground of their Ministry, and the sufficient chief Rule and Guide, which
implies no defect in Christ's Light, but on the Creatures Part, whose mind is
alienated from the Light; the Insufficiency is not in any degree of the Light
it self as a Rule, but they that are turned to it ought solely to depend upon
it, in it to know and receive the Light of Life, and Power from Christ against
Sin and the Devil.

As for John Story and our Friends refusing to be catechized by thee when thou
had accused them, they might very well, while thy catechizing argued want of
Proof for thy Charge, and a Willingness to draw out some Occasion from them;
therefore they had the Advantage to discover thy foolish Rashness. And thou
have made use of diverse other lying Pamphlets to prove thy Falsehoods against us
in many things, and have raked up in thy Dialogue Slanders out of our
Adversaries Writings, which have been long since answered.

Reader be pleased to view over these two Accounts (touching the Controversy
between Tho. Hicks and John Story) that It may be understood how Sillyly Tho.
Hicks came off about his false Charge against the Quakers,

Devizes the 21st of the 11th Month, 1672.
THe Occasion and Substance (as I remember) of what past between John Story and
T. Hicks at Bromham- bo^se was as follows, viz. A Friend of ours visiting
some of her Relations that were Baptists in the Vize; some Discourse passed of
the Fewness that was converted of late Years; to which Tho. Hicks said, it is
not now a time for Conversion; the Friend answered, she believed otherwise, for
many had been converted within these few Years by the People called Quakers,
the Quakers, said Hicks, their Conversion is but from Christianism to
Heathenism, which the Friend said was not so; but he pretended he would prove
it, and came to the Meeting, where John Story laid his false Accusation hard
upon him either to prove it or confess his Lie, but he sought many Ways to
evade it -- at length Hicks, and an outed Priest that came with him, produced a
Book, a Priest's Book (as was conceived) in which as they said was contained
many Errors collected out of our Friend's Books. John Story replied to this
Purpose, that we shall take no notice of what is printed or misrepresented of
our Principles, but we shall claim that Privilege to state our Principles our
selves and to present them as we understand them: And in some Discourse about
the Light, John Story laid it down as our Principle, that the true Light that
lights every man that comes into the World is sufficient for Salvation, etc.
But Hicks not willing to be beat out of his own Road raised many Intergatories,
which some Friends of ours reproving, said, they (needed not, or) did not come
to be catechiz^d of him, but pressed him to answer the matter in Controversy,
and not permitting their Arguments out of the Book they brought, Hicks and his
Company rose up and went away with a Lie in their Mouths, which was that our
Friends did deny their Principles.

Samuel Noyes.

Chippenham the 15th of the 11th. Month 1672.
ITs known here that the matter to be disputed, was Hicks' s own Assertion
under his Hand, which he promised to p^ve, viz. that the Quakers converted from
Christianism to Heathenism, and John Story to make an Introduction into the
Dispute) (after the People understood the matter to be disputed) opened to the
People what must be understood by Christianity according to the Saints
Testimony, and what by Heathenism according to holy Scripture, as to both their
Ways and Worships, by that Hicks found himself at a loss, and surely felt his
own Words his Burden, and strugled much to avoid the proving his Charge,
though given under his own Hand; but Truth bruised his Head and held him fast,
God's Power and Wisdom was manifested above the Serpent; then he pulled out a
Priest's Book, and read that which he called the Quakers Tenet, which either
the Priest had wronged in his Book, or Hicks in reading, or the Printer in
printing, viz. that the Light in every man is sufficient without any other
Councellor to guide unto Salvation, leaving out the two Words [of Christ] it
should have been (the Light of Christ) or that true Light which lights every
man that comes into the World is sufficient) So our Friends answered they came
not there to be catechized by him, but to hear him to prove if he could, that
the Quakers converted from Christianism to Heathenism, and said that Book in
his hand was a lying Book; so the Weight of Judgment in the Truth came upon
him. These are the Heads of the matter, and manner of the Dispute so far as
Friends here at present remember. Take this at present, lest John Story's
Information come not in time.

Thomas Neat, William Dyer.


Sect. XVI. The Baptist's Disparagement of the Light within contrary to his own
Pretense.
AFter thou have pretended no Disparagement to the Light within to say, that
God makes any thing more known of his Will, etc. for each degree of Light is
serviceable to its end, p. 36. wherein though thou have granted the Difference
to be but in the degrees of Light, and not in the kind; yet mark what thou
say afterward in thy 38. page viz.

T. H. What intolerable Pride and Arogancy have you arrived to? And all this
in following (as you pretend) the Conduct of the Light within, improving it to
the subverting and anihilating the Covenant of Grace, which is the only Way God
has revealed (since the Fall) for the Salvation of Sinners: Surely then this
Light, which instead of directing what you do in a Way of Subserviency to the
Ends of this Covenant, does directly oppose it, is in that so far from being a
sufficient Rule, that it ought to be rejected.

Answ. Are all these no disparagement to the Light within? let the ingenuous
Reader judge. Have thou not herein manifestly opposed and denied what thou
say before, for the Serviceableness of each degree of Light to its end: But
what Service, if the following or Improvement of any degree of the Light does
either anihilate or oppose the Covenant of Grace: What dark, mad and
blasphemous Work have thou here made against the Light within, which if it
ought to be rejected, what account will be given to God for it; And he, should
he give a Light so repugnant to his own Covenant?

Have thou not told us, that man must be accountable to God for every
Dispensation of Light? But now thou say it ought to be rejected: And have
thou not told us, that Christ is the Light and Life of men? How easy is it to
see thy lamentable and blasphemous Contradiction, which thou art fallen into,
as a Judgment upon thee for thy opposing the Light.

But let us understand how thou discribes this Covenant of Grace, and way for
the Salvation of Sinners, since thou do not own it to be obtained by
following of the Light within, but the ^ight within to be Rejected, where thy
Christianity comes to be embraced? We are sure that God has not planted a
Light in man that opposes the Covenant of Grace, nor is the Light of Christ
repugnant to (...) Christianity, neither can the least degree opp^se the
greater. Thou proceeds thus.

T. H. How comes it to pass that Jesus Christ as to the great end of coming
into the World, is so much neglected, and the Stress of many men's Hopes laid
upon something in themselves? Hence the Hope of the Hypocrite is compared to
the Spiders Web, being spun out of their own Bowels? Do you not see this in
your selves who are the greatest Admirers of the Light within, p. 38.

Answ. Still thou runs upon thy gross mistake of the Light within, whereby thou
falsely reflects upon us for relying on it: for,

First, Our Hope and Dependence upon the least degree of the Light of Christ in
us, which is the divine Life of him, as the Eternal Word; this can neither
oppose nor neglect the great ends of Christ's coming into the World in the
Flesh, any more then John's bearing witness to the Life of the Word, being the
Light of men, could oppose the Word becoming or taking Flesh.

2ly, What were those great ends of Christ's so coming into the World, but
evidently to show forth and exalt that divine Light and Salvation in a greater
Fullness and Manifestation, which in some degree did before universally shine
throughout all Ages; or otherwise how could Christ be the Rock of Ages, or his
Outgoings from of old from everlasting?

And whence in the days of his Flesh showed he Light through his innocent
Life, Ministry and Miracles, but from that divine Power and Glory of the Father
in him; for God did work them by him?

3ly, After its testified concerning God the Eternal Word, that in him (or in
it) was Life, and the Life was the Light of men, Joh. 1. 4. Its said, that the
Word was made Flesh and dwelt amongst us (or tabernacled in us) and we beheld
his Glory, as of the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth, ver.
14. and of his Fullness have all we received Grace for Grace, ver. 16.

Now mark, this discovery of his Glory, Grace and Fullness was a divine
discovery, being as of the only begotten of the Father, of whom John said, he
that comes after me is preferred before me, for he was before me, verse 15.

The divine Light of the Word was that by which they had this discovery of
Christ, which was beyond that of the outward or fleshly Appearance, which might
be seen with a visible Eye, but the other only seen by the Eye invisible and
Spiritual; So that this coming of Jesus Christ into the World, was so far from
lessening or destroying his spiritual Light of him as the eternal Word in men,
that it was to increase the Knowledge of it, and in order to bring it forth in
its Brightness and Glory for the Revelation of the perfect Day of Salvation,
And herein he came to render the Appearance and Testimony of his Light within
the more valid and effectual, men having erred and been estranged from it.

Now is it consistent with the Hope of the Hypocrite to obey the measure of the
Light of Christ within, in order to receive more? Is it not rather consistent
with the Hope of the Hypocrite to hope that their Sins are pardoned and they
justified by the Righteousness and Obedience of Christ wholely without them,
while they are rebelling against, sliting and rejecting his Light within them,
and so living in their Sins and Impurity?

And this is thy State and Hope as will further appear; for who have received
Power to become the Sons of God, whom the World knows not, because it knew
not him; they have that Hope and Expectation of being made like unto Christ,
through his Appearance, and every man that has this Hope in him purifieth
himself even as he is pure, 1 John 3. therefore this Hope which they have in
them is both living and effectual, and to be fore it is not placed upon
Darkness, but upon the Light.

For it is the Inlightening of the Eyes of the Understanding, whereby a Soul is
capable of seeing what is the Hope of his calling, and the Power that wrought
in Christ, when God raised him up from the dead: Therefore thou who rejects the
Light within, thy Eye is blind, thy Hope is the Hope of the Hypocrite, thou
neglects the great ends of Christ's coming into the World, which was not only
to condemn Sin in the Flesh, as his Light within effectually does, but also to
show and increase Light, and to manifest the day of God's Salvation by his
divine Power in delivering man from Sin and Wrath.

Sect. XVII His Slander about the Person, Offices, Sufferings and Blood of
Christ and continued Abuse of the Light within.
T. H. WHat contemptible Thoughts you have of the Person, Offices and
Sufferings of Jesus Christ, that you account his Blood no more than you do the
Blood of a common Thief, p. 38.

Answ. It Is no new thing for thee to slander us, while by opposing and
rejecting the Light within, thou art become hardened and seared in Conscience.
These are such notorious Slanders that thousands can witness against thee
therein.

When did ever any of us express such contemptible Thoughts of Christ, his
Offices or Sufferings? If we had never expressed any such thing, how come thou
to judge our Thoughts to be such? And where did ever any of us express such an
Account of his Blood that was shed, as no more then that of a common ^hief? The
Lord rebuke thee for this thy abominable Slander, as I doubt not but he will.

T. H. And esteem Justification by that Righteousness which Christ wholly
fulfilled in his own Person without us, to be a Doctrine of Devils, p. 38.

Answ. Though these are not our Words, we do not own the Doctrine, viz. That
men are justified wholly without them, by what Christ fulfilled in his own
Person only; for this is not the Language of the Scriptures which thou
pretendest to be thy Rule, Christ fulfilled the Righteousness of the Law in his
Person, but here thou make no Exception, but that Justification is by that
Righteousness which Christ wholly fulfilled in his own Person without us, men
will only believe this when they reject the Light within, as thou have taught
them.

But we are not justified by the Righteousness of the Law, nor by any Act of
Christ, merely as done in his Person, but by the Righteousness of Faith in
which we are interested in Christ, as we are Partakers of living Faith which
are inseparable.

But what is this Justification thou would advance, as wholly wrought without
thee? Is it either in Reallity a making men just, or an accepting of them as
Just and Righteous who are so in Reallity, or is it a reckoning of them so, who
are actually sinful?

If the former, then it is not wholly wrought without, but the inward Effect of
the Blood of Christ in cleansing from Sin is witnessed in order to bring forth
this justified State.

If in the latter Sense (as thy Words import) then all must be in a justified
State for whom Christ dyed; If their Justification was wholly wrought without
them in his Person; and then all men must be in a justified State; for Christ
dyed for all men; and then what have thou to do to revile or condemn any as
thou have done? those whom thou severely opposest must be in as justified
Estate as thou can think thy self.

But if men receive the Pardon of Sin through true Repentance, and
Justification through living Faith in the Name of the Son of God, and by his
Virtue and Blood, then are not all men justified, nor the Justification of any
effected nor fulfilled wholly in his Person without them; for,

First, Men are not in a justified State while their Sins are unremitted. 2.
They are not in a justified State while the Wrath of God abides upon them: And
men's Sins are unremitted while they impenitently persist in Transgression, and
the Wrath of God abides upon them who bclieve not the Son.

Again we do not affront either the Grace or Wisdom of God in adding what more
Light he pleases to any measure that he has given, while we are witnessing
against men's affronting that measure of Light and Grace which he has already
given to Mankind.

T. H. This Light within directs not our Actions to those Holy and Spiritual
Ends which the Scripture does: Alas, whereto do the best of men's Actions
naturally tend, p. 37, and 38.

Answ. Here like a dull and dark Opposer still thou endeavourest to confound
the Light within with man's corrupt Nature; whereas thou have confessed it to be
not only such a Light as can discover God, and that he is to be worshipped, but
also that Christ is the Life and Light of men; and also that it can discover
morality, that its serviceable to its end, and that God's Soveraignity over
man, and man's Inferiority to God ought to be acknowledged.

And does not this extend to the same holy and spiritual Ends which the
Scriptures direct to? What more holy then God's Soveraignity over man, and
man's Subjection to, and Adoration of God? But according to Scripture, is it
not an holy and spiritual End truly to ^ear God, work Righteousness, and do
Good? which in every Nation he that does is accepted: And this the Light
teaches, and Glory, Honor and Peace to every man that works good, to the
Jew first, and also to the Gentile; for there is no respect of Persons with
God, Romans 2. 10, 11. Besides, it is most natural and proper to a spiritual and
divine Light to direct to sacred and spiritual Ends.

And if thou did not vary and waver in thy Confusion from thy Concession to
the Divinity of the Life and Light of the eternal Word, which is the Light of
men, thou would have spared much of thy Babylonish Work to the contrary, who
in thy 39 page say, that thou opp^sest not the Scriptures to the holy Spirit,
but to the Light within.

And why do thou oppose the Scriptures to the Light within? Or imply such a
Difference between the Spirit and the Light within, while thou have granted
that the Light within is not only serviceable, but ought to be improved, as
that which chccks for many Evils, and excites to Good: And does not this agree
with the Testimonies of the Scriptures? And will thy reviling of G. Whitehead,
as dealing deceitfully for but asking a sober Question, excuse thee in thy
Malice and Confusion? The Question being,

By what Rule shall we be convinced that the Scripture is the Rule, and has
Preheminnece above the Spirit? Apology page 48. which instead of answering
directly to, thou revilest me, as in page 39. not at all telling me by what
Rule shall we be so convinced; but asks this Question.

By what Rule shall we be convinced that the Light within is the Rule, and has
Pre-eminence above the Scriptures? page 39.

Answ. Every one that does Truth brings his Deeds unto the Light, which Light
within being divine is sufficient to evince it self as supreme Rule in the
Conscience: And as it is so manifest where it is not withstood, but obeyed, its
own Brightness, Virtue and Operation sufficiently discovers it self; but where
Enmity is lived in, and Darkness loved rather than Light, the Excellency of it
cannot be known.

Concerning the Rule that the Patriarchs or Holy Men had before the Scriptures,
thou tellst us, they were instructed by Dreams, Visions and Angels, page 40.
But were these the standing Rule? Had they these Dreams and Visions to instruct
them in the sole Course of their Lives, or rather on particular Occasions?
Surely these were neither the standing, nor yet their chief Rule: They had a
Rule to know the Truth of those Visions; and whether those Angels were good
Angels or no; a Rule of divine Light to discover whether they were good Angels
or evil Angels transforming themselves into Angels of Light, which nothing but
that which is divine can discover; for the Saints in this Light shall judge
Angels.

And Peter, James and John had both a Vision and Voice (when in the Mount) from
Heaven; yet Peter himself testifies, We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy
unto ye do well that you take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark
Place, until the Day dawn and the Day Star arise in your Hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19.

Though the former Vision and Voice were true, yet not so universal and
abiding, as this shining Light was. That Vision and Voice was only seen and
heard by a few, the other was seen and known by all who attained to the dawning
of the Day, and the arising of the Day. Star in their Hearts; for it did shine
as in a dark Place for that end. Its evident that this Light or Word so shining
was a Light of the same holy Ghost which moved the holy men of God to speak
forth Scriptures, ver. 21. and therefore the Apostle prefers it before the
Scriptures, as the Cause of their being given forth.

Sect. XVIII. The Baptist's Quarrel against S. Crisp removed.
THou make a great Pudder against S. C. about knowing the Beginning and Date
of thy Christ, whom to confute thou pleadst his Deity, p. 44, 45. having before
told us of expecting to be saved by Jesus, as being in a Person without; what
Scripture have thou for this Creed? Is Christ the Object of Faith only as a
Person without?

But do thou believe in thy Conscience, that he could intend any such thing
with reference to the Deity of Christ? Why art thou so wilfully quarrelsom? And
though the Appearance of Christ in the Flesh, or as man when upon Earth, was
within the Compass both of time and date, that is, as to his coming into the
World and going out at his Ascension; yet still the same man Christ is in being
glorified with the Father, in the same Glory that he had with him before the
World began.

But the true saving Knowledge of whom is spiritual and divine, and inwardly
received in his own Light and Life within; and saving Faith is in his Name and
divine Power as inwardly revealed.

Stephen Crisp's Answer to T. H.
THomas Hicks, I having seen thy Book called a Dialogue, etc. and finding my
Name mentioned in page 44. and 45. have very seriously taken notice of thy
manner of Rehearsal of my Words, and thy own spoken at that Conference which we
once had at Bartholomew-Close, and that I know of, I never saw a Narrative of a
thing past, given forth with more Falsehood and Hypocrisy then that is, and
with a known and witting Purpose to deceive the Reader, and to abuse me; and I
am persuaded Thomas thou have in thy self a Knowledge of it; and surely except
thou repent, and obtain Forgiveness, it will one Day be heavy to thee.

The Business or matter upon which we treated was, about our holding and
believing Christ to be the Light of the World, or that the Light which lights
the World, and every one that comes into the World, was and is the true
Christ, which was then proved by plain Scripture; and whereas I do not intend a
Narrative of the Discourse, but only to dis-abuse the Reader, and to make known
the Occasion of these Words of mine thou have mentioned; therefore I shall pass
over most of our Discourse, and come to the matter relating to Christ. And that
thou did say (as thou mentions in thy Book) that no Spirit nor Principle was
capable of Suffering and being Crucified, is true, thou did say so, but how
faise the matter it self is let the Scriptures be judge. Do they not speak in
many places of the Sufferings, Pressures, Vexings, Burdenings, Grievings and
Quenchings of the Spirit? and do they not speak of crucifying afresh, killing
and slaying the Lamb of God, the Lord of Glory, the (...) One, from the
Foundation of the World in the Streets of Sodom and Egypt, etc? which Sayings
cannot have Relation to that Body that hanged upon the Cross, which was not
from the Foundation of the World, nor was ^ot in Sodom, nor never hanged upon a
Cross in Egypt, but he whom the Saints called our Lord, and the Lord from
Heaven a quickening Spirit was capable of suffering these things, besides those
great Sufferings which he suffered in that Body, in which he conversed with men
in the Form of a Servant in the ^arts of Judea and Jerusalem, whom the Jews
took and hanged upon a Cross without the Gates of Jerusalem, who I believe dyed
for Sinners, and is raised up again by the Power of God, and exalted therein
above the Power which caused him to suffer, and sits now at the right Hand
of God, and makes (...) for the Saints, and is the Ruler over the true Israel
of God, who destroys his Enemies with the Spirit of his Mouth and the
Brightness of his coming: New this Christ of God thus truly considered, I
neither said nor thought I knew the Date or Beginning of, as thou do wickedly
suggest; for I know he is without beginning of Days or end of Life, and such
an high Priest becomes us to have, and blessed are they that believe in him
and are faithful to him: and now having answered what thou maliciously would
have the Reader believe, which I am persuaded thou thy self do not believe,
viz. That it is my Judgment and Belief that Christ has a Beginning and Date. I
shall now declare the Occasion of such Words, when I was about to prove to
thee, that this Principle of Light was that (...) of Ages in which the Fathers
and Prophets believed, and that it was that Word which came unto the Prophets,
and which was known to Abraham to his rejoicing, etc. thou made me this
Answer, That the Names Jesus and Christ were not proper unto any Spirit, Word
or (...) whatsoever, either in Heaven or in Earth, but unto that Body or Person
which was born of the Virgin; to which I replied, I remember John Newman has
written so in his Book, but I had thought you Baptists had not owned him in it,
but now I see you do, and thou said, yes thou did; for though thou
grantedst, that the Word and Spirit was from the beginning, yet that was not,
nor could not properly be called Christ, or Jesus, but that Person that was
born of the Virgin, that only was Jesus and Christ; where upon I (...) then I
know the date and beginning of thy Christ; upon which thou criedst out
Blasphemy, to which I replied and asked thee, if thou thoughtst I did not know
how long it was (...) he was born as well as thou or another man, etc. and
after that did prove to thee by plain Scripture, that the very Assertion was
false, to say there was no Jesus nor Christ before, and did mention the Rock of
which the Fathers did drink, and which followed the Jews in the Wilderness,
which Rock says the Apostle, was Christ, not is now become Christ, but was
Christ; and the same Apostle says, that God made all things by Jesus Christ;
mark, Thomas, if this be so, then he was before Mary was, or besore he became
Flesh, or took that Body made of a Woman; for the Prophet testified, that he
that should be born in Bethlehem his Outgoings was from of old. I say the more
concerning this, because thou endeavour'st to cast the Socinian Leven (of which
thou did appear that night too full) upon me, as if I looked upon Jesus
Christ as a mere Creature, whose beginning and date I knew, when as those Words
were only spoken with Detestation of, and in Testimony against thy corrupt
Socinianism that Night uttered, who also made a great Stir with me for saying,
the Eternal Son of God. Thy Foundation is manifest, Thomas, thou can not hide
it this Way; and as concerning thy foolish prattling in page 45. that if I knew
his beginning then he was not God; and if I knew his date, or when he ceased to
be, then he is not man; this is not all worth the answering, the pretended
Foundation thereof being taken away, and thou left naked in thy Folly and
Perverseness, having shown thy self but as one who makes a Likeness of a man,
and sets it up, and then beats it down again, and goes away and boasts of
Conquest. But for a Conclusion, I shall ask thee and thy Reader a Question:
Suppose that a man should affirm to me that all things come by Nature, and that
there is no universal Spirit of Life to quicken them; and I should answer
thereuppon and say, Then there is no God. I query, were this sufficient Reason
to charge me, that I were an Atheist, and that I held there was no God, or
ought it not to be taken as detecting the Atheism of the first Assertor; this
is my case with thee, which I refer to that of God in all Consciences, and let
that judge in and amongst men; and thee I leave to receive the reward of thy
work at the hand of God, who is just and will not let the guilty go unpunished.

Whereas thou (T. H.) seem offended at us for saying, Christ is within (in
whom as such we have living Faith) as opposed to their Faith who know not him
within, but expect to be saved, as believing in a Person without them, as thy
Phrase is, p. 44. It appears this is the manner of thy Expectation and Belief,
expecting to be saved by Jesus as a Person without thee, though thou have no
real Knowledge of him as such.

But it is to be minded, how plainly before thou have contradicted thy Faith,
as thus declared, where in thy 24th. page upon 2 Corinthians. 5. 16. thou do thus
paraphrase, viz. Though I Paul when a Jew, and in my unconverted State only
knew Christ after a fleshly manner, to be a King of the Jews, and to deliver
only from outward Bondage and Captivity, yet henceforth, from the time of my
Conversion I know him so no more; for now I know him according to that design
of infinite Grace and Love, which he came to carry on in the World, in being a
Savior of Sinners from Sin, Death and Hell, which before I knew not. Thus far
thou.

Mark, here thy Contradiction is plain, one while believing in, and expecting
to be saved by him, as a Person without; another while, from the Time of my
Conversion, I know him no more after a fleshly manner; for now my Knowledge of
him in being a Savior from Sin, etc. is not after a fleshly manner, but
according to the design of infinite Grace and Love: From whence it follows,
that he is not now known to be the absolute Savior from Sin, as a Person
without, or as considered after a fleshly manner but after a spiritual, (though
he was truly a Savior in the Days of his Flesh, by the Power of the Father,
by which the Saving Work always was and is inwardly effected) And indeed his
going away or dis-appearing after the Flesh, was, that his Appearance and
Knowledge after the Spirit might be the more revealed; and the Disciples might
the more know and rely upon the Comforter, even Christ's Spiritual Appearance
within.

Sect. XIX. The End of Christ's Coming, Example and Suffering more truly owned
by the Quaker then the Dipper.
AGain thy implying by Way of Question, as if we owned that the Word did take
Flesh, and that the Flesh was crucified for no other End and Purpose then
merely to be an Example, p. 47. is very false against us; for our owning Christ
in the Flesh to be a living Example, does not argue that he took Flesh, and was
crucified for no other End and Purpose, then merely to be an Example; for he
came into the World, both to bear witness to the Truth, to show Light, to do
the Works the Father sent him to do, to war against the Power of Darkness and
Wickedness, to exalt the Divinity, the Power of the Father, and to glorify him
upon Earth, to pass through and fulfill the first Covenant, and end the Shadows
thereof; and to set up the new and the living Way, that the second Covenant or
Testament might be established and confirmed; that the Living Ministry thereof
might have its free Course, being enforced above and beyond all the former
Types, Shadows and Vails under the first Covenant.

And so in offering himself up freely, both to do his Fathers Will, and to
suffer for Mankind, he gave himself a Ransom for all to be testified of in due
time.

As also he was an eminent Example and Pattern of Innocence and Piety through
all, which they that slite his Example, have no Benefit in his Sacrifice, nor
are concerned in the Ends thereof otherwise then to their own Condemnation; for
Christ's Innocence and Righteousness, even in the Days of his Flesh, as openly
manifest, do both judge and condemn all the Hypocritical Professors of
Christianity, who refuse following his Example, while they are applying the
Ends of his Coming and Suffering.

Sect. XX. The Baptist's Ignorance and Cavil about Redemption and the Spiritual
Discoveries of Christ and his Seed.
WHereas thou make a piece of thy Dialogue, p. 47. run thus viz.

Qua. He (viz. Christ) comes to work Redemption.

Christi. I query, for whom or what did he work this Redemption.

Qua. There is a Seed to which the Promise of Redemption is, which only wants
Redemption: Thus Nayler in his Book, Love to the Lost.

Answ. Thou perverts his Words; for they are not, That this Seed only wants
Redemption, but wherein only its seen and received, viz. that in the promised
Seed Redemption is only seen and received by Man or the Creature, as he fully
after explains.

Chr. Nayler says, that Christ is the Election, and the Elect Seed; and Fox in
his great Mystery, the Seed has been laden, etc. which Seed is the Hope Christ.

Answ. If God was so pressed as a Cart with Sheaves, and his Spirit grieved by
men's Sins, is it otherwise with his Seed in them? And it thou were not
wilfully blind and hardened, thou would not raise such a Consequence from
the Words before perverted by thee, while the Scripture mentions the Seed under
a two-sold Consideration.

1st. As to Christ, to whom the Promises originally are, as being Heir of all.
2ly. As to the Children of Promise the Children of the Kingdom, the true
Believers, who are truly Israel, and of Abraham's Seed according to the Faith.
Now know that Christ, the promi ed Seed, has entered into Sufferings and
Travel of Soul to bring forth his Seed: as its written, He shall see his Seed,
he shall see of the Travel of his Soul, and shall be satisfied

So he came not to redeem or save himself (as absurdly thou infers) but to
bring forth and redeem a Seed which shall serve him, and be counted for a
Generation.

And the Life of Christ as manifest in mortal Flesh, has pertaken of the
Afflictions of the Upright in all Ages; and the Spirit of God is grieved, the
just Principle oppressed and offended with men's Iniquities and Transgressions:
So Christ considered as a Seed, and in that low Estate is capable of being
formed in man, both of being raised up in man by the Power of the Father, of
growing up as a tender Plant, and as a Root out of dry Ground; and so of
receiving Power and Help from him, as indeed every Seed that's sown, and every
Plant that takes Root is capable of receiving Virtue and Nourishment according
to its kind, or else it cannot be quickened to Life, grow or bring forth Fruit:
And such a Growth of the immortal Seed was both in Christ and in his People,
which must be owned, if the Seed of the Kingdom within, and the Spiritual Birth
or forming of Christ within (or he as a Seed or Plant of Renown) be known and
owned, or a Suffering, Crucifying, Dying and Living with Christ be witnessed by
man.

For Christ's Suffering, Cross, Death, Resurrection, Life and Dominion are
spiritual, known in the true Believer, who is of that Seed which Christ took
upon him; yea, his spiritual begetting, spiritual forming in man, and spiritual
birth is known within; and all for the Redemption and Salvation of man to God,
or else he falls short o^ L^e and Glory; and he that brings up the Soul out of
the horrible Pit first descends thither.

And though its not true to say, he only comes to redeem, raise up or save
himself; yet it may be truly said, he does arise to scatter his Enemies, and
to bring man out of the Pit; and in conquering his Enemies, his own (...)
brings Salvation to him, Isa. 63. 5, 9. And thus says the Lord, in an
acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of Salvation have I helped
thee; and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the People, to
establish the Earth -- that thou may say to the Prisoners go forth, and to
them that sit in Darkness, show your selves, Isa. 49. 8, 9. which Promise is of
a general Extent.

So mark here, He that redeemeth the Prisoner, and calls forth them that are
in Darkness, he has his help of God that sent him; we are not to conclude that
he helps not others, because he is helped himself: And Christ's Sufferings both
inward and outward (for they were two-sold) were for man's Benefit (as is
testified in the said Book [ Love to the Lost] accused by thee) The Creature is
blessed of God for the Seeds Sake, and Redemption from the vain Conversation,
as Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, etc.
So if thou were thus redeemed, thou needst not enquire for the Subject of
Redemption, nor accuse others for owning the Seed of God, both in an oppressed
State, and as raised up by the Eternal Power and Glory of the Father; for worcester
thy is the Lamb that was slain from the Foundation of the World, to receive
Power, and Wisdom and Glory and Might, etc.

However T. H. slites our Testimony of the Seed of God within, as in several
States; and so the spiritual Resurrection of Christ in man; his Brother H. G.
confesses thereto in his Book, p. 54. where he says, Praises and Halelujahs
to God for ever, who has given us that Witness in our selves of which thou
speak, that we can experience the Power of Christ's Spiit risen in us for
our Sanctification and Renovation, as well as Christ was raised from the Dead,
etc. Thus far H. G.

Is it not here evident, that he has confessed to Christ's arising in man, for
man's Restoration? What think T. H. of this? Is this Canting or Gibberish? as
his Words are against us, p. 47.

Moreover, as the elect Seed is spoken of in the Scripture, both with respect
to Christ the Anointed, and with respect to his Seed and Heritage; so also the
Seed is Christ, not only as in himself a^ointed with the Oil of Gladness above
his Fellows, but also as in Union and Conjunction with his Church or Members:
As the Body is one, and has many Members, so also is Christ; and so Christ and
the Body comprehensively is one; he is the Anointed, and we are anointed in
him, and he that has anointed us is God.

By all which it is understood, that we are Partakers of the Life, Redemption
and Privilege that is in Christ, as we are in him, and grow up in him; so that
all our Opposers Cavils (which render our Principle as only including Christ
and God in the Redemption, and not man) do fall to the Ground, as Groundless
and Frivilous.

As for his groundless Cavills in his p. 48. The little Understanding he has
either of the Measure of God's Gift, his Seed within, or of Redemption by
Christ, the Elect Seed, is very intelligible from the Tenor of his impertinent
and contradictory Discourse throughout his Pamphlet. By all which we see the
Nature of his pretended Christianity, and how Un-christian he is in his
appar^nt Oppositions against the divine Light and Seed within.

Sect. XXI. The Baptist's Imperfect Work against Perfection.
COncerning Persection which we say is attainable in this Life, he attempteth
to confute us, though very feebly here, as will appear.

T. H. I perceive you are forced as much as any others to borrow from the
Scriptures, without which you can no more prove any thing, either concerning
Christ or Perfection, then a mere Indian, p. 49.

Answ. Touching which it appears, while thou grantst something for Perfection
we proved from Scriptures, how consistent with this thy after Work is, against
Perfection, will ^rther be manifest: But while thou concludes, that we can
prove no more of Perfection then a mere Indian without the Scriptures.

How agrees this with thy former confessing, that Man was always under an
Obligation, that God's Soveraignity over him, and his Inferiority unto God
might be acknowledged. Now if this be truly to be acknowledged by Man or
Mankind in general, why are Indians excluded? And if God's Soveraignity over
man, and man's Subjection thereto be known, does not this extend to Perfection?
If either the Rule be perfect that thus obliges man, or if in God's Rule Power
or Soveraignity (as over man) be Perfection, which we affirm is able to evince
it self, where true Fear and Subjection to God is lived in, or Sincerity and
Uprightness toward him retained: Though to such as thou art, who opposes
Sin-less Perfection as attainable in this Life, there is a need especially of
producing Scriptures to prove it, while you pretend a Belief of them; for the
perfect Light or Gift of God within you do not believe in.

Yet thou have granted to Perfection, as sincere and upright, p. 50. and is not
this Perfection of Sincerity and Uprightness without Sin? Were it good Doctrine
to say, that Persection, as it respects the Sincerity and Uprightness of Saints
is sinful?

But that a perfect Freedom from all Sin in this Life is attainable, we intend
is by the all-sufficient Power of Christ; and no true Christian does dissent
from us herein: Nor does this cause either Pride or Presumption, as thou falsely
insinuates; but the contrary Sin-pleasing Doctrine that's for Imperfection and
Sin while in this Life.

And while thou confessest a holy Fear, Humility, Watchfulness and Industrious
Endeavors to persevere in a Holy Course to the End, p. 50.

Either thou do hereby grant Perfection, or a perfect Freedom from all Sin
attainable in this Life; or else thou excitest People to be industrious, and
endeavor for that which thou believe is not attainable; which is as much
faithless Inconsistency as to say, use your industrious Endeavors to persevere
in a holy Course (that is sinless) to the End, but it is not attainable: Were
not this a sad and Heartless Way of Preaching, to put People upon
Impossibilities.

Again upon Phil. 3. 15. as many as are perfect, be thus minded. Thou say, By
Perfection, no more can be understood in this Text, then Sincere and Upright,
accompanied with an earnest reaching after Perfection, as Paul did, p. 51.

Answ. What ever Perfection with respect to a full Apprehension or Knowledge
was pressed after by Paul, as Phil. 3. 12, 13. yet this his Perfection granted of
Sincerity and Uprightness was sinless; it was pure in Nature, wherein he was
capable of attaining a perfect Growth in spiritual Understanding: And this is
employed in his pressing after Perfection, while he was perfect, as appears in
his own Words.

But if in this Sense sincere and upright Men do earnestly reach after a
sinless Perfection, and that Paul did so, then it is attainable, otherwise both
Paul and the rest did ^rnestly strive after an Impossibility; and this renders
both their Praying, Striving and Preaching in valid as yours is, who put on
People earnestly to reach after Per^ction, and yet tell them it is not
attainable.

Upon Mat. 5. (...). Be ye perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect, thou
presumest, We intend not that we should be perfectly powerful wise and good as
God is.

Answ. 1st. We do not intend that we should be God, but holy, just and good
men, renewed after his own Image which is perfect.

2ly. Though not so perfectly powerful and wise as God is, yet while thou
withal excludes being good as God is, thou art contradictory in saying, the
meaning of the Text is, Be Merciful, as your Heavenly Father is Merciful, that
is, Love your Enemies, do good to them that hate you, p. 51. these are not
intelligibly consistent, That we must not be good as God is, and yet Merciful
as he is, that is, love our Enemies, etc.

I would know if that Soul is not endued with the Goodness of God, that is
endued with his Mercy and Love, so as to do good to enemies: Was it not a plain
Caracter of being his Children, when they did so love their Enemies, and do
good to them that did hate them; See Math. 5. 44, 45.

But this perfect Resemblance of the Heavenly Father, such Sin-pleasers and
pleaders (as T. H.) will not admit of in this Life, who is so far from this
Love and Goodness toward Enemies, that his Enmity leads him to abuse,
bespa^ter and defame such of us, who never owed him or his Friends ever any
ill will in the World.

But when does he expect this divine Resemblance of God, or sinless Perfection
to be brought forth? It does appear in Answer to the Question stated by him
thus, viz.

Where would thou be perfectly free from Sin, if not in this Life? His Answer
is, in Heaven, p. 50.

Reply, He would be perfectly free from Sin in Heaven, as he pretends, but
opposes Perfection being attainable in this Life, accounting that it causes
much Pride, Presumption, hinders all holy Fear, Humility, Watchfulness and
industrious Endeavors to Persons in a holy Course; whereas this all tends to a
perfect Life: But sufficiently has he contradicted this his sinful Doctrine
against a perfect Freedom, where he confesses, p. 24, That Christ came to carry
on in the World the Design of insinite Grace and Love, in being a Savior of
S^ers from Sin Death and Hell.

Note here, he has given a deadly Blow to his own Imperfect lame, and Sinful
Cause; for if Christ came into the World to save Sinners from Sin, and to
redeem us from all Iniquity; then to be so saved is attainable in this Life;
for Christ is able perfectly to do the Work which he came for, that is, to save
from Sin, and to redeem from all Iniquity.

Again T. H. in his Forgery deals very corruptly according to his ^onted
manner, in stating the Christian and the Quaker thus speaking viz.

Chr. If thou can prove a perfect Freedom from Sin's Inherency, etc. remember
thou must prove it by Scriptures or Instances, Qua. I will prove it by both.

First, By Scriptures, Phil. 3. 15. Math. 5. 48. Secondly, By Instances, Many
of our Friends do witness it, p. 50, 51.
Reply, Herein most falsely and abusively he has acted the Quakers, speaking
his own Notorious Forgery as Proo^. They have no Reason to choose him for their
mouth; for what needed they bring any Instances of themselves for any Proof,
when they are left to prove Perfection by Scriptures, or Instances, while the
Scriptures plainly prove it.

And let me tell him, it is not our manner of arguing with our Opposers, to
tell them, that many of our Friends do witness Perfection, knowing, not only
that to be the thing which they seek to reproach us by; but also that to plead
the Verity of Principles from the mere Credit of Persons asserting them, to be
no prevalent Proof, nor Effect any Conviction, while the Persons themselves are
slited and abused.

But our Adversary having thus falsely acted the Quaker as before, as saying,
many of our Friends witness Perfection, he declines the Scriptures for it, and
falls upon personal reviling; and to express to the World some wrong
Expressions and Mistakes of Persons. If he rightly state them, which I much
question because his many notorious Abuses.

Sect. XXII. Tho. Hicks his groundless Calumny and malicious Railing against G.
Whitehead.
NOw we come to his Railing and Sla^der against G. Whitehead, viz. That he is
guilty of Deceit and Falsehood in matter of Fact; and that he told him he was a
Knave, that is, he was a false deceitful man, p. 53.

Answ. Here I shall take leave to answer for my self; therefore understand,
Reader, what he pretends as his Reason for this abusive Language to me. I find
two things he pretends for it.

First, He accuses me with denying mine Opinions, when charged with them. 2ly,
He that shall give a false Relation of what another man asserts, and does it
wifully, is false and Deceitful: But th^s he accuses me; and why so? But
because I acknowledged Explicatio^s to be given to his Propositions, yet gives
not the least him what t^ose Explications were, p. 53.
Reply, To the first, what I did deny, I still do deny, as none of my Opinions,
as stated by T. H. in his accusing the Quakers, That they deny the Person of
Christ, his Offices, Sati^action and the R^surrection of the Body. I do
recharge these upon him, as his Lies and Slanders forged and brought forth in
Envy and Darkness, as I did in the Paper and public Debate between us; and in
so doing I do not deny any Opinion or Tenent of mine or my Friends: And he
dealt most dis-ingenuously in not laying down my own Words to prove that I
denied the Person of Christ, or his Offices, Satisfaction and the Resurrection.

But instead thereof was it either ingenuous or honest to bring my ^dversary T.
D. his Pamphlet, styled a Sinopsis (which falsely accuses me with saying, there
is no Resurrection from the Dead) for Proof? Most falsely instancing my Answer
to W. Burnet, in which Answer (quite contrary to what I am accused o^) I have
given a plain Confession to the man Christ, his Offices, Satisfaction and the
Resurrection according to the Scripture, though it is probable not in my
Opposers Words and Terms; for note that his Charge which I denied, was not that
the Quakers deny the raising again of this very Body of Flesh, etc. but the
Resurrection of the body (in this general Phrase.)

Is it therefore ingenuous that I should be thus accused in these general
Terms? And when I cannot in Reason or Conscience own T. H's manner of stating
things, as my Opinions in his own Words, both besides and contrary to what my
Words were or are, must I therefore be called a Knave, a deceitufl Fellow, etc?
Whereas my Conscience bears me witness, that if he had stated either my
Affirmations or Denials in any Case in my own Words, Books or Writing, I would
not in the least have disowned or receded from them as mine; but either have
stood by them, or upon plain Scripture Evidence to the contrary, should have
fallen under Conviction and Reprehension, according to the nature of the Error
or Mistake, if truly detected or proved guilty thereof.

As concerning the Resurrection, I am so far from bauking my Testimony, or
receding from what I have and do hold concerning it, that I am intended (if God
permit) to speak further thereof, according to the Sense and Understanding
given me, and that before I have done with my present Opposers.

But whereas T. H. takes the Liberty to be the Quakers Mouth, and to present
them as speaking those impertinencies and Falsehoods which are merely his own
Forgeries, and ^ever believed nor intended by them: Let the unprejudice^ Rea^er
judge, whether he be not highly guilty of Falsehood and Deceit herein, as in
diverse things has been signi^ed in this Discourse.

And as for his second Accusation, admitting that I did not write down all his
Explications upon his Positions; it is no Proof, that the Relation of what I
gave was false, as very sillily he accuses me; Neither has he proved that I
have given a false Relation of any one Position of his.

Besides, in some of his Positions, the very Substance of his Reason or
Argument, is therewith inserted in my Paper; others of his Positions are so
absurd and gross, that he could not make so much as the Color of a reasonable
Explication upon them; and therefore I did endeavor to induce him upon more
deliberate Conside rations, to produce what Explications he could for his
Doctrines; for which these were my Words, If our Opposer say we have not
inserted his Explications upon his Assertions; our Answer is, that's his Work,
he has Liberty to do it himself.

Now if for this he must revile me in the open Street, calling me Knave, and
shaking his Stick at me: If the Baptists will prove men Knaves at this Rate
about Principles or Opinions, they will make all Knaves that oppose them, who
do not relate all Circumstances of Words, as well as their Assertions, how
impertinent soever.

Though I am unwilling to reflect upon all of them for this outrageous and
uncivil Carriage, and defaming Language of their Brother Hicks; for his Brother
W. Kiffin did somewhat ingenuously show his Dislike thereof openly; yet when he
attempted to prove it, adding thereto against me such Language as this, viz.
impudent Fellow, audacious Fellow, deceitful Fellow, etc. To excuse him herein,
some of his Companions said, it was his Zeal; but this Cover was too narrow;
such hypocritical and false Excuses will not hold up the Credit of T. Hicks and
those his Adherents.

And be it reminded, that in diverse things he has both curtailed and wholly
left out my Explications, particularly of that Passage cited by him in his 28.
page viz. That which is spoken from the Spirit of Truth in any, is of as great
Authority as the Scriptures, and greater; here he stops and leaves out, As
received and proceeding immediately from that Spirit, and as Christ's Words
were of greater Authority when he spoke, then the Pharisees reading the Letter,
as before hinted: See here he has called me a Knave for that which he is more
manifestly guilty of; and so is condemned out of his own Mouth, in that which
he allows himself in.

And I desire that Tho. Hicks may look at home, and examine his own Conscience,
whether he was not in himself detected for that his Passion and Fury toward
me; I would not have him go on wronging his own Conscience, nor withstand that
Light in him, which in secret would show him his Infirmity and Evil, in this
matter of Passion and calumnious Railing, whereby he will never gain upon the
Spirits of any, who are tender and sincere to God.

But instead of repenting thereof, he brings the same Language over again in
his Postscript, after he has had both reproof and deliberation to have learnt
better, but it appears he is disturbed and royl'd in his Spirit, as a man
guilty, and therefore shuffles to ease himself, by telling us again thus, viz.
I told G. W. he was a Knave, wherefore I did then, and do so still esteem him,
etc. really false and dishonest, p. 91.

To which G.W's reply is, the Lord forgive him; howbei^ I am at defiance of my
Adversary's implacable Enmity, and do challenge him and all the World justly to
detect me of dishonesty, or of acting against my Conscience, or to the Injury
of any one living, knowing my own Peace in the Testimony of a good Conscience
toward God and Man; I do really defy the Envy of the Devil and all his Agents.

And T.H. cannot hide his Passion and (...), by his begging the Question, viz.
Does not that Quaker who wrote that Book called the lying Wonder. p. 9.
endeavor to fasten these terms of Fool and Knave upon J. G. Whereas his Case
was not the same with mine, nor is he positively so charged, for his Brother J.
G. attempting to attest the Anabaptist's lying Wonder out of Lincolnshire, upon
the mere Credit of his Brother Ralph James (the Fomentor of it) as having been
an Elder of a Congregation many Years, from whose Mouth J. G. had the Relation
of a great Miracle done by the Prayers of their Church (though contrary to
their Faith, who affirm that Miracles are ceased long since) and yet in his
Letter to his Elder R. J. to desire a Reason why this great handy Work of God
has been so long concealed from Publication, when he himself knew of it some
Months before, as also Ben. Morley, as J. G. affirms; to which the Words are
added by T. R. thus, viz. Whether J. G. be not as much Fool as Knave by his own
handy Work, let his Brethren judge. See here its referred to his Brethren to
judge in this Case, which was, 1st, His deposing the lying Wonder under his
Hand from the Credit of the Forger. 2. His pretending to desire a Reason of its
being so long concealed, when he himself knew of it some months before; though
they have not judged his Folly (at least) in this; but T. H. has positively
called me a Knave, a deceitful Fellow, etc. 1. For not writing all his
Explications upon his Doctrines (which are false) 2. For rejecting his Charge
against the Quakers (of denying the true Christ and the Resurrection, etc.) as
false and slanderous, being we own both according to the Scriptures, Judge
candid Reader this man's Shuffling to cover his Envy and malicious Railing.

ct. XXIII. The Baptist's Abuse against G. W. about a Meeting with them at
Devonshire House, the 18th of the 7th Month, 1672. and T.H. taking part with a
Socinian Pamphlet.
HIs accusing me of so much Partiallity as renders me Guilty of very Great
Imperfection, p. 54. about a Relation of what happned betwixt him and me, at a
Meeting in Devonshire House, the 18th of the 7th Month, 1672.

This is of little value to me, while I and many others know the contrary: and
while he neither proves his Accusation; nor gives either a true or impartial
Narrative thereof himself.

But his chief pretended Proof against me, is our saying, the Baptists seemed
more like Beasts then Men, several at once making a bawling and hideous noise,
etc. The truth whereof many were eye and ear. Witnesses; and he cannot clear
them herein: But instead thereof, falsely says, the Quakers manifested as much
Rudeness, as the worst of men are wont to do to their Opposers.

But in this also, he has very grossly belyed the Quakers: And he may know in
his own Conscience, that he himself was a pattern of Incivility toward us;
stirring up his Proselytes into Rudeness by his Passion and ill Language, as
Knave, deceitful fellow, audacious fellow, impudent fellow, etc. whereas he had
no such Language, nor Behavior from me, or my Friends.

Besides, there were many of his Friends, and but very few of mine had notice;
Because some of the Baptists pretended before, to me, that there should be but
a few of their friends, and therefore I acquainted but very few of mine;
otherwise, I should have made it more public, if they had but dealt
ingeniously by me, which I must say, they did not herein.

And for him, thus to charge the Quakers with manifesting as much Rudeness, as
the worst sort of men. He does not so much herein, as ex e pt common Revilers,
Drunkards or Persecutors; so that his slander is the more gross and notorious.

He says that they called to speak directly to the Question (viz.) Whether
this Body of Flesh and Bones shall arise again? To which Whitehead answered, he
says, that this Body of Flesh and Bones, shall not arise again.

Herein again he has wronged my Answer; sor it was not stated in these words,
but in the very words of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 35, 36, 37, 38. as in the
Narrative is fully related; for being aware of their carping, caveling, spirit,
I kept close to the plain Words of Scripture in my positive answer,

How be it when W. Kiffin, said, That the Seed, that is sown, is this same Body
of Flesh and Bones which shall arise, though otherwise qualified, viz. more
glorious, etc. This being upon my Question about the Seed, to which God gives a
Body as it pleases him: I did deny that the terrestrial Body, or Body of
Flesh, Blood and Bones, as dead and buried, is the Seed intended by the
Apostle, to which God gives a Body, as it pleases him; And that the very same
Carnal Body, should arise again: I say, it has not yet been proved to me; nor
am I satisfied therein, from any who have obtruded this Question and
Controversy upon me. To which I now add, nor am I resolved by these men; but
the Question may be further examined hereafter.

Again, after I am accused for leaving out of the Narrative the a^oresaid
Answer, viz. About this Body of Flesh and Bones, falsely obtruded upon me, the
pretended Omission is supposed to be either from a bad Conscience, or a
defective Memory, p. 54. wherein my own Conscience does clear me; and my
Innocence concerning the first, and Experience of the latter is better known
and judged of in my self then by an envious and salse Accuser, that neither
knows my Conscience, nor Capacity.

And yet after thus doubtfully he has accused me, either for an evil
Conscience or bad Memory, he presently says, hence I conceive it to be more
proper for him to be angry with himself, for being deceitful, then sor another
to tell him that he is so, p. 35. See here what a positive Judge he makes
himself over my Conscience, when as before he is so doubtful and wavering in
his Charge.

For suppose any Omission through defect of Memory; Is this sufficient ground
to conclude a man deceitful? Mark the Inconsistency of this man's Work of Envy
against me: And I do not only reflect his false ill Language upon him; but also
testify against his Malice and slandering of me, (as he does diverse others)
And particularly his Outrage against G. F. most maliciously and falsely
reproaching him as a Blasphemer and Deceiver; and for instance tells us, he has
been publicly detected, as namely by a Book called, The Spirit of the Quakers
tried, p. 55.

Concerning which I would have the Reader to take notice, that the Book he here
cries up, is a Socinian Book, wherein the Divinity of Christ is denied; and
that G. F. is chiefly opposed sor asserting the Divinity of Christ, and
particularly, for his confessing, that Christ was in being, and in Glory with
the Father before the World began. See here, from hence it is observable, this
Adversary of ours makes little Conscience, whom he takes part with, so he finds
them to be Enemies to us.

He now questions whether to attain to Perfection, be the Privilege of any on
this side Death, p. 55. When before he has opposed its being attainable here,
and put it off till he be in Heaven, p. 50. But now he is uncertain whether
Perfection be attained by any on this side Death. He should have appeared thus
ingenious at first; and not positively opposed that which afterward he
questions; But this is according to the Tenor of his uncertain confused Work.

Lux Exorta Est: OR THE LIGHT SPRUNG UP IN THE Despised Quaker, With Evident
Testimony against the Darkness and Prejudice of the Old Anabaptist IN ANSWER To
Henry Grigg's Book, styled, Light from the Sun of Righteousness, (but proved an
Effect of Smoke and Darkness, proceeding from the Pit of Enmity and Confusion.)
Unnaturally published against his own Natural Sister in Barbados, chiefly,
because of her owning the People of God called Quakers, and their PRINCIPLE,
Which is herein further Vindicated; AND His Erroneous Doctrines are Examined
His Self-Contradictions are Compared His Impertinent Exceptions are Overturned
By G. W.

-- Neither do the Aged understand Judgment.
Night is come upon you, and the Day is become Dark over you.
Printed in the Year, 1973.

THE CONTENTS.
About
1. The Light within. 2. Justification, etc. 3. The Lord's Supper. 4. Baptism.
5. The Anointed. 6. Jesus and his Body, Man and the Body of Man, etc. 7. The
Resurrection. 8. The Light, the Sufferings and Work of Christ. 9. The Baptists
Ordinances Shadows, etc. 10. Knowing Christ, and his Coming, Reign, and Deity.
11. Their Erroneous and Groundless Distinction between the Light of God and the
Light of Christ. 12. Turning to the Light within. 13. Christ as at the Right
hand of Power. 14. Perfection. 15. The Light within distinguished from an
Historical Knowledge. 16. The Baptist's unlearned Question.
TO THE READER.
Serious Reader,
THe implacable Enmity of diverse Baptist Teachers against us, our present
Liberty and Prosperity is very obvious, by their several perverse confused
Pamphlets; although the sad Experience and Fruitlesness of Coertion has not
been shown by their Valor: They have Cause rather to be abased and humbled for
their timorous obscuring themselves (many of them) in the late stormy times,
then now either to boast, or thus come croaking out in warm Weather, with
Blasphemy and Revilings against the Light of Truth, or us its Children: As also
for their many Divisions among themselves, contrary to this Man's pretended
Order and Communion of him and his Brethren of their baptized Churches, as in
page 53. being divided about Principles and Doctrines; as some of their Leaders
and Chieftains preaching up a personal Election; others general Redemption;
some for Christ's dying for all; others for his dying but for a few; some for
the Jews Seventh-Day Sabbath, others opposing it; some holding the Souls
mortality with the Body, others the Immortality: They should have been
reconciled among themselves, before they had thus appeared in Print against us
called Quakers; for as yet we have no consistent matter from them to deal
withal.

Lux Exorta Est: OR THE LIGHT SPRUNG UP IN THE Despised Quaker, With Evident
Testimony against the Darkness and Prejudice of the Old Anabaptist
I. Concerning the Light within.
THe Light or Life of the Eternal Word, which is the Light of men, Joh. 1. 4.
is spiritual and divine, as is that Word; and therefore able to direct man his
Way out of Sin, and to give him Power against it; what Cruelty and Partiallity
does he therefore (like the partialminded Electioners) reflect upon God in
saying, that this Light or Illumination of the Eternal Word, leaves man like
the Priest and Levite in his Blood and Wounds? and yet how manifestly is this
contradicted in his granting, That by this Light Mankind may come to understand
there is a God, and also their Duty as he is their Creator? Now this their Duty
is both truly to love, obey and sear him; as also the man grants, the Light to
convince them of Sins, and teach them to do unto all men, as themselves would
be done unto; and that if the Heathens do follow the Light (they are
enlightened withal by the glorious Creator) they would shine forth in the
Principles of Morality and just Living, p. 9. Now then it appears that this
Light in all men, can both teach them their Duty to God and one another; so
then it would teach them both to begodly and just: Then the Question is,
whether all that are so taught, and are such, be they called Heathens, or
others, be not in Reality Christians? Can a man be godly and not a Christian?
Surely if the Heathens do mind and follow so much Light as God has given them,
they shall be saved; for is there any more required then what is given? Or does
God condemn Men for not improving more then he gives them? How can they then be
inexcusable, or left without Excuse before him?

Observe again, that this Opposer is not only cruel, in leaving men in their
Blood and Wounds, though they follow so much Light as is given them; but he is
greatly confounded about the Light in all men; one while calling it, The
Substance of the Law of the first Covenant, p. 11. another while says, That
Law was a more glorious Ministration, and did convince of Sin more clearly then
this Light, p. 10. (whereas the inward Convincement or Conviction does not
arise from the Law, merely as written without; but from the Law or Light as
received from God in the Heart) another while he calls it, the Spirit that God
has formed in man, Zach. 12. 1. The Candle of the Lord, p. 9. Let the ingenuous
Reader judge how this man is shattered in these his Contradictions,
Inconsistencies and Variations, and how plainly he has broke the Neck of his
own Cause in confessing that the Lord Jesus, as the eternal Word, enlightneth
all men; for Jesus Christ and his Light as the eternal Word, is the divine and
highest Light.

II. Concerning Redemption Justification, etc.
HE is very inconsistent in his Saying that, Redemption and Justification have
been fully completed and finished by our Lord Jesus for ^s once for all, and
that the Debt is paid, and Satisfaction made, p. 14. while yet he grants that
Ignorance and Unbelief as Chains and Fetters bind many in Satan's Kingdom, p.
14. for did you ever know of any so fully in a redeemed and justified Estate,
while so actually under Satan's Chains and Fetters in his Kingdom? Or that any
should be thus detained in Prison, so long after the Debt is paid, and
Satisfaction made, as he imagines? But in this Notion of Satisfaction, he
appears very short and shallow, though it be not a Scripture Phrase, as T.
Danson grants, Synops. p. 19. and though it depends but upon some Notions of
Law, as Dr. Owen says, Declar. p. 150. Now that all men's Debt should be so
strictly paid, or such a severe Satisfaction made to vindicate Justice by
Christ in their Stead (which God never imposed upon the Son of his Love) and
that for Sins past, present and to come (as some say) how inconsistent is it?
Besides the gross Liberty this gives to Sin; how agrees it with his teaching
them to pray, Forgive us our Debts? Math. 6. 12. for what needed that if they
be all fo strictly paid in their Stead? Howbeit that Christ in another or more
acceptable Sense, was a most satisfactory Offering and Sacrifice for Mankind,
for a sweet smelling Savor to God, Ephesians. 5. 2. this we confess and own; and
that he tasted Death not only for some, but for every Man, and is a
Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World.

And that Men are not justified, nor all their Debt paid in their Stead, while
they are actually in Chains in Satan's Kingdom; see this Man's Concession to
his own Confutation, touching the Power of true Conversion that is taught by
Christ and his Ministers, viz. That a man must repent, that true Repentance is
a through Change of the mind, and that it consists in (1) A clear Sight and
Sense of Sin (2) Godly Sorrow in the Sense and Burden of it (3) In utter
Abhorrence and forsaking of it: And also -- Faith is required and must be
wrought with Power in the Hearts of the Penitent, etc. p. 15. 16.

Mark then, here is some Debt for men to pay through the Help of Christ's Power
and Work within; but to go round again, he is sliting that inherent Holiness
which is wrought within, and accusing his Sister for not having a deep
dependency on that Sacrifice of Christ's Crucified Body without, p. 14. The
Truth on it is, she or they that believe Christ to be risen, and know his Power
in their Hearts may think it improper to have their Dependancy on that his
Body, as crucified without, but rather on him that lives for ever, as knowing
the blessed Effects of his Sacrifice, to wit, the Relief and Redemption which
his Flesh and Blood affords.

His saying, The Debt is paid, and yet fearing his Sister's remaining in Prison
and Darkness, notwithstanding her Teacher near, p. 14. proves no more against
the Light, the inward Teacher, then against Christ's Sufferings: She may as
well say, Brother for all thy Dependence upon the crucified Body without thee,
I fear thou art yet dead in thy Sins and in gross Darkness, and thou take not
the Course to convince me, nor at all to draw my Heart toward thee and thy
Brethren, by such sad and wicked Work as thou make against the Light.

Concerning his Water Baptism, its not Reasonable in him, either to impose it,
or judge us Transgressors in not submitting unto it, p. 18, 27. until he prove
his Call, or himself or any of his Brethren commissionated from Heaven, as John
was, to administer it; for we do not own it to be Christ's Baptism, and till
they prove themselves so called, they should let us alone without it, we being
content with the one Baptism of the Spirit.

III. Of the Lord's Supper.
THe drinking of the Fruit of the Vine in the Fathers Kingdom, and the eating
of the Living Bread which comes down from Heaven, Joh. Chap. 6. Luke 22. 18,
30. Mat. 26. 29. We are come to witness and so to partake of the heavenly
Passover, and the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, which wise men can
judge of, 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16. And the Power and Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
we have been Eye Witnesses of; so as we cannot dote about Signs and Shadows, as
you carnal Professors do, whose pretended Lords Supper is but Bread and Wine,
and no more then a Sign, Type or Shadow, which the clear Light of the Gospel
and its Dispensation is beyond; and in it there is no need of those Shadows for
a sacred Memorial of Christ's Death; for the supposed Use and End thereof is
better supplied by the divine Light and Spirit of the everlasting Gospel, which
has not only begotten in us a living Memorial and Sense of the Death of
Christ, and blessed Effects thereof; but has also brought us to know the Power
of his Resurrection, and our being risen with him; so as we are not only dead
with him from the Rudiment of the World, and from touching, tasting and
handling those things that perish with the using after the Commands and
Doctrines of Men, but also being risen with Christ, we are come to set our
Affections on things above.

Where are those his Words written in Scripture, viz. That Bread and Wine
remain in full Force until Christ's second coming in Person, p. 19. where does
the Scriptures call his second Appearance, a coming in Person? Which was a
coming to Salvation, Hebr. 9. 28. but this man says, he is not so come the
second Time, which does both conclude that all the primitive Believers or
Christians, who so look^ for his second coming, both fell short of Salvation,
and mist and were dis-appointed of their Hope and Expectation, which is a sad
Mistake.

His saying, He dare not be wise above what is written, p. 29. contradicts his
asserting that which derogates from what is written, viz.

That Christ's second coming to Salvation is in Person, or a personal Coming,
whereas (nigh his Departure) he said, I am Joh. 17. 11. and 14. 19.
no more in the World, Joh. 17. 11. and yet a little while and the World sees
me no more, but ye see me, Chapter 14. 19. his spiritual Appearance was to be in
the World, and he universally to be seen in Judgment.

As for that which Paul received of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 23. proves not that he
received outward Bread and Wine of the Lord, to deliver to them, till Christ's
supposed coming in Person again; but he received of the Lord, not only the
Relation how Christ took Bread and the Cup, etc. And so of the Administration
of the Sign or Shadow; but the Communication of the Mystery, viz. the Body and
Blood of Christ: See 1 Cor. 10.

And this was that Bread and that Cup spoken of 1 Cor. 11. 28. And he further
shows what he received, and what he delivered concerning Christ and his
comings, 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 2 Cor. 13. 5. As for the
Corinthians, many of them were carnal, and their minds too much in outward
Things and Shadows, and some liable to run into Idolatry: And the Apostle in
some things condiscended to them as Weaklings below the spiritual and manly
Understandings; wherefore their Practice and Example is not in every thing
binding to spiritual men.

IV. Of Baptism.
H.G. FRom Math. 28. 19, 20. The Baptism here spoken of is that of Water, p.
23. to baptize with the holy Spirit, is the alone Work of Jesus Christ; and it
never was in the Power of any Apostle or Disciple to do it. p. 24.

Answ. This man contrary to his Pretense, here makes himself wise above what is
written, in adding to the Command, That it was the Baptism of Water, which is
not mentioned in the Command; but rather it appears to be a spiritual Baptism,
which the Disciples were impoured to administer, in that they were to teach,
baptizing them (...), into the Name, etc. which (...) imports the Authority and
Power of Christ, and sometimes Christ himself, and sometimes Reverence and
Worship; see T. C's Lexicon: The man is very rash in his concluding, that it
was never in the Power of any Apostle to baptize with the holy Spirit: I ask
him if the true Ministers were not endued with Power from on high, to turn and
convert People from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power unto God: And if
so, what is this short of the Spirit's Baptism, I pray.

His meaning from Paul's not being sent by Christ to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. is, that he gives us to understand, that to baptize was not
the alone or chief Business he was sent to do, p. 27. [alone or chief Business]
is his own Addition to Paul's Words; what needed he give them to understand,
that to baptize was not his alone Business, while they knew he was more a
Preacher. It Is not to be supposed, that the Corinthians should think that Paul
was to do nothing else, but baptize or plunge them in Water; but he himself
gives it as the chief Reason why he baptized none but those few mentioned;
namely, for Christ (says he) sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel:
So he did not thank God for neglecting part of his Commission, in baptizing so
few, but partly to prevent their wrong Use thereof, and chiefly because his
Commission did not extend to Water Baptism.

And as to his Allegation, to prove that the Word not is not always used as an
absolute Negative, p. 27. he cites, Joh. 6. 27. Labor not for the Meat that
perishes, but for the Meat which endures, etc. If the Occasion of these Words
be minded, not will prove an absolute Negative in this Place; Jesus speaking to
them that sought after him, because they did eat of the Loaves, ver. 20. and
were filled, for which end they ought not to have sought after him.

And admitting his Instance in Adam, that he was not deceived, namely, that he
was not first deceived, taking in the Word [first] from the Verse before; this
is altogether impertinent unto his Purpose, about Paul's not being sent to
baptize, there being no such Discovery, that Paul was sent at all to baptize,
as there was of Adam's Transgression, but the contrary, in that Paul expressly
said, Christ fent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel.

V. Of the Anionted
TO his saying the Word Christ signifies one Anointed, accounting it absurd to
say, the Spirit or Anointing is Christ, p. 37. I answer, are not the Father,
the Spirit and the Word one? Christ as the Son of God is God's anointed: And is
it not granted that he was the Son of God by eternal Generation? And fo was
(before he took upon him that Body prepared for him) called the Lord's
anointed, Psalm. 2. 2. which Word Anointed, sometimes relates to his being set
up; or exalted as King; yet have I set (or anointed, Hebr.) my King upon Sion,
the Hill of my Holiness, ver. 6. As also to his being endued or anointed with
Power from on high, which Power is that divine Unction, and in that Christ is
called the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24 He may as properly
be called, the Anointing, as where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty,
now the Lord is that Spirit; this Anointing is not an outward Unction, nor
outwardly received upon the Flesh or Body; but being a divine Unction of Glory
and Power from above, its inwardly and spiritually received by an immortal Seed
and Birth born from above, as that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit. As
for his Term, Humane Nature, and Glorious Unity between the divine and human
Nature, p. 36. he talks he knows not what, besides Scripture Language: the Word
human is not applicable to Christ in Glory by the Scriptures, but originally
relates to the Earth, and so to the Body of man as coming thence. But Jesus
Christ was the Anointed, as he was the Son from the Father's Substance (which
he was before he came in the Flesh, or took upon him that Body that was
prepared for him) and the Anointed and Savior by the divine Power given him,
when in that Body upon Earth; though more highly exalted or anointed, as
ascended far above all Heavens, and exalted in the Father's Glory; the Anointed
and Savior also, as revealed and formed in the Saints, Gal. 4. 19. the
Anointed as set up from Everlasting; the Anointed both in Sufferings and in
Glory; the Anointed both as he came in Flesh, and as coming and revealed in the
Spirit in his People; and his Name by which Life and Salvation comes, and is
given, is his divine Nature and Power, to which his Name relates that is above
every other Name.

One thing this man H. G. and his Brethren stumble at, and at which his Soul is
wounded (as he says) p. 30. is, that Christ was never seen with an outward (or
rather carnal Eye) which H. W. is accused of, sor saying, The Eternal Son of
God was never seen with any Carnal Eye; to which I say, they should have been
so ingenuous, as to have considered the Intent of these Words, and more
heartily to have construed them thus, Christ as the eternal Word, the Lord from
Heaven, the only begotten of the Father in his spiritual Discovery, as the
Image of the invisible God and Brightness of his Glory cannot be seen with a
carnal Eye, Flesh and Blood has not so revealed him; the saving Light of
Christ never was nor can be reached with the carnal Eye; he that sees the Son
and believes on him has everlasting Life, Joh. 6. 40. and as says the Son of
God, he that sees me sees my Father also, Joh. 12. 45. and 14. 9. but none
can see the Father with a carnal Eye, therefore none could ever see the eternal
Son with their carnal Eyes in this Sense of seeing, which extends to true
Knowing, Joh. 8. 19. and 14. 7. though many did see the Body or Person of
Christ in the Days of his Flesh, wherein he was crucified and put to Death;
the Jews and Persecutors saw him in that Sense with their outward Eyes, when
they did neither truly see nor know him to their Salvation, it being the
Spirit that quickneth, and such a Sight of Christ as that of his Body or
outward man, no reasonable man can be so absurd as to say, it was not obvious
to the Bodily Eyes, and as absurd for any to imagine, that any of us should
intend otherwise.

Now these Baptists Faith concerning the Son of God, according to their carnal
Discourse of him, may be modelized into this or the like Argument, viz. If
Jesus Christ, the Son of God be also the Son of man glorified on the right Hand
of God in Heaven, then he consists of human Body of Flesh and Bones, as some
say; or of a body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, as others say.

But he is the Son of man glorified, etc. Ergo he consists of a human Body,
either of Flesh and Bone, or of Flesh Blood and Bones in Heaven.

Ans. I deny their varied Consequence as inconsequent; for Christ was called
the Son of man in a higher Sense then this human, earthly or carnal Sense,
which they represent him in, in that he himself said, no man has ascended up
to Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of man which is in
Heaven, Joh. 3. 13. and what if you shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he
was before; it is the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh perfitteth nothing, Joh.
6. 62, 63. who will affim, that as he came down from Heaven, or as he was
before in Heaven, he so consisted of a carnal human Body, either made up of
Flesh and Bone, or of Flesh, Blood and Bone in their gross and carnal Sense;
John the Baptist had not such mean Thoughts of Christ, as these carnal Baptists
have; for John said, he that comes from above is above all, he that is of the
Earth is earthly and speaks of the Earth, he that comes from Heaven is above
all, John 3. 31. and the Flesh of the Son of man, which he gave for the Life of
the World is that Bread which came down from Heaven, Joh. 6. 50, 51. Except ye
eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood ye have no Life in you,
ver. 53. Yet that the Name Son of Man was applied to him as a Sufferer, and as
he said, so shall the Son of man be three Days and three Nights in the Heart
of the Earth, Math. 12. 40. I deny not; but this does not limit him from being
called the Son of Man in a higher State, also each of God's Prophets might be
called (as diverse were) a Son of Man; but Christ the great Prophet, the Son of
Man, the Apostle distinguishes between the first man and the second man thus,
The first man is of the Earth earthly (or human) the second man is the Lord
from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15. 47. therefore the second man is not human in their
Sense, nor consisting of a human or earthly Body as the first man, and Ephesians.
4. 9, 10. now that he ascended, what is it, but that he also descended first
into the lower Parts of the Earth, he that descended is the same also that
ascended up far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things, and Phil. 3.
21, who shall change the Body of our Lowness, that it may be fashoned like unto
his glorious Body, etc. Now if it should be read according to these Baptists
Sense, it must be, who shall change our vile Bodies, that they may be fashoned
like unto his human Body, as if they were not such already, and how
disproportionable is it to say, Christ consists of a human Body of flesh, blood
and bones in Heaven; but the Saints must have a spiritual glorious Body in the
State of Glory hereafter; yet to prevent these men's Scruples concerning our
owning the man Christ, or the Son of man in Glory; I tell them seriously that I
do confess both to his miraculous Conception by the Power of the holy Spirit
overshadowing the Virgin Mary, and to his being born of her according to the
Flesh, and so that he took upon him a real Body (and not a fantastical) and
that he was real Man, come of the Seed of Abraham, and that he in the Days of
his Flesh preached Righteousness, wrought Miracles, was crucified and put to
Death by wicked Hands, that he was buried and rose again the third Day
according to the Scriptures; Mar. 16. 1^.
and after he rose, he appeared diversely, or in diverse Luke 24. 36, 4. 8.
Forms and Manners he really appeared to many Brethren, 1 Corinthians. 15. and
afterward ascended into Glory, Joh. 20. 19. 23, 24.
being translated according to the Wisdom and Power 29 Mat. 28. 9, 10.
of the Heavenly Father, and is glorified with the same Glory which he had with
the Father before the World began, being ascended far above all Heavens, that
he might fill all things, whose Glory is Incomprehensible, and beyond the
Apprehension of Human Capacities.

VI. Of Jesus and his Body; of Man and the Body of Man.
WHereas H. G. cavils at my speaking distinctly of the Body of Jesus, in that
Joseph of Arimathea begged the Body of Jesus, and to confute me herein, he
instanceth that of the body of Saul, and says, that the Case is the same, and
the body of Moses which the Devil disputed about, p. 39, 40, 41. but in this I
cannot see any valid Matter to his purpose, nor wherein he can intend it,
unless he believes that the Soul or spiritual Existence of man dies with the
body; and the Devil did appear wiser then he, concerning this distinction, in
that his disputing about the body of Moses does imply a distinction between
Moses (as to his immortal Existence) and the body of Moses; and that he did not
confound them as this man does, who concludes Jesus Christ to consist of a
human Body of Flesh and Bone, which the original Being of no man properly
consists of, though to prevent Cavils and for (...) sake i will grant him thus
much, that the Name Jesus Christ is indifferently and mutually applied both to
his spiritual being, and to the body he took upon him, and that distinctly in
Scripture, although the Names Messiah, Jesus Christ, the Anointed, the Image
and Glory of the invisible God, the Word, the Light, the Life, etc. do more
eminently, and more originally belong to him, as he was before he took that
body upon him, which he called this Temple, and it was called the body of Jesus.

Whereas H. G. says, What a strange Epitath would this Man write upon a
Tombstone, he cannot write, here lies the Body of Thomas or William, etc. but
rather thus, here lies the Thomas of Thomas, p. 41.

Reply, This more properly falls upon himself in not admitting that distinction
touching Jesus and the body of Jesns; but their concluding and confining Jesus
Christ, as to confist of the mere body of flesh and bone, and that he could not
be Jesus Christ the Savior before he took upon him that body; by which this
man cannot write, Here lies the body of Thomas or William, etc. (which implies
a belief of an Immortality of the man, as to his Spirituality) but rather, here
lies the whole man Thomas or William without admitting of any such Immortality;
and yet I will grant him as before, that the Word Man is indifferently applied
to either the spiritual Being or Body of man, as there is an inward man and an
outward man, 2 Cor. 4. 16.

And as God created man in his own Image; and yet its said, he formed man of
the Dust of the Earth, Genesis 1. 27. and Chap. 2. 7. and its said, That the rich
Man dyed and was buried (which was his Body) and in Hell he lift up his Eyes,
etc. (which could not be that Part which dyed and was buried, but the immortal
part or Soul) Luke 16. 22. 23. yet the Word Man, most properly and originally
(as God created Man in his own Image) belongs to his spiritual Existence or
Being; for the Earthly Body was not the Image of God.

But farther, let the Reader observe how evidently H. G. has contradicted his
foregoing Stuff, for a human Christ consisting of a Body of mere Flesh and
Bone, against my distinction (concerning Jesus and his Body that was put to
Death and buried, which was also raised) as where he speaks distinctly of Jesus
and his Body, p. 33. and confesses that Christ came in the Flesh, p. 36. that
he has an outward glorisied Existence -- that he has a body, p. 46, 47.
Christ's crucified Body, p. 50. the Body that was prepared for him, p. 79. He
did assume our Nature, p. 80. He had the very Form, Shape and Fashion of a Man,
p. 81. And what He or Him was this he speaks of? Was it not Christ, the Son of
God, the Anointed.

And to his arguing, That if Jesus Christ continues a man for ever, then he
has a Body of Flesh and Bone forever: This does not follow, but is falsely
deduced as before is proved, that Man both did and does exist when he has not
such a carnal body as he intends; although I do own Christ to be the heavenly
and spiritual Man glorified, and (in a more sublime and heavenly Sense) his
flesh and bone, of which the Saints are Members, and that the true Christ is
not without Blood to communicate, which the Spiritual Communicants drink of.

H. G. also further adds, Unless it can be proved, that Man can exist and have
a Being without Flesh and Bone, which I suppose, all will conclude is
impossible, p. 47.

To which I say, This is not only confuted by what I have said before, but also
by himself, where he confesses the Coming of the Spirit into his Heart, for
the binding of the Strong Man Satan, p. 16. here he has found out a Man, and
that a strong one to, too wit, Satan, whom I suppose he deems not a man made up
(or consisting) of flesh and bones, though he be called the strong Man; but the
Heavenly and Spiritual Man Christ Jesus is stronger then he.

VII. Of the Resurrection.
AS for his insinuating against us, as denying the Resurrection of the Dead, or
of the Body, p. 41, 42, 43. This Accusation is not only in general Terms, but
also it is notoriously false, as may be evinced, not only in many of our Books
and Writings, but also by our deep Sufferings for Christ; so that if in this
Life we had Hope only, we were of all men most miserable: Its true, there has
been and is a Controversy between us and many of the Baptists, and some others
about that, or the like unlearned Question, which they have been busy to
obtrude upon us, viz. How are the dead raised, and with what Body? Which we
have answered, as the Apostle did such, Thou Fool, that which thou sowest is
not quickened except it dye, and thou sowest not that body that shall be, but
bare grain, it may chance of Wheat, etc. but God gives it a body as it
pleases him, and every Seed his own body, or its proper body, 1 Cor. 15. 35,
36, 37, 38. etc.

But to prove the arising of the same Bodies buried in the Graves, he perverts
and miscites Phil. 3. 21. thus, He will change our vile bodies, and fashion
them like unto his glorious * And so he has dealt with Acts 1. 11. saying, In
the same manner, p. 21. instead of In like manner.
body; whereas that Phil. 3. 21. is in the singular, vile Body, or rather, he
shall change the body of our Lowness, or our suffering body, that it may be
^ashoned like unto his glorious body; now the body of their Lowness or
Humility, (...) comprehended the whole Suffering Estate of the Church: And I do
confess that the Resurrection, Change and Translation or Transfiguration (as
some renders it) of the Just or Righteous, extends not only to a Resurrection
from Sin, Corruption and Weakness, but to an arising out of a Suffering State
into Glory: And as God knows how to deliver and raise up the Righteous, out of
Temptations, Trials and Sufferings; so he knows how to reserve the Unjust unto
Punishment, and unto the day of Destruction; for both shall rise to their
several Ends and Rewards; yea, the Sea, Death, Hell and the Grave shall deliver
up their dead to be judged, etc. and he gives to every Seed his own proper
body, as he pleases; and we know, that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle
be destroyed, we have a building given of God, that is, a House not made with
Hands, but eternal in the Heavens: Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50. H. G. says, By Flesh and Blood the Apostle does intend
Corruption, p. 44. whereas the Apostle spoke of them distinctly, viz. flesh and
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does Corruption inherit
Incorruption; to say that by flesh and blood he does intend Corruption is no
Answer to their Question, with what body are the Dead raised, etc. Which though
reproved as foolish, yet not so foolish as to ask whether Corruption be raised?
And more absurd it is to imply, that by flesh and blood he does not intend
Body, but only Corruption.

Again H. G. to prove the rising of the same Bodies cites Job 19. 25. In my
Flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine Eyes shall
behold, etc. p. 44, 45.

By this his Instance it appears what gross Apprehensions he has of God, while
he thinks to see him with his bodily or carnal Eyes, which no Being nor Thing
is visible or obvious unto, but what is of an outward or corporeal Substance or
formal limited matter, which an infinite eternal Spirit is not? for God who is
that Spirit is invisible; therefore Jeb did not speak of his bodily Eyes, but
of his spiritual, who afterward said unto the Lord, I have heard of thee by
the hearing of the Ear, but now mine Eye sees thee, Jo. 42. 5. which cannot be
understood of his seeing him with his bodily Eye; H. G. pretends to know the
State or manner of the Saints being in Glory, telling us that all deformity
shall be done away, p. 44. and that these vile Bodies shall be fashoned like
unto Christ's glorious Body: How then shall they be these very same earthly and
numerical bodies? many whereof are not only deformed, but greatly defective,
both as to Infants and Aged that dye; as also his confessing to 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2.
does appear a Contradiction plain enough to himself, if righly considered; its
probable this Man has as strange Conceits about the Resurrection, as Tho.
Vincent in his Book of the Coming of Christ to Judgment and the Resurrection;
but I cannot look upon either him or the Baptists to be such divine
Philosophers, as either to know or define the manner of the Saints Existance or
Beings in Heaven and Glory; but rather that they are Imaginary and Intruders
therein, though it would better become them to acquiese with God s Will and
Pleasure concerning such Mysteries as are beyond their Capacities; I expect
some of them in their busy minds, will give me farther Occasion to speak to
this weighty Point of the Resurrection, though it be a matter I never desired
to make public Controversy of, it being beyond human Capacities.

VIII. Of the Word, the Light, the Sufferings of Christ and his Work within.
H.G. THere is a great difference between the Essence and Body of the Sun and
its Beams or Rays: for though the Sun by its Rays does give Light to all, yet
is not the Essence or Body of the Sun in them; so in like manner, though the
Word be the true Light which lights every man, yet is he not essentially in
their Hearts, p. 48. 49.

Answ. He has strained his Simile too sar, and thereby has denied the
Omni-presence and Infiniteness of God, whose Presence fills Heaven and Earth;
the Sun and its Rays and Beams are finite and limitable; so and in like manner
is not God and his Illumination, and thus to limit and circumscribe God and his
Light or Shining to be so, and in like manner as the Sun and its Beams, does
mani^est such gross Apprehensions of God, as he did before, in expecting to see
him with bodily Eyes: And this relates to the old Heresy of the
Anthropomorphites or Monks in the deserts of Egypt, as also to that of the
present Mugletonians, who imagine God to be a personal or bodily Existence
circumscribed as to place, denying him to be an infinite Spirit; yet thus far I
will admit of his Simile, by a Reason of the contrary, that as the natural
created Sun immediately sends forth its Beams or Rays which are natural, and
do influence the Earth with the Virtue of the Sun; so the eternal increated
Spi^itor Word does shine and show forth its own immediate, increated divine
Light and Virtue in the Hearts and Souls of Mankind; as the Sun is natural and
created, so is its Light or Shining; and as God the eternal Word is increated
and supernatural, so is his immediate Shining or Light in the Hearts and Souls
of Mankind; and as a man's Eye is directly set toward the Sun, in the least
Beam thereof, shining through any Crevis into any Dungeon Cell or other oscure
place, it sees directly to the Sun it self; so the Eye of the Soul being
direct dtowards God by the least Appearance of his divine and immediate
Shining or Illumination, therein it has a Sight of God, and the Soul thereby
comes to seel of his Virtue and Power in waiting upon him.

And for this man to conclude, that this Light of the eternal Word cannot teach
and reveal unto man the Lord Jesus Christ, p. 50. is to deny Jesus Christ to be
the Word, or that true Light that enlightneth every Man, whereas his
Illumination directs man immediately to himself as its eyed and minded.

As also he is as narrow, shallow and partial, in concluding the Light will not
reveal unto man his Savior without the Help of the Scriptures p. 50. this is a
strange undervaluing of the Light of Christ; what then did the Scriptures
proceed from? Was it not the Light? And what shall become of all those Nations
and People that have not the Scriptures, if this be true?

It is none of our Assertion, that Christ in his Death and Sufferings, was but
only a Pattern or Example of that which must be wrought over again in us; for
though we own him to have left an Example, yet he was more then an Example, and
he did not only end the Types, but was a Sacrifice and Offering for Mankind,
and opened the new and living Way, giving Testimony of God's free Love toward
all, and making Way for the enforcing of the new Testament or Covenant of Life:
But yet that either all or any men are cleansed, or justified, or saved merely
by the outward Sufferings, Crucifixion, Death or Blood shed of Christ, the
Scripture proves not (but by Christ himself, and his Blood, Life, Spirit and
Power) nor yet that men are acquitted or saved by their outward Application
thereof: And this man to his own Confutation confesses to the Power of Christ
s Spirit being risen in us, for our Sanctification and Renovation, as well as
Christ was raised from the dead for our Justification, p. 54. then all is not
fully doneby his Death without them, but both the End and Mystery of the Cross,
Sufferings and Death of Christ without, (...) be known and fulfilled within,
see Philip. 3. 10. although this man seems not willing to hear of Christ's
being a Pattern or Example of that which must be wrought over again in us, p.
50 yet in Contradiction to this he says, The Lord Jesus Christ has wrought
Red^mption and Salvation for me, and revealed this by his Word and Spirit, and
(...) it in me, p. 52. its well that in any Measure he is made to grant to this
inward Work of Christ.

IX. Further about their Ordinances.
His pleading for their shadowy and carnal Ordinances to continue under this
Notion, viz. Under his Shadow I have with the Spouse sat down, and his Fruit is
and has been sweet unto my t^ste, p. 53. This is a very impertinent Instance,
and altogether improper, to reckon Bread, Wine and Water-Baptisin that Shadow
of the Souls Beloved, to wit, Christ, that the Spouse sat under, seeing the
Lord himself says, I will be a Shadow from the Heat, and a Refuge from the
Storm: And we are so far from believing these his carnal Ordinances to be the
direct Shadow of the Souls Beloved in that near Sense, that we look upon him,
he is yet to prove them Appointments, Institutions and Ordinances of Christ, or
of Necessity to continue in the Church, notwithstanding his spiritual Coming
and Revelation, which he has not, much less that they are spiritual or of a
Spiritualness, as he says, p. 59. and 60. which he has manifestly
contradicted, in granting, They are but the Sign, the Shadow, the Shell, and
Christ the Substance p. 53, 54. For my part, I don't look upon either John's
Baptism, or the Supper of Christ and his Disciples (at which they had the
Passover) to be Institutions and Ordinances originally appointed by Christ, or
enjoined to all that should succeed in the Gospel and true Church; but rather,
though they were not directly enjoined by the Law of Moses, as we say, modo and
forma; yet that they did more naturally relate to that former dispensation of
Shadows, then to that of the Gospel and new Covenant; and that John's Baptism
was rather for a Consummation of the Jews diverse Sprinklings and Washings under
the Law, comprehending them in order to end them, and Christ's eating of the
Passover and drinking with his Disciples, Luke 32. to be as a Consummation of
the Jews Feasts under the Law, viz. that of the Passover and others, according
to the Relation given at large concerning the Ecclesiastical Rites of the
ancien^ Hebrews, by T. Goodwin in his Antiquities of the ^ews, called, Moses
and Aaron, p. 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91. and (...), and Christ saying, As often as
you do this, is not a ^ommand, and This do in Remembrance of me, and (...) the
Lord's Death till he come, does limit a time for its Discontinuance; for till
he come must either respect his next Coming, or render not only his coming
after he was risen, but his spiritual Coming and Revelation in his Saints no
Comings, which were absurd and Auti-Christian, and there was a time to show
forth his Life as well as his Death.

Hi^ saying, The Sign and thing signified God has joined together, p. 54. is
again contradicted by his granting a Personmay find a Shell and have no Kernel
in it, p. 54.

To which I add, That God has so joined the Sign or Shadow and the Substance
together, as so to continue, I deny, or that the Scripture any where so says;
but as for these Baptists Shells, Husks and Shadows they are both dry and
empty, and the Lord is departed from them, so as neither Life nor Substance is
to be found in them, but a dark Spirit of Enmity and Opposition against the
true Power and Life is centered in them; Yea, the same Spirit which walks in
dry Places: I wish they were truly sensible of it.

X. Of knowing Christ and his Coming, Reign and Deity.
UPon 2 Cor. 5. 16. Though I have known Christ after the Flesh, yet from
henceforth know I him so no more.

H. G's Exposition is, That the Word [know] here, does hold forth to esteem,
regard, allow or to approve by Way of Preference, p. 58.

Now if we read his Exposition herein upon the Text, it runs thus, viz. Though
I have known or esteemed, regarded or approved Christ after the Flesh by Way of
Preference, yet from henceforth do I esteem regard or approve of him so no
more; and then how must I regard and prefer him, but after the Spirit and in
his spiritual Manifestation, as I know him in me to be my Hope, Life and Stay:
But how does this agree with his Description of Jesus Christ (as the alone
Savior) H. G.
As consisting of a human Body of Flesh and Bone (as before) p. 31. and 55. and
with his saying that the Spirit or blessed Comforter cannot be the Savior and
Mediator, p. 46. But this he has also eminently Contradicted, in confessing
that H. G. Contrad.
The Power of Christ's Spirit risen in us, is for our Sanctification and
Renovation, p. 54. To which I add, that the Apostle witnessed that the
ingrafted Word is able to save your Souls, or the Word that is grafted in you
(as some have it) Jam. 1. 21. and see 1 Pet. 1. 23. and the Spirit is Life,
gives Life, quickneth, sanctifies, it self makes Intercession: And if ye
through the Spirit mortify the Deeds of the Flesh ye shall live, Romans 8.
Therefore the Word and Spirit (which are one) do save the Obedient.

Whereas H. G. says, Some of those Cazers and Waiters (viz. that look for
Christ's personal Reign) was Paul, Peter and John, yea, all the primitive
Saints, though Christ was come in Spirit to them as gloriously, etc. p. 60.

I deny that they were any such Gazers, after Christ's Ascension and glorious
spiritual Appearance and Revelation in them; he has herein asperst Paul, Peter
and John and all the primitive Saints with gazing for Christ's personal Reign,
which he reckons his second Coming to Salvation; wherein he has not only
rendered all the Saints and former Witnesses of Christ to be such uncertain
Gazers abroad; but their Hope, Expectation and Faith ineffectual and fruitless
as to such a Coming, and they to be disappointed of Salvation; for a personal
Coming and Reign of Christ (as this man speaks of) they attained not in their
Days, neither is it yet, nor are Baptists like to see such a personal Reign,
though he has rendered all the primitive Saints Gazers and Waiters for it;
whereas Christ said unto his Disciples, Verily I say unto you, there be some
standing here, which shall not taste of Death, till they see the Son of Man
coming in his Kingdom, Math. 16. 28. or till they have seen the Kingdom of God
come with Power, Mark 9. 1.

As for H.G's human personal Christ, consisting (or merely made up) of Flesh
and Bone, finite, weak, subject to Passion as page 94.
we are, who as such he deems the alone Savior with his unscriptural
Expressions he puts upon him, as outward Existence, personal Existence,
personal Subsistence, human Nature, second Person of the Trinity, etc. p. 46.
and 83. and 94. And yet in Contradiction he is made to confess him to be the
most high God, p. 80. Jesus of Nazareth truly God, the most high God as is the
Father, and of the same Substance and Essence, yet distinguished from the
Father, as touching his personal Subsistence, p. 83. I cannot but look upon
this Relation to be non-sensical and confusedly intermixed with those
unscriptural Terms, of which let the ingenuous Reader judge, that can
distinguish between the Body which Christ took upon him and the divine Being;
this Relation of his tends farther to stumble and keep distant both Jews and
Others, thus to represent Jesus Christ as a mere Body, consisting of Flesh and
Bone, human Nature, finite, weak, etc. and then saying, He is the most high God
of the same Essence, etc.

And his rendering him only a Savior, after this his own imaginary, human or
earthly manner, he has sufficiently confuted by these Reasons, wherewith he
proves Jesus Christ his Deity or Being God (and as such the Savior, orgiveth
Power unto others to become the Sons of God.)

1st. From his Name, the mighty God, the true God, the only wise God, God
blessed for ever, Isa. 9. 6. 1 John 5. 20. Jude 25. and Romans 9. 5. 2ly, His
making and creating the World, Joh. 1. 1, 3. Col. 2. 16. Heb. 2. 10. 3ly, His
upholding and preserving the whole Creation, Heb. 1. 3. Col. 1. 17. 4ly, His
knowing all things, Joh. 12. 17. and 2. 24, 25. Psa. 139. and 4. 10. Job 36. 4.
and Chapter 38. 5ly, His searching the Heart, Jer. 17. Rev. 2. 23. 6ly, His being
the fist and the last, Isa. 44. 6. and 48. 12. Rev. 2. 8. 17. 7ly, His having
spiritual Worship or divine Adoration due to him, Mat. 8. 2. and 28. 17. Luke
24. 52. Joh. 8. 38. Heb. 1. 6. Phil. 2. 10. 8ly, His having Power to forgive or
pardon Iniquity, Mat. Chapter 9. and Mark 2. 5. Luke 5. 21. 9ly. In that the Saints
ought to pray to him, Act. 9. 14. Romans 10. 9, 10. 1 Cor. 1. 2. 10ly, His having
Power to give the Holy Spirit and Saving Graces, Math. 3. 11. Mark. 1. 4.
Ephesians. 4. 8, 9. 11ly, His being equal with God, Phil. 2. 6, 7. Zach. 13. 7.
12ly, His having Power to lay down his Life and to raise it up again. Joh. 2.
19. and 10. 18. 13ly, His being the Object, Author and Finisher of the true
Believers Faith, Joh. 14. 1. and 9. 35. Heb. 12. 2. 14ly, He who can by his own
Name, proper Power and Authority, give Power unto others to become the Sons of
God, must needs be God himself; but that Christ does and can do this is
evident, Joh. 1. 11, 12. He does adopt, regenerate or make others the Children
of God, by the effectual Working of his blessed Spirit in the Hearts, by which
they are interested in all the Privileges of the Covenant of Grace, which none
can do save God alone, p. 91, 92. Thus far H. G. to his own eminent Confutation
and Contradiction, has assented to Truth in Words; and how Jesus Christ is the
Object of Faith, and Giver of Power to men to become the Sons of God; and how
he makes them his Children by the effectual Workings of his blessed Spirit in
their Hearts, even because he is God Eternal, in that none can do those but God
alone, according to Isa. 43. 10, 11, 12. and 45. 14. and 49. 26. and 63. (...).
Jer. 14. 8. Hos. 13. 4. 1 Timothy 1. 1. and 4. 10. Jude 25. But how does H. G's
Confession and these Scriptures agree with the Description he gives of Jesus
Christ as Savior, and as the only true Christ, viz. That he consists of a Body
of Flesh and Bone, human Nature, being finite, weak, subject to passion as we
are, says he, p. 94. Let the Reader judge how gross and confused he is in
these matters, and whether the true Christ and Savior does either consist of
an earthly Nature or finite being, or was subject to Passion as fallen men are?
The Truth of it is, this Man has confessed more to the Deity and divine Power
of Christ, and so to save and beget men to himself, as God alone, more then
most of the Baptists that I have met withal before; for one of his Brethren,
to wit, W. Burnet (a Preacher) says, That Christ as he was the Word, which was
God was not a Savior, as he was God he could not save Man, in his Book styled
the Capital Principles, p. 35. which denies the Omnipotency of God; but this
Baptist H. G. grants that it is the Power and Spirit of God himself, or God
alone that does regenerate and make men his Children; whence it follows that
then it was not merely the outward Body of Jesus that was the Savior, though
he was a Savior in that Body, but it was by the Divine Power or Holy Spirit of
the Father in him.

XI. His Erroneous Distinction about the Light.
BUt whereas H. G. accounts the Light and Knowledge of God as Creator, that was
given to the Gentiles, Romans 1. 19. and Chap. 2. 14, 15. But the Light of the
Moon to guide their Paths, and so much inferior to that of a crucified Jesus,
as that it leaves them utterly void of the saving Knowledge of the Gospel, and
of a crucified Jesus, p. 68, 69. Mark here, how he has undervalued the Light
and Knowledge of the glorious Creator whom before he has in Words exalted above
all, in the Work of Regeneration, and Christ as man, but as finite weak, etc.
But now alas! with him the Light and Knowledge of the glorious Creator, is but
the Light of the Moon in comparison of the Light and Knowledge of Christ as
man, though in that Weakness as crucified; how egregiously he is involved in
gross Consusion and self-Contradiction in these things; he that runs may read;
and no such distinction nor contrariety between the Light of God and the Light
of his Son is owned in Scripture; ^or I and my Father are one says Christ; and
the Father, Word and holy Spirit are one.

And the same Life which was in him was the Light of Men, Joh. 1. 4. and this
Life which in due time was manifested, was the same eternal Life which was with
the Father, 1 John 1. 1. 2. which Light or Life they that obey and follow, in
its Appearance and Guidance, it brings them to a Fellowship with the Father,
and with the Son; and this is not the Light of the Moon, as our Opposer blindly
and unscripturally terms it: But seeing he says; this Law or Light is given to
guide their Paths, by which the Gentiles are taught their Duty to God in
Morals. I ask him, whether will this Light guide their Paths, if not in the Way
to Salvation? And whether will they go, and to what End, if they obey and
follow it? Does not the Apostle for a Proof of a justified State, instance it
in the Gentiles, showing the Effects of the Law written in their Hearts? Romans
2. 13, 14, 15, 16. And what Nature was that by which those Gentiles did those
things contained in the Law; surely it was not the corrupt Nature, for that is
inconsistent, the Law being holy, just and good; and though these Gentiles had
not the Law in the Letter of it, as many now have not the litteral Description
or histotical Relation of Christ's outward Sufferings, must they therefore be
damned to Hell? What Cruelty were this, to condemn Nations for want of the
Scriptures? But as those Gentiles who had not the Law in the Letter, and yet
had and obeyed it in the Spirit, were both therein a Law to themselves, and
excused in the Sight of God, in the day when he judges the Secrets of Men by
Jesus Christ according to the Gospel, Romans 2. 16.

So those Gentiles and Peoples who obey the Light and Life of the Son of God in
them, though they have not the historical Knowledge and Profession of Christ as
he was Man, and suffered Death in the Flesh, etc. Yet they are truly accepted
of God, and more real Christians inwardly then many of you, that have the
Scriptures, and an historical Faith and Profession of the Man Christ, and of
Christianity outwardly; for in all Nations, every one that fears God and
works Righteousness is accepted of him. Depart from Evil, and do Good, and
dwell for evermore. And this the Light of the Son of God implanted in the
Hearts of all Nations teaches; and herein the Grace of God that brings
Salvation has appeared unto all Men, Tit. 2. 11. But it is the Error and
Mistake of these Men, to put their historical Notions and Profession of the Man
Christ, for the Light of Christ in Man, whereas their Notions and Professions
are neither any real Knowledge of the Man Christ, nor the Principle of his
Light in Man; for the one is traditional and acquired by Man, and so but dark;
the other is the immediate and divine unchangeable Gift of Christ in Man, which
indeed is the Light of the Eternal Word, the glorious Creator; but as these
men's pretended Light and Knowledge of the man Christ, is what they get out of
Scriptures (with their own private Interpretations on them) so they hereby
render Christ and his Light, as limited only to such Places and People as have
the Scriptures, opposing his divine Omni-presence and denying him his Right,
which is the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth
for his Possession, Psa. 2.

Now as for that Morality (as he calls it) which the Law of the first Covenant,
and Light implanted in the Hea^ts of all Mankind teaches, in the true Nature
and Inten^ thereof, it falls no more short of Christianity then Godliness
does; for this Law and Light teaches Man to love the Lord God with all his
Heart and Soul, etc. and his Neighbor as himself; this do (says Christ) and
thou shall live, in answer to the Question, what shall I do to inherit Eternal
Life? Luke 10. 25, 26, 27, 28. This is the highest Morality or Duty of
Mankind, even this Love to God and one another, which is the fulfilling of the
Law: And this is both taught by the Light within, and Power given by the Grace
of God to fulfill it, which the Law without in the Letter cannot do: Now if the
Jews Way to inherit Eternal Life was (through the Grace or Help of God) to
fulfill what was written (as before) then if a Heathen, that has not this Law
outwardly written, should ask the same Question, what shall I do to inherit
Eternal Life? He may truly be answered, Obey the Light or Law of thy Maker in
thy Heart which tells thee, Thou must love and honor him above all, and do
Injury or Wrong to no Man; this do and thou shall inherit eternal Life; for
this End the Grace of God is free for thee.

XII. Our Doctrine for turning People to the Light within justified.
H. G. NOne of the true Gospel-Preachers did ever teach such a Doctrine as this
is which the Quakers preach, namely, bid People turn to the Light within, This
is Mat Caffin's old Story against the Light.
p. 63. 64. H. G. Contra. That God who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness
has shined in our Hearts, 2 Cor. 4.

(Concession) Who does deny that Holy Men did endeavor to turn Men and Women
from Darkness to the Light, to leave their Sins, to turn from all their wicked
Abominations, and Unfruitful Works of Darkness to God and Christ? p. 67. What
may be known of God is manifest in Men, Romans 1. page 68, 69.

Anim. If God has shined in our Hearts, and what may be known of God be
manifest in Men; must they not turn to his Shining and Illumination? For God is
Light, whose inward Light (which we testify to) is become the main stumbling
Block and Rock of Offense to these dark Opposers: And where was the Darkness
which holy Men endeavored to turn others from, was it not within? And the
Light shines in Darkness, the Light of God and Christ which their Minds were to
be turned unto, it was not an outward created or natural Light, but inward and
Spiritual, and so rceived; God has shined in our Hearts, see 2 Cor. 4. 6. his
Concession to this overturns him: And if the Quakers do not prove these very
bare Words in Scripture, to wit, turn to the Light within; it does not
therefore follow, that they cannot prove the Matter of such a Doctrine, as turn
to the Light within; see Deuteronomy, 30. 1. 2. (both in Tindal's Translation, and in
the Bible in folio, London printed in the Year 1576. Thou shall turn into thy
Heart -- and shall return unto the Lord thy God, etc. As also to the Question,
wherewith shall a young Man cleanse his Ways, the Answer and Direction is
(says H. G. page 64.) by taking Heed thereto according to thy Word, Psalm.
119. 9. And did not David hide this Word in his Heart, that he might not sin
against God.

And both Moses and the Apostle say, the Word is nigh thee in thy Heart, Deuteronomy.
30. Romans 10. And did not Jesus say, There is yet a little Light in you (as some
Copies have it) Joh. 12. 35. And while you have the Light, believe in the
Light, that you be the Children of the Light, ver. 36. Many other Instances of
this Doctrine might be urged

XIII. Of Christ as at the Father's right Hand. etc.
I May not well omit one Passage of H.G. which had like to have been buried in
the bulk and heap of his Rubbish, that is, after he denies the Spirit to be
Savior, though present, to prove the Savior absent, he says, He is ascended
into Heaven, and has a real outward Existence at the Father's right Hand, p.
46. an outward glorified Existence in the Kingdom, of his Father or Glory
above, p. 47 To which I say, The Savior is not absent from them that are
saved; for Christ said, He that is with you shall be in you: His ascending into
Heaven, yea, and far above all Heavens, was not, that he might remain absent
from his Church; but rather that being departed from them in his outward
Presence or Body, he might be the more present with them, and in them, in the
Spirit and Power of the Father.

And Christ being exalted at the Father's right Hand, is no Proof that he is
remote, separate or absent from his People and Members, any more, then that the
Father's right Hand of Power is absent and remote from them; though we see what
gross Apprehensions some Men have of God and Christ; who thus would exclude,
limit or circumscribe them, yea, God and his right Hand of Power only to a
Place distant from his People and Children, which does not only strengthen
gross Apprehensions in the Ignorant, to keep them in Ignorance, dark Thoughts
and car^al Imaginations concerning God and his right Hand, as if he were a Body
or Person like themselves; but also opposes his Infiniteness and Omnipresence,
and so Christ's Divinity; whereas the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him. We
may in a Sense be said to be absent from the Lord, while at home (or Strangers
in the Body, in Comparison of that Enjoyment of him hereafter to be had, which
yet proves not him nor his right hand absent (as circumscribed or only far
distant) from us; his right hand of Power is where he is; and Christ
inseparably with and in the Father, glorified with the Father's own self, even
with the same Glory which he had with him before the World began, which Glory
is divine, invisible and incomprehensible; and therefore human or Earthly
Nature is not capable of that divine Glory and Power, wherewith the Son of God
was anointed, dignified and exalted at God's right hand: And David said, O thou
that savest by thy right hand them which put their Trust in thee, and thy right
hand has holden me up, Psa. 17. 7. and 18. 35. and 20. 6. and 60. 5. and 63.
8. and 73. 23. So that neither the infinite God, nor his Son, nor his right
hand of Strength can be circumscribed, or limited into a Separation or
Remoteness from the Children of Light, who are saved by the right hand of God,
whose Hand and Power is spiritual. And if Saul was struck down and blinded by
the Light that shone from Heaven above the Brightness of the Son (which he
calls the heavenly Vision in Acts 26. 13, 19. In which Jesus did speak unto
him, whose Voice the Men with Saul heard not, Chapter 22. 9. How much further does
Jesus himself in the Father's Divine Glory transcend this Vision, though
glorious? And how far is his own Being, his spiritual and glorious Body beyond
the reach of these Men's earnal Thoughts and mean Conceptions, as this Man
represents Christ, at God's right hand in Glory, as consisting of Flesh and
Bone, human Nature, outward Existence, etc. And so to have appeared to Paul at
the time of his Conversion, p. 46. and which John saw in that Vision, p. 56.
Rev. 1. 13, 14, 15. Whereas Paul and John gives no such account of Christ's
Appearances to them, as that it was in a human Body of Flesh and Bone; much
less, that he consisted merely of Flesh and Bone; but the Cause of the Martyr
Stephen his seeing Jesus standing on the right hand of God was, his being full
of the holy Ghost, Acts 7. 55, 56. And it is in the same holy Ghost, that the
truly sanctified and Spiritually minded come to see the Glory of God, and
Jesus or the Son o^ Man at his right hand.

XIV. Of Perfection.
H. G. WE do not believe it is possible to attain to such a Degree of
Perfection, as to be as pure from Sin as Jesus Christ was, p. 62. I know not
what such should call one the Name of the Lord for, etc. p. 63.

H. G. Contra. We can experience the Power of Christ's Spirit risen in us for
our Sanctification and Renovation, p. 54. He does adopt, regenerate, make
others Children of God, by the Effectual Workings of his blessed Spirit in
their Hearts, by which they are interrested into all the Privileges, Promises
and Blessings of the Covenant of Grace, p. 91, 92.

Anim. We believe that the Spirit and Power of Christ working in our Hearts, is
able to sanctify throughout, and his Blood to cleanse from all Sin, and that
in Christ who is the Covenant of Grace, all the Promises of God are yea and
amen; and that Covenant is both a Covenant of Forgiveness, and therein Sin is
taken away, as God has promised, Jer. 31. I will cleanse them from all their
Iniquity, Jer. 33. 8. Ezekiel. 36. 25. All things are possible with God; and we
can do all things through Christ that strengthens us, Phil. 4. 13. who
commanded, Be ye perfect Mat. 5. 48.
as your Heavenly Father is perfect; and its possible through his Power and Aid
to keep his Commands otherwise for what End are they given out to his Church
and People, and for what End should they pray to take away all Iniquity? On
whom (we believe) he does not impose Impossibilities; but to such as dwell in
the Love of God, his Commands are not grievous but joyous.

XV. The Light within above an Historical Knowledge.
WHereas to undervalue the Light within which all Men have; H. G. affirms, that
none can make appear that ever any Heathen, Ethiopian, Moor or Infidel, in any
remote Parts that never heard the Scripture, etc. That ever did attain, merely,
by that Light within, to the Knowledge of one Jesus of Nazareth that was
crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem, that merely by the Help and Guidance
of that Light within, came to find out so much as the Name or historical
Knowledge of a cruciefid Jesus, p. 70.

Answ. 1. As an historical Knowledge and Profession concerning Christ and his
Sufferings in the Flesh cannot save you; so its very uncharitable in you
Baptists to condemn all Nations that have it not, merely for want of the
History or that historical Knowledge. 2. Though you have a historical Faith and
Profession of Jesus, as he came and suffered in the Flesh; I deny that this
Faith will either save you (for they have as much Faith at Rome) or that you
have from thence any real Knowledge of Christ, either as in the Flesh or in the
Spirit, either as crucified, as put to Death, or as living and reigning: Its
still your Mistake to count your dark Opinions and litteral Notions the Light
of the Son of God: Nay, if you have no further Faith and Knowledge of him, then
what is merely historical and litteral. If you have not a spiritual and divine
Knowledge of Christ, as inwardly revealed, you will dye in your Sin, and perish
for lack of Knowledge: And many of those called Heathens who follow the Help
and Guidance of the Light of Christ within, shall come from the East and from
the West, and from the North, and from the South, nd shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom, as Children of Faith and Heirs of
Promise, who have believed God, and obeyed his Light in them, when you and such
like litteral Professors shall be utterly rejected, unless you return to
Christ's Light within, and believe and wait in it to know Christ's inward and
spiritual Appearance and Revelation. 3. In the Gospel preached to Abraham (in
whose Seed all Nations should be blessed) It was foreseen, that God would
justify the Heathen through Faith; and accordingly, Christ was absolutely
promised and given for a Light to the Gentiles, to be God's Salvation to the
Ends of the Earth; that he might say to the Prisoners, go forth, and them that
are in Darkness, show yourselves, Isa. 42. and Chapter 49. Now observe, that the
Promise of Christ, both for a Light to the Gentiles, and Salvation to the Ends
of the Earth, and himself to speak to the Prisoners to go forth, etc. its
absolute, and not restrained or limited to the spreading of Scripture, nor to
any such Condition, as to be a Light and Salvation (or to speak) only to such
as get the Bible, and have the Scriptures or an historical Knowledge and
Profession of Jesus Christ; but he is given both for a Light to the Heathen,
and Salvation to the Ends of the Earth, and so to call forth the Prisoners
where the Scriptures are not; he being in himself absolute and perfect, and so
able to be whatever he is promised of God; and this Salvation is absolutely
placed upon the Son of God, who is given both for a Light, a Leader, God's
Covenant and Salvation; and therefore he is to be followed, obeyed and depended
on for Life and Salvation. 4. Moreover, Its possible to have both the
Sufferings and Glory of Christ revealed by his Light and Spirit without the
Scriptures; seeing the Spirit of Christ showed and testified aforehand unto the
Prophets of his Sufferings and of the Glory that should follow, 1 Pet. 1. 11.
to be sure, they who first wrote Scripture of these things aforehand, had them
first discovered or opened unto them by the Spirit. 5. And when Nebuchadnezer
said, Lo, I see four Men loose walking in the midst of the Fire, and they have
no Hurt, and the Form of the fourth is like the Son of God, Dan. 3. 25. How
came this Heathen to have any such Impression or Similitude of the Son of God
in his Mind, as thus to speak of the Son of God, or of the fourth, as
represented to him like the Son of God? And what Scripture could he have for
this pray you? Or for Nebuchadnezer and Darius to speak so truly and admirably
as they did of the Kingdom and Dominion of the most high God, Dan. 4. 3. and
Chap. 6. 26. Let the narrow-Spirited Litteralists, and partial Predestinators
(who would place all true Knowledge upon the Letter, and confine it within the
Compass of a few Professors of Scripture) consider these things. 6. But seeing
that Christ dyed for all Men, tasted Death for every Man, and gave himself a
Ransom for all; God does therefore (no doubt) afford a Way for the universal
Conveyance of the Virtue and blessed Effects inwardly of his Death and Blood to
Mankind, and that is his divine Light, though many have not the outward
Description thereof.

XVI. His unlearned Question.
AS to H. G's Question, p. 70. viz.

I shall only ask this one Question; what things and other Signs were those
which Jesus did that are not written, Joh. 20. 30. and Joh. 21. 25. To this I
say, Its an easy matter for Intruders to ask unlearned and unnecessary
Questions, whereof this is one; of those many other Signs and Things that Jesus
did, its said, If they should be written every one, I suppose that even the
World it self could not contain the Books, Joh. 20. 25. how then should this
Querist be capable to contain them? I suppose he does not think himself able to
contain more then the World it self: If he says, it is an hiperbolical
Expression, then is his Question hiperbolical to be sure. And if we cannot give
him Account of all those Signs and things in particular, while we are not
sollicitous to know them, nor do we think it needful; is that any valid Plea or
Proof against the Sufficiency of the Light within or Spirits Teaching? Would
such an Argument against the Scriptures being the Rule please him, because they
contain not all that was done? God gives us to know what is sufficient and
necessary for Life and Salvation by his Light within: But if the Word contain
(...), of (...), be taken for, to understand as Mat. 19. 11. to comprehend,
Job. 21 25. Then in that Sense there is far more written in the Scriptures
already, then either our Opposer or his Brethren can either comprehend or
understand (and therefore its a busy Intrusion and Cavil in them to query for
more) while they oppose the true Light within, and will not believe in it, nor
depend upon the Immediate Teachings of the Spirit of Truth, from whence the
holy Scriptures proceeded; but dark they are, and more grossly dark and confused
they are like to be, who persist in that gainsaying Spirit of Prejudice and
Enmity against the Light of Truth, which I desire the Lord to give them a Sight
and Sense of unto Repentance, rather then they should perish in their perverse
Gain-sayings.

THE Angry Anabaptist Proved BABYLONISH, IN Answer to Henry Grigg's Pamphlet,
styled, The Baptist not Babylonish. Wherein, Whilst he endeavors to reconcile
his Contradictions (in his Book Entitled, Light from the Sun, etc.) Charged
upon him in a Paper, Entitled, The Babylonish Baptist; He is run into more
Contradictions, Absurdities and false Accusations against the People of God,
called Quakers, and their Principles.

By G. W.

Ex ore tuo te judicabo.

Printed in the Year, 1673.

The Heads of the following Treatise.
I. OF the Light of the Eternal Word in Man, and the Anabaptist confounded
about it. II. The Sufficiency of the Light within to reveal God, Christ, etc.
III. The Effect of Christ's Sufferings only known in his Light within. IV. The
saving Work of the Spirit. V. How the Light in Man is a Gift, and H. G' s
Distinction between the Meritorious and Instrumental Cause of Salvation
examined. VI. The Lord's Supper in the Type and in the Antitype; the Shadow
and Substance distinguished. VII. The Anabaptist's Imposition about their
Shadowy Baptism. VIII. Their Definition of the true Savior and his Being. IX.
The Hypostatical Union. X. His Charge against the Quakers Principles and
Doctrines (of the Light within) proved impure, vile and ignorant; and the
Spirituality, Divinity and Sufficiency of the Light within further asserted.
XI. His sad and impious Prayer against the Light in all, which Light is proved
of the same Nature (or kind) with the Witness in Believers. XII. His groundless
Comparison and Distinction (between the Light of God in man, and the Light of
Christ or Gospel) further refuted. XIII. His belying us with denying the Man
Christ Jesus, to ^loak his own Absurdity and Ignorance of Christ and his Being.
XIV. That scriptural Distinction between the Eternal Son of God, and the Body
prepared for him further maintained, and the Anabaptist's persecuting Spirit,
reviling and traducing the Inocent reproved. XV. A Warning and Reproof to Hen.
Grigg, etc. XVI. The Baptist's nine Questions answered.
THE Angry Anabaptist Proved BABYLONISH, IN Answer to H. G's Pamphlet, styled,
The Baptist not Babylonish.
WHereas H. G. pretends he has set down my Animadversions (upon his
Contradictions) in order exactly, after my own Fashion, page 1.

I say, this is not true, he has left out the latter part of five of them
which it appears did pinch him. Therefore I shall represent to the Reader his
Contradictions with my Animadversions, and the Stress of his Exceptions,
whereby he would endeavor to make People believe he has not contradicted
himself, but that we must refer to the Impartial Readers to judge of in the
Light of Truth.

I. Of the Light of the Eternal Word in Man, and the Anabaptist confounded
about it.
HEnry Grigg says, viz. I utterly deny that this Light which all Men have from
the Glorious Creator is a saving Light, page 8. of his Book called, Light from
the Sun of Righteousness.

H. G. [in Contradiction] says, I really believe that the Lord Jesus Christ,
AS the Eternal Word, has given Light or enlightneth all Men and Women that
come into the World, p. 8.

G. W. his Animadversion, The Light or Life of the Eternal Word, which is the
Light of Men, Joh. 1. 4. is spiritual and divine, as is that Word, and
therefore saving to all that truly obey it.

H. G. replies, It seems to me as if this Man had lost his Common Reason --
because I deny that the Light which is in all Men is a saving Light; and yet
say, I really believe all have a Light in them from Christ considered as
Creator -- This cannot be a Contradiction, unless he can prove there is no
Light proceeding from the Eternal Word as Creator, but what is saving, p. 2.

G. W. answers, Whilst he would insinuate that the Light in every Man is
created, or a Creature, he merely beggs the Question, and still remains in his
self-Contradiction; for he dare not say, That AS the Eternal Word Jesus Christ
is a Creature: Neither is his Light that proceeds from him, as that Word
created, any more then that Life which was in him, which Life was the Light of
Men; will they say this is either created or natural? As the Eternal Word is
divine, so is the Light or immediate Shining thereof in Man's Conscience.

H. G. What though it be granted, that the Light which all Men that come into
the World are lighted, which flows from the Eternal Word, and so is spiritual;
must it needs therefore be a saving Light? Was not the Law given forth on Mount
Sinai, a Light of, or come from the Eternal Word, and does not Paul say, that
the Law is spiritual, Romans 7. 14. and yet a Ministration of Death, 2 Cor. 3. 7.
and that killed, and in other places that there was no Justification by it?

G. W. Answer, 1. If it be a spiritual Light in Man, proceeding and flowing
from the Eternal Word; it must therefore be the Eternal Word that immediately
shines in Man's Heart (which is not created nor natural) for all have not the
Law in the Letter, or as outwardly written; And if this Immediate Light be not
of a saveing Property what Light is? And for what end is it given universally
to Mankind? That they may be saved; or only to condemn them?

2. Christ's enlightening all men as the Eternal Word and that with a spiritual
Light flowing from himself, (as the Eternal Word Enlightening) It is not with
the Letter which kills and Cannot give Life but with an Immediate
Illumination or Influence of Light from himself which can both kill and make a
live; it has both the Law, or sentence of Death in it to the transgressor, and
quickening Virtue and Gospel in it to make alive to God, and minister Life and
Justification from God to them that truly obey it.

3. This immed iate Light or Shining from Jesus Christ, as the Eternal Word, is
neither the Letter of the Law, nor created, nor yet natural, as Anabaptists use
to say; but as the Eternal Word enlightening man, and the Life which was in him
being the Light of Men; is therefore a Light and Law which can give Life (which
the Law, as in the Letter could not) it being the Life it self that was in the
Eternal Word.

H. G. The great Darkness of these Men who cry up Light page 3.
and Power within; this Wile of Satan, and Cheat of AntiChrist, p. 31.

H. G. [Contradiction] The Lord Jesus Christ, as the Eternal Word enlightneth
all Men; this Light is the Substance of the Law, the Candle of the Lord, it
does convince of Sin, p. 8. If Heathens follow it they would shine in just
living; the Work of Faith with Power; I do mantain that Faith is required and
must be wrought with Power in the Heart, p. 15, 16.

G. W. Animad. What horrible Blasphemy is it then to term our crying up the
Light and Power of Christ within the Wile of Satan, and Cheat of Antichrist,
and how plainly hereby confuted: We have Cause to look upon those Heathens that
follow the Light or Gift of God within to be more godly and better Christians
then many of these Baptists.

H. G. Rep. Your Lies and Ignorance -- I say, the Darkness of these Men who cry
up Light and Power within, is great; and I did say in p. 31. I should make
appear this Wile of Satan, and Cheat of Antichrist (that is to say) the Evil
Doctrine, and Principles of yours -- And do I contradict this in affirming
there is a Light in all Men, called, the Candle of the Lord, and in owning the
Inward Work of Faith with Power upon the Heart, etc. p. 4.

G. W. Answer. Has he not before evidently made their crying up Light and
Power within, the Character of the great Darkness, and this the Wile of Satan,
and Cheat of Antichrist? You that understand Grammar and common Sense, mark
the Tenor of his Words, and how he shuffles to cover this Blasphemy and
Contradiction, to his confessing that the Lord Jesus, as the Eternal Word
enlightneth all Men; and this is our Principle, though now he places the great
Darkness, Wile of Satan, and Cheat of Antichrist upon our Doctrine and
Principles (without Exception) concerning the Light within; and thus still
ensnares himself in his Confusion; as also in one while affirming that this
Light in Man is the Substance of the Law or first Covenant, another while, that
it is the formed Spirit in Man, Zach. 12. 1. which is called the Candle of the
Lord, as in his 9th page of his first Book.

Where note that by seeking to obscure his gross Contradiction before, he is
run into another, viz. One while calling the Light (of the Eternal Word) in
every Man, The Substance of the Law of the first Covenant (yea, now the
Ministration of Death or Letter that kills, from 2 Corrinth. 3. 6, 7. cited
by him) another while he calls this Light in every man, A Spirit that God has
given or formed in Man; you who can distinguish between the Law (or Letter of
it) written in Table of Stone, and the Spirit of Man: Judge, if this Anabaptist
be not plainly contradictory to himself herein; for is the Spirit of Man, and
the Law written both one and the same thing? And while the Spirit of Man is
confessed to be the Candle of the Lord, its lighted by his Divine Word or Fire,
The Lord has lighted my Candle.

II. The Sufficiency of the Light within, to reveal God, Christ, etc.
HEnry Grigg again shuffles and beggs the Question thus, viz.

Do not you say, that this Light which is in every Man that comes into the
World, is God, is Christ, is the Holy Spirit or Blessed Comforter, and a Saving
Light, and that it will convince a Man of every Sin and Transgression, and lead
into all Truth, etc.

Answ. He here questions the things which in his 18th. page he affirms, The
Quakers speak of the Light within, viz. That it is the Divine Essence, the Lord
Jesus Christ, the holy Spirit, etc.

But I ask him, where, or in what Book and page do the Quakers speak all this
of that Measure or Gift of Light that is in every man (he deals disingenuously
in not citing our own Books and Pages for these Words, that we might consider
further thereof, seeing the Stress of his Charge lies so much on them, which
though we assert it to be a divine Light of God, and Christ, and holy Spirit,
which are one, and omni-present, filling Heaven and Earth, over all, and
through all, God unlimitted in his Presence, which to man is an Enlightening
Presence; yet God and Christ is not revealed in all; for he was in the World,
and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not, yet his divine Light
or immediate Shining in Man is manifest by measure or Degrees, as man is
capable to receive it; the least degree whereof is saving to them that obey it,
and tends to direct and draw Man toward God, who is the absolute and alone
Savior, and he and his Light in men are inseparable, whose Salvation is
manifest by degrees, as his Light or Grace in man's Heart is, which has taught
us to wait and to look for that blessed Hope, and the glorious apprearing of
the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ.

The Measure or Manifestation of this Light and Grace, which immediately
directs and leads to this Appearance of the great God and our Savior, must
needs therefore be saving: And because God or his Son, in his infinite Fullness
and Knowledge, as in himself, cannot be contained in man, in that the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain God; it follows not therefore, that the Measure and
Manifestation of his Light in Man is not convincing, sanctifying or saving,
whilst it is confessed to be a Light or Illumination of Jesus Christ, as the
Eternal Word, enlightening all Men and Women.

If the infinite Fullness or Giver of this Light cannot be contained in Man; yet
God has promised to tabernacle with Men; and to dwell in them; it follows not,
that a little degree of the Light, Virtue and Knowledge thereof is not saving
or sanctifying.

A small Stream can wash, and a little Fire kindle and increase to more, and a
little convenient Food nourish and satisfy, and a little Water quench one's
Thirst, or a small Seed grow and bring forth great Increase; and so a little
Light from Christ can increase and shine more and more till it discover the
Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ the anointed; these things are truly
known in the Mystery through true Obedience to so much Light or Illumination as
God has given man; for he (the Glorious Creator) has given a Light to all men
sufficient to save, or else they could not be left without Excuse; but it would
reflect upon him for condemning them for Sin, if he did not afford them a Light
sufficient to guide out of Sin unto Salvation. But for our asserting the Light
of Christ that is in every Man, to be convincing, sanctifying and saving; H. G.
concludes as follows, p. 5.

III. The Effect of Christ's Sufferings only known in his Light within.
H. G. IN this appears your great Darkness, and herein you are beguiled and
cheated by the Devil, to the invalidating of the Meritorious Death and
Sufferings of our Lord, as if there were no need of his Blood to be poured
forth, nor of his Intercession, p. 5.

Answ. Can either Christ's Light within, or our following of it, invalidate or
make void his Sufferings without? Or deprive us of the End thereof, or of the
Virtue of his Blood? When they that crucified, murdered Christ were turned
from his Light within? Or can any receive the Benefit of Christ's Sufferings
and Blood without (or out of) his Light within? Or are the Sufferings and Death
of Christ absolutely meritorious for Man's Justification without any Dependence
upon his Light within? If so, how can any be deprived of Justification for whom
Christ dyed? Which was for all Men; but what Proof has he from Scripture, That
the shedding Christ's Blood was the Meritorious Cause of Justification? Seeing
it was shed by wicked Hands; and surely, had the Jews and Gentiles obeyed and
walked in that holy and just Light that was in them, they had not crucified nor
murdered the just One, the Son of God, whose giving up to the Death of the
Cross (though of Necessity) yet it was occasioned because of Sin and Death that
was come over all, which man must only be convinced and truly sensible of by
the Light of Christ within; and its such only as walk in his Light, who come to
know the Blood of Christ to cleanse them from all Sin. And there is a certain
Congruity and Oneness in being sanctified, redeemed and saved by his Life,
Light, Blood, Power, Arm, Ingrafted Word, Spirit, Fire, Water or by Grace;
these do not oppose Christ as Savior, he being in all the great Workman of
God, through whom God has saved us by the washing of Regeneration and renewing
of the holy Ghost, Titus 3. 4, 5. These being one in Substance with him, and of
himself, as the Spirit, the Water and the Blood agree in one: And as his
offering up himself, being a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World,
pouring out his Soul to Death, and making Intercession for the Transgressors
was by the Eternal Spirit, so the blessed Effects thereof are spiritually and
inwardly received by them that obey and walk in the Light of his Spirit;
wherein his Life and Virtue of the Blood of the Covenant is received unto
Cleansing, Sanctification and Reconciliation with God: The great Sufferings,
Burdens and Afflictions of Christ were occasioned by man's Sin, Disobedience,
and turning from his Life and Light within; and this brought Darkness and Death
over Mankind; and therefore Christ deeply traveled in the Spirit of Prayer
and Intercession, through all his Sufferings, to bring forth his own Life and
Light for man's Deliverance out of Death and Darkness, that he might see his
Seed, and the Travel of his Soul, and be satisfied. And this is the Seed that
shall serve him throughout all Ages, which shall be counted unto the Lord for a
Generation; and this serves him in his Light, and worships him in Spirit;
therefore they that oppose this Light of Christ to the End of Christ's Coming,
Death, Sufferings, Blood or Intercession, as if his Light in Man did invalidate
these; they are darkened and cheated by the Devil, and not these who obey
Christ's Light within for Life and Savation in him.

IV. The saving Work of the Spirit.
HEnry Grigg observes from John 16. 7. That the Spirit or blessed Comforter
cannot be the Savior, page 46. page 6.


H. G. Contradiction) Till the Coming of his Spirit and Grace with Power in my
Heart for the binding of the strong man Satan, and killing my Corruptions, my
Soul was not brought out of the horrible Pit, p. 16. having wrought this
glorious Work of Regeneration, p. 17.

G. W. his Animadversion. Then its the Spirit and Power of Christ that effects
Salvation through the Work of Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. which is not merely by
Christ's outward Sufferings, though we cannot believe that Satan is bound in
this Man, while he is in Satan's Work, blaspheming Christ's Light within, and
belying us.

H. G. replies, What sober Christian Man can find any Contradiction here
against H. G? Is not G. W. the Liar and false Accuser? I say the Spirit or
blessed Comforter cannot be the Savior or Mediator, p. 6.

G. W. Answer, The Contradiction is very obvious to say, the Spirit cannot be
the Savior, when it can save the Soul out of the horrible Pit; can it save and
not be a Savior? Or can it bind the strong Man, or kill man's Corruptions, and
yet not save him? And if the Father, the Word and the holy Spirit be God,
cannot God be the Savior? When as Christ's being the Author of Faith, giving
Power to others to become the Sons of God, is a Proof of his being God, Light
from the Sun, p. 91. And Christ said, The Son can do nothing of himself, etc.
The Father that dwells in me he does the Works, Joh. 5. 19. 30. and 8. 28.
and 14. 10. And the holy Spirit where received, also makes Intercession
according to the Will of God, and by this Spirit Christ prayed unto the Father;
but to say, the Spirit or blessed Comforter cannot be the Savior, is also to
deny Christ in his spiritual Appearance, to be a Savior, and so to confine the
saving Work to him only, as man, or in the Flesh without (or separate from) us,
whereas he said, I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you, John 14.
18. which plainly denotes him to be the Comforter in that Spiritual Appearance,
wherein he that was with them promised to be in them, and as revealed in them;
his Appearance was another or diverse to his outward Appearance in the Flesh,
whereas H. G. says, Are there not three that bear Record in Heaven? I say yes,
and these three are one; and is not Christ (the Savior) that Word, which is
one of the three, which are but one divine Being, Thing or Substance, though
revealed under several Considerations and Diversities of Manifestations, and
Degrees of Discoveries? yet all one divine Life and Being, as God is the Word,
the Life, the Light, and so is Christ; and the holy Spirit is Life to the
Righteous, and so is Christ the Way the Truth and the Life: In him was Life,
and the Life the Light of Men; the Life affords Light to all, and the Light
Life to all that obey it, and in it follow Christ, such receive the Light of
Life, and come to walk in the Light of the Living, as the Light of Life is
received unto Justification and Peace, the holy Spirit is received in that
glorious Ministration as Comforter, after a State of Desolation and Sorrow of
whom Christ said, He shall receive of mine and show it unto you, Joh. 16. 13.

H. G. Did the true Savior die on the Cross or not?

Answ. Yes, as concerning the Flesh, but not as concerning the Spirit or most
noble Principle, by which he was empowered to his Work of Salvation.

H. G. I affirm once again, That neither the Comforter, viz. the holy Spirit,
nor the Deity of our Lord Jesus distinct from his Manhood or human Nature,
could be the Savior and Mediator which dyed on the Cross, etc. page 7.

Answ. This is a mere impertinent Shuffle to prove the holy Spirit could not be
the Savior; he now tells us, that neither the holy Spirit, nor the Deity
distinct from his human Nature (as he calls it) could be the Savior that dyed;
who of us ever affirmed that his Deity or holy Spirit dyed? But seeing the holy
Spirit or Deity dyed not with the Flesh of Christ that was crucified, then the
whole Savior did not dye, but what he calls the human Nature: But if we take
his Words according to his Doctrine before, for Proof (that the holy Spirit or
Comforter cannot save or be the Savior) only thus, viz. Neither the Comforter
the holy Spirit, nor the Deity of our Lord Jesus distinct from his Manhood or
human Nature could be the Savior.

This were all one as to tell us, that God cannot be the Savior, or that God
cannot save, if the holy Spirit or Deity be God; he should rather have said,
that the Manhood could not save without the holy Spirit, divine Power or Deity,
which alone is sufficient (and only that which is felt and experienced in Man)
to effect his Salvation and Deliverance from the Power of Sin and Satan: Ye are
my Witnesses says the Lord, and my Servants whom I have chosen, that ye may
know and believe me and understand that I am he, before me there was no God
formed, neither shall there be after me; I even I am the Lord, and beside me
there is no Savior, Isa. 43. 10, 11. There is no God else beside me a Just God
and a Savior, Chap. 45. 21. And we both labor and suffer Reproach, because we
trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, specially of those that
believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. And how is God especially known to be the Savior, but
in saing man from Sin, Unrighteousness and all Guile? I will mention the loving
Kindness of the Lord, etc. For he said, Surely they are my People, Children
that will not lie; so he was their Savior, Isa. 63. 7, 8. Now consider whether
it be not grossly erroneous to suppose the holy Spirit o^ Deity cannot save, or
is so deficient distinct, or in it self, whereas though God was manifest in
Flesh, God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself; the Divinity and
human (or earthly) Nature were always distinct; and is not God omnipotent? To
the only wise God our Savior be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and
ever,

Amen.
V. How the Light in Man is a Gift, and H. G' s distinction between the
Meritorious and instrumental Cause of Salvation examined.
H. G. ARt thou not able to distinguish between the Giver and the Gift, between
the Fountain and the Stream, p. 7.

Answ. Yes, I do distinguish between the Giver and the Gift, between the
Fountain and the Stream, between the Fullness and the receiving thereof Grace
for Grace; bu^ while the Distinction between God and the Gift of his Spirit, or
between Christ and his Light within, seems to be no more then between the
Fountain and the Stream; how grossly erroneous is it to conclude, either that
the Spirit cannot be Savior, or that the Light of Christ is not saving? For
that is all one as to say, that either the Stream is not the same Water with the
Fountain, or that the Stream cannot wash because not the Fountain or Fullness;
who in his right Wits will believe this?

H. G. But again it appears thou distinguishest not between the meritorious
Cause of man's Salvation, and the Instrumental, the killing of the Sacrifice,
and the sprinkling of the Blood, etc. p. 7. 8.

Answ. Where does the Scripture make this Distinction, or say, that the killing
of the Sacrifice (which he must mean of Christ) is the meritorious Cause of
man's Salvation? Such like blind distinctions are fit to darken Knowledge and
blind Peoples Minds; and how gross and unchristian is it to place such a Merit
or Worth upon that murtherous Act of killing the Sacrifice if he mean) Christ
as his Discourse implies? For though Christ Jesus (by that inherent Holiness,
and original Righteousness, and Grace of God in him) offered and gave himself
up to suffer, and tasted Death for every Man; yet the crucifying and killing
him, according to the Flesh, was an Act of Murderers and Persecutors, who by
wicked Hand put him to death; so that the Dignity and Worth was in Christ and
on his Part through all his Sufferings, and not in the Act of killing him by
wicked Hands, nor on their Parts; howbeit the Sufferings and Death of Christ
were of great value with the Father, and his Power did appear through all to
the bruising the Serpents Head.

And if it be the Work of the Spirit to sanctify and renew us; is not this a
saving Work? And does not this bring us to receive the Atonement, and to enjoy
Peace? Who follow and obey this Spirit for a Reconciliation (through the Death
of Christ) and being saved by his Life; and so the Work of Christ in saving and
redecming man from Iniquity, and in making Atonement Peace and Union between
God and Man (however these be directly pointed at, made way for by the
Suffering and Death of Christ) yet they were inwardly revealed, effected and
fulfilled by the Spirit or Life of Christ, where the Word of Reconciliation is
received in the Heart.

For Christ's Appearance and Suffering in the Flesh did really and directly
point at those spiritual Ends (which are for man's Eternal Advantage) to be
fulfilled by his Appearance in Spirit.

VI. The Lord's Supper in the Type and in the Antitype, the Shadow and
Substance distinguished.
H. G. THe Ordinance of the Lord's Supper you call Bread and Wine, p. 19.

H. G. [Contradiction] The Sign, the Shadow (speaking of their Ordinances the
Substance being Christ, p. 53, 54.

G. W. his Animadversion, Your pretended Lord's Supper then is no more then
Bread and Wine, the Sign the Shadow, and therefore their Continuation of no
Necessity in the true Church, which has received Christ the Substance [Thus
far he cites my Words, and leaves out what follows] The living Bread, who
spiritually communicates his Flesh and Blood, or Fruit of the heavenly Vine
without your Shadows; and this is our Lord's Supper that we partake of; and our
Baptism is spiritual, 1 Cor. 12, 13. Ephesians. 4. 5. and as in 1 Pet. 3. 21. Its
said; to the which also the (...) Anti Type, that now saves us even Baptism
agrees.

His Contradiction before is between his calling their Bread and Wine the
Lord's Supper, now remaining in full Force, and yet confessing them to be the
Sign, the Shadow, and that the Substance is Christ.

If that you call the Lord's Supper be a Shadow, as of Christ to come, it
cannot be that Lord's Supper which remains in full Force, where he is come to
sup together with them who have received him in, as being the Substance which
ends the Shadows; but

H.G. Attempts to reconcile his Contradiction by speaking of sitting down under
Christ's Shadow, p. 9.

When as its very obvious, that his Sense of Christ's Shad^ here much differs
from his Sense of their preten^ed Supper, being a Shadow of Christ the
Substance as to come, whereas Shadow is metaphorical in the one, real in the
other; for were it good Doctrine to say, You must sit down under Christ's
Shadow till he come? Or that Christ is not come to his Church, while she sits
down under his Shadow; or that your Bread and Wine, as a Sign and Shadow of
Christ the Substance, is that very Shadow of his that the Church is always to
sit down under, while upon Earth: Whereas what he says of sitting down under
his Shadow, is taken out of Canticles 2. 3. As the Apple Tree among the Trees
of the Wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons; I sat down under his Shadow with
Delight, and his Fruit was sweet to my Taste: See how plain it is, that the
Simile here is taken from sitting down under the Shadow of an Apple Tree, and
eating of the Apples. Were it good Sense to say, I must sit down under the
Shadow of an Apple Tree, and eat the Fruit thereof until the Tree come, when
both Tree and Fruit are then present? And so is Christ with
his Church, when she sits down under his Shadow, and pertakes of his living
Fruit, where then there is no Necessity of your outside Shadows. And yet H. G.
(in contradiction to his confessing their Ordinance to be the Shadow) he is
still imposing upon his Opposer, That the Practice of it is to be kept up in
the same manner as Christ the Night before he ^e was betrayed instituted, p. 9.
But I ask, do you Baptists observe and keep a real Supper in the very same
manner that Christ then did with his Disciples? Be plain and ingenuous herein;
have you the Passover at a real Supper? And have you the Cup both before and
after Supper as Christ and his Disciples had, Luke 22. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
And was all this either an Institution of Christ, or of Necessity to continue
in the Church? When as what Christ says of the Passover, to wit, I will not
any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God, verse 16.

The like he says of the Cup, I will drink no more of the Fruit of the Vine,
until I drink it new with you in the Kingdom of God, Mat. 26. 29. Mark 14. 25.
and Luke 22. 16, 18. Does not this show as much a discontinuance of he Cup as
the Passover? And there is no mention of Christ's taking Wine, or the Cup, after
his Resurrection, either to continue, confirm or reinforce it (as a
commemoration of his Death) when he sat at Meat with them, and took Bread and
blessed it, and brake, and gave them that their Eyes were opened, and he was
known of them in breaking of Bread, after he was ^isen? Luke 24. 30, 31. Jo^.
21. 13. Howbeit H. G. is pleased to cite Acts 2. 42. and Chap. 20. to prove,
that the Lord's Supper and the Practice of it is to be kept up in the same
manner as Christ did the Night before he was betrayed; I ask again, do you
Anabaptists practice it in the same manner? And have we not the more Reason to
deny your Practice, if it be not in the same manner as pretended here? Whereas
in Acts 2. 42. its said, They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and
Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers (wherein is no mention
either of the Wine, the Cup, the Supper or Passover) also its then said that
all that believed were together, and had all things common, and sold their
Possessions and Goods, ver. 44, 45. Now if what they did must be binding to
Posterities because practiced; why do not the Baptists imitate those Believers
in this of selling their Possessions, etc? But were it not a very preposterous
Way of arguing, to conclude a continuance of Commands and Duties from
Practices. And in Acts 20. 7. Upon the first day of the Week the Disciples came
together to break Bread, and that Paul had broken Bread, ver. 11. (according to
Christ's Practice after he was risen) And in 1 Cor. 11. Paul gives a Recitation
both of the Bread and Cup that Christ gave in the Figure to show the Lord s
Death till he did come; as also of the Substance, to wit, the Body and Blood of
Christ, which he was a Partaker of in the Mystery; but as the Corrinthians were
too carnal, and Envying, and Strife, and Divisions were amongst them, and some
liable to Idolatry, 1 Cor. 3. 1, 3. Chap. 10. 14. and 11. 17, 18, 19. the
Apostle said, I could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal;
so as then they had not the clear Sight of Christ as the Substance, or Mystery
of his Body and Blood; and the very Stress, Drift and Scope of the Apostles
Testimony was to exalt the Substance and Mystery, and to bring them into a
spiritual Mind and State; for which see also, 1 Cor. 10. 14, 15, 16, 17. and in
2 Cor. 13. 5. he says, Examine your selves whether ye be in the Faith, prove
your selves; know you not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you
except ye be Reprobates.

Now Jesus Christ is confessed to be the Substance, when your pretended Lord's
Supper is but the Sign, the Shadow or the Figure: If his saying, This is my
Body be but a figurative Speech, according to the Martyrs, p. 9. And I require
this Man to prove that Gospel Ordinances are a Shadow, as he has confessed
their Supper to be.

H. G. I would know of this Man, where he reads of any thing called the Lord's
Supper, but this which we contend for, page 10.

Answ. You are contending but for the Shadow, but there is the Lord's Supper in
the Mystery, for says the faithful and true Witness, the beginning of the
Creation of God, Behold I stand at the Door and knock, If any man hear my Voice
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him and he with me,
Rev. 3. 20. Is not this the Lord's Supper that is above the Shadow? And Christ
said, I appointed unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me, that
ye may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, Luke 22. 29, 30. Verily I say
unto you, I will drink no more of the Fruit of the Vine, until that day that I
drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom. Is not this the Lord's Supper in
the Mystery or Antitype? And I am the Bread of Life, I am the living Bread
which came down from Heaven, if any Man eat of this Bread, he shall live for
ever, and the Bread that I give is my Flesh that I give for the Life of the
World; He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in
him, Joh. 6. Is not this living Bread from Heaven conf^st to be the Substance,
and the ontward Bread the Shadow thereof?

H. G. I do affirm, That this is spiritual, (to wit, the Lords Supper) the
Baptist, p. 10.

Answ. The Lord's Supper in the Mystery is spiritual, but not your Bread and
Wine, unless they be transubstantiated which we utterly deny.

H. G. The Ordinance of Water Baptism was given forth by Christ after his
Resurrection, Mat. 28. 20.

Answ. There Is no mention of Water but baptizing them (...) into the Name of
the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, and this Baptism was saving, so is not your
dipping.

H. G. And this of the Lords Supper Paul received of Christ sometime after his
Ascension, 1 Cor. 11. 23.

Answ. 1st. Paul received of Christ the Lords Supper in the Mystery, not in the
Shadow, 1 Cor. 10. 15, 16, 17. yet he delivered unto them the Relation how the
Lord Jesus took Bread and the Cup the same Night in which he was betrayed, ver.
23, 24. which he applied to a spiritual End, ver. 28. explained before, Chap.
20. 16. and he delivered the Gospel, as well touching Christ's Resurrection as
his Death, 1 Cor. 15. 3. and for their being baptized into his Death, and
raised in the Likeness of his Resurrection, which was more then a Remembrance
of his Death, in (or by) the Shadow, which could not be positively enjoined by,
[ as often as ye do this,]

2. That which the Apostle received of the Lord, was the Gospel, and a
Gospel-Discovery of the Substance, which was beyond and above the Shadow.

And his Recitation of the Shadow was directly to point at the Substance, viz.
that Bread and that Cup which was the Body and Blood of Christ, and the
spiritual Communication thereof; he was a Minister of the Gospel, the
Dispensation whereof was not a Dispensation of Shadow, but of Substance.

H. G. The end of this Ordinance does remain, notwithstaning the pourings forth
of the Spirit, and therefore the Ordinance must needs remain, which is to
confirm our Faith in the true Savior, and to keep up our Love to him, p. 21.

G. W. What Faith and Love are these of theirs, which are confirmed by Bread
and Wine, and what Idolatry and Diversion from the Spirit does their Doctrine
tend to herein? Surely the holy Spirit can best supply the said End, Gal. 5. 22.

H. G. Rep. This Ordinance tends to increase our Love to him, and our Faith in
him; therefore the end remains, unless you can prove Christ is come the second
time without Sin unto Salvation; do you suppose there is no need of this
Ordinance because the Spirit can best supply the said End? p. 11.

Answ. There Is no need of the Shadow where the Substance is enjoyed, and whilst
thou ( Henry) have confessed your Supper as (its called) to be the Shadow, the
Substance being Christ, thou do but contradictorily beg the Question,
calling it a Gospel-Ordinance, the Lords Supper in full Force, the Ordinance,
the Ordinance.

2. Thou do but imagine a Confirmation and Increase of Faith in, and Love to
Christ by your Bread and Wine, which they cannot do, true Love and Faith being
Fruits of the Spirit (which in that it can best and only supply this End, which
idolatrously thou proposest to reap from thy pretended Supper) There can be no
Necessity of this thy Shadow for any such End to the Soul; can there be any
need of that which cannot supply the Soul, when that which best can do it is
manifest? Is there Necessity where there is Plenty, or a full Supply?

3. Whether those Believers in the Apostles days who hoped and looked for
Christ's appearing the second time without Sin unto Salvation, Heb. 9. 28. did
not accordingly come to experience his Appearance unto their Salvation?

H. G. Dare thou say the Spirit can best supply those Ends without making use
of the means God in his Word does direct unto?

The Usefulness and Sufficiency of the Spirit in fulfilling of its Work does
not dis-annul Christ's Precepts, p. 12

Answ. 1. I would know where the Word of God has dictated that your shadowy
Supper of Bread and Wine is the means to confirm true Faith in Christ, or
increase your Love to him, or else confess thy Error; for the means thou talkst
of must have reference to what we were upon before, about your pretended
Supper, or else thou art insignificant and impertinent in thy discourse.

2. If the Spirit be sufficient to fulfill its Work and Office, which is to
bring forth its own Fruit, what Necessity of your Shadow which cannot do it,
nor so far help man, as in the leasts supply those Ends the Spirit is given
for, much less help the Spirit therein which is all-sufficient?

VII. The Anabaptist's Imposition about their shadowy Baptism.
AGain H. G. is very fierce and rash for their WaterBaptism (or plunging People
in Water) where he says, Whosoever brings any other Gospel let him be
accursed, p. (...):

G. W. Hereby he has cursed all the People of God and sincere minded, both
Protestants and all others in the World, who oppose and come not under the
Baptists dipping or plunging People in Water. The Lord sorgive him he is very
uncharitable herein; for our parts, we cannot believe their Baptism to be
either the Baptism of Christ or Gospel, or of Necessity and available to
Salvation.

H. G. Rep. Thou have in this manifested thy Imperfection and false
Antichristian Spirit; have thou no more Care nor Conscience, that thou go
about thus to belie the Innocent? Have I affir^ed that Baptism or plunging Men
and Women is Gospel? Have I said, it is of Necessity to Salvation? p. 13.

Answ. It Is both dishonest and false in thee to accuse me of an Antichristian
Spirit and belying the Innocent, for stating thy own Words and the Consequence
thereof from the very Tenor of thy Discourse; have thou not accounted your
Water Baptism or dipping Gospel, or at least part of Christ's last Will and
Testament, and them accursed that bring any other Gospel? See thy other Book,
pages 24, 25, 26. and have not thy Brethren declared it for the Remission of
Sins, and the only Way of gathering Churches 1. To teach, and then to baptize
or dip them? See their Confession of Faith (Article 11.) presented to the King,
and subscribed by above 40. of them.

And have not some of thy Brethren affrighted many simple People into Water, to
be dipped, formerly by such Language, as, dip or damn; and what have thou said
less, if they be accursed that own it not: Some of thy Brethren have positively
affimed it necessary to Salvation on that Scripture, Except a Man be born again
of Water and the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, falsely deeming
that outward Water there spoken of.

H. G. All that are accursed, are only those who bring another Gospel besides
that which was given sorth by Christ, as he is King and Mediator of the new
Covenant, p. 14.

Answ. And your dipping thou reckons to be given forth by Christ, thy pretended
Proof being Mat. 28. 20. as before mentioned, wherefore thy case is against all
that own (...), or deny to be dipped; for our parts we will not be dipped by you.

H. G. I doubt not but all sincere-minded Protestants are of my Persuasion
touching this matter, though we may differ about the Form and Subjects of
Water Baptism, p. 14.

Answ. Here thou insinuatest and flatters the Protestants, like a temporizer
and decliner of your former Testimony, and contrary to thy Brethrens said
Confession of Faith, which is wholly against that scriptureless thing of
sprinkling Infants, Article 11. (as their Phrase is) and have not diverse of thy
Brethren deemed it Antichristian?

H. G. False it is and a Slander to say, that we make it essential and of
absolute Necessity to Salvation, though we believe it essential to Church
Communion, p. 14, 15.

Answ. Is it not essential and of Necessity to Salvation, if part of Christ's
last Will and Testament, as before thou say? And such to be accursed that
oppose it, or if the same Baptism of Christ, mentioned, Mat. 28. and Mark 16.
which is annexed to believing in order to Salvation: But if not of Necessity to
Salvation, then not the Baptism into the one Body or Church Communion; and then
its not that one Baptism or Antitype which does save (viz. The Baptism into
the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit) for without that Name or Power Men
cannot be saved.

VIII. Their Definition of the true Savior and his Being.
HEnry Grigg denies the true Savior to be the Light and Power. I afsirm (says
he) that Jesus Christ is a Man consisting of Flesh and Bones p. 30, 31. human,
finite, weak, subject to Passion as we are, 94. p. 33. the true Christ
consisting of a Body of Flesh and Bone, p. 31. 34.

H. G. Contrad. John declared plainly that Christ was before him, being from
everlasting, before Abraham, the Son of God by Eternal Generation, truly God,
David's Lord, p. 35. The Lord Jesus, the Eternal Word, p. 8. The Emanuel, p.
32. Christ the Son of the living God, p. 33.

G.W. [ Animed.] Therefore its both unscriptural and absurd to assert, that
Jesus Christ consists of a human Body of Flesh and Bone, or is finite (seeing
he was before all things, and by him all things consist, Col. 1. 17. and
inconsistant both with the Eternal Glory of the Son of God, which he had with
the Father before the World began, wherein he is glorified, and his Body
Glorious and Spiritual: They should have said, that he took upon him that Body
prepared for him, and not that he (Jesus Christ) consists or is made up of
Flesh and Bones, but at length they are made to grant to the Deity of Christ
more than formerly; though to their own Confutation as before: And I further
add, Is there not a plain Contradiction between Jesus Christ consisting of
Flesh and Bone, human Nature, and that the Lord Jesus Christ is the Eternal
Word from Everlasting, etc. Besides, after his Resurrection he said, a Spirit
has not Flesh as ye see me have, Luke 24. 39. now for Jesus Christ to have
Flesh and Bone, and for him to consist of Flesh and Bone (in his Sense) are two
differing things; for to have Flesh and Bones, implies a Distinction between
him the Son of God (as to his Being) and the Flesh and Bones which he had, but
to consist of Flesh and Bones implies he could not have a Being without them,
but that he is made up merely of human Flesh and Bones.

H. G. Does he not evidently declare to the World, that it is a Contradiction
and absurd to assert, that Jesus Christ is God and Man, subsisting in too real
distinct Natures -- because I said, he is Man, and that the Divinity distinct
and apart from the Humanity is not the Christ, and yet also said, he is God
everlasting and the Son of God by Eternal Generation, p. 16.

Rep. 1. It is remarkable how the Man shuffles, evades and uses a Subterfuge,
besides my Objection, which was not at all against Jesus Christ being God and
Man (take Man, as Christ is the heavenly, spiritual and glorified Man; being
ascended up where he was before) but it was against his affirming that Jesus
Christ consists of human Flesh and Bone (I distinguishing between consisting
and having) seeing Christ was srom Everlasting.

2. And now also to say, he subsists in two Natures (divine and human
contradicts his saying, he consists of Flesh and Bones, human Nature; for these
do not consist of two Natures, the human Nature is not two Natures, both human
and divine, as human or earthly Nature cannot be the heavenly also.

3. If Christ consists (or is made up) of human Flesh and Bones, and be the
Christ only as so considered; then how is he the Son of God by Eternal
Generation, even before (as well as since) he took upon him that Body which was
prepared for him, or pertook of that which the Children had (to wit, Flesh and
Blood?) If the Son of God before, was he not then Christ before? Or was he the
Son of God when he was not Christ?

IX. The Hypostatical Union.
BUt H. G. instead of clearing himself in this matter he sillily (yet
perversely) begs the Question thus, Does he not deny his human Nature and
glorious hypostatical Union? p. 21.

This being considered, together with his severe Conclusion against us, of
horrible Heresies, Delusions and vile Impostures, as in p. 17. shows, that he
has a design to render us as odious and as obnoxious as he can; for if he can
influence the Powers with his own and his Brethrens implacable Enmity, and
inveterate Spirit, and possess them, that the Quakers are horrible Heretics,
and vile Imposters, and that they deny the Man Christ Jesus, and the
Hypostatical Union; we must be no objects of Mercy, nor fit to live among Men,
but Subjects of Ruin and Destruction; we cannot herein but take notice of the
persecuting Spirit, implacable and deadly Envy that is in some of these
Anabaptists, tending to Persecution in the highest.

But to the Question, Whether I do not deny his human Nature and glorious
hyp^statical Union?

1 ^nswer, 1. That if Hypostatical signify Substantial from (...) Substance; I
do confess and own that the Father, the Word and holy Spirit are one Substance,
or that the Oneness of Substance is applicable to all the three in Heaven; ^or
they are not three Substances.

And that the Son of God is the Brightness of his Father's Glory, and the
express Character of his (...) Substance, Heb. 1. 3. And that therefore the
Father and the Son are one Substance.

2. But that either the Son of God does consist or is made up of human Flesh
and Blood, or that these and the divine Nature are one Substance, I deny, as
contrary to the Son being the Brightness of his Glory and the express Character
(or Image) of his Substance, Heb. 1. 3. for human Nature and divine are not
both one; though still the one Hypostacis or Substance is in all the three
divine Witnesses in Heaven (whose glorious hypostatical Union we never denied)
this is further opened in our Books, viz. The Divinity of Christ, etc. Serious
Apollogy, 1. Part, Chap. 3. Howbeit if we cannot own these to be
Scripture Language, viz.

1. That Jesus Christ consists of human Flesh and Bone. 2. That the glorious
hypostacical Union consists of a human and divine Nature, or that they are
hypostatically one; he should bear with us, till he produce us plain Scripture
for those Positions and Words.
X. His Charge against the Quakers Principles and Doctrines (of the Light
within) proved impure, vile and ignorant; and the Spirituality, Divinity and
Sufficiency of the Light within further asserted.
ANd again H. G. is very vile and impure in affirming the Quakers Principles
and Doctrines of the Light within to be impure and vile, p. 17. (note that
before he accused the Quakers Principle of the Light within, now its the
Principles, that is, all our Principles about the Light within he accuses to
be impure and vile) which is also still contradictory to his confessing, that
Christ as the Eternal Word enlightneth every Man that comes into the World, or
that the Light in every man is the Light of the Eternal Word, or a spiritual
Light flowing thence: This he has granted, and this is one of our Principles
and Doctrines, which he has accused with Impurity and Vileness, as before,
which must needs strike the Principle of Light it self (though I would believe
he might not intend so badly as his Words import) while we assert it to be what
it is as manifest in Man, as,

1. That Christ as the Eternal Word enlightneth every Man, etc. 2. That as the
Eternal Word, his Light is spiritual and divine, as the Word it self is, which
is the true Light enlightening every Man. 3. That therefore this Light in Man
being sincerely obeyed and followed, it will guide and direct man his Way out
of Darkness and Sin to God and Christ the Giver of it, and so to Life and
Salvation. 4. That men are not condemned, nor can they be left without Excuse
for want of Light sufficient given them; but for their Disobedience and
Rebellion against the Light that God has given them; which therefore is
sufficient. 5. By these we do deny their Predestinarian partial Principle, that
concludes, That God has not given a sufficient or saving Light or Grace, to
every Man; but that he has refused it to the greater part of Mankind, as
having from all Eternity particularly designed their Damnation, Destruction or
Preterition: This we cannot own, though it be the Doctrine upon which much of
these men's oppositition is grounded against God's affording Sufficient Light to
every man, the Sufficiency thereof, and our Vindication of it as it is; for
which this Opposer, and his Assisters in his work, most blasphemously, and
outragiously cry out against us, in this Language, viz. The great Darkness of
these Men who cry up Light and Power within; This Wile of Satan, and Cheat of
Antichrist; the Vileness and Impurity of which Principle, etc. And all this in
his pretended Light from the Sun of Righteousness, p. 31. and 48. which he
should rather have called, Darkness from the Son of Perdition.
Howbeit H. G. is made to give us a little better Language concerning the Light
within, where he says, viz.

I acknowle^ge the Light which is in all, and do esteem it, and have a Regard
to it in its place, and do say, it witnesses for God, and serves for the End
and Purpose (when obeyed) for which is was given unto Man, p. 18.

But for what end it serves and is given to Man (if it be neither saving nor
sufficient to lead from Sin) he tells us not, nor to what End it can guide men
singly following it; what Esteem or Regard soever he pretends he has to this
Light within, it appears he has made little Trial or Proof of its Testimony
for God by obeying its Directions and Guidance: We may see what Esteem and
Regard this Man has to the Light within, when he counts it great Darkness to
cry up the Light and Power within, and this a Wile of Satan and (...) of
Antichrist.

What horrible Atheistical Stuff is this, thus to cry down the Light and Power
of God within? And then deceitfully to evade and say, it was the Quakers
Doctrine and Principles; that which you Quakers speak of it is abo^inable, and
to be detested by all good Christians, p. 18.

What Is now the Matter, what do the Quakers speak of the Light within that is
given to every Man?

H. G. It was never bestowed upon man to be made an Idol of, and set up in the
(...) of God.

Answ. The Light of the Eternal Word neither is (nor can be) made an ^dol; for
that which is divine (as is this Light) cannot be too much loved, esteemed, set
up or obeyed.

H. G. It is Blasph^ to say, it is the divine Essence.

Answ. To what place will thou limit or confine the divine Essence? In him was
Life, and the Life was the Light of Men, is this divine, yea or nay? If divine,
is it not a Light of the divine Being.

Whereas H. G. to prove the Quakers Doctrine and Principles concerning the
Light within impure, and vile abominable, and to be (...) by all good
Christians, p. 18. He further adds these Positions by Way of Charge, viz.

1. It is a vile and wicked thing to say, it is the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lamb
of God, the great Prophet God promised to raise up. 2. It is a vile Error to
say, it is the holy Spirit or blessed Comfortor, for that Christ s^ith, the
World could not receive.
Answ. H. G. should have been so ingenuous as to have cited the Quakers Books
and pages, first to prove these to be their Doctrines and Principles, and that
in their own very Words before he had so severely charged their Doctrines and
Principles about the Light of Christ in every man, which till he does, I must
deny him to be either an impartial or true Stater of our Principles, and state
them in our own Words, as, 1st. We confess that Jesus Christ (as the Eternal
Word) enlightens every Man with his own divine Light or Life which gradually
appears in Man, and shows it self by Measure; but God gave not the Spirit by
Measure unto Jesus Christ the great Prophet; therefore we do not call every
Appearance of Light the whole Christ: And according to H. G's Definition of
Jesus Christ, as consisting of human Flesh and Bone, he is not in any Man; but
we knowing him after the Spirit, and that he is God over all, he is spiritually
in his Saints in Union with them, and known to them, and his Presence is
unlimitted; he was in the World, and the World knew him not, whose Presence
enlightens Mankind with an immedia^e Light from himself, which is able to
reveal Christ himself, as he is only peculiarly revealed in the Saints, who
have obeyed his Light.

2. The Gift, Enjoyment and indwelling of the holy Spirit as Comforter is a
peculiar and glorious Manifestation of Life, only received by those that obey
the Measure of that spiritual and divine Light within, which is freely given of
God to all, wherein they tha^ wait upon God, obtain more Power and Virtue from
him, who gives the holy Spirit to them that truly ask him from a Sense of its
Virtue and Light within, in which they are only capable of receiving the
powrings forth of the holy Spirit, and abundant Shedding thereof on them, as
those that receive the Measure of his Discovery or Appearance in them: And
though the rebellious World does not receive or accept of this holy Spirit, nor
see his Glory as an indwelling Comforter; yet some enlightening Appearances and
Operations thereof, do at times reach the men of the World to their Conviction
and Reproof, often striving with Man to persuade him out of his Sins and
Iniquities. And if the holy Spirit be God, his Spirit is unlimitable, filling
Heaven and Earth, etc. Whether shall I go from thy Spirit, or Wisd. 12. 1, 2.
whether shall I flee from thy Presence, see Psa. 139. 7, 8, 9. and his
Presence is to Man an enlightening Presence, and Thine incorruptible Spirit is
in all things, therefore thou chasteneth them measurably, by putting them in
remembrance of the things wherein they have offended, that leaving Wickedness
they may believe in thee O Lord.

3. H. G. Abominable it is to say, 'twill cleanse from all Sin and eternally
save those that obey it, p. 18.

Answ. The Life which is the Light of Men is both cleansing and saving in the
least degree of it, to them that obey it; and it does not in the least deny
Christ to be the Savior, to say, that his Life or Light in Man is saving,
being divine, and that by which the obedient come to know and follow Christ,
and thereby receive the Light of Life and Power to become the Sons of God, and
the Kingdom of God, which Christ said is within you, is compared to a little
Leaven, a grain of Mustard Seed, which therefore has a seasoning and growing
Virtue in it; he said, believe in the Light, that ye may be the Children of the
Light; and this Light Men ought to walk in, of which its said, as yet ye have a
little Light in you (as some read it) walk while ye have the Light, and in
walking in the Light, the Blood of Jesus Christ is received, which cleanses
from all sin.

1. Were it not a vile Error for any to affirm, that that Life which is the
Light of Men, is neither Divine nor a Saving Light of Christ or Holy Spirit in
any Degree of it?

2. And art not thou H. G. vile and wickedly erroneous, to give out such
Language, as, This Wile of Satan and Cheat of Antichrist, that appears
blasphemously to reflect upon the Light and Power within, as before, in calling
it a Wile of Satan and Cheat of Antichrist to cry up Light and Power within:
And now to refuse believing in the Light which enlightens every Man that comes
into the World for Life and Salvation, p. 19 though it be the Word which is
Christ that so enlightneth every Man.

XI. His sad and impious Prayer against the Light in all, which Light is proved
of the same Nature ( or kind) with the Witness in Believers.
H. G. GOd forbid, that I should ever own their Principle of Light in all, that
does so clearly tend to the racing page 18
out the grand Fundamentals of the Gospel, p. 52.

H. G. [Contrad.] Praises and Hallelujah to God for ever, who has given us
that Witness in our selves of which thou (...)-est, p. 54, 55. which Witness
his Sister spoke of, was the Light which reproves for Sin, to own and believe
in the Light that enlightneth every Man that comes into the World, p. 8. and
29.

G. W. Animad. See what a sad pass these men are grown to, and what kind of
Prayers they offer to God against his own Light and witness within, and how
contrary to the Gospel Spirit and Light they are.

H. G. Rep. G. W. belics both me and my Sister in what he says here; for the
Witness she spoke of is not the Light which reproves for Sin, which is in every
one that comes into the World, though I confess, she bids me believe in the
Light that reprov^s for Sin, which lights every one that comes into the
World, (...) contrary-wise she mentioned the Words of the Apostle John, 1 John
5. 10. He that believes has the Witness in himself, p. 19.

To this I answer, Let all moderate and impartial Readers both thy Sister and
others judge, whether I have belyed thee or her in this Matter: And how
quarelsome and peevish thou art; could she intend contrary-wise or another of
this Witness of God, then of that Light which enlightneth every one that comes
into the World? Thou should have asked thy Sister, if she does not own the
true Light (that enlightens every Man) and the Witness o^ Word, which he that
believes has in himself, to be one and the same? And have not thou confessed,
that Christ, AS the Eternal Word enlightens every Man? which he that believes
has in himself, as having (through the Light given) received Christ the
faithful and true Witness (who stands at the door of Man's Heart and knocks)
so as in true Union with him, and Knowledge of him to experience his
Indwelling, as he dwells in us, and we in him, if we keep his Commandments;
and thus the true Believer has the Witness in himself, which that thou might
experience, was thy Sister's wholesome Advice to thee, to believe in the Light
that reproves for Sin, which enlightens every one that comes into the World;
and so thou might in Love and Humility have received the Witness in thy self,
which if thou had obeyed, thou durst never have prayed so wickedly, as, God
forbid that ever I should own their Principle of the Light in all (contrary to
thy pretended Praises and Hallelujah to God for the Witness within) neither
co^ldst thou have opposed the Witness in the Believer to the Light which
reproves for sin (which enlighteth every man) as thou have done.

H. G. This Witness through Grace I in measure do Experience, not that I
believe in that Light which every man that comes into the World is enlightened
with, for Life and Salvation that is insufficient, etc. page 19.

Answ. If thou rejectest the Gift or Measure of the Light or Life of Christ
within, thou rejectest the saithfull Witness, Christ the Giver, and can not
know him to be thy Savior, while thou art disobedient to his Light within; and
Christ and his Light in man are so inseparable, that he who obeys and believes
in his Light within, he and his Faith must needs have a dependence upon Christ
the Enlightner (who is the Object, Author and Finisher of Faith) and so upon
God, who is the Fountain of Light, who shines in man's heart, to give the
knowledge of his Glory in the Face of his Son; and hereby is the benefit of him
as the one Offering, and the virtue of his Blood known; that both Sanctifies
and makes Perfect.

XII. His Groundless Comparison and Distinction (between the Light of God in
Man, and the Light of Christ or Gospel) further Refuted.
ANd whereas in thy other Book from, Romans 1. 19. and Chap. 2. 14, 15. thou
call the Law or Light of God in men; The Law or Light of the Moon, to Guide
their Paths, by which they are taught their duty to God in morrals, but
understand nothing of the glorious Mystery of the Gospel, page 6^.

To this I Answer, 1. Those Gentiles mentioned in Romans 1. had a Sight and
Knowledge of the Invisible things of God even his Eternal Power and Godhead
ver. 19, 20. was this but the Light of the Moon? and was there nothing of the
Gospel or Mystery of it in this, whereas the very reason of their becoming
foolish, vain in their Imaginations, darkened and reprobated in their minds, was
that, because that when they knew God they glorified him not as God, ver. 21.
they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, ver. 28. Therefore if they
had continued in the Light given them, glorified him as God, and retained him
in their knowledge, they had been preserved unto Salvation out of that dark
reprobate state, and out of those gross evils which they fell into.

2. Those Gentiles mentioned, Romans 2. 15. were accused or excused according to
that Light or Law of God in their hearts, and the secrets of them and all men
to be Judged by Jesus Christ according to the Gospel; but could this be, or
were it Just, if there were no Law nor Light of Jesus Christ and Gospel given
men? are they and their secrets to be judged by a Law or Light which they never
had in secret? for my Part, I know none so gross and partial as to affirm it on
any serious Thoughts or Consideration.

3. If the Light of God and his Knowledge be but the Light of the Moon, and the
Light of Christ the Light of the Sun; how does he demonstrate this difference
between God and Christ, and the Light of each? and wherein the Glory of the one
so far exceeds the other? or can any suppose there is a Light proceeding from
Christ as man, that so far excels the Light flowing from him as he is God, or
the Eternal Word, as the Light of the Sun does the Light of the Moon? what
Scripture has H. G. for this distinction? are not God, and Christ, and holy
Spirit One, and one Eternal Light and Fullness in their own Being, and so the
Light immediately shining or flowing thence unto man's Heart and Conscience one
Divine Light though manifest by degrees, and in several measures, being still
one in kind in man.

And this which H. G. calls the Law or Light of the Moon is granted to be,

1st, The Light of Jesus Christ as the Eternal Word. 2dly, That which may be
known of God, manifest in men. 3dly, That Light which gives the Light and
Knowledge of God and his Eternal Power. 4dly, The Law written in the Gentiles
hearts, who were a Law to themselves: to which I add, If men truly believe in,
and obey the Light of the Eternal Word in them; and retain the sense and
Knowledge of God, as therein they receive it, they will find Preservation and
Acceptance with God; for is the Improvement of any more then what is given
required?
XIII. His belying us with denying the Man Christ Jesus, to cloak his own
Absurdity and Ignorance of Christ and his Being.
AGain H. G. To prove thy slanders, 1. That we deny the man Christ Jesus; 2.
That we are found daily in the Sight of all Persons, denying that man to be
Christ, who was born of the Virgin, etc. page 20, 21. Thou judge us insolent
for saying we are falsely accused and guilty of this; If it be absurd (as we
judge it is) to say Christ does Consist of a human Body of Flesh and Bone, page
21. which is thy own absurdity.

To these I say, Though we never denied the man Christ Jesus, nor him to be
Christ that was born of the Virgin, (according to the Flesh) yet I must still
count it absurd to say, That Christ does Consist (or is made up) of a human
Body of Flesh and Bone, for that, 1. because Christ the Son of God was, and had
a Being before he took upon him that Flesh or Body in the Virgin; 2. Because
that when he took upon him that Body, and even in the days of the Flesh, he
was spirit as well as had Flesh. 3. In that he is ascended up where he was
before, and far above all Heavens, and is glorified with the same Glory that he
had with the Father before the World began, 4. He was before all things, and by
him all things consist; this is truly our Christ and Savior.

But If your Christ does consist of a human or earthly
Body of Flesh and Bone, our Christ who consists of quickening spirit, and
heavenly Body (of divine Life and Light, a spiritual and glorious body) is
above you and yours; so we must leave you Anabaptists, with your earthly
Christ, consisting of a human Body of Flesh and Bone, together with your empty
and lifeless Shadows; and your darkness and enmity wherewith its you that are
stirring up Smoke and Darkness with prejudice against the Truth, the true
Light, and against us for bearing witness thereto.

XIV. That Scriptural Distinction between the eternal Son of God, and the Body
Prepared sor him, further maintained, and the Anabaptist Pers^cuting spirit
Reviling and Trad^cing the Innocent, Reproved.
AS touching that distinction of the Christ, and that Body which was prepared
for him, which he took up, and dwelt in (as hinted in a book, entitled, Some
Principles of the Elect People, etc. p. 116. and 117 which he cites as a proof
that the Quakers are found daily denying the man Christ) This can be no denying
of the Man Christ, as in that Body, unless either that Body alone was Christ,
without the Spirit, or the names Christ, the Anointed, or Son of God, did
originally, strickly and solely belong to the mere Flesh or Outside, and that
the Son of God was not in being before he took upon him that Body, which I know
none own but such as deny his Divinity and eternal Generation; sor that Flesh
or Body is sometimes called the Body of Jesus, this Temple, the Form of a
Servant (which he took upon him) a Body prepared for him; and HE Jesus Christ
come in the Flesh, etc. Also in the said Book you are asked, what that is which
appeared in the Body? whether that was not the Christ, before it took up the
Body, after it took up Body, and ever? p. 117. yet far be it from us to deny
Christ being truly Man, because we confess his Divinity, or to deny him in any
of his Appearances either in the Flesh or Spirit, for he was truly Christ the
Son of God when miraculously conceived and Born of the Virgin Mary; and his
Name was also called Immanuel, God with us; now, dare you say, that all these
eminent names and Divine Appellations given to him, when in the Flesh, did most
properly and originally belong to the Flesh or Body; and not rather to
something more Eminent and Divine therein?

Again, if the Quakers were so notorious g^ilty of horrible Heresies, Delusions
and vil^ impostures, as this Opposer says, and that they are found daily in
the Sight of all Persons denying the Man Christ Jesus, and appearing to all men
to be Babylonish rather then H. G. and other Baptists, page 17, 20, 21, 22.

Why then do diverse of you Anabaptists and Dippers so fret, rage and turmoyle
your selves against the Quakers, if they be so apparently Erroneous and
Babylonish in the Sight of all Persons, what need is there then of your
scribbling so many Books and Pamphlets against them in this time of Liberty, as
if you could not demean your selves quietly, unless you see them under
Persecution? for with that you appear most quieted; But still your striving,
raging and clamouring against us does imply you have lost ground, and you
cannot enforce such a belief in people against the Quakers as you would;
thousands have secretly a Witness for us and a better belief of us then that we
are such horrible Heretics, or vile Impostors, as daily in the sight of all
deny the Man Christ or are Ravening Wolves, etc. as this old angry Anabaptist
would have them believe; who also prays in his Conclusion thus, viz. The Lord
deliver Christ's Poor Lambs from being preyed upon and devoured by ravening
Wolves.

There Is two things to be Considered in this man's thus praying.

1. How This agrees with the Doctrine of personal election from eternity (as
held by some of his Brethren) whether those they all count so unchangeably, and
particularly elected, are or can be in any such danger of being devoured?

2. His great Care over these poor Nations, in praying the Lord to deliver them
from Horrible Heresies, and vile Impostures, p. 17. as if the^e Anabaptists
were so National In their Dipping-Church and Society, or as if they were either
devout members of the National Church, or these poor Nations were mostly
Anabaptists, or ready to be dipped by them; Is it not easy to see these Men's
temporizing Hippocritical Insinuations, and all in the height of their Envy to
persecute and run down the poor despised Quakers, if it were possible? but the
Lord God who has stood by us in our Tribulations and Sufferings will
disappoint their malicious Design, and frustrate the Tokens of Liars; and the
Pit which they have dug for us, they shall fall into themselves.

As for H. G. his saying, He never saw yet any distinct solid Answer given by
G. W. to any Book which has come out against them, page 2^.

I must leave that to God's Witness to judge of, and to those that are free
from Prejudice and Partiality against me, which I am sure. H. G. with some of
his Brethren are not, who has little cause to boast of his Answer as any
Sollid Piece, that so much savours of Envy and Reviling.

XV. A Warning and Reproof to Hen. Grigg, etc.
Hen. Grigg
ITs high time for thee to Repent, Lest in thy old Age thou be cut off in
the Guilt of Enmity and Falsehood, who have turned thy back of the Light of
Truth in thee, which through Judgment would have reformed thee, the testimony
whereof thou art now turned against: Repent, Repent, Lest thy days and
visitations from God be Extinct in utter darkness and thou have thy Reward
therein among Hypocrites and such as contentiously resist the Truth.

Thou say thou art outwardly decayed, and the time of thy departure is at
hand: Light Sun p. 73, 74. And concludest, Now (Reader) if thou have received
any spiritual Benefit from what has thus occasionally been written, by a poor
Worm, Weakling and nothing Creature, etc. p. 94, 95. To all which I say, 1st,
It is high time for thee to be better Prepared for thy Departure, by a true and
unfeigned repentance of all thy Prejudice and hard Speeches against a People
fearing God and their Principle (which is on the behalf of the true Light in
man) 2dly, Thou have entered into a War troublesome, and Contest against that
which will be too strong for thee and thy Assistant, when thou should rather
prepare for a Rest. 3dly, What thou have written savours too much of Flesh and
fleshly Conceits (which are against the Spirit and Light within) to afford
spiritual Benef^t to the Reader. 4thly, [ Occasionally written.] What occasion
to print and publish such a Book, so much reflecting thy natural Sister? Was a
private Letter from her such a great Occasion to print both it, and perverse
Commentaries upon it against her? Did thou herein do like a natural Brother?
or did thou and thy Brethren think this would be a good Expedient to work a
Conviction upon her, Infamously to notify her to the World, in print for a
private Letter, wherein was much wholesome Advice to thee? Oh, shame upon such a
Procedure as this of thine against thy Sister! 5thly, [ A poor Worm, Weakling
and nothing Creature] What is this to show thy Humility and self-Abasement?
thou had shown more of that in Silence; a Fool is sometimes counted a prudent
Man by keeping silent, who otherwise bewrayes his Folly, in uttering words, as
some men show their Pride and Hypocrisy by endeavoring to appear humble.
6thly, [ Nothing Creature] Should another tell thee so in earnest (in showing
the Nothingness of thy Work) thou have produced; ^t is probable thou would
not take it well: Some, while they discommend themselves, would have others
commend them and their Work: But to thee [ nothing creature] and thy Brethren
(that have assisted and encouraged thee in thy Work against the Light within,
and against us who believe in, and confess to it) we may say, Produce your
Cause, bring forth your strong Reasons; behold ye are of nothing, and your
Works of naught, and Abomination is he that chu^eth you, Isa. 41. 21, 24.

Lay aside your Envy, Pride, Hypocrisy, vain Imaginations and Conceits; and
come down and stoop to this Light within, which at times convinces and
reproves you of your Iniquities, that you may be Reformed, and the Reproofs of
Instructions may be the way of Life unto you: Otherwise the Light within will
pursue you to your Condemnation.

XVI. The Baptist's nine Questions Answered.
THat the Reader may perceive the man is uncertain, and argues Doubt^ulness in
his severe Charge before (of horrible Heresies, Delusions, vile Impostures,
ravening Wolves, etc.) against the Quakers -- note, that at last he puts
Questions to us about the same Things whereo^ he has accused us, which he
needed not have done, had he either been certain, or had any such plain or real
Advantage against us, as he has pretended.

His Questions (to which he desires direct and distinct Answers) are as
follows.

First, Was he the Christ and true Savior that was born of the Virgin yea or
nay?

Answ. Yes, he was the true Christ, the Son of God, both then and before he
took on him that Body, or was so born.

2dly, If you say he Was, I query, whether that same Christ be in the Heart of
every Man and Woman?

Answ. The same Christ is spiritually in (yea, revealed and dwelling in) the
Hearts of true Believers and Saints, and they in him, but not so in every man,
though he enlightens every Man, and in his Light he is to be revealed and known.

3dly, Whether he that you own to be the Christ, and true Savior was put to
death, or Crucified on the Cross?

Answ. As concerning the Flesh he was.

4thy, Whether you believe there is any other Christ then what is in the heart
of man, yea or nay?

Answ. The true Christ is but one and the same forever, though variously
manifested, as both in the Flesh and in the Spirit, both In his Flesh or Body
Entirely (wherein he came unto his own, the Jews, who received him not) and
spiritually in his followers who have received him; for he said to his
Disciples, he that is with you shall be in you; and to his Father, I in them,
and thou in me, etc. that the Love wherewith thou have loved me may be in them,
and I in them; but thus not universally In Man, though in some Degree and Sense
he appears universally in man.

5thly, If that Body that was nailed to the Cross, was but as a Garment, which
the true Christ did wear, or as a House in which he did dwell: why may not any
other Man in whose Flesh Christ is manifested, and does dwell, be called the
Christ, as well as Jesus of Nazareth?

Answ. There Is not the same Reason for any other man to be Called the Christ.

1st. Because of his divine Pre-existence, both before he took upon him that
Body or Flesh, and before man or other things were made, which God created by
Jesus Christ. 2dly, Because of his Miraculous Conception, as Concerning that
Body. 3dly, Because he was anointed with the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows.
Lastly, He that compared that Body or Flesh, which he took upon him to a
Garment or House, intended no Detraction from the Honor or Dignity of the true
Christ; for his Flesh was called the Vail, his Body, the Body of Jesus, this
Temple, the Form of a Servant, and his Saints are his Members.

6thly, If you own the man Christ, why do you affirm it a Contradiction to say,
he is God, of the Substance of the Father and yet truly man, made like unto us
in all things, sin only excepted? For either he must be mere Man or (...); or
else it cannot be any Contradiction. And if you say, (...) (...) Man, then you
seem to side with those Jews that (...) Savior for Blasphemy, in that being a
Man he made (...) (...), Joh. ^0. 33. and if you say, he is mere God; does it
not then clearly follow you deny the man Christ?

Answ. Thou have herein Queried like a disingenious Shuffler, to obscure thy
own self-Contradiction, and to reproach us; whereas thy Contradiction was not
between Jesus Christ's being of the Substance of the Father, and yet truly Man
in time, but between his being from everlasting the Son of God by eternal
generation (or of the substance of the Father) and thy asserting, that Jesus
Christ consists of human Flesh and Bone, which (to be sure) the Substance of
the Father does not consist of.

But Let H. G. and his Assistants Shuffle off this Contradiction if they can.
But it is no Contradiction to say that the Son of God in his divine being, is
God, and that he took upon him the pure being of Man, and a body prepared for
him, and is the heavenly Man, the Anointed of God.

7thly, I query, whether you own any other Resurrection then what (you say) you
experience within?

Answ. We believe and own a farther Attainment of the Resurrection (which with
respect to a future State in Glory may be called another) then what we yet
experience, though we have attained to a good Degree and Experience of our
rising in and with Christ, who is the Resurrection and the Life, and in him is
the Saints everlasting Rest and Glory.

8thly, Whether you believe that that body of Flesh and Bone, which is laid in
the Grave (respecting the Matter or Substance of it A mere Ta^tology; Unless at
sometime to say [ that Body of Flesh and Bone] does no^ respect its own matter
and Substance, but some other.
) shall by the mighty Power of God be raised from the dead at thelast day?

Answ. As Flesh and Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; so I query,
how the same Flesh and Bone (...) (...) blood should inherit the Kingdom of
God? or how (...) (...) be the same (Flesh Blood and Bones) after (...) to dust
without any new Creation, as some Baptists affirm?

9thly, Whether that man (whosoever he be) does not deny the Refurrection of
the dead, who does deny the same IT which is sown (and shall rise) mentioned 1
Cor. 5. 38. (...) Intend the same Body (respecting the Matter or Substance of
it) which was buried and laid in the Grave? Answer plainly without Equivocation.

Answ. There is an Ambiguity and Fallacy in this Question; for in some Sense a
Man may deny that the self same IT which is sown shall rise (as the Apostle
did, where he answered such Querists as thou art; Thou Fool, thou sowest not
that Body that shall be: for which he Instanceth Wheat or other Grain) and yet
not deny that IT which is raised, nor the Resurrection of the dead; though that
IT which is the natural Body, and that IT which is the spiritual Body, are not
both one and the self same; neither are celestial and ^errestrial Bodies one
and the same. Thus far in Answer to his Questions
And what that IT is, to which God gives a Body as it pleases him; (and to
every Seed his proper Body,) And what is that body given to it these Baptists
have not yet resolved; nor given a sensible Answer to; Although Thd. Hicks,
faith, That the Body given to it Dialogue, page 58.
is the same, for Substance the same that was sown, (viz. the body of Flesh and
Bone^ In this many of them agree.)

But their Elder Brother, Thomas Collier appears of another mind in his Marrow
of Christianity; where concerning the Resurrection, he says

This Truth is by some denied, and by others too carnally looked upon, some
thinking that our Bodies of Flesh shall be raised, in the same Form in which it
dyed, etc. p. 93.

And further he says;

That the Form in which they shall be raised that is in a Spiritual Form, not
in a Fleshly, for as the Spirit of Christ raises us up in the S^irit, while we
are here; so it shall raise up our Bodies in the Spirit at the Last Day; it is
Sown a Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body, etc. p. 94. Col. 3. 3. When
Christ, who is our Life, shall apear, we shall appear with him in Glory, all
Flesh shall be swallowed up in Spirit and our Bodies shall be changed and made
like his Glorious Body; all things that offend shall be done away, and we shall
be made Eternal, one in the Father and in the Son, and in the Spirit, etc. One
in Glory, this for the Saints is enough to know; besides, what shall be we do
not know, it is an Height and Depth, a Length and Breadth unsearchable, p. 95.

Thus far Tho. Collier.

These passages of his, I desire that Henry Grigg, Thomas Hicks, and William
Burnet, etc. may consider, and compare with their own carnal Conceits and
Doctrines, about the same Flesh; and see how Inconsistent they are: Its evident
that: Thomas Collier, did aim at more Spirituallity in the Resurrection, then
these men do, he confessing, It should be in a Spiritual Form, and not in a
Fleshly; and that it is by some too carnally looked upon, etc.

And Indeed, it is too much Carnality, and Grosness of Opinions and Thoughts:
that darken too many from a spiritual Apprehension and divine Understanding of
Things Eternal and States Immortal; which are only and truly seen in the Light,
which is Divine, and Revealed by the Eternal Spirit, through which ^nly the
things of God are Truly Known.

THE CONTENTS OF A Bill of Excommunication, Exhibited by the Baptists at
CHICHESTER; Together with a Brief Answer thereunto.
THe Evils for which the Church of Christ Meeting at Baptist's Excommunication.
Chichester have cast out of her Communion John Richardson.

Answ. We deny you to be the Church of Christ; you do but presume and beg the
Matter in Controversy; you are in Envy and Darkeness, as will further appear
from your Blasphemy against the Light; for if we say, we have Fellowship with
God, and walk in Darkness, we lie and do not the Truth; but you pretend your
selves to be his Church, consequently, to have Fellowship with him, and yet
both walk in Darkness, and slight the Light within, and despise Exhortation to
harken to it; therefore you lie (in saying you are the Church of Christ) and do
not the Truth; so that in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, we deny
your pretended Power and Authority of Excommunication and Condemnation.

First, For withdrawing himself from the Church of Christ Excom.
refusing to come to her Assemblies which practice is sin.

Answ. You blind and confused Men; did you not say just before, that your
Church had cast him out of her Communion: but now you excommunicate him for
withdrawing himself from you: It seems then, he excommunicated himself, there
was no need of your Excommunication.

2dly, For siding and taking Part with William Steel, Excom.
in some of these things for which the Church did deal with W. S.

Answ. What these things are, will further appear hereafter, together with
these Baptist's Envy and gross Ignorance.

3dly, For siding, owning and mixing with the People called Excom.
Quakers, who are of diabolical heritical Opinions, who under Pretense of
Preaching up, that all Persons should harken to a Light within, do say, that
Light is Christ.

Answ. Oh you malicious Blasphemers, you dark Cheats, and blind Guides: is it
either diabolical or heretical to preach that all Persons should hearken to a
Light within? Or, that Christ is that true Light, that enlighteneth every Man
coming into the World? For that is the Quakers Doctrine; and that in him was
Life, and the Life was the Light of Men; is it diabolical, that they should
take heed to this Life or Light which is both supernatural and divine? Oh you
dark, sottish, NightDreamers, when will you come out of your gross Darkness?

In which saying of theirs, there is these two abominable Lies, Excom.
first Lie, is their saying, that Christ is in every Man that comes into the
World, whereas the Scriptures say, where Christ is in Persons, the Body is dead
to sin, etc. there is a People without God and Christ -- in a reprobate State,
in a Course of Life unapproved of God -- though under a Profession, as the
Church at Corinth was -- surely then may such be accounted without Christ, that
are neither under a Profession nor Practice.

Answ. 1 You might as well deny Christ's Divinity and Deity, or his being the
Eternal Word, as deny him to be that Light that enlightens every Man, or his
Life to be the Light of Men.

2. Again, Its not our Doctrine to say, that Christ is so in every Man,
prevailing or ruling, as that the Body is dead to Sin, nor is he revealedly or
unitedly in every man; which the Phraise, Christ in you, or Christ dwelling in
you, imports and includes the Saints being in him, as he says, I in them and
they in me; yet in some Sense, he is in all, and through all; or else he could
not be God, nor Omni-present; and some Baptists themselves have confessed, that
Christ in Respect of his divine Nature, is every where; therefore he must needs
be in Man; and in Respect to his divine Nature, he is God, and God is Light,
and in him is no Darkness at all: They that are without God, and without
Christ, and Reprobates, etc. Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. 2 Cor. 13. 5. 2 John 9. they are
without God and Christ, or as being Strangers to both, and without the true and
living Knowledge of them not as if God or his Light were limited to a Distinct
or Remoteness of Place from them. For then, how were he either infinite or
omni-present? But, as he was in the World, and the World was made by him, and
the World knew him not, so some are without God; and know ye not how that Jesus
Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates? But you know not either Jesus
Christ or his Light in you, who are blaspheming against his Light that is in
every Man.

And having taken up the diabolical Conceit of having a Excom.
Christ in every Man; then follows the next notorious damnable Heresy;
namely, That Persons are to hear this their new conceited Christ, viz. The
Light within; and so by this mears, preach down the Authority of the
Scriptures; and so end^avour to undermine the true Gospel-Faith and Practice of
Gos^el Appointments.

Answ. 1. If it be a diabolical Conceit, that Christ is in some sense or degree
in every man; then your own Brethren are guilty thereof, whose Concession is,
that his divine Nature is every where; but I deny your Charge, it being
blasphemous.

2. Your calling the Light within, a conceited Christ, and notorious damnable
Heresy, that persons are to hear the Light within. This contains a twofold
blasphemy, both against the divine Principle of Light, and Doctrine directing
to it; for the Life which was in the Eternal Word, is that Light of Men which
we affirm they ought to turn to, fear and obey, or else they perish; and so
will you, if you continue in your Darkness, Envy and Blasphemy against the
Light within.

3. You grossly belly us, in accusing us with preaching down the Authority of the
Scriptures, underminding the Gospel Faith and appointments in our preaching up
the Light within; for without the minding and following the Light within, Men
can neither truly understand the Scriptures, nor come into the fulfilling of
them, nor acceptably practice the Lord's Requirings or Appointments in the
Gospel and new Covenant: And now comes into the true Gospel-Faith; but they
that obey and believe in the Light, as Christ commanded, when he said, believe
in the Light, that you may be the Children of the Light, you theresore who term
this either damnable Heresy, or a conceited Christ, are guilty of damnable
Doctrine against Christ's Doctrine and Light within: Had you been in his Days,
its probable you would have joined with the hypocritical Jews who persecuted
Christ, with your Bill of Excommunication against him and his Apostles.

By such a Scriptureless Notion as is [ Harken to the Light Excom.
within] which Saying, is not only Scriptureless, but against the Scriptures,
or the Way of God noted in the Scriptures of Truth.

Answ. You have said your worst against the Light within before, showing that
you do not harken to the Light of Christ within, but to your own Darkness
within; however that you may see your Ignorance, and be convinced, that to
harken, to obey, or believe in the Light within, is neither against the
Scriptures, nor any Scriptureless Notion, as you falsely call it: See, Joh. 1.
4. 9. Act. 26. 18. Joh. 12. 36. Psa. 56. 13. Job. 25. 3. 1 John 1. 7. Isa. 2.
5. 2 Cor. 4. 6. Rev. 21. 24. 1 John 2. 9, 10.

For when Saul ( who afterward was called Paul) was converted, Excom.
the Lord did not say, harken to the Light within thee; but go to Ananias, etc.
Nor when the Angel was sent to Cornelius, did he Say, Harken to the Light
within? but send for Peter, etc. Nor those that enquired of the Apostles what
to do, the Connsel was not, Harken to the Light within, but Repent and be
Baptized, Act. 2.

Answ. How grossly, silly and false is your arguing Assertion (which is but Mat.
Caffin's old Stufflong since answered) for was not Paul converted to the Light
within, when he was sent to turn others from Darkness to Light? and what was
that that prict him before? and could either hehave a Vision of Ananias, or
Ananias a Vision of him as praying, or could he be filled with the holy Ghost,
as Ananias told him without respect to the Light within? How could he receive
the pouring forth or Gift of the holy Ghost without regarding the Light within?
And what is that in the Conscience, which the Preaching of the Gospel is
manifest unto? And did not Peter preach him and his Name to whom all the
Prophets gave Witness? Act. 10. 43. And was not he that Light of the Gentiles
promised? And did not Peter bear witness to the Light shining in a dark Place?
2 Pet. 1. 19. But your council excludes the Light, and is not to harken to it,
and yet exhort People to repent and be Baptized; it seems then they must do
both these in Darkness: Oh Ignorant Men! how do you lead silly Women Captive
blinsdold, and in darkness into your WaterBaptism you never knew the Nature of
true Repentance (nor the Spirit's Baptism) through which the Mind is changed
from Darkness and Sin to Light and Righteousness.

And when the Man that came to Christ to know what to do to Inherit eternal
Life, Christ did not say, Harken to the Light within, Excom.
Mar. 10. 17. Nor when Christ sent the Gospel to be preached to all Nations, he
did not say, that such as harkened to a Light within should be saved, but he
that believed and should be baptized should be saved, Mar. 16. 15. 16.

Answ. This Argues still your continued Darkness, that is to be felt; Can men
believe, in herit eternal Life, keep the Commands of God, or be saved, and yet
continue in Darkness, as you do who shut out the Light, and divert Peoples
Minds from it, as much as in you lies? Besides, you belly both Christ and the
Apostles; for they preached up the Light within. As for your Water Baptism, it
is not the saving Baptism, as you Imply contrary to diverse of your Brethren's
Confessions, and to Peter's Testimony 1 Pet. 3. 21. But you are for believeing
and being baptized; but not to harken to the Light within, wherefore we deny
your dark and dead Faith, and your Night-Dipping; for you are in the dark in
all you do, you are out of the Righteousness of Faith which directs man to the
Word that is nigh, even in the Heart, to obey it and do it.

For his not only taking that Scriptureless Liberty to go to a Excom.
People that he before knew to be a people, who preach down the Way of Gospel
Appointments, but does now himself plead for a Light within, as that which he
is to be guided by, and not by the Scriptures, to judge whether that be Light
or Darkness within him.

Answ. 1. Your Charge of preaching down the Way of Gospel Appointments is
false; yet we deny, that you have a Commission from Christ to Baptize or plunge
People in Water.

2. To be guided by the Light within, is that you still boggle at; but is this
Matter worthy of Excommunication? the Darkness wherein you walk is sufficiently
manifest, and therein you undertake to judge by the Scriptures, without the
Guidance of the Light, that gave them forth, though the Light be most
sufficient to discover it self and to make manifest all things that differ: for
whatsoever things are reproved are made manifest by the Light.

Though Christ said, take heed least the Light within thee be Excom.
not Darkness.

Answ. There were those that put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light, as
you do; in which Sense Christ gives this Caution, if the Light that is in thee
be Darkness, how great is that Darkness? Therefore it could not be really
Light, neither can real Light be properly counted Darkness.

And for the Rule by which Christ says, we shall be tried at the Excom.
great and last Day, is what he had spoken to the Sons of Men when in Person
among them, Joh. 12. 48, 49. but now says. J. R. we must try the Scriptures by
the Light within.

Answ. The Words should rather be [We must make use of the Scriptures by the
Light within] but Christ does not say, that the Rule by which you shall be
tried at the last Day, is the Scriptures; you pervert his Sayings; but he
says, he that rejects me and receives not my Words, has one that Judges
him, the Word, etc. Joh. 12. 48. For God will judge the secrets of Men by
Christ Jesus; and his living Word (Christ being the universal Judge, and by his
Law in them, their own Thoughts and Consciences bearing Witness in that day,
for or against them: Howbe it, the Jews that sinned in the Law, were also
Judged by the Law (o^ Scriptures) for rejecting Christ, and so are you also,
for contemning his Light within.

Oh horrible Prophanness! that ever any should dare to set up Excom.
their own whimsical Imaginations above Christ's Sayings; and not only so, but
condemn them where their erroneous Opinions cannot own them.

Answ. We perceive you have not one good Word for the Light within; you have
called it as bad as you can; one while a diabolical Conceit, another while
Damnable Heresy, another while their new conceived Christ, another while
scriptureless Notions, another while Darkness, and now tells of whimsical
Imaginations; but erroneous opinions and ^phemous, too are your own; and you
have most (...) (...) us; for Christ's Light within cannot lead us either to
slight or condemn his sayings, but to fulfill them.

For refusing to hear the Counsel of the Church, wherein the Excom.
Churches Endeavors have been to convince him of his Errors and to reclaim
him.

Answ. It is easy to see what a Church you are, that blasphemes against the
Light within, and do not admit of it in any Duty: a sad Church, thus to shut
out and contemn the Light you are in thick Darkness until now; your Envy
greatly blinds you; Therefore it is well not to hear your Counsel, seeing that
it is to persuade us, not to harken to the Light within, and we will never
harken to your darkness, nor be led blindfold by you blind Guides.

And for the Churches Authority to Excommunicate Persons Excom.
guilty as aforesaid, see 2 These. 3. 6. Romans 16. 17. Mat. 18. 17, etc. The
Apostles Way was one and the same in Every Church, 1 Cor. 4. 17. Written by me
W. Flecher, W. Claton.

Answ. The true Church's Authority was given her by Christ, who is the true
Light, and this we own, and reverence the Power the Apostles had; but you
falsely assume a Power, and pretend their Authority to excommunicate Persons for
professing and owning his Light within; and (it seems) to cast out such as you
needed not, who withdraw themselves from you; whereas the true Church never
cast out nor excommunicated Persons sor owning the Light within, but for
running into the Deeds of Darkness: theresore in the Name and Power of our Lord
Jesus Christ we deny you, who are called Baptists and Anabaptists, to be the
Church of Christ; we deny your Authority; we deny your Excommunication; we deny
your blasphemous and scornful Doctrine against the Light within, and Exhort you
to leave your Envy, and turn from your Darkness; and condemn your Blasphemy,
and embrace the Light of Christ within; lest you perish in your Darkness and
Gainsaying. Note that some of the Baptists and Apostates have upbraided us for
Excommunicating persons out of our society; but we never Excommunicated any for
owning the Light within, but for their unfruitful works of Darkness. Hereafter
follows a Rebuke to the Baptists and their Zion, or Church, from some of their
Own Ministering Brethren, given out when they were more tender and free from
Prejudice then now they are; and have confessed to those Truths (viz) the
Immortal Seed, the Light, Trembling at God's Majesty, Travil of Soul, the
Inward work, and Perfection, which now diverse of them deride and oppose; also
their reigning Abominations are confessed, which since are greatly increased
against the Light, which then made some of them (...) of their Iniquities, and
to bewail them.

And this is recited, for these Baptists and their Hearers, to Remind them of
the former Tenderness and Desires in some of their Brethren after an Amendment
among them, and that these our present Opposers may consider and see how
greatly they are declined, hardened and Apostatized from the good that formerly
was stirring among them: (...) all which I desire their Return, Repentance and
Conversion to the true Light, that they may have regard to the Inward Work of
God, to break their Hearts, and work out their Abominations, Pride and Envy,
etc.

Some Confessions concerning the baptized Churches, made by their Messengers in
their bewailing Epistle from Twerton, dated the 18th Day of the 7th Month,
1657. and signed in their The Marginal Notes are added.
Names, and by their Appointments, by Thomas Colliar, Nath^niel Strange and
Thomas Glass, and directed, viz.
TO all the Churches of Jesus Christ, called to be Saints, through the Immortal
Seed Some of your Brethren now scoff. at the Quakers for bearing Witness to the
Immortal Seed within
which dwells in you, and shall be with you forever.

A few poor Worms -- we would labor night and day, warning every one of you,
striving with you, and together with God for you, that every one of you may be
presented perfect For this Doctrine of Perfection, the Baptists, now revile us,
who are called Quakers, and furiously oppose it.
in Christ Jesus -- The several Weights that lie upon you and us -- we have
been ready to cry out, we are cut off from before thine Eyes -- while we
carried the Yoakes and Burdens of Zion, and have been as the Souls under the
Altar, crying, how long Lord, holy and true -- The Lord has lightened us, while
we thus looked unto him -- we could not be satisfied with Life for our selves,
Which Lightning and Revivings do assert the Inward Light and immediate
Teachings of God, now opposed by many of the Baptists.
Some Revivings have attended our Souls -- and now, as we have been faithful
for you to God; So we would now be faithful for God to you.

We have been arraigning the Abominations of Zion besore the Bar of the most
high; we have been crying for Justice from the Throne upon every Sin, for
Strength and Light, And this Strength and Light must inwardly be received; but
not by them that hate the Light.
to purge our every persisting impenitent Sinner, as Enemies and Traitors to
the Crown and Dignity of our Lord Jesus: More particularly, we have made
Confession of those reigning Abominations Which are since greatly increased
among you.
in our own Souls, and in the Churches, of that light Spirit living short of
the true Sight and Sense of God's Majesty, in his Churches, and among his
Saints, from whence proceeds that Vanity and Carelesnes which does so much
attend them.

We have bewailed that wretched, worldly Spirit, that plucks down the Saints
from their Excellency, and leaves such Blackness upon them Many of you are
greatly guilty of that, witness your Railing Pamphlets and Sermons against us.
which renders them so uncomely in the Eyes of Men.

We have bewailed that Coldness and Deadness that is upon our selves, and upon
the Churches; that Formality in holy Duties, that Indifferency, and that
Laodicean Spirit that is fallen in upon us All these are fallen in upon you,
because you have refi^ed the Light within, which would give the Knowledge of
the Power and Life.
while we have been crying, let him make Speed and hasten his Work, that we may
see it; let the Counsel Herein you did own immediate Teaching.
of the Lord come that we may know it; and all this while, we have been drawing
Iniquity with Cords of Vanity, having been in a great Measure, as without the
Sense of the Work; so without the true Travil of Soul That Sense and Travel you
have yet kept off, and despise them that experience it.
which this Work should put us into -- the Crown is fallen from Sion's Head by
Reason of her Iniquity; we have been bewailing personal Iniquity,
Congregational Iniquity, National Iniquity, Family Iniquity, Closet Iniquity;
we have by Search found poor Sion, as it were without Soundness And you are
more unsound now then ever, neither can you be sound, until you own the Light.
from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, full of Bruises and
putrified Sores; your own poor Souls are in Distress, Heaven and Earth seem to
frown -- Oh! come down, sit in the Dust -- and weep bitterly before the Lord
for all your Abominations And especially for your Envy and Hypocrisy.
you have but as it were, played with God; you have not trembled in his
Presence But now you despise them that do.
you have been wanton before him, having been without the Terror of his
Majesty; therefore you have confessed, and have delighted to word Which kind of
Pharisaical Babbling is still very customary among you.
it out with the Lord -- Oh! how often have you mocked God? -- It appears
already how God takes it at your Hands; We have begged him to save us, yet this
once more, and truly we tremble -- the Hope that is in Isra^l -- lies in your
putting from you that accursed Thing; Oh! now if you would pursue this
Worldliness, this Coldness and Sloathfulness, your personal Neglects, your
Family Neglects -- how does the World, as a Canker, eat out your Affections to
the Lord Jesus, eat out your Time, your Strength, your Zeal, while you have
been asleep in the Lap of this Da^ilah, your Locks have been cut off, and you
are but as other Men Excepting, that you are outwardly dipped, but as inwardly
corrupt as others, and more envious then most Men are.
whoever beholds you may say, what singular thing do ye? Now then lay to Heart
these crying Abominations -- the World is too beautiful -- this has bewitched
-- you have fallen before your Enemies And will yet fall more:
-- this Iniquity has been apparently written upon your Foreheads, witness
your Remissness in Meetings, your Neglect or the poor Saints and Ministers of
Christ, whose daily Complaints and Addresses Which shows the great hardness of
Heart that is among you.
are living Monuments of this reigning Abomination, your Cruelty to Servants,
Children, exacting all their Labors, but take no Time to counsel them,
instruct them that are without Christ, that miserable Estate wherein they are
-- this has made Professors Families so dry Oh! great Dryness and Withering is
come upon you.
useless and unprofitable -- this Sin eats out all of that divine Sweetness of
regenerating, sanctifying Grace: We have mourned So you have Cause still to
mourn much more.
in that we have had so great a hand in this Trespass, in not bearing so
faithful a Testimony against it in our Ministry; but slavish Fear of being
accounted selfish, or the like, has stopped our Mouth The slavish Fear of many
of you has greatly appeared in suffering Times; and se (...)-In^erest and Gain
has much stopped you.
until the Mouth of this Iniquity has almost devoured the poor Churches of
Christ -- That of Sloathfulness and Carelessness, another reigning Evil -- They
are Evils rooted deeply in the Heart; it is hard to get them out You cannot get
them rooted out without the Power of God, which only is received by believing
in his Light within.
They are Sermon-Proof and Epistle-Proof; so strong, that they have wrested all
Weapons out of the hands of Saints and Ministers, that have been formed against
them: Now we desire we may no longer rest in a Testimony of Words, but proceed
to take some effectual Course, that Sin or Sinners may be purged out Your House
is not yet purged of them; however, this was an honest Care to endeavor such a
purging, better then to excommunicate Persons for owning the Light within.
of the house of God; in order to this, we desire the Churches, that they would
set some day or days a part, wherein they may bewail the Iniquities and
Pollutions o^ Zion before the Lord -- also, that the Ministering Brethren would
without Respect of Persons Which they are very prone to for Advantage.
bear their constant Testimony -- warning every one to f^ee from these
Abominations -- Another Evil we had Thought to have spread before you Many more
Evils you had n^od now to spread before them.
for want of Opportunity, we shall now omit, yet desire you to lay it to Heart.

THE Presbyter's Antidote TRIED, Or Stephen Scandret (with his Antidote against
Quakerism) Proved a PHYSICIAN of No Value; AND The Truth plainly asserted and
vindicated in diverse Weighty Points, against both the Imperfect and corrupt
Work of S. S. and his Masters, the Assembly of Divines (so called, who sat at
Westminster in the long Parliament's Time) and of the general Assembly of the
Kirk of Scotland, about their Confession of Faith, which was first printed at
Edenburg, and after reprinted at London, Anno 1651.

G. W.

Ye are all Physicians of no Value, Job. 13. 4. Printed in the Year 1673.

THE Presbyter's Antidote TRIED, etc.
CHAP. I.
A Comprehensive Account concerning the Rule, the Light, and Scripture,
Explaining both ^ur sense of the terms and S. Scandret's; together with the
Assemblies Confession about the Scriptures.

BY the word [ RULE] we understand, 1st, The Power of Government, and Authority
to order and rule, in the Sense that in the first Creation the greater Light
was set to rule the Day, Genesis 1. 16. or for the Rule and Order of the Day: So
in the new Creation the divine Light of Christ, the Son of Righteousness, does
govern and rule in the Order of his Everlasting Day in the Souls of the
Righteous; the Path of the Just being this shining Light, which shines more
and more until this perfect Day.

2ly, So this divine Light is truly the only Rule, for its being most eminent
(above all outward Rules and Prescriptions) ^or its Power, Glory, Virtue,
Order, and Government (as Rule of Life) in all the Children of Light.

The only trying and discovering Rule, for its manifesting whatsoever things
are reproveable, Ephesians. 5. 13. whether they be Spirits, Works or Words; and he
that does Truth, comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be made mani^est, that
they are wrought in God, Joh. 3. 21.

3dly, By only Rule, An universal, manifest, public Standard ^or Truth and
Righteousness, in the Consciences, of all People and Nations, and against all
Sin, Wickedness and Unrighteousness; and so is the S piritual and Divine Light
of the Son of God, in whom was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men, Joh. 1.
4. whose Life is Supernatural, Increated and Incorruptible, Christ the divine
Word being that true Light that inlightens every Man coming into the World,
verse. 9.

4thly, Concerning that heavenly Gift, or divine Manifestation within, which
was the Saints Rule of Life, the Apostle Paul thus speaks, 2 Cor. 10. 13. But
we will not boast of things without our Measure; but according to the measure
of the Rule, which God has distributed to us, etc. ver. 15. not boasting of
things without our Measure, that is of other men's Labors; but having Hope when
your Faith is increased, that we shall be enlarged by you, according to our
Rule abundantly, verse. 16. not to boast in another Man's Line of things made
ready to our hand; And Philip. 3. 16. whereto ye have already attained, let us
walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same thing, Gal. 5. 15. and 16. for in
Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision avails any thing, but
a new Creature; and as Many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them.
By all which note, that there was an universal, divine and spiritual Rule,
dist^ibuted of God to the true Believers, and new Creatures in Christ, in whom
stood their several Seize and Growths (and this was not other men's Lines
nor the Letter) wherein they were mutually enlarged: nor could the Letter be
this Rule, for that required Circumcision what then was Paul's Rule, for
denying it, but the Spirit of Li^e, the new Covenant, the Immediate Dictates of
the holy Ghost? see Act. 15. 24, 28. Heb. 8, 9, 10.

By the Word Scriptures we understand, not only Writings in general, but
particularly all the holy Scriptures contained in the Bible, not excluding
those many Writings of Prophets and Apostles, which are not inserted in the
Bible, which contain a Plurality of Words of Truth, Commands, Prescriptions,
Precepts, etc. (and in that Sense) Rules or Directions, relating to both the
old and new Covenant; and to diverse States, Occasions and Dispensations, many
of which are abolisht with the old Covenant, which therefore cannot properly
(in the Singular) be called the Rule, or one Entire full Rule, much less the
only Rule (with Exclusion of all others, as falfe as S. S. very blasphemously
does) the Chiefest and highest Rule, as he unscripturally and erroneously calls
them; for the Spirit or Light that first gave them forth with its Immediate
Illumination, Motions, and Directions, being both before and higher then the
Scriptures or Writings, how true soever they be.

So, though we confess the holy Scriptures to contain true Words, Commandments,
Precepts, Directions (and so Rules) yet it is no more proper to call them the
only highest Rule and Guide to Heaven and Glory (as S. S. does) then to call
them the only highest Word, Commandment and Light, which they are not: We can
neither call the Scriptures God, nor Christ, nor the Light, nor the Spirit, nor
the Power of God; but Innocently and simply as they term or call themselves,
owning them in the true Light given us, according to the true Intent, Purpose
and End, for which they were first given out from divine Inspiration; for which
none that are Ingenuous will Blame us: for, the Word lives forever; It Is settled
in Heaven; It Is also to be known and felt nigh in the Heart; and it is the holy
and living Commandment of Power, which is called Life Everlasting, and this is
Immediate. This Word was to David a Light, and Lanthorn to his Paths; and
therefore his only Way and Rule to Felicity: Yea, for its Eminency it may be
truly esteemed the Word of Words, the Commandment of Commandments, the Rule of
Rules, that divine Light, wherein consists the Government, Rule and Order of
the Everlasting Day of Salvation, Glory and Life, to all the Children of the
Day, who in order to that Attainment, have obeyed and followed the Degree and
Measure of this true and divine Light in its Manifestation in them.

The Scriptures also (or Bible) contain many various Passages, as well
Historical as Doctrinal, even of the Examples of Men in the fallen State, of
things done in the time of Ignorance, and of the Failings and Weaknesses of
diverse, of things transacted and do^e in a Time and State not suitable to that
of Man in the beginning, nor to that of the Gospel or new Covenant: As for any
Man to have diverse Wives, or many Concubines at once; it was not so in the
Beginning, nor ought to be so now, yet such things are recorded in Scripture of
diverse; Therefore it is both Gross, Impious, and Contradictory for any to count
the whole Bible the Rule of Life, and Duty without Exemption, according to our
Opposer, p. 61. Moreover, for his Asserting the Scriptures Infallibility, and
as so being the highest Rule, * He neither puts a Limitation of what part But
S. S. tells us not whether or no he owns those Books, called Apocrypka, or any
of them, as any part of his Rule or Canon; or whether he is not of the same
Opinion with his Masters of the Assembly, where in their confession they say,
that the Books, commonly called Apocrypha, not being of divine Inspiration, are
no part of the Canon of the Scriptures, and therefore are of no Authority in
the Church of God, nor to be any otherwise approved or made use of, then other
human Writings: Thus far the Assembly; but this general Debasement of these
Books we cannot own.
of the Scripture or Bible he intends, nor yet tells us in what Language, Copy
or Translation they are infallible; for every Rule whether moral or artificial,
ought to be infallible, otherwise it is n^ Rule, but therein lies obscure under
Ambiguities: Howbeit, we may suppose he means, according to his Masters, the
Assembly of pretended Divines, Confess. Chap. 1. where having declared, that the
holy Scriptures are given by Inspiration of God to be the Rule of Faith and
Life, they add Artic. 8. The old Testament in Hebrew ( which was the Native
Language of the People of God of old) and the new Testament in Greek ( which at
the time of the writing of it was most generally known to the Nations) being
immediately Inspired by God, and by his singular Care and Providence kept pure
in all Ages, are therefore Authentical, so as in all Controversies of Religion
the Church is finally to appeal to them (thus far the Assembly) From hence it
follows, that when Steph. Scandret and these his Masters tell us, that the
Scriptures are the chief and highest Rule, the only Infallible Rule to Heaven
and Glory, or the Rule of Faith and Life, and to decide Controversies, we are
to understand it is as they are in Hebrew and Greek, and as in the first Copies
as given by Divine Inspiration, by which these men still lead people in the
dark and in Doubtfulness, at a Distance from Life and Glory, and Ignorant of
the Rule, and Way thereto; implying this Difficulty, that they must first learn
Hebrew and Greek, and be ascertained of the truth of the Copies, as concurring
with the first; And this must be from their own knowledge (not from the Priests
Interpretations and various Meanings) and yet the Assembly and S. S. still fall
short of clearing the matter of the Greek, not resolving which is the true
infallible Copy, there being diverse Greek Lections or Copies of the new
Testament: But further, if they could produce or evince the first Copy, or that
which most agrees with it, while they prefer the Writing as the chief or only
Rule of Faith and Life, they leave people in Darkness and Death, in not
referring them to the Inward Divine Light or Inspiration of the Almighty, as
the chief and only Rule, which gave forth the holy Scriptures, and without
which they cannot be truly understood in any Language.

Moreover, concerning the Hebrew W. Tindal (of whose Translation we have one
ancient English Bible without Verses) in his Prologue prefixed in some Bibles,
he says thus, viz.

W. Tindal unto the Christian Reader.

If ought seem Changed, or not altogether agreeing with the Greek, let the
Finder of the Fault consider the Hebrew Phrase, or Manner of Speech left in the
Greek Words, whose Preterperfect Tense and Present Tense is often both one; and
the Future Tense is the Optative Mood also; and the Future Tense is often the
Imperative Mood in the Active Voice, and in the Passive ev^r; likewise Person
for Person; Number for Number, and Interrogation for a Conditional; and such
like is with the Hebrews and Common usage [ and he further adds] if I shall
perceive, either by my self, or by the Information of others, that ought be
escaped me, or might be more plainly Translated, I will shortly after cause it
to be amended; howbeit, in many places, me thinks it better to put a
Declaration in the Marg^nt then to run too far from the Text.

Now, from hence considering the Difficulty of truly translating the Scriptures
from the Hebrew, both as to Time, Manner, Voice, Person, Number, and Condition,
etc. how easily herein may the Sense be greatly changed, and how this ingenuous
Translator himself does not place Infallibility upon his Work or Translation
from the Hebrew, but ingenuously proffereth Amendment of it, if either by
himself or an others Information he shall perceive a Deficiency in which he
has done; and also considering what Irreconcilable Controversies have been
among many counted Learned, about the Translations in diverse Places of
Scriptures, and how many Amendments have from Time to Time been made upon them,
and even how many various English Translations we have, what Dubiousness and
Uncertainty are both Priests and People in, both as to Rule, Faith, and
Foundation of their Religion, who neither know nor own the Principle of true
Knowledge, and divine Understanding (which is God's Gift) while they have no
regard to divine Illumination -- as the Rule of Faith, before the Scriptures;
but do cry and set up, one while a mere Translation or Reading (which to them
may be dubious) as their only highest infallible Rule of Faith; another while
their own uncertain Meanings, private Conceptions, and fallible Interpretations
upon the Scriptures, they set up as the Rule and Judge over them, (as their
Phrase has been) to Reconcile the Scriptu^es, which (as given by divine
Inspiration) cannot be broken. And while still their Work tends to divert
peoples Minds from depending upon the Spirit of Truth, and its Inlightning, as
the chief and only infallible Guide and Rule, where will they center? and what
a Babylonish Structure do they erect upon their uncertain Conjectures and
dubious Interpretations, from their fallible Spirits and Judgments? And to
place Infallibility upon the Letter, or Writing, or English Translation;
whereas W. Tindal, a Translator himself did not attribute this to his
Translation, nor diverse others in their putting many marginal Notes upon some
English Bibles, as from the Hebrew and Greek; and even their learned D. Ce^l,
set forth a large Book in Folio, entitled, An Essay to the Amendment of the
Last English Translation of the Bible, wh^ he finds fault with, and corrects
several noted Places; and what less is signified in their ample Annotations,
and manifold Notes upon some Bibles? And moreover, when some of the Clergy have
made that of Job 2. 9. their Texit, viz. that Job's Wife said unto him, Curse
God (...) dye; they have told People, that that Hebrew Text signifies, Bless
God and dye; and some take it so, as to desire humbly of God, that he might dye
(which arguing Impatiency was reproveable) others, that it was, Curse God and
dye (which was much more reproveable, not only as Foolishness but Wickedness)
And concerning that of Saul and the Witch 1 Samuel 28. 11.
of Endor, his bidding her bring him up Samuel, it is said, And when the Woman
saw Samuel, ver. 12. and Saul know, that it was Samuel, verse. 14. And Samuel,
said unto Saul, why have thou disquieted me, etc. ver. 15. then said Samuel,
ver. 16. So the matter runs in Samuel's name; Whereas those of the Clergy have
told us it was Satan, and that Saul spoke according to his gross Ignorance, not
considering the slate of the Saints after this Life, and how Satan has no
Power over them, it was Satan who to blind Readiness Eyes took upon him the Form
of Samuel, etc. Now seeing this Interpretation is so plainly contrary to the
Words themselves (for which I blame them not in this, though in many others I
do) I query, how the^ agrees this with their placing Infallibility upon the
Scriptures, not only on the Doctrinal, but on the Historical Part, when they
are minded to oppose the Sufficiency of the Light of Christ within? Many more
Instances might be brought to show their vast Variations from the Letter of the
Scriptures in their Interpretations: By the Tenor of all which Discourse before
of this Import, it is evident, that their Confession (at least of many of them)
is, that a^l the Scriptures are not Infallible; but some Corrupted in the
various Translations, ^hers, not to be taken merely as the Words import.

Howbeit for all this, many Priests and Professors, for their own Ends, if they
be about to oppose the Light within or divine Illumination, and the Sufficiency
of the holy Spirit's Teaching, denying it to be either the Rule of Faith or
Life, or sufficient to guide to Heaven without the Scriptures (which argues
their gross and carnal Diffidence and sinful Unbelief) then in plain
Contradiction, they place all the Infallibility and sole Sufficiency therein
upon the Scriptures, as the only highest Rule of Faith and Life, the only Rule
and Way to Heaven and Glory, the only Rule totry both Doctrines and Spirits by:
And here they most Idolatrously, and in a most pre^sterous Manner, prefer the
Scriptures before Christ, and set them up above the Spirit that gave them
forth, while they slight and cry down the Light of Christ within, as not any
Rule, etc. though it both manifests all things reproveable, and be the Prover
of Deeds, whether they are wrought in God; for which End, he that does Truth
brings his Deeds to the Light, Joh. 3. 19, 20. But as Christ said to the
unbelieving Jews, so it may justly be said to these Opposers of his Light
within now, Ye search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have Eternal
Life, and they are they which testify of me; but ye will not come to me that
you might have Life, Joh. 5. 39, 40. Mark, ye will not come to Christ, that ye
might have Life; and now, the Scriptures do not direct Men to themselves for
Life and Salvation, but to the Son of God, who is both the Life, the
Foundation, the Way, and so the only Rule, Guide and Teacher and not the
Scriptures. But why do the Presbyters of our Times so often exalt their own
diverse Meanings and Interpretations, as the Rule above the Scriptures, contrary
to the great Stress, which at other times they lay upon the Scriptures? So that
finally, they deny both the Spirit and the Scriptures to be the Rule, setting
up their own Meanings over both, being ignorant of the Scriptures and the Power
of God. We may believe, that the Truth of it is, It is more consistent with
their Gain and Trade of Preaching, that their Meanings should be the Rule over
or above the Scriptures, then that the Scriptures should be the only or highest
Rule to Heaven (as sometimes they pretend) for that Bibles are had at a great
deal cheaper Rate, then their Trade of Preaching can be had: But then for their
own Ends on the other Hand, they can (in plain self-Contradiction) cry up the
Scriptures, as the only (...) Rule to Heaven, when their Design is to divert
Peoples Minds from depending upon the DIVINE LIGHT and IMMEDIATE TEACHING OF
GOD WITHIN (for Life and Salvation) Seeing, that it is evident, they can more
easily avoid the Scriptures Infallibility (for their own Ends, that they may be
Masters, both over the Scriptures and Men's Faith, for their Lucre and Gain)
than they can get any of the Children of Light to assist their Trade (or any to
maintain them therein) who are turned from Darkness to the LIGHT, to wait upon
the Immediate Teachings of God; it is easier for them to evade or dispense with
the Scripture's Infallibility, then to hinder the true LIGHT WITHIN from
shining in Men's Hearts; for that is impossible for them. Again, the Scriptures
were not the Presbyterians sole Rule of Faith and Practice, when they set forth
their (...), Confession of Faith, and Scotch Covenant, agreed upon by the Kirk
of Scotland and the Assembly at Westminster, which was of no small Charge: It Is
easy to see, that their sole Rule (as they have pretended the Scriptures to
be) they can easily dispense with, add to, or vary from, for their own Ends at
their Pleasure, both in Doctrine, Discipline and Practice, as might be
instanced, not only for their unscriptural Sprinkling Infants, but in many
other Traditions and Babylonish Relics.

S. Scandret' s Sense about the Points in Controversy examined.
S. S. BY the Light in every Man understand -- not the Light of the Gospel, 2
Cor. 4. 4. lest the Light of the glorious Gospel should shine, etc. p. 1, 2.

Answ. The God of the World has blinded the Minds of them that are lost, lest
the Light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 4. And this
Man's Work is of the same Tendency, viz. to blind Peoples Minds, which implies,
that the Light of Christ Jesus (which is Gospel Light) is given to all; but the
Minds blinded by Satan oppose it. The Subject which Satan works upon and
prevails with, is their Minds, not the Light.

S. S. Mark, it is not said the Light, but (God) has shined, p. 7.

Answ. A frivolous Exception; Can there be such divine Shi^ing without his
divine Light? God has shined in our Hearts, etc. and God is Light.

S. S. (Upon Phil. 3. 16.) The Saints were to walk according to their several
Seize what they had got out of the Scri^s, by the same Rule, etc. p. 9.

Answ. What Scriptures? They were to walk in the Spirit, which directed their
Minds to God; that he might reveal his Mind to them: And here was the same
Rule, the same Thing, the same Principle; their several Seize being
according to their spiritual Growth in the Light. Was the Rule mentioned in 2
Cor. 10. 13. and Gal. 6. 15, 16. to be got out of the Bible? See this Man's
gross Ignorance.

S. S. Innocence, man's perfect Light must not be the whol^ his Rule, p. 11.

Answ. A gross Error. God was then his perfect Light and Rule in his Teachings;
and is not that Light which is perfect whole?

S. S. We need no infallible Spirit to help to discern the Counsels of Light
and Darkness in Scripture; for all there comes from God, p. 27.

Answ. He is not told this by an infallible Spirit; for many Counsels of
Darkness, Serpent and wicked Men, both against God, Christ and his People, are
recorded in Scripture. And it is the Spirit of Christ which is Infallible, that
truly opens and reveals the Truths in Scripture, to the Understanding of the
Children of Light.

S. S. The Spirit dwelling in all Believers, is sometimes a sweet Mo^r to Duty,
though no indwelling Spirit, p. 38.

(...). Gross Ignorance and Confusion; What! no indwelling Spirit, and yet
dwelling in all Believers? Did you ever hear such Doctrine before?

S. S. God's Commands cease not to be God's Commands; either because the Spirit
does not within put Men on to obey them, etc. p. 38.

Answ. A gross Inference against the Spirit; for the Spirit of Truth leads true
Believers into all Truth, from which no true and necessary Commands can be
excluded; unless he will say, some of them are no Truths

S. S. We are to obey them, though the Spirit (...) puts not on -- otherwise,
some wicked men in living contr^ry to the Scriptures, do not sin, cannot be
dam^ed for so doing; for s^e have sinned away the Motions and Strivings of
(...) Spirit, p. 8.

Answ. What will become of such poor people, that are fed with such Chaff and
Darkness, as this? And what is the Tendency of it, but to set (...) on, to work
in their own Wills, to set up their own (...), without the Movings of the
Spirit of God? (And what will that profit them) though without this Spirit,
they are carnal and selfish in all their Acti^gs and can^t truly obey: Nor can
wicked Men (who have (...) away its Strivings) escape Damnation, withal S. S.
^is pressing them to obey the Scriptures, without the Guidance of the Spirit;
for without him we can do (...); but all things through him that strengthens
us.

S. S. Because a Thing is written in the Scripture, are we to do it? -- I will
in God's Assistance, roll my self, and act Faith on God and Christ, because I
see the sweet Words in the Scriptures, etc. p. 38.

Answ. This is a Faith of his own making, a Will acting (that is not grounded
upon the Spirit of God, and its Persuasion within) an imperfect Imitation of
the ^etter without the Spirit; for he has not an infallible Spirit o^
discerning between the Counsels of Light and Darkness in the Heart; nor to
discern those few Truths it does reveal (as he confesses, p. 27. and 31) So
that this Book of his against us, pr^ceeded from his Darkness and fallible
Spirit.

But if God s Spirit teach us by the Works of Creation, and the Light in every
Man propounding the Creation to be considered; and he helps us to conclude a
God thence, that he is to be worshipped, etc. for in him we live, move and have
our being, as is largely confessed, p. 53. Then there is a twofold Testimony
afforded of God to Mankind, viz. Immediate and Mediate, as namely,

First, his Spirit or Light. 2dly, His Works of Creation, thr^gh which his
Light gives Men to consider and see God and his eternal Power, Romans 1. and to
worship him: And this Light and Works are (and do preach forth the Power of God
and his Wisdom) where the Scriptures are not; And therefore God affords a
Sufficiency, even to the Heathens, both of Light inward, and Evidence outward,
of his Power, etc.

They that have the holy Scriptures in the Bible may thank God for those good
Testimonies in them, as his Light within opens their Understandings in them to
the Right Use of them; And they that have not the Bible, have the Book of the
Creation to read in; and the Light within to open it, and to read and
understand a Deity and Divine Power through all and over all.

And they that are born Deaf and Blind shall not be therefore damned; God
having afforded an invisible sufficient Light to save, being obeyed, to leave
them without excufe, being disobeyed.

And if by the use of Reason, the Spirit of God teaches the Heathen moral
Duties, as in p. 54. which Duties as he explains, are to love and worship God,
and to love our Neighbors as our selves; then have the Heathen,

First, A supernatural and Divine Light, to wit, that of the Spirit.

2dly, His Spirit with the Teaching and Reason of it in that degree it is in
them, is a Rule of Life to them that have not Scriptures (who obey it) And this
confutes and overthrows the greater part of S. S. his Book or bundle of
Confusion.

S. S. Most falsely obtruds upon R. Ludgater this Concession, viz. That the Will
of God, as much of it as is revealed by the Light in every man without the help
of Scripture, is not the only Rule to Heaven, p. 23. And this (says S. S.)
fetched out of the very Heart-Blood of Quakery, Epist. This is a gross Abuse and
Lie; for R. L. has a better Knowledge and Esteem of the Light of Christ in
every man, and its own Sufficiency to guide the Obedient to Heaven: In him was
Life, and the Life was the Light of Men, Job. 1. 4. This Life and Light of
Christ being divine is therefore a sufficient Rule.

Also S. S. has abused G. W. in several places, perverting his Words, and
setting down words in G. W's Name, which he never wrote nor spoak; and in
particular these words about Christ's Coming, viz. He has tarried above
Sixteen Hundred Years, p. 86. quoting Divin. of Christ, p. 49. and then to back
this Abuse, and to lay Judgment (...) G. W. brings those Scriptures, 2 Pet. 2.
3, 4. and Mat. 4. 48. Whereas G. W's Words were quite contrary; ^nfessing both
to Christ's Outward and Inward Coming, which ^is Disciples did not put afar
off, as you do; it being above ^ixteen Hundred Years since they both waited for
and received ^is Coming. Here is no such Word as that, He has tarried so long;
we refer the Reader to the Book and Page before mentioned to see S. S's Abuse
in this; as also many more might be instanced, where instead of answering, he
has wronged and belyed our Words and Books.

S. S. in p. 32. says, though the Counsels of God's Spirit in Believers
Hearts, be IN themselves as certainly the Truth of God as are his Counsels in
the Scriptures; yet are they not to Believers so certainly the Truths of God.

Answ. What Is this but to tell us that the Scriptures can better ascertain us
of the Truths therein then the Spirit that first gave forth those Truths? (or
that the Spirit of Christ is Insufficient assuredly to manifest his own
Counsels to Believers) which is contrary to Christ's own Testimony, He shall
guide you into all Truth; He shall abide with you forever; and the Sons of God
are led by his Spirit; and hereby know we that we dwell in him and be in us,
because he has given us of his Spirit, 1 John 4. 13. Chap. 3. 24. Therefore
this Spirit is our certain and highest Rule.

And as to his pudder he makes about Water Baptism, it is very confused and
silly (as at the Dispute) not plainly asserting whom he would have the Subjects
of it, whether Infants or Believers; yet brings some of the Anabaptists
Arguments, though we still suppose he intends Infants, but durst not tell us
whether it be his Practice now.

So see what a Laborynth and Loss his Work tends to bring People to; neither
plainly telling them the Subjects, nor showing who are the Ministers of this
imposed WaterBaptism, whether himself, or such as he, or who? and yet injoyns
it as a Means of Sanctification, a Means of Salvation, which we do not believe.

As also he explains not his terms of the Lord's Supper, what he means by the
Lord's Supper; whether the Shadow or the Mystery, and what is his own Practice
therein? whether he ministers Bread and Wine as a Figure, or the Substance? And
whether the Mystery or thing signified, be attained by any in this Life? This
is unanswered: Nor whether Shaddows be essential to the Gospel Dispensation.

Concerning Justification.
He has in some degree granted to truth, that the word [ Justifie] the
Scripture sometimes uses it, to signify [ to make Just] by inherent Holiness,
or [ to Sanctifie] Tit. 3. 5, 7. He saved us by the Washing of Regeneration,
that being justified, etc.

Herein he has assented more to Truth, then many of his ^rethren; but it is
much contradicted again in his handling the matter of Imputation of Adam's Sin
to those that are not Partakers of it; and so of Christ's Obedience, p. 96. As
if Adam's Sin and Christ's Righteousness, were so imputed to them who partake
not of them: This we cannot own, and has been often answered in our Books; and
much we have against this his Sense of Imputation, as also against their
Opinion about personal Election and Reprobation, and the Cruelty, Partiality,
and ill Consequence of the Presbyters Opinion therein; And against S. S. his
shallow and absurd managing the matter, whose manifest Contradictions were long
since published, which we do not understand that he has made any Public Essay
to reconcile: also his work about the Scriptures, Baptism and the Supper, are
more particularly and fully answered elsewhere, which there has not been (for
some time) an oppo^tunity to publish.

CHAP. II.
About JUSTIFICATION and IMPUTATION.

S. S's Quest. WHether we are justified by the Righteousness of Christ imputed?

The Question would better reach the Controversy, as thus stated, viz.

Whether Impure (that is, unsanctified Persons) while (...), be justified by
the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness? [Thus I stated the Question at first,
which S. S. evaded with this, viz. Whether Justification be by the Works of the
Law, (...) by the Righteousness of Christ through Faith? No^ ^enying the
former, and granting the latter, this Question will not find out the
Controversy; but rather] Whether Christ's Righteousness be imputed unto
Persons in a disobedient, unsanctisied or unconverted State? Or, Whether
Christ's Righteousness be imputed of Co^ to Persons who are not in some degree
really and inwardly Partakers thereof, by the inward Work of Christ, through
Faith and Sanct^fication?

I am for the real Participation of Christ's Righteousness, and against a false
Imputation of it; but con^ss the true Imputation of Christ's Everlasting
Righteousness to true Believers, who inwardly are Partakers o^ his Work, Nature
and Image, which the true Seed of Abraham in all Ages were Partakers of, whose
Faith was reckoned to him (as the Faith of all his Seed is to them) for
Righ^ness, which was and is both real and inward.

By [ the Righteousness of Christ] I understand his everlasting Righteousness,
Holiness, Faith, Nature and I^ge, from whence his active and passive Obedience
(as in his own Person) sprung, and that true Believers, as Partakers thereof,
are accounted or esteemed of in the Sight of God, being Partakers of his
Holiness, divine Nature, and renewed therein to God; in this they are pr^sented
unto God in an absolute j^stified State: and S. S. proceeds thus, viz.

By the Word [ Justifie] the Scripture sometimes (but very rarely) uses it to
signify, to make Just by inherent Holiness, or to sanctify, Tit. 3. 5, 7. He
has saved us by the Washing of Regeneration, that being justified, etc p. 89.

Reader, Be pleased to take Notice here, how far this his Concession is to
Justification in the Reality of it, as springing from the inherent Holiness or
Image of Christ in a Soul; and how this is effected through Sanctification (and
it must be from hence that the real Imputation arises) and note, how herein he
has granted to the Truth of our Principle (in the first Part) though much of
his ^ollowing Work be contradictory to this, as will appear; for this is to
make Just by inherent Holiness, or to sanctify; the other is, to impute, or
reckon Guilty or fallen Creatures Just: So that this Man's Imputation of
Christ's Obedience, must be opposed to the real and inward Participation
thereof.

S. S. [Justifie] It is used in Contradiction to Sanctification, (...) This
Contra-distinction is his own or Tutor's Inventing.
1 Cor. 6. 11. but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, etc. an^ (...)
mostly, we are therefore to take it in this latter Se ise, p. 89.

Though [ Justifie] be often in Scripture taken to declare Just or Righteous,
or to accept of, as such (as well as to make Just) in which Sease there is a
Distinction (not a Contradiction nor Severation) between Sanctification and
Justification; yet God never declares, accounts or accepts any as Just and
Righteous, but such as are really (in some Degree Partakers of his
Righteousness in themselves, by a living Faith and Subjection to him (there
being also a time of justifying before Men are justified) for it is they who are
of Faith that are of Abraham, whose Faith or believing God (wherein was
Obedience) was imputed or reckoned to him for Righteousness: And true and
living Faith is of the same Nature still, and so is the real Imputation, which
(...) (...) God, and is evidenced unto the Soul by his S^irit: (...) the Truth
o^ this is further confirmed by the very Proof which (...) (...) cit^d before,
which proves that Sanctification is previous to and joined with Justification;
and that it is such a (...) ^shed and sanctified that are justified, and t^t in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, (...) Cor. 6. 11. It
was not the Unrighteous, Unconverted or Unsanctified that were justified, but
the Sanctified; and therefore it is not the guilty and unsanctified Persons,
applying or imputing to themselves Christ's active and passive Obedience (as
performed in his Person) that will justify, make or declare them just in the
Sight of God; out the inward Operation of his Spirit, sanctifying, (...) (...)
changing them from Sin and Impurity, into the Image, Name and Nature of Christ
Jesus, that A S they have born the Image of the Earthly, S O they must bear the
Image of the Heavenly which must be in Reality.

S. S. [Justifie] Signifies, to declare just, Luke 7. 35. Wisdom is justified,
etc. Psalm. 51. 4. that thou may be justified, etc. to absolve, acquit or
discharge, Romans 8. 33. It is God that Justifies, etc. Proverbs 17. 15. He that
Justifies the Wicked, and he that Condemns the Just, are both Abomination to
the Lord, p. 89.

He says true in the Definition of the term [Justifie] but whether his after
Application or Imputation thereof (as to the Creature) does agree therewith, or
not, will further appear; However, his Definitions (being compared) intimate
thus much to us, that to justify, is both to make Just by Inherent Holiness,
and to declare that Thing or Person Just which is really so; as Wisdom is
declared Just of her Children, God is declared Just when he speaks, who
Justifies his Elect, acquitteth and declares them Just, to whom there is no
Condemnation, Romans 8. 1, 2, 3, 4. and ver. 33. But on the other hand (as
conc^rring with the Definition before) He that Justifies the Wicked, that is,
he that declares the Wicked Just, and so the Unrighteous Righteous, the Impure
Pure, absolveth or acquitteth the Wicked or wicked Workers (while such) and he
that condem^s the Just, are both Abomination to the Lord. And then the next t^g
to be enquired is, Whom does S. S. declare Just, and in what State are the
Persons, whom be Just^s, declares Just, absolved, acquitted or pardoned (as his
terms are)?

S. S. This Acquittance to us fallen Cre^es, is a propor Absolution or Pardon;
we are guilty in our own (...) -- p. 91. Now Moses, or the Law of God, is the
true Accuser of everyone of us, Joh. 5. 45. There is one that accuses you,
even Moses in whom ye trust; the only Defense is, though I am guil^y, yet
Satisfaction has been made for that Guilt, p. 90. [ Yet] God pronounces us
Just, and absolves us, for the Satisfaction or Righteousness of Christ, p. 91.

Rep. Without Faith it is Impossible to please God; and without Holiness none
shall see him to their Justification or Comfort: our Pardon and Absolution from
Sins past, must be received in our Rising out of Sin and the Fall, and by the
Power of God Renewing us into the Image of God, through a Living Faith in
Christ, Repentance, or a real Change of the Mind and Heart from Evil; and so by
a true Separation of the Creature from Enmity and wicked Works, wherein men are
Enemies in their Minds; for in that state, while you stand as fallen Creatures,
guilty in your own Persons, Enemies in your Minds by wicked Works (and in the
State of those unbelieving Jews, whom Moses accused, as before confessed) God
does neither pronounce you Just, absolve nor pardon you (in that Condition) And
while you so pronounce or declare your selves Just and acquitted, you are but
Justifying the Wicked, wherein you are an Abomination to the Lord, as is proved
before.

It Is true, he that confesses and forsakes Sin finds Mercy upon true
Repentance and Conversion; the Creature obtains Remission of Sins past, and
that through Faith in the Name and Blood of Christ, which has a secret
Influence upon the Soul, and sprinkleth the Conscience from dead Works, in
order, both to Pardon and Justification, upon the Act of living and true Faith
in Christ; yea, Christ as the one Off^ing, Sacrifice and Propitiation for the
Sins of the whole World, which puts away Sin, consecrates, makes true Believers
holy, and declares God's Coming near to Man in Kindness; I say, Christ as thus
considered, has an inward Influence and Effect upon the believing and penitent
Soul, to bring it near to God, and render it capable of receiving Mercy and
Forgiveness, and of seeling the Pardon and Peace, upon true Conversion from Sin
and Evil; yea, I further testify, that God looks upon (and has a regard to)
every Appearance and Effect of his Grace and Spirit in the Heart and Soul, even
from the very first Act of Faith, springing up and budding of Grace to the
highest Growth thereof; even, from David's Repentance to his Songs of
Deliverance; from Niniveh's believing God and repenting to his Peoples walking
in Newness of Life; from the Prodigal's Return to his Father's House, to his
abiding therein; yea, the first Appearance of true Tenderness, Remiss and
Brokeness of Heart, or godly Sorrow for Sin, the Lord has Regard to the
Creature for the sake thereof, still from the Respect he naturally has to his
Grace and Spirit, that works these in Man: To this Man will I look, says the
Lord, that is poor and of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at my Word. The Work
of Christ or Grace in the Heart, from the Beginning to the Accomplishment
thereof, is acceptable to God, because of the Dignity of him that works it,
and not from any Dignity or Worth of the Creatures own; but only the Creature
is accepted, as in Christ; we are accepted in the Beloved, and it is for
Christ's sake that God forgiveth us, and not merely for our own: Howbeit, it is
so far as we are related to Christ, and have an Interest in him and his
Righteousness, by a living Faith, that God owns and looks upon us in a Way of
Acceptance; he respects his own Image in us, and does not justify, acquit or
accept Men only upon the Account of Christ's Sufferings and Acts of Obedience,
as done in his Person; for if he did, then were all Men justified for whom
Christ dyed, and that was the whole World, all Men in general; he tasted Death
for every Man; yet his Obedience and Sufferings in the Flesh had a good End and
Effect ( be being through all, both acceptable and prevailing with God, for the
good of Mankind; and we must needs partake of the Benefit and Effects thereof
in our Souls, so far as they have an Influence upon us, by the Life and Power
of Christ, considering the Travel of his Soul, through all his Sufferings
(which were inward as well as outward) his Soul being made an Offering for Sin,
and his making Intercession ^or the Transgressors, was, that Men might be
influenced with a real Sense and Sorrow under their own Sin, and be made
sensible of Christ's Sufferings and Travil of Soul, and know the Fellowship
thereof, and so be made conformable to his Death, through the Operation of his
Spirit and Life in them, as that they may be raised up in the Likeness of
Christ's Resurrection, in Dominion and Triumph over Sin and Death, and not
plead Christ's Satisfaction and Righteousness (only as in himself) in their
^ead, to absolve or justify the Guilty, whom God will not clear, nor acquit
the Wicked: Christ's Righteousness will not excuse any in Unrighteousness; for
he was a holy Example, as well as a Sacrifice and Propitiation; and he that
says, he has an Interest in Christ's Rightcousness, or that he abides in
Christ ought to walk as he walked.

Now the Question is not, Whether Christ was a most Satisfactory Sacrifice, or
well-pleasing to the Father? for that is undeniable: He was the Delight of the
Father's Soul, who gave himself for us an Offering and a Sacrifice to God, for
a sweet smelling Savor, Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. But, In what State and Condition are
we acquitted, pardoned and justified of God, and in what Nature; whether as
fallen, sinful, guilty Persons in our selves, and that merely by the Sufferings
of Christ in his own Person (which were finite) without respect to his Work in
us? Or, as Converted, Believers, Sanctified, Obedient, new Creatures in Christ,
accepted (and so justified) in his own Righteousness, as real Partakers
thereof? The latter is the Justification and Imputation which I plead for, and
not the former; I would not have Men flatter themselves, nor one another, in
Sin and Darkness, with Christ having done all, paid all, satisfied God for all
Sins past, present and to come, and that in their stead; nor to think
themselves thereby absolved, acquitted and justified in their Sins and fallen
Estate; for such Doctrine has stre^gthned the Hands of many Evildoers, and
made many Hypocrites, who are yet to undergo a Sense of the Judgments and
Terrors of the Lord, and to know Repentance from deadWorks, before they receive
Forgiveness of Sins past, or Jesus Christ, as the Atonement or their Peace;
for he came in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, that he might condemn Sin in the
Flesh, before Man be justified from it.

If the Question be, What is it that gives us Interest in Christ's
Righteousness? Or upon which it is imputed or reckoned to us? He answers, Our
Faith, Romans 10. 10.

If the Question be, What will evidence our Faith to be living and sound Faith?
He answers, Our sincere Obedience to the Law, Jam. 2. 24. You see then, how
that by Works a man is Justified, and not by Faith only; we are Justified by
Works, as Evidencing our Faith, living by Faith, as giving Interest in Christ's
Righteousness by Christ's Righteousness, as constituting ^s Righteous, etc. p.
91.

The Reader may see, I take the better part of his Confession, as well as the
worse; He has truly confessed here,

1st, That it is our living and sound Faith that gives us Interest in Christ's
Righteousness, and upon which it is imputed or reckoned to us.

2dly, That our sincere Obedience to the Law (or Works of Faith) does evidence
our Faith to be living and sound; from whence it follows, that none are
Justified, but who are in a living and sound Faith in Christ, and sincere
Obedience to his Law: Therefore Justification was not effected or completed
without us by Christ's Sufferings (or Death) in his Person; for he dyed for our
Sins, but rose again for our Justification, which is effected even in bringing
forth in us the Answer of a Good Conscience; nor art thou either Justified or
pronounced Righteous in the Sight of God (whoever thou art) who art a guilty
Person, a fallen Creature, accused by Moses, unsanctified, unregenerate,
Impure; see how manifestly the Man has contradicted himself in these Passages,
one while in Justifying the guilty (or disobedient) another while, only those
who have a living and sound Faith, and are sincerely obedient, who thereby are
interested in Christ's Righteousness; With this I agree, but not with the
other, which declares the Guilty and Disobedient, Just or Innocent, p. 91. and
what then? must the Guilt be charged upon Christ, who offered up himself a Lamb
without Spot to God, and was a sweet smelling Savor to him, of whom all our
Obedience ought to savor, that by him we may Offer up living Sacrifices unto
God? Both we and our Actions must Savor of his Unction, and not of Pollution,
Sin or Guilt, if we be Justified or accepted in the Beloved: Whereas he
accuses G. W. with teaching Justification by Faith in Christ, and the Works
that follow Faith, without Christ's Righteousness Imputed, p. 91.

The End of his Charge is false [ without Christ's Righteousness imputed] are
his own Words, and Forgery against me, and not mine; for I have both owned and
confessed the Real and Scriptural Sense of Imputation in the 65th Page of
Divin. of Christ. (first Part) and several other Places therein:

The blessed Man's partaking of Christ's Righteousness through Faith; and that
Justification is in the Righteousness of Christ, by Faith in him; and that this
true and living Faith and the Righteousness of it, is reckoned (or imputed) to
the true Believer; yet we do not grant, that Sinners or polluted Persons in
that State, are clothed with this Righteousness, or that it is imputed to
them, as theirs, whilst they are out of it:These were my Words, which clear me
from his Charge; although he adds thereto, that I say, Faith in Christ, and
Works that follow, without any mention of Christ's holy Life and Sufferings, p.
92. which is false again, and the contrary may be often seen in my said Book,
Divin. of Christ. For,

1st, Living Faith in Christ cannot be without the Participation of Christ's
holy Life, Virtue and Effects of his Sufferings and Blood, which sprinkleth the
Conscience, cleanses from Sin, etc.

2dly, We are by Faith in him spiritually influenced with a Sense of his
Sufferings, Travil of Soul and Fruit of his Intercession, therein, I bear in my
Body the Dying of the Lord Jesus, that the Life also of Jesus may be manifest
in my mortal Flesh.

3dly, In spiritually eating of his Flesh, and drinking of his Blood, we
receive of his Life in us, do come to live to God in his Love and Favor; and
so we partake of Christ AS the one Offering, Sacrifice or Propitiation, that
makes holy, in whom God comes near to us in Mercy, and we to him in a holy
Life; and this is the one Offering, by which he has forever perfected them
that are sanctified, whereof the Holy Ghost bears Witness unto us, Heb. 10.
15.

Object. You have not from the Beginning of your Life to the End perfectly
obeyed the Law; what have you to say why you should not bear the Curse? p. 92.

Answ. This is an impertinent Objection, and unsuitable for him that does not
believe perfect Obedience to Christ attainable in any Part of our Life, either
Beginning or latter End^ But God will not bring this Charge against them, whose
Sins are forgiven and blotted out, to be remembered no more in the new Covenant,
who since they have received Remission and Justification of Life, have the
Answer and Testimony of a good Consciense to plead, which gives Boldness in the
Day of Judgment, the Heart being sprinkled from an evil Conscience, there is a
drawing near to God in full Assurance of Faith, if our Heart condemn us not,
then have we Considence toward God: Howbeit, Upon the Charge before (as S. S.
his chief Objection) depends much of his Work, and what he pleads to this, as
his only Defense, is, Christ's Holy Life and Sufferings, Obedience to the
Death, etc. not Sanctification, nor Christ's Righteousness (or Life) inherent
in us, or the Answer of a Good Conscience, etc. And why so? why thinks he,
cannot this acquit us or render us acceptable to God?

S. S. In justifying God does judge us by the Law, though by the Gospel also;
To be Righteous in a legal Sense, is, to be invested with a sinless
Righteousness, from the Beginning of Life to the End thereof; this the Law
requires, it does require Perfection, not only in the End of our Lives, but in
the middle also, and in the Beginning, p. 92, 93. But the Breach of this (says
he) will be the Accusation or Charge that the Law (or Justice) will bring
against us at the Day of Judgment, p. 50.

Rep. The Man runs upon a Mistake, and thereupon makes his Apologies and
Defense; for there will be no Occasion for God, to bring this Charge against
his Elect (or those whom he has justified) at the Day of Judgment; for,

1st, Against a Righteous Man there is no Law; neither does the Gospel judge
such as Transgressors all their Days, as is vainly imagined: And how should
you be justified, while you are judged both by Law and Gospel? Does not the
Gospel acquit and clear such as (in the Faith) receive it, from the
Condemnation of the Law, that being justified by Faith, they may have Peace
with God?

2dly, They who are pardoned of Sins past, and justified by Christ from all
those things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, are
received into a Covenant of ^ace, Mercy, Forgiveness, Love, Peace and Union
with God (for such is the new Covenant, wherein God will remember their
Iniquities no more.

3dly, They who are thus justified and received into Covenant with God, have
passed from Death to Life, from Condemnation to J^stification, through the Law
are become dead unto the Law, that Christ might live in them; and the Life they
live, is by the Faith of the Son of God, which Faith purifies the Heart, and
the Mystery of it is held in a pure Conscience.

4thly, The Gospel is preached to them that are dead (viz. in Sin) That they
might be judged as Men in the Flesh, but justified after God in the Spirit.

And God's sending his Son in the Likeness of sinful Flesh was, that Sin might
be condemned in the Flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled
in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8. Therefore
Justice will not (at the Day of Judgment) charge us with Transgression and
Imperfection from the beginning of Life to the End.

They that are come into Covenant with God (who therein are in a Justified
Condition) have this to plead, We have known and believed the Love that God
has to us; God is Love, and he that dwells in Love dwells in God, and God
in him; Herein is our Love made Perfect, that we may have Boldness in the Day
of Judgment, because as he is so are we in this World, 1 John 4. 16, 17. And
does not this perfect Love and Conformity to his Image (which gives this
Boldness in the day of Judgment) spring from the Life and Work of God in us?
And is not this our Love (or such Conformity) inherent in us, as we dwell in
God, and God in us?

6thly, What the Law says, it is to those that are under the Law; but we (true
Believers) are not under the Law, but under Grace; and shall we Sin because we
are no more under the Law but under Grace? God forbid; for how can we that are
dead unto Sin, live any longer therein? But, whereas this Opposer's main Charge
is, You have not from the beginning of life to the end perfectly obeyed the
Law, or been invested with a sinless Righteousness, Perfection, etc.

This is not stated according to his own Doctrine and Principle, which
concludes, that there is no such Perfection attainable in this Life, either in
the beginning, middle, or end of Life, so that according to his own Doctrine he
should have stated it thus (and it may justly be charged upon these
Sin-Pleasers) viz.

You have lived in Sin and Disobedience all your Life long, and have preached
to others, that perfect Freedom from Sin and Corruption is not attainable in
this Life by any, either in the beginning or end of Life; but have preached
many into more Looseness and Liberty of Sinning by telling them, that it is God's
good Pleasure not to remove the being of Sin in this Life, but to suffer
Corruptions to remain in his Saints to keep them humble: so no part of your
Life is pure or clean, but corrupt and sinful: What have you to plead or say
for your selves, why Sentence of Damnation should not pass upon you? The
Sin-pleasi^g Presbyter pl^ads, viz.

Christ's holy Life and Suffering, is our only Defense or Apology, against this
Charge, p. 9^. Though I am Guilty, yet S^tisfication has been made for that
Guilt; because therefore the same Fault cannot b^ twice (...) after
Satisfaction; it is as if it never were: This is the only way of Defense we have
at God's Tribunal, p. 90. Christ s Sufferings are they for which God will
Justify us, they have fully satisfied Justice for our Sins; We may be
confident they will secure us from Condemnation, it being against Justice to
punish those Sinners a second time that h^ve been punished to the full already,
p. 106.

To all which it may be justly replied, and reflected upon you who are thus
pleading and maki^g your Apology in your Si^s and unholy Life: This will not
cover nor excuse you in your Sins, if you live and dye in Sin; your Mouths will
be stopped, you will not be able to plead Christ's holy Life and Sufferings to
resc^ you from Condemnation; except you Repent, ye shall all likewise perish:
What Influence or Effect has Christ s holy Life or S^fferings upon you, only
you pro^ess and plead them? So it may be said, Christ was ever Holy; but you
were never holy: Christ was a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling Savor to God,
which neither your Life nor Actions seem any thing of; but contrary wise are a
b^d Savor to him: Christ was an holy and perfect Example which you never
followed, no^ ever intend to follow so long as you live (for you do not believe
it is attainable) Christ came to condemn Sin in the Flesh, which you keep alive
(and plead for) in your Flesh as long as you live: Christ also came to fulfill
the Righteousness of the Law in us who walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit; but you do not own nor believe its-Fulfilling to be in your Persons,
but only in Christ's Person: Christ's Blood was not only for R^mission of Sins
past, but is to cleanse from all Sin, and to purge the Conscience, sanctify,
etc. This you reject, and in your Sins and defiled Con^iences trample the Blood
of the Covenant under Foor, and add to the Sufferings of Christ and the Sin of
his Persecutors, by adding Sin unto Sin, and so grieving his Spirit all your
days, and pleading his Holy Life for your Defense therein; and so the Guilt of
his Blood will be charged upon you in the day of Judgment, if you repent not.
And surther you (...) charge divine Justice with punishing your Sins to the
^ull in Christ, or punishing him that was ever Innoc^ to the full sor your
Sins; so that you count it against Justice to punish your Sins again i^ you,
though you live and dye in them; and yet you think it an excellent piece of
Justice to punish the Innocent to the full for the Guilty: But your Mistake
herein is g^oss, as will further appear, and you will not be acquitted, nor
cleared hereby; This will not prove you invested with Christ's everlasting
Righteousness; nor will this cover your own Filthy Rags, or hide your Shame.

And while you think that you are secured in your Sins from the Stroke of
Justice, as having been fully executed and that by way of Revenge upon the
Innocent Son of God, in punishing your Sins to the full upon him; I say, while
vou state this as the Nature of the Satisfaction by Christ's Suffering in your
stead, the whole World may as well acquit it self from Punishment thereby as
you; for he dyed for all, and is the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole
World; and therefore if this must be looked upon as the full Punishment of Sin
laid upon Christ, and that the Sin cannot be twice punished after such
Satisfaction, this may make a merry World in Sin; once punished to the full in
Christ, never to be punished again upon the Offender, which the Law directly
takes hold of. Oh Sinner's soothing Doctrine! to make the wicked World rejoice
in a Sinful State, and say, Oh Admirable Justice, that was pleased thus to
Revenge thy self upon an Innocent Man, that never sinned, and to punish our Sin
to the full upon him! O transcendent Mercy, that have found out this expedient,
that we might be fully acquitted, pardoned and discharged from the Penalty that
is Just and due to us for all our Sins past, present, and to come! Oh! what
Glad Tidings are these to the Hypocrites and Drunkards? etc. And how merry they
are apt to be in their Sins, upon their Ministers Proclaiming such an Act of
Indemnity of all Offenses and Injuries past, present and to come, not only
against their Neighbors, but against God himself. But if it be objected, That
without Sound Faith (which is a working Faith men have not an Interest in
Christ's Obedience, Righteousness or Satisfaction; nor are we Invested with any
thing for which God should pronounce us Righteous, etc. p. 93. 94.

From hence it follows then, that if they remain in Unbelief, they have no
Interest in Christ's Righteousness or Satisfaction; and then the Consequence
is, Christ did not make Satisfaction in our stead (nor was punished) for the
Sin of Unbelief nor for the Effects of Unbelief, to acquit us therein; for what
Sins then was he punished to the full?

But above all it appears wonderful strange, that God could not remit or pardon
Offenses past, without such a severe Payment and Satisfaction (as is employed)
because (as some say) he dispenses not with the Act of Law: If he could so
punish his Innocent Son to the full, who never offended, was not this a
Dispensing with the Act of Law, when the Law was made for Offenders, and added
because of Transgression, and to punish such? for it was not made to punish an
Innocent or Righteous Man, against whom there is no Law.

But if to pardon former Transgression upon true Repentance, and to save Man
from Sin and Wrath, be not inconsistent with the infinite Goodness and Mercy of
God himself; and to be both a just God and a Savior, were not Inconsistent;
then his divine Justice consisted not in such Severity, as to obliege him from
showing Mercy witho^t such a rigid Satisfaction and Payment, as that of
punishing his Son to the full, and pouring out his Wrath upon him, for the Sin
of Mankind: Whereas, where Remission of Sin is obtained, there is both a
Relaxation of the Severity of the Law, and a manifest Effect of the
Propitiation, or sweet smelling Sacrifice of Christ, as Mediator and Advocate,
and not as the Object of Wrath, Revenge and full Punishment from God, that is
due to Sin, and that to acquit the Sinners continuing therein; And his not
sparing his own Son, but delivering him up for us all, and his being made a
Curse for us, was neither equivalent to that of Eternal Death, Curse and
Damnation, which Sin and Sinners have deserved; nor does it absolve Man from
his Obedience to the Law of the new Covenant or Spirit of Life in Christ,
though it was for a Relaxation of the Law, as to the Bondage thereof, and in
order to abolish and end the first Covenant and the Curse thereof; yet not to
pardon or justify Men in Sin against the second: Nor is it any Loosening, but
a Reinforcing of the Terms thereof; for he took away the first, that he might
establish the second; he removed, and ended the Shadows, that he might exalt
the Substance that was veiled under them; he blotted out the Handwriting of
Ordinances, and nailed it to his Cross, that he might reinforce the Law of the
new Covenant written in the Heart, that we might not be without Law to God but
under the Law to Christ: He did both fulfill the Law in hs Person, and does
fulfill the Righteousness of it in them that walk not after the Flesh, but after
the Spirit; he did not only remove the shadowy Part of the Law and the Curse
thereof, through his Suffering and Sacrifice; but also, he actually delive^s
the Soul from the inward Terrors, Condemnation and Wrath of the Law (upon true
Repentance and Contrition of Heart) in Remission and Pardon, through Faith in
his Blood, being virtuously felt, and efficaciously evidenced by his holy
Spirit unto the Soul that has a Part in Christ, as the Propitiation for the
Sins of the whole World, whose Blood bears Record in the Earth, agrees in one
with the Spirit, sprinkleth the Consci^nce from dead Works, speaks forth
Mercy and Forgiveness, better things then that of Abel: Besides, Christ was as
well exemplary, as propiriat^ry or gracious in his Sufferings, which had both a
blessed Accep^ance and Effect with G^d, and a spiritual Influence upon them
that follow him in Spirit, further then the Historical Faith and Relation
thereof, as he said, If any Man serve me, let him follow me, and where I am,
there shall also my Servant b^ J^h. 12. 26. And thus far is his Example
spiritually fulfilled in them that follow him, as namely, Mark well.
Jesus Christ was outwardly c^rcumcised, baptized, crucified, put to Death (as
concerning the Flesh) buried, quickened, raised up by the Power of God, etc. His
Followers or Servants are spiritually circumcised, baptized into his Death, or
crucified with him, buried with him by Baptism (as Partakers of the Fellowship
of his Suff^rings) quickened by his Spirit, raised up by his Power into the
Likeness of his Resurrection, and having suffered with him, shall reign with
him. And now in Opposition to the Doctrine of such a rigid and Severe
Satisfaction, as is by diverse asserted; (...) must tell my Opposers, that
though the Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and by his Stripes we are
said to be healed; this is neither of the Nature of Revenge from God, Wrath or
Punishment to the full, that is due for Sin; nor does it exempt or free them,
who come to be his Followers, from being liable at all to God's Chastisement or
Correction in their own particulars, when there is Cause for it; for whom he
loves, them also he does correct, which is not Revenge, as it is said, If my
Children forsake my Law, and keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their
Transgressions with the Rod, and their Iniquity with Stripes; nevertheless my
loving Kindness will I not utterly take from them, etc. Psa. 89. 30, 31, 32,
33. This concerned David (and his Seed) who notwithstanding did so undergo the
Chastisements of the Lord, that he went often in a bowed down and mournful
State, as when he complained, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, etc.
Psa. 22. which were the same Words Christ u^tered in his deep Suffering, Mat.
27. 4^ plainly i^timating, how he took upon him the Sufferings and Bur^en of
his People, and his bearing the Sin and (...) of many wherein it is evident,
that they that ^ollow Christ through the Work of Regeneration, and obtain the
new Birth, do spiritually pass through the Fellowship of Christ's Sufferings,
and do partake of their due Shares thereof, both for their Remission, and to
obliege them to follow him in his own Way of Light and Life, whereby they who
are faithful to him, witness the Blood Covenant the Coverant, that cleanses
from Sin, and an Interest in that everlasting (...) This is the Way and Passage
of the Ra^somed o^ the Lord, who through his Judgment and Chastis^ments have
(...) a Ransom, received the Atonement and an Interest in the Everlasting
(...) of Li^ and Glory.

Having thu^ (...) (...) to the Matter in general, I come further to (...).
(...). (...) particular Passages, that chiefly concern me to (...).

S. S. The La^ ^ver a^ows us to sin; if at ten Years of Age a Person commits
M^er, and then lives according to the Law of the Land in ev^ (...) ^rty Years,
then arraigned for this, the Judge cannot pro^ounce him Innocent, and so acquit
him, because the Law did not allow him to commit Murder any Part of his Life,
p. 93.

Answ. A Truth in both. 1st, The Law never allows us to sin, no more does
Grace, or the Gospel; Shall we sin, because we are no more under the Law, but
under Grace? God forbid, for how can we that are dead unto Sin live any longer
therein? 2dly, Justice cannot pronounce a Guilty Person Innocent, upon the
Cessation from the mere Act of Unrighteousness, but God's lovin^ Kindness and
tender Mercy can, and does afford Remission upon true Repentance; and his
Justice can pronounce him ^nocent, that is purged from the Nature and Root of
Sin, and washed from Iniquity: Have Mercy upon me, O God, according to thy
loving Kindness; according to the multitude of thy tender Mercy blot out my
Transgressions, wash me thoroughly from mine Iniquity, etc. Psa 51. 1, 2. They
whose Transgressions are thus blotted ou^, who come thus to be washed and
saved, through the Washing of Regeneration; such come thus to be justified by
his Grace, and can be pronounced Innocent, as being washed and sanctified; and
such have the Demand of a good Conscience: And though Pardon and Justification
look not back at the unconverted State with Severity, but with Remission upon
Conversion; yet they require what God's Covenant does afterward, to the End of
our Days; that is, not to live in Sin, but in Christ's Righteousness: The
Grace, or Favor of God, teaches us, that denying Ungodliness and wordly
Lusts, that we should live godly and soberly in this present World, Tit. 2. 12.

To be invested with Christ's Everlasting Righteousness, p. 93. is the very
Thing I plead for, and if in Reality the Man stood to this, the Controversy
would soon have an End.

And he further assents to Truth, viz. If this Righteousness be not put on by
Faith, we are not invested with any Thing, for which page 93.
God should declare or pronounce us Righteous.

From whence observe, That we must be invested with Christ's Everlasting
Righteousness, if God pronounce us Righteous: Take Justification and Imputation
in this Sense, and then we differ not in this Matter; but how well this agrees
with imputing and reckoning Guilty, Condemned, Fallen Creature, JUST or
INNOCENT, only on the Account of Christ's Sufferings and Death, while such
condemned Creatures are invested with Sin and Guilt, and not with Christ's
Everlasting Righteousness? Will his telling us of Christ's Death imputed, p.
97. make up the Matter? It Is true, Christ is our Surety, and that of the new
Testament or Covenant, 1st, For that without him we can pay no Debt, nor truly
obey or fulfill the Terms thereof on our Parts, but in and through him that
strengthens us. 2dly, Of the New Testament also, in fulfilling the Promises
belonging thereto; for all the Promises of God are Yea and Amen in him.

David describes the Blessedness of the Man to whom God imputes Righteousness
without Works, saying, Blessed is he whose Iniquity is forgiven: But then S. S.
is not pleased to take notice of (but overlooks) the following Words, viz.
Blessed is the Man unto whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity, and in whose
Spirit there is NO GUILE; See Psalm. 32. 1, 2. If it were only a Man thus
qualified, that the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness and Justification were
pleaded for, we should not have this Controversy; but should agree, That the
Man in whose Spirit is NO GUILE, is blessed; He is the Man whom God pronounces
Just and Innocent; his Transgression is forgiven, his Sin is covered: And
though it is said, God imputes Righteousness to him without Works; yet it is to
be understood, it is not without a sincere Obedience, because that in his
Spirit there is no Guile: and then without what Works? 1. Not without the Work
of living Faith. 2. Not without yielding true Subjection or Obedience unto God
in his spiritual Requirings or Law of Faith; for Abraham did not only believe
God, but by Faith yielded ^o obey him: Without what Works then? but the Work of
the Law of Works (as wrought by the Flesh or st^nly Jew) by which no Flesh
shall be justified. I mentioned C^rcumcision, and others, that were Types or
Signs, wherein the Righteousness of Faith does not consist; see Divin. of
Christ, p. 64, 65. in which this Point is opened and cleared: But to this S. S.
objects, viz. He errs, calling the Ceremonial Law a Law of Works; in giving
this, the Lord gave a Law of Grace to his People, p. 94.

Rep. If the Ceremonial Law be not a Law of Works, but a Law of Grace; he
should have been so Ingenuous as to have told us, what the Law of Works is,
which the Apostle distinguishes from the Law of Faith, Romans 3. 27. as he does
between justifying Faith and the Deeds of the Law (as wrought and boasted in by
the literal Jews) And whether the Law of Works be some Law inferior to that of
Circumcision and other Types? But to show S. S. his Error, in denying the
Ceremonial Law (as he calls it) to be the Law of Works; let him consider, that
after the Apostle excludes Boasting, not by the Law of Works; and concludes a
Man is justified by Faith without the Deeds of the Law, he says, Is H^ the God
of the Jews only? Is He not also of the Gentiles? and that it is by Faith that
God justifies both the Circumcision and the Uncircumci^on; and that Faith was
reckoned to Abraham ^or Righteousness, not in Circumcision, but in (...); and
that he received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of the
Faith which he had, yet being Uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all
them that be^ieve, though they be not Circumcised, etc. See Romans 3. 28, 29. and
Chapter 4. 10, 11. Gal. 2. 16. and 3. 2, 5. and 4. 10. And ^urther, If ye be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing, chapter 5 2. From all which it is
plain, it is no Error to say, the Law of Works (as opposed to the Law of Faith)
is that enjoining Circumcision and other Signs and Shadows, and these the Works
which are not imputed unto Justification; nay, I shall further grant, that all
Man's Works or working whatsoever before a living Faith, are neither available
nor accountable unto his Justification with God, and on the other Hand, that a
true and sanctifying Faith, and believing in God (from a Sense of his living
Word or holy Command in the Heart) is accounted for Righteousness to him that
so believe^h, before he has performed his actual Obedience; even while in the
Faith he is passively waiting upon God (as being ceased to do Evil) that he may
receive Strength to act Good, even while he is so believing, and waiting, and
breathing to the Lord, and saying, draw me, and I will come after thee; lead
me, and I will follow; give me Strength, and I will walk in thy Ways; come,
let us walk in the Light of the Lord, etc. knowing that it is the Power of God
that begets living Faith, and thereby changes and sanctifies the Mind unto a
living and sincere Obedience; and this Faith is the Gi^t of God, a Fruit of his
own Spirit, and therefore accounted of by him, and reckoned unto us: I would
not make the Scriptures speak, that God imputes Works wrought by us, without
Works by us (as S. S. falsely accuses me, p. 94.) But rather, that God imputes
his own Works in us, without any self-Works wrought by us, and accepts us in
the Beloved, in whom we are created again unto good Works.

How can Christ's sinless Obedience from the beginning of page 94.
Life to the end, (which takes in his Conformity to the Law) be imputed to the
Guilty and fallen Creature; or that Conformity be the Everlasting Righteousness
wherewith the true Believer is invested, when as it is not the Works of the Law,
but the Righteousness of Faith that Justifies and Recommends to God? And this
is inwardly poss^ssed, where true Faith and the Obedience thereof, is enjoyed
and Lived in; it is not Christ's Conformity to the Law that Justifies us, but
his making us conformable to his own Image and Partakers of his Everlasting
Righteousness, for which God pronounces us just; for men are not imputatively
Righteous or Just, when actually condemned as Guilty, Sinful, Fallen Creatures.

And further, I deny that Christ's Conformity to the Law, whilst on Earth, does
either constitute or reckon us righteous from the Beginning of Life to the End;
for that God according page 95.
to his Grace and Mercy forgiveth Sins that are past (before Faith) and after
his Visitation and Mercy is received, the Law and Righteousness of Faith
enjoins us to Newness and Holiness of Life, without which he will not acquit
us: He will not acquit the Wicked; If I sin, thou markest me, and wilt acquit
me from mine Iniquity, Job. 10. And then, shall we sin, because we are no more
under the Law, but under Grace? God forbid, etc.

His saying, But were the Works of Faith perfect, yet could they not be a
justifying Righteousness, p. 95. Though Righteousness in the Abstract, and as
it is everlasting, does not consist (or is not made up) of any Work outward, or
temporal Acts; yet to conclude that the Works of Faith, though perfect, cannot
be justi^ing, is contrary to the Apostle's Testimony of being justified by
Faith, whereby we have Peace with God; and you see ^hou that ^Y WORKS A MAN IS
JUSTIFIED, and not by Faith only: Was not our Father Abraham justified by W^ks,
when he offered up his Son Isaac?

And God will ordain Peace for us; for he has wrought all ^ur Works in us,
Isa. 26. and then are not his Works in us, ^ding to our Justification and
Acceptance, being recko^d ours, as wrought in us? Are not these accounted of
wit^ the Lord from the Dignity of himself that works them? For to him it is
said, thou have also wrought all eur Works in us.

To that Question, Will he say that Abraham did not in Faith circumcise his Son?

Answ. But he was Justified before that; for Faith was reckoned to Abraham for
Righteousness when he was in Uncircumcision: Though every Act of true and
living Obedience, both before, under, and since the Law, was done in Faith; yet
are they not made Righteous by the mere Works, but by that Power and Spirit of
Faith that works them.

And If A S we are made Sinners and condemnable by One Man's Disobedience, we
be S O made Righteous and Justifiable by the Obedience of One; then we must be
as really made Righteous in the second Adam, as we were Sinners in the first
Adam: A S in Adam all dye, S O in Christ shall all be made alive; A S we have
born the Image of the Earthly, S O we must bear the Image of the Heavenly;
which is not from a mere Imputation o^ either without a real Participation:
They are not Innocent or Clear in themselves who are either made or reckoned
Sinners by one Man's Disobedience; nor are they without the Participation of
Christ's Righteousness in themselves who are made Righteous by his Obedience;
They that receive abundance of Grace and of the Gift of Righteousness, shall
reign in Life by Jesus Christ: Death has passed upon all men, for that all
have sinned; Sin has really reigned in man unto Death; and so must Grace reign
through Righteousness, unto Eternal Life. God's Imputations or Reckonings to
Man are true; whom he reckons Sinners are inherently such, and whom he reckons
Righteous are so likewise; but the Hypocrite, who can Justify the Wicked, is
an Abomination unto God, Howbeit, contrary to what I have said, S. S. reasons,
viz.

We are not Partakers of this by our actual Commission of it: I^ page 96.
cannot be said we are Par^ers of Adam's Sin in that we are personal Offenders;
it must be therefore by Go^ ^mputation.

Obs. By this he has explained his ^se of the Imputation of Ada^'s Sin and
Christ's (...), and s^ of (...) and Justification; and ^o by this, Romans (...).
^9. is thus to be read, AS by One man's Disobe^ience many were made Si^ners
that were not actual Sinners, SO by the Obedience of One many are made
Righteous who never actually obeyed; an easy, pleasant and Sin-pleasing
Doctrine for the Ungodly, Sinners, and Hypocrites) from whence also it follows
that they are condemnable by Adam' s Disobedience (Children are not excepted,
he says) who never committed actual Transgression; and so they are Justified
by Christ's entire Obedience, who never actually obe^yed him: and what is this
but still the old Abomination, to Condemn the Innocent, and Justify the Guilty
or Wicked?

S. S. adds, Let the words be weighed [by one man's Disobedience many were made
Sinners] it is not here said, By many Personal Disobediences we are made
Sinners, though this be true, etc. p. 96.

Rep. By one man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; yet it is not
Adam's Sin entirely (as a particular Person) that is imputed, though from one
Offense sprung many; ^or Death reigning in Man is an Effect of his own sinning
and being in the Nature and Image of the first Man, in whom all dye; Death has
passed over all Men, for that all have sinned, even over as many as have not
sinned after the Similitude of Adam's Transgression, which still implies, they
have sinned after some Similitude or Manner; yea, many in a more gross Manner
then Adam sinned, Though they seem to render Adam worse then the Devil (who is
the Author of sin and Immediate Tempter to it) and to lay more to Adam's Charge
then to the Devil or their own corrupt Hearts and vile Affections which
constantly att^nd them.
that yet think themselves Imputatively Righteous: It was not only the Offense,
as committed by him alone; but the Offense or Sin, and Nature of Enmity
continued and committed by men themselves, and also springing up into many
Offenses, which makes many Sinners; As it is not the Father's eating sower
Grapes alone that sets the Childrens Teeth an Edge; but every Man that eats
the sower Grape, his Teeth shall be set on Edge; the Soul that sins it shall
dye; every man shall dye for his own Iniquity. And further, Why should Adam, as
a particular Person be so very much exclaimed against and blamed (whereby many
Hypocrites think to ease themselves, and over look their own Iniquities) seeing
that you know not, but that Adam found Repentance and Forgiveness? However,
since Adam sinned, there were Righteous Generations left, namely Seth, whom God
appointed unto Adam as another Seed in stead of Abel, Genesis 4. 25, 26. and 5. 3.
and afterward Enoch came forth, who walked with God, Genesis 5. 24. and Noah and
his Family, with whom God renewed his Covenant, that was made to Adam, Genesis 1.
28. Chap. 9. 7, 9. and there were Righteous Generations after the Destruction
of the UNGODLY WORLD by the Flood, though many turned to Iniquity again: But
all Men are accountable for their own; It will not be either their crying out
of Adam's sole Offense, or their pleading Christ's entire Obedience, that will
excuse them in the Day of the Lord, wherein every man shall give an Account of
himself to ^od, and be rewarded according to his own Deeds done in the Body,
whether they be Good or Evil.

S. S. God does not punish that Person, in whom he does not first see a
Transgression, p. 96.

Answ. True; But how agrees this with his Sense of Imputation? Let the
competent Reader judge: hence it ^ollows (and that by his own Rule of
Contraries) that A S God does not punish a Person in whom he does not first see
a Transgression; SO God does not justify a Person, or repute him Righteous, in
whom he does not first see a real Righteousness, and that through Faith and
Sanctification: And this plainly overthrows his Notion of Imputation before.

S. S. We are made Righteous, not by Conversion only, as G. W. would have it,
p. 96.

Answ. However, this [ Not only] grants thus far, that we are not made
Righteous without Conversion; and then we are justified, made Righteous or
declared just (in the true Sense of Imputation) when converted, in which State
we are inherently or inwardly Partakers of Christ's Righteousness, and not in
the unconverted: So that S. S. his reiterated contradictory Opinion, as stated
by him, (viz. AS the Disobedience Adam wrought in his own Person on Earth makes
us Sinners; SO The Obedience Christ wrought in his own Person on the Earth
makes us Righteous, p. 96.) is still opposed by the Light of Truth, which
manifests how far Men are Partakers of the Nature and Disobedience of the first
Adam, and how they come really to partake of the second Adam in themselves,
without which God does neither justify nor reckon them just. It being also
confessed, That God does not punish that Person, in whom he does not first see a
Transgression; and then it follows, No more does he justify that Person, in
whom he does not see his own Image. His Phrase [ Christ's Sufferings imputed]
is not a Scripture Phrase, though much of his Work hangs upon it; yet his being
made a Curse for us, was not in vain, being to remove the Curse of the Law (as
generally pronounced for not continuing in all that is written, etc.) to abolish
the Shadows of the first Covenant, and to establish the second, that both Jew
and Gentile might be reconciled in one Covenant, wherein Christ is the Blessing
to all, having been both a perfect Example and Sacrifice, who travilled that he
might see his Seed, and suffered that he might reign: Though he suffered and
tasted Death for every Man, as an universal Offering for Sin; yet Men are
neither acquitted thereby in their Sins, nor interested in the second Covenant
(which he dyed to establish) unless they come under the Condition and State
thereof, namely, an Agreement and Friendship with God; for Men will be
condemned for disobeying the Gospel, though there be a Relaxation and Change of
the Law, touching the Curse thereof, as it is threatened on those general Terms,
for not keeping all: But what the Law says, it is to them that are under it;
It was the outward Jews that it was imposed upon in the Letter of it, though it
be universally to be fulfilled in Spirit in the true Christians or Jews inward:
And though God has shown a Mitigation of the Severity (which has been
incurred by Sin) and a Pacification and coming nigh to Mankind with Kindness in
his Son Christ Jesus; yet still, if men reject the Love of the Truth, the Terms
of Friendship and Agreement with God, and obey not the Gospel, they miss and
fall short of the Benefit of Christ and his Sufferings, and the blessed End for
which God sent his Son: And though the Curse of the Law does not rest upon men
for not continuing in all the Letter of it, or shadowy Part (including both
Circumcision, diverse Washings, etc.) yet if their Hearts be not circumcised to
the Lord, nor they inwardly washed or sprinkled from an evil Conscience, they
have no Part with Christ, as he said, If I do not wash thee, thou have no Part
with me; Except ye be born again, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God:
Notwithstanding God does greatly show himself propitious and kind, in his Son
to Mankind, in that upon any Condition (viz. his own Terms) he will admit Man
to approach unto him, or come into actual Friendship with himself.

Argum. What was typified in the Ceremonial Law is certainly page 98.
accomplished; but the Imputation of Christ's Sufferings was typified, Exodus
24. 8. Heb. 9. What did this Sprinkling typifie, but the Imputation or
Application of Christ's Sufferings to us.

Answ. He varies uncertainly in his Words [ Imputation or Application] which
are different; the Imputation being supposed to be God's; the Application
Man's: And M^ses's taking the Blood and sprinkling it on the People, Exodus 24.
8. was neither a Type of this Man's Imputation, nor his Application of Christ's
Sufferings unto unsanctified Persons, for their Justification; but a real Type
of Sanctification, and Remission by the Blood of Christ sprinkled upon the
Conscience for that End, which is more then unsanctified Persons Application
thereof, and thence imagining their Justification: The Scriptures cited by
himself prove what I say against him, 1 John 1. 7. But if we walk in the Light,
as he is in the Light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of
Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses us from all Sin: And Hebr. 9. 14. How much
more shall the Blood of Christ, who offered himself without Spot to God, purge
your Consciences from dead Works, to serve the Living God? And Hebr. 12. 24.
And ye are come to the Blood of sprinkling: From whence [Mark] that this
cleansing, purging, sprinkling the Conscience, etc. was a real Act or Effect of
the Blood of the Covenant, unto the Sanctification of them who walked in the
Light, and not a mere Imputation or Application of Christ's Sufferings for the
Justification of Impure and Unsanctified Persons: Moreover, it was when the
People said, ALL that the Lord has said will we do, and be Obedient, that
Moses took the Blood and sprinkled it on the People, and said, Behold the Blood
of the Covenant, etc. Exodus 24. 7, 8. To which Type answers what the Apostle
Peter says, Elect according to the Foreknowledge of God, through
Sanctification of the Spirit ^to OBEDIENCE and SPRINKLING of the Blood of
Jesus, 1 Pet. 1. 2. And he has washed us from our Sins in his own Blood.

This is the Blood of the Covenant that does sanctify, Heb. 10. 29. And he
shall sprinkle many Nations, Isa. 52. 15. Where Christ is known to sprinkle and
purge the Conscience by his own Blood, He really and effectually thereby
applies it both unto Sanctification, Remission and Pardon; but this Effect has
not Men's Imaginary Application o^ it in their Sins and Pollution: It is one
Thing for Men in their own Wills to apply the Sufferings, Death and Blood of
Christ to themselves; it is another to know him to apply it in sprinkling the
Conscience. And seeing it is Christ's Work, it concerns us all to obey and
follow him in his i^hining Light for that End; it being only those who are
sanctified by his Blood, of whom it may be truly said, Much more th^n, being
justifi^ by his Blood, we shall be saved from Wrath through him, Romans 5. 9. To
his saying, To be justified is to be pardoned, p. 97. I grant, that to receive
Pardon of Sins past upon true Repentance, is to receive a Degree of
Justification so far as from the Condemnation; but to be absolutely justified
to the End of Life, a^er Pardon is received, is more then Pardon of Sins past
before; for this is not without a Perseverance in the Grace, Romans 11. 22. Heb.
6. 4, 5, 6. Chap. 10. 26.

His saying, We are pardoned for the sake of Christ's Death imputed, p. 97. is
no Scripture Phrase or Language: why is not the whole World for whom he dyed
then pardoned and justified? If he replies, because of Unbelief, or that they
have not Faith in his Blood; It follows then, that Men are pardoned and
justified through Faith in the Blood of Christ, and not by their Application or
Imputation of the Death of Christ; for it is said, that he was delivered for
our Offenses, and was raised again for our Justification, Romans 4. 25. therefore
not by the mere Imputation of his Death: Neither do these cited Scriptures (
Col. 1. 14. Ephesians. 1. 6. Romans 3. 24. Mat. 26. 28.) prove his Doctrine of
Imputation; but Redemption or Remission through his Blood, Redemption in
Christ; and Ephesians. 1. 6. We are accepted IN the Beloved: These real
Scripture-Truths are never doubted of by us, and it is true, that the Children
of Israel bringing their Sacrifices to the Priest to offer (or otherwise Blood
was to be imputed to them) does typifie, that we must offer our Services by
Christ our high Priest.

S. S. If we think to have the best Services that we are enabled to perform,
accepted immediately as from us, and not for the sake of Christ presenting
them, etc. for this God will cut us off; he will as soon accept of Murder from
us, as such a Service, p. 98.

Rep. As herein he would represent the Condition of Believers or justified
Persons, he non-sensically mistates the Case; For, 1st, Such are not apt to
ascribe either the Dignity or Acceptance of their best Services to themselves;
but unto Christ who enables them to perform. 2. As their Sufficiency is of
Christ, and in him, and not of themselves; so he has the Glory thereof, and
they the Acceptance and Peace in him, as they continue faithful in him, serving
the living God. 3. Christ's Priesthood is an holy Priesthood: It is also said
of them, Ye also as lively Stones built up a spiritual House to offer up
spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5. And these
are not polluted or unholy Sacrifices which this holy Priesthood offers by him:
But, 4. You who are of an Unholy and Polluted Priesthood, are offering polluted
Services; sinsul and wandering Prayers, which are but Dreams, sinning in your
best Duties, committing Iniquity in your holy Things (as many of you have often
confessed) and are all as an unclean Thing, and that God will as soon accept of
Murder from you, as of such a Service; and yet presume, that those your
unclean, polluted Sacrifices and Services are presented by Christ to the
Father, and accepted in the Merit of his Sacrifice; but herein you are deceived
and deluded: Christ does neither present, nor does God accept any of your
sinful Services or polluted Performances; but will Po^e Contempt upon you in
them, and return back your polluted Prayers and Services, and with Indignation
spread them as Dung upon your own Faces; therefore Repent, Repent, and be
converted to Christ, the true Light and Way to the Father, and to the Spiritual
House and Holy Priesthood (which yet you are much short of) to offer Spiritual
Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Christ.

CHAP. III.
About Christ's Justifying Righteousness, the best Robe; the Necessity of its
Inherence (or being inwardly enjoyed) not to invalidate but to fulfill the
blessed Intent and Ends of his Sufferings, in Reply to S. S.

S. S. If the Righteousness we are justified by is a Garment, a Arg. Robe, even
the best Robe, then we are justified by a Righteousness wrought without us; for
our Garments are not wrought within us, but without us.

Rep. This justifying Righteousness then is a Garment to be put on; but whether
its being a Garment, and to be put on, does prove that it is not within, but
without only, let them that have put it on judge: It appears, that this Opposer
has disputed and pleaded so long for the Being of Sin to remain within, that
he has no Room ^or Christ's Righteousness within: But I would enquire of him;
Is every Thing that is to be put on therefore not within but without? Is this a
good Argument? As, P^ye ye on the Lord Jesus Christ; Put on Strength, O Sion!
Put on thy beau^iful Garments, O Jerusalem! Put on the whole Armor o^ God,
etc. Must these therefore not be within, but without only? And so he might as
well say of Salvation, with which the Meek are clothed; or of the Zeal of the
Lord, which the Upright do put on for a Cloak, and Righteousness ^or a Garment.

But to give him his due; After he has concluded that the Righteousness for
which we are Justified is wrought without us, is a Garment, etc. He confesses
that the holy Ghost does not always (using this Similitude) intimate to us,
that that Righteousness which is put on, is wrought without us, p. 99. And what
Righteousness is that which is put on that is wrought within us? Do we both put
on a Righteousness that is within us, and a Righteousness that is not within
us? what Scripture has he for this Distinction? And what Confusion is the Man
fallen into, to conclude that the Justifying Righteousness is not wrought
within but without, because put on as a Garment; and yet that there is a
Righteousness put on which is not wrought without us but within us? See what a
profound Logician this man would show himself; but thus he confounds the Minds
of the Simple, and darkens Counsel by Words without Knowledge. To Luke 15. 22.
Bring forth the best Robe and put it on him, he says, By this Robe the holy
Ghost understands Christ's Obedience unto Death; not to speak of Increated
Righteousness, even the essential and incommunicable Righteousness of God,
which never was wrought within or without, but is the eternal Godhead, page 99.

Rep. However he has sufficiently confessed that the Righteousness by which we
are Justified must be put on; but while he denies it either to be within or
Essential, he denies our Participation of the divine Nature (which is essential
to God himself) or of Christ, who is God's Righteousness, who was delivered up
for us all, and with whom the Father will give us all things; Is He then
Incommunicable or not to be given, whenas they that are Christ's have put on
Christ? Is not He the best Robe? And is not He then within us? And He that
obeyed and suffered for us (who wrought Righteousness) Greater then the Act of
Obedience? Is not the Worker above and Greater then the Work? But while this
Opposer endeavors to exclude or shut Christ and his Righteousness (or the Robe
which the Saints put on) all out of his Members, and counts Christ's Obedience
unto Death without them this Robe, and not a Robe within them; because a Robe
put on, as he argues, we are to understand that by [Put on] he must ^ean
Christ's Obedience without (unto Death) is imputed (...) reckoned theirs, when
there is nothing of it in them either of the Nature, Spirit, Virtue, or Effects
of it unto the Crucifying of the Old Man, or mortifying of Sin; or else own
that Men are not accounted Righteous, nor Justified only by Christ's Dying or
Obedience without them, but through the Operation of his Spirit within them,
who dyed for our Sins, but was raised for our Justification; and then only they
that dye and live with him are accounted Righteous and blessed with God (being
Partakers of the Heartpurifying Faith) and not they that live to themselves
without the Possession or Enjoyment of Christ's Nature and Life in them, which
is Divine and Increated:

But he tells us of a four fold Righteousness.

1st, The sincere Obedience of an upright man. 2dly, The perfect but loosable
Righteousness of the first man in Innocence. 3dly, The perfect but confirmed
Obedience of blessed Angels. 4thly, The perfect everlasting and Infinitely
Precious Obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ; this last, the best Robe; the
Righteousness of God himself, p. 99.
Rep. What is it we contend for but Man's being invested with the perfect and
everlasting Righteousness of God himself, his own Nature and Image? And is not
this in the renewed Man?

1st, Was not this in Man while in Innocence in the Image of God; though he
then not Immoveably Confirmed in it, however accepted while he stood in it?

2dly, Does not the fincere Obedience of an upright Man in Christ, flow from
his Inward Participation of the Divine Nature and Image in him, and therefore
accepted from the Excellency of that Divine Root and Seed from whence his Fruit
Springs?

3dly, Are not the blessed Angels accepted in their Obedience to God, which
from a Sense of his divine power they are exercised in? Still the everlasting
Righteousness is but one, and the Life and Excellency thereof is infinite both
in Christ and in his Members, who are of his Flesh and of his Bone; as he that
sanctifies and they that are sanctified are all of one; and Christ is the
First and the Last; and in all things must have the Pre-eminence.

4thly, The man mistakes, if he suppose that we plead either the Righteousness
of a Creature, or man's own Righteousness which he himself is enabled to
perform, as the Cause of Our Justification; for Christ that strengthens us and
enables us by his Power and Spirit dwelling in us to do the Fathers Will, He is
the Ground and Cause of our Justification, and in him who is the Beloved are we
accepted, not merely for our Works or Obedience, but for his sake who works
in us and enables us to do those things which are well-pleasing in his Sight.
That God bestows Righteousness on a returning P^odigal as the best Robe, is
true; but to exclude this Righteousness, or best Robe, that God bestows, as not
to be within, but only without, because, to be put on, is not true; for if the
Mind, Heart, or Soul within be not clothed therewith, how is it put on? or how
should good or acceptable Fruits be brought forth to God, if not from an inward
and Everlasting Righteousness? And though Man does not partake thereof from the
beginning of Life, Can this Man think that Christ's Death or Obedience without,
does Justify Men, or make them be deemed Righteous from the beginning of Life
to the End? howbeit, when Men are converted and become the Righteousness of God
in Christ, and come to Live and Dye (or end their Days) in him, they are
accepted and blessed; yea blessed are the Dead which dye in the Lord, for their
Works follow them. Mark the Perfect Man, and behold the Upright, for the End of
that man is Peace: But all this Man's Imputation of a Righteousness and best
Robe (which he says, is a Righteousness wrought without us, there being none
wrought within us; so God, etc. p. 99.) depends upon his Doctrine for Sin and
Imperfection term of Life, which he and his Brethren have not only concluded
must continue in the best of Men and their best Actions all their Days; but
Imperfection even in Christ's Work or Righteousness wrought in his People,
which therefore he disclaims from being concerned in our Justification; but
says, we are Justified by that Righteousness which Christ wrought without us,
though he cannot deny, but that Christ wrought the Righteousness of the Law
without us (and conformed to the Law in the Days of His Flesh) which I suppose
will not be deemed our Justification: But if I ask, By and to Whom was this
Obedience, Righteousness or Satisfaction made without us, to be Imputed unto us
as ours, or men thereby Justified while Unjust, Imperfect and Sinful, without
the Robe of Righteousness in themselves; or rather accounted Just from the
beginning of Life to the End? (whether all or some of these for whom Christ
dyed, he tells us not) You may take this for his Answer, viz.

God in our Nature obeyed God; and this is Righteousness of Infinite Value, the
very best Robe, p. 99.

Rep. 1. Is this the Compensation, Payment and Satisfaction in our stead to
vindictive Justice, so much pleaded by our Opposers? Were it good Doctrine to
say, either that God obeyed, and satisfied his own Revenge by obeying himself
(as if he were divided and at Variance with himself) or that he was revenged on
himself, considered as Christ in our Nature or Flesh? I cannot own this
Doctrine, that such a rigid Payment and Satisfaction could be required in the
Nature of the great Propitiation and Sacrifice for Sin; but a Pacification or
Atonement and a Condescension to Forgiveness of Sin past, to be received on
true Faith and Repentance. 2. That Christ in the Flesh did by his divine Power
perfectly obey the Father agendo and patiendo, i. e. by doing and suffering;
and therein was an acceptable and satisfactory Sacrifice for Sin, is not any
Matter in Question or Doub^ with me; but that God obeyed God by way of a rigid
or strict Payment; made to himself, as a Satisfaction to absolute Revenge or
vindictive Justice, thereby to acquit Man continuing in his Sin and
Imperfections: This I utterly deny, as repugnant to the very Language and
Tenor of the holy Scriptures and Testimonies of the holy Men, which require
Obedience and Faithfulness to God (and a walking in his Light) on our Parts. 3.
As also your Continuance in Sin, and yet thinking your selves absolved or
justified by Christ's Dying for you, is contrary to the very Intent of Christ's
Dying for all, which was, that as many as live, should not live unto
themselves, but unto him that dyed and rose again. 4. While he shuts out
Justification, as done or effected by God obeying God, as he says; how is the
Creature to put this on as a Robe, seeing these Men like not to be concerned in
Christ's inherent Righteousness or Holiness, as a Matter of Justification?
Which while they are not Partakers of, nor clothed with, they are clothed
with Sin and Iniquity, the Rags of old Adam and self-Righteousness, ^vered with
a Covering, but not of God's Spirit; and how then should they be invested with
the best Robe upon these filthy Garments, or while unstript of those old Rags?
Surely they will find it otherwise. 5. For they will find, that if they appear
before the Lord, not having on the Wedding Garment, the white Linen, the
Righteousness of Saints, they will be found speechless, and be turned out as
unmeet Guests; their own Guilt will stop their Mouths that they will not be
able to plead and say, O God, thou have obeyed thy self in our Nature for us;
or, Christ's Obedience, Suffering and Death is imputed to us for our
Justification; we are very fit Guests, only on that Account; though we be all
our Days disobedient, polluted and sinful in our best Actions: This will be no
Plea for you; neither will God say then, bring forth the best Robe and put upon
these men's filthy Rags and polluted Garments; but Friend, how came thou
hither, not having on the WeddingGarment take this evil Servant and cast him
into utter Darkness; Devart ye Workers of Iniquity, I know you not. God will
take Vengeance on all them that know him not, who obey not the Gospel, but obey
Unrighteousness; and Tribulation and Anguish will be upon their Souls. 6. The
Prodigal's coming to himself, and returning to his Father's House with Regreet
and Bewailing himself to his Father, saying, Father, I have sinned against
Heaven and in thy Sight; I am not worthy to be called thy Son; and the Father's
meeting him with Compassion, and then calling for the best Robe to put upon
him, and allowing him sumptuous and joyful Entertainment upon his Return and
Repentance: This makes for our Purpose; The Prodigal did not remain in his
Extravagancy, nor among the Swine from his Father's House, confidently telling
his Fellows, That though I be an Unfaithful and Disobedient Son, and thereby am
become poor and ragged; it is sufficient that I believe, and apply my Father's
best Robe and Entertainment that he has in his House at this Distance, and in
this my Rebellion; Nor did he say to his Father when he met him, Father, thou
have been faithful, and have perfectly obeyed and fully paid thy self in my
stead for me, which I must look upon as my Absolution and Acquitment from all
thy Anger, Frowns and future Punishments, though I continue a Disobedient and
Rebellious Son all my Days; thy Obeying thy self is my whole Discharge for all
my Iniquities past, present and to come, etc. Surely this was not the returning
penitent Prodigal's Song (though it be the impenitent Presbyter's) but Luke 15.
18, 19.
Father, I have Sinned, etc. make me as one of thy hired Servants: His inward
Remorse and Penitency spoke sorth it self as his acceptable Plea, and there is
Joy in Heaven over one Sinner that repents; not over impenitent, unmortified
Hypocrites, and Boasters of Christ's Righteousness without them, and they
living in the World without it or him either.

I have often granted and confessed, that neither by the Deeds of the Law, nor by
men's own Actions are any justified with God: But the Man's concluding, that our
personal Obediences to God's Will and in God's Strength are the Deeds of the
page 99.
Law, whether we obey from Faith or without Faith, they are the Deeds of the
Law; and what is the Consequence? Therefore not justifying, or our Obedience by
Faith to the Will of God, and that by his own Strength, is not concerned in our
Justification: And both these I must deny as unsound and unscriptural; for 1.
The Deeds or Works of the Law, by which no Flesh shall be justified, are not
that Obedience of Faith which the Apostles preached, which was and is
acceptabl^ to God; nor that justifying Faith or Belief in God, which is
Obedience itself, and without which it is impossible to please God or be
justified: Dare he deny that this believing is Obeying? 2. To conclude obeying
the Will of God from Faith, not to be of a justifying Tendence, is repugnant to
plain Scripture, Jam. 2. 24.

And note, that if all Works and obeying God, even from Faith, must be counted
the Deeds of the Law, by which none be justified; then this makes the Apostle
James's Testimony void, as thwarting Paul's, where James said, Was not Abraham
our Father justified by Works? etc. And Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed to him for Righteousness, Jam. 2. 21. 23. And was not this Believing of
God a real Obeying? though not those Deeds of the Law spoken of Romans 3. 20. For
the Obedience or Works of living Faith, which justify in James his Sense, and
the Works of the Law (not of Faith) which Paul mentions, are two differing
States and Things, otherwise there would be a Clash between them.

Again, If Abraham's believing God, was imputed to him for Righteousness; and
so the Righteousness of true andliving Faith be imputed to them also, who walk
in the Steps of the Faith of Abraham, who was faithful and obedient; for any to
oppose the Imputation of this Righteousness, as to its being within, or
endeavor to exclude this Righteousness of Christ and Faith from true
Believers, as only wrought without them, and not within them, because imputed
or reckoned theirs; it were as good Doctrine to exclude true Faith and
Obedience of it, as all wrought without us, not within us, and yet say, it is
imputed to us; for living Faith which works by Love, and the Righteousness of
it, are inseparable.

But the Man is greatly confounded in a self Contradiction, where he grants
that Christ's Justifying Righteousness To his 10. and 11th Argum.
(that is Imputed) is the same that redeems our lost Souls; p. 100. (which is
true) And yet he shuts out, not only Believers personal Obedience to the Will
of God, through Faith and God's own Strength; but also Sanctification and
Holiness (and so the Inward Work of Christ) from being our Justifying
Righteousness or Redeeming our lost Soul, p. 100.

Where then and how is the Soul redeemed? Is not the Soul within? And is not
Christ made unto true Believers Wisdom, Righteousness; Sanctification and
Redemption; and all these inwardly received? and has not this man confessed
that we are saved by the Washing of Regeneration? etc. and so Justified or made
Just by inherent Holiness, from Titus 3. 5, 7. page 89.
Can we be both saved and Justified through this inward Washing of
Regeneration, and yet not redeemed nor Justified through it? Oh! Confusion and
Darkness to be seen and felt.

Arg. II. No Righteousness wrought by us, is of that Worth as to redeem our
lost Souls, nor for that are we Justified; therefore the Sufferings of Christ
only, etc. This Argument (says he) God enabled me the first Dispute to press
with full Enlargement on the Consciences of the People to secure them from the
Soul-destroying Error of this man.

Rep. This Accusation upon me is both groundless, false and malicious.

For 1st, I never affirmed any such Doctrine, as that any Righteousness wrought
by the Creature, does redeem man s lost Soul to God; nor place any such
Infinite Worth, Price or Merit upon any temporal Act or Work of Man; but Christ
Jesus, who is God's Righteousness, is the Redeemer, Deli verer, and so the
Redemption of the Soul to God, by whom also the Soul is enabled to true
Obedience: It is by Grace in him, through Faith, that we are saved; not of our
selves, it is the Gift of God; nor of Works, lest any Man should boast;
howbeit, Good Works are ordained of God that we should walk in them; for we are
his Workmanship, created in Christ again unto good Works, see Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10.

2dly, I never undervalued the Worth of Christ's Sufferings in the Flesh; far
be it from me so to do, though yet I cannot own this man's placing men's
absolute Justification on them, and from thence shutting out Christ's Inward
Work of Sanctification; yet thereto both the Travil of his Soul. Intercession,
Sufferings and Sacrifice had a lively Tendency, seeing that both Remission and
Sanctification is known through Faith in his Blood, which both purges the
Conscience, sanctifies and justifies. I do confess that as the Redemption of
the Soul, or its Salvation, is of infinite Value; so the Price that procures it
must be equivalent and nothing short of infinite.

But I further perceive my Opposer is confounded in this matter of Satisfaction
and Justification as he states it; for one while he reckons, it is only by God
obeying God in our Nature; an other while, ' it is only by the Sufferings and
Death of Christ (which he calls his Righteousness imputed) wherein also he
contradicts diverse of his eminent Brethren, who say, that Christ could not
satisfy divine Justice as Man simply, by temporal Death and Suffering, because
Infinite Justice must be answered with an infinite Satisfaction, Price or
Payment for Man's Redemption: Others again are of the mind, that God Being
Infinite and Perfect in all his Attributes both in Goodness, Love and Mercy as
well as Justice; and Omnipotent in Power, he could forgive or pardon Sin, upon
true Repentance (without such a strict and severe Payment as before, as to be
sure he both can and does.

To his pressing with Enlargement on the Consciences of the People viz. That
they are Justified and Redeemed only by the Suffering of Christ, and not by his
inward Work of Sanctification and Holiness, any more then by their own Works or
Righteousness wrought by them. The Unjustness and Unrighteousness of both such
Teachers and People that follow them, do manifest what little Effect such
Preaching has upon Conscience; neither indeed does it tend to any real in
ward Conviction or Remorse in order to a true Conversion; but to make them
believe they are already secure and saved in their Sins, and pure in their own
Eyes, when they are not washed from their Filthiness, (which is to Justify the
Wicked, or declare them, Just (and to condemn the Just, or declare Christ as
the Subject of his Fathers Wrath, in Man's stead) How falsely and corruptly have
many Defiled and Guilty Consciences unjustly acquitted and eased themselves on
this account? But had he in Truth pressed the Necessity of Turning to the true
Light in the Confidence, Repeatance, Regeneration, the new Birth, Obedience of
Faith, perseverance in Grace, etc. this might have had Impression on the
Consciences in order to a Reformation, and so have manifested and demonstrated
the blessed (...) and End of Christ's Coming, Suffering and Sacrifice for
Sinners, and God s holy Design therein, and his condescending to make a
Covenant in his own terms with them, to receive them into his Kingdom,
Government and Protection; none of whose Terms or Covenant, is Continuance in
Sin or Disobediance term of Life; for to be received in Covenant with God is,
to be received into Agreement and Union with him.

But after this Man has shut out both Obedience to the Will of God through
Faith, Sanctification and Holiness, from being our justifying Righteousness, or
to redeem or acquit, etc. he essaies to mend the Matter, saying, It does not
shut page 130.
it out, either as inconsistent or a needless thing, etc. And wherein is
Sanctification consistent and needful? Is it consistent and needful to
Justification, y^a or nay? Take his Answer.

It is so far from being inconsistent, that they are inseparable, and the one a
Means to the other.

Well said; Is Faith and Justification consistent, and Faith a Means thereof?
This overthrows his shutting (...) Sanctification therein; for there can be no
living and justifying Faith without Sanctification; But then he goes round
again, viz.

Flying out of our selves, as seeing nothing but Matter of Condemnation page
100.
nation in ourselves to Jesus Christ by Faith, and apprehending the Purity and
Holiness of our Savior's Heart and Life, etc.

Whether do you fly out of your selves to Jesus Christ? And by what Faith can
he be seen, laid hold on, or his Purity be apprehended to your Justification,
while there is nothing seen but Matter of Condemnation in your selves? For

1st, The true and living Faith is not enjoyed without some Degree of
Sanctification within; and if without this Faith you cannot be justified, then
not (...) inward Sanctification; true Faith, and Love by which it works, are
Fruits of the Spirit, and the Mystery of Faith is held in a pure Conscience;
and he that believes in the Son of God (...) Life.

2dly, The Righteousness of Faith does not bid us fly out of our selves to
Christ's Sufferings without only for Justification (and that while there is
nothing to be seen within but Matter of Condemnation (which is to impute
Christ's Susfering to men's Justification, while they are under Condemnation in
themselves, as if they were imputatively just and righteous, even when really
and actually damned, which is a sad Imputation, and none of God's nor Christ's)
but the Righteousness; of Faith, rather bids us return to the Word of Faith that
is nigh in the Heart, to obey it and do it, which Word is both saving and
justifying to them that obey it: Say not in thy Heart, who shall ascend (or fly
up) into Heaven to bring Christ down; or who shall descend into the deep to
bring Christ again from the dead; but the Word is nigh thee, etc. Romans 10. And
it is by this ingrafted Word that the true Faith is wrought in the Heart, and
the true Application, Benefit and Confession is made to the Soul of Christ's
Sufferings, Death and Resurrection, and the real Intent, blessed End and
spiritual Advantage thereof, experienced by true Believers, who are Obeyers and
Doers of the Word, and not mere outside Hearers and Talkers.

Again, this man in Contradiction to his excluding Sanctification before, and
saying, that Holiness is not needful to constitute page 100.
a justifying Righteousness; and to his Doctrine for Imperfection and Sin, and
his justifying Persons condemned in themselves; He grants thus far to the
Effects of Faith, viz.

Our Hearts turning to God, we dislike our Sins.
We are sweetly engaged to please God in all things.
That thus God purifies our Hearts by Faith.
That thus we are sanctified by Faith which is in Christ.
And a lively Faith will work by Love.
It is needful to testify our Love to God and Christ, and to please and honor
God, and be a good Example to our Neighbor, etc.
Come on; Good Doctrine! Well said S. S. And is not Faith needful to
Justification? And can we be justified without pleasing God, or please God
without Justification? or is not that of a justifying Nature which pleases
God? Pray consider it; the Apostles Experience was, being justified by Faith,
they had Peace with God, Romans 5. ^. And whatsoever we ask we receive of him,
because we keep his Commandment, and do those Things that are pleasing in his
Sight, 1 John 3. 22. The Apostles Doctrine and our Opposers Inconsistent.


But S. S. and his Brethren expect to be accepted and justified, because Christ
kept the Fathers Commandments, or because God obeyed God (as his Phrase is) and
on the same Account to be heard and answered of God, while they break his
Commands, and do those things that are displeasing in his Sight.

Again, John the beloved Disciple said, Hereby we know that we are of the
Truth, and shall assure our Hearts before him; for if our Heart condemn us, God
is greater then our Heart, and knows all things; but if our Heart condemn us
not, then have we Confidence toward God, 1 John 3. 19. 20, 21. to the End.

But S. S. and his Brethren pretend Faith, Justification and so Confidence
toward God (because of Christ's Sufferings only) when their Hearts do condemn
them (from the Evidence of the true Light bearing Witness against them) and
when they see nothing but Matter of Condemnation in them; and indeed this their
dead Faith, Confidence and false Imputation are of the same Matter.

The true Apostle said, Let us draw near with a true Heart, in full Assurance
of Faith, having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our Bodies
washed with pure Water, Heb. 10. 22.

But our Sin-pleasing Presbyters think to draw near unto God in a justified
Condition on the Account of Christ's Sufferings only, with such a Faith as does
not purify the Heart; and having both a polluted, sinful Heart, and a defiled
or evil Conscience all their Days.

The Apostle John's Testimony was, Herein is our Love made perfect (viz. in our
dwelling in God, and God in us) that we may have Boldness in the Day of
Judgment, because as he is, so are we in this World, 1 John 4. 16, 17.

But the Imperfection and Sin pleading Presbyters think to have Boldness in the
Day of Judgment, because Christ was perfect and suffered in the Flesh, although
they remain all their Days imperfect and sinful, seeing nothing but Matter of
Condemnation in themselves; and so are not at all like God nor Christ in this
Present World: They think it will be a Sufficient Plea, that Christ was Perfect
and Sinless in their stead; that God obeyed God, and so was like himself, how
Imperfect and unlike him soever they be on this side the Grave; they conceiting
themselves Elect Persons Christ said, If ye love me keep my Sayings, Joh. 14.
23. and John said, By this we know that we love the Children of God, when we
love God and keep his Commandments; for this is the Love of God that we keep
his Commandments and they are not Grievous, 1 John 5. 2. 3.

But our Opposers, the Presbyters and others, will pretend they love God and
his Children, while they are daily breaking and violating his Commandments, and
will not believe it possible for any to keep them in this Life, though assisted
by the Power of Christ.

The Apostle Peter testified, That even Baptism does now save us, not the
putting away of the Filth of the Flesh (or outside Washing) but the Answer or
(as some have it) Demand of a Good Conscience toward God by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

But our Opposers Belief and Principle is, That it is only Christ's Obedience,
Sufferings and Death in the Flesh imputed to us, that does save and Justify
them; and on this is only their Plea and Demand, and not from his Spirit's Work
of Sanctification or spiritual Baptism, nor the Answer or Demand of a Good
Conscience toward God; they have both shut out Sanctification and Holiness,
(and so excluded Good Conscience) from being needful to Justification, or to
constitute a Justifying Righteousness, Many more Comparisons and instances
might be produced to (...) how inconsisient our Opposers are with the true
Apostles and their Doctrine.
for they herein hold, or at least imply two Righteousnesses of Christ, the one
Outward to Justify, and the other Inward to Sanctify; the one Imputative, and
the other Inherent; the one Perfect, and the other Imperfect: And so the
Sufferings and Death of Christ in the Flesh (however inflicted on him by wicked
Hands and Murderers) must be imputed by these men as the Perfect Justifying
Righteousness; but Christ's own Everlasting Righteousness of Sanctification in
the Saints must be deemed Impersect, and not accounted unto Justification; nor
the best Robe, though it be the white Linen, the Saints Righteousness, whose
Garments are washed and made white in the Blood of the Lamb.

Whereas Christ's everlasting Righteousness, Holiness, Love, Faith, Patience,
etc. (wherein he perfectly obeyed the Father, and resigned up to his Will both
in Doing and Suffering) were inherent in him; and therein, and for that Cause
his Obedience and Sacrifice was most acceptable and a sweet smelling Savor to
God; not with respect to the Murtherous Act of those that crucified and slew
him; but with respect to that Inherent Holiness, everlasting Righteousness and
eternal Spirit, by which he offered uphimself a Lamb without Blemish, and
spotless Sacrifice to God, and always did those things that pleased him, Joh.
8. 29. And of the same everlasting Righteousness must every true Believer
partake in himself, by the same eternal Spirit by which the Saints were both
Washed, Cleansed, Sanctified and Justified, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Through the same
eternal Spirit, the same Power, the same Righteousness, the same Holiness, the
same Faith, the same Love, the same Patience, etc. that was in Christ, do they
partake of, who truly follow him and walk in his steps, having his Life
manifest in them, and received the Spirit of the Son, which receives of his
things, and gives unto them who walk after the Spirit, not after the Flesh:
But, Object.


Quest. What can we give to God for our Souls, proportionable to so Great a
Loss, to so great Sufferings? Sanctification and Holiness; or a little Faith,
and the Works that follow? This is likely to do!

Answ. A groundless Question in the first place; no man can redeem his Brother,
nor give to God a Ransom for him; for the Redemption of the Soul is precious,
and so precious, as that which cannot be procured without a Price of Infinite
Value: Christ gave himself a Ransom for all; it is Christ himself that ransoms,
saves and redeems the Soul to God, and that through Sanctification, or washing
of Regeneration; and Christ is made unto us who believe in him, both
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption: however, this man undervalues
Sa^ctification and a little Faith; and though it be the Gift o^ God to us (and
not ours to him) and the Saints Victory, we have not given to God the Ransom
nor the Price; he Loved us first, and therefore we Love and believe in him: and
in this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because he sent his only
begotten page 101.
Son into the World that we might Live through him, 1 John 4.

Again, though the Phrase [ Merit of Christ's Blood and Sufferings] be not a
Scripture Phrase; yet the Worth and Value thereof, with respect to man's
Salvation, we never disesteemed, since we knew the true and spiritual
Application, Virtue and Effects of his Blood, etc. through his Light and
Spirit, to the purging our Consciences, cleansing and justifying, which yet is
an inward Experience, not shut out nor put afar off by the true Church, whom
God has purchased with his own Blood, not redeemed with corruptible thing, but
with the precious Blood of Christ, (which therefore is incorruptible) Act. 20.
28. 1 Pet. 1. 17, 18. cited by S. S. But then he egregiously mistakes in
saying, viz.

Let us then with Paul abhor all Sanctification in us, all Holiness, page 102.
Notewhat Doctrine is here.
all Works of Faith whatever is wrought by us, in Comparison of what we spy by
Faith in Christ.

Answ. A very gross Mistake and Perversion; an Abuse of Paul and of those
Hearers to whom S. S. preaches such impious Doctrine: It was not Sanctification
or Holiness within; nor yet the Works or Obedience of Faith that Paul either
abhorred or rejected for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ, or that he
might win Christ; but it was his former Confidence in the Flesh, his own
self-Righteousness, which was of the Law, and all those things that had been
deemed as Gain to him, that he counted Loss for Christ, and for whom he
suffered the Loss of all those things, and counted them but as Dung, that he
might win Christ, which Phil. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
he could not so account of all Sanctification or Holiness, wrought by Christ
within, nor of the Works of Faith: Can it be any less then Blasphemy (as in
this man's Sense) thus to present and read Paul? viz. I abhor all
Sanctification within, all Holiness and Works of Faith; and I count them but
all Loss for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus; and have suffered
the Loss of all my inward Holiness, Sanctification and Works of Faith, and do
count them but Dung, that I may win Christ? etc. How unlike Paul, odious and
gross were it, thus to pervert his Words, as to say, Let us with Paul abhor all
Sanctification in us, etc. neither does Paul make any such Difference or
Repugnancy between Christ's inward Work of Sanctification, and the Excellency
of his Knowledge; nor between being in the Faith or Obedience thereof, and
being in Christ and his Righteousness; but really desired that he might be
found in Christ, not having (said he) mine own Righteousness, which is of the
Law; but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is
of God by Faith, Phil. 3. 9. so far was he from either putting the
Righteousness of Faith afar off, or abhorring Sanctification within, that he
desired to have it and be possessed with it, as one found in Christ.

For that only does God justify us, which does suffice to turn away Arg. 12.
13.
his Wrath from us, and satisfy his Justice for our Transgression; but
Christ's Sufferings only, etc.

Answ. I deny his minor, as it depends on the Word only; for then, why are not
all Men in the World justified, for whom Christ suffered and dyed? which was
for all Men; he tasted Death for every Man, for the Sins of the whole World:
And yet, he that believes not on the Son has not Life, but the Wrath of God
abides upon him; therefore without Faith, Repentance and Conversion (which are
Effects of Christ's inherent Righteousness and Work) the Wrath is not turned
away, nor are Men justified.

Obj. Let us then place no Confidence in Sanctification, Holiness, Faith, and
the Works that follow, as if these (laying aside Christ's Death on the Cross)
could turn away God's Wrath, etc. page 103.


Rep. Herein he varies from his Argument before, which was, that Christ's
Sufferings only can turn away Wrath, justify, etc. Note, It is not
Sanctification, Holiness, Faith, etc. only can do it, without Christ's Death
(or laying it aside) But while here he implies, that Sanctification, Holiness,
Faith, etc. (with respect to Christ's Death) can turn away Wrath, he has
contradicted his own Argument before of Christ's Sufferings only, which also
cannot be slited; nor his Death made void, where true Faith and Sanctification
in him are enjoyed; for therein Christ himself is enjoyed, and we dare not
preach nor own such Doctrine, as to abhor all Sanctification in us; nor the
having no Confidence in Faith and Sanctification, which are wrought in the Soul
by Christ Jesus.

CHAP. IV.
Of Satisfaction; some serious Considerations farther opening the Doctrine and
Sense of our Opposers.

Obj. GOd will not Justify us without full Satisfaction to his Justice for our
Sin. page 103. 104.


Rep. And what Kind of Satisfaction is it, he thinks this Justice requires? (We
confess a Satisfaction, or answering his Good Pleasure in and by Christ Jesus;
but about the Manner of it, as supposed and stated, we differ) See how the man
states it; He concludes, it must be a Punishing our Fall.

1st, From God's Judgment. 2dly, God's Truth. 3dly, God's Will and Purpose.
Quest. What is his Ground from these? see his Answer, viz.

1st, God has said in the Day thou eatest thereof thou shall Dye. page 104.
2dly, Cursed is he that continues not in all, etc.
Rep. God's Truth is concerned in his gracious Promises (both absolute and
conditional) as well as in his conditional Threats: And let it be considered,

1st. That Man's Dying in the Day he so eat, was the Fruit of his Fall into a
State of Misery, in dying from that State of Righteousness and Felicity he was
in before; and it was the Natural Effect of his Transgression; and yet not so
as that God was absolutely bound to bring eternal Death on Man in that day, no,
no; nor was divine Justice so narrowly tied up or short sighted, as not to
reserve a Remedy, for God had the Seed of the Woman in his eye; and divine
Justice does not require that eternal Death or the second death, shall remain
upon any, but on the finally Impenitent, who continue in Sin under the Power of
the first Death; for all they who return to God and receive Christ the promised
Seed, he proves to them both a Just God and a Savior: neither Justice nor the
Curse of the Law can limit him from showing Mercy, Remission or Salvation to
the Creature, upon true Repentance and Faith in Christ Jesus, who overcomes the
World and the evil Nature; from whence those cursed Actions have sprung,
mentioned Deuteronomy. 27. 15. to the end of the Chapter. And it is true, the Jews
outward, who rejected the Righteousness of Faith (that is received in the
Spirit) when Christ was set forth, and fetched their Righteousness from the
Letter of the Law, they did strictly and formally bring themselves under the
Curse thereof, when they continued not in all that was written; But there is no
Condemnation (or Curse) to them that are in Christ Jesus [my Opposer leaves out
what follows] viz. that walk not page 106.
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1.

Yet what the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law, that every
Mouth may be stopped, and all the World may become Guilty before God: This Law
therefore (as thus convicting) is Spiritual and tends to man's Conversion, in
that it is to prepare him for Mercy, which divine Justice does not hinder, nor
detain the World under the Guilt; divine Truth being concerned in the gracious
Promises, which are Yea and Amen in the Promised Seed that ransoms Man, slayes
the Enmity, crucifies the Transgressors or first Birth which must dye, upon
which the Law and its Sentence of Death must pass; and Man that is guilty must
feel this in himself before he be delivered into that State wherein there is no
Condemnation, or be united to the Lord who Kills and makes Alive: So that
neither Justice nor Truth in the Law are frustrated; the Law is not made void
through Faith, but established in the Spirituality and Purity of it; the
Righteousness of the Law being fulfilled in them that walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit; And it is said, that the Righteousness of God without the
Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, even the
Righteousness of God, which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon
all them that believe, Romans 3. Christ came to condemn Sin in the Flesh; and is
the End of the Law for Righteousness, to all them that believe (and not for the
Continuance of Unrighteousness) and where Sin is put an End to by Christ, the
Curse and Condemnation of necessity cease with it, and the Righteousness of
Faith takes place in the Soul.

Obj. Adam has sinned -- We are by Nature Children of Wrath page 102.
in our own Persons; We have failed, hence God's Wrath is up against us, God
burning in his Wrath is ready to condemn us, to take Vengeance on us, to
consume us as Fire; not to Justify and acquit from our Ill Deserts, etc. If
Burning ten thousand millions of Years in Hell is not enough to turn away his
Wrath, etc.

Rep. Thus he has defined divine Justice, as he thinks (which is further
spoken to hereafter) but upon whom must it be thus satisfied, supposes he?

S. S. Justice is satisfied upon Transgression, p. 103.

Rep. Then upon Rebellious Transgressors, and not upon Christ, who was always
Innocent and did the things well pleasing to the Father; and therefore divine
Justice could never burn, nor take such Vengeance on him for Satisfaction, and
let the Guilty go free; for so to do could not be Justice; the Satisfaction
whereof (as it intends the Undergoing the Penalty of the Law due for the Injury
done) Justice can only require it of the Offender and Guilty, for whom the Law
was made; not of the innocent or Righteous, for whom the Law was not made: But
where then were the Mercy or Forgiveness to the poor Creature that has sinned,
if God were so engaged to burn in his Wrath, and take the full Vengeance upon
lost man?

S. S. His Truth engages him to execute his Justice in punishing page 104.
Sin (yea to the full) should Mercy offer to pronounce any Truth says not this
to Christ, but to the Offenders, Deuteronomy. 27.
man absolved, his Sin unpunished, Truth would stop the Mouth of Mercy, and
say, Hold, I have Cursed, etc.

Rep. What strange and lamentable Division would this make in God! and how
variable and in Contrariety with himself? And how Contrary to the Testimonies
of his Faithful Witnesses has this Man rendered God? As if absolute Revenge
and Wrath toward all Mankind did bear the sole Sway in him over all, both his
Love, Goodness and Mercy; Oh sad! Is not his Mercy over all his Works? and has
he not Forgiveness in store? unto whom it is said, who is a God like unto Thee,
that pardons Iniquity and passes by the Transgression of the Remnant of his
Heritage, he retains not his * Anger forever, because he A Testimony against
S. S's Doctrine.
delights in Mercy, Mica. 7. 18.

The Lord God merciful and gracious, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin,
Exodus 34. 6, 7. So that even in the Law Gods Mercy and Forgiveness (as well as
his Threats) were signified, which his Truth must needs be concerned in.

Is it not evident, that God is not engaged under Revenge (nor his Mercy and
Truth divided or opposite) as this Man renders him? For both must be received,
and have their place where Judgment and Mercy meet, and men through the Law
become dead unto the Law, so as to know Christ to live in them, and through
God's Judgment and Chastisements to find a Ransom and an Atonement; and God
has Power to turn away Wrath, as he does upon men's true Repentance,
Humiliation and Return to him; as when the King humbled himself, the Wrath of
the Lord turned away from him, 2 Chronicles. 12. 12. And also Hezekiah seeing the
Wrath of the Lord upon Judah and Jerusalem for their doing Evil in his Sight,
and turning their Backs, etc. He said, Now is it in mine Heart to make a
Covenant with the Lord God of Israel, that his fierce Wrath may turn away from
us, 2 Chronicles. 29. 8, 10. And (in the King's Letters) be ye not stiff necked but
yield your selves unto the Lord; serve the Lord your God, that the Fierceness
of his Wrath may turn away from you, 2 Chro. 30. 6, 8. The King did not
conclude, that the Curses pronounced before in Deuteronomy. 27. against Offenders, did
obliege God to perpetual Revenge, or not to turn away his fierce Wrath, if the
People turned from their Iniquities: And said the Lord unto his Church (that
was to be gathered of the Gentiles) In a little Wrath I hid my Face from thee
for a Moment; but with Everlasting Loving Kindness will I have Mercy on thee,
says the Lord, thy Redeemer, Isa. 54. 8. And concerning Israel, whose Heart
was not right with God, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant; it is
written, But he being full of Compassion, forgave their Iniquity, and destroyed
them not; Yea, many a time turned he his Anger away, and did not stir up all
his Wrath; for he remembered, that they were but Flesh, etc. Psalm. 78. 37, 38.
Yea, in the midst of Judgment and in Wrath he has remembered Mercy;
Righteousness, and Equity are the Stablishment of his Throne; Mercy and Truth
go before his Face, Psalm. 89. 14. See how well consistent his Mercy and Truth
are: also Psalm. 57. 3. and 61. 7. and 98. 3. and 103. 8. and 115. 1. and 119.
64. and 130. 7. Dan. 9. 4.

Therefore neither his Justice, Law nor Truth could intend (or be) any
Limitation or Tie to his Power or Soveraignity, not to turn away his Wrath, or
show Mercy to them that turn away from Evil; and Mercy rejoices against
Judgment (or Condemnation) Jam. 2. 13. His Truth is so far from stopping the
Mouth of Mercy; yea, it is most evident to the spiritual Travelers, that though
God hide his Face, and send forth his Terrors because of Men's Iniquities and
Sins, he has Power to turn away his Wrath, extend Pardon, and show the Light
of his Countenance (as he really does) when Men turn from Iniquity, and depart
from Evil, and with broken Hearts submit themselves to his Power, who keeps
Covenant and Mercy toward them that love him, and them that keep his
Commandments, Dan. 9. And for any to deny him this Power and Soveraignity in
himself, to show Mercy and Forgiveness, is

1st, To deny the true God to be God.

2dly, To deny his Love and Goodness.

3dly, To deny his Omnipotency, Infiniteness and Perfection.

4thly, To render God less gracious and kind then his Son.

5thly, To debase God's Power, Glory and Soveraignity below the Prerogative of
Earthly Princes, which is best shown in mitigating, rather then in exacting the
Rigor of Laws; in Acts of Pardon or Grace, rather then the Severity of Revenge
upon the Subjects.

6thly. To conclude, That God cannot forgive Sin or Debt, but must have full
Payment, or use the utmost Revenge or Rigor (for Satisfaction) (whether on the
Debtor or Surety) is contrary to Christ's Similitude of the Kingdom of Heaven,
as likened unto a King that had Compassion on his Servant, when he (...) down
and worshipped him, and forgave him all his Debt o^ ten thousand Talents; and
blasphemously renders God like the same Servant, in his Want of Patience
toward his fellow Servant, taking him by the Throat and casting him into
Prison for his hundred Pence, so that the Lord was wrath with this unmerciful
Servant, and delivered him to the Tormentors, etc. See Mat. 18.

7thly, To represent God thus Cruel and Revengeful, either to Man or to Christ
in his stead, as that he cannot otherwise pardon Sins past before Conviction
(without such a rigid Satisfaction or Payment) is to deny him to be a Just God
and a Savior, when besides him there is no Savior; or as if to be a Savior
were inconsistent with his being a just God, contrary to his own plain
Testimony; See Isa. 45. 14, 15. Chap. 43. 10, 11, 12. and 49. 26. and 63. 8.
Jer. 14. 8. Hos. 13. 4. 1. Tim. 1. 1. Chap. 4. 10. Tit. 3, 4, 5. Jud. 25. And
thus says the Lord God (unto the Seed of Jacob) I, even I, Isa. 43. 11, 25.
am the Lord, and beside me there is no Savior: I, even I, am he that blotteth
out thy Transgressions for MINE OWN'SAKE, and will not remember thy Sins.

Now our Opposer having justified the Wicked, and rendered God cruel; we must
now take a View of his condemning the Just One, for whose Dig^ity I thus appear
on the behalf of God and the Son of his Love. The Man having taken Pains to
justify such as have nothing but Matter of Condemnation in them; Let us now
take notice what Honor he has ascribed unto the Son of God, and what
Entertainment he allows him, while (to justify the condemnable) he condemns
him as with Wrath and Vergeance (which some call Justice vindictive) whereby he
reckons, the Sins of the World were punished in (...).

He alleges Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up
for us all: What made God's Just^ce lay page 104.
on so? Did Christ ever by Sin provoke to this? Will God punish where there is
no Sin? This is an ocular Demonstration.

Rep. God spared not his own Son from what he was to do and suffer, but
delivered him up for us all; yet not to his own Revenge or burning Wrath
incurred by Sin, but to be a Sacrifice for Sinners: It could not be, that
Christ should be the Subject of the Wrath that is due to Sin, he being the
Mediator between God and Man that had sinned; No more could the Act of those
wicked Hands and Murderers that crucified him, be counted an Act of Gods
Justice, laying on so, as fully punishing the Sin of the World in the Son of
his Love; for this is contrary to his Mediatorship, and to his being a
Sacrifice of a sweet smelling Savor to God, both for a Pacification and
putting away Sin: It behooves a Mediator and Advocate, to be a Man of Interest
and Favor with the King, and not an Object of his Hatred, else he could not
prevail for others, if himself were so out of Favor.

S. S. The Faith of a Believer that is justified can here see Justice page 104.
punishing his Transgression, and that he is not justified without full
Satisfaction to Justice; God has punished then the Sins of all that are
justified in Jesus Christ.

Rep. See here how the Man has condemned the Just that never sinned, unto the
Punishment due to Sin: See how he has thundered it out against Jesus Christ; the
burning Wrath and Hellfire incurred by Sinners, must now be Christ's
Punishment: Oh, wonderful Justice! there was never such divine Justice known or
heard of from just Men or justified Persons, How God ever could be thus angry
with his ever Beloved, Innocent Son, whom he both freely gave and upheld in his
Love through all his Sufferings; for God was in Christ, reconciling the World
to himself, bearing, forbearing, and as sympathizing with him in Spirit in his
Sufferings, wherein Christ, as Man, was accepted a most acceptable Sacrifice;
howbeit, his bearing the Sin of many, rasting Death for every Man, was not by
Way of Revenge or Wrath from the Father, nor the Punishment due to the World's
Sin; for tasting Death is far short of eternally dying: The Prophet said,
Surely he has born our Griefs, and carried our Sorrows, yet we did esteem him
stricken, smitten of God and afflicted; but he was wounded for our
Transgressions; he was bruised for our Iniquities; the Chastisement of our
Peace was upon him, Isa. 53. It was man's Transgression that was his Burden
and Cause of his Grief and Suffering; however, some esteemed him smitten or
plagued of God; He has born our Griefs and carried our Sorrows, etc. Such as
suffer with Christ, and lie under the Sense of their Burden do not lay all,
both the Sorrow and Punishment O^ Sin upon Christ; such do not say, Christ was
sorry or repented for us, therefore we need not; or, Christ was chastised and
afflicted in our Person for us, therefore we need not be chastised nor
afflicted; for Sin past Christ made Intercession, therefore we need not pray:
This were not to know the Fellowship of his Sufferings, nor to be conformable
to his Death, nor baptized with his Baptism. Besides, the Chastisement of our
Peace upon him, was not Revenge nor burning Wrath from God: Chastisement and
Vengeance are two things; God's Chastisement is in Love, not in Revenge; it
pleased the Lord to bruise him (who had done no Violence) Isa. 53. by
delivering him up to suffer and bear our Sorrows and Griefs [AN ACT OF HIS GOOD
PLEASURE, NOT OF REVENGE OR WRATH] how could it be Justice, fully to punish the
Innocent for the Wicked's Offense? Were it not Blasphemy to charge God with
such Cruelty and Inj^stice.

Obj. Every known Sin is a wilful Rejection of Infinite Goodness, page 105.
a free Choice of Infinite Displeasure, etc. It therefore carries Infinite
Demerit with it; and nothing short of Infinite Punishment, or Sufferings of
Infinite Wrath, can possibly suffice to satisfy for it.

Rep. Woe unto them that persist in Sin, and reject Christ's inherent or inward
Righteousness for such a Satisfaction as this of Infinite Punishment, etc. or
that believe, their Sins were thus punished in Christ, and thereupon continue in
Sin! Woe unto you that thus justify the Wicked and condemn the Innocent! God's
Controversy is against you: you are afflicting, oppressing and crucifying the
Just with your Iniquities, treading under Foot the Son of God, rejecting the
Blood of the Covenant, you are Guilty of the Body and Blood of As S. S. has
page 105.
Christ, as much as they were that condemned him, and said, Also his Brother T.
Dans. says, Christ was not Innocent, but guilty of our Sins, when he suffered,
Synops. p. 36, 40.
he was Guilty of Death; your Doctrine imputes the Sin, Guilt and Punishment
thereof to Christ; you have esteemed him plagued of God, but you have pierced
him and grieved him by your Iniquity and Hypocrisy: Take Heed of wilful
sinning, and rejecting the Goodness of God, lest there remain no more a
Sacrifice for you: Repent, repent, repent; Return, return, return to the Lord
God, before his Wrath sweep you away into Perdition.

Further he says, None but God's Equal, and this is God himself page 105.
in our Nature, that is capable to satisfy God for Sin -- Christ received the
Stroke of God's Justice, etc.

Rep. While he states this Satisfaction to be only by Way of punishing men's
Sin in Christ, and now it is God himself that satisfies God; this is of an
absurd and blasphemous Tendence, as if God punished himself; or as if God
satisfied God with Infinite Punishment or suffering of Infinite Wrath: and what
is this but to divide God against himself? Yet we may find out a better Sense
for the Words before, that God and Christ were one and inseparable in the
Suffering and Affliction; That his Soul bore, as the Spirit of God was
burdened, afflicted and grieved under the Weight and Pressure of Man's
Iniquity and Sin; howbeit, this was not of the Nature of strict Payment, made
to God by himself in Man's stead, much less to punish man's Sin in Christ with
infinite Wrath.

Quest. Can Faith and the Works that follow, without the Imputation page 105.
of Christ's Sufferings satisfy God's Majesty for our Sin?

Answ. Here he misseth the true State of the Controversy or Question, which
should rather be, Can your Imputation of Christ's Sufferings without true Faith
and the Obedience (or Works thereof) either satisfy God's Majesty for Sin, or
justify Men? while he implies No, he has given away his Cause, by granting,
That the Sufferings of Christ alone can not justify Men without true Faith and
Obedience to him.

By so much was Jesus made the Surety of a better Testament, Heb. 7. 22. This
is no Proof that your Sins were imputed to him, as punished in him by the
suffering of Infinite Wrath, which to affirm, renders him no better then a
Transgressor, guilty of your Sins (as your Brother T. D. has affirmed) which
is much beneath his being Mediator or the Surety of the new Testament, which he
was made the Surety of, to ensure and make good the Promises and Privileges
thereof to true Believers (which are all Yea and Amen in him) and to enable us
to obey and perform those Terms and Conditions of the new Testament or
Covenant, which concern us; for we cannot receive the Promises but in him, nor
discharge or pay our Duty without him; therefore he is the Mediator Heb. 12.
24. Chap. 9. 14, 15.
of the new Covenant; he is our high Priest, made with the Oath of God, and
continues forever; and he is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them, Heb. 7. 24,
25, 28. But if God's Justice be fully satisfied for your Sins by the Sufferings
of Christ, and for them only God justify men, and secure them from
Condemnation [ It being against Justice it page 106.
self to punish those Sins a second time, that have been punished to the full
already] he says, How then shall God render to every Man according to his
Works? Indignation and Wrath to them that are contentious and obey not the
Truth, but obey Unrighteousness; Will they be able to plead this Doctrine
before his Tribunal, Lord, thou have punished our Sins to the full in thy Son
Christ: It is against Justice it self to punish them a second time; for Christ
dyed for all Men, tasted Death for every Man, gave himself a Ransom for all for
a Testimony in due Time? But if this were a Punishment of their Sins to the
full, then how Christ's tasting Death for every Man could not be the same with
the full Punishment that's due for Sin.
could Justice punish them again with Indignation and Wrath? But Glory, Honor
and Peace to them that do Good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile, to
them that through Patient continuing in Well-doing, seek for Glory and
Immortality eternal Life: see Romans 2. Such do not plead Christ's doing Good and
suffering only for them in his Person to justify and excuse them in Sin in
their Persons, or to cloak their doing Evil all their Life long, though
Sin-pleasing Hypocrites thus endeavor to indulge themselves and others in
their Iniquities: But be not deceived, God will not be mocked; such as you sow,
such shall you reap.

Whereas S. S. accuses G. W. with saying Satisfaction is not needful;
Quoting, Divin. of Christ, page 62. And then cries; Such Blasphemy is this Man
not afraid to utter; the Lord page 106.
Convince and Humble him.

To thee S. S. I say, Thou have wronged me; those are none of my Words; the
Lord humble thee for thy belying me, thi^ is not the first time: If thou or any
Reader, do but moderately view my Book and Page quoted by thee, it will plainly
appear, that to say, Satisfaction is not needful, are none o^ my Words; for
it is very plain, that I have not denied, that Satisfaction that was in Christ;
but have objected aga nst the manner of their stating it, and sinful tendence
of their Notion about it: as 1st, Against their making Satisfaction the Effect
of God's full Revenge, or the Execution of Vindictive Justice (as their Phrase
is) on his Innocent Son, thereby to clear the Guilty. 2dly, I have
distinguished between God's Chastisement and Revenge. 3dly, That the Intent and
End of God's Peoples undergoing his Chastisements or Correction (according to
Jer. 10. 24. Heb. 12. 9, 10, 11. And their partaking of the Fellowship of
Christ's Sufferings) is that they might be Partakers of his Holiness, live and
reign with him. 4thly, I have plainly told my Opposers, That if Man continue in
Rebellion against Christ, rejecting his Love and Grace, his Sufferings and
Satisfaction will not free them from the Severity of God, nor from the
Execution of his Judgment, which is committed t^ Christ, etc. Divin. of Christ,
p. 62, 63. The Truth of what I have written in the said Book in the Plaineness
and Simplicity of it, stands over the Subtility of my Opposers, and remains
unanswered; and instead of an honest or moderate Answer, this Man does but
pervert, curtaile, tautologize, nibble and pick at my Words, and abuse me; He
does not so much as seriously take notice of the stress of my Objections, but
over and over imposes his Opinion, and brings a very unfit Instance for God's
judging it meet to punish all Sin (or that all our Sin is punished) in his Son
without Cruelty, etc. where he says, If God does damn the Impenitent, if he
damns the page 107.
fallen Angels, he is cruel.

We say, No; he is Just: But is this and his punishing your Sins in his Son to
the full, a fit Parallel? Let the unprejudiced Reader judge. And then he grossly
imposes and begs the Question again, viz.

And for that person who is God, to suffer a temporal Death (though page 108.
in his human Nature only) this is of infinite Value, an infinite Abasement, a
stroke of Infinite Wrath; for had not God's Wrath against Sin been Infinite, he
would not thus have struck a Person of infinite Worth and Dearness to him,
interposing as a Surety between him and us miserable Sinners: for ^od in our
Nature to suffer what he Is not this like the Language of Hell? or theirs saing
of Christ, will he kill himself? And he is guilty of death.
did, this is more then for Men or Devils, to suffer God's Eternal Wrath or
Revenge; this Wrath more clearly shines in the Infinitude of it in thus smiting
* the Brightness of his Glory and Express Image of his Person * then in the
eternal Damnation of Men and Devils in the unquenchable Flames of Hell.

Rep. This strange Language against God and Christ, I This is something like
his Brother W. Haworth his Affirming, [ That the Father poured out all his
Wrath upon his Son Jesus Christ] and that this way he Satisfied Vengeance,
which he calls his Justice, in his Epistle to their Quaker Converted; answered
by John Crook, and W. Bailey, in their Book Rebellion rebuked, but the
Adversaries of Truth shall find there is wrath yet for them, if they repent not.
shall need to ^ay little about; let them that know the holy Scriptures see how
unlike them it is; only I may query and demand of him,

1st, Where do the Scriptures say, That God suffered a Temporal Death as a
Stroke of Infinite Wrath? 2dly, That in Infinite Wrath he struck a Person of
Infinite Worth and Dearness to him. 3dly, That this Wrath more clearly shines
in the Infinitude of it in thus smiting the Brightness of his own Glory, etc.
then in the Eternal Damnation of Men and Devils, etc.
If I should conclude this both Blasphemous and Unscriptural Language, that
thus sets God at variance with himself, or as smiting and punishing himself,
etc. S. S. perhaps would be ready to cry out, Oh Blasphemy! and charge it upon
me, though it be his own, the very Tendence and Nature of his own Doctrine: The
Matter is fully answered and refuted before. Again, Where do the Scriptures
say, that God punished the Surety, Christ, for our Sins, and for a time poured
forth his Wrath upon him for our Iniquities? p. 108.

I am sure the Scripture he cites, says the contrary of him, Isa. 42. 1. viz.
Behold mine Elect in whom my Soul delights. Could he then pour forth his
Wrath upon him for your Iniquities? Oh! be ashamed of such Doctrine; Could
either the Chastisement of our Peace on him, his bearing the Sin of many, or
carrying our Griefs, be the Father's pouring forth Infinite Wrath upon him?

That it is for Christ's sake that God does pardon upon Repentance, page 109.
is very true ('it is well he Grants this upon Repentance) and it is for Christ's
sake; for all the Good that is revealed or wrought in us, that is acceptable to
God (as true Faith, Repentance, Obedience, real Righteousness, etc.) is all of
Christ, and brought forth by him in that Soul that is pardoned and Justified in
him, or accepted in the Beloved: But, how God's Forgiveness of the ^ebt, or
Pardon of the Offenses, agrees with the Surety's full Payment and Suffering the
Punishment and Wrath deserved, I leave to the understanding Reade^ to judge.
Or, how Christ should make Intercession for them that come unto God by him, if
all their Debt were paid and Punishment undergone, appears not; especially
where the Surety's Payment and Suffering is supposed in this case to be
Infinitely of more Value then if the Debtor himself had paid and suffered all,
because of the Surety's Infinite Dignity; and when, if the Payment and
Satisfaction of Law were thus strictly and severely made, neither Law nor
Justice could admit that the Debtor should lie in Prison (as many do under
Satan's Chains of Darkness, liable to Wrath and Vengeance) but he should be
both discharged and delivered ipso facto? But we see it otherwise: Many are yet
in the Prisonhouse in Satan's Chains, who yet may be loosed; and Christ ever
lives to make Intercession for them that come unto God by him. The Man mends
not the matter in what follows.

Obj. Christ Having purchased Salvation for us at the Hands page 109.
of Justice by his Intercession, he Obtains the Purchase at the Hands of free
Grace, and so applies it to us.

Rep. Oh strange! Justice (or rather Revenge) fully paid and satisfied, but
Grace yet to be so much interceded or solicited to; this renders Grace more
Severe then the Condemnation of the Law, and Inferior to Revenge. And what
Division would this make in God (and between Christ and Grace)? it renders him
Inferior to Earthly Princes, and his Grace below Common Justice among Men; For
supposing, a Subject had forfeited his Inheritance to his Prince by Rebellion,
and after a full Satisfaction and Payment made to the Prince in his stead by a
Person of Intrest with him, Could it be Just in the Prince to detain his
Inheritance from him? Or Suppose, the Surety has made full Payment and
Satisfaction in the Debtors stead, both to what Law and Severity could demand;
Could the Creditor justly detain the Debtor in Prison for some great and
ear^est Solicitation to be made by his Surety for him? Or, were it proper for
the Person for whom the Satisfaction is thus made, to cry out, Good Sr. forgive
me my Debts, etc. if all past, present and to come be fully paid by the
Surety? And yet those Persons that are of this Opinion pray to God, to forgive
them their Trespasses or Debts as they forgive others, etc. but is their
forgiving of Debts, either a Casting the Debtors or their Sureties into Prison
till they have paid the uttermost Farthing? Surely that is not Forgiveness.;
whereas the Intercession made to God does acknowledge his Dominion, Power and
Justice, as having been offended, and a Subjection due to him; and also his
Grace, as that which Man owes due Obedience and Respect to: Notwithstanding,
this man, who has pleaded such a kind of Satisfaction, by Justice or Wrath
punishing their Sins in Christ, he is not only Rigid or Severe, but Partial in
his Opinion (like a Sect-Maker) limiting this Satisfaction and the Extent of
saving Grace only to a few; and yet that few not allowed the Privilege, to be
delivered from the Being of Sin in this Life. In his saying, That

This Satisfaction was designed for all them, who through special page 109.
Grace in time believe; these all are delivered here from the Guilt and
reigning Power of Sin, and so are out of their Fetters, and shall hereafter be
delivered from the Being of Sin.

Rep. That Satisfaction that was made, and Testimony of God's Love and Mercy
that was given by the Sacrifice and Death of Christ (and as he is the
Propitiation) it was for ALL Men; by the Grace of God he tasted Death for every
Man, for the Sins of the whole World; he dyed for ALL MEN (not only
Presbyterians or a few particular Predestinarians, but all Men or Mankind in
general) That as many as live, should not live unto themselves, but unto him
that dyed and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 15. Who his own self bare our Sins in his
own Body on the Tree, that we being Dead unto Sin, should live unto
Righteousness, 1 Pet. 2. 24. And see verse 21, 22, 23.

It is plain, that Christ's Suffering under the Burden of Sin, and Dying for
all Men, pointed at an other End, and had another kind of Emblem in it, then
Men's living in Sin all their Days, or their not expecting Freedom from the
Being of Sin till after Death; this is not to suffer or dye with Christ, nor to
come to the Blood of Sprinkling, which only frees from the Guilt of Sin, by
sprinkling and purging the Conscience from the Being of it: The Ignorance and
Absurdity of the contrary Sin-pleasing Doctrine is sufficiently detected before.

And why [ Presbyterians] Satisfaction of Revengeful page 109.
Wrath in your stead, or the Death of Christ, as Satisfaction in your stead, to
free you from everlasting Burning, and forgive your Sins? Why for you more then
the whole World besides? Did not Christ dye for all Men as well as you? And yet
none are pardoned or in a justified State, until they come Christ to ease them,
and they to have true and living Faith in his Name and Power, and so to be led
by that eternal Spirit, by which he offered up himself a Lamb without Spot to
God.

Obj. Nor can this Writer nominate one of us, that encourages Men to take
Liberty of sinning from the Consideration of Christ's page 110.
Satisfaction -- the Lord convince and humble Slanderers.

Rep. What ever you think or pretend, your Doctrines are Sin-pleasing, and give
Liberty therein; your disputing for Imperfection and Sin all your Days; your
justifying the Sinner or the Unjust, while justly condemned in himself by the
Light of Christ; your setting sorth Christ, as made the Subject o^ God's Wrath
and Revenge in your stead, and saying, that divine Justice (which you term
vindictive or revengeful Wrath) was satisfied in your stead, by punishing your
Sin to the full in Christ, and that thereby you are secured from Hell, etc.
though you continue in Sin, or uphold the Being of it all your Days, and
deserve to have your Failings and Infirmities cast as Dung into your Faces (as
is confessed) page 110.
and yet you count your selves imputatively Righteous, pardoned and justified,
etc. even while you are saying, Let us with Paul abhor all Sanctification in
us, etc. S. S. p. 102. Let us place no Confidence in Sanctification, etc. p.
103. The very Nature and Tendence of these and such Doctrines is Sin-pleasing,
and soothing, and grateful to Hypocrites, encouraging them to take Liberty of
Sinning all their Life time, if they can but be so credulous or self-confident,
as to believe they are Elect Persons, and secured from Damnation on the Account
of your Notion of Satisfaction, that pretends and imputes Revengeful Wrath and
Severity to Christ, but Ease to your selves in your Sins: But this your empty,
devised Notion will prove neither your Justification nor Security in the great
approaching Day of God, which shall declare every man's Work, and wherein he
will judge the Secrets of Men by Christ Jesus, according to the Gospel; and
every Man must give an Account of himself to God, and be Rewarded according to
the Deeds done in the Body, whether they be Good, or whether they be Evil,

AN APPENDIX, Wherein The Controversy is summed up and resolved, partly by Way
of Question and Answer, with a plain Intimation of my Sense thereof, as
relating unto the 2d, 3d and 4th Chapters before.
Quest. 1. WHat was the Nature and Extent of Christ's Sufferings?

Answ. Not an undergoing infinite Wrath or vindictive Justice (so called) at
the Hands of his Father (for that is the just Reward of Rebels against God,
Christ and free Grace) but, 1st. The Weight and Burden of Sin and Grief of
Soul because thereof, as seeing the Punishment and Wrath incurred by the
Rebellious. 2. The Fury of his Persecutors, in his undergoing that cruel Death
of the Cross, inflicted on his Body by wicked Hands and Murderers; so that his
Sufferings were twofold, both inw^ard and outward. 3. His real Desire, Travil
of SouI and good Will through all, was for the Benefit and Good of all Mankind,
even for the whole World (for whom he suffered and dyed) that all (who receive
him) might be spiritually influenced with his holy Life, and partake of his
Mind and Will, which stood in subjection to the Father.

Quest. 2. What was the true Signification, Intent and Ends of Christ's
Sufferings?

Answ. 1. To evince God's long Suffering toward all men (for whom Christ gave
himself a Ransom for a Testimony in due Time) 2. The Appeasement of Wrath and
Severity, so far as to grant Remission on true Repentance. 3. The End of the
Law and first Covenant, and the Shadows and Curse of it (as threatened to impose
the Terms of it) 4. To introduce the new-Covena^t Administration, Christ being
the Mediator of it. 5. To show God's great Condescension to receive poor lost
Man again on the Terms of this new Covenant, reinforced by the Death of his
Son, that Man coming into this new Covenant, he might experience a real
Agreement with God, even in the Son of his Love.

Quest. 3. How far the Light in Man is necessary, and answers the Intent and
Ends of Christ's Sufferings?

Answ. It is absolutely necessary to Salvation, being that divine Principle of
Light within, which directly guides all them that obey it, into the Way and
Dispensation of the new Covenant, whereby they secretly experience the real
Intent, Virtue and Ends of Christ's Sufferings and Blood.

Quest. 4. Whether the Light of Christ within (in each Degree of it) be not the
New Covenant Light in Nature and Kind, and the certain Guide into this Covenant?

Answ. It is; being it was the Life that was in Christ (as the eternal Word)
that was and is the Light of Men; which Life or Light is therefore divine and
spiritual, as the NewCovenant Dispensation is.

Quest. 5. Whether the Word within, the Law within, the Commandment within, the
Kingdom of God within and the Light within, be not one and the same thing, and
so the Life of the New Covenant?

Answ. They are: The Names, Degrees and Manifestations do not alter or vary the
divine Nature or Life thereof.

Quest. 6. The Satisfaction, what? and in what did it consist?

Answ. 1. Not rigid Payment from Christ to God. 2. Not of the Nature of
Payment, for all Sins past, present and to come (as stated by Sin-pleasers) 3.
Not Christ's undergoing infinite Wrath or Revenge from his Father (for these
were never exacted nor required of him) But the Satisfaction was in Christ, as
the Son of the Father's Love, the Delight of his Soul, and as he was a
Sacrifice of a sweet smelling Savor to him; both the Father and the Son
condescended in one and the same Infinite Love for Man's Recovery out of Sin
and Death, and for his Deliverance from Wrath to come, being confessed to be
equally kind to Man, and equally angry at Man's Sin) God so loved the World,
that he freely sent his only begotten Son, etc. And in the same Love the Son
freely gave his Life, yea, even himself a Ransom for all, for a Testimony in
due Time.

Quest. 7. What is true Justification?

Answ. It is properly and strictly a making Man Just (viz. through the Washing
of Regeneration) It is also not only God's pardoning Sins past for Christ's
sake, through Faith in his Name; but also God's absolute accepting, owning and
blessing all them who faithfully obey, persevere and walk in the Light and Law
of the new Covenant.

Q. 8. What is the true or real Imputation of Righteousness?

Answ. It is the same with Justification (as it relates to God's reckoning or
esteeming that Man Righteous that partakes of the everlasting Righteousness of
Christ by a living Faith in him) and so the same Righteousness and Holiness of
Christ as inwardly revealed and brought forth in the new Creature that is made
conformable to his Image; and so all the blessed Fruits and Effects of Christ's
Power and inward Work of Righteousness, as true Faith, Love, Obedience,
Sincerity, Holiness, Integrity of Spirit to God, are acceptable to him,
accounted of and reckoned unto his People for Righteousness, and all still for
Christ's sake, who is the Author and Finisher of true, living, saving,
justifying Faith; as, Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him for
Righteousness; We say then, that Abraham's Faith was so reckoned or imputed to
him: It has been by some confessed (as between God and the Creature) That there
can be no liking one another without Likeness of Disposition; nor does God
receive Man into actual Friendship with himself, without being renewed after
his Image.

Quest. 9. Who are the Subjects of everlasting Wrath and Vengeance?

Answ. Wicked and Rebellious Persons, who reject the Love of the Truth tendered
to them, such as tread under Foot, crucify or contemn the Son of God, slight
the Blood of the Covenant, and do Despite to the Spirit of Grace.

Quest. 10. Whether it consists with divine Justice or Truth in God, to show
Mercy and to be an absolute Savior, after so much Injury done against him and
his Commands by Adam's Fall, and the actual Disobedience of his Posterity in
the Fall?

Answ. Yes; It is not inconsistent with divine Justice, sor God to be the
absolute Savior of all that return to him and believe in him, he being a just
God and a Savior, besides (or without) whom there is no Savior: Absolute
divine Justice in God does not limit him, nor withold Mercy from the Creature
in the first Place; nor does it produce Severity or Revenge, until his Goodness
be rejected and wholly slighted; for he says plainly, I am a just God and
Savior, etc. I, even I, for my own sake do pardon Transgression.

Quest. 11. Whether Divine Justice did properly and strictly require a full
Payment and Punishment upon Christ in man's stead, for all the Debt contracted,
and Injury done by fallen Man?

Answ. No; Christ's Sufferings were not of that Nature or Intent; but as it was
by the Grace of God that he tasted Death for every Man: They showed God's
Patience, and proclaimed his Mercy, in Order to pardon all that return to him
from the Evil of their Ways.

Quest. 12. Whether God as Rector and Judge, could dispense Object.
with the Act of Law, and not rather with the immediate Object? Did he not
substitute an Innocent Person to undergo the Punishment or Severity of the Law
due to Sin and Sinners?

Rep. This is objected by some of our Opposers, which m^st needs imply a great
Dispensation with, and Digression from the very Intent of the Law: If the
severe Punishment of it be removed from the Unrighteous (for whom it was made,
and who have incurred it) and fully inflicted upon Jesus Christ, the Righteous
One that never Sinned, Could God thus far dispense with the Intent of the Law,
and yet not forgive Sin, without such a kind of Satisfaction and Payment
supposed? Oh, sad Blasphemy and Inconsistency! And seeing it has been
confessed by some of our Eminent Opposers, that Satisfaction is not a
Scripture Phrase but a Notion of Law, and made agendo and patiendo, viz. by
Christ's Obedience in Doing, and Subjection in Suffering the Penaltey, which
the Law should have inflicted upon Offenders, I propose these three Questions
to our Opposers.

Q. 1. Were it Reasonable or true to say, the Creditor has forgiven both the
Debt and Injury, if it be all paid and fully punished in the Surety?

Q. 2. Were it Justice in the Creditor to detain the Debtor in Prison, if his
Debts be all paid by the Surety? or to suffe^ the Surety to wait long
soliciting or interceeding for his Pardon or Deliverance?

Q. 3. Does not your Doctrine of such Rigid or Severe Satisfaction oppose
Christ's Intercession? Howbeit we still confess, the Man Christ was greatly
acceptable and most eminently satisfactory, considered as a Sacrifice of a
sweet smelling Savor to God, and as the first Fruits.

Quest. 13. What did the Blood of Christ that was shed, bespeak? and what is
our Sense of Christ's Blood; and for what End owned?

Ans. 1st, It did bespeak Remission of Sin past to all that truly repent and
believe in him. 2dly, Our Sense of the Blood of Christ is a living and
spiritual Sense of the Virtue and Efficacy of it, as through it we receive
Redemption, even the Forgiveness of Sins. 3dly, We really own and confess to
the Blood of Christ, both in the History and in the Mystery, as most
significant to express his Life which he gave a Ransom; and the Value of the
one Offering, we do in the sight of God confess, and own the Blood of Christ
both as shed for us, and as sprinkling and purging our Consciences from dead
Works: And this We are come to know by his Light shining in our Hearts, which
as we walk in [the Light] we have Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of
Jesus Christ cleanses us from all Sin, 1 John 1. 7. Heb. 9. 14. To come to the
Blood of Sprinkling (which speaks better things then that of Abel) is an
Attainment and Mystery, only obtained by true Believers, in and through his
divine Light and Eternal Spirit, by which Christ offered himself without Spot
to God; and by One Offering God has perfected sorever them that are
sanctified, whereof the holy Ghost is a Witness to us, Heb. 10. 14, 15. For if
a Literal Knowledge and Application of the Blood, could either Sanctify or
Justify without having the Conscience sprinkled with it, then how could it be
as the AntiType answering and ending the Type or Pattern under the (...) Hebr.
9. 23.
Law, where all the People were sprinkled with the Blood of the Offerings? see
Heb. 9. and 10. Chap. And the Leaper was cleansed by seven times sprinkling
upon him the Blood of the Bird that was killed, Lev. 14. 6, 7. but the Blood of
Christ, which sprinkles and purges the Conscience, far excels all those under
the Law; and therefore, as it redeems from the vain Conversation, it is called
the Precious Blood of Christ, as opposed to, and beyond all Corruptible things,
1 P^t. 1. 18, 19. Thus in the Blood of Christ there is a Mystery, and a
spiritual Consideration and Application, absolutely necessary beyond the
Historical Profession and Faith thereof (as well as in the Cross, etc.) as
Christ said, Except ye eat my Flesh and drink my Blood, ye have no Life in you,
Joh. 6. It is the Spirit that quickneth, etc. The holy Ghost is Witness to us
of the Virtue and blessed Effect of the One Offering; Blessed be the Name of
the Lord our God forever, who by his divine Light has opened our
Understandings in the Mystery of Christ Jesus and the saving Knowledge of him
which is after the Spirit.

All these Scriptures relating to Christ's Sufferings, as Isaiah 53. Zach. 13.
17. Romans 8. 32. Phil. 28. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15, 21. Gal. 3. 13. and 4. 5. Heb. 2.
9. do all intimate God's great Kindness and Condescension in Christ Jesus, and
his Humiliation, and deep Suffering under the Weight and Burden o^ Sin; and as
by the Grace of God he tasted Death for every Man: all which fall greatly short
of proving our Adversary's ^harge against him, viz. That God poured down his
Wrath or Revenge upon his Innocent Son, for Satisfaction to divine Justice in
Man's stead that had done the Injury: I say, all the Scriptures alleged by
them, can never prove this; but rather, 1. That Christ's Sufferings were of
another kind, both as he was delivered up by the Father, in his Patience to
suffer and bear the Burden, Sorrows and inward Griefs, by reason of man's Sin,
for which his Soul also was made an Offering. 2. And as the Reproaches,
Suffering and Death of the Cross that he sustained from the Wicked and
Murderers, were temporal or had an End; and not as infinite Wrath and Revenge
from God, due to wicked Men. 3. Yet Christ was rendered a Curse, and as made to
be Sin; This he could not properly be a in his own being for Sin, and a Curse
(in this abstract Sense) couldnot strictly relate to his pure and sinless
being; but so made or reputed with respect to his bearing the Reproach and Sin
of many, the outward Punishment Crucifying, Death, and Blood-sheding: And all
that was in him, which in any sense might be said to Suffer, was offered and
given for the Advantage and Good of Mankind; and that which he so gave and
offered, was called his Life, Himself, a Ransom, and all some times in
Scripture comprehended and expressed under the Phrase The Blood, the precious
Blood of Christ, that redeems from the vain Conversation, purges the
Conscience, etc. and even the outward part of his Suffering, most Innocent
Example, his Cross, Death, Blood of his Cross, his reviving again, were so far
from yielding either an Indulgence or justification to men as in Sin and
Disobedience, that they did very eminently preach and openly proclaim to
Mankind, both the Condemnation of Sin in the Flesh, Repentance, Mortification,
Remission, and Man's reviving again to real Righteousness and Justification
therein; and all to be experienced through Faith in the Name and Power of Jesus
Christ, the Son of the living God; in sending of whom the Father's Love was
manifest, that we might live through him.

And, as Christ's Travil of Soul was inward, and so his Suffering inward, as
well as outward, what is more obvious to the spiritual Eye and Mind, then that
his Travil and Sufferings, and his holy Design therein, were to have an inward
Effect, and inwardly to be fulfilled by his Word and Power, even in them who
receive and believe in the same? as that Instance of the holy Evangelist is
very plain and pertinent, where it is said, They brought unto him many that were
possessed with Devils, and he Cast out the Spirits with his Word, and healed
all that were Sick, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaiah the
Prophet, saying, Himself took our Infirmities, and bare our Sicknesses; see
Man. 8. 17. Isaiah 53. 4.

And moreover, as to Christ's being the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins
of the World; This taking away the Sins was not only fulfilled by that general
Expiation or purging (which he made) by Way of Sacrifice; but also inwardly by
his real Cleansing, purging the Conscience, and purifying the Soul from the
Nature and Being of Sin. And God's Reconciling us by the Death of his Son,
whose putting away Sin, is said to be by the Sacrifice of himself, his [ by
himself] purging our Sins, the Will of God sanctifying us through the offering
of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all, etc. as being a Sacrifice of far more
Value then those Typical ones under the Law, which he fully answered and ended,
though they were said to make Atonement and Reconciliation for Sins of
Ignorance, that they might be forgiven; and the Scapegoat to bear away the
Iniquities and Transgressions of the Children of Israel, Lev. 4. and 16. and
23. (And did not the killing and sacrificing of Bulls, Goats and Heifers
typifie or figure forth the killing and destroying that corrupt, beastly Nature
and Enmity in man, which is for Death and Destruction, and which those Beasts
were as a lively Emblem of?) Seeing hereby God was pleased in a Way of
Condescension to their low Capacities, to show a Pacification or Expiation, to
express his Forbearance, suspending the severe Execution of the Law, and
Willingness to pardon Iniquity, and to pass by former Transgressions, and be
reconciled, when they afflicted their Souls, and offered up burnt-Offering in
the Day of Atonement [as both were required] much more has God declared
himself reconciled to us, in commending his Love, to us in that while we were
Enemies, Christ dyed; and so he has showed forth his Kindness and free Love,
as willing to pass by and pardon the Sins of the World upon true Repentance, in
his setting forth his Son to be a Propitiation, through Faith in his Blood; and
in his being in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their
Trespasses unto them, which was both in his Forbearance, commending his Love
and Good Will in his Son unto the World, and sending his Son that the World
through him might be saved. Let it be seriously here minded, 1. That those
Scriptures relating to Christ's Death, Reconciliation, Sanctification, and
putting away Sin, as by Way of Sacrifice, etc. as Joh. 1. 29. Romans 5. 10. Heb.
10. 10. Chap. 1. 3. Col. 1. 22. which intimate the Work, as if universally
done; yet it is with respect unto the general Favor and Good Will of God in
Christ, as by the which Will, we (Believers) are sanctified through the
Offering of the Body of Jesus; and so we are said to be reconciled in the Body
of his Flesh through Death: Withal note, that it was the manner of the
Hebrews, Prophets and Apostles, to speak many Things in the Spirit of Prophecy,
as done or past before they were accomplished in the proper Subjects, God
having an Eye of Pity and Compassion open to lost Man for his Redemption, even
before it was fulfilled, whereby he saw and looked beyond the former
Transgressions, Sins and Infirmities; for the Sin of the World is not actually
taken away, purged out or put away, as to its Nature and Be ing (nor are Men in
a State of Reconciliation or Friendship) while actual Sinners and Enemies in
their Minds, but as they come to be converted and sanctified by the Spirit:
Therefore God's reconciling the World in and by his Son, shows his gracious
Will, and was intended conditionally to be fulfilled in them (viz. Upon Faith
and Obedience) It was done so, as with respect unto Christ as the first Fruits,
and with an Eye to the Condition, before it was actually fulfilled in them; and
what was outwardly signified as to the Good of Man by Christ's Sufferings and
Death in the Flesh, as our great Exemplar (in his Obedience and Holiness) is
inwardly to be fulfilled and answered in Spirit, as to the Principle, End and
Design of God therein: as for Instance, God was in Christ reconciling the World
to himself; yet the Apostle added, We pray you in Christ's stead, be you
reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. And to the Saints at Colos. You that were
sometimes alienated, and Enemies in your Minds by Wicked Works; yet now has he
reconciled in the Body of his Flesh through Death, to present you Holy, and
Unblameable, and Unreproveable in his Sight, If ye continue in the Faitle
grounded and settled, etc. Colos. 1. 21, 22, 23. Mark, on this Condition they
were reconciled and to be presented to God; Not as being Enemies and in wicked
Works, But as made Friends by Conversion to and continuing in the Faith: And
God showing forth Mercy to all, and universal Pardon of Sin past, in and for
the sake of his Son Christ Jesus (he being the Propitiation for the Sins of the
whole World) declares his not imputing their Trespasses unto them according to
Severity; but his being reconciled to them, that they may be reconciled to him.

Finally, Because God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself; and
because he commended his Love to us, while we were Sinners, and we reconciled,
etc. by the Death of his Son, as our Representative: If from hence any infer,
That their Sin being not imputed, therefore they are justified by the
Imputation of Christ's Death and Blood, though they continue in Sin and
Disobedience to him, and remain Unsanctified, I must deny their Consequence,
and tell them, that there is a twofold non-Imputation of Sin; or, under a
twofold consideration Sin is said not to be imputed: 1st, with respect to
God's Forbearance, while he suspends Execution, and does not cut off (...) in
their Sins, when yet the Nature and Being of Sin is not destroyed, nor purged
away, expecting their Repentance, etc. In this Sense David, when he said, I
have sinned, Nathan to^d him, The Lord has put away thy Sin, Thou shall not
dye, 2 Samuel 12. 13. Yet this proves him not then at that time in an absolute
and complete Justified Estate, or his Sin blotted out; for after this he both
implored Mercy, entreated Forgiveness, and passed through great Judgment,
Difficulty and Trouble, under the Weight and Burden of his Iniquity. 2. A Non
Imputation of Sin in a better and higher State, as where the Mi^d and Spirit is
sanctified and cleared, and Sin really done away and wholly blotted out, where
the Lord Imputes not Iniq^ity, but Righteousness; as, Blessed is he whose
Transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is covered; Blessed is the Man unto whom
the Lord Imputes not Iniquity, and in whose Spirit there is NO GUILE, Psa. 32.
1, 2. It were unreasonable to think, that all to whom Sin is ^ot imputed i^ the
first Sense, are in a Justified State; for then were the whole World Justified;
for God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their
^respasses: But in the latter Sense they are Justified, being Washed,
Sanctified and Justified in the Name o^ the Lord Je^us, and ^y the Spirit of
our God, 1 Cor. c. 11. and such as in w^ose Spirit there is no Guile; And so no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1, 2. Therefore Justification. And if it be
further queried (viz.)

Quest. How does it consist with God's Justice and Truth (which always
required perfect Obedience) either to Pardon or pronounce Man Just upon the
account of an Inh^rent Righteousness, Sanctity or Reformation wrought by the
Spirit, without Satisfaction to vindictive Justice for Sins past; seeing those
who are the most inherently Holy have not perfectly obeyed God s Law from the
Beginning of Life to the End?

Answ. 1. Both God's Justice, Truth and Mercy have a share in Man's Reformation
and Restoration to himself: and it is in his u^iversal Love in Christ Jesus to
Mankind, that he makes know^ his Truth that makes free; and the Grace and Truth
concurring in Man's Conversion and Restoration (and so in making him a New
Creature) it must needs be consistent with God's Truth, to Pardon and pronounce
Man Just, as (he becomes and is) God's own Workmanship, in whom he beholds his
own Image renewed; for he blessed the Works of his Hands, and still blesses
them.

2dly, Without such a Satisfaction he does pardon, etc. And yet Justice and
Truth are not violated nor destroyed, but have their place and share in Man's
Reformation, both in God's Judging, Reproving and Correcting Man for Sin,
Co^demning, Crucifying and Slaying the Transgresfing, Earthly Nature and Birth:
and Christ came not to destroy, the Law, but to fulfill it; He came to condemn
Sin in the Flesh (and to Save Man) that the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in them, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: The Law
forbids Adultery; Christ forbids and removes the Evil Lusts and Desires, which
are the Ground of it: The Law forbids Covetousness; Christ removes It: The Law
forbids Murder; Christ forbids Envy.

3dly, But, from the Beginning of Life to the End, who can say, he has perfect
Righteousness inherent in him?

Answ. He that is born of God, the New Creature, to whom Christ is made
Righteousness, and who being God's Workmanship is made the Righteousness of God
in Christ Jesus; He that is attained to this New Creature's State has
crucified and put off the Old Man with his Deeds, whom the Law (...), that has
been the Offender and Sinner from the Beginning of Life to the End: as, The new
Birth and new Cre^ture in Christ, has No Guile in his Spirit; but is always
inwardly Righteous from the Beginning of Life. And that ^or this End God is
pleased in his Son, to show forth his For^earance and Favor to Mankind, and
for a time to suspend the ^evere Execution of his Law, as not to execute
Judgment ^peedily, but in giving Man Grace and Space to Repent, be Converted
and Renewed in Righteousness, This answers the (...) of his sending his Son
into the World, to be both a Sa^ice and a Savior: So his Forbearance or
Suspension of the ^verity o^ the Law for Christ's sake, can be no making void
(...) Law, Justice or Truth, which Christ came to fulfill and (...) (...).

The Difference between the Terms or Tenor of our Opposers Gospel and ours.
I. AS to the Sense or Substance of our Opposers, the Predestinarians
(according to their Traditional Faith, partial, harsh Opinions, repugnant to
God's universal Grace and Love in Christ Jesus to Mankind) their Gospel runs on
this wise, or in such Terms as these, viz.

We tender Grace and Salvation to all; but believe it is only free for a few
Elect Persons, for whom only Christ dyed: Therefore believe you are Elect
Persons, and that Christ dyed for you; apply his Blood and Merits, and you
shall be saved, though you be Sinners all your Days.

Believe that you are Justified by Christ's Death and Sufferings only, though
you have nothing but Matter of Condemnation in you; believe that you are
Imputatively Righteous by Christ's Sufferings and Righteousness without you
only; The Presbyterians, or Predestinarians Gospel antiscriptural.
and in Comparison thereof, do you abhor all Sanctification in you, or inherent
Righteousness wrought in you by the Spirit.

Believe that it is God's good Pleasure, Sin should be in you all your Days,
to keep you humble; and that Christ has satisfied for all your Sins past,
present and to come.

Believe that God has poured out all his Wrath upon his Son Jesus Christ, and
punished your Sin to the full in him, to satisfy Justice for your Injury done
him; Therefore there remains no more Wrath behind for you, being Elect and
Justified Persons: Though you commit Sin, as did David, and have Corruption
remaining in you all your Days, and and daily Sin in your best Duties, and
have Sin mixed with your Graces; your Salvation is eternally secured for you, as
Persons whom God has had in his Eye to save; you need not fear any final Fall,
or falling away from Grace, once in Christ and ever in Christ. [ Thus far
Presbyterians]

II. The Sense and Terms of our Gospel, according to what follows.
From the Sense and Experience we have of God's free Love and Grace in Jesus
Christ to all Mankind, We preach in the Spirit of the Gospel; The Instructions
and Conditions thereof are on this wise: viz.

Be converted that your Sins may be blotted out. Turn ye from Darkness and Sin
to the true Light that shows It, and reproves Evil; And so turn from Satan's
Power to God, and receive the Remissions of Sins.

Believe in the Light that ye may become the Children of Light. Labor to make
your Calling and Election sure.

If ye walk in the Light the Blood of Christ cleanses from all Sin. If ye be
Crucified, Dye and Suffer with Christ, ye shall Live and Reign with him. The
Conditions and Tendence of the Quakers Gospel Scriptural.


Believe and Obey the Gospel, and be saved. Christ Jesus is the Author of
Eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him.

Confess and forsake Sin, and ye shall find Mercy.

Depart from Evil and do Good, and dwell forevermore.

Wash you, make you Clean, put away the Evil of your Doings, etc.

Except a Man be born again he cannot enter in the Kingdom, etc.

If I do not wash thee (says Christ) thou have no part with me.

[And to them in whose Hearts the Work is begun] Look diligently to your
Standing, lest any of you fall from the Grace of God. Abide in his (...), that
you may not fall into the hand of Severity.

[To Unbelievers and Rebellious] If ye believe not in Christ, you shall dye in
your Sins; and where He is ye cannot come.

The Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness; and his Wrath
abides upon them that do not Believe nor Obey his Son. Thus far Quakers so
called.

Now, serious Reader, judge which of these, whether the Presbyterians or the
Quakers Doctrine tends to stir up and excite People to Righteousness, to true
Fear and Watchfulness: And whether the Presbyterians does not tend to beget
People into a Self-Confidence and false Liberty in Sin, upon a partial Opinion
and Conceit; But the Quakers Desire, Aim and End is, To turn People from
Darkness to the true Light, and to true Fear, Diligence and Faithfulness to God.

CHAP. V.
Concerning ELECTION and REPROBATION.

THE CONTENTS.
A brief Introduction, with the Assemblies Opinion; and Stephen Scandret's
uncertain Proposition for it. His Abuse of diverse Scriptures in his State of
the Case for a personal Election, answered, and the Way of God's ^hoosing
resolved. The Weakness of his two first Arguments touching God's Decree and
Promises. His gross Ignorance of those Names written in the Lamb's Book, Arg.
3. His Impertinency and ignorant Allegation and misunderstanding of diverse
Scriptures, concerning God's Choice and Ordination; and the Cause of Men's
Destruction opened, against Argum. 4. Persons being chosen proves not their
Eternal Election (as Persons) Concerning Jacob and Esau; Christ's Sheep, those
that come, are drawn, and given unto him of the Father, Arg. 5 and 6. Election
explained. God's loving Jacob and hating Esau; their Posterities concerned
therein: And how far the two Births were figured in Jacob and Esau. Our
Opposers blasphemously placing a partial Resolution upon God (as creating
Persons with Intention to leave them to Destruction) contrary to his universal
Call and Tenders of Salvation. The Unchangeableness of God's Election in what
State; and our Opposers Ignorance and Error concerning God's Purpose. My
unanswered Objection of setting Life and Death before Men, and warning them of
Destruction. The Cause of God's hardening Pharaoh, Judas and others, not
grounded upon mere Will and Pleasure, but for their Rebellion. Touching the
Fall of particular Angels and Men; the Tendence of God's long-Suffering toward
the Wicke^, and my Opposer's Confession to Truth, to the ^tter Overthrow of his
Opinion. Presbyterians M^ckery in their Warnings and setting Life and Death,
conditional Promises and Threats, before People, contrary to their partial
Opinion of an eternal personal Election and Reprobation. The sad Consequence of
their accusing God with decreeing to deny saving Grace to particular Persons,
yea, to the greater Part of Mankind; showing that divine Justice it self has
not so decreed. Grace differing from Debt. The Reason why God finds Fault with
Men. The Question, Who has resisted his Will? resolved. Their urging all to
for sake Sin, contradictory to their Opinion, and not in true Eaith. Their
Flattering many with fair Pretenses, contrary to their own Intentions; the poor
Encouragement and cold Comfort, that their Doctrine of a personal Reprobation
yields to the greatest Part of Mankind. The wise God, the just Judge, is the
Ordeiner of the Punishment, not of the Fact; nor the Author of Sin, or their
Wickedness who persecuted Christ. Hypocritical Priests, making and strengthening
Hypocrites, by deceitfully daubing them up in their Sins, and flattering them
with a [You are not fallen from Grace] while they are guilty of gross
Wickedness. Concerning God's Convenant with David, and his Seed and the Mystery
typified in him. To all which is added a short Postscript.
A Brief Introduction TO The following Discourse concerning Election and
Reprobation.
STephen Scandret begins with an absolute false Charge against me, as Depraving
God's Truth; whenas according to plain Scripture, without any Depravation
thereof, I examined their partial and graceless Opinion, as their making God
the Ordeiner of whatsoever comes to pass (both as to the States and Ends of
Men) and their placing his Decree thereof from all Eternity upon particular
Persons, and no^ upon the two Seeds and Conditions, wherein Election and
Reprobation do originally consist, which in time extends to Persons, only as
related to the good or evil Seed, and not from a partial, absolute and mere
voluntary Decree and Design to particular Persons, as their narrow and silly
Opinion imports; which I opposed, and that from the Scriptures of Truth,
testifying, 1. God's Good Will and Grace to Mankind in general. 2. The real
Causes (on their Parts) of his Severity toward them and their Reprobation: I
said down the Presbyterian Principle and Opinion, as it may be seen in their
Confession and Catechism, agreed upon by their Assembly of Divines (so called)
at Westminster, and approved by the general Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland;
as where they say in their 3d Chapter,

That God from all Eternity did by the most wise and holy Counsel Presbyter:
Opinion.
of his own Will, freely and unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass [
What soever] makes no Exception of either good or bad Actions of men; and this
is high Ranterism.
And that by the Decree of God, for the Manifestation of his Glory, some Men
and Angels are predestined unto everlasting Life, and others foreordained
unto everlasting Death -- and that these Angels and Men thus predestined and
fore-ordeined, are particularly Note, They place it upon particular Persons,
rendering God a Respecter of Persons.
and unchangeably designed; their Number so certain and definite, that it
cannot be either increased or diminished, etc. And also upon the same
Principle, they add in their tenth Chapter, That all those whom God has
predestined unto Life, and those only he is pleased effectually to call by
his Word and Spirit (out of the State of Sin and Death, in which they are by
Nature) to Grace and Salvation by Jesus Christ, enlightening their Minds,
spiritually and savingly to understand the things of God, etc. And in their
eleaventh Chapter, God did from all Eternity decree to justify all the
Elected; and Christ did in the Fullness of time dye for their Sins, Whereas he
dyed for all men, and is a Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World.
and rise again for their Justification. The Consequence of this Doctrine, with
a plain and scriptural Answer and Confutation, are laid down in the latter End
of our Book, entitled, The Glory of Christ's Light within expelling Darkness,
which Book yet remains unanswered by S. S. both as to this and other Heads,
wherein he and his Brethren are concerned; though now, in order to vindicate
this Doctrine, he lays down the Proposition thus,

S. Scandret, That God did most freely, and unchangeably, and from all Eternity
choose some particular Persons to partake of saving Grace, etc. from whence it
will necessarily follow, That he has reprobated or passed by others: I must
manifest this by Parts.

Answ. In Opposition to this Partiality unjustly charged upon God, I must
assert this Proposition, That God's eternal Election stands originally in his
own Seed of Promise, and free Grace thereby freely tendered to all Mankind,
both Jews and Gentiles, and all Men in the first place left free for a Share
therein, and none are reprobated, but who first reject this Grace, and like not
to retain God in their Knowledge; his words [ that he has reprobated or passed
by others] are very doubtful, being as much as to say, that either God has
from all Eternity reprobated particular Persons, or left them to Reprobate
themselves: It is then either God's Act or the Creatures, which (as appears)
this Man's Masters (the pretended Divines) could not resolve; and we do not
expect him to be a more pro^ound Divine then his Tutors: However, their Opinion
at least reflects upon God, as passi^g by the greater part of Mankind without
a^ording them any Saving Grace, or the least Spiritual Assistance of Divine
Light or Life; so as if he thus takes no notice of them at all, but passes by
them, they must inevitably be left to Destruction and eternal Misery by this
Graceless and Uncharitable Opinion, which tends greatly to ^cclipse the Glory
of God and his free Grace, and renders the Tenders of it to Mankind in general,
and preaching Salvation by it conditionally to all, no better then a Mockery to
the greater part of the World: And this neither S. S. nor his Assembly of
Divines have answered, nor can they clear themselves herein.

S. S. begins to vindicate his Opinion by parts thus: God's Act, which
Essentially takes in the Object thereof; he has chosen some particular
Persons, 2 These. 2. 13. God has Chosen you, Joh. 15. 19. I have Chosen you,
Ephesians. 1. 4. He has Chosen us; This being directly denied, I shall add
Arguments.

Answ. The Scriptures are not denied by me, as most falsely is here insinuated;
but I deny that these prove their Proposition for a Personal Election or
Reprobation from all Eternity: as also I deny, that God from all Eternity did
unchangeably ordein whatsoever comes to pass (as they most grossly asserted) or
that his Decree or Act, is so absolute from all Eternity to particular Persons,
as strictly eying and unchangeably designing each Person to his End; a certain
definite Number unto everlasting Life, and others to everlasting Death: This I
still oppose, and find this Man's Vindication thereof very ^eeble, and his
Proofs impertinent. For that 2 These. (...). 13. He has left out the following
words; after [chosen you] he leaves out [ through Sanctification of the Spirit,
and Belief of the Truth] which, as they clearly explain, how they were chosen
to Salvation, even the Conditions on which God's Act of Choosing them depends,
to wit, Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth: So this makes
clearly against my Opposers Opinion, for they were not capable of this Belief
of the Truth and Sanctification, before they had personal Beings, which sure
they had not from all Eternity; and so seeing the Way and Act of God's choosing
Men, must be through Sanctification, and of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth
(which Condition answers this Decree) he has not designed nor ordained the
contrary Condition (of his Wrath against Man) as Sin and Unbelief, though they
are come to pass upon many, whose Repentance and Return God rather willed, then
their Death or Destruction. But if S. S. might have pleaded a little further
from the words, God has from the Beginning chosen you, if he had insisted on
the Words [from the Beginning] I might answer, That does not signify from all
Eternity; much less that he has had you particular Persons in his Eye, as
unchangeably designing you to Salvation, merely as particular Persons, without
having Relation to any such Conditions or Qualifications, as Faith,
Sanctification, etc. (which may be rejected by Man) 2. The Words [from the
Beginning] are so far from signifying from all Eternity, that in this place
they reach not so far as to the Time of the Beginning of the Creation; but
rather to the Time of their first Reception and Belief of the Truth, according
as they import in diverse other places, as 1 John 3. 11. This is the Message
that ye have heard from the Beginning; and 2 John 5. Though [Beginning] in the
highest Sense, relates to Christ (as the divine Word) who is the Beginning and
the End. And also note, that S. S. deals with that of Joh. 15. 19. as he does
by the other, leaving out both the foregoing and following Words, which still
make against him; setting down only [I have Chosen you] whereas Christ said
thus, Because ye are not of the World, but I have Chosen you out of the World,
therefore the World hates you, Joh. 15. 19. And then it is plain, they were
both of and in the World, before they were chosen out of the World; for could
they be chosen out of that-which they were never in? So that Christ's Choosing
his out of the Corrupt Ways and Spirit of the World through Faith and
Sanctification, is the Reason why the World hates them, which it did not while
they were Conformable to the World. By [ the World] here is understood, those
who are in the Natural, Unbelieving State, and also such as hate the true
Believers and Disciples of Christ; whence it follows, that you Presbyterians
(how highly soever you conceit of your selves as Elect Persons from all
Eternity above all others, yet) are not in the Election of Christ, nor in a
State of Election so (...) (...) (...) (...) the Spirit o^ Persecution Rules in
you; as (...) (...) (...) showed it self in many of your Leaders and (...)
(...). And to that of Ephesians. 1. 4. He has Chosen us (...) him; These words [In
him] to wit, in Christ) S. Scandret, has left out, like one that both shuts
his own Eyes, and seeks to keep others in a blind Belief of his partial
Principle: The very Ground and Principle of Election being in Christ (which the
man overlooks) God has Chosen us (the true Church, which is Elect) in him,
before the Foundation of the World, that we should be Holy and without Blame
before him in Love, Ephesians. 1. 4. For as we are in him, and become so well
qualified in Holiness, and thus nearly related to him, as to be without Blame,
in due time we show forth the Effects and Fruits of that Elect Seed and
Principle, wherein our Life and Ground of Election stood before the Foundation
of the World; not merely as we are particular Persons, or Natural men; but as
his living and Royal Offspring, his Church and peculiar People sprung from his
own Seed, now in due time chosen by him out of the World and the Corruptions
thereof, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth.

S. S. Arg. 1. Particular Persons in time, receive Mercy, are converted, made
to p^rsevere are saved: Therefore God did Decree this beforehand; for God
works according to the Counsel of his own Will, Ephesians. 1. 11.

Answ. Particular Persons in time receiving Mercy, being converted, and
persevering in Grace; does not argue that Mercy was but only proffered and
showed to a few particular Persons; nor yet that it is so absolutely and
Eternally Decreed of God, that all (to whom Mercy and Grace is showed) shall so
inevitably persevere in it, as that there is no Possibility of their Declension
and Falling from it after the time of their receiving Grace, while yet
unestablished; for 1. He has concluded all under Sin, that he might show Mercy
upon all. 2. Those particulars who sincerely receive Mercy and Goodness, upon
them he will have Mercy, both in a way of Continuance and Increase, and unto
them Goodness who abide in his Goodness, Romans 11. 20, 21, 22.

It is true, God works all things after the Counsel of his own Will; his
gracious and good Will counsels him to show forth Goodness and Mercy to all in
the first place, and Severity or Damnation to none without Cause: And his Will
is alfo Believers Sanctification, in order to which he graciously counsels and
persuades Men by his Spirit, to forsake Sin, and be converted; which manner of
working in Man by his Counsel, is not an inevitable or forceable Act of his
Will; for Counsel and Force are much different, as is a^ absolute Decree to Act
himself alone, and a Persuasion of the Creature to Act with him, by the Power
and Assistance that he gives it: So the Persuasion on Men to Repentance and
Perseverance in Faith and Grace cannot be an irresistible Forcing them thereto;
for what Reward can Men expect of God for any thing they are unwillingly forced
to (as by some supposed) whereas God works upon that Reason and Conscience
which he has placed in Man, to persuade, induce, and move Men to forsake Sin,
from a real Sense of the Evil of it, that they may leave Iniquity from a true
Zeal and Hatred (stirred up by the true Light) against it: I drew them with
Cords of a Man, with Bands of Love, etc. Hosea 11. 4.

S. S. Arg. 2. God has made Absolute Promises of the first Saving Grace, Ezekiel.
26. 25, 26. I will sprinkle clean Water upon you, and you shallbe clean; a new
Heart will I give you, Chap. 11. 19, 20. and he quotes Jeremy 31. 33. and Isai
54. 13. All thy Children shall be taught of the Lord. These Promises are but a
Declaration of his Decree, and they are not made concerning all, but particular
Persons whom God has in his Eye to save.

This Argument is grounded upon his Mistake, and is very dull and impertinent,
as not reaching his Principle he intends to vindicate by it: For 1st, It
imports absolute Promises of the first Saving Grace to be but to particular
Persons.

2. That God had only a few particular Persons in his Eye, and that from
Eternity in his Promise of the first saving Grace, contrary to plain Scripture,
which says, The Promise is to you and your Children, and to all them that are
afar off, even to as many as God shall call; and this Promise is Christ Jesus,
who is God's Everlasting Covenant and Light, to which Men are called.

3. This Man mistakes the first saving Grace, confounding it with the Effects
of it (which it brings forth where it is received and obeyed) As men's being
made Clean, having a new Heart, etc. Ezekiel. 36. 35. and Chap. 11. 19. which are
Effects of the Grace; these he puts for the first Saving Grace and Promise of
it; as also his blind Argument supposes these Effect^ to be unavoidably or
forceably brought forth in some particular Persons, supposed to be designed for
that End, without respect to their accepting of, and Concurrence with the
Tenders and Appearance of saving Grace) which in the Light of Christ is given
them) whereas it has appeared unto all Men, Tit. 2. 11. And the Promise of the
Everlasting Covenant, though freely and absolutely tendered to (...); yet as it
is made with any particular Men and confirmed ^o them, they are such as are
serious and penitent, retur^ing and obeying, and harkening to the Voice of God,
abiding in his Love and Grace, etc. upon which he enters into Covenant with
them and they with him, both in the Agreement o^ Li^e; Hearken unto me, and I
will make with you an Everlasti^g Covenant, even the sure Mercies of David,
Isa. 55. 2, 3. The Willing and Obedient shall eat the Good of the Land, Cha. 1.
19. (not the Unwilling and Disobedient) And I will give them an Heart to know
me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my People, and I will be their God
(mark the Reason) for they shall return unto me with their whole (...), Jer.
24. 7. Note, that this was foretold or prophesied ^rding to the Foresight that
God had of the Willingness and Compliance of his People with his Grace and
Spirit, a^er it was proffered and given to them, to invite, persuade and draw
them (as many other Prophecies are, which ^elate to his everlasting Covenant,
for its Establishment with the Creature, on these and the like Conditions)
which is not a forcing Men to Conversion, to have new Hearts, to be clean, etc.
For Grace from God is given, and Love shown Men, to persuade and induce them to
Love and Good. Will toward God; he loves them first, that they may love him;
he opens unto them a Fountain and pours clean Water upon them, that they may
wash in; he works in them to WILL and to DO, that they may obey him, and by his
Power and Aid work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling, Phil. 2. 12,
13. He puts his Laws in their inward Parts, that they may read and meditate Day
and Night therein; he teaches his People, that they may hear, and learn of
him, and obey his Voice; and the Ministers of the new Covenant that was
promised, preached Obedience and exhorted Persons to the Obedience of the
Spirit, and of the Son of God, he being the Author of Eternal Salvation to as
many as obey him, Heb. 5. 9. not to them that presumptuously hazard their
Salvation upon a lazy Expectation of being driven by some irresistible Impulse
or forceable Motion of Power, beyond what they are capable of.

Arg. 3. Persons by Name, are particular Persons; but Go^ has chosen Persons
by Name, Rev, 13. 8. All that dwell on the Earth shall worship the Beast, whose
Names are not written in the slain Lamb's Book of Life from the Foundation of
the World.

Answ. What great Ignorance and wonderful Darkness does his Man show in this
Argument, both of the Book of Life, and of those Names which are written in it!
which belongs to Men in the newborn State, as related to the Seed of Election,
to every one that has a new Name given him, having overcome Sin; and not the
traditional Names given to Persons by natural Parents: But this Argument makes
no Difference between the Old Birth and the New, nor between the old Name and
the new; nor between the old Nature with its Name, and the new Nature and its
Name; but says, Persons by Name, are particular Persons; but God has chosen
Persons by Name, as if he should tell us, That S. Scandret, Nath. Barnard,
These were of cur Opposers.
Hen. Coleman, with the rest of ^resbyterians are chosen Persons by these and
such their Names from all Eternity; and that these Names, S. Scandret and Nath.
Barnard, etc. are written in the Lamb's Book of Life) but George Whitehead, To.
Ludgater, Geo. Witherly, with the rest of the Quakers, are reprobated by Name
from all Eternity. But what then does he imagine this Lamb's Book of Life is,
and what is it made up of? Ah Lord! free poor Souls from such Ignorance, and
deliver them from such blind Guides as this Man; against whose dark Argument
and partial Opinion, let them read Jer. 17. 13. O Lord, the Hope of Israel, all
that for sake thee shall be ashamed, and they that depart from me shall be
written in the Earth, because they have forsaken the Lord, the Fountain of
living Waters: So here being signified a Possibility to fall; and many do
forsake and depart from the Lord, and because thereof to be written in the
Earth; therefore it follows, that if People abide with the Lord, he will both
abide with them, and their Names shall not be blotted out of the Book of Life,
nor shall they be written in the Earth: And this also evinceth, that they are
not by Name, as particular Persons, either absolutely elected to Salvation, nor
reprobated to Damnation, but on Condition of abiding with, or forsaking the
Lord.

Arg. 4. All that are chosen do infallibly believe in time, and partake of
Christ's Righteousness, Acts 13. 48. As many as were ordained to Eternal Life
believed, Romans 11, 7. The Elect have obtained it; therefore some particular
Persons were elec^ed; for if all were Elected, all would infallibly believe,
etc.

Answ. This is also a very frivolous, dull and impertinent Argument, and wholly
misseth the State of his Proposition and the Controversies between us: In the
first place he begs the Question, while he intends it to particular Persons, as
eyed, and absolutely designed particularly from all Eternity to Salvation, etc.
whenas the Question is not, Whether those that are chosen ( through
Sanctification) do infallibly believe? nor, Whether Election (which i^ in the
Seed) does not in due time extend to particular Persons? For those Persons ( or
People) who are true Believers, are come into the Elect Seed, being ingrafted
into the tr^e Root, are in the Election which obtains the Inheritance: And as
true Belief, Faith, and Obedience are the Terms, upon which Life Eternal is
promised and received; so on the same Conditions Life is freely te^dered in the
Son of God to all Mankind, yea, to the whole World: God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting Li^e; for God sent not his Son into the World to
condemn the World, but that the World through him might be saved, Joh. 3. 16,
17. This plainly cuts off that Opinion of a secret Decree and absolute Design
from Eternity against the greatest Part of Mankind for their Destruction; for
it cannot be consistent with him to have so decreed Damnation from all
Eternity, ^or those he ^roffereth in time to save by his Son, upon Believing
and Obeying; and therefore, as to that of Acts 13. 48. some have it thus, And
they believed, even as many as were ordained (or fitted) for Eternal Life,
which may not oppose Christ's Testimony before, Whosoever believes on the Son,
shall have Eternal Life; which is promised, not as merely respecting particular
Persons, but that Condition on which it is universally tendered, as namely, to
be accepted in a living Faith and sincere Obedience: But some more Ingenuous,
and as much learned as this Man, affirm, that the Word (...), which (...), is
Order, or Rank, 1 Cor. 15. 23.
is translated Acts 13. 48. ordained, signifies well appointed, set in good
Order, prepared or disposed: So as many whose Hearts were prepared or
well-disposed (viz. in a Willingness of mind and right Order of Spirit, having
true Desires sor eternal Life) believed as the good Ground, or honest Heart
that received the good Seed, so as it took Root. And as when Lydia heard the
A^ostles, God opened her Heart, that she attended unto the things which were
spoken of Paul, Acts 16. 14. And as Barnabas exhorted the People, that with
Purpose of Heart they would cleave unto the Lord, Acts 11. 23. Here was a true
Preparation in them, both for Believing and Eternal Life. And further, from
that of Acts 13. 46. it is evident, that both the Word of the Lord was
preached, and Life Eternal tendered to those Jews who rejected it, or put the
Word of God from them, and judged themselves unworthy of Everlasting Life:
Wherefore, surely God did not from all Eternity either absolutely design them
(as particular Persons) to Damnation, or to pass them by for that End; for he
did not pass them by without taking notice of them; but gave them notice of the
Way of Life and Salvation, tendering it to them by his Spirit in his Messengers,
which had been a Contradiction to himself, if he had from Eternity absolutely
decreed the contrary: But the envious Jews opposing and rejecting the Word of
God, judged themselves unworthy of Everlasting Life, wherein they rejected
their Hope which was of the Lord, and therefore their Destruction was of
themselves, whereupon Paul and Barnabas said, Lo, we turn to the Gentiles, for
so has the Lord commanded us, saying, I have set thee for a Light of the
Gentiles, that thou should be for Salvation unto the Ends of the Earth; and
thereupon the Gentiles were glad, etc. verse. 47. So that here was universal
Grace and Salvation preached and tendered to all, as that which God had
foretold and promised, who did not exclude any from the Benefit thereof; nor
was any hindered from Life and Salvation, but who excluded themselves, being
such as judged themselves unworthy of Everlasting Life.

Arg. 5. Jacob was a particular Person, and loved before he had done any Good,
according to God's Purpose of Election.

Answ. He has herein wrested the Scripture; for it does not say, that Jacob
was then loved and Esau hated, before they had done Good or Evil (as he renders
the Words) for then it may be asked, what he hated Esau for, before he had done
Good or Evil? Did he hate him for nothing? Surely no; but what was said before
they were born, or had done Good or Evil, was by Way of Prophecy, The Elder
shall serve the Younger; what is this to their Eternal States? Jacob had no
need of Esau's Service in Hell. And then to the following Words, as it is
written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated; where was it written? and
how does it relate to Jacob and Esau? Does it relate to them merely as
particular Persons, under such a Limitation of Election and Reprobation from
Eternity? or rather to their Posterities, as under such different
Qualifications of Love and Hatred? Could God absolutely determine to hate any
particular Persons, merely as Persons, without respect to either the good or
evil Qualifications or Works, as before they had done Good or Evil? This were
blasphemously to render him in Enmity against his own Works, as if he had made
Man, or forced him into the World unavoidably, to destroy and damn him to all
Eternity; whereas the Mercies of God are over all his Works, a great and
principal Part whereof is Mankind. And as for that which is written o^ his
loving Jacob and hating Esau, it is in Malchie 1. Their Posterities were called
by their Names, that People of the Edomites, who succeeded Esau ( who was called
Edom) Edom relates to the Earthly Birth.
* both in Name and Nature, Genesis 36. 19. whom Men should call the Border of
Wi^kedness, which could not be, till they were wicked and ha^ acted Wickedness:
These were they against whom because of t^eir Wickedness) God had (and against
such st^ll (...), Indignation forever; and hereupon his. Decree is ab^olute
against the Wicked, who are Rebellious against him, and reject his Grace by
rebelling against his gracious Light and Spirit in them: And also it was said
unto Esau (as (...) the Wicked of his Posterity, or the earthly Edonites, and
carnal, envious Persecutors) Shall I not, says the Lord, even destroy the wise
Men out of Edom, and the Understanding out of the Mount of Esau, Obed. 8. That
every one of the Mount of Esau may be cut off, ver. 9. For the Viol^ce against
thy Brother Jacob, Shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off forever,
ver. 10. Thou should not have looked on the Day of thy Brother, etc. neither
should thou have spoken proudly in the Day of Distress: See ver. 12, 13, 14.
to the End: Are not here plain Causes sh^wn why God hated Esau?

Arg. 6. God knows his Elect from others, and this not only after, but before
they are called, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The Foundation of God stands sure. The Lord
knows who are his, Joh. 13. 18. I know, whom I have chosen, Joh. 10. 14. I am
the good Shepherd, I know my Sheep, ver. 16. Other Sheep I have that are not of
this Fold, them also I must bring, and they shall hear my Voice: Therefore are
they particular Persons; These, and not others, that the Lord has chosen, Joh.
6. 37. All that the Father gives me shall come to me.

Answ. This Argument signifies nothing at all sor his Purpose, nor would it
help him one whit if it were all granted; for who questions God's Omnisciency?
God knows all alike considered merely as Persons; but in a near and peculiar
Relation to himself, he knows his Elect; he knows who are his; Christ knows
them both Men and Women, whom he has chosen out of the World, and he says, I
am the good Shepherd, and know my Sheep, and am known of mine, Joh. 10. 16. But
these latter Words [ and I am known of mine] S. S. is pleased to leave out and
quietly to pass by, for that Christ is known of his Elect, his Sheep; but
surely he could not be known of them before they were born, or had a Being: and
as for those other Sheep which are not of this Fold, which Christ foretold the
Gathering or bringing home of, they were such as had a Remainder of Innocence,
in whom Jacob was not wholly destroyed through Rebellion and Wickedness; but
such as had been seeking Rest, where they could not find it; but when the Truth
and Way of Life came to be manifest to them, they were ready to receive and
comply with it, and hear the good Shepherd's Voice and obey him. There were
such lost Sheep both among Jews and Gentiles, who when the good Shepherd
appeared, were so well disposed, as willing and ready to come to him, receive
and follow him, and obey his Voice, which were distinguished from the
Murderers of the Just one in themselves, who were Wolves and Persecutors of
Christ and his Witnesses, as he the good Shepherd was distinguished from the
Hireling that flees, Joh. 10. 13, 14. And they that come to Christ out of a
true Hunger and Desire after him, as the Bread of Life, are those whom the
Father has given to him, who come to him in that which is given to him, of
which he loses nothing, but will raise it up at the last Day, Joh. 6. 37, 39.
And they whom the Father gives to the Son, are given in a true Desire,
Willingness and Love in themselves to the Truth, to follow and obey Christ; the
Father's Drawings not being resisted by them, but having an Influence and
Prevalency with them, and upon their Spirits for that End as he said, Every man
that has heard and learned of the Father comes unto me, Joh. 6. 45. so the
Father's Teaching or Instruction was the Way of his drawing to the Son; and
this was not a Forceing them (whether they willed or nill'd) to the Son; but a
gentle Persuading them to hear and learn of God (in his Light) that thereby
they might come and (in a sense of his Love therein) be given to the Son.

Arg. 7. This appears from the very Nature of Election; for where all are
taken, or all are left, there can be no Election.

Answ. Election rightly considered and truly stated, according to Scripture, I
never questioned; the Nature of which (as is by this Opposer implied here) is a
being chosen out of or from imong; and so the Elect, or true Believers, are
chosen out of the World, from among Men, chosen out of Kindreds, Nations and
People, as the Royal Offspring and Priesthood of Christ: But what proves this
of a Personal Election and Reprobation particularly decreed and designed from
all Eternity? But still the quite contrary, far from the Nature of Election, or
choosing a Church or People out of the World or from among Men, and that through
the Sanctification of the Spirit and Belief of that Truth; it follows that they
were first in the World, in the Unbelief, and scattered among Men and People,
before this Act of Election or choosing out, was fulfilled in them: He has
chosen us that we should be Holy and without Blame, that we might partake of
Salvation by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 14. 1 These. 5. 9. and those thus cho^en for
this end, were the Saints, the Faithful in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1. 1. who first
trusted in Christ, ver. 12. who, alter they believed, were sealed with the holy
Spirit of Promise, ver. 13. their Faith was in the Lord Jesus, and Love unto
all Sai^ts, ver. 15. who believed according to the working of his mighty Power,
ver. 19. And that the Esta^e might be attained, Faith is offered to all; the
Power of Believing is given in the free Grace and Gi^t of God's eternal Spirit
and universal Light of his Son; It being the World's Sin that they do not
believe in Christ, of which the Spirit reproves them, sor which they would not
be chargeable or reproved, if he had not afforded them Light and Power
sufficient ^or them to believe and obey Christ.

S. S. Jacob have I Loved, and Esau have I hated. Though these last Wor^s were
spoken when Esau's Posterity was the Border of Wickedness, Mal. 1. yet what
ever G. W. says, were they spoken, to (...) the free Choice that God long
before had made os Jacob and his (...), page 112.

Answ. As he intends Jacob after the Flesh (and so his Genesis 35. 10.
Seed) who was called by the Name of Israel, this is still grounded upon his
Mistake, and does not at all make for his Opinion, but against him: For, though
I grant a free Love to and Choice of Israel, so of the Seed of Jacob, as a
peculiar People; yet this did not secure them as to their eternal States,
without their Perseverance in the Way of God: Neither was the Seed of Jacob, as
after the Flesh, under an absolute Decree of Election to Eternal Life, that
being known only in the Seed after the Spirit; for the contrary was and is
manifest in them, that did back-slide and rebel against the Spirit of God, and
became Persecutors of the holy Prophets, and fell into gross Evils, many to
their Destruction, which caused the Prophets often to complain against them,
and Severity from God to come upon them that fell: On them that fell, Severity;
but on thee Goodness, if thou abide in his Goodness, Romans 11. And it is said,
The Lord was Wrath: So a Fire was kindled against Jacob, and Anger came up
against Israel, Psalm. 78. 21. Who gave Jacob to the Spoil, and Israel to the
Robbers? Did not the Lord against whom they had sinned? For they would not walk
in his Ways; neither were they Obedient unto his Law, Isa. 42. 24. and Chap.
43. 22. But thou have not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou have been weary of
me, O Israel; thou have made me to serve with thy Sins; thou have wearied me
with thine Iniquities, ver. 24. Thy first Father has sinned, and thy Teachers
have transgressed against me, ver. 27. I have given Jacob to the Curse; and
Israel to Reproaches, ver. 28. Was Israel or Jacob's Seed then after the Flesh
eternally Elected and Loved? Was not his saying, I have loved Jacob, intended,
to reprove the Ingratitude and Unfaithfulness of those his Posterity? Mal. 1.
2. I have loved you, says the Lord; yet ye, say, wherein have thou loved us?
etc. ver. 6. O Priests! that despise my Name, etc. ver. 7. Ye offer polluted
Bread upon mine Altar, etc. Thus those of Jacob or Israel (after the Flesh,
both Priests and People) were reproved sor their Abuse of God's Love and
Kindness; and can any People now be said, to be so absolutely chosen to
Salvation, merely because God does show Love to them? when now his Love in his
Son is universally extended to the World: God so loved the World, etc. Joh. 3.
Did he theresore decree the whole World to be saved? See the Narrowness of the
said Opinion of a Personal Election and Reprobation from all Eternity, and that
impertinent Allegation of God's sree Choice of Jacob, and his Seed (as it is
intended to suit that Proposition, how false it is) But further, the Apostle
explains who are truly in the Election of the Seed of Promise, and who are the
true and spiritual Israel, (and so in the Election which obtains) See Romans 9.
6. They are not all Israel which are of Israel, ver. 7. neither because they
are the Seed of Abraham, are they all Chil^ren; but in Isaac shall thy Seed be
called, ver. 8. That i^, They which are the Children of the Flesh, these are
not the (...) of God; but the Children of the Promise are counted ^or the Seed:
see also Gal. 4. 28, 29. For Illustration whereo^, the Apostle alludes to those
Instances of Jacob and Esau, ( Romans 9. 10, 11, 12.) who were instanced as
Figures of the two opposite Seeds, the two contrary Births, two differing
People and Nations: as the Earthly and the Heavenly, the Natural and the
Spiritual Seed, and Birth, are contrary in the very Nature and Ground; and so
are the Generations of each, as namely those in the first Adam, and those in
the second; those after the Flesh, and those after the Spirit: And so the
Righteous and the Wicked, how contrary are they both in Nature and Spirit? yet
not simply as Creatures or Persons; but as influenced with contrary Pri^ciples,
Spirits and Powers, which bring forth their own contrary Seeds, B^rths and
Images in Men and Women. Now whereas it is sa^d, being no^ yet born; neither
having done Good or Evil. that the Purpose of God according to Election might
stand, not of Works, but of him that calls, it was said unto Rebecca, The
Elder all serve the Younger; or, the Greater hall serve the Lesser: Note, that
this cannot oe a^y (...) of any (...) or eternal Election and Reprobation of
J^cob and Esau's Persons; for what Service need Jacob in Heaven srom Esau in
Hell? or, what Service could Esau in Hell do Jacob in Heaven? Howbeit, the
Purpose of God according to Election stands sure originally in the El^ct S^ed,
and so not of Works: Esau was a Worker; and so the first Birth would of it self
be a Willing, Running and Working for Li^e eternal, which can be no Procurement
of God's Purpose thereof: But a Seed is freely given of God to Mankind, and
Power to bring forth Righteousness, and the living Works, as Effects of Grace;
and God freely calls Men thereto out of his free Grace and Love to all; By
grace are ye sav^d, through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the Gift
of God; not of Works, lest any Man should boast, for we are his Workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good Works (mark this) which God has before
ordained, that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10. And Note, That this
saving Grace has appeared unto all Men, Titus 2. 11. It is not limited, or
bound up to that Narrowness as the particular Electioners Opinion would bind
it, as only to a particular designed small Number of Persons from Eternity,
with an eternal Exclusion of all the World beside to everlasting Damnation,
without Remedy; which is a most partial and cruel Doctrine, ecclipsing the
Glory and Soveraignity of God, which is most manifest in showing Mercy, rather
then mere partial Severity on his poor Creatures.

Whereas S. S. teaches, that the making this Vessel to Honor, that to
Dishonor, is God's creating such a Person with a Resolution to recover him out
of his fallen State, by Saving Grace; such a Person, with an Intention to leave
and never recover him out of his fallen State, by renewing Grace, etc. p. 112,
113.

Answ. The Man runs still upon his first Mistake, placing such a partial
Resolution and Intention upon God toward his Creatures, or particular Persons,
in creating them as absolutely to recover one, and leave the other in the Fall:
and why then does this Man, or his Brethren, preach and tender Salvation upon
Terms to all Sorts? They cloak this partial Reserve with general Tenders of
Good, imagining God to be as partial in his Intentions, and both as slighty and
Contradictory in his Call and Proffers as themselves; as if he should call all
to Repentance and Life, and yet to have created them with Intention to leave
the Greater Part in the Fall for Eternal Death (or rather, to have from
Eternity reprobated them) or as his Masters of the Assembly Confession of Faith.
say, He has before ordained them to everlasting Death; the Contradiction of
which Doctrines both to God's universal Love, Grace, and Call, as also to
themselves, how manifest is it? That he should from Eternity ordain them for
Reprobation, whom in due time he gives Light unto, and calls to Repentance, how
plainly inconsistent are these and contradictory? One while to say, he has
reprobated them; another while, he passes by them: One while, he has before
ordained them to everlasting Death; another while, he creates them with
Intention to leave them without Recovery; which though all in curreth the same
End (as is supposed to a certain fore designed Number of Persons) yet the State
of the Case (as it reflects upon God) is as much opposite and contrary, as to
say, God does absolutely, eternally decree Man's Destruction, or did reprobate
them from Eternity; and then that he purposely passes by, and leaves them to
destroy or kill themselves; whereas his good Will, and Kindness, and free
Proffers of Grace and Salvation to lost Man admits of neither, to wit, neither
of such Cruelty to, nor Carelessness of his Creatures; his Mercies are over all
his Works, and his Grace and Mercy in the first place extending to all: And
that saying, He will have Mercy on whom he will, is no Limitation to the first
extent of his Grace and good Will; But that he will have Mercy, both by way of
Increase and Continuance to the Upright-hearted, even to them that fear him,
who Love and obey him; but those that are destroyed, their Destruction is of
themselves, as it is written, But my People would not hearken unto my Voice,
Israel would none of me; Therefore (mark the Cause) I gave them over to their
own Hearts Lusts, Psalm. 81. 11. and as S. S. (in Contradiction to himself)
says, Nor does God consume any Man merely as his own Workmanship; but (he
adds) God endures with much long Suffering unregenerate men, and they fit
themselves for Destruction, page 113. See here, how the Man breaks the Neck of
his own Cause: Is his Opinion of God's Eternally reprobating and ordaining
partiticular Persons to Destruction come to this, That now while he shows
long Suffering toward them, they fit themselves for Destruction; that is, they
rebel against God, resist his Spirit, and despise the Riches of his Grace, and
slight his long Suffering and Patience, till they bring swift Destruction upon
themselves? And this God is not the Cause of; He does not unchangeably ordain
whatsoever comes to pass: Sin and Rebellion in the Wicked, and their Striving
against him, Isa. 45. 9. are come to pass, which he is not the Author of; Woe
unto him that Strives with his Maker; thou have hid thy Face from us, and we
are consumed, because of our Iniquities; which God is neither the Author nor
Cause of.

S. S. God's Election is unchangeable; he will certainly bring in, never
finally reject that Soul he had taken Liking to -- Nothing can fall out, not
Sin it self, causing God to alter his Purpose; he foresaw all, etc. p. 113.

Answ. His Election and Purpose thereof, where made sure and confirmed by his
Spirit in his Sanctified ones (who are established in his Grace) is
unalterable: But 1st, There are Degrees and Growths in a State of Election
before Establishment; as those to whom Peter wrote his first Epistle, were
called Elect, according to the Foreknowledge of God through Sanctification of
the Spirit unto Obedience, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 2. These though Elected (so far as
they were chosen out of the World, through Sanctification and Belief of the
Truth) yet he both wrote unto them, to stir up their pure Minds, 2 Pet. 3. 1.
and exhorted them, to give Diligence to make their Calling and Election sure,
that they might never fall, 2 Pet. 1. 10. But what need of this, if they were
personally elected (from an absolute Purpose of God) from Eternity? Needed, or
could they make that more sure, which God had made so absolute? If so, then the
Exhortation had more properly run thus, viz. Brethren, believe that God has
made your personal Election sure from Eternity; and then what needed he warn or
admonish them concerning the Apostasy of those who denied the Lord that bought
them, who had forsaken the right Way, or of such, who after they had escaped
the Pollutions of the World, through the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ (which sure was saving Grace) yet were again entangled therein,
that their latter End was worse with them then the Beginning, 2 Pet. 2. Did not
then their Sin, their falling from Grace, and so their Disobedience hinder
their Establishment and Security in a State of Election, or keep from that
Diligence (in the Spirit) whereby they should have made their Calling and
Election sure.

2dly, His saying, That Sin it self cannot cause God to alter his Purpose, is
not only a gross Mistake (as in this Case) but also gives a great Liberty to
Hypocrites (who believe they are eternally elect Persons) to continue in Sin
and Presumption: But in Reproof to such, and Confutation of the Mistake, see
what the Prophet Jeremiah says in the 18th Chapter, where having first
declared the Power God had over them, by the Instance of the Potter, ver. 3, 4,
5, 6. He further shows his Purpose and the Manifestation of his Power, both in
Judgment and Mercy, and the Condition on which his declared Thought or
Intention may be altered, as where he says, v. 7. at what Instant I shall
speak concerning a Nation and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull
down and destroy it, v. 8. If that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn
from their Evil, I will repent of the Evil I thought to do unto them, v. 9. And
at what Instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to
build and to plant it, v. 10. If it do Evil in my Sight, that it obey not my
Voice, then will I repent of the Good, wherewith I said I would benefit them:
See also ver. 11, 12. to the 18th.

Object. If any should thus object, That these conditional Alterations of God's
Purposes did but concern their temporal Conditions, not their eternal, etc.

Answ. It may be answered, That it is a Mistake; they concerned both; except
Men repent they shall perish eternally: Their persisting in Evil-doing and
Disobedience to the Voice of God, i^currs eternal Condemnation, as well as
temporal Punishments; so contrary wise, through true Repentance, etc. both have
been escaped by many, and Godliness is great Gain, which has the Promise of
the Life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. and 6. 6.

Again, my unanswered Objection was and still is, Were it not impertinent and
vain, to warn Men of Destruction, Deuteronomy. 30. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. If God had
particularly designed them for Death and Destruction, how should they then
choose Life? Were not this to mock them with a dissembling Proffer of Life, if
the contrary be so unalterably designed for them?

S. S. (After his fashion) answers, God that decrees their Salvation, decrees
by such Warnings to work in them his Fear and an holy Caution, to keep them in
his Ways, that they may be saved, p. 114.

Rep. What Fear? A Fear of that which there is no Danger of, or that from a
Fear of Destruction they may fear him, when they are from Et^rnity unalterably
secured from Destruction, or of Salvation (as is supposed) What Nonsense and
impertinent Preaching and Warning is this, to dissemble People into a Fear and
Cautiousness of that which they are out of all Danger of incurring, especially,
if God's Purpose in the Case be so unchangeable (as to particular Persons) that
Sin it self cannot alter it? Is this Way of Presbyterians warning Men of
Destruction (being compared with their partial Opinion) any better then
frighting Children with fond Conceits and Fancies of things that are not? But
we are sure that the Warnings that both Moses, the Prophets and Apostles gave,
were real and serious, both as to their Tendence and Consequence, and not with
such partial and contradictory Reserves and Opinions, as this of the
Presbyterians eternal Election and Reprobation of particular Persons.

Object. Whom he will he hardens, Romans 9. Peter deserved hardening as well as
Judas; That God hardens Judas, not Peter, proceeds from the mere Pleasure of
his Will, p. 114.

Rep. The Man most egregiously mistakes in this his placing such a severe Act
of God's Will (as hardening any that are rebellious) upon mere Will and
Pleasure (in our Opposer's Sense) as the Cause of such a Judgment, whereas it
cannot be the mere Will and Pleasure of God to use such Severity, as to harden
and destroy his Creatures; for he delights in Mercy, Micah 7. 18. and has no
^leasure in the Death of him that dies; and he wills not the Death of a
Sinner, but rather his Return, Ezekiel. 18. 23. and 33. 11. So that when he will
harden, or give Persons up to the Hardeness of their Hearts, Justice (as being
provoked) is of Necessity the Reason of his so acting, and not mere Will and
Pleasure; neither does he harden Men from Eternity, but in Time, because of
their Rebellion, resisting and gainsaying him in the Time of his long
Suffering and Warnings to them, which doubtless he foresaw in Pharaoh, who was
in himself a proud, imperious, cruel Rebel against God, and Tyrant over his
People, which appeared when he was warned in his saying, Who is the Lord that I
should obey his Voice, to let Isra^l go? I know not the Lord; neither will I
let Israel The Hardness and Cruelty of Pharaoh, (...) app^ared against the
Hebrews witness the Murtherous Intention of that King, who gave Command to kill
the Malechildren, Exodus 1. 16. and their great Affliction and Bondage, v. 11,
14. until the Lord heard their Cry, after much Forbcarance.
go * Exodus 5. 2. As also Pharaoh's Rebellion appeared when he hardened his own
Heart, when he saw there was Respite, Exodus 8. 15. So God's giving him up to
Hardeness of Heart, was not upon mere Will and Pleasure; for that is all the
Reason that the severe Actions of such Tyrants as Pharaoh, yields, as namely,
Will and Pleasure: their Will is their Law; they will be cruel and oppress,
because they will do so: But all the Judgments of the Lord are just and
righteous, respecting the Merit of the Fact or Cause more then mere Will and
Pleasure; therefore it was his Will to give Pha^aoh, Judas, and many others, up
to Hardeness, because it was Just so to do, for that their Rebellion and
Provocation was exceeding great and high against him; when as rigorous and
cruel Tyrants use their Power in their Cruelties and Oppressions (and seek to
temporize and draw out their Subjects into Irreligiousness and Debaucheries)
only upon Will and Pleasure (which to affix upon God, as the Reason of
hardening any, is no small Degree of Blasphemy, as is this Man's accusing God
with the mere Pleasure of his Will, as the Cause or Reason of hardening Judas,
not Peter; and his accusing Peter with deserving hardening as well as Judas, is
his manifest Error, making no Difference between Judas his Offense and Peter's,
nor between their States and Conditions; As the State of Peter, who through
Weakness and Fear denied Christ, which he presently repented of; and that of
Judas, who wilfully betrayed Christ, and delivered him into the Hands of
Murderers: Was not here a vast Difference between Peter and Judas? (what say
you Professors to it?) and a great Reason for the Judgment of God upon that
Traitor Judas more then mere Will and Pleasure.

S. S. Arg. As there are particular Angels, whom God suffered to fall (though
he could as easily have preserved them as he did the rest) so there are
particular Men and Women (whom God endures with much long Suffering to fit
themselves for Destruction; therefore from all Eternity did God decree thus to
do concerning them in particular; for known to the Lord are all his Works from
the Foundation of the World, p. 114

Answ. God's suffering Men and Angels to fall, or to fit themselves for
Destruction, does much differ from eternally decreeing them particularly for
Destruction; for if he had so decreed concerning them (merely as particular
Persons) what needed he endure t^em with much long Suffering? that being both a
Testimony of his Grace or Favor toward them, and of his Unwillingness to
destroy them; for his long Suffering and Goodness leads some to Repentance,
and his Judgment is according to Truth upon them that despise the Riches of his
Goodness and Forbearance, Romans 2. And concerning the Fall of those Angels that
fell, 1st, God did neither particularly design it; nor was he the Author of it,
no more then of Men's Transgressions in general; he has ordained the
Punishment of the Ungodly, not their Ungodliness; for in Jude 6. it is said,
The Angels which kept not their first Estate (or Principality) but left their
own Habitation, he has reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness, etc. To
that Saying, God could have preserved them, I answer, They provoked him, which
was their great Sin and Loss to themselves; Therefore he saw it not meet to
continue his Love and Favor to them which they had so abused: Neither is it
his Will or Way to detain or restrain any forceably in his Way, whether they
will or not; nor to preserve any without their Diligence in attending upon him,
and keeping their Habitations. 2dly, So likewise concerning those that were
ordained of old to this Condemnation, Jude 4. (or as it may be read) who were
of old prescribed to this Judgment of the Ungodly) however they as Ungodly Men,
were so ordained for Condemnation; not merely as particular Persons, but as
such, who were so far fallen from the Grace of God, as to transfer his Favors
unto Luxury, denying the only Lord God; They were also Trees whose Fruit wither
d, twice dead, etc. Jude 12. Surely they could not be twice Dead, if they had
never been Quickened; but their Ingratitude and Abuse of the Grace of God that
had quickened them, caused their Condemnation; as, God spared not the Angels
that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, they having left their own Habitation;
and spared not the old World, nor the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, whom he
condemned with an Overthrow, making them an Ensample unto those that after
should live Ungodly, 2 Pet. 2. This sufficiently declares the Reason and Cause
of Condemnation, both to Angels and Men to be their Sin, in forsaking the Lord,
and living Ungodly.

But whereas S. S. renders God's foreknowledge of all his Works, as the Reason
or Proof, That he from eternity decreed particular Angels and Men for
Destruction (which appears Contradictory to his Masters of the Assemblies
confessing, viz. That God has not decreed any thing because he foresaw it as
future, Confess. Chap. 3) This Proof is as impertinent as the rest of his
shallow Arguments; for his Foreknowledge being infinite, it is no Proof that
he has absolutely decreed or ordained all things that come to pass, because he
foresaw all; for he has not ordained that Men should live in Sin, though he
has designed their Punishment who do so live; yet known unto the Lord are all
his Work's, both those of his Creation which he wrought according to his
absolute Pleasure, both in Heaven, and in Earth, and in the Sea, etc. Psalm.
135. 6. and Man was not capable of resisting his Maker in forming of him; he
was as the Clay in his Hand; as also, the Lord foreknew his work of
Sanctification and saving of man from Sin and Death; but this is not effected
without a Subjection to his Will, and a Compliance with his Spirit, and Power
in his Work within: They are not Partakers of Salvation from Sin, who wilfully
gainsay the Truth, resist the holy Ghost, and act Despite against the Spirit
of Grace.

But further, I find S. S. so uncertain in the Management of his partial
Proposition for a personal Election and Reprobation, that he is made sometimes
to grant and confess to Truth to his own absolute Confutation, and the Break
neck of his graceless Cause; As by his Confessing, That God has no Pleasure in
the Death of him that dies; considered page 115.
barely as his Creature; for he is willing to receive to Mercy every returning
Sinner, yet if a Person perseveres in Wickedness, as such God will laugh at his
Calamity, etc. Thus far S. S. From whence it follows, 1st, That God did not
from Eternity decree the Damnation of particular Persons, contrary to his
declared Pleasure. 2dly, That persevering in Wickedness is the Cause of Men's
Calamity, 3dly, And their Perverseness and Obstinacy in rejecting Wisdom's
Reproof and Counsel, the Cause that God will laugh at their Calamity, and mock
when their Fear comes.

Now the Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, as universally Eat not of the
Tree of Knowledge. His conditional Promises, If thou do well, shall thou not
be accepted? If you Seek the Lord, he will be found of you. Whosoever believes
shall not perish; shall not abide in Darkness. His conditional Threats, If thy
Heart turn away thou shall Perish: If ye for sake him he will for sake you. His
sending his Son into the World, not to Condemn the World. He should have added
[ Christ's Dying for all Men, tasting death for every Man] his giving his
Spirit to instruct them; His Setting Life and Death before them, in the
Promises and in the Threats, or giving Men up to their Lusts for Sin, This
cannot be inconsistent with God's Election or Choice of true Believers and
Obedient, nor with his rejecting the Rebellious Which is our Sense of the
Matter in both.
unto Reprobation, for they evince the Truth thereof; But the Presbyters
partial Doctrine of Election and Reprobation of particular Persons, and certain
definite number of Men and Angels, and their most grossly Asserting, that God
from all Eternity did freely and unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass,
This is both inconsistent with those and such his Prohibitions, conditional
Promises and Threats; His sending his Son not to condemn the World, but that
the World through him might be saved; his dying for all Men; his giving his
good Spirit to the Disobedient to instruct them; his setting Life and Death
before them, to choose Life, or perish, Deuteronomy. 30. 15. to the end; but Alas! if
from Eternity God had reprobated them, or absolutely ordained and designed
their Damnation and Curse, how should they Choose Life or Blessing? Or, if
particularly and unchangeably ordained to Life and Salvation from all Eternity,
Could there be any such Danger of their perishing, or that they should thus
need to be threatened with Cursing and Perishing, if their Heart turned away
from the Lord? For had they been unchangeably designed of God for the one End
(whether Life or Death) were it not very inconsistent to propose both
conditionally to them? as namely, to exhort them to choose Life; or if they
refused, to threaten them with perishing etc. do not you partial-minded
Presbyters and Calvinists by such kind of Preaching, and Propositions so
contrary to your partial Principle, most grossly dissemble with People, and mock
them contrary to your own Belief? whenas Moses, the Prophets and Apostles in
such like Conditional Promises and Threats believed what they spoak; they
believed and therefore spoak from the Spirit of God, which cannot lie nor
dissemble. If you say, God has decreed particular Persons Salvation by such
Warnings, you thereby tell us that he has decreed it by Threatening them with
Damnation, and thereby you affix your nonsense and incongruous Doctrine upon
God, rather then you will confess your own nonsensical Contradiction therein,
which runs thus, That God has from all Eternity unchangeably designed some
Persons eternal Salvation, and yet that he warns and threatens the same Persons
with eternal Damnation or Perdition, if they refuse Life, or to ^earken to him
and obey him, or if their Hearts turn away from him: pray, mark, how
inconsistent and contradictory this is; like as to say, It is unchangeably
designed of God that you must live for ever; yet take heed you do not dye
eternally.

And to S. S. his adding, All these are subservient to the Sovereign Design of
God's Decrees: The Magnifying his Mercy and Grace in the Salvation of all the
Elect; his Justice or Wrath in the Reprobates, etc. page 115.

Ans. If by the Words [ All these] as we may take him) he intends, according to
the Assembly's Confession, That God from all Eternity did most freely and
unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass; then it may be understood, that
all these things, those Conditions or States, both Good and Bad, which he
mentions before, are subservient to the sovereign Design of God's Decrees (as
he words it) But if by [ all these] he intends all these conditional Promises
and Threats, are so subservient (as I think he does) then God's Decrees of Men
Salvation or Damnation, are also conditional accordingly: as first, If you seek
the Lord he will be found of you (and then as all are called to seek the Lord,
he has also given Liberty and a Capacity to all to seek him that they may find
him) this I grant to be according to his good Will, and subservient to his
Decree, as his sending his Son into the World, not to condemn the World, but
that the World through him be saved; for he verily was foreordained before the
Foundation of the World, 1 Pet. 1. 20, 21. But then I deny, that God has
either decreed or ordained that men's Hearts should turn away from him, or that
they shall forsake him; or love Darkness rather then the true Light (which is
come into the World) whereby many cause their own Condemnation: How dare any
say or think, that all these are subservient to the sovereign Design of Gods
Decrees, as they must who say, that he has unchangeably decreed whatsoever
comes to pass? which renders him to be the Author of those and such Sins and
Abuses against himself and his Love, and that in order to serve his own Decree;
which is very blasphemous against God, who has testified otherwise, as namely,
Thy Destruction is of thy self, but in me thine Help, says the Lord, Hoseah,
13. 9. and why will ye die, O house of Israel? etc. God is not the Author of
Sin, nor willing that any should perish therein; he does actually damn none but
the finally ^mpenitent (as is plainly confessed) So, thus his Decree Justly
stands against the finally Impenitent; therefore do not continue in your
Impenitency, that you may not incurr final Damnation.

God is neither Partial nor Cruel, in decreeing to deny saving Grace to some,
whilst he decrees to give it to others, p. 115.

Answ. That God does so decree is but Petitio Principii, and sufficiently
confuted in the whole Tenor of this Discourse; and let the Ingenious Reader
Judge, whether this does not render him both Partial and Cruel, to conclude, he
has unalterably decreed to damn some, and to deny them saving Grace; but
decreed to give it to others, who were by Nature Children of Wrath as well as
the rest, and yet all God's Creatures and Workmanship, as Man and Woman, both
the saved and the damned, are all inevitably brought into the World. This
partial Doctrine of God's eternally decreeing to save some and to damn the rest
(who by Nature are rendered as all a like) is enough to make many despair, and
curse God that ever they had a Being, and to Note the Consequences of the
Predestina^ian Opinion against universa^ Grace.
destroy themselves, as many have donc upon this Principle, as by Satan's
seconding it by persuading them, That God has decreed to deny them saving
Grace, on purpose to damn them forever; which is ^o small Reflection upon God
and the Glory of his Soveraignity and Grace, and tends more then a little to
eclipse the Glory of his divine Justice, to render it so vindictive and cruel,
as not in the first place to regard his own Workmanship in general (to wit
Mankind) but to decree eternal Vengeance for the greatest part thereof, without
affording them the least Degree of saving Grace, to help them out of the sallen
Estate. Oh, What a cruel, dark Spirit is that in Electioners, that thus
reflects upon a most gracious and Merciful God, who delights in Mercy and not
in Destruction! Neither is his divine Justice so Inconsistent with himself and
his gracious divine Nature, as not to respect poor lost Man and Woman in
general, or as not to allow Grace and Light sufficient for the Help and
Salvation of Mankind in general, seeing that his being a Savor is not
inconsistent with his ^vine Justice; for he said, I am a Just God and a
Savior; there is none besides me, Isa. 45. 21, 22. Divine Justice cannot be so
partially cruel to the Creature, as either to make void divine Goodness, or
withhold it from Mankind.

S. S. Who can prove that converting, confirming Grace, is a due Debt to every
fallen Man and Woman, who has first given to him, p. 115.

Answ. What an impertinent Question is this? Who of us ever asserted Grace to
be a Debt to any Man? Grace being so contrary to Debt in the very Nature of it,
Romans 4. 4. and 11. 6. God loved us first; so that his Grace or Favor in the
first Place is free to all Men, without Exception or respect of Persons; and
this condemns the Cruelty and Partiality, which the particular Electioners (or
Predestinarian) Opinion would lay upon God, to limit and tie up his Grace in
such Narrowness as it does. Why does he yet find Fault? Romans 9. may be justly
objected against that erroneous Doctrine, That God has unchangeably ordained
whatsoever comes to pass; for why should he find Fault, either with his own
Works, or with the Effect of his own Design or Decree? But he does not find
Fault, either with his own Works of Creation ( as made by him) no^ yet with any
Vessel, as made, renewed o^ clea^sed by him, but as polluted or corrupted with
Sin; and so with Man, not as his Maker is the Potter or Framer, but as the
Devil is the Potter, having framed Men up in his own Nature and Image of Sin
and Unrighteousness; and so, W^ unto him that striveth with his Maker, Isa. 45.
9. to which that of Romans 9. 20. relates. And likewise, Who has resisted his
Will, or the Might of his Power? is a Question (of some) supposing that God
absolutely Wills and Effects whatever comes to pass from an unchangeable
Purpose or Design, both as to the particular States and Ends of Persons: but
herein ma^y partial Minds and narrow Spirits are greatly mistaken; for though
the Will of God, and the Might of his Power, both in creating Man, and in many
times convicting, judging and condemning the Wicked and Rebellious for Sin, be
absolute and irresistible; yet his Will, as manifest in the Tenders o^ Good, in
Counsel and Persuasion to Man, in the Strivings of his Spirit with the Wicked
(All which have a tendence to draw Men out of Sin and Evil, and to induce them
to Righteousness) His Will, as thus considered, many do resist, in rejecting
his Counsel, rebelling against his Commands, quenching his Spirit, resisting
the holy Ghost, despising his Law, casting it behind their Backs, striving
against their Maker in the time of his Patience and long Suffering toward
them, till for their Rebellion he bring his Severity and heavy Hand upon them;
for if Men did not resist the holy Spirit, it should not need to strive with
them; God wills not that any should perish, but that all Men should come to
Repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. Who will have all Men to be saved, and ^o come unto
the Knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4. And yet all are not saved; all do
not know the Truth; and what hinders them? Not any Decree of God; but their
resisting his Good Will, Counsel and Motions of his Spirit. O Man! thy
Destruction is of thy self; but thy Help is of me, says the Lord.

S. S. All fallen Men and Women are not reprobated; this is some Comfort, and
it importunately urges all in Compassion to their own Souls, to turn from Sin
to God in Christ, and to seek after good Scripture, Evidence of their Election,
p. 116.

Answ. The Matter would have been more congruous thus, for that no fallen Men
nor Women are reprobated for Everlasting lasting Destruction, until they have
first slighted the Kindness of God, abused his Grace, rebelled against his
blessed Light, rejected his Knowledge, as not liking to retain him in their
Knowledge; this importunately urges all in Compassion to their own Souls, to
turn from Sin to God in Christ, while his Grace and Good Will extends to them,
and a time of Love is afforded them; while he makes his Sun to rise on the
Evil and on the Good, and sends Rain on the Just and on the Unjust, Mat. 5.
45. Now this is Matter of Comfort, that God does show Love and Kindness toward
all; and that he universally extends Light and offers Salvation by his Son
(who indeed is his shining Sun) to the Ends of the Earth; and that he wills
not (or desires not) the Death of any in their Sins; but rather their Return
and Repentance, that they may live.

But alas! What a mani^est Contradiction is it for the Man, one while to
conclude, that God has from all Eternity reprobated the greatest Part or
Number of ^allen Men and Women, or unchangeably designed their Eternal
Damnation (poor Encouragement) another while, to tell of importunately urging
all in Compassion to their own immortal Souls, to turn from Sin to God in
Christ? How should they have Compassion to their immortal Souls, if God has no
Compassion nor Love toward them? Or how should Reprobates turn from Sin, if
eternally reprobated? This were but putting them upon an Impossibility, and so
a flattering and mocking them with a pretended Kindness, never intended for
them.

As the Opinion (which I oppose) vainly supposes, by such specious Pretenses
Presbyterian Priests, etc. have flattered many out of their Money, which is
like as if a Priest in his preaching to a People, should bid them all have
Compassion upon their Immortal Souls, and turn from Sin; and then tell them it
is impossible they should ever turn from Sin, or be saved, God having
unalterably designed the Destruction and Damnation of the greatest Part of
them; what Comfort would this Contradiction and cruel Partiality administer to
them, I pray you? It would be but cold Comfort to tell a great Congregation,
That God had fore-design^d them all, except two or three of them, to be damned
eternally. This is not the Word of Faith, nor any preaching in the Faith; this
is not Yea and Amen, but a saying and unsaying; a pretending to comfort and
encourage them all, and to discourage and lead many into Despair: And how then
should they seek Evidence in Scripture for their Election or Salvation? The
Scriptures of themselves do not evidence to particular Persons their Election
from Eternity; the Seriptures do not tell S. Scandr^t and Not. Barnard, etc.
that they are Elect Persons; B^t to them that believe in Christ, and in him
have obtained Power over their Corruptions, and whose Hearts are truly and
spiritually tender toward God, his Spirit bears Witne^s with their Spirits,
and evidenceth to them (according to Scripture) that they are the Sons of God,
chosen in Christ Jesus, through Sanctification of the Spi it and Belief of the
Truth; and so are adopted through the Spirit of Adoption, to be the Children of
God, and Coheirs with Christ of Eternal Life and Peace.

S. S. Is the Judge cruel that hangs up a Murderer?

Answ. No; but neither the Judge, nor yet the Law does ordain or prescribe,
that this or that Person shall be a Murderer; for the Fact is forbidden, and
the Punishment is prescribed, as is the judgment and Punishment of ungodly Men
in general.

S. S. God does actually damn none but the finally Impenitent.

Answ. Then their Impenitency is the Effect of their own Disobedience and
Rebellion, not of God's Decree; and this sufficiently con^utes their accusing
God with fore-designing or ordaining the Sin or wicked Actions of Men, or
particular Persons, ^or such and such Ways and Ends, Act. 2. 23. Christ, being
delivered by the determinate C^unsel and Foreknowledge of God, after you had
taken with wicked Hands, you have crucified and slain, p. 116. There was a
Necessity of his being delivered to suffer, as God fore-knew, because of the
Sins of the World: Christ was given up in the Counsel of God on his Part to
suffer; but their wicked Hands, that God permitted to take and murder him,
were against God and Christ, not subject to his Counsel of Love and Mercy; but
to the Devil and their own wicked Hearts, malicious and murtherous Spirits; and
therefore they were by God's Counfel called to repent, to be converted, to turn
from their Iniquities, Acts 3. 14, 15, 19, 26. But surely God did not call them
to re^ent of obeying his holy and just Counsel, but of their Iniquities, having
murdered the Just one.

Acts 4. 27, 28. Against thy ^oly Child Jesus, Herod and Pontius Pilate with
the Gentiles and the People of Israel, gathered themselves together, to do
whatsoever thine Hand and thy Counsel had determined before to be done. But see
ver. 25, 26. concerning the Gentil^s Rage, and the Kings of the Earth, and the
Rulers standing up, and gathering together against the Lord and against his
Christ; the Rage and wicked Consultations of whom God was not the Author of;
for when God by the Mouth of his Servant David asked, Why did the Heathen rage?
ver. 25. Would it have been a good Answer for any to have said, Lord, why do
thou ask? Have not thou ^ore- ordained them to rage and imagine vain things?
Surely no; sor th^n he would not ask, why? but when thereby they had provoked
him, having rejected his Counsel and Good Will, they were given up to work
Wickedness and Injustice, and so their own Ruin, like those who brought Woe upon
their Souls; for they had rewarded Evil to themselves. As God's Counsel
foresaw and perceived, as the Jews or People of Israel rejected Christ, and
would not be gathered by him, he said, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! how often would I
have gathered thy Children, even as the Hen gathers her Chickens under her
Wings, and you would not; he therefore said, Ye are the Children of them that
murdered the Prophets; fill ye up the Measure of your Fathers, etc. Serpents,
etc. Mat. 23. 31. to the End: This was not from an Eternal Decree
irrespectively against their Persons, but in Judgment and Wrath against them
because of their Ungratefulness, Envy and Wickedness; and so likewise all who
receive not the Love of the Truth, whereby they might be saved, but have
Pleasure in their Unrighteousness, God gives them up both to strong Delusions
and Hardness of Heart for their Iniquity, 2 These. 2. 10, 11.

S. S. Is Cod the Author of Sin in determining or fore-ordaining Page 116.
the wicked Actions of these Men? It is one thing to decree the Permission of
Sin, another to commit it; between God's fore-ordaining the Sin, and the actual
Commission of it, came in the Will and wicked Hands of Men: The Will and these
wicked Hands were the Author and Cause of Sin, and not God's fore-Ordination.

Answ. How S. S. can clear himself from rendering God to be the Author of Sin,
while he accuses him of determining or fore-ordaining the wicked Actions of
these Men, of fore- ordaining the Sin, let the unbyas'd Reader judge whether
this be not an Unjust Charge against God: And I ask, Did God determine and
fore-ordain the Wicked Actions of Men, and yet warn and counsel them to turn
from Iniquity? What Inconsistency is this? How will these hold together? Does
not God first counsel, and desire the (...) before he lets them alone, and
gives them up to their Lusts and Hardness, to Work their own Ruin? How like the
Ranters Principle (that all Actions are of God and by his Power) is it to say
(in these general Expressions) That God has determined or foreordained the
Actions of wicked Men? For then, how should they reform, as he counsels them by
his Light in their Consciences? and what need of Reforming what God has
foreordained? But how contradictory to this Fore-ordination of wicked Actions
(which the Man has unjustly accused God with) is his P^rmission of Sin?
although he does not always permit Sin to go unpunished, yet in this we agree,
that the Will and wicked Hands of Men, as acted by the Devil, were the Author
and Cause of Sin, and the Commission of it; and therefore not God, nor any
Foreordination of his; for he has foreordained his Son Jesus Christ to call
Sinners to Repentance, to offer Life and Salvation to all, before he g^ves up
any to a reprobate Mind, or to work their own Ruin.

S. S. to those he counts Elect, says; You are now afraid you have lost all;
for you have greatly fallen as did David * your 1 Samuel 11. 5, 15. and 12. 9.
Faith is even giving up the Ghost, yet are you not fallen from Grace; God has
not forsaken you, Psalm. 89. 30.

Answ. Although I confess that in the Lord is plentious Redemption, and
Forgiveness to all that unfeignedly repent, and turn from Iniquity; yet as this
Man places all upon a personal Election (even David's Forgiveness and
Redemption) not so much taking notice of his Repentance, Judgment and Terror
that he under went, under which David often asked God Forgiveness for his
Transgression: This pretended personal Election, and telling Men, they are not
fallen from Grace, when guil^y of horrible Wickedness, gives them a large Scope
and gross Liberty to Sin and Wickedness, if they can but in the first place
conceit they are elect Persons; and be but such Hypocrites as outface their
own Consciences, and murder the Just Witness, and evade the Conviction and
Reproofs of Truth therein; and be so self-confident as to persuade themselves
they are not fallen from Grace, when they have committed Adultery or Murder,
and acted as badly as Reprobates can do, and then flatter themselves with that
Imagination, That Christ has paid all their Debt, and satisfied the Justice
of his Father (which they call vindictive) for all their Sins past, present and
to come. This is an easy way to make Hypocrites, for them to continue in the
Sin of Whoredom and other Abominations.

But this is too broad a Way ever to lead them to Heaven; and the Wicked had
not need thus to have their Hands strengthened in Sin, nor thus to be
encouraged in a course of Impioty by a Pretense of an Impossibility of falling
from Grace, seeing there is a just Man that perishes in his Righteousness, and
then where shall the Wicked and Ungodly appear? and what manner of Persons
ought we to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness, 2 Pet. 3. Will it avail
Persons any thing before the Just God, for a Company of daubing Hypocritical
Priests to tell a few conceited Electioners, Though you have fallen very
foully, as did David, or into Adultery or Murder; yet have a good Heart on it,
believe still you are elect Persons, chosen and designed of God for Salvation
from all Eternity; you are not fallen from Grace, when you are guilty of
Whoredom and the like; as if Grace had such a great Affinity with them in this
their Wickedness. A pleasant Doctrine for the Devil and his Children to feed
upon, as Hypocrites, Whoremongers, and abominable Workers; who, though as bad
and filthy as those they count Reprobates, yet do imagine that God respects
their vile Persons, Eternally to mak^ Choice of them only more then others, who
it may be, ar^ not so bad as they (as if they were such choice Jewels in their
Filthiness) which is no small Blasphemy, and Reflection upon God, thus to
render him partially-indulgent to the Wicked, and unequal in his Way toward
Mankind, as eternally to design such great Favor and Indulgence to a small
part thereof (which is as bad as the rest) and inevitable Cruelty (as eternal
Wrathin Hell) to the greater part thereof; whereas all Mankind in general is
God's Workmanship by Creation, all made of one Earth, one Blood, etc. surely he
is no such Respecter of Persons.

As concerning God's Covenant with David and his Seed, Psa. 89. It is said, His
Seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his Throne as the Days of
Heaven: If his Children for sake my Law, if they break my Statutes, then will I
visit their Transgressions with the Rod, and their Iniquity with Stripes;
nevertheless my Loving Kindness will I not utterly take from him: I ask, From
Whom? Was it not David that is beloved, who as he entered into Covenant and
Agreement with God, he was his Servant anointed with the holy Oil? There
remained a true and tender Seed in him which the Name Beloved most properly
related to; though the Man passed through great Judgment and Tribulation, he
obtained Forgiveness, and God had such regard to him for his own Name and Seed
sake, and the Sincerity that had a Root in him, that his Children fair'd the
better in some respects for his sake, 1 Kings, 11, 12. howbeit, this proves not
that all the Seed of David after the Flesh, kept their Covenant with God, or
stood in his Grace, so as not at all: to fall from it; for, however God for a
time retains Favor, Kindness and Patience to Revolters, who have tasted of his
Grace and Power, as very unwilling they should be utterly lost, yet in
departing from the Lord into Iniquity, they do in themselves turn from and
abuse his Grace, not being steadfast therein with the Lord: So that the Instance
proves not, that his loving Kindness did always continue unto such as run into
Adultery, Idolatry and Abominations, and continuing in Rebellion, after their
many gentle Chastisements, though the Lord is long suffering, and keeps
Covenant and Mercy with them that fear him; his Faithfulness fails not; he is
ready to fulfill the terms of his Covenant and Promise on his part.

I Would ask our Opposer (who reckons it not a falling from Grace, for those he
counts Elect Persons, as David and his Children, with others of his own Opinion
now, to sall into the Guilt of Adultery and Murder, etc.) whether or no did
not his Son Solomon fall from Grace when he loved the outlandish Women, so as
they turned away his Heart aster other God's? 1 Kings 11. Did he stand in the
Covenant of Grace, or in God's Favor all this time? Was not the Lord angrv
with him? See ver. 10, 11, 12. And surther that of Psalm. 89. Concerning David,
his Seed and Throne, it extends further then merely a literal Relation of him
and his Seed, according to the Flesh; for David is beloved: I have sound David
my Servant; with my holy Oil have Psalm. 89
I anointed him, ver. 20. his Seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his
Throne as the days of Heaven, ver. 29. his Seed shall endure forever, and his
Throne as the Sun before me, ver. 36. Herein David was truly a Type of Christ,
the Anointed of God, to whom these Promises relate, which were typified in
David; as also that saying, I will make him my First-b^rn, higher t^en the
Kings of the Earth, ver. 27. This is a Mystery beyond a mere Literal
Acceptance; and I may say in this, as the Apostle said in his Instance of
Abraham and his Seed, That, as they that were of Faith, were of Abraham and his
Children; so they that are spiritually anointed of God, and his Beloved
Children and Faithful Servants, are of David's Seed, even such who incline
their Ear to God, and obey his Voice; for it is written, Hearken diligently
unto me, and eat ye that which is Good; and let your Soul delight it self in
Fatness: Incline your Ear and come unto me; hear, and your Soul shall live; and
I will make an Everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies of David,
Isa. 55. 2, 3.

A POSTSCRIPT about the Will of God, Election and Reprobation.
Concerning the Will of God in its Manifestation, both 1st, as unresistable.
^dly, as resistable.

FIrst, On what Considerations it may be said to be unresistable, showing forth
the Might of his Power; as, 1. In bringing forth the Works of Creation;
Whatsoever he pleased that did he, Psalm. 135. 6.

2. In fore-ordaining his Son to be set forth in him, to tender Grace and
Salvation in due time to Mankind (Who could hinder his first Ordination, though
many reject the Tenders?)

3. In extending his Light and Power universally to the final Conviction of
Impenitent Evildoers for their Rebellion (which Light and Power unavoidably at
times seizes upon their Consciences, reproving and convicting them while they
have a Day; and though they may shun being reformed thereby, yet they cannot
always avoid the Torment and Trouble thereof in themselves) That God may show
himself clear when he Judges.

4. In bringing and executing his Judgments and Wrath as he sees Cause, upon
the Wicked and Rebellious, who are finally Impenitent.

By all which God has manifested his Power (or Soveraignity) which on these
Considerations has irresistably showed it self for the fulfilling his
Righteous Will, so far as it has absolutely extended it self from an Intention
or Design of God, to show forth his Wisdom, Justice, and the Greatness or Might
of his Power, without the Creature Compliance; as,

1. God's Work of Creation. 2. His Fore-ordination, to bring forth his Son into
the World, etc. 3. His Power in finally Convicting Rebellious Sinners. 4. The
Execution of his Judgments upon the Rebellious.
In all these who shall say to God, What do thou? Who shall let what he will
do, so far as his Will inevitably and unresistably has acted, or does act in
any thing without Man's Compliance, as it was in Making Man; in Convicting and
Condemning the Rebellious and Stubborn?

But Secondly, The Will and Power of God as condescending and reaching
gradually to the Creature's Capacity, it is possible ^or Men to resist the
Manifestation thereof to their own Condemnation:

As the Will of God is manifest in a Way of Friendship and Kindness to Mankind,
as,

1. In a way of Counsel, Commands, These many do slight and refuse, and both
resist, grieve and quench the Spirit in its low and tender Appearance to their
own Destruction and Misery, when the Love and long Suffering of God is turned
into Wrath and Indignation against them.
Instructions, Invitations, Persuasions and gentle Reproofs (which have a
tendence to draw Men out of Sin) and

2. In his Patience and long Suffering toward them, waiting to be gracious,
desiring their Return, striving with them by his Spirit: Thus his Will is, That
all should know the Truth and be saved, 1 Timothy 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9.

But Men's Conversion and Salvation is not wrought without their Subjection,
Obedience and Compliance with the Spirit and Power of God, cooperating by
Faith.

Reprobation What it is?

A Reproving, Disallowing, Rejecting.

Reprobate is, Wicked, Base, Dishonest, Corrupt, so as to be cast out of God s
Favor, etc. And the Cause of Persons being given over to a Reprobate Mind, is
their Rebellion against Light given them; their rejecting the Knowledge of God,
till their Minds became so reprobate or corrupt, as to be void of true Sense
and Judgment, Romans 1. As they who were called Reprobate Silver (or as corrupt,
drossy, false Coin) were rejected of the Lord, Jerem. 6. 30.

The Word Election explained.

Election is Choice, which respects both:

I. The choosing of some from amongst many, as Christ said to his Followers, I
have chosen you out of the World, Joh. 15. 19.

II. The Excellency or Choiceness of that which is chosen; And this relates,

First, To Christ, the Elect Seed, of whom it is said, Behold my Servant, mine
Elect, in whom my Soul delights, Isa. 42. 1. And He is also called a chief
Cornerstone, Elect, Precious, 1 Pet. 2. 6.

Secondly, To the true Church or Elect People, who (being chosen through
Sanctification of the Spirit and Belief of the Truth) are the faithful
Followers of Christ; these are choice and precious in God's Sight, and
therefore are called the Elect of God, Holy and Beloved, Col. 3. 12. a chosen
Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a peculiar People, etc. 1 Pet.
2. 9. They that are with the Lamb, are Called, Chosen and Faithful, Rev. 17.
14. the Precious Sons of Sion, comparable to fine Gold, Lam. 4. 2.

This God's Election or Choice of his Church or People, is gradually manifest
and experienced in them: as,

1st, When they have known the Work of God by his Grace begun it them unto
their Separation from the World, through a Decree of Faith and Sanctification,
are called Elect, that is, as chosen out of the World, or from among Men, being
more peculiar to God then others; while yet they are not perfectly grown and
established in the Truth: as Israel of old was Elect, and Jerusalem chosen
(before their Estrangement from God, Esa. 44. 1. 1 Kings 11. 13.) Paul was a
Chosen Vessel, when first he had received and obeyed the heavenly Vision and
Call, Acts 9. 15. and Chap. 26. 19. Who notwithstanding after that said, I keep
my Body under, and bring it into Subjection, left that by any means, when I
have preached to others, I my self should be a Cast away, 1 Cor. 9. 27. and
those whom the Apostle Peter, in his first Epistle calls Elect, in his second
Epistle he exhorts to give all D^ligence to make their Calling and Election
sure, that so they might never fall, 2 Peter 1. 10. Exhorting or warning them
from diverse Examples of them that fell from Grace, denied the Lord that bought
them, backslid, and became Enemies, Chap. 2. throughout; And this second
Epistle was to stir up their pure minds, Chap. 3. 1.

2dly, Election in the height or perfection of it, as attained to in the full
Growth of the Elect Seed, and Establishment of the Children of Light, in and by
the Grace of God (through Diligence and Faithfulness on their parts) this
admits not of being deceived, nor of falling, nor of backsliding, as Christ
intimates an Impossibility that the very Elect should be deceived, Mat. 24. 24.
And they who through Diligence have made their Calling and Election sure, shall
never fall, 2 Pet. 1. 10. being grown up in the Life, Nature and Image of the
Elect Seed, which the Prince of the World has nothing in.

Oh! All you in whom there yet remains a Sincerity and Breathing after the
Lord, labor in the Light of Christ by the Assistance of his Grace in you, to
make your Calling and Election sure, in this Elect Seed, and none conceit your
selves secure out of it: For,

God's Foreknowledge and Fore-appointment of his People his own Seed; in this
they are known of him, related to him, in this chosen of him, and Choice to
him, and in his sight as his peculiar Treasure; in this he did foreknow, and
does predestinate or appoint them to be conformed to the Image of his Son, that
he might be the Firstborn in many Brethren, Romans 8. 29. (yea and the
sanctified Children of believing Parents) Their Growth and Security was to be
in this Elect Seed of Life, or otherwise they might degenerate, as Israel of
old did, after they were planted of a Noble Vine, and an holy right Seed.

If it should be said, that this of Romans 8. intimates some special
Foreknowledge How long before their Conformity to Christ were they appointed?
Was it from all Eternity, or rather in their Age and Time? Had not this and all
other mere Acts and Works of God a beginning in their time and season
(considered as mere Acts) Could this of his appointment then be from eternity
and so far a Preappointment merely respecting particular Persons, and with
exclusion of all besides from any saving Grace? This is still harsh, and
partial, and unequal, contrary to God's Ways; although as the general
Fore-appointment and Ordination of God concerning the true Believers and
obedient, is, that they shall be saved: So this Predestina ion, or
Fore-appointment includes or reaches all the many holy Brethren in whom Christ
is formed.
and Purpose of God, concerning these many Brethren thus Conformed, as unto
Witnesses chosen before of God, Christ s Resurrection was manifest for them to
preach, Act. 10. 40, 41. To this I say, Grant it does; We confess both God's
Foresight and Foreknowledge of his own, and deny not his Omniscienc^, nor
limit his Power or Omnipotency from showing forth it self both how, after what
manner, at what time, and in whom soever he pleases, as sometimes he does
miraculously upon Eminent Occasions, and for peculiar Works, Ends and special
Services, as is that of true Prophets, Apostles, Ministers of Righteousness; or
those many Brethren unto whom in their Day Christ was first manifest, and in
whom he was first revealed, formed and born, who in their Day were first raised
up to witness forth his Power, as the Prophet Jeremiah was sanctified before he
came forth of the Womb, for his peculiar Service, as an Eminent Prophet; and
John was filled with the holy Ghost from his Mothers Womb, that he might be a
Witness to the Messiah; and Paul was miraculously stopped from Persecution by a
Heavenly Vision, which he obeyed, and was called into the Work of a Faithful
Apostle, God having separated him from his Mothers Womb, and called him by his
Grace, to show forth his Universal Kindness and Love to others, to turn People
from Darkness to the Light: and many other Instances might be shown of God's
taking particular notice of his Witnesses and Servants for peculiar Services
(yet the Growth, standing and Security of all was by Faith and Obedience in the
Power of God) who, though in their Age and Times were as the first (and so
Choice) Fruits to God; yet, this neither hinders his second Fruits (but rather
to further them and his Work, so as his Name might be the more spread) Nor do
these Instances prove any Limitation of God's universal Love in Christ (as only
to a few) Nor frustrate the free extent of his Grace; nor yet hinder Salvation
from being common in the Freeness and free Tenders of it to Mankind.

CHAP. VI.
Whether PERFECTION, that is, a State sreed from all Sin, be attainable in this
Life?

Let the Reader observe the State of the Question, which is not, Whether the
Saints had Failings, or upon extreme Trials, might not be tempted into
Impatiency? but, Whether such a State of Perfection be attainable in this Life?
which we affirm.

Attainable, chiefly, because of the Aid and Assistance of God's Power afforded
unto them who wait upon him, and trust in his Name and Power; for, Greater is
He that is in us, then he that is in the World: Christ is stronger then the
Devil; therefore the Devil is not an invincible Enemy; and we can do all things
through Christ that strengthens us.

2. A Sinless State is attainable by true Believers, because God has commanded
it (who does not command Impossibilities) to Abraham and his Seed, and said, I
am God Almighty, walk before me and be thou perfect; Sin not. Be ye perfect a^
y ur h^avenly Father is perfect.

3. Because he has promised it to his peculiar People; Thy People shall be a^l
Righteous; they shall do no Iniquity that trust in the Name of the Lord; Christ
shall thoroughly Purge his Floor.

4. Christ's Work and Ministry is, to destroy the Work of the Devil; to present
men perfect; to bring them to a perfect man in him; to subject every Thought
unto his Obedience, etc.

Therefore, to affirm the contrary, or that a State free from all Sin is not
attainable in this Life, is to oppose the All Sufficiency of God's Almighty
Power, and t^ set the Devil's Power above it; as also to oppose the Ends of
God's Command, Promise, the Work of Christ and his Ministry, which to oppose or
render frustratious, by pleading or arguing for Sins Continuance in this Life,
is Impious and Antichristian: And, how far this Opposer is herein concerned,
will further appear.

Whereas he puts two differing Senses on the word Perfection; viz. a State free
from all Sin, as that of the Spirits of Just men, Heb. 12. 23. And yet that it
does not always sig^ifie free from all Sin, etc. I ask then, What Christ
makes true Believers perfect in? Is it in any thing consistent with Sin; or in
himself in whom is no Sin, whom he that abides in, sins not? I cannot
understand that Perfection, as it is the Effect of Christ's Work in true
Believers, can admit of the Continuance of Sin all their Days, while it
signifies both the Reality and Compleatness of his Works.

His Instance for P^rfection not free from all Sin, is Job 1. 1. Job was a
Perfect man, yet not without Sin; for he Cursed his Day.

It is evident that Job's Perfection had none of this Extreme in it, nor did it
consist with Sin; for it is thus explained, He feared God and eschewed Evil. --
And upon his Loss of Goods and Children, being told him, its said of him; in
all this Job sinned not, nor Charg^d God Foolishly, Chap. 1. 22. and when
smitten with sore Boyls, and tempted by his Wise; it is also said in all this
did not Job si^ with his Lips, Chap. 2. 10.

But, he Cursed his Day, Chap. 3.

He was then under an extreme Trial and Grief diverse ways aggravated; the most
that can be reasonably inferred from thence, is, that a Perfect or Upright Man
that fears God, and eschews Evil, may possibly through great Trials,
Temptations or Provocations, be drawn into an extreme to express his Grief: but
this only, if God suffers Satan so to affict, or deeply to try: for, he could
not have so afflicted Job, if God had not suffered him, in that he saw the Lord
had hedged him about.

From whence observe, that what is granted hereupon, and what he argues, is not
in pursuance of the State of the Question, as to grant, that a Perfect Job may
be tempted into some extreme Expressions, if God Suffer Satan so deeply to
afflict him: but, Whether it be not possible for such a one to be delivered as
well from all Failings or Sin, as from the Trial or Temptation? For was not Job
a Perfect Man both before and after his Deep Affliction? and is not his
Patience highly commended of, who said, when I am tried I shall come forth as
Gold?

Now, when I affirm that this refined State was attainable in this Life, were
it not absurd to object, that it is not, because Job cursed his Day? for did
Job do so all his Life time; or did his Perfection reach no higher?

His Instance, That God took six Days to create the World, when he could have
done it in a Moment, is no Proof that he is only a mortifying Sin more and more
in this Life, and that he will remove its Being in the next, page 63.

Neither do the Scriptures any where say, that the Being of Sin (yet mortified
in part) shall remain in the Saints till, the next Li^e; though we grant, God
took six Days to create the World, and rested the seventh; and so he carries
on his Work gradually in the true Believer for the perfecting of the new
Creation; the six I ayes Work thereof, as also the Seventh Day of Rest, are to
be experienced in this Life: the Work o^ Holiness is to be perfected while in
the Body, and he that believes enters into his Rest or Sabbath, to enjoy the
holy Day in that inward retired waiting upon the Lord in his own Light, wherein
Man must not think his own Thoughts, nor speak his own Words: And as for God's
Work, it is perfect; each Day's Work was perfect (as such) the first Day's Work
not mended on the sixth Day; and he that has begun a good Work in the Soul is
able to perfect it.

Whereas S. S. states the Question and Answer thus, viz.

Quest. But why will he not in this Life? (viz. remove the Being o^ Sin)

He answers, It is his good Pleasure.

I Reply, A damnable Doctrine to affirm that it is God's Good Pleasure, that
the Being of Sin should remain in his Saints all their Life time, or till the
next; when he has no Pleasure in Evil, therefore does prohibit all Sin.

Quest. Can he see the Continuance of Evil good; or that his Command should not
be kept? To this he answers.

He sees good to suffer Corruptions in par (...) in his Saints, to keep them
humble, drive them to his Blood and Righteousness, etc.

Reply, Let the so^er Reader mark the Nature and Tendency of this Do^rine.

First, How Impiously he reflects upon God; as seeing it Good to suffer
Corruptions, either but in part mortified, or in part unmortified in his Saints
(in this Life) for his Doctrine bears the same Sense on both Hands, as that God
sees it good to suffer Corruptions; if but in part mortified, then in part
unmortified in his Saints. And then

2dly, What a great Use and Service does he place upon the remaining of
Corruptions in the Saints, as namely, to keep them humble, exercise and drive
them to his Blood and Righteousness, which is as good Doctrine, as to say,
There is a Necessity for the Saints to sin, that they may be humbled,; to do
Evil, that Good may come of it: and by this, the more they sin, the more
humble; the more Unrighteous or Corrupt, the more Partakers of the Blood and
Righteousness of Christ; which are gross I^consistencies: Shall we sin that
Grace may abound? God forbid. Christ's Blood cleanses us from all Sin, as we
walk in the Light; and his Righteousness admits of no Iniquity to continue:
For us to feel the Remission of Sins past, through the Blood and Righteousness
of Christ, when we are come to the lively Act and Operation of Faith, therein
does sufficiently render the infinite Perfection of Pardoning Grace both
splendent and glorious; and not to say, That God sees good that Corruptions in
part should continue in his Saints to keep them humble: for this is a manifest
pleading for Sin, and a Commendation given to it, as to those good Effects
(vainly supposed) of Corruptions, viz. To keep the Saints humble, to drive them
to his Blood; whereas when they are truly humbled, and Partakers of the Blood
and Righteousness of Christ, and living in the Sense thereof, they withstand
all Sin and Iniquity, and dare not give way thereto, that they may be
righteous: They that will teach men true Humility, must not teach them to be
Proud, that they may be Humble; nor tell them, that it is God's good Pleasure
that the Being of Sin and Corruptions must remain in them all their days, or
till the Life to come, to keep them humble; neither is a perfect or holy State
so void of true Humility as this Sin-pleasing Doctrine implies.

But this is something like the Papists high Commendation of Man's Fall, where,
in their Saturday-Mass, in the Deacon's Hymn are these words, O (...)
necessarium Adae peccatum Vid. Mass in Lat. and Eng. by Ja. Mountain, page 121,
122, 123.
quod Christi morte deletum est. O felix culpa quae talem ac tantum meruit
habere redemptorem. O vere (...) nox, quae sola meruisti scire tempus and
horam, in qua Christ us ab inferis resurrexit. i. e. O surely the Sin of Adam
was necessary, which by Christ's Death was blotted out. O blessed Fault, that
have deserved to have so great and such a Redeemer. O truly blessed Night,
which alone have deserved to know the Time and Hour, wherein Christ rose from
the Hells.

Again, To prove it God's good Pleasure not to remove the Being of Sin in this
Li^e, that he sees good to suffer Corruptions, etc.

And in answer to my Objection, That his Pleasure is not contrary to his
Command, which requires us to be perfect, he says. God commands to offer
Isaac, he purposes Isaac shall not be offered; this shows he does not
efficaciously will every thing he commands, p. 64.

Rep. First, This Instance is not pertinent in this Case, it being a peculiar
Command and Act to Abraham, and not common to the Saints, nor relative to those
Commands injoyning Holiness of Li^e, which they are all concerned in.

2dly, He is mistaken in saying, He purposes Isaac shall not be offered; for
the Scripture says, That by Faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up
Isaac; and he that had received the Promises, offered up his only begotten Son,
Hebr. 11. 17. It is evident, that neither God's Command nor Purpose was, to
kill Isaac; but that Abraham's Faith should be tried in offering him up, which
by Faith he did; in which he said, God would provide himself a Lamb for a Burnt
Offering, Genesis 22. 8. And he accounting, that God was able to raise him up even
from the Dead, from whence also he received him in a Figure, Hebr. (...). 19.

But this is no Proof, that it is not his Pleasure, his Commands requiring
perfect Love and Obedience, should be kept; and they that enter into the
Covenant of Grace, enter into an Agreement with God in Christ, which though it
remits Sins past, yet gives no Liberty to continue in Sin; neither is it any
Condition of this Covenant, that the Being of Sin should remain to keep the
Saints humble; for, by this Covenant God takes away Sin, not only by
Remission, but by Receiving the Soul into Agreement with himself.

Jesus Christ is our Surety, Mediator and Advocate, both in his being a
Propitiation or Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World, that upon the Act of
Faith in his Blood, and believing in his Name, Sins past may be remitted; as
also in his inabling us to obey the Conditions and Obligation of the Covenant
of Grace (or Law thereof) which we are under, and in fulfilling the Promises
thereof to us; for without him we can do nothing, we can obtain ^o P^iviledge
but in him, in whom the Promises of Cod are all Yea and Amen: And seeing God
receives true Believers in Christ into Agreement with himself, Christ being
their Surety, does not exempt them from the Payment of what is their due
Obedience, but inables them thereto; for, to be in Covenant or Agreement with
God, is neither consistent with disagreeing with him by Transgression or
sinning against him.

When or where Sin shall be removed after Death, he resolves not: He tells us
not, How long a time shall be between Death and the perfect Removal of Sin; for
a Purgatory he seems not in words to own, how nearly related soever his
Doctrine be to it in his saying, It suffices me to be assured from God's Word,
it (Sin) is not done away in this Life; it shall in the next.

But where and what that God's Word is, that so assures him, That Sin is not
done away in this Life, but in the next, he has not yet demonstrated nor
proved; nor does he clear himself of the Pope's Doctrine of a Purgatory, but
confesses, That no unclean thing shall enter the Kingdom of Heaven; since
Christ is to present us holy, unblamable and unreprovable in his Sight, a
glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, p. 64. Mark here, how he has
manifestly contradicted his pleading for the Being of Sin in the Saints, and
saying, It is not done away in this Life, and yet the Church must be holy,
unbl^mable and unreprovable in his Sight, not having Spot or Wrinkle; but then
he adds further, as a part of what Christ has merited touching this Point,
and in page 67. He has perfected forever them that are sanctified
meritoriously. To which I say, Has Christ merited or purchased the Church's
Beauty and Perfection, even perfect Sanctification; and yet is it his Father's
good Pleasure, that the Church shall not receive such Perfection here? Or that
the Being of Sin shall not be removed in this Life? Were it not Blasphemy to
suppose, That Christ has bought for man that which his Father will not allow
him? But I must suppose his Sense of Christ's Merit, Dignity, Righteousness and
Obedience, as not to be really partaken of and inherited by true Believers in
this Life, but only in their Sense of Imputation, which can be neither real nor
true, to reckon themselves Holy, Unblamable, Unreprovable, without Spot or
Wrinkle, while yet spotted with Sin and inherent Corruptions; though still I
grant, that every Degree of Real Righteousness, true Faith and Sincerity to
God, springing up from his own Life in his Children, is owned and accounted of
in his Sight; for the Lord is wellpleased for his own Righteousness sake, Isa.
42. 21. and the Fruits of his own Spirit are acceptable to him, from the
highest Growth and Maturity to the least Appearance, breathing and breaking
forth thereof in the Soul, yea, from Israel's Tryumphing and Glorying in the
Lord, to Niniveh's believing God and repenting; and God commands us nothing but
what he inableth us to perform, although against this S. S. objects, that he
commands from the Beginning of Life to the End of Life, to continue in all
things written in the Law to do them; but where this is commanded us in
Scripture, he shows us not: We are satisfied, that God lays no more upon man,
as to doing or performing, then he inableth man; for his Commands are gradually
and orderly imposed to be obeyed, according to the Ability that he gives the
Creature; he does not command a Child to do a Man's Work; he is no hard Master:
So in the Covenant of Grace there is a Growth from one Degree of Strength to
another, (...) Faith to Faith, from Little Children to Young Men, etc. and so
according to their Growth and Capacity God requires Obedience, and does not
impose Impossibilities o^ them.

And if so be that the Power and Glory of God be more manifest in the Second
Covenant (or in the New Covenant of Grace) then in the First Covenant; by how
much the greater man's Privilege is in this, by so much the more he is enabled
by the same Power cheerfully to live in Obedience and Faithfulness under it.
Therefore S. S. his being assured, That Sin is not done away in this Life, and
his Con^ession, That a Believer dies unto Sin by degrees, and so AT his Death
the whole of Christ's Merit is immediately applied, whereby Sin is forever
totally abolished: These are not consistent, neither does he write as a man of
Experience of the Work of God, what Assurance foever he pretends; sor to say,
That his Sin is not done away in this Life, or that it shall in the next; and
yet to say, It is totally abolished AT his Death: These are as Contradictory as
to say, That S^n is done away At Death, and yet it is not done away till After
Death, which is (says he) to the last Trump will Sin be in the Saints, p. 64.
and when that shall be he explains p. 85. at his Coming in the End of the
World, quoting 1 These. 4. 17.

Mark Reader here, how plainly he contradicts his Saying, That At Death Sin
is forever totally abolished: Now, it is in the End of the World, when Christ
comes Personally (as he supposes) to Judgment; So by this confused Work, one
while Sin is Not done away in this Life; another while, it Is done away At
Death; another while, it Is done away After Death; another while, it is Not
done away Till the last Trump or End of the World; whereas there are many
Believers and Saints deceased in the mean time, and many long since dissolved
as to their outward Man, what becomes of their Souls between the Time of their
Departure, and the End of the World? for he has confessed that No Unclean
Thing shall enter the Kingdom of God: So then, if the Saints deceased be not
thoroughly cleansed from Sin before, nor Sin to be done away till the E^d of the
World, what other Place besides Heaven, ca^ he provide or think of for the
Saints deceased? How can he avoid the Pope's imagined Purgatory, unless he hold
the Mortality of the Soul, that it dies or sleeps in the Dust with the Body?

To his alleging, That the Ministry is to continue to the last Trump; and to
the last Trump will Sin be in the Saints; but then in a Moment will the Saints
be changed and perfected.

If he intends that the Saints have their Benefit and part in the Ministry,
each in their Life time and several Ages, how does this clear his concluding,
that to the End of the World or last Trump, Sin will be in the Saints; that
then in a Moment they shall be changed? for many of the Saints are deceased
many Hundreds of Years since, which if Sin be in them still, they do not
particularly partake of the blessed End of Christ's Ministry and Gifts, which
were for the Perfecting of the Saints, till all come into the Unity of the
Faith, and of the Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a Perfect Man, etc. and yet
those deceased Saints are not now under the Ministry of Apostles, etc.

From Ephesians. 4. 13. he says, That perfect Man is Christ with all his Members;
for he consists of many: and he is thus to be a perfect Man in the other World,
not this, page 46.

Whereas the Benefit of God's Gifts did as well extend to the particular Saints
and Members of his Body, as to the whole Body, to wit, till we all come in the
Unity of the Faith, etc. That we henceforth be no more Children tossed to and
fro, etc. Ephesians. 4. 14. There is no Danger of their being tossed in the other
World with Windy Doctrines; Both their Perfection, and Establishment, and
Growing up in Christ in all things, being Effects of his Gifts and Ministry,
which were experienced and obtained in this Life.

S. S. The Ministry and Scriptures were perfecting the Saints as long as they
live, Deuteronomy. 17. 19. The King shall read therein all the Days of his Life, that
he may Learn to fear therein the Lord his God: If he is to Learn to fear God
all the Days of his Life, etc. page 65.

Answ. Are the Saints then but a Learning to fear the Lord God all the Days of
their Life? or, Does that King in the time of the Old Covenant represent the
best State of the Saints in the New, the King that was forbidden to multiply
Wives, Horses, Silver or Gold to himself? Are the best of Saints in the New
Covenant in Danger of these things, and therefore to be restrained by an
outward Law, that their Hearts turn not away from the Lord? whereas he has
promised, I will put my Fear in their Hearts, and they shall not depart from
me: and this is a Condition of his Everlasting Covenant.

That there is a time of Perfecting Believers or Saints before they are
Perfected, I confess; as, while God was Creating the World, it was not Created;
but I differ with him in his counting it God's good Pleasure, that Sin should
remain in the Saints, and that to keep them Humble, either till Death, till
after Death, or to the End of the World: and it were more absurd to say, That
Sin will remain even in the Saints deceased till the End of the World, to keep
them Humble.

It is true as he says, That whilst a Carpenter is building an House, the
House is not builded, page 65. but then, if the Carpenter undertakes to build a
House, and bargains for a Price to build it, and then does not build it, or
tells a Man whose Money he has got, It is true I took your Money to perfect
this Building, but I can get but little of it builded, you must not expect to
have it builded while you live; Would not the Man reply then, Give me my Money
again? But Carpenters do not use to cheat men thus; They that are Honest do not
use to serve People as you pretended Ministers do, who say, You are sent for
Perfecting the Saints, and for this take Money, and Gifts, and Rewards, and yet
tell them, Perfection is NOT attainable in this Life: Honest Carpenters would
not deal thus with them.

In Psalm 119. 1, 2, 3, 4. Blessed are the Undefiled in the Way, he says, In
Point of Justification, Believers are in Christ their Head, clear as the Moon,
fair as the Sun; In Point of Sanctification, through the Renewing and Assisting
Grace they do not allow themselves in any known Sin, but in God's Fear oppose
all, page 65.

He has said enough to break the Neck of his own Cause,

1st, Unless to be In Christ Spotless, Clear as the Moon, and Fair as the Sun,
be a Spotted or Sinful State.

2dly, Unless that there must remain some Sins in those that are in Christ,
which cannot be known to them; whereas he that abides in Christ sins not:
And He has left us an Example, that we should follow his Steps, who did not
sin.

And the Word Justify sometimes uses to signify to make Just by inherent
Holiness; or to Sanctify, as he confesses page 89.

Upon Titus 3. 5. 7. But if to evade this, he renders Justification in their
sense of Im^utation; then it is, to reckon them Spotless, Clear as the Moon,
Fair as the Sun, who are yet Spotted, Corrupted and Defiled with Sin: But if in
the Fear of the Lord true Believers, through Renewing and Assisting Grace, do
not allow themselves in any known Sin, but in God's Fear oppose all, then if a
Discovery of all Sin by the Light be attainable to them, not only to Oppose,
but to Overcome all Sin through assisting Grace, is attainable in this Life;
for, Resist the Devil, and he will fly: And we can do all things through
Christ that strengthens us; knowing our Faith in him, which is the Victory,
and also obtains actual Dominion over Sin.

Whereas Psalm. 119. 3. They also do no Iniquity, was further urged against him;
And he that abides in Christ sins not, does not commit Sin, in whose Spirit
is no Guile: To this he answer, So far as Regenerate, and acting from the
Regenerate part, they do no Iniquity. This is such Tautologie, or as good sense
as to say, they do no Iniquity so far as they do no Iniquity; whereas the Words
are positive and plain, They are undefiled in the way; they keep his
Testimonies; they walk in his ways.

Whereas he still insers, the Saints are not perfectly free from Sin; for when
Paul did NO Iniquity Sin dwelt in him; and yet in that State Paul said, The
Evil that I do I would not: Did he do Evil, and yet no Iniquity? or was Victory
over, and Freedom from that Evil not attainable by him in this Life? What Evil
did he live and dye in? or what Sin must remain in him, now being deceased,
till the End of the World?

S. S. Nor will G. W. say, I suppose no Man is Regenerate, but who is perfectly
free from Sin; To this I say, according to his own words before: As while the
Saints are Persecting, they are not perfected; so there is a Regenerating and a
Travailing in Birth before Regenerated and born again.

Of Romans 8. 1. he says, This intimates there is Flesh in such though Guilt is
Removed. Herein is a twofold Error couched:

1st, Implying the Guilt removed, while the Sin it self remains; as if a Man
could commit Sin and not be Guilty of it.

2dly, He confounds Sin and Flesh, and renders them Inseparable; whereas he
grants in the Scripture before, there is no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. He perverts,
Job 9. 19. and 1 J^h. 3. saying, If I sin, as do the wicked, with Allowance,
here he adds [WITH ALLOWANCE] for it is plain, if I Sin then thou markest me;
whosoever is born of God does not commit Sin: It is not, Does not commit Sin
with Allowance as do the Wicked: And the Saints on Earth enjoying Communion
with God, and Saints in Heaven (as he says) is not a Communion in Sin; neither
is the Being of Sin according to the Will of God in Heaven, which is prayed for
so to be done in Earth.

If he grant it our Duty to be Perfect, or perfectly to obey, while he denies
Power or Possession for that End, his Work is Weakness it self, and
inconsistent with it self; God is no such Hard Master, as to enjoin.
Impossibilities upon us, or to require Obedience beyond the Power he gives.

Will he say, None are Sanctified that have any Sin in them?

I say, according to his Concession before; There is a Time of Sanctifying as
well as Perfecting before the Work be effected, which ought to be throughout in
Body, Soul and Spirit.

If he cleanses away all Guilt from Believers, and the reigning Power of Sin
in this Life, Why should the Being of Sin remain till the next?

He has wa^hed us from our Sins in his own Blood, before which there is a time
of having Sin, 1 John 1. 8. yet said he, My little Children, These Things write
I unto you that ye sin not, chap. 2. 1.

Can the Work of Faith and Grace be sinful? He answers,

Faith it self can be imperfect; therefore the Work of Faith: Lord, I believe,
help my Unbelief; Imperfection is Sin, Perfection is Duty, p. 67.

Rep. By the same Reason Unbelief is Sin; but Faith is Duty: They ought not
thus to be confounded; nor Unbelief, which is the Creatures Defect, imputed to
Faith, which is the Gift of God, a Fruit of his Spirit; therefore pure, as he
confesses to his own plain Confutation, The Work or Thing wrought is always
perfect for its Part, Nature or Kind, the least Draghm of Grace true, p. 68.
From whence it follows, that true Faith is pure in its kind, and not sinful,
nor having Sin mixed with it, though it does grow and increase.

Degrees of that which is of a pure or perfect Nature, do not alter its
Property; And the saving Work of the Spirit is carried on by degrees. His
citing 1 These. 3. 10. praying that we might see your Face, and perfect that
which is lacking in your Faith, p. 68. This proves not true Faith to have Sin
in it; but that in some there might be something lacking in it, as to Growth
and Increase of Effects; and which some read thus, FULFILL that which is
lacking. It is not that we might add more Purity to your Faith, but more Joy,
Comfort, Refreshment, Edification, etc. unto you in the Faith for Imperfection
(where it imports only the Want of full Growth or Maturity of that which in its
kind is pure) is not Sin; and Imperfection and Sin have not the same
Signification; for Imperfection, as it relates to a Thing or Work not fulfilled
or finished, it implies a Work begun; and they who have known the Work of God
begun in them, and Faith in his Power, they dare not plead for Sin, nor cast it
upon God, as his good Pleasure, that the Being of Sin should not be removed in
this Life, but know that the good Pleasure and Will of God is their
Sanctification; and therefore wait upon him for the perfecting of it.

His accusing David with having Failings in the End of his Days, and asserting
the Perfection of his Warlike Attempts, not of his Graces, p. 68.

This Accusation against David, he has neither proved by Scripture, nor showed
what Failings he had in the End of his Days; nor yet that his Graces were
imperfect; for God was the Lise and Grace of all his Graces; and he said, God
is my Strength and Power, and he makes my Way perfect, 2 Samuel 22. 23. And were
not his inward Warlike Attempts against his Soul's Enemy, both perfect and
succesful, as well as his outward? Did he not confess to the Lord, Thou have
also given me the Shield of Salvation; and said, He is the Tower of Salvation;
and in his last Words, He has made with me an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in
all things and sure; for this is all my Salvation, (...) Sam. 23. The Means for
a Man to have his Way made per^ect, is to know the Lord to be his Strength and
Power, a strong Tower, and Salvation: Thus he is known to them that truly wait
upon him.

If in this Life our Work be not to let Sin reign, not to obey it in the Lusts
thereof, p. 68. why should we either commit Sin, or the Being of it remain in
us, when we have received Power, so far to subdue it and bring it under? And if
the Lusts of it be not obeyed, but watched against, they will be subdued so
far, as Sin may neither be brought forth, nor have a Being.

If the Operation or working of the Spirit ^e always perfect, he working by
infinite Wisdom and Power, p. 68. though the saving Work thereof be not
presently fulfilled in all those Degrees of Perfection, it is to attain unto;
nor the Being of Sin forthwith excluded, p. 68. yet by Degrees it comes fully
to be effected and Sin put an End to, as there is a waiting in Patience and
Diligence upon him, who has begun a good Work, who will also perfect it.

That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us; on this he thus
paraphraseth, Fulfill signifies sincerely to obey the Law, 1 Chronicles. 22. 13.
that is, sincerely to obey every Precept, so far as we attain to understand it:
Thus far he contradicts his pleading for the Being of Sin and Corruptions in
the Saints, and his denying perfect Obedience to be attainable in this Life;
yet I assert, that Man in his own Will and Strength cannot attain sincerely to
obey the Law of God; but through the Power and Aid of Christ Jesus, he may
attain to the Righteousness or Substance of the Law, to be fulfilled in him,
being led by the Spirit of Life; for the Law thereof in Christ makes free from
the Law of Sin and Death: But when this Opposer adds, Thus in the other World
God's People shall attain to fulfill the Righteousness of the Law, p. 69. Herein
he perverts Scripture, and puts Christ's Work afar off, who is the End of the
Law for Righteousness (not to indulge Men in Sin) to them that believe; and he
came to condemn Sin in the Flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit; which
State the Apostle did not put off to the other World.

And if the Gospel, or Law of the Spirit of Life, free us from the Law of Sin
and Death; and Christ was sent to condemn Sin in the (...) (which Words he
turns thus, viz. Condemned our Sin in him) I say, First, Why should we be
subject to the Law of Sin and Death, or (...) believe a Freedom from the Being
of Sin, when its Power, Law, and Rule is taken away? These are inconsistent:
Must Men needs subject themselves to that, which is brought under by the Power
of Christ, and Law of Life in him?

His saying, He condemned our Sin in him, will not excuse page 69.
him from being condemned with Sin, if he does not come to find Sin condemned
and destroyed in himself; and Man's Disobedience to the Law of God within will
not be excused by what Christ has done and suffered without; neither will your
Application cause you to be looked on, as if from the Beginning of Life to the
End to have obeyed the Law as Creatures, to have satisfied it as Sinners, p.
69. Surely God does not so look upon you while you continue in Sin, and his
Spirit striving with you, and reproving of you for Sin and Corruption: God and
his Spirit do not so oppose on another; and yet he is Gracious and Merciful,
ready to pardon and forgive Sins past upon true Repentance, and that for
Christ's sake, who is the Propitiation, etc. but the Notion of Satisfaction, as
it is taken in the severe Sense of strict Payment in Law (by undergoing the
full Punishment) It is not consistent with the Gratiousness of God, in
forgiving Sins past on unfeigned Repentance; but sufficient is said to that
Point.

He is offended that we should say to him and his Brethren, You plead for Sin;
he calls this an opprobrious and gross Slander; but has not cleared himself
thereof, but verified it, as appears in this Discourse of his: And his saying,
Who do more call Men off from sinning then we (If he had added) Who tell
People, that to come off or be free from Sin, is not attainable in this Life;
and that it is God's good Pleasure, not to destroy the Being of Sin in this
Life; and that he sees good, Corruptions should remain in his Saints, to keep
them humble, Then the World might easily have judged how heartily they call Men
off from Sin, or rather, how they impiously plead for Sin as necessary.

He says, Their Light without the Scriptures will help to call men Page 69.
off from Lying, Injustice, Uncleanness, etc. They should then obey it; for
then it necessarily calls unto Truth, Justice, Purity, etc. and consequently to
Heaven: Depart from ^vil and do Good, and dwell for evermore.

We urge Men to the Observance of the Christian Sabbath, p. 69.

And what is that Christian Sabbath? And how do you urge men to Observe it? Was
not the Jews Sabbath a Type of the Christians Sabbath, or Rest? And do they not
cease from their own Works, and Thoughts; being not to think their own
Thoughts, on this Sabbath, or holy Day.

We press to repent of the very Being of an evil Thought in us. Page 70.


But do you press it in the Faith? Do you believe that the Being of evil
Thoughts can be removed in this Life; else what signifies your pressing to
repent thereof? Your Denouncing against men's Allowing themselves in Sin and
Wickedness, Your saying, It is the Duty of all to be Perfect, to Press after
it, to watch against all, even the least Sins, p. 70. What avails all this,
when you press and preach thus in your Unbelief? You unsay what you here
pretend, when you tell people, It is God's Good Pleasure that the Being of Sin
and Corruption should remain in his Saints to keep them humble: What
Encouragement do you here give People to press after Perfection, and to watch
against all Sin, when you tell them, A Sinless Perfection is not attainable?
But he brings an Instance for their Encouragement, as he thinks, viz.

If two Companies of Children were to run a Race, and one should Page 70.
say to this Company, There are strong Men at the End of the Race; if you run
as strong and as fast as they can run, you are to enjoy a rich Inheritance; but
if not, you are to die.

By the way observe, he very egregiously does mistate the Case and Doctrine of
those called Quakers; for they do not propose Heaven and Salvation upon these
Terms, as for Children to run as fast as Men; but that Children may become Men,
and in the mean time act according to their Abilities, beyond which God does
not impose upon them, nor require of them; but that the Race that is set before
us may be run with Patience, which ought to have her perfect Work, that we may
be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.

It is certain, that they who have begun in the Spirit, and spiritual Journey,
who are diligent, using their best Endeavors, and hold out, shall enjoy an
Everlasting Inheritance: And this is not to cut off their Endeavors by
Despair, as falsely is supposed against the Quakers, upon the said Mistating of
their Case; but your Preaching tends to Despair, when you press People after
Purity and Perfection, and then tell them, It is Not attainable in this Life.
He further adds against us: There must be no Sin at all in you, and then you
shall obtain Salvation (...) I must be quite free from all Sin here, or burn in
Hell to all Eternity, page 70, (...).

Let it be understood, that we do not fall thus abruptly upon People, to
surprise them with such Threatening them with Hell, as if we would fright them
into Perfection, or drive them into Despair: He has not herein proposed our
Method in order to Freedom from Sin and Salvation; for, first We preach the
Grace, the Light, and Power of God, to be believed and patiently waited in; and
that Patience may have her perfect Work in order to Perfection and Freedom,
which is not all wrought on a sudden, or presently upon Conviction; for it
will require both Faith, Patience, Diligence and Travail, to obtain it; and we
know that to obtain Salvation is to obtain Deliverance from Sin, and this is by
Jesus Christ who saves his People from their Sins.

It is not our Method, first to say, There must be No Sin at all in you, and
then you shall attain Salvation: Nor barely to say to People at first, You must
be quite free from All Sin here, or burn in Hell hereafter; for this (though it
has a Truth in it) is not a proposing the Ground and Foundation whereby to
obtain Freedom, but an abrupt Threatening, tending to make Men look more at the
Difficulty of the Condition, then at the Power of Christ to aid them for that
End: And thus have the Papists misrepresented our Method in their Indefatigable
Seeker, as if we presently imposed such a Difficulty, Indef. Seek.
as the setting Men strictly to keep the Law, obey punctually in every Title,
or else be damned: But this is to make way for their Purgatory; and may be
taken as if we set People on work in their own Wills and Power, to a most
strict severe Life without the Power of God, whenas without that we can do
nothing acceptably, and yet all things by that Power, or through him that
strengthens us.

But whereas this man takes it for granted, that to be quite Free from all Sin
here, or to keep the Commands of God, is Not attainable; Let it be minded, that
since he has confessed, No Unclean Thing shall enter into Heaven; And Christ
proposed the Keeping the Commandments (as namely, Thou shall love the Lord thy
God, with all thy Heart, etc. and thy Neighbor as thy self) as the Way to
inherit Eternal Life; this Man does render it impossible, either to enter in to
Heaven, or inherit eternal Life, while he will not believe, that to keep the
Commands of God; is attainable (though God assist his own thereto) for to keep
the Commands was, in order to inherit Eternal Life: So to say with Christ, if
thou will enter into Heaven, keep the Commandements^, and a Presbyter answers,
No; It is not possible to keep the Commands; The Consequence is then, It is not
possible to enter into Heaven: Or, it may be as well proposed, If thou will
enter into Heaven, make thy self Wings and fly thither, or go and stop the Sun
in its Cou se, or take the World on thy Back; but God's and Christ's Commands
imply no such Impossibility, but that they may be performed.

We should not speak an idle Word; we should not have one vain Thought in us,
not one wandering Thought in Prayer, Eccl. 5. 3. We should not have one
inordinate Desire, nor evil Imagination against our Neighbor, p. 71.

He asked, If a State of Freedom from all these Sins were attainable in t^is
Life? and that I had the Face to tell him it is; but the Consciences of all
enlightened Persons, Observers of their own Hearts, will bring in Testimony
against me: Thi^ still shows his Presumption and Unbelief, while he grants it
our Duty to for sake all these Evils, as, idle Words, vain Thoughts, wandering
Thoughts in Prayer, inordinate Desires, evil Imaginations, etc. Where then is
the Christian Sabbath in which Man is not to speak his own Words, nor think his
own Thoughts? And are not the Weapons of the spiritual Warfare mighty thorrow
God, to the pulling down of strong Holds, and the bringing every Thought into
Subjection, into the Obedience of Christ? And the Thoughts of the Just are
right Thoughts: If the pulling down of Satan's Strong Holds, be attainable by
the spiritual Weapons, much more the subjecting of wandering Thoughts, being
watched against in the Light that discovers them: But, while he does not
believe that a Freedom from wandering Thoughts in Prayer is attainable, and yet
confesses that the holy Ghost calls a wandering Prayer a Dream, we are to
understand that when you Presbyters bring forth your wandering Prayers with
your wandering Thoughts in them, you are but dreaming; and so mere Dreamers:
you do not pray with the Spirit; for that page 71.
does not bring forth any such Wandering Prayers and Dreams.

And be it further minded that his granting enlightened, Observers of their own
Hearts do see wandering Thoughts and Imaginations, herein he has given
Concession to the inshining Light* as the Rule to discover wandering Thoughts,
which is more then the Scriptures do, Therefore he and every The Light within
the Rule.
one should attend and watch in the Light against Imaginations and wandering
Thoughts, and not to suffer them in Prayer.

From Job 9. 21. he concludes, That Job abhors to entertain such a Thought
as being Perfect, page 72. Herein he has wronged Job, for he counted it not
consistent with SelfAbasement and Humility for him to say, I am Perfect,
especially upon a Self-Justification, as his words before plainly intimate, If
I Justify my self, mine own Mouth shall condemn me, etc. Job 9. 20. Though I
were Perfect, yet would I not know my Soul, verse. 21. Which proves not, that
Job abhors to entertain such a Thought as that of Perfection; but rather,
that it was not so proper for him to speak it in his own Justification; for
surely he did entertain such a Thought as that of Perfection, when he said,
When he has tried me I shall come forth as Gold, Job 23. 10, 11.

The man's gross Confusions about Job's Perfection, is hinted in our Paper,
entitled, the Presbyters Antidote choking himself. That saying, If our Hearts
condemn us, God is Greater, does not prove these holy Men knew God saw
something in them which ought not to be, for which their Hearts condemned them
so long as they lived; for it is as well said, If our Hearts Condemn us not,
then have we Confidence toward God.

S. S. Thoughts prevailed against, and cast out, return again; and their being
in us, is Sin, Act. 8. 20. Thou thoughtst that the Gift of God might be
purchased with Money, p. 72.

Answ. A very pertinent Proof for the covetous Presbyters, the quondam Hireling
Parish Priests; but no meet Instance to prove, the Being of Evil Thoughts
remain in all the holy Men of God; nor an equal Comparison, to mention the
corrupt and erroneous Thought of Simon the Sorcerer, as a Proof, that Thoughts
preva^led against and cast out, must return, and have their being in the Lord's
People all their Days; but while he grants that evil Thoughts are prevailed
against and cast out, why does he conclude they may not be kept out? or that
the keeping them out is not attainable in this Life, unless he will charge a
Want of Diligence upon all the Faithful, or accuse them with neglecting their
Watch? for I affirm, that to keep out evil Thoughts is attainable through
Diligence and Watchfulness in the same Light and Power that discovers them,
prevails against them, and cast's them out.

To prove that such a State, as to be wholly free from all evil Principles, is
not attainable in this Life, (...) cites John 15. 2. Every Branch in me that
bears Fruit, he (...) it: from whence he argues, If the Father purges him,
he has evil Principles to be purged out, p. 73.

Rep. What I said to this does not yet appear to be answerable by him, which
was, because it is the Father's purging out Sin or evil Principles; they must
needs be perfectly purged out by Degrees, though it is true, a Man is not
perfectly purged while he is a purging: I did not conclude, as he says, that
Freedom from all Sin is instantly, but in God's due time, who is the Purger,
and who perfects his own Work: In the same Scripture before cited, Christ
says, Now are you clean through the Word which I have spoken unto you; abide
in me, and I in you, Joh. 15. 3. 4. Without me (or severed from me) ye can do
nothing, ver. 6. If ye abide in me, and my Words abide in you, ye shall ask
what you will, and it shall be done unto you, ver. 7. and 16.

From hence observe, here is enough to confute S. S. his concluding, that Evil
Principles cannot be wholly purged out in this Life; for in Christ there is both
Power and Sufficiency; and if his Followers ask in his Name to be thoroughly
purged, it shall be done; or if they sincerely pray, that the Will of God may
be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven, It shall be answered.

Now I would ask S. S. if it be not a Duty of true Believers, when they see any
thing that is to be removed or purged out, to pray to the Father in Christ's
Name to remove it, and thoroughly to be purged, and their Hearts made clean in
this Life? And shall they not then be answered herein? Did not Christ say, What
soever you ask in my Name, believe that you shall have it, and you shall
receive it, or it shall be given you? And he that abid^th in Christ sins
not; and is not the Branch of the Nature of the Vine? He answers, We are
Partakers of the divine Nature; and how do we partake thereof, but by escaping
the Corruptions of the World? Page 74.


But as without Christ we can do nothing; so it is not our Phrase to say, I
have made my Heart clean; for it is he that works all our Works in us.

His concluding, that no Man has perfect Knowledge (viz. either of the Will of
God, or of his own Errors) and that this Ignorance remains during Life, from
Psalm. 19. 12. 1 Cor. 13. 9, 11. and therefore that there cannot be perfect
Practice, p. 74. We have Reason to conclude, he is very imperfect and mistaken
herein; for,

1st, The Will of God with respect to our Duty to him is to be known: It is
revealed by his Spirit, that it may be obeyed; and he that will do the Will
shall know the Doctrine.

2dly, Both secret Errors and Faults are discernable, and to be known by the
Light, which makes manifest whatsoever Things are reproved; and therefore
secret Faults are not always to remain in this Life, if David and others, when
sensible thereof, prayed not in vain, when they prayed to be cleansed from
secret Faults; and that secret Sins and Errors are to be discovered and known,
is evident, and that the Lord at his Appearance or Coming, will bring to Light
the hidden things of Darkness, and will make manisest the Counsels of the
Hearts; and it is he that reproves the Wicked, and sets man's Sins in order
before him; he that tells unto Man what his Thought is, the Lord God of Hosts
is his Name: Therefore, as he does perfectly show Man his Sin, and by Degrees
mani^est his Duty, and afford Light and Power sufficient to forsake Sin, and
obey fully; both are attainable in this ^ife, though gradually. Still his
concludi^g, that the perfect Man, if on Earth, he sins, from 1 Kings 8. 46.
There is no man that sins not; and Ecclesiast. 7. 20. There is not a just
Man upon the Earth that does Good and sins not; I ask him then, If there be
no higher Attainment in this Life, then for the best of Men to sin in doing
Good, as some of his Brethren interpret those last Words? But if he will please
to read D. Gill's Essay to the Amendment of the last Translation of the Bible,
he will find, that he does not render the Words in the Indicative Mood [That
sins not] but Vide Gill's Sermen on Eccl. 7. 19, 20. in his Essay.
in the Potential [That may not sin] as there is no man that may not sin, or
but that he may sin; there is no man just in the Earth that does Good, and may
not sin; which much differs from positively concluding, that every just man
sins in doing Good: And he further intimates it to be but in a legal State
of Justness, wherein a legal just Man may sin, and not in an Evangelical or
Gospel-State in Christ.

Neither do the Words as ren^ered in 1 King. 8. 46. There is no Man that sineth
not, agree with the Words before, If they sin against thee; but rather, there
is no Man, but that he may sin, and then it is possible for them not to sin;
and for a good Man that is one in Christ, beyond the State of the Law, to act,
and speak, and walk in Christ the true Light, and not to sin in doing Good; but
as of Sincerity, but as of God, in the Sight of God, so speak we in Christ:
Such are not sinning in their Preaching and Praying nor do they bring forth
wandering Prayers or Dreams, as you do, who are pleading and di^puting ^or Sin
Term of Life, because it is said, the Imagination of Man's Heart is Evil from
his Youth, S. S. says, This is not spoken of the Old, Wicked (...), b^t of
Noah and his Family, p. 74. If he intend this according to the Tenor of his
Discourse, as the State of Noah and his Family, and that all their Life time, I
must tell him, that it is contrary to the Testimony given of Noah, viz. That he
was a Just Man, and Perfect in his Generations; and Noah walked with God, which
was not with an Evil Heart or evil Imaginations; for that is not a State of
walking with God.

His saying, that this is not spoken of the old World, but of Noah, is a
Mistake: for God saw that the Wickedness o^ Man was great in the Earth, and
that every Imagination of the Thoughts of his Heart was only Evil continually:
This is as well mentioned in Gen^sis 6. 5. as Chap. 8. 21. and relates to Man
as in the unrerenerate State, estranged from God, and not to him as walking
with God: I must needs conclude this Man a Pleader for Sin (with many others of
his Brethren) A Pleader for Sin, whilst he thus confounds States and
Seize; and his Doctrine to be Antichristian and Impious, while he
accounts it God's good Pleasure, that the Being of Sin and Corruptions in part
must remain in the Saints, to keep them humble; and that Job abhors to
entertain such a Thought as that of Perfection, and that to be wholly Free and
purged from Evil Principles, is not attainable in this Life; let the impartial
Reader judge, whether there be not in these Doctrines a Pleading for Sin: And
while he and his Brethren contend against the Quakers for Evil Principles, they
contend to no purpose, while they r^ckon that neither themselves, nor any else
can be purged from Evil Principles in this (...); but they should not thus
dispute and contend for Sin and Imperfection for term of Li^e, ^eeing they say,
It is the Duty of all to be Perfect, and to press after it; to watch against
all, even the least Sins, page 70. and tell men, It is needful to forsake
Lying, Injustice, U^cleaness, etc. which the Light calls them off from, page 69.

I say, their pleading for Sin Term of Life, is inconsistent with this, and God
will require it at their Hands, for their strengthening the Hands of Evil Doers,
that they may not forsake their Sins by these Sin-pleasing Doctrines. They
cannot be altogether ignorant how apt Transgressors are to lay hold on every
Doctrine that is of such a Tendence as suites their Evil Minds, as much of
Stephen Scandret his Work does.

Therefore, as it is high time for the Wicked to repent of their Wickedness, so
it is time for you pretended Ministers, who are contending for Sin and
Imperfection, to repent thereof, and of your Sinful Doctrines, for the Being of
Sin and Imperfection Term of Life, whereby you have strengthened many Thousands
in Iniquity, made their Bands more strong, and exposed them to Ruin and
Destruction.

THE ANSWER TO Tho. Hicks, AND HIS BRETHREN, About the RESURRECTION. HIS
Absurdity, Confusion and Carnal Conceits about it Discovered. The Resurrection
Owned by us, and Scripturally Asserted; with the Future and Distinct Existences
of Men and Angels. And the Eternal Advantage of the Righteous after Dissolution.

Joh. 11. 25. Jesus said, I am the Resurrection and the Life, etc. 1 Cor. 15.
38. God gives a Body at his Pleasure. Ver. 44. There is a Natural Body, and
there is a Spiritual Body. 2 Timothy 2. 23. But put away Foolish and Unlearned
Questions. Serious Reader,
OUr Opposer appearing altogether utterly void of any spiritual Sense or divine
Under^tanding in this great and sublime Mystery of the Resurrection, his Work
is the less to be regarded; and we having very little of so much as seeming
Argument^tion from him, I need say the less to his Work; only take notice of a
few of his Absurd^ties and Abuses. What further, as is opened in the Discourse
following, is chiefly for the sake of others more honest and free from
Prejudice, and in order to incline them from gross Conceptions, into a
spiritual Apprehension of this Mystery, and that they may be mindful of their
present Concernment, of Acceptance with God in his own Life and Righteousness;
and not be diver^ed from obtaining the End and future Felicity of the
Righteous, by Uncertain, Vain and Gross Thoughts and Notions of carnal Minds,
which are but depending upon their own Imaginations of a future State, and not
upon a divine Principle or spiritual Understanding thereof.

God is my Record, that it is a sp^ritual Eye and divine U^nderstanding, that I
desire may be opened in these weighty Matters treated on; for which End in the
S^ght o^ God, I am open and free in my Spirit in what I write on this Occasion;
which I desire to i^prove only for the Glory of God and Good of Souls.

THE ANSWER To Tho. Hicks about the RESURRECTION, etc.
First, T. H. accuses us from what one Tarner should say; but answers not what
he said, or his Argument.

2dly, He accuses us in general words, with manifest Denial of the
Resurrection of the Body. For which his Instance is our saying, That Flesh and
Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

Observe hence, That it is no marvel that he reviles and slanders us, and thinks
we have some reserved Meaning, like the Jesuitical Equivocation; Dialoge,
p. 56. when he has accused us for making use of the Apostles plain words,
which he has not answered: Would it be well taken if he should positively say,
That the Apostle denied the Resurrection, when he says, Flesh and Blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50. Its one thing to deny Men's carnal
gross Thoughts about the Seed, Resurrection and Body: And it is another thing
wholely to deny the Resurrection of the Body in those general Expressions.

3dly, He pretends to desire Information what the Body is we believe shall
arise again; when before he has positively accused us with manifest Denial of
the Resurrection of the Body, that is, of any Body, if he meant as his words
import.

And here again he is obtruding upon us that Fool's Question, which the Apostle
reproved, when in answer thereto he said, Thou Fool, that which thou sowest is
not quickened except it dye: And thou sowest not that Body which shall be; but
God gives it a Body as it pleases him, 1 Cor. 15. 35, 36, 37, 38.

For which again he queries, Whether we do not tacitly deny the Resurrection
of the Body? For all this man's Pretense of Scripture being his Rule, he is not
content with the Scripture Language, nor yet willing to resign up himself to
the Pleasure of God, in giving to every Seed its own Body, as it pleases him.

But such busy Intruders will be inquisitive concerning the manner of God's
executing his Pleasure in this thing: Whereas men's present Concern should be
rather to wait to know, and submit to the good Pleasure of God in this Life;
and to find a part in Christ Jesus, who is the Resurrection and the Life, that
they might be assured of the good Effect and Fruits of God's good Pleasure
hereafter.

For it is a Design of Satan to busy and puzzle men's Thoughts about their
Existences in Heaven, while he keeps them in Sin and Darkness, in the Way to
Hell: Whereas if they would faithfully serve God in the Way of his Grace here
on Earth, they would freely trust him with the Manner how he will Glorify them
hereafter.

And my saying, We ought not to be Curious in these Matters, to inquire into
God's secret Pleasure in things beyond our Capacity; neither do I desire to
make my self wiser then I am; nor to appear wise above (or besides) what is
written ( viz. in this Case.)

Does this argue that the Divine Light within is not the Rule above the
Scriptures? as is employed in his 57th page; when I confess it to be that, that
gives the true Understanding of them; and to be wise according to what is
written, And not to pretend the Scriptures for Proof of what they prove not.

As for Instance; When I am called to answer an Unscriptural Question, by such
as profess Scripture to be their Rule; I think it most meet to answer them in
the Scripture Language, which while they are not satisfied with, they inquire
but to Cavil, and for Advantage, as my Opposer and some others of his Abettors
did. As for a more particular Instance, when they query about the Resurrection
of the Body; as desiring I would inform them, what Body that is, that shall
arise again? which being the same with that which the Apostle reproves for, 1
Cor. 15. 35. it deserves the same Reproof for Answer, verse. 36, 37.

Again, Though I really confess the Universal Resurrection of the Body of
Mankind, or of the whole Adam; which implies,

First, A general Fall and Death; and that they shall come forth, some to the
Resurrection of Life, and others to the Resurrection of Damnation; yet for the
very Phrase, namely, The Resurrection of the Body of Flesh, etc. I find not in
Scripture; But the Resurrection of the D^ad, the raising and arising of the
Dead, etc.

2dly, Upon my Answer in the Apostle's very words, 1 Cor. 15. 35. the feigned
Christian says, This Answer Whitehead said, is sufficient for such busy
intruding Fools, p. 57. By which he has contradicted what he says, before
Whitehead answered in p. 54. But then he adds, The Apostle calls Fools, not
they that believed; but they that deny the Resurrection of the Body, Persons of
the same Persuasion with the Quakers in this Point, p. 57.

That the Corinthians did positively deny the Resurrection, he has not proved;
But that some questioned like him, How, and with what Body are the ^ead raised?
etc. whose Folly the Apostle reproved: And this is not Quakers Persuasion thus
to question, much less to deny the Resurrection in the true Sense and real
Mystery of it; For so to question, With what Body are the Dead raised? is not a
Question necessary to Salvation, nor essential to the being of a Christian, who
knows a part in Christ, who is the Resurrection and the Life.

Now come we to examine T. H's Meaning upon the Text, 1 Cor. 15. 37, 38.
wherein he proceeds thus, Concerning this Mortal, viz. That the Body given it,
is the same for Substance, the same that was sown, etc. only called a Body
given to it, because it is so changed from its Accidents of Corruption and
Mortality. Thus far T. H.

What reasonable man can make Sense of this piece of Oratory, as to say that
the Body given to it, is the same for Substance: Like as if he had said, This
same mortal Body is the same It which is given it, or it is the same It that is
sown, that is given it self; or the same Body for Substance is given to the
mortal Body. What rare Rhetoric is this?

And so his Brother Kiffin says, That the Seed that is sown, is the same Body
of Flesh, etc. which shall arise, though otherwise qualified: If so, what is
that Body that God gives to it, as it pleases him? For if it be looked upon in
the Nature of a Seed, it must be supposed that it is another Body, that is given
unto it, as is to every Seed sown, according to its kind: For it is plain
Nonsense to say, That that which is sown, is the same Body that is given to it.

Besides, that which is not quickened except it dies (which may be spoken of
every kind of Seed, that has Life in it first) does not dye before it is sown,
but after it is sown; as Christ says, Except a Grain of Wheat fall into the
Ground and dye, it abides alone; but if it dye, it brings forth much Fruit:
Now the Fruit or Ear brought forth, is the proper Body given to it, which is
not the very same which wa^ sown in the Earth. But I pray, how holds this dying
aftersown, with these men's fleshly Opinion of the carnal Body in the Grave
being the Seed? for that being Dead before, does not dye after it is buried;
neither do these men intend to be buried alive.

And seeing every Seed has its own proper Body, what Body can be proper to the
Terrestrial Bodies? which if every one of them must be looked upon as the Seed,
to have each a proper Body given, what a plurality of Bodies must there be
besides what are? And will it not amount to this, That every man shall not only
have these very Terrestrial Bodies, but each a Body besides; and so every man
two Bodies, and those of the same Substance that these are now, to wit,
Terrestrial or Carnal?

He cites Phil. 3. 21. thus, He shall change our vile Bodies. Herein he
mis-cites and perverts the Phrase; For it is not Bodies in the plural, but Body
in the singular: And it is to be read thus from the Greek, He shall change the
Body of our Lowness, that it may be fashioned or trans-figured like unto his
Glorious Body.

But does not this evidently make against him; considering that Christ's
Glorious Body is not a Carnal, Terrestrial or Earthly Body, but a Spiritual,
Transcendent, Glorious Body? And the changing of our Low Body, in fashion to be
like his, implies not the same Terrestial or Carnal Bodies, or to be of this
Fashion and Substance, as now they are; For Celestial, Spiritual and Glorious
Bodies are much different from Terrestrial, Carnal and Mean Corruptible Bodies.

Again, T. H. adds from Phil 3. 21. This cannot be meant of a new created
Body; because such a Body cannot be said to be either vile or changed. If then
this IT be not the Body which dyed, but another, how can that be called a
Resurrection; for that supposes the same? If another, then it is more properly
a Creation of a new Body, then the Resurrection of the Body, p. 58.

Repl. Mark here. 1. He is for a Resurrection of the very same T^rrestrial
Bodies of all men, but no new Creation; for that opposes his Thoughts of the
Resurrection.

2. What a strange Inconsistency is it, that the selfsame Earthly or Carnal
Bodies of all should arise again after they are turned to Dust without any new
Creation, and yet rise complete, the same they were sor Substance? What Sense
or Congruity can be made of this? Many Thousands being dissolved, and turned to
as real Dust of the Earth, as man was at first formed of, how should Living and
Complete Bodies be raised out of that Dust, without Creating anew first? But if
it cannot be a new created Body, it is not the same Natural, Carnal or
Terrestrial Body for Substance after dissolved: It is not this very same
corruptible Flesh, Blood and Bones, that is given to every Seed as it pleases
God, or that shall inherit God's Kingdom.

Howbeit, As to be Quickened, implies a Death first; and Resurrection, a Fall
before; and to be Changed, that there was either a vile, corruptible Suffering,
or low Estate before: So all that come to know Christ in them, and the Body
dead because of Sin, know the Spirit to be Life because of Righteousness: And
if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead dwell in you, he that
raised up Jesus from the Dead shall also quicken your mortal Bodies by his
Spirit that dwells in you, Romans 8. 10, 11, 12, 13. And this plainly is a
quickening unto Righteousness, by the Spirit dwelling within, which is far from
being a Proof of T. H's Opinion, though cited by him.

And as in the first Adam is both the Fall and Death come over all men; so in
the second Adam, who is the Resurrection and the Life, all are made alive, and
that unto Righteousness, who first come to see the Body dead because of Sin,
and the Deeds of the Body mortified, Romans 8. 13. or who come to know Christ,
and the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of his Sufferings, being
made conformable unto his Death, these attain unto the Resurrection of the
Dead, Phil. 3. 10, 11. Such do not strive for a Notion thereof, but to attain
to it.

As to the manner of Existences or Beings of all men in the World to come,
there is no Necessity for any to be taking thought or busying their Minds about
them; it being in the Pleasure and Wisdom of God, to reserve all to their due
and deserved Ends in an immortal Capacity.

Our present Concernment is, so to know and esteem of Christ, as that we may be
found in him, not only mortified to the Corruptions of this World, through the
Fellowship of his Suffering and Conformity unto his Death; But also interessed
in that blessed Resurrection, which is only attained to in Christ, who is the
Resurrection and the Life; that he may be magnified in our Body, whether by
Life or Death.

To what he says in his 59. page about the B^dy that was dead; about that It
which is raised; about the So^l and the Seed of God; the Matter is answered
else where; yet,

First, All that know the Body dead because of Sin, having mortified the Deeds
of the Flesh and being conformable to the Death of Christ, as dead with him,
shall alfo be quickened and raised up by his Spirit that dwells in them, which
is Life, because of Righteousness; and such only can speak experimentally of
the Seed of God, and the Soul.

2dly, That there is a Seed of God, and a Seed of the Serpent in Mankind,
according to G. F. Junior's relation, he further tells you, that they that
discern the Body of each Seed, are not the Fools which are questioning, how the
dead should be raised and with what Body; for they know that all Mankind will
be found in one of these two Seeds. By which it is plain, he does not exclude
men from a future Being or Immortality, nor confound them with the very Being
of God; though it is by his invisible Power, that all are upheld in their
respective Existences, in Immortality, whether they be found in the Nature and
Image of the good Seed, or of the evil.

T. H. And since he calls them Fools, that is, the Apostles and all true
Christians that say, This Body of Flesh and Bones shall arise, page 59.

Rep. He should have produced his plain Scripture for the Apostles so saying:
where are these Words to be found in all the Scriptures of the new Testament,
that this Body of Flesh and Bones shall arise again? Does not the Apostle say
the contrary, Thou sowest not that Body that shall be? And Flesh and Blood
cannot inherit the Kingdom of God?

But must we then suppose, as some Professors do, That these Bodies of Flesh
and Bones, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, without any Blood in them? Or,
that after they are returned to Dust, they shall arise again the self same as
they are, without any new Creation? I confess, this is such kind of new
Philosophy as I have not read of before.

The man has run himself into such strange Confusion; and wholly misses the
Sense of the Resurrection and the Life; and over looks the true Seed and Root
of the Matter, while in his vain mind he is imagining, muddling and Devil-like
disputing about the Body, which in Comparison of the immortal Existence and
being of Man, is but an outside Case, earthly Shell or Husk that disolveth.

Again he says, If this Seed of the Serpent be only Sin, and the Seed of
Christ only Grace, it is only Sin and Grace which shall arise again, p. 60.

Oh the gross Darkness and Ignorance of this Man! He knows not the Seed of the
Serpent, from whence Sin springs; nor the Seed of God, from whence Grace and
Life flows: But falsely supposes, that our Principle extinguishes the future
distinct beings of Men, though it has been plainly told him, that all Mankind
will be found in one of these two Seeds.

As also we testify, from that Sense of Life and Immortality, that is brought
to Light in us through the Gospel, That the Soul, whole spiritual Man, and
spiritual Body, shall exist in Immortality; yea, though our outward Man perish,
yet the inward Man is renewed day by day, and in order to possess an eternal
Weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4. This inward Man is neither extinguished by the
perishing of the outward Man; nor thereby deprived of that Advantage, which is
an eternal Weight of Glory:

And that God gives it a Body as it pleases him, and to every Seed his own
Body, or his proper Body.

The Man would know what this It is, showing his Dubiousness of his own
Assertion before, viz. "That it is a mortal Body of Flesh and Bones (whether it
shall be raised and go to Heaven with any Blood in it, he tells us not) and
that the Body given it is the same for Substance; that is as good Sense as to
say, the Body of Flesh and Bones shall (when it is raised) have the same Body
of Flesh and Bones given to it; whereas it is to every Seed his proper Body,
which is comprehensive both of the Seed of the Righteous, and the Seed of the
Wicked; of the Seed of God, and the Seed of the Serpent: and so comprehends and
takes in the whole Body of Mankind under those two Relations and Natures; not
to dissolve or extinguish their Rational, Intelligible Beings, with the
perishing and dissolvable Earthly Outside or Case, but that all shall be
reserved for their due and proper Ends, according to the Seed, Nature and
Image, which their Soul carries with it when it parts with the Earthly
Clothing.

And whereas it is said, that It is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a
Spiritual Body; the great Stress is laid on the particle [IT] which may as well
be applied to Wheat or other Grain; It is sown, and It is raised, when the
Body, or outside of that very Corn that is sown is dead, though the innate
Virtue or Life, does not in it self dye, nor fruitlesly expire: Thou sowest not
that Body that shall be, etc. yet in these two relations, It, is used as
relative both to that which is sown, and to that Body that shall be, while in
the very next Words to those before cited, it is said, there is a Natural Body,
and there is a Spiritual Body, 1 Cor. 15. 44. and these can no more be the
self-same, then Celestial and Terrestrial Bodies can; or then the first Adam
and the laft Adam, or the Earthly and the Heavenly, which the Apostle plaiuly
distinguishes between, as he does betwixt the Natural and the Spiritual.

But whereas T. H. and his Brethren so much argue from the word It [as, It is
sown a Natural Body, It is raised a Spiritual] they take this It for Idem
corpus, the self-same Body in both: Their Mistake is evident; they have not
this either from the Greek or Latin: see (...), seminatur corpus animale,
surgit corpus spirituale, i. e. a Natural (or Animal) Body is sown, a Spiritual
Body rises; it is not Idem surgit: Nor would this agree with the next Words,
There is a Natural Body, and there is a Spiritual Body.

This admits of no such Transubstantiation, as that the self-same Natural Body
should become Spiritual, or be the Subject of such an Accident.

And it is sown (...), an Animal Body; or as having Life, a Living Body, which
therefore cannot be the Body as dead, and laid in the Graves; for in that
Condition they are not Corpus Animale; for that relates to the Earthly Adam, or
Body of Mankind, as having a natural Life: and must not even the Animal or
Natural Man dye before the Spiritual Man be risen, or Immortality in Christ be
put on? And is not the Natural (or Animal) Man doposed to the Renewed Man? 1
Cor. 2. 14.

And the Seed which is sown in Weakness must needs have some Degree of Life in
it, when sown (whether Natural or Spiritual) and the Weakness and Corruption
does relate to the Subject in which it is sown, if the Seed it self be
incorruptible.

And as the First Man is of the Earth, Earthly, the second Man is the Lord from
Heaven; and As is the Earthly, Such are they also that are Earthly; and As is
the Heavenly, Such are they that are Heavenly, ver. 47, 48. which if this be
owned, it must be granted, that they that are Heavenly must have Bodies
suitable, viz. Heavenly or Spiritual Bodies; this Heavenly being the second Man,
the Lord from Heaven, ver. 47. And mark, As is the Heavenly, Such are they that
are Heavenly; which cannot be the same with Earthly any more then the Image of
the Heavenly can be the Image of the Earthly.

And as to our being asked, what this Mortal is that must put on Immortality?
Though Mortal in this place implies a dying Condition of Man (as the Effect of
Sin) as in Adam all dye; yet it cannot (as having put on Immortality) be
relative to Flesh and Blood, but as admitted in a Heavenly and Spiritual Sense;
for the Apostle plainly tells us but a little before, Now this I say, Brethren,
that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; neither does Corruption
inherit Incorruption: Behold, I show you a Mystery! We shall not all Sleep, but
we shall all be Changed, ver. 50, 51. And so by that Life and Immortality which
is brought to Light, we see beyond Death and Mortality; and we (though as in a
dying State, yet) behold Immortality, being quickened by the second Adam, and
renewed again into the Image of the Heavenly; being made alive in Christ, who
redeems Man from Death, and ransoms the Soul from the Power of the Grave; who
swallows up Mortality and Death in Life and Victory, and says, O Death, I will
be thy Plagues; O Grave, I will be thy Destruction, Hos. 13, 14. Isa. 25. 8. by
whom also Death being so swallowed up into Victory, and the Sting of it, which
is Sin, taken away: They who thus have their part in Christ, who is the
Resurrection and Life, can truly say, Thanks be to God, who gives us the
Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. ^7. And to take off further
Surmisings against us, I tell my Opposer, that this Resurrection, or Change,
extends not only to a Raising of Man up from Sin to Righteousness, but also to
an Eternal Glory: And it is not only the Raising up of the Seed or Grace in Man,
as he supposes; but the Raising up of Man from Sin, Death, Hell and the Grave,
even in the Seed and Life, which is the Ransom; and this answers his Cavils in
his 6^. and 61. Pages, only where he fictitiously makes us speak thus, viz.

Qu. We believe the Resurrection of the Body, though we know not what that Body
is which shall rise: And then he absurdly makes a Christian to answer thus, viz.

Chr. Thou said before, the Light within was the divine Essence: either then
thy Light within thee is not God, or God knows not all things, etc.

Reply, First he feigneth the Quacker, though we will never own him to be our
Mouth; for the Words were not so spoken by me, or us; but that we ought not to
be too Curious or Inquisitive in things beyond our Capacities, as to the Manner
of the Existences hereafter; or how Men shall be reserved unto their several
Ends and Rewards; for God knows how to do it: but we being sensible of the
different Seeds, we cannot be altogether ignorant of the Nature of each Body
being proper to the Seed it belongs to: Yet, if with John, we say, it does not
yet appear what we shall be; it is Satisfaction that we know what Manner of
Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of
God; for such are Sons of the Resurrection.

2dly, T. H. abuses the Christian by making him speak absurdly that which
implies, that if Man have a Divine Light in him, he must needs know all that
the Light knows, or else either conclude, that the Light is not Divine, or else
God is not Omniscient; and then it follows from hence, that none have either a
Divine Light, or God dwelling in them, unless they know as much as God (which
was a Temptation to Man at first) and by this he has shut out all, not only
the fallen World, but God's People also from having any Divine Light or Power
of God in them.

He scoffs at some of our Friends, saying, We own the Resurrection; that is, We
witness it: and then adds, But what is it you witness? the Resurrection of the
Seed? It Is Christ in you.

Ans. Is this a matter to be taunted or scoffed at? Has he truly acted the
part of a Christian thus to slight the Arising of the Righteous Seed in any; or
Christ's Arising, who does appear, reveal himself, and arise in the Souls that
believe in him, to raise them also up with him; yea, and that which the Father
has given him he will loose nothing o^ it, but raise it up at the last Day?
And if you do not come to know a Righteous Seed raised up in you, and Truth to
spring up out of the Earth and to witness Christ to be your Resurrection and
Life, you remain dead in your Sins, and short of the Glory of this
Resurrection. But in witnessing Christ to be the Resurrection and the Life unto
us, we do not assert that it is only the Seed or Christ in us that does arise,
as is vainly imagined; but we are revived, and do arise in and with him, as
those that have believed in his Name, as he said, I am the Resurrection and the
Life, he that believes in me, though he were dead yet shall he live; and he
that lives and believes in me, shall never dye: wherein he does not take
notice of the putting off of the earthly Body or Clothing, as his dying, or
Death. And, as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made 1 Cor. 15.
22, 23.
alive; but every man in his own order, Christ the first Fruits, afterward they
that are Christ's at his Coming: and this is not to exempt Man from the Benefit
of the Resurrection; nor to say, That Christ and the Light within is sown
Natural, Mortal and Corruptible, as T. H. most maliciously and falsely accuses
us by way of Question, as asserting Blasphemy: To which he farther adds, that
we intend the Resurrection of something past, and witness in our selves: What
is Falsehood and Deceit, if this be not? p. 61. And further says, Thus do you
undermine the very Foundation of Faith, Hope and Holiness of Life, like Hymneas
and Philotus, 2 Timothy 2. 17. who said the Resurrection is past already.

To which I answer, first, What we witness in ourselves of the Resurrection, it
is this Man's horrible Blasphemy, to call it Falsehood and Deceit, for that we
do witness to Christ as being the Resurrection and the Life revealed in us, so
far as we have a living Knowledge of him, and Experience of being by him raised
up from Sin and Death that came by it, in order to attain to a future Glory.

2dly, It Is a Gross Slander, that we either intend or say, like Hymneas and
Philotus, that the Resurrection is past already; for that it is not yet (as to
Man) completely; we are not yet raised to what we shall be, as namely to that
Fullness of Glory and absolute Joy and Triumph, which shall be incessantly
possessed after our Labors and Sufferings are ended, and our Earthly House
dissolved; for the more we are drawn up into absolute Spirituality, the more
capable we are of that full Fruition of an eternal Weight of Glory in the
Heavens; in order to which let us be Spiritually minded, and walk in Holiness
of Life while here in our earthly House. As also we cannot hold that the
Resurrection is past already, while we, or any of us, are suffering with
Christ, and travailing in order to attain unto the Resurrection of the Dead,
that is, perfectly to be raised up with Christ; who is the Resurrection and
Life (in some Degree at least) of all that truly believe in his Name and Power:
Neither is this to undermine the Foundation of true Faith, Hope or Holiness of
Life, while we confess Christ to be that Foundation. But to argue for Sin and
Imperfection term of Life, and so to put off being Perfect till in Heaven, as
this Opposer has done, this is repugnant to the Foundation of living and
purifying Faith and Hope; and so excludes Holiness of Life: howbeit he thinks
to arrive at Heaven with the same Carnal Carcass or Corruptible Cask he now
beats about with him; only he thinks, it will be new dressed up and polisht after
it is turned to Dust: But the greatest Miracle is, that it must not be Created
a new, nor a new Created Body; and unless we grant him this, he reckons our
Religion a mere Cheat, calculated only to the Service of the Devil and our own
Lusts, and that it denies any Eternal Advantage; and therefore be opposes the
Christian to the Quaker, p. 62. And what is the Marrow of his Matter for this
severe Conclusion upon us? But,

First, he accuses us of a palpable Denial of all future and distinct Beings
and Existences after Death, page 62. which is a palpable and notorious Untruth:
for as we confess to the distinct Beings of Angels in Heaven; so we confess the
future distinct Beings and Existences of the Saints and Children of the
Resurrection, that in the World to come they shall be AS the Angels of God;
yea, They which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that World and the
Resurrection, etc. They shall be equal unto the Angels, and are the Children of
God, being the Children of the Resurrection, Luke 20. 36. And what Bodies have
these Angels of God? Terrestrial, or Celestial; Carnal, or Spiritual? let that
be considered.

2dly, The Man's other Pretense is, If the Soul be a Part of God, Divine,
Infinite (as before) and returns into God, being God it cannot miscarry, he
says. His Abuse concerning this has been answered before, both in this
Treatise, and in my Book of the Nature of Christianity.

And it was never asserted by us either of the Soul of Man, or of the Spirit or
Existence of Man, or the Creature which may vary in its Affections to Good or
Evil, according to the Power that acts Man: Neither can it be conceived in
Reason (but Envy) that any of us should look upon the Infinite God, to be
Divisible into so many Parts or Particles as there are Entities or Existences
of Men; yet that there is an Infinite Life, Principle or Seed in the Soul of
every Man, This we confess, as that by which the Soul immortally subsists in
its being; and therefore this may be counted the Soul, or Life of the Soul; for
without this the Soul of man could not subsist in an Immortal Capacity. And
this I and diverse others can testify, that G. F. did not intend or asscribe
either Immutability, Infiniteness or Divinity to the mere formed or created
Spirit, Soul or Being of Man, but to the divine, immediate Inspiration or
Breath of Life, flowing from God himself, who inspired into him an active Soul,
and breathed in a living Spirit, Wisd. 15. 11. whereby Man became both a living
and reasonable Soul, endued with Rational, Intellectual and Spiritual Parts.

3dly, I know no other Reason he can pretend for his Charge against us and our
Religion, as a Cheat, and as denying an eternal Advantage, but that we do not
own his gross and carnal Sense of the Resurrection, though it be none of our
Phrase, to say in these general words, That the Body perishes forever; but
hereby he plainly implies man's Incapacity of an eternal Advantage, unless his
Carnal or Terrestrial Body that now is, partake thereof; and how shall it
partake thereof after it is dissolved and turned to Dust? He tells us, It
cannot be a new Created Body, but a Resurrection; Of what? he would have it of
the self-same Body for Substance: But if there must be no new Creation, but a
Resurrection of these Carnal Bodies, opposed to Creation, it must only be a
raising of the Dust of these Bodies; and then what a sad Garment would this
invest the Souls of the Righteous with? But if on second Thoughts, he will
admit of any new Creation of Bodies out of the Dust, this cannot imply, that
they shall be the very self same that now they are in Matter and Form. But if
any of them shall yet say, They shall be specifically the same Bodies, That
varies from their Principle of being the self-same that now they are. What is
now become of this Man's Religion? and whereon do his Expectations of a future
Advantage depend, but upon his Ignorant and Carnal Conceptions, and not upon
any living Sense of Christ, or any spiritual or divine Understanding of the
Mystery of the Resurrection, whose Work is gross Body, and not Spirit? He
reckons our Religion and Suffering to be for a Carnal Interest, while his empty
Faith and Profession is for the same to be sure, being so much for the
Promotion of his Carnal Body in eternal Glory, which it is not capable of; nor
he in the Way to it. Such is the course of some carnal Cavillers, who while
contending about Bodies, and musing how they shall exist in Heaven, they are
now neglecting the Way thither, more busying themselves about their carnal
Bodies, then regarding their poor Souls; or minding the Spirit of Holiness,
thereby to become Sons of God, and of the Resurrection; or to be converted from
Sin and Pollution to Holiness; or turned from Satan's Power to God, which is
the Way to Glory. And now in short to answer what we and our Religion are
charged within the Conclusion of our Adversary's bitter reviling Dialogue:

First, We testify that the Resurrection is not past.

2dly, That the Soul of Man is not God, nor Christ; but God is the Savior of
it; and so we (always since we knew our own Souls) have distinguished between
the Soul and the Savior of it.

3dly, That we confess future and distinct Beings after Death, as well of Men
as of Angels; and that the Children of God and of the Resurrection shall in the
World to come be as the Angels, yea, equal to them.

4thly, Though it be said, Thou sowest not that Body that shall be; and Flesh
and Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. It does not
therefore follow, that our Religion denies any eternal Advantage that is to be
reaped; much less that it is a Cheat, or Calculated to the Service of the
Devil, as most wickedly and maliciously T. H. has reviled and blasphemed that
Religion and Testimony which we know, is given us of God; for we have not by
distinguishing between the Natural and Spiritual Bodies, denied the Saints,
their proper Existences, Spiritual Body, or House eternal in the Heavens, when
the Earthly Tabernacle is dissolved: and unless the Man holds the Mortality of
the Soul, that it dies with the Body, or the extinguishing of the spiritual
Being of Man, I do not see how he can suppose a denying of any eternal
Advantage on our parts; unless he place it all upon the Earthly Body. It is
true that some of his Brethren do hold, that the Soul dies with the Body, and
sleeps in the Dust, till both be raised; and this also depriveth all the Saints
deceased from having any eternal Advantage, in the mean time at least: But we
are not of that Faith, Hope or Religion that will expire or perish with the
Carnal Body, as our Opposers will, who in his fruitless, carnal Work and
Discourse consists more of and for gross Body, then Spirit; he is too carnal
and gross in his Apprehensions, to discern so much as a Vision of the future
Beings and State of Saints: But both they that think they shall reap no Eternal
Advantage without their Terrestrial Bodies of Flesh and Blood, as T. H. page 75.

And they who hold the Mortality of the Soul, are not of the Apostle's mind and
Spirit, who said, We know, that if our 2 Cor. 5. 1. 8.
earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of God, an
House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. We are
confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the Body, and to be
present with the Lord, ver. 8. For to Phil. 1. 21.
me to live is Christ, and to dye (...) Gain; but if I live in the Flesh this
is the Fruit of my Labor: Yet what I shall Choose I wot not; for I am in a
straight betwixt two, having a Desire to depart and to be with Christ, which is
far better, Phil. 1. 21, 22, 23.

Mark here, First, he expected a far better and more excellent House then the
Earthly House after Dissolution.

2dly, If to dye was Gain to him, and to depart from the Flesh, desirable; and
so out of it, to be with Christ, far better, he did not place his Felicity upon
the Flesh or carnal Body, as T. H. does: neither did the Apostle so endeavor
to magnify that fleshly outside Clothing, which is perishing and dissolvable;
but his earnest Expectation and Hope was on the behalf of Christ, and his
future Gain in him, saying, Christ shall be magnified in my Body, whether by
Life or by Death, Phil. 1, 20. But T. H. his carnal Contest is for magnifying
his earthly, carnal Body, and not for magnifying Christ therein; for he
scornfully slights our witnessing Christ (and his being risen) in us; though it
is evident the Apostle did not place his eternal Felicity and Advantage upon
the Earthly House, Flesh or carnal Body that perishes and turns to Dust; for if
he set his Heart upon Man, if he gather unto himself his Spirit and his Breath,
all Flesh shall perish together, and Man shall turn again unto Dust, Job. 34.
14, 15. But T. H. sees no Eternal Advantage to be reapt by Persons after Death,
unless they confess the Resurrection of the very selfsame Flesh, Blood and
Bones that dies, corrupts and turns to Dust (If he intends any Blood in it) he
will admit of no new Creation of it; and by this, his Religion and Hope do
expire and perish with his corrupt Body, and must only be renewed when the Dust
of that Body shall be raised without Creating it a new Body: And if there be no
eternal Advantage without this kind of Resurrection, as described by him, this
does either wholly deny the Original and Spiritual Being of Man, and
comprehends the whole Man, only as consisting of a mortal and perishing Body;
or else admits not of the reasonable Soul really to enjoy her self in any
condition out of the outside perishing Vesture or decayed Clothing, which for
Man to be divested of, can be no more Loss to him, as to his immortal Being,
then it is to the Wheat to dye and bring forth much Fruit, unto which [
Resurrection] is applicable as well as to Man, though not to the Sameness of
Body: And as it cannot unman a Man to put off his Old Clothing, that he may
put on New; no more can it annihilate our Spiritual Existences to have the
Earthly Clothing put off and dissolved, but be to our far greater Advantage
and Glory, to be invested with that Spiritual Transcendent Clothing, and most
Excellent House Eternal in the Heavens; which State they only attain to, who
become Sons of God and of the Resurrection, and desire Christ may be magnified
in their Bodies here. And furthermore from that Belief and Discovery I have
received in the true Light, of the Resurrection and future Rewards, according
to the holy Scripture; I desire it may be minded, that God Acts 17. 30, 31.
commands all Men every where (in their Day and Time) to Repent, because he
has appointed a Day in the which he Mat. 10. 15. and 11. 22, 24. and 12. 36.
will judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained: So
that there will be a Day of Judgment, Job. 21. 30.
Wrath and Perdition of the Ungodly; unto which Day the 2 Pet. 2. 9. and 3. 7.
Lord Knows how to Reserve the Unjust to be punished; and this will be a
Terrible Day to all that make Lies their Refuge, and reject the universal Call
of God to Repentance: And seeing that in the Great Day of the Lord a final
Dissolution Psalm. 102. 25.
may be expected of all those things that are perishing Hebr. 1. 10, 11, 21.
and dissolvable, even of the Heavens and the Earth, and that they shall be
changed, what manner of Persons ought we to be here in all Holy Conversation
and Godliness?

After T. H. has vented his Blasphemous Outrage against our Religion, as
before in his Catechism, he impudently abuses and bespattereth our Sufferings,
p. 75. where he thus questioneth, viz. Tell me what it is that does influence
and prevail with you to Do and Suffer as you do? And then he makes us thus to
answer, viz.

Answ. What do thou think it should be? And then he thus proceeds.

Quest. May not the Satisfaction of your Wills and Lusts, the Promoting your
Carnal Interests, be your chief Motive and Inducement? And then he makes the
Answer thus.

Answ. We deny the Flesh and the Lusts: This is thy own Dark Imagination: And
then he proceeds again.

Quest. May not you live in and fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh whilst you deny
it in Words, since your Opinion denies any eternal Advantage to be reaped by
Persons after Death in denying the Resurrection of this Body? Must you not then
have respect to something to be enjoyed here as your Encouragement? p. 75.

Rep. The Malice, Falsehood and Absurdity of these Forgeries against the real
Intent and End of our Sufferings, Thousands may testify against; and all
Impartial Readers that know us, and have beheld our deep Sufferings, may
perceive the Man's Envy: Considering the great Number of our Friends that have
dyed in Prisons, and the many hundreds that have been ruined and spoiled in
their Estates and Callings, could these be either consistent with Lusts or
carnal Interest? and the many that have been banished, and many Families
undone; besides the many that have been knocked down, Bruised and Beaten in the
streets, and their Lives often hazarded and resigned up for Meeting in the Fear
of God; Could these things be endured for a Carnal Interest? No, No; but merely
upon a Religious and Conscientious Account (wherein we have eyed the Glory of
God, and our own Peace andfturue Happiness: If we did not own any Resurrection,
eternal Advantage, or Existences hereafter, what should we suffer for? we were
of all men most miserable: If we were of that Atheistical Opinion, instead of
choosing our Great Sufferings, we should have chosen this, viz. Let us Eat and
Drink, for tomorrow we dye, 1 Cor. 15. 19, 32. It may be easily judged whether
we are justly reflected upon or no, as being influenced either to satisfy our
Wills, or promote carnal Interest, or to fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh, or
obtain any temporal Enjoyment here by our Losses and Sufferings: These gross,
abusive Slanders are so apparent that he that runs may read them, being also
manifestly detected by our apparently often resigning up our Estates, Liberties
and Lives; also in Times of deep Suffering, when we could see no public
Appearance of such, as T. H. and many of his Brethren, before the face of
Persecution; but then they could sculke and creep into Corners, and Obscure
themselves, and leave all the Burden upon u^, there being but a few Baptists
that did suffer in the late Trial sor their Religion or Consciences: Though to
give them their due, a few of them have suffered Imprisonment, some whereof
have received the Benefit of our Labors among our Friends, in a late General
Discharge; but the most cowardly and base-spirited among them are now most
Quarrelsom against us; and why? They have lost Ground by their Carnal Policy in
Obscuring themselves in Stormy Times, which they are never like to regain, but
still to loo^e more by Fretting and Struggling against us; and therefore T. H.
is offended that our Number should now augment, though that he cannot hinder;
for the Hand of the Lord is in it: And many having seen the Coldness of
Baptists Zeal, Night-Dipping, and their Timorous Creeping and Securing
themselves in Suffering Times as also the Emptiness and Dryness of their
Religion; Diverse are aweary thereof: And when they come among us to receive the
Sense of God's Power, then diverse of the Baptist-Teachers do fret and are
Angry, eagerly besetting the Parties: And in that God has made our Sufferings
effectual for his Name and Truth sake, for the drawing many after it, T. H.
endeavors (in the Malice of Satan) to debase and render our Sufferings
Odious, saying: He believes our Carnal Advantage is one great Thing in our Eye;
And then he adds,

Quest. Though you may sustain some outward Losses; yet whether you have not a
Way to augment your Outward Gain by Loosing? page 75.

Reply, He now questioneth that which before he says, he believes, as namely,
That Carnal Advantage is one great Thing in our Eye. One Great Thing implies
some thing else; but What else, he leaves no place for in what he has
concluded before, to wit, That we have regard only to something to be enjoyed
(...); afterward he falsely rekons Carnal Advantages to be One great Thing in
our Eye, and then questions the Matter surmised and before believed by him; as,
Whether we have not a Way to augment our outward Gain by Loosing? and thus
bewrayes his own Guilt, Falsehood, and Wickedness in his Traducing a People or
whole Body of us, and Reproaching our Conscientious Sufferings, though it is
known that Carnal Interest and Advantage is a great thing in the eye of diverse
Baptist-Preachers, while they augment their Gain, Stipends and Pluralities by
preaching in several Places in times of Liberty; which Liberty their occult
Creeping in times of Trial has not procured, but added to our Sufferings:
Coertion was effectual and sruitful upon such timorous Dippers or Baptists, and
not at all shown to be fruitless by the Valor of these Opposers and
Quarrelers, who now further to increase our Sufferings, reproach them as
Irreligious, and only for self-intrest; and Us, as neither Christians nor
Conscientious; and such is the Reward we have from cowardly, base and envious
Spirits, who have strengthened the Hand of Persecution, and aggravated our
Sufferings by their own Unchristian and Ignoble Policy, and Subterfuges for
self-Security. But T. H. might have very well allowed us Conscience and
Religion for our many deep Sufferings (especially while he and his Brethren
partake of the Fruits and Benefit thereof) wherein we have resigned up all our
Worldly Interests, outward Concernments, and our Lives also) although he had
judged our Conscience erronous: But what is the Tendence of all his imbittered
Traducing and Reproaching our Sufferings; as, one while Wills, Lusts and carnal
Intrests being the chief Inducement thereto; another while, Respect only to
some temporal Enjoyment; another while, Carnal Advantages one great thing; and
then he questions, Whether we have not a Way to augment our outward Loss? Thus
showing his Variation and Doubtfulness in his own perverse and most apparent
Slander against our Sufferings: And finally after he has thus perversely
vilified them (as, Carnal Interest being either the chief thing, or only thing,
or one great thing; or whether we have not such a Way to augment, etc.) he
says, If not, then may not a Disposition to be singular, and to (...) (...) to
all other men, and to be noted in the World as a People of peculiar Motions and
Fancies prevail very much with you, to Do and Suffer as you do, p. 76.

Rep. His wicked surmising a Carnal Advantage to be our End, is now turned into
a Suggestion of a Disposition to be singular and noted in the World, which,
though varying from the former, is also abominably false and wicked; and our
Consciences bear us witness in the fight of God, that T. H. has shamefully
slandered the real Intent and End of tur Sufferings in these matters: And what
do all his Atempts herem tend to, but to calumniate, defame and odifie us and
our Sufferings to the World, and to make us so obnoxious to the Powers, and
both wilfully and Irreligiously repugnant to the Government, as that they may
fall more vigorously upon ^us to ruin and destroy us, If they will believe this
reviling, inveterate Baptist, who is so very dirty that he had need to be more
dipped then ever he was, who has shown his implacable Enmity and persecuting
Spirit, from which he has fomed out his own Shame (like a malicious
Incendiary) which will the more extend to the Discredit and Dis-reputation of
himself and his Brethren that own him, and not to the making void the Christian
Reputation which we, the People, called Quakers have on the behalf of God and
his living Truth: However T. H. has published us as no Christians, and most
shamefully treated us like an Insinuating Temporizer, falslly and deceitfully
accusing us of Enmity against the Ministry and Institutions of Jesus Christ, p.
76. but neither tells us, who he intends are that Ministry, nor what he means
by those Institutions, whether he intends not Baptist-Preachers, and their
Night-dipping, etc. Though for his Cover he would make the World believe, as if
we were really acted and influenced by some Romish Emissaries to insinuate many
of their Heresies, to distract, dejor^ and defame the Protestant Profession p.
^6. which is still slanderous and fallacious, tending to make us suffer by such
deceitful and popular Insinuations; as if to vindicate our selves and our
^nnocent and Just Cause from the perverse Calumnies of a few peevish Dippers
and Anabaptists were such an Heretical Crime to distract and deform the
Protestant Professions; and as if these distracted Anabatists were the
Protestants Principal Representatives. And He having abused us after thi^ his
deceitful and malicious way, and with his calumniating Language against us, our
Religion, and Sufferings; the summary Conclusion of his Method against us, runs
thus, viz.

Cheats, and Impostors, great Imposters, p. 27, 28, 62. Knave, Knave, a false
and dec^itful man and that wilfully, a man false and deceitful, really salse
and dishonest, p. 39, 52, 53, 91. before his Words were against G. W. Deceitful
Fellow, Audacious Fellow, Impudent Fellow, You are a Knave, You are a Knave:
And to C. Harris, You are a Cocks-Comb; I Will prove you a CocksComb. Such
Tinkers-Rhetorick as this, he is very ready at, when his morose Cholerick-Humor
is up; also Blasphemers, or Blasphemy and Heresy, he is very ready to charge
men with, when his corrupt Opinions are opposed; and finally, that our Religion
should be a mecr Cheat, calculated only to the Service of the Devil, page 62.
This is the highest Charge proceeding from the hight of his Rancor and Malice;
as also his notoriously defaming our Sufferings, to be for the Satisfaction of
Wills, Lusts, promoting Carnal Interests, Carnal Advantages, outward Gains,
etc. as before: Concerning these matters as considered of together, I appeal to
you, his Brethren, W. Kiffin and the rest; let Honesty and Conscience speak,
whether they do not savor of a Persecuting Spirit; and, whether they are not
of an evil Tendence, as before signified, to stir up Persecution against us:
And knowing that he has most abominably and falsely traduced our Sufferings,
and so reproached our whole Body as we are a People, and that in this public
manner in his Pamphlet, we do expect that Justice and Right from you his
Brethren, as that you should give out a public Testimony against his Injury
done us and our Sufferings in this Case, and allow us our Consciences and
Religion therein, how erroneous and mistaken soever you think them; otherwise,
if you refuse to do us this Right, and so connive at your Brother Hicks his
Iniquity, we must look upon you so far concerned in the Guilt thereof, as not
doing us that Right and Justice that both Truth, Equity and Reason requires of
you: So as you do intend to clear and quit your selves, be Ingenuous, plain and
open in this matter, which does so nearly concern you, Thomas Hicks being a
Brother and Teacher among you, against whom we call for Judgment and Justice to
be done us in as public a manner as his Abuses and Injuries are in Print.

God knows, who bears Witness with my Spirit, and is my Record, that I bear
no Ill Will nor Prejudice to you, or any of you, what ever any bear toward me:
And for those things wherein your Brother Tho. Hicks has abused and wronged
me, I defire he may Repent thereof, and I wish he may find a place for
Repentance; as also that you who are concerned in Society with him, may clear
and quit your selves of his inveterate Spirit and gross Abuses against us, who
bear Love and Good Will toward you and all men, believing that there are some
among you that are more tender and honest, and of a better Spirit then T. H.
for whose sakes I have writ thus much, and not for his; for he has shown
himself Dirty and Wicked, who has made no Conscience to forge, and spread many
notorious Lies and Slanders against us.

And therefore however takenotice of this, that it will not be reputable for
you to allow or own him as a Teacher among you, nor for you to sit. under him
(who has no Power either over his Tongue or Passion) unless he Repent, and as
publicly Revoak, Judge and Condemn his gross Errors, Abuses, Lies Slanders and
Forgeries, as he has broached and spread them; and if you suffer him to go on
a Preacher among you without a public Reproof from you, and his open
Recantation, it will lie upon you as Upholders of a persecuting Spirit, and
rende^ you as uncharitable and unchristian Professors of Christia^ity, for
suffering such a notorious piece of Wickedness, as this of T. Hicks's, to
proceed from among you unreproved.

But I really desire the Lord may open your Eyes so as you may clear your
selves; and that Envy and Prejudice may cease and dye among you, that you may
not dye and perish in it.

A Serious Reflection Upon some of Will. Burnet's Chief Arguments, about the
Resurrection of the SAME FLESH, In his Book, styled, The Capital Principles of
the People called Quakers.
W. B. IF Jesus Christ did rise again with that Body that went Arg. I. to the
Crave, then there is a Resurrection from the Grave of the same Body, etc. But
Christ did leave the Grave empty, etc. Ergo.

Arg. II. If Jesus Christ rose from the Dead with Flesh and Bones, yea with the
same Flesh as was nailed to the Cross, Joh. 20. 27. then there is a
Resurrection from the Grave of the same Flesh that goes to the Grave; But
Christ did rise in the same, Ergo.

Answ. This Man's Work savours of Flesh and not Spirit: The Consequence of both
his Propositions is inconsistent, and so his Argument is fallacious; for
Christ's Flesh saw no Corruption, being raised the third Day it did not corrupt
in the Sepulcher, much less turn to Dust or Earth as others do; therefore the
Instance and Comparison is unequal in this case, though it holds for a more
Spiritual End and Advantage then this drives at, for which the Apostle did
instance the Resurrection of Christ by the Glory or Power of the Father, that
men might believe in that Power: He did not say that Christ's Flesh was raised
up the third day, that you might believe that the same Flesh (as gross part) of
yours that goes to the Grave and turns to Dust shall be so Raised, as this Man
argues; for Christ's Resurrection was preached, that their Faith might be in
God, who raised him up; that Men might in this Life receive and feel the
Spiritual Benefit thereof to their Immortal Souls, and so partake in this Life
of the Power of his Resurrection, to be raised up with Christ, in order to
reign with him in Glory hereafter^ as for ^nstance; Know ye not that so many of
us as were baptize^ (...) jesus Christ, were baptized into his Death; therefore
we (...) with him by Baptism into Death, that like as Christ was raised up
(...) Dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should (...) in (...)
(...) of Life, Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. to the end. And (...) (...) him by
Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him throu^h (...) Faith of the
Operation of God who has raised him from the (...). Col. (...). 12, 13. As
also to the same Purpose and End, read Romans 8. 11. and 10. 9. Ephesians. 2. 1. 1 Pet.
3. 18, 19, 21. 1 Cor. 15. 45. Phil. 3. 10, 11. 1 Cor. 6. 14. 2 Cor. 4. 14. Joh.
6. ^9, 40 Col. 2. 20. and 3. 3, 4. Ephesians. 1. 20. and 2. 6. Col. 2. 12. 1 Pet. 1.
3. 21. Heb. 11. 35. 1 These. 5. 10, 11.

By all which it is evident, that Christ, Death and Resurrection was not
preached for a (...) E^d, but for a spiritual Benefit here, and an eternal
Advantage hereafter.

But whereas our Opposer carnally infers from Christ's arising, a Resurrection
of the same Flesh that goes to the Grave: His Shortness in this, and the
Shallowness o^ his fleshly Apprehension, comes under this further
Consideration, As

First, That all Flesh and Earthly Bodies of Men do not go to the Grave, in hi^
Sense: It is said, The (...) (...) of thy Servants have they given to be Meat
(...) (...) Fow's of Heaven; the Flesh of thy Saints unto the (...) of the
(...): Their Blood have they shed like Water round about Jeru^alem, and there
was none to bury them, Psalm. 79. 2, 3. Therefor these were not laid in Graves
of the Earth. As also it is See also (...). (...).
apparent, that the Flesh of many is wasted away with Sickness before they dye,
or their Bones be lai^ in the Grave: Chap. 19. (...)
And likewise many undergo such great Sick^esses and Calamities in their Life
time, as so often does, both corrupt and waste their Flesh and Blood, that so
often as they are restored to Health again, they have new Fleth or rene^ed
Bodies thereof; and then, what a vast Bigness would (...) Bodies amount to, if
raised with all the self (...) (...) that they had in their Life time? Moreover
through (...) Judgment and sore Exercise David said, My ^ones ^leave to my
Skin, Psalm. 102. 5. And my K^ees are weak through (...), and my Flesh fails
of Fatness, Psalm. 109. 24. And as (...) signified, when man is chastened with
Pain upon his Bed, and the multitude of his Bones with strong Pain, so that his
Life (...) Bread; his Flesh is consumed away, that it cannot beseen; and his
Bones (that were not seen) stick out: His Soul draws near unto the Grave,
etc. Job 33. 19, 20, 21, 22. Through such Judgment, and Chastisement, they who
have known the polluted Flesh consumed away, are not so much concerned for the
same Flesh, as these our fleshly Opposers are, whereby they show, they never
experienced such Chastisements, nor underwent such Judgment, that God might
hide Pride from them, and keep back their Soul from the Pit: Their proud Flesh
would always live, and be reserved to eternal Glory; Whereas he whose Flesh is
consumed away, through the Chastisements of the Lord, and who comes to see that
God is gracious therein unto him, to deliver him from going down to the Pit,
who says, I have found a Ransom; It is said of such a one, His Flesh shall be
fresher then a Child's; he shall return to the Days of his Youth, Job. 33.
This is not the old Flesh that was consumed away through Chastisements: And as
all Flesh is not the same Flesh; so all Bodies are not of the same kind, as
has been fully showed. It were more meet, for Baptists and others, to wait to
see Judgment and Chastisement from God upon them, to the consuming and wasting
away of their corrupt Flesh, then to quarrel for it, and cry, This Body, and
this very Flesh, shall arise again out of the Grave, even as Christ's did, and
with these very Eyes I shall see God, (pointing at their present Flesh and
carnal Eyes) when as they do not know but that their Flesh may be diverse times
consumed and wasted through Judgment or Sickness before they dye; and so often
in the mean time new Flesh, or Bodies thereof restored them, as was hinted;
which if truly obtained as a Token of their inward Renewing unto God, were much
better and of more Concernment, then thus carnally to quarrel for their old
corrupt Flesh.

W. B. Arg. III. Upon Job Chap. 19. 25, 26, 27. If Job had that Faith, that
with his Flesh he should see God, then it was not in other Flesh; nor yet
another Eye but it was both with his Flesh, and with his Eye, that after this
Life he should see God; therefore do I conclude, that the fleshly Body of Man
shall be raised out of the Dust, to see God.

Answ. By all which Assertion and Conclusion, we may see and still conclude,
how gross and carnal these Anabaptists are in their Apprehensions and Thoughts
concerning God; thus to render him visible to their Flesh and fleshly Eye,
supposing that Job in his Belief herein, and God in his being, were like
themselves; whereas God is invisible and an infinite Spirit, not made up of
Flesh and Bones to be seen with Flesh and carnal Eyes. As also the man has
perverted Job's words which are (as translated) Though after my Skin Worms
destroy This Body; yet in my Flesh shall I see God, Job. 19. 26. (who before
said, my Flesh is clothed with Worms. Job. 7. 5.) It is not, that with My
Flesh, or fleshly Body, I shall see God after Worms have destroyed it; but I N
my Flesh I shall see God. Neither did Job quiet himself in his Perplexity with
the Belief that his Flesh should see God (as is imagined) but that he should
see God, as afterward he did, when he said, I have heard of thee by the
Hearing of the Ear; but now mine Eye sees thee; wherefore I abhor my self,
etc. Job. 42. 5.

Now that wherein Job was quieted, was, That he knew that his Redeemer lived,
who should redeem him out of all his Troubles that he had in the Flesh; and
that after his outward Body was destroyed out of his perplexed Flesh, he should
see God in an Immortal State: He had no reason to quiet himself upon any
Confidence in, or concerning that Flesh, when he was so disquieted and
perplexed in it; for those words, Chap. 19. ver. 26. are differently rendered
in the Margins thus, After I shall awake, though this Body be destroyed, yet
OUT of my Flesh shall I see God; see the Margined Bibles of the last
Translation, with Hebrew notes and various Translation: Now there is a great
Difference between seeing God With my Flesh, and seeing God Out of my Flesh
after it is destroyed.

But to these men that believe, that with their Flesh or fleshly Bodies they
shall see God, he may say, as he said to the Wicked, Thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self; but I will reprove thee, and set them (to
wit thy Iniquities) in order before thine Eyes, Psalm. 50. 21. yea, thou
thoughtest that I was so like thy self, as that thou might see me with thy
Flesh and fleshly Eyes: But thy Thoughts in this were very carnal, and thy
Apprehensions very gross; thou shall find thou art mistaken, I am an invisible
All-seeing Spirit, that searches Hearts, and penetrates through the dark
Spirits and Cogitations of Men, to bring their secret Thoughts to Judgment and
set their evil Actions in order before them.

And there were those that saw Christ's outward or bodily

Appearance, that had neither heard the Voice of God, nor seen his Shape, Joh.
5. 37. And Philip said to Christ, show us the Father, and it suffices us. It
was not enough for them, nor yet a seeing the Father, to see Christ's Body or
Person; both Father and Son being truly and savingly to be seen in Spirit: And
said Christ, a Spirit has not Flesh and Bones as you see me have. The
Anthropomorphites, who were Monks inhabiting the Deserts of Egypt, held, That
God was a Person in the Bigness and Stature of a Man, mistaking that Saying,
Let us make Man in our own Jmage, applying it to the Man's outward Similitude
(and so do the Blasphemous Muggletonians) and therefore that God is visible to
the Carnal Eye and fleshly Body; from which these Baptists Doctrine (of seeing
God with their Flesh and fleshly Bodies) is little Different.

W. B. Arg. IV. The fourth Witness to this Truth is Martha, Joh. 11. 24. Her
Brother Lazarus being dead, that She believed, that he should rise again at the
Last Day in the Resurrection: If the Resurrection of dead Lazarus, or that of
Lazarus laid in the Grave, was believed and assented to by Martha, etc.

Answ. That Martha had such a Belief from the Jews Opinion of the Resurrection,
as she intimated of Lazarus his Body (which Christ did then raise) is not the
matter in Question: But that they and she had it from Christ, or the true and
spiritual Understanding thereof, does not therefore follow; but rather the
Contrary from Christ's own following reprehensive Diversion, after Martha said,
I know that he shall rise again in the Resurrection at the Last Day; Jesus said
unto her, I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in me, though
he were dead, yet shall be live; and whosoever lives and believes in me,
shall never dye, Joh, 11. 24, 25. but our Opposer was not pleased to take
Notice of this Answer of Christ's, but only of Martha's Words and Belief, and
to argue from thence after this manner.

Arg. V. The Word Resurrection implies to rise again.

Answ. And can this be applied to nothing, nor any other wise, then to that
very Flesh or gross Body, that returns to Dust? Is not Christ the Resurrection
and the Life? And does not to Rise again, imply, that Man was fallen before?
and that as in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive? And is not
Resurrection applicable to that which is quickened? and must this be understood
only of the Dust of dissolved Bodies without any Creation? For he says, If God
give another Body, and raise not again that Body that before was in being, then
it is a Creation, and no Resurrection: So that from hence it is a Resurrection
of the same Dust of the gross Bodies dissolved, that seems to be expected by
these men, and not any Creation; and therein is their great Mercy and Comfort,
though they do not acquiesce herein from Contention and Quarrelling: But in
that Resurrection, Quickening, Reviving, Changing, Translation, do not signify
Creation; therefore they are not applicable to the Dust of Bodies after
Dissolution, though both Resurrection and new Creation be to Renewed man;
Behold, I make All things new; New Man, New Creation, New Heavens, and New
Earth, etc. but this is a Mystery hid from corrupt Flesh, so much contended for
by our Present Opposers.

The rest of his Arguments and Doctrines are mostly very weak and ignorant
about this Point, yet comprehensively answered in this Book.

Here follow some Passages out of a Manuscript by W. B. against me, with a
Reply, detecting his Ignorance in consounding the Carnal Body and the Spiritual:
W. B. INdeed, If G. Whitehead has found out a Body for Christ that is not a
Carnal Body (which implies only a Fleshly) It is such a Body that I never read
o^ in the Scriptures; I would know what in Scripture is called the Body, but
the Flesh? Now take but away the Flesh, and where is the Body? Aye but, says
G. W. It is a spiritual Body; as if a Body of Flesh and a Spiritual could not
stand together: This is his Great mistake. The Apostle could have born his
Testimony to this Truth, that it is the Body of Flesh that shall be raised
spiritual, 1 Cor. 15. 14, 43. It is sown a natural Body, it is raised spiritual,
here the Apostle still keeps to the Word (It) etc.

Answ. The Nonsense and Contradiction that may be gathered from these
Passages, is, that Christ's Body is a Carnal Spiritual Body, as if Carnal and
Spiritual were both one; or that the Spiritual Body that is raised or given to
the Seed, is Carnal. Let these Passages be kept in Record, as the Baptists
Doctrine and Testimony; whereas the Apostle's own Testimony proves the
Contrary, and that W. B. has belyed the Apostle: For it is sown a natural Body,
it is raised a spiritual; and there is a Natural Body, and there is a Spiritual
Body: Here the Apostle clearly makes a Distinction and a Difference between the
natural Body and the spiritual; He does not say, it is sown a natural Body, and
raised a natural or Carnal Body also, but a spiritual Body; as he also
distinguishes between the Bodies Celestial and the Bodies Terrestrial; as
those of Sun, Moon and Stars differ from those of Men, Beasts and Fishes: Now
you would count him a very blind Philosopher, that should make no Difference,
but say, they are all one and consistent, or that the Bodies of Sun, Moon and
Stars, were all one with those Earthly Bodies of Men and other Creatures; and
so blind and such Ignorant Divines are these Baptist's. He understands not the
Difference between the Natural Body and the Spiritual, any more then if a
Person should be so ignorant as (when he sees the Sun, or Moon, or Stars) To
ask, if these were not Men, or Birds, or Beasts, or Fishes, in the Firmament;
or on the contrary, if he should see Men, Beasts and Fishes, to ask, if these
are not the Sun, Moon and Stars; or rather to conclude that they are, because
he knows not which are Celestial and which Teriestrial, no more then this
Baptist does discern between Bodies natural or carnal, and Bodies spiritual:
But how should he do other, or see better while his Mind is so much upon Flesh,
and so little upon Spirit; or so much upon Flesh and Blood which cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God, and so little upon that spiritual Birth or Seed that does
inherit the Kingdom of Glory and Peace.

And as for the Baptists Argument, That the Apostle still keeps to the Word
(IT) as, It is sown a natural Body, It is raised a spiritual; or God gives it
a Body as it pleases him, and to every Seed his own Body.

Reply. How evident is it, that as the Particle It is used as a Relative to
both the natural and spiritual Body, it is a mutable He takes It for Idem, the
Self same Body; but where has he this ^ither from the Greek or Latin on the
place cited?
It; for that there is a natural Body and there is a spiritual Body, which
therefore are not the self-same; the very Parable or Instance of the Wheat and
other Grain may confute his Opinion herein? For is it the very self-same Grain
of Wheat that is in the Ear that was sown in the Ground? Let the Husbandmen
judge him herein. To him we may say, as the Apostle did in the same Case to
such, O Fool! thou sowest not that Body that shall be, etc. 1 Cor. 15. And now
the words, It Is sown, imply a Seed sown, in order to a sprouting and bringing
forth Increase: Upon which it may be queried, if that Body of Man (to wit) that
of Flesh, Blood and Bones, (that is laid in the Grave, or drowned in the Sea, or
devoured by Fire, and some by Beast's, etc.) be the Seed that the Apostle
intended, to which God gives a Body as it pleases him, yea, or nay? If it be
answered in the Affirmative, then what Body is it that God gives to it, as it
pleases him? If it be answered in the Negative, that overthrows the Baptists
Doctrine of the same Flesh, Blood, and Bones, etc. which W. B. has not
distinguished from a spiritual Body.

THE RESURRECTION, Future Glory and Felicity of the SAINTS, Further asserted (
according to the Holy Scriptures) Discovering, How far short of the true
Vision, Sight, or Revelation thereof our present Opposers are in their gross
Thoughts and Traditional Conjectures: Being An Examination of Thomas Danson' s
Arguments and Doctrines (about the Resurrection, Future State and Glory of
Believers) in his Synopsis.
THe Resurrection as plentifully asserted in the Scriptures, is not in the
least questioned by us (however we be unjustly censured for denying it)
Therefore there is no necessity of his Argument to evince that, which (as he
says) the Scripture is so plentiful in asserting of; nor does he evince it
according to the Scriptures, but varies from them, as will appear.

His Argument, If the Bodies that have done Good or Evil, must receive their
Reward accordingly; then the same Bodies that dye must rise again: But the
Antecedent is true; therefore the Consequent.

Answ. This Argument (both Antecedent and Consequent) appears neither clear,
nor grounded upon Truth, as it places an Eternal Reward upon the Body for its
temporal Acts, in putting the Body (on this account) for Man that has acted
therein, who must receive the things done in the Body, 2 Cor. 5. 10. The mere
Terrestrial Body being neither the Subject reteining Perpetual Love or Enmity
to God; nor is it the Original Cause of Good or Evil Actions, therefore not the
Object of eternal Love or Wrath; but Man in his Spiritual Existence or Being,
as spiritually and suitably organized (as it pleases God) to receive the
things done in his Body, according to what he has done, whether it be Good or
Evil, proper and natural to the Image he bears, which the Soul carries along
with it out of the Earthly Body or House that turns to Dust: But see the Proof
of his Antecedent, That the Bodies, that have done Good or Evil, must receive
their Reward accordingly (which Proposition is the Antecedent) is evident by 2
Cor. 5. 10. and then the Consequence is firm, etc.

Rep. He has manifestly perverted the Text; it does not say, The Bodies must
receive their Reward accordingly (though in some Sense it may be granted
according to their temporal Actions) But we must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the Things done IN his
Body, according to that he has done, whether it be Good or Bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
And but a few words before he says, We are confident I say, and willing rather
to be Absent from the Body, and to be Present with the Lord, ver. 8. Wherefore
he knew that they were Capable both of a Being, and Reward with the Lord, when
absent from the Body; and that as when in the Body they had found Acceptance
with him, they received the Deeds done in the Body when out of it; to Dye being
Gain unto them.

Every man's Works shall follow him; the Nature of them shall remain in him,
whether it be Good or Evil, that he Lives and Dies in: The Soul spiritually
has its proper Organ, Vessel or Body, wherein either the Habit of Good or
Evil, Holiness or Filthiness cleaves to it, and wherein accordingly it retains
either Mercy or Wrath, Love or Hatred from God, when the earthly Mansion or
House is destroyed and turned to Dust, as it was; there being a House or
Clothing that cleaves more closely to the Soul then Dust can: and it will come
to pass that he that will be filthy, must be filthy still; and he that is Holy,
let him be Holy still: Behold I come quickly, and my Reward is with me, to give
every man according as his Work shall be, Rev. 22. 11, 12. Rom 2. 6. And
therefore Woe will be to their Souls who reward Evil to themselves, Isa. 3. 9.
and whose Souls delight in their Abominations; and Tribulation and Anguish
upon every Soul of Man that does Evil, of the Jew first, and also of the
Gentile; but Glory, Honor and Peace to every man that Works Good, to the Jew
first, and also to the Gentile, Romans 2. 8, 9, 10. But to procced to T. D's
further Proof of his Antecedent and Consequent, which to Ordinary Readers (he
says) may seem inconsequent (by which then he must be more then an ordinary
Writer) The Place he cites, is Mat. 22. 31, 32.

T. D. For the surther Proof of Antecedent and Consequent, I shall first
explain the Terms of Christ's Argument, etc. The Place is, Mat. 22. 31, 32. As
touching their Resurrection from the Dead, have ye not read that which was
spoken unto you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob; God is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living: And it
is added Luke 20. 38. for all live unto him.

This Passage he thus explains, viz.

1. To be a God to Abraham, notes a Covenant Relation.

Answ. True; and then it follows, that they who are in this Covenant Relation,
are those that live to him, whom he is the God of; Wheresore Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, and all Partakers of the same Covenant live unto God, in Union of
Spirit, and with the Spirits of all Just Men, though in a more full enjoyment
of Glory hereafter; as Abraham, etc. is not dead, because God is his God, and
he in Possession of Eternal Glory.

2. Not the God of the Dead: He says, that might be meant either of them who
are Dead simply, or of them that are so dead as that they shall never return to
Life; not in the former Sense, therefore in the Latter.

Are we therefore (as by this) to read the Words thus, viz. God is not the God
of the Dead, that are so Dead as that they shall never return to Life; but of
the Dead that shall return to Life? And then what are those Dead that shall
never return to Life; Or those Dead that God is not the God of, if the Living
and Dead must all be applied to the Outward or Earthly Bodies? But had he been
sensible of his Sense before, that to be a God to Abraham (and so of the
Living) notes a Covenant Relation, and that Christ speaks of such as shall be
accounted worthy to obtain that World and the Resurrection, Luke 20. 35. he
might have understood that the Dead, whom he is not the God of, are such as are
Strangers to that Covenant Relation, and live not to God, however their Souls
be Immortal.

3. But of the Living, that is (says he) of them whom God intends to restore
to Life, or whose Bodies live potentially; not only of them whose Souls live
actually; for all Live to him, etc.

If the Living must intend the terrestrial Bodies of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
then that Denomination Living, is given to those that are truly Dead (as he
says) and then I ask, if it be good Doctrine, or proper to say, that all those
dissolved Bodies do live unto God? Whereas in Christ's words there is no
mention of their Elementary Bodies, but that the Dead are raised, and that he
is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and these were they that Lived unto
him, who were counted worthy to obtain that World, and the Resurrection. And it
is further evident, that when the Saducees (who said, there is no Resurrection,
Angel, nor Spirit) asked Christ about the Wife, whose (of the Seven) She should
be in the Resurrection? their Thoughts were carnal, and upon the Carnal or
Earthly Bodies, which Christ's Answer did not gratify in his asserting the
Resurrection (as to the State of the Righteous after this Life) He said, The
Children of this World marry, and Luke 20. 35.
are given in Marriage; But they which shall be counted worthy to obtain that
World, and the Resurrection from the Dead, neither Marry, nor are given in
Marriage: Neither can they dye any more; for they are equal unto the Angels,
and are the Children of God, being the Children of the Resurrection, Luke 20.
35, 36.

1. Note here first, That he speaks of a Resurrection-state in the World to
come, wherein the Children of God so much excel in their Beings, as that they
are equal unto the Angels, whose Bodies are not such as these Earthly ones of
the Children of this World, wherein they Marry; but in that World they are in
another Capacity, more Sublime and Spiritual; even Equal unto the Angels:
whereby Christ does not only assert the Resurrection and an Immortal State; but
also the Spirituality and Glory thereof far Transcending this earthly State and
Body.

2. As thus considered, it is plainly implied that there are but some that are
counted worthy to obtain that World and the Resurrection, that is, the Children
of God, who live unto him; as Paul says, if by any means I might attain unto
the Resurrection of the Dead, Phil. 3. 10, 11. Now, therefore to apply this
Resurrection to the Terrestrial Body of the Righteous, and hence to argue for
Immortalizing that Dust, which that Body returns to; it implies thus much,
that Only the Bodies of the Children of God (who are counted worthy) shall
rise: and how agrees this with our Opposers Intention?

3. Moreover, while Christ intended by his Answer, that those that were counted
Worthy, etc. even the Children of God, and such as lived unto God, were the
Children of the Resurrection; and that they cannot dye any more, etc. This
agrees with his Answer to Martha, Joh. 11. 24, 25, 26. I am the Resurrection,
and the Life; he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he Live;
and whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never dye. Though this be a
plain asserting of the Resurrection, yea, and that of the Dead; yet it is as
plain a Diversion (as far remote) from the carnal and gross Thoughts and
Apprehension that the Jews in that Age had of the Resurrection, as his Answer
to the Saducees was from their gross Thoughts about it.

Concerning the Scope of these words of Christ before cited, He T. D.
says, There are different Apprehensions; Some conceive, that Christ hereby
proves the Immortality of the Soul (which the Saducees denied, as appears Act.
23. 8. for if there be no Soul of a Spiritual Nature in Man, it must needs be
Mortal, as his Body) and by Consequence, the Resurrection of the Body. The
Saducees denying the Resurrection of the Body, because they denied the
Immortality of the Soul (as these Interpreters conceive) Others, that Christ
intends only to prove the Resurrection of the Body: So Calvin. Others, that
Christ intends both directly: So Beza Diodati. And from these Differences T. D.
differently frames his Argument several times, p. 76. From hence it is
observable, that this Man not seeing with his own Eyes, proceeds to argue
doubtfully from the different Apprehensions and Conceptions of others, viz.
Some Conceiving,

1. That Christ hereby proves the Immortality of the Soul, and by Consequence
only the Resurrection of the Body.

2. Others, that Christ intends only to prove the Resurrection of the Body.

3. Others, that he intends both directly.

See how these Learned Men and Students differ and oppose each other in their
Apprehensions and Conceivings; and what Certainty can we expect from T. D.
their Scholar? And how came he to undertake such a Controversy, about such a
weighty and mysterious Point upon such dubious and uncertain Grounds, as only
men's different Apprehensions, Conceivings and Consequences can produce or
amount to? (which argues more Confidence then Knowledge in him) And T. D. to
vary his Arguments thereupon (from his uncertain Conjectures and fallible
Judgment) as with him it is either thus, or else thus; or more plainly, thus,
etc.

1. They whose God, God is, shall rise from the Dead: God is Abraham's, Isaac's
and Jacob's God; Therefore they (and all other Believers) shall rise again. Or
else thus:

2. They whose God, God is, after Death shall Rise again, etc.

3. Or the Argument, may be framed more plainly thus, viz.

If God be under a Promise to Glorify the Persons of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
then their Bodies must rise again: but God is under such a Promise; Ergo, page
77.

Answ. 1. That God is the God of the Living, both of Abraham and all Believers.

2. They all live unto God in Righteousness here, and Glory hereafter.

3. He that lives and believes in me (says Christ) shall never dye.

These prove the blessed Resurrection of the Children of God, who are Children
of the Resurrection: But what Proof has he produced herein of the self-same
Earthly, numerical Body's rising? His Assertion being the Resurrection of the
Body in general; his Proof is the Resurrection of those whom God is the God of,
viz. Believers; and that their Body must be glorified: which so far as Christ
intends, is granted. That in the World to come they are equal unto the Angels,
what is this to the Earthly, Elementary Bodies of all in general, which Angels
do far surmount and transcend in Glory? Neither has he by all that he has
said, proved, that the Promise of Eternal Glory (he mentions) extends to the
same Earthly Body of Flesh and Blood (that now is) after dissolved to Dust, or
its first Elements; or that it is capable of that Glory which is Eternal,
though the Believer be as in his Spirituality, or spiritual Body glorified.

Now, as touching the Promise of God to Abraham and his Seed, it was not only
of a Temporal Inheritance or outward Canaan; but also of an eternal Inheritance
of Life and Glory, for the Enjoyment whereof they had a twofold Capacity, an
Outward and an Inward, a Natural and a Spiritual; and so far God was their God
in each. But that the Eternal Glory was promised to the Terrestrial or Natural
Body of Abraham, etc. T. D. (though he runs on with it and takes it for
granted) does merely beg the Question, as if Abraham in his new Spiritual and
Glorious State were but a Part of Abraham; and consequently not fully Capable
of absolute Felicity, without the Dust of his dissolved Clothing being
immortalized (I understand not that they will admit of any new Creation of it, to
make it a complete Body, who are of the Anabaptist's mind) And after the same
manner he may as well say, that all the Saints, who are said to be in Glory,
are not perfectly in Glory, but only in Part; as but part of Abraham, part of
Isaac, part of Jacob, part of Moses, part of Elias, part of Paul, etc. are in
Heaven, in Glory, or in the Rest which is Glorious (and so of all the other (as
if, when Moses and Elias appeared with Christ in the Mount to Peter, etc. it
were not proper or true to say, Moses and Elias; but Part of Moses and El^as
appeared: And what Bodies appeared they in? were they Human, Earthly Bodies, or
Angelical?) and by this, that they are not as yet absolutely Happy, or at Rest,
without their little earthly Mansions or Tabernacles, when they must needs
enjoy far better, viz. an Heavenly Clothing and Mansion, or House Eternal in
the Heavens; being the more Spiritualized and changed into Spirituality, they
are in a higher and more meet Capacity for that Enjoyment.

T. D. 2. God were not fully Abraham's God, or did not fully make good his
Promise, if he Glorified one Part of Abraham, and not another.

Answ. God, in his Glorifying Abraham in a Spiritual Sat, and Body that
transcends all Earthly Bodies, or that part (as he calls it) of Abraham, which
is Spiritual, and therefore most capable of an Eternal Glory, he shows himself
to be (...) God, he being the God of the Spirits of all Flesh (and most
eminently of his Children) and who has all Souls in his Hand. But in Answer to
what he says hereafter, let us enquire, whether the Promise of God to Abraham
and his S^ed, of eternal Glory and Happiness, cannot be made good without the
Earthly and perishing Organs.

T. D. 3. Nor were the Promise, to Glorify Abraham's Soul, made good, without
glorifying his Body too; for the Happiness of the Soul is not Perfect without
the Body, its dear and beloved Companion; the Soul having a strong Desire * and
Inclination to (...) Note.
a Reunion to the Body, as the Schools not without good Ground determine: vid.
Calvin Harm. Evang. in Mat. 22. 31, 32. Luke 20. 38.

Answ. It is evident that this Man does give this account ( that the Happiness
of the Soul is not perfect without the Body) not from any spiritual Sight of
the Souls Happiness or Glory; for in Page 81. he confesses, that the different
Disposal of the Spirits of Man and Beast is not visible to the Eye of Sense,
and but dimly to the Eye of Reason and Faith; although he has taken upon him by
Tradition from Calvin, etc. to assert, that the Happiness of the Soul is not
perfect without the Body: It may be understood, that they have neither clear
Reason, nor perfect Faith for this; and to be sure, while he and others assert
it without either, we have no Reason to believe them. But to answer him
closely; Both Calvin, T. D. the Schools, and diverse Anabaptists are mistaken in
this very Matter, and see not with the Eye of true Faith, either that the
Happiness of the Soul is not perfect without the Body;

Or, that the Soul has a strong Desire to a Reunion to the Body, ^hile they
intend the Terrestrial, Elementary Bodies: for this implies the Soul to be in a
kind of Purgatory or Disquietness, till the supposed Resumption of the Body;
and their Assertion and Determination herein is Contraty to what the Apostle
says 2 Cor. 5. for we know, that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, eternal in
the Heavens, ver. 1. for we that are in this Tabernacle, do groan, being
burdened, etc. ver. 4. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent
from the Body, and to be present with the Lord, ver. 8. And said he, I am in a
Strait betwixt two, having a Desire to depart, etc. Phil. 1. 23.

See now the Stress of the Controversy where it lies, and that it is not only
between these our Opposers and Us; but also between them and the Apostle Paul:
Thus ( viz.) Calvin, the Schools, (...) and Anabaptists determine and conclude,
That the Happiness of the Soul is not perfect without the Body; and that the
Soul (when separate) has a strong Desire and Inclination to a Reunion to the
Body: But,

The Apostle Paul, as knowing, that when their Earthly House was dissolved,
they had a far better, namely a Building of God, Eternal in the Heavens;
Therefore, in the Earthly Tabernacle they gro^ned, being burdened, as willing
rather to be absent from the Body. By which it appears, they expected a more
full Fruition or Felicity in the Heavenly Tabernacle, then in the Earthly:
Their Soul did not desire after the Flesh, as these Opposers imply; neither had
they any such Delight therein, as fleshly Minds, and carnal Contenders have.
Moreover, the Apostle from the Visions and Revelations of the Lord, says, I
knew a Man in Christ, above fourteen Years ago, whether IN the Body, or OUT of
the Body, I cannot tell; God knows: Such an one caught up to the third Heaven
-- caught up into Paradise, and heard upspeakable Words, etc. 2 Cor. 12.

From hence consider, that being caught up to the 3d Heaven, into Paradise, he
does not place the Sight and Sense of this Condition upon the Body; for that he
knew not whether he was In the Body, or Out of the Body, yet knew, that he was
a Man in Christ, and in the Revelation of the Lord: But he did not concern
himself about this Earthly Body being so glorified in Heaven or Paradise, as
these Men do, and carnally think, who have neither Visions nor Revelations of
the Lord concerning any such State, but Calvin and the Schoolmens
Determination, contrary to the Apostles.

But the presumptuous Confidence of our Opposers appears the more, in
undertaking to assert or demonstrate the future State of the Soul, as not being
in perfect Happiness without the Body, and as having a strong Desire after it,
while yet they neither know the State of the Soul, nor have had so much as a
Vision of the Glory thereof, or of the glorified spiritual State of the Saints
hereafter; for Visions and Revelations they deem to be ceased long since; and a
Disposal of the Spirits of men after Death is not visible to the Eye of Sense,
and, he says, but dimly to the Eye of Reason and Faith: However, while these
Men cannot but appear themselves so Dim in these Sublime Matters; and that,
while their dim Reason cannot reach them, they cannot demonstrate to others,
either that the Souls of the Just in Heaven are not yet perfectly Happy, or
that they have such a strong Desire to a Reunion with the Body dissolved, the
show themselves imaginary Intruders, puffed up in their fleshly Minds, exercising
themselves in things too high for them; and it were better for them to sit down
in Silence, and wait in the Light to have some Sense and Knowledge of the true
immortal Life, to quicken them to God; and not thus to busy themselves with
unprofitable Talk, brought forth from Imaginations of men, and not from any
true Sight or Revelation of the Conditions of Saints, either here or hereafter.

His telling of Abraham's Soul living actually, is true; and as true it is,
That his Soul is in perfect Felicity and Glory, and the more, being out of the
Earthly Tabernacle.

But his saying, that the Body of Abraham (or Bodies of the deceased Believers)
lives potentially; for this we have his own Traditional Assertion, but not any
Scripture Proof or Phrase that suits it, nor rational Demonstration for it.

As to his saying, That if any shall say, that Christ's Argument, and his
Application of it, proves but the Resurrection of the Good, etc. I say, his
Application thereof seems but to extend to the Good, as in his saying, They
whose God, God is, shall rise; yet he has not proved the Rising of their
Earthly Bodies, after they are dissolved to Dust, and reduced to their first
Elements; but that there is a Resurrection of the Good; and who of us questions
that? The Resurrection of the Good or of the Just, being Glorious, and
extending not only to Arising out of the Fall, out of Death that came by it,
out of the Grave of Corruption, which has followed, yea, out of the Dust of
that Earth, and out of all Afflictions here; but also unto an Inheritance of
Eternal Glory hereafter; as, They that be Wise shall shine as the Brightness of
the Firmament; and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars forever
and ever: So that they shall be so Celestial and Glorious, as that they shall
incomparably excel these Terrestrial Bodies.

And therefore where it is said, That the Saducees and Quakers Proposition be,
that there is no Resurrection from the Dead; This is a Falsehood against the
Quakers; and their Sufferings testify the Contrary: If a Man should say, that
the Wheat or other Grain in the Ear, is not the self-same that was sown in the
Earth; does it therefore follow, that he denies the Arising of Wheat, or any
Grain at all? Or that, when the Apostle in Answer to the Question, that some
foolishly put, said, Thou Fool, thou sowest not that Body which shall be; does
it therefore follow that his Proposition was that there is No Resurrection from
the Dead?

And whereas T. D. upon Eccles. 3. 19, 20, 21. confesses, That Men are said to
be Beasts in respect to the Mortality of the Body, which being composed of the
same Materials with brute Beasts, etc. By this the Reader may observe what kind
of Body these men are contending for, and without which they reckon the Souls
are not perfectly Happy; and which they say, The Soul has a strong Desire to a
Reunion with: And with what? but with the self-same Body, which is composed of
the same Materials with brute Beasts. What! Cannot the Soul be ^erfectly Happy
without this? O the gross Conceits of these Men! And what do they place their
chief Happiness and Glory in? but in such a perishing Body, as is composed of
the same Materials with brute Beasts, which being Dust, returns to the Earth as
it was, and the Spirit unto God who gave it, Eccles. 12. 7. (as he says true)
to be disposed of as Justice or Mercy shall see meet. But where he says, As
for Ver. 21. If they be the Atheists words personated by Solomon, they note the
Reason of his Opinion, etc. herein he appears doubtful, whether they be the
Atheist's words, or Solomon's; for he dubiously varies again, and says, If
they be Solomon' s own words, etc. Judge Reader; Is this man fit to discourse
of the future States of Men or Saints in Glory, who (when Solomon speaks of the
Spirit of Man that goes upwards) knows not, whether he personates the (...)'s
words; or his own? Whenas he further says, The Spirit shall return unto God
who gave it, chap. 12. 7. which is implied in his saying, The Spirit of a Man
goes upward: But for Men to follow their own Imaginations, and Traditions of
others, concerning the future State of Man, which they have no spiritual Sight
of; as also to determine, that the Soul (after Man's Decease) has such a
strong Desire after the Terrestrial or Carnal Body, that it is not perfectly
happy without it, this (while they have neither Truth nor Reason to demonstrate
it) does really tend to open a Gap to Atheism, and to make People Atheists, who
are not come to know an Immortal Principle in themselves to depend upon,
whereby the true Knowledge of Life and Immortality is to be revealed, without
which men are (...) in their Knowledge, as this man grants; the Difference
bet^ixt Man and Beast as to their future State, not being visible to the Eye of
Sense, as their Agreement in Dissolution is, therefore the Difference is only
truly to be seen by a Spiritual Eye, opened by the Divine Light, whereby the
Spiritual and Immortal State of Man is seen, and the Glory of the Righteous
beheld in the Everlasting Kingdom of God, which Flesh and Blood cannot inherit;
neither can the Carnal Eye see the invisible God: And I must conclude, that
while T. D. from 1 Cor. 15. affirms, the whole drift of the Apostle in a great
part of the Chapter is, to show that the same Body shall rise, etc. he does but
herein impose and beg the Question; and I cannot at all grant him his Assertion
to be true, while the Apostle plainly distinguishes between the first Adam and
the Second, the Earthly and the ^eavenly; The Natural Body, and the Spiritual,
the Celestial and the Terrestrial; and says, Thou ^ool, Thou sowest not that
Body that shall be; and Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. How
plainly do these Passages contradict our Opposers? As also is it not evident
that the Man opposes himself, in granting, That the Body shall rise with so
differing Qualities, that it shall be as unlike to what it was before as the
standing Corn to the Seed put into the Earth, or as one S^ar is to another in
Brightness and Luster; how shall it then be the selfsame Terrestrial Body? For
first, Is the st^nding Corn the selfsame Seed that is put into the Earth?
Secondly, Are the Bodies Celestial (as those of Sun, Moon and Stars) one and
the same with Terrestrial Bodies, as those of Men, Beasts and Fishes? Verily I
find nothing in this Man's Work about this Subject that has any real Weight in
it; and what he has said of any seeming Stress, it is answered here, and in my
Answer to the rest. I desire the Lord may open all their Understandings, and so
quicken their spiritual Senses, as that their Minds may be truly spiritualized,
that they may be more upon Spirit, and less upon the Flesh, so as to be
mor^ified unto the Flesh, that they may know a Life in the Spirit, wherein they
may live unto God in Righteousness here, and Glory herea^ter; to set down with
(...), Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God.

Finally, in these two Questions much of the Controversy is res^lved about the
^uture Rew^rds of ^ouls, or of Men after Dissolution, viz.

1. Whether the Righteous ^e capable of perfect Happiness, or the full Frustion
of the (...) Rest, when separate from the Earthly (...) or Terrestrial Body;
Ye^, or Na^?

This may be considered and resolved in this Question, viz.

Whether the Angels of God in Heaven (unto which the Children of God and the
Resurrection are equal) are in perfect Felicity and Glory, who do not exist in
Terresirial Bodies, or whose Organs or Clothing is not Earthly, but Heavenly?

2. Whether the Wicked be capable of absolute Misery when separate from the
Earthly Tabernacle; Yea, or Nay?

Which on the other hand by the like Reason may be considered and resolved in
this Question, viz.

Whether the Devil and his Angels be not capable of Everlasting Fire, prepared
for them without Terrestrial Bodies? And then, Whether the cursed Workers of
Iniquity (who live and dye in Sin) are not to be sentenced into the same
Everlasting Fir^? But,

If it be supposed that the Wicked cannot be absolutely miserable without their
Earthly and Elementary Body or Outside; and therefore they must have it again,
to aggravate their Torment: Does not this then suppose, that their Torment must
be Worse then that of Devils, that have not such Bodies supposed to aggravate
their Torment?

Howbe^t though the Judgment of the Wicked be many times figuratively
expressed, and set out in Scripture by Parables and Similes; yet still there is
a Reality of Judgment and Torment therein signified in apt Resemblances obvious
to the Senses; as Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the King it is prepared,
he has made it deep and large; the Pile thereof is Fire and much Wood; the
Breath of the Lord like a Stream of Brimstone does kindle it, Isa. 30. 33. and,
Bind him Hand and Foot, and cast him into ulter Darkness; there shall be
Weeping and Gna^hing of Teeth, Mat. 22. 13. As also, If thy right Eye, Hand or
Foot offend, pluck it out, or cut it off, and cast it from thee, as being
better that one Member should perish, then the whole Body should be cast into
Hell; where the Worm dies not, and the Fire shall never be quenched, Mat.
(...). 29. Mark. 9. 49. to the end. Which still argues, that the Impenitent and
Wicked are liable to meet with real ^orment; and that he has spiritually his
proper Being and Habit consisting of such spiritual Parts and Senses (having an
evil Eye, a polluted Mind, and defiled Conscience, covered with Guilt, pressed
down with the Body of Sin, and perplexed with Horror) wherein he both receives
the Deeds (...) in the Body, and is capable of absolute Misery in the Fire
which shall never be quenched, where the Worm dies not.

As also it is said, The Rich Man also dyed and was buried; and in Hell he lift
up his Eyes, being in Torments, and sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his
Bosom; and he cried and said, Father Abraham, have Mercy on me, and send
Lazarus, that he may, dip the Tip of his Finger in Water, and cool my Tongue;
for I am tormented in this Flame, Luke 16. 23, 24. When his Body was buried,
yet he had the Sense of Torments that seized upon him; and a Sight of the
other's Felicity which he himself had lost: Therefore as Christ said, I say
unto you, my Friends, be not afraid of them that can kill the Body, and after
that have no more that they can do, but I will fore-warn you whom ye shall
fear, fear him, which after he has killed, has Power to cast into Hell; I say
unto you, fear him, Luke 12. 4, 5.

A Summary of the Difficulties, in the Point in Controversy.
FInally, The Controversy is run up to these Difficulties, which I object upon
our Opposers Doctrines and Conceptions:

1st, How the self same Bodies should arise complete after dissolved to Dust,
without a New Creation, appears not, nor is it demonstrated by them.

2. If a New Creation of complete Bodies of the same Dust and Elements should
be conceived or admitted, it is Incredible, that God should create any corrupt,
sinful or polluted Bodies thereof for perpetual Torments, seeing his Works are
pure; And as Incredible, that he should make a pure Body to be invested with
the former Evil Habit of Sin and Corruption, for perpetual Torment in
Hellfire; and to be sure, the first Elements or Dust of dissolved ^odies is as
pure as at the first.

3. If Infants be supposed to arise at the Stature of Men, how can theirs be
the self-same Bodies they were?

4. How the Body of the Saints, and Children of the Resurrection, should be
either a Celestial, Spiritual, Glorious; or Angelical Body, and they Equal unto
the Angels in Heaven; and yet the self-same Earthly, Elementary Body that
dissolveth to Dust, etc. such a strange Transubstantiation appears not, unless
that the Natural Body and the Spiritual, the Terrestrial and the Celestial, the
Human and Angelical be both One and the Self-same.

5. That the Soul should not enjoy her self in absolute Felicity or Misery, in
perfect Glory or Contempt (in her proper Vessel or Clothing spiritually)
without the Earthly Clothing, which is Dust, appears not, while the Children
of the Resurrection are equal unto the Angels of God in Heaven, which are
absolutely Happy; and the Devil and his Angels absolutely Miserable.

6. We cannot believe that the Invisible, Infinite God should be seen with the
Bodily or fleshly Eyes, after Dissolution; not that Job intended he should see
God with his Flesh or bodily Eyes; It being in consistent both with his being
an Invisible. Eternal or Infinite Spirit, and with the true spiritual Sight of
him which Job received, Job 42. 5.

7. That the Seed to which God gives a Body as it pleases him, 1 Cor. 15. and
the Body given to it, should be one and the self same Earthly Body, is a
non-sensical Doctrine, and an apparent Incongruity.

8. That the Terrestrial Bodies should be so desirable to the Souls of the
Righteous after Dissolution (for the completing their Felicity, and perfecting
their Glory) appears plainly inconsistent with their desiring here, to be
dissolved and to be absent from the Body, to enjoy and possess a Building of
God, au House eternal in the Heavens.

Or that the Souls of the Righteous should be so variable, as to desire to be
absent from the Body, and presently after Dissolution to desire the Resuming of
the same Earthly Body, or a Reunion to it: This implicitly accuses the Souls
of deceased Saints, with being in their Affections both Earthly, Variable and
Unquiet, as in a kind of Purgatory: Which we can never assent to.

Thomas Vincent's Illustrations ABOUT THE RESURRECTION, Which we may look upon
as the Sense of the Rest, and as the Explication of their Doctrines and
Opinions, who are Opposing the Spirituality of our Testimony about the
Resurrection.
[Among which some Truths are intermixed, though his gross and carnal
Conceptions about the Point we cannot close with.]

His Illustrations are in his Book, entitled, Christ's Certain and Sudden
Appearance to Judgment.

Collected and Placed in his own Words, as follows [for the Serious and
Spiritual-minded Readers to judge of.]

T. V. GIve me leave to illustrate the Resurrection a little further; and here
I shall endeavor to set it forth by an Allusion to that notable place, Ezekiel.
37. and Page 16.
ten first Verses, page 16. some thing like this will the Resurrection be at
the Last Day. Now the Bones and Bodies of all former Generations are scattered
up and down in the Valley of the Shadow of Death; some are sunk into the Deep,
others are buried in the Earth; the Flesh is consumed and resolved into its
first Elements; and the Bones of some remain, of others are mouldred into
Earth: Now when the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, shall come down from
Mount Sion, which is above, into the Valley of this inferior World, he will
Prophecy over all the Bodies and Bones of all the Children of Men that are
dead, and speak unto them to Live; he will say unto them whilft they lie
rotting in their Graves, Live; he will say, Awake ye that sleep in the Dust:
And Oh, what a Noise and Shaking will there be then in the Ground? What a
clattering of Bones together in the coming of Bone to his Bone? If the Body
has been quartered and buried, part in one place and part in another (as the
Levite's Concubine, who was divided into Twelve Parts, and sent to the Twelve
Tribes of Israel, and it is likely buried in twelve distinct places) the Bones
will fly through the Air out of all those places, and meet together in one
Body: Oh! what a great part of the Air, Water, and Earth will there run into
Conjunction, by the Command of Christ, and be turned into those very Bodies
which were resolved into them by Death, and the Corruption of the Pit? But with
the Addition of such new Qualities as shall sublimate, spiritualize, Note, Then
not the same gross Bodies; but as a pure Extract.
and refine them from all that Dreggishness, and ill humor that shall be the
Foundation of any Sickness or Death forever, then the Bones will come together,
and be made like Stones for Strength; then the Sinnews will be, as it were,
Iron Sinnews, and the Flesh, Brass Which cannot be This (...) Flesh.
such Strength will be put into them, as I conceive, is not to be found in the
strongest Creatures which hitherto God has made, that they might be fitted,
the Bodies of the Righteous for an Eternal Life of Happiness, and bearing the
Glory of Heaven; The Bodies of the Wicked for an Eternal Life of Misery, and
bearing the Torments of Hell, page 17, 18. But, what a Stirring will there be
in the Earth? Those which are alive, will wonder to see such a strange
Metamorph^ of the Ground, to seel Men and Women stirring and moving under their
Feet, arising and crouding for Room amongst them? Then will the Lord bring down
all the Souls of the Righteous which have been in Paradise with him many Years,
and they shall find out their own Bodies: And he will open the Prison of Hell,
and let out the Souls of the Wicked for a while, that they also may find out
their own Bodies, page 19. The Book of God's Remembrance will be opened; This
we are to understand in a Spiritual Sense, not Not? Why are we not then to have
as spiritual a Sense of the Resurrection?
as if there were a real Book, which God did make use of for his Remembrance of
things, as Men do who have Frail and Weak Memories, page 22. The Spirits of all
the just Men and Women made persect, shall then come down, and enter again into
their Old Habitations Nay, they shall have far better.
page 31. when the Soul left the Body vile to putrify and corrupt in the
Grave, and shall find it come forth more Bright and Glorious then Gold A Glory
(...) that of (...) Earthly Bodies.
after it has been resined in a Furnace. If the Love between the Soul and the
Body were so great, when the Body was so vile, and the Soul so Sinful; what
will it be when both are glorified? If the Conjunction between the Soul and
Body were so sweet when the Body was so Frail and subject to Death, and the
Soul a Spiritual and Never-dying Subscance, what will it be when the Body shall
be made immortal and in some sort spiritual Not only, as spiritually qualified;
but as a spiritual Body.
page 32. No sooner are they awakened, and risen out of their Graves, but they
are entertained by Angels, those Holy and Excellent Creatures, when before in
the Body they were too low, and unfit for their Acquaintance; but they will
then know them, and be able to discern the Beauty of those lovely Spirits, page
33. They will arise like so many shining Suns Which excel all Terrestrial
Bodies.
out of the Earth, page 34. They admired to see the Saints, and to see
themselves so transformed, page 36. He will bring the Keys of Death and Hell
along with him, and open both these Prison Doors, not to give Liberty and
Release to the Prisoners: But as prisons are opened at Assizes, to bring them
sorth unto Judgment Concerning the Judgment of the Wiked.
he will open the Prison of Hell and all the Souls of the Wicked shall come
forth like so many (...) cut of the bottomless Fit, and he will open the Prison
of the Grave, and all their Bodies shall creep Like so many ugly Toads out of
the Earth, and then Soul and Body shall be joined together again; and this
Meeting will be sad beyond Expression: Then the Meeting of the Souls and Bodies
of the Wicked will be dolesul, page 46, 47. It is said that the vile Bodies of
the Righteous shall be made like unto Christ's Body in Beauty and Glory Which
is not Carnal; but Spiritual.
but the Bodies of the Wicked will have another Hew and Fashion; if it were
possible to fashion Bodies like Devils, those impure and foul Spirits, such
spiritual Bodies the Wicked should have: Be sure their Bodies shall have no
Glory put upon them; but as they lay down Vile Bodies, they shall rise up far
more Vile And who must make so vile and like Devils?
-- The Bodies of the Wicked most probably will be Swarthy, Black, Ugly,
Monstrous Bodies, p. 48. -- The Blackness and Dread of the Soul would quickly
appear in their Countenance; besides the Impressions which the Fire of Hell
will have upon them -- and if the Body be black, how black will the Soul be,
after so long abode with foul Devils in the lower Regions of Darkness? And when
such foul Souls and such vile Bodies meet, what a Meeting! what a Greeting will
there be! We may fancy a kind of Language to be between them at that Day; The
Soul to the Body, Come out of thy Hole, thou filthy Dunghill, Flesh; for the
Pampering and Pleasing of whom, I have lost my self forever; who have stolen
away my Time, and Thoughts and Heart from God, and Christ, and Heavenly Things,
to feed, and cloathe, and cherish thee, and make Provision to satisfy thy base
deceitful Lusts, when I should have been making Provision for thine and mine
Everlasting Happiness. Awake, and come forth of the Dust, thou Bewitching Dirty
Flesh, who did lull me asleep so long in thy pleasing Chains, until thou
did suddenly open thy Doors, and thrust me out, where I was awakened in
Torments before I was aware; Now I must come into thy Doors again, that thou
may share and taste the Bitter Issue of sinful Pleasures and Delights: And, O
how will the Body be affrighted, so soon as the Soul is entered, p. 49. -- The
Body to the Soul, And have thou found me out, O my Enemy? Could not thou have
let me alone, to lie still at rest in this sweet Sleep? Have thou used me as a
Slave, and employed all my Members as Servants of Iniquity and Unrighteousness,
and (...) thou come now to Torment me? and is this the Fruit of all the
Pleasures we have taken together? Should not thou have been more Wise, and
provided better for thy self and me.? O! what Cries and Shreeks will the Tongue
give forth, so soon as it has recovered its Use? p. 50.

2. The second Antecedent to the Judgment of the Wicked, will be their Meeting
with Devils -- to entertain them at their Resurrection; and then they will not
appear unto them like Angels of Light, as sometimes here they have done, p. 50.
-- but they will spit forth their Venom and Malice then in their Faces;
possibly they may buffet their Bodies, and lay painful Strokes upon them:
surely they will terrify their Souls for those Sins they have drawn them unto
the Commission of p. 51. -- How will they be affrighted at the Apparition of
And who must drag the Devils to Judgment then, if they must be so officious for
Justice?
so many Devils about them? -- when they shall lash their Spirits with Horrible
Scourges, when they shall seize upon their Bodies, and Tear them and Drag^ them
to the Judgment Seat, and there is none to Rescue and Deliver them

3. The Third Antecedent to the Judgment of the Wicked will be their Meeting
one with another -- O what an innumerable Company of Rebels, and Traitors, and
Villains will then be got together? How fiercerly and horribly will they look
one upon another? And if they speak, what Language of Hell will there issue
forth of their Lips? They may meet with their old Companions and FellowSinners;
but it will not be like such as they now call Meetings of Good Fellowship, when
they get together in a Tavern, and Alehouse, or someHouse of Wickedness, to
Drink, and Sing, and Dance and Sin, and make Merry in the pleasing of their
Flesh; they shall not then have Ale, and Wine, and Women, and Music, or any
Incentives to Mirth and tensual Pleasures -- O the Angry Countenances the
Wicked will have on that Day! -- O the Angry Speeches! How will they Rage and
Storm at one another, p. 52. -- O the Horrible Noise that will be amongst the
Damned Crew, when they are got together! It may be from Words they fall to
Blows, and Tear one another Hair, and Spurn at one another Bellies, and Bite
one another Flesh, and even Claw out one another Eyes What sad Work's here?
we cannot conjecture so much of the Misery of the Wicked, as will be on that
Day, p. 53. -- Friends will be together at that Day as at other times; Some
will be in Churches together, it may be Ministers preaching, and People
hearing, as you are hearing me this Day: Suppose that the Heavens should just
now open, and you should hear the Sound of the last Trumpet, then all you that
are Believers, would immediately be caught up into the Clouds; but all you that
are Impenitent and Unbelievers, would be left behind: What Terror would fall
upon you, to see us caught away from you? He thinks of a Good Place for himself
however.
It may be some of you might come hanging about me and others, when you see us
arrayed in shining Garments; O take us up along with you! What, will you leave
us behind? Alas! what can I do for you then? p. 54. -- I came with Oil often
to Sell Rather an empty talk to sell at a dear ra^.
from my Lord and Master; and you might have had it for nothing; you might have
bought it without Money Presbyters are not wont to be so free.
and without Price; but then you ^leighted and refused all Proffers of Grace
which were made, p. 56. Alas^ Why do you hang about me with Tears and
Weeping? What can I do for you now? Can I carry you all up with me in my
Arms? If all of us together could hand and help some of you up into the Air
with us, and bring you into the Presence of our Dear and Glorious Redeemer,
with what Confidence could you stand before him? with what Face could you look
upon him, when you are so Black and Filthy? Would not your Looks betray you to
be none of our Number? Would not your black and Trembling Joints speak what you
are? -- Could we carry you up with us? If you should lay hold on us, would not
the Angels snatch us out of your Arms? or would not Devils tear you away from
us? page 58. -- The Saints are all risen, and have put on their Glorious
Attire, and we are called for: It is your own Faults Is it so? then God did not
decree it as his own mere Wist and Pleasure.
that you did not help to fill up this Number, p. 59 -- The whole Innumerable
Company of Saints shall attend Christ in white shining Garments, with Bodies
like unto Christ, more Beautiful and Glorious then the most spendid Attire can
make them, page 66. -- The Accusers of, and Witnesses against the Wicked, they
will be, 1. God. 2. Men. 3. Devils. 4. Themselves. First, God's Justice will
arraign the Wicked before the (...) personal Election and Reprobation.
Judgment Seat of Christ, p. 78. -- 2. God's Goodness, and Bounty and Patience
will accuse them -- 3. God's Omniscience will be a Wit^ ness against the
Wicked at the Day of Judgment, page 79. --

1. Ministers will be the Accusers and VVitnesses against the Wicked, p 80. --
2. The Godly Friends of the Wicked will be their Accusers, and VVitnesses
against them -- 1. The Believing Husband will then accuse and witness against
his Unbelieving Wife, page 83. -- 2. The Believing Wife will then accuse her
Unbelieving Hu^band, p. 84. -- 3. Believing Parents will VVitness against their
Ungodly Children, p. 85. -- 2. The Ungodly Friends and Companions of the
Wicked will at that Day be their Accusers, and witness against them -- 3.
Devils will be the Accusers and VVitnesses against the Wicked, p. 86. -- 4.
The Wicked will be accused by themselves, their own Thoughts shall accuse them
in the Day when God shall judge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ; their own
Consciences will accuse them, and be as a Thousand Witnesses against them: They
will find all their Sins registered in that Book; and that Book will then be
opened; and they will not be able to deny one word of what they shall find
there recorded -- Concerning the Conviction -- Suppose that this very Day were
the Day of Judgment, and in this very Church were the Judgment Seat; that here
were a great white Throne, and the Lord Jesus Christ sitting upon it in his
Glory, with Millions of Holy Angels about him, and all the Saints in white at
his Right Hand; and on his Left, all the Wicked gathered together into one
Body, as it will be at the Last Day; And the Judge should cry with a loud
Voice, Bring the Prisoners to the Bar, Bring the Sinners to Judgment, p. 87.
and so summon and convict particular Sinners; 1. Come forth all ye Ignorant
Persons, who have not known the Father, nor me, nor the Mysteries of Salvation;
who lived in Darkness, and loved Darkness, and hated the Light, le^t your Deeds
should hereby have been reproved -- had you an Ear, and yet not hear, so as to
learn? Had you an Eye, and yet not see, so as to understand? And if you were
Naturally Blind, had not I Eye Salve? Could not I have opened your Eyes? was I
not willing Was he so? Good Doctrine: But then he did not decree their
Damnation from eternity.
? Did I not stand in the Gates to call upon you? How long ye Simple Ones will
you love Simplicity, and Fools have Knowledge? Turn unto me, and I will pour
out my Spirit upon you, and make known my Words unto you? Have you neglected
me through Ignorance? Is not your Fault double, because you have neglected
Knowledge too? Did not you hate Knowledge, and therefore disregard^? Did not
you love Sin, and therefore shunned the Light True; then the true light was
freely given to them, to show them the Way out of evil.
which would have discovered it, and disturbed you in your wicked Courses? Have
you liked Darkness so well? and is it not (...) then that you should go to the
Place where there is Blackness of Darkness forever? TAKE THEM DEVILS, BIND THEM
HAND AND FOOT.

2. Come forth all ye Sloathful and Unprofitable Persons; Had not ye Talents
committed to you for my Use and Service? and what have ye done with them? did
you bury them in the Earth, That was their Fault still, and not Gods Decre^.
p. 88. 89. Did not Hell gape for you long ago, and Devils long for this time,
when you should be delivered into their Powers? TAKE THEM DEVILS, BIND THEM
HAND AND FOOT.

3. Come forth all that have neglected Family-VVorship, and never sought after
God in your closets, p. 90. If you had not Ability to Pray at first with
others, might not you have attained it, had you used to Pray by your selves:
Was it Curiosity and Elegancy of Words, that God so much looked for? Would
not Sighs and Groans have been understood? p. 91. TAKE THEM DEVILS, BIND THEM
HAND AND FOOT.

4. Come forth all ye Sabbath Breakers, you that have spent the Day in
Sleeping, in Eating and Drinking to Excess, who instead of Holy Meditations
have been thinking and contriving your worldly Business, instead of Religious
Conferences, p. 93. TAKE THEM DEVILS, BIND THEM HAND AND FOOT.

5. Come forth all ye Swearers, and Prophaners of the Name of God, p. 94. TAKE
THEM DEVILS, BIND THEM HAND AND FOOT. -- 6. Come forth all ye Scoffers at
Religion, and the zealous Professors thereof, page 95. TAKE THEM DEVILS, BIND
THEM HAND AND FOOT. -- 7. Come forth all ye Persecutors of my Disciples, page
96. TAKE THEM DEVILS, BIND THEM HAND AND FOOT. -- 8. Come forth all ye
Intemperate and Liscentious Persons, p. 97. Come forth all ye (...), page 98.
Come forth ye Drunkards, page 99. TAKE THEM DEVILS, BIND THEM HAND AND FOOT. --
9. Come forth all ye Adulterers: Come forth all * What will become of the
Covetous Priests and Presbyters then?
Covetous Persons whose Treasure and Heart, and Hope, and Confidence has been
in Earthly things, who have made the World your God, p. 100. TAKE THEM DEVILS,
BIND THEM HAND AND FOOT. -- 10. Come forth all ye Unmerciful Persons, p. 101.
TAKE THEM DEVILS, BIND THEM HAND AND FOOT. -- 11. Come forth all ye Unrighteous
Persons, who have wronged Widows and Orphants; who have overreached your
Neighbors in your Dealings; who have heaped an Estate together by Unrighteous
Practices, who have squeezed and oppressed the Poor, And so did many of the
Presbyters when parish Priests.
TAKE THEM DLVILS, BIND THEM HAND AND FOOT. 12. Come forth ye Liars; you who
have taught and accustomed your selves to this Sin, page 103. TAKE THEM DEVILS,
BIND THEM HAND AND FOOT. -- 13. Come forth all ye Slanderers and Backbiters, p.
104. TAKE THEM DEVILS, BIND THEM HAND AND FOOT. 14. Come forth all ye Proud and
Ambitious Persons, page 105. Take them Devils, Bind them Hand and Foot. -- 15.
Come forth all ye Envious and Malicious Persons, p. 106. Take them Devils. --
16. Come forth all ye Wrathful and Contentious Persons; Take them Devils. --
17. Come forth all ye Civil and Moral An Uncharitable Sentence.
Persons, p. 108. Take them Devils. -- 18. Come forth all ye Hypocrites, p.
110. Take them Devils. 19. Come forth all ye Backsliders and Apostates from me
and my Ways; You that turned back to Ways of Profaneness, and open
Wickedness, after some time of Profession, p. 111. Take them Devils. -- 20.
Come forth all ye Impenitent Persons and Unbelievers, p. 114. Take them Devils,
page 115. -- And when the Sentence is pronounced by the Judge upon the Wicked,
O what direful Shreeks will they give forth With what Horror will they cry out,
How shall we be able to endure the Devouring Flames, and Everlasting Burnings
of Hell? p. 117. The Torment of the Bodies of the Wicked will be dreadful,
through the Sense of the Fire which will be kindled about them, and burn more
horribly then London's Fire did, when it had got into the Heart of the City:
Their Torment will be greater then if scalding Lead (p. 135.) were poured into
their Bowels; then if they were torn in pieces with wild Horses; then if their
Breasts were rip^up, and their Hearts were plucked out with Burning Pincers; it
will be worse then if they were cast into a Caldron of Boiling Pitch or Lead;
or put into Phalaris Bull, or Nebuchadnezar's Fiery Furnace, p. 136. and every
Member of the Bodies of the Wicked will be Tormented: O how will their Eyes
glaze? their Tongues roar? The guilty Conscience and d^filed Mind is attended
with such Imaginations of Torments, which though they are not real, but
Imaginary, yet they produce a real Torment and Horror to some; and in these
things appears an Image of that future Darkness that the Wicked will have their
due Rewards in: But these frightfull Stories of T. Vincent's do not fright
People out of their Sins, nor reach their Cons^ for that End. They must be
directed to the LIGHT which discovers Sin, and disturbeth Men in their wicked
Courses (as he cor^sesseth) To this they must come, and bring their Deeds,
whoever escape Damnation, or attain to the blessed Resurrection and future
Glory. From a true Sense and Knowledge of the Terrors of the Lord, men may be
persuaded from Evil to Good; and their Hearts become broken with a sense of his
Goodness therein, when mere Dreams and Fancies will not fright them to Heaven;
nor truly reduce them from any Sin or Evil.
their Hands and Feet fry? their Flesh roast? No Part will be free from the
Devouring Flames of this Horrible Burning Fire, p. 137.

Something for the SPIRITUALITY OF THE RESURRECTION, Being some Passages
touching the NATURE of the BODY OF CHRIST After his RESURRECTION and ASCENSION;
(Whose Glorious Body ours shall Resemble.) Out of H. Moor's Search into the
Nature of a Glorified Body, Apol. Chap. 3. (page 494. of his Modest Enquiry
into the Mystery of Iniquity.)
The CONTENTS.
That it is a Heavenly Body of an Angelical Property, a Spiritual Body, a
Celestial Body: That the Heavenliness of the Glorified Body imports the
Brightness and Splendour thereof: That the Lucidity of these Bodies is also
testified by Ancient Fathers: he forbears to affirm it to consist of
Terrestrial Flesh and Bones; but admits of Celestial and Spiritual Flesh and
Bones, confessing to Paul's Enarration of the Mystery of the Resurrection, 1
Cor. 15.

IN his Answer touching the Lucidity of Christ's Body after his Ascension, he
says, The Soul may even enjoy her self, out of her Terrestrial Body.

That the Glorified Body is Organized, which he calls Organized Light.

That if the Objecter understand Terrestrial Flesh and Bones, is it a Fault to
deny it? That the Body of Christ in Heaven is not Terrestrial Flesh and Bones,
but of a more refined Nature; for the Apostle says expressly, That Flesh and
Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50.

That according to Testimony in Scripture. we shall find, that a Glorified
Body, or that Body wherewith they shall be rewarded, who shall attain to that
blessed Resurrection, which is the most precious Hope of all true Christians,
may be dignified with these three Titles, Angelical, Spiritual, and Celestial:
It is an Angelical Body, because the Sons of the Resurrection are said to be in
every actual Respect, that tends to any real Perfection or Happiness, equal
unto Angels, Luk^ 20. 36. ( viz.) not only in that thing of Immortality, but
the Sons of the Resurrection are absolutely in all such actual Respects (as
above intimated) equal to the Angels: nor can the Condition of the Bodies be
left out as touching the Nature and Glory of them; but a Son of the
Resurrection, and an Angel must be in every such Regard all one; our Savior
seems plainly to assert so much.

That those that are once the Sons of the Resurrection, plainly become Angels
thereby -- for they were Sons of God in a moral or spiritual Sense before.

It will conduce something to the better understanding of the Nature of a
Glorified Body, if we make search into Scripture, what the Nature of the
Angelical Bodies is; it is said, Psalm. 104. Who makes his (...) Spirus, and
(...) Ministers a Flame of Fire: Upon which Text Grot^s does freely and truly
(I think) not unscilfuly comment after this manner, Esse Angelis corpora, sed
subtilissima, non Pythagorae tantum and Platonis schola sensit, sed and Judaei
and veteres Christians, etc.

That the Fathers were of this Opinion, Agrippa in his Occulta Philosophia has
also noted.

That there are many Instances how Igneous and Lucid they, namely, the Bodies
of the Angels, are, with which the best of them are invested, as truly that of
Exodus 3. 2. Acts 7. 30. which answers well to that of Hebr. 1. 7.

The Bodies of the more Glorious Angels are Igneous and Lacid.

That also is a remarkable Example of the Lucidity of the Bodies of Angels,
which we have Acts 12. where, while Peter was sleeping betwixt two Soldiers in
the Prison, bound in Chains, the Angel of the Lord is said to come upon him,
and a Light to shine in the Prison, etc.

I will add one Instance more, which is, Dan. 10. 5. where the Angel that
instructed Daniel, is thus described; Then I lifted up mine Eyes, and looked,
and behold a certain Man clothed in Linen, whose Loins were girded with fine
Gold of Ophaz; his Body was also like Beryl, and his Face as the Appearance of
Lightening, and his Eyes as Lamps of Fire, etc. This Appearance certainly of
this Angelical Shape is Fiery, Lucid and Glorious: It is manifest that they are
very Luminous and Glorious.

Whoever is invested with such a Body, as is reserved for the Sons of the
Resurrection, will be, if he please to show himself thus Lucid and Glorious; of
which I shall want no more Examples then that one of our Savior Christ's Body;
for all ours, at the Resurrection, are to be made like to his Glorious Body;
and how Lucid and Angelical his Body was after his Ascension into Heaven, may
appear from Apocal. 1. 13. where one like unto the Son of Man, is said to be
clothed with a Garment down to the Foot, and girt about the Paps with a Colden
Girdle; his Head and his Fair to be white, like Wool, as white as Snow; that
his Eyes as a Flame of Fire, and his Feet like unto fine Brass, as if they were
burning in a Furnace; and his Voice as the Sound of many Waters; a sharp
Two-edged Sword came out of his Mouth; and his Countenance was as the Sun,
shining in his strength. This Body, I think, is sufficiently Lucid, and
expressly and almost exactly conformable to that of the Angel which appeared to
Daniel, as any one may observe, that lists to compare them.

The like Appearance of our Savior se^meth to be also, Apocal. 10. where an
Angel is said to be clothed with a Cloud, with a Rainbow on his Head, and his
Face to be as the Sun, etc.

I will add his Appearing to an out of the Heavens, as he was going to
Damascus, Acts 9. that suddenly there shined round about him a Light from
Heaven, etc. above the Brightness of the Sun, Chap. 22. 6. and 26. 13. Which
again does not only assure the Reality, but the exceeding great Splendour of the
Corporeal Presence of Christ; which is also agreeable to that in Apocal. And
his Countenance was as the Sun shining in his Strength.

Out of all which, I hope, it is plain enough, that as our Savior has said,
That the Sons of the Resurrection do become i^so facto Angels in Condition, as
well for the Splendor and Constitution of their Body, as their Immortality.
The Body of our Savior, after his Refurrection, being so accurately answerable
in Light and Glory to the most illustrious Appearances of Angels, in either the
Old or New Testament; and this alone, one would think, might be sufficient to
assure us of the Lucidity or Luminosity of the Body of Christ, as also of all
our Resurrection-Bodies.

For the Spirituality of this Body, see 1 Cor. 15. 44. It is sown a natural
Body, it is raised a spiritual Body; there is a natural Body, and there is a
spiritual Body, etc.

I think it is most reasonable to understand the Resurrection-Body to be called
Spiritual, not for that it is actuated by a Spirit (for the Soul is a Spirit,
that actuates the natural Body) but for that the Body it self is become
spiritual; which I must confess, Calvin seems abhorrent from, but merely out of
his Ignorance in Philosophy; for he reprehends those, qui substantiam corporis
putant fore spiritualem, etc. Calvin seems to be afraid of the Opinion of the
Body being spiritual, as implying a substantial Change, etc.

There is not any Inconvenience to admit, that the Resurrection^ Body is a
spiritual Body, that is to say, that the Contexture of it is of more subtle
Parts then those that constitute the Earthly Bodies, page 498.

[And so he distinguishes between that Terrestrial Statue, or Body that Adam
had, and the Spiritual Bodies of those that are made conformable to the last
Adam, and to his Glorious Condition.]

Such as are not of a stupid and Statue-like Condition of themselves, but of
such a Nature as has an Activity in it self, and does most wonderfully
contribute to the most lively and most divine and enlarged vital Operations of
the Soul.^

[In this Manner has he g^ven his Distinction upon the Words, It is sown a
Natural (or Animal) Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body.]

The Resurrection Body is Heavenly or Celestial; as the first Man is of the
Earth, Earthly; the second Man is the Lord from Heaven: as is the Earthly, such
are they that are Earthly; and as is the Heavenly, such are they also that are
Heavenly; and as we have born the Image of the Earthly, we shall also bear the
Image of the Heavenly: And then it follows, But this I must tell you, Brethren,
That Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God -- not that they shall
only have Heavenly Bodies in a moral Sense or spiritual Meaning; Bodies in
which they shall be Heavenly-minded [For such Slips as these, and dilute
Senses, are very Dangerous, etc.] but that they shall have an Heavenly Body in
that Sense that Adam had an Earthly, which was not called an Earthly Body, for
that he was Earthly-minded in it, but because his Body was of an Earthly
Substance.

Really and Physically Heavenly, not only Morally; we shall be such in our
Corporeal Constitution as our Celestial Lord is in his; we shall bear his Image
of Heavenly Glory and Brightness, not only in a Moral, but Natural Sense -- nor
can I imagine how Interpreters could be carried so forcibly off from so obvious
and true a Sense, had it not been by reason of some false Pre-conceptions in
Philosophy that had corrupted their Minds, and perverted their Judgments,
namely, the Hypothesis of Ptolo^e and Aristotle.

By an Heavenly Body, I would understand an Angelical Body.

That the Heavens are fluid, according to the most ancient and divinest
Philosophy, as the very Notation of the Hebrew word intimates.

Our Resurrection-Bodies will be furnished with the Seeds and Principles of
Light and Splendor, and be more Beautiful, and more full of Luster and Glory,
then the Heavenly Matter it self; as that part of the Earth, which becomes an
humane Body, is more precious and beautiful then the Earth it self before it be
modified into a Frame fit for the Functions of Life: So that whether we
consider the Angelicalness; Spirituality or Heavenliness of the Body at the
Resurrection, there is all Reason to conclude, that it will be of a Bright and
Lucid Nature; which is not only agreeable to Reason and the Scripture, but also
to the Sayings of the Fathers themselves, as S. H^rom, S. Macariu^, S. Ephrem,
S. Austin, as you may see in Vossius, in his Theses de corpore glorioso.

But nothing more express for our Purpose then that of S. Ephrem, in his
Discourse of the Resurrection, viz. Justorum corpora septuplum supra solis
(...) radios.

How Angelical, how Spiritual, how Heavenly or Celestial, how refulgently
Bright and Glorious the Bodies of the Blessed are, etc. and more particularly
the Body of our Savior, that shone about Saint Paul, and Saint John, as the
Sun in his Strength, etc?

The first Man is of the Earth, Earthly; the second Man, that is, the Lord
Jesus, the Heavenly Man, from Heaven: And who should be entirely Heavenly if
not He? And what has Earth to do to either descend from Heaven, or (...) (...)?
or what Body more radient or refulgent then the Sun in his greatest Brightness
can be vitally Organized, but it must be of an Heavenly Nature indeed?

We have all Reason in the World to conclude the Body of our Savior entirely
Cele ial.

The Terrestrial Modifications of his Body were changed -- all cloggings
thereof were quel'd and abolished.

(...) and Blood cannot i (...) the Kingdom of God; and I think there is the
ame Reason of Flesh and Bones, viz. I understand natural Flesh and Bones not
glorified.

I demand by what Creed that has the ^ssent of the Universal Church, are we
required to believe, that the Glorified Body of Christ consists of Flesh,
Blood and Bones? It ^eming so contradictious to the exprestwords of the
Apostle, as well as uniuitable to the Nature of the Peavens, which the
Philosophers new adays conclude to be universally fl^d.

[He admits of a Body of Flesh and (...), provided they be Celestial and
Spiritual Flesh and Bones, p. 503.]

If any mortal could get within this so refulgent Orb of Glory and Bright^ss,
and approach so near as to see the Fraim and Feature of ^o Divine a Body no
Heart could escape from being struck into a (...) at the Sight of so
overcoming a Beauty and Majesty, nor the Soul of the Beholder from being
carried quite away in an extatick Fit of Love and Joy, and transporting
Admiration, p. 503.

Touching the Sameness of the Body.
The Atheist makes a fresh Assault from the sense of the word Resurrectio, as
it is implied the rising again of the very same numerical Body, in the
strictest Scholastic Sense. To which is answered, first, That (...) in Latin
implies no such thing necessarily; but that as a City or Temple, suppose being
razed to the Ground, and from the very Foundations -- is truly laid to be
Rebuilt, and so is both deemed and called the same Temple and City again,
though not a Stone were used of the former Structure; provided only, that they
be rebuilt upon the same Ground -- though the ^ame numerical Matter were not
congested together to make the same Body at the Resurrection, the stable
Per^onality being in the Soul, etc.

[He places the Samene^s of the Body that shall be, upon its vital Union with
the Soul, and faith] That Resurrectio is to be interpreted according to the
Latitude of the Original to which it answers, namely, (...) ^is (...), which
signify only Vivification, or Erection into Life: but then considering it is
spoken of them that have in some sense ceased to be alive, that in that sense
it signifies Revivification, whence the Atheists Objection from the word
Resurrectio, is utterly defeated, p. 506.

The Scholastic State of the Resurrection is described, namely, That we shall
have the same Numerical Bodies (...) which we lived here on Earth; and that
these very Bod^es, the Moulds being turned aside, shall start out of the Grave:
To which I presently subjoyn, This Doctrine the Atheist very dearly hugs, as a
Pledge in his bold Conce^ of the Falsness and Vanity of all the other Articles
of Religion.

But for those that take any Pleasure, or find any Ease or Satisfaction of Mind
in the Conclusions or P^raseologies of the School-Divines, touching this Point,
they are left free to enjoy their own Apprehensions, and may, if they please,
either fancy it necessary, that all Bodies should rise out of the Ground, the
Moulds being cast aside; or else, conceive only that God will by his
Omnipotency, gather all the Particles of our Bodies, whether flying in the Air,
or s^ting in the Water, and frame them together on the Surface of the Earth,
etc, concerning such things they may vary their Fancies as they plea^e, (...) p
508.

To the second Objection he says, I answer farther as concerning the Scripture
it self; That I dare challenge him o produce any place of Scripture, out of
which he can make it appear, that the Mystery of the Resurrection implies a
Resuscitation of the same Note.
Numerical Body. The most pregnant of all is, Job 19. which later Interpreters
are now so wise as not to understand at all of the Resurrection: The 1 Cor. 15.
that Chapter is so far from asserting this Curiosity, that it plainly says, it
is not the same Body; but that as God gives to the Blades of Corn Grains quite
distinct from that which wa^ sown, so at the Resurrection he will give the Soul
a Body quite different from that which was buried, as different as a Spiritual
Body is from a Natural Body, or an Heavenly from an Earthly, p. 508, 509.

A POST SCRIPT By way of Animad version and Counsel.
SErious and impartial Reader, I have collected these Passages that thou may
not only see how some of these learned Men differ about this mysterious and
(...) Point; but also how unreasonable it is for any of them to be (...) this
or the like unlearned (...) upon us (viz.) How, and with what Body are the Dead
raised, etc? or to seek Occasions to vilify us about this Point which (...)
(...) are not only confounded, but liable to be (...) (...). The Question is
not only unlearned, but (...) (...) unnecessary unto Salvation; it is not
necessary that (...) should imagine (...) they shall be clothed, or (...) with
Bodies in Heaven; but to enquire the Way (...), that they may walk in it, and
be solicitous to know that Power and inward Operation, whereby they may be made
Sons of God, and attain to the Resurrection of the Dead, as being Children of
God, and of the Resurrection.

If men walk in the True Light, and so truly serve and please God on Earth,
they shall not need to (...) or dispute about their future Beings in Heaven;
Their Business is, to get thither, and (...) will well accommodate them there:
Men ought not to be too curious and (...) (...) in Matters beyond their reach,
as to the Manner of their future Beings, or how they shall be reserved for
Eternal Rewards.

There are two things tend to Atheism, or to make men Atheists (viz.)

First, Some Men's Curiosity, in studying and searching into Matters and Things
beyond their Capacities and Reason (being things of another (...) and Principle
then they are in.)

Secondly, Other Men's Self Confidence in asserting things contrary to Reason
and manifest Experience; and in particular, in their affirming, that these
self-same Terrestrial Bodies of Flesh, Blood and Bones, shall be made
Spiritual, Immortal and Incorruptible, and yet the same Matter and Substance as
now.

It is true, that Henry Moor had finer and more (...) Notions about the
Resurrection then many other learned men, and aimed at the Truth and
Spirituality thereof, from the Visions of the Holy Men recorded in the
Scriptures; but if any should soar after those Notions, how fine, thin,
sublime, or desirable soever they seem to be to that Aspiring Mind that
desires to feed upon the Tree of Knowledge, such are in Danger both to fall
(...) and miss of the Fruit of the Tree of Life, and of the Resurrection of the
Just.

Therefore, Oh breathing Souls, retire, and (...) down to the holy Principle of
Light and Life in your selves, so as that may both rend the Vail of Darkness,
open you, and show it self in its own Purity, Virtue and Efficacy unto you,
that thereby you may know Christ revealed in you to be your Resurrection and
Life, your Hope of Glory and Everlasting Reward, your Strength, Nourishment and
Souls Satisfaction; For this is Life Eternal, to know God, and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent; that in him each of you may arise to Righteousness and Peace
here, and to Glory hereafter: And though it appear not what you shall be, yet
it is matter of Satisfaction, Stay and Comfort, that you have such Experience
of the Love of God, as to be his Children, and to have his Witness and
Testimony in you, That his Appearance and Work will be to your Glory and future
Felicity in Immortality, where we shall have a Building of God, an House 2 Cor.
5.
not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens; for in this we groan earnestly,
etc. that Mortality might be swallowed up of Life: Now, he that has wrought us
for the self-same thing, is God, who also has given unto us the Earnest of the
Spirit, Glorified be his Name forever.

George Whitehead.

THE END.
A Conclusive ADVERTISEMENT.
Serious Reader,
THe many Controvers^s, the great (...) of the Press, the (...) Strivings of
our Adversaries, and their (...) to prejudice and divert the Minds of People
with their (...) (...) and perverse Gain-sayings, from the Reception of Truth
(which required (...) (...) (...) and speedy Answers) have occasioned the long
Delay of publishing this Book after it was writ; but I hope it will not be
unseasonable at length, but of Service to many, for the Information of such
honest Minds as sincerely seek to understand the Truth about those principal
Matters of (...) between us and our present Opposers, herein unfolded. And if
the Manner or Method of Wording any Passages of Reprehension, etc. seems too
Harsh or Sharp in the Eye of any, who have not known, (...) been concerned (as
we are) with such unplacable Adversaries, let not this disgust or (...) them
from eying the Light and Manifestation of Truth aimed at, really intended, and
seriously contended for in the Matter and Substance of these (...); Considering
also (in the reading) the reprovable Occasions given us by those (...) Spirits
we have to deal withal, our Zeal being for the Truth as made known to us, and
that in Uprightness and Simplicity of Heart to God, and Love to Souls, we have
taken this Pains, with much more: And we must speak and write (...) according
to our several Gifts, and as we see Occasion, as they naturally (...) and
spring, even in the Simplicity of Truth received; not as Men-(...), nor to
gratify Men's Curious Fancies and Affections; but as those that must give
Account unto GOD, whose we are.

Upon perusal of the Answers here (...), I (...) meet to give a Hint of these
two Passages; to prevent some Objection, viz (...) in page 112. there is a
Question upon John 12. 35. which is, Did not Jesus say, There is yet a little
Light IN YOU? Having made further (...) (...) it, I find only in the Old Latin
Translation these words, Dixit ergo eis Jesus, adhuc modieum Lumen IN VOBIS
est: And whether this might not be (...) out of some very ancient Greek Copy
not come to our (...), is to be (...), as being supposed by some: However, it
is a Truth, (...) the (...) that was with them, was also IN them; To be with
them, does not (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) in them.

And whereas in page 305. lin. 6. (...) (...) [(...) are to dye] these Words of
S. S' s should have been inserted, viz. [Another (...) say to that Company,
Though you are not able to run as (...) as (...), (...) as strongly; yet if you
do your best Endeavor, and hold out, you are to (...) the rich Inheritance: I
ask, which of (...) two did speak to the (...) of their Companies?] (...) he
renders the Scripture-Minister as (...) in Opposition to the Quaker: How this
Passage (...) omitted, I know not; for I am (...) it was intended, being
spoaken to in my Answer, as (...), page (...) (...) 306.

And as for the Errors or Defects, that (...) (...) in the Press, through any
Inadvertency or much Business, the Reader is desired to correct, or at least,
not to reflect upon the Author therein; seeing the most material Faults are
noted in the following Errata, and how to be Corrected in the (...).

ERRATA TO THE SECOND PART.
HEre are some of the most material Faults escaped the Press, which the honest
serious Reader is desired to correct as (...).

(...) (...) (...). read obvious to the Sight. p. 8. l. 30. for us read as. p.
14. l. 23 for filth. (...) (...). p. 15 l. 1. r. obliterated p. 19. l. 21. for
Saint r. Saints. p. 29. l. (...). for (...) (...) (...). p. 30. l. 4. r.
Manifestation or Principle. l. 19 r that the Light is Christ. p 32 l. 10. for
good read Goodness. p. 39. l. 15. r. comparing it (as to its Work) page, 45 l.
29 f. effect r. affect. p. 48. l. 3 for which r. the. p. 54 l. 24 f principle
r. principal. pages 66, 67, 68. in the Titlo blot out [ Offices (...)] p. 72 l.
27. (...) merely as a (...) without. p. 75. l. 22. (...) spiritual known r.
spiritually (...). p. 77. l. 35 r (...) (...). p 80. l. 33. f. to be r. will
be. p. 84. line last de^e lux. p. 105. l. 9. f Christ saying r. that saying. p.
132. l 6. r. (...). p. 133 l. 16 for he r they. p. 142. l. 5. r. strike at. p.
150. l. 22. f Body r. the Body. p. 151. blot out [ Body of] in the (...). p.
152. l. 31. r. on thy. p. 162. l. 35. r. and assertion. p. 177. l 28. f. which
r. (...). p. 178. l. 27. r. Impatiency in her. p. 183. l. 32. dele of. p. 189
l. 17. f. remiss r. (...). p. 195. l. 25. f. seem r. smell. p. 198. l. 37. f.
my r. his. 40 f them r him. p. 200. l. 18. r. but judge. p. 202. l. 40. after [
before Faith] add or (...) in the State of Unbelief p 213. l. 8. f. God r.
Good. p. 217. l. 24. f. yet thereto r whereto p. 231. l. 23. f. our r. his. p.
233. l. 20. r. as he says. p. 235. in the (...), (...) 4. for saying read who
said p. 242. l. 28. f. a great (...) r. dispensing. page 280. l. 28. the full
Stop or Breach should be placed after [ (...)] p. 288. l. 22. f. it r in p.
290. (...). 33. after [ impatiency] add [ in a time of (...)] p 305. (...). 2.
after ( incourazement) add ( against us) p. 308. l. (...). read who knew. p.
310. l. 20. read Gell's. p. 323. l (...). read (...) l. 42. for do read op. p.
326. (...) 37. read Philetus. l. 38. read completed after page 334. for 135
read 335, and so correct them to the end. page 341. l. 19 read he being out of
his perplexed. p. 348. l. 3 for their read the. l. 13, 14. read ( in Union of
Spirit, and with the Spirits of all just Men) within a Paren: hesis. page 354.
l. 22. f. the r. they p. 357. l. (...). for set read sit. p. 363. l. 48. for
fiercerly read fiercely.

There are also diverse Faults and (...) in Letters and Points of less moment,
which may be understood by the Sense of the Matter.

THE END.

