THE Counterfeit Christian DETECTED; And the REAL QUAKER JUSTIFIED.

Of God and Scripture, Reason and Antiquity. against The Vile Forgeries, Gross
Perversions, Black Slanders, Plain Contradictions and Scurrilous Language of T.
HICKS an Anabaptist Preacher, in his Third DIALOGVE between a Christian and a
Quaker, called, The Quaker Condemned, etc.

By way of Appeal to all sober People, especially those called Anabaptists in
and about the City of London.

By a Lover of Truth and Peace W. P.

The Vile Person will speak Villainy, and his Heart will work Iniquity, to
practice Hypocrisy, and to utter Error against the Lord,

Isa. 32.6. But ye are Forgers of Lies, ye are all Physicians of no value,

Job 13.4. Printed in the Year 1674.

Reader,
IT was about a Mon^th after the Publication of T. Hicks's last Dialogue, ere I
knew there was such a Pamphlet in the World; I took great Care to ge^ it, and
then used no less Diligence to per^se it, which having done, I shall bri^fly
and faithfully give thee my Sense, both of the Man and his Work, and, I hope,
sufficient Proof to justify that Account.

Some were of the mind, our full and so^er Answer to his other disingen^ous
Dialogues, with that Remembrance we gave him of his own former Dislike and
Reprehension of that unfair way of writing Controversy, to some of his own
Profession in Wiltshire, would have had some place with him, and influence upon
him, toward a more just Proceed with us for the f^ture; That instead of a Man
of Straw, and a Fool and a Knave of his own creating (and therefore called by
him a Quaker, that he might the better entitle us to his invented Error,
Blasphemy and Immoralities, and bring us under the Odium that follows) we
should have seen, if not a real Contrition for the Wrong done us at least, if
in the Wrong our selves, some Arguments more fairly given, and tenderly pressed,
in order to reclaim us: But in lieu of a solid and edifying Confutation (were
we in the Wrong) the Man is become resolved and desperate; without all regard
to God, Reason, Scripture, his own Credit, and the Reput^ of his Party (not a
little weakened by his Carriage) for it seems no matter with him how black the
Stratagem be, provided it r^nders but the Quakers and their Faith detestabl^.
And so remote is he from the least Acknowledgment of his former Miscarriages,
to wit, Forgeries, Perversions, Evasions, Lies, Slanders and Railings, that
with regret I speak it, he has presumtuously continued and advanced in that
Ungodly Practice, as if he would maintain on^ Iniquity by the doubled
Confidence of another; increasing, with the number of his Dialogues, the number
of those Impieties, for which his other two were so frequently rejected of
sober and well-disposed People. Now if the man be so bad, and that in his Book
too, how his Book can be good, is beyond the Skill of any man to tell us. That
he deserves no better Character at any good man's ^and, and that I write but
the very Truth of the Matter, I shall proceed to manifest by such Instances and
Evidences, as I think cannot be justly questioned of either Reason or Sense.

Reader, be but intent and impartial in thy perusal, and I desire no more at
thy hands to our Vindication and our Adversary's utter Shame. Farewell.

THE Counterfeit Christian DETECTED;
NOt long after Tho. Hicks had brought forth his first piece of Fiction, being
charged by several, as well those that were not of our Way, as our own Friends,
with having made a Quaker of his own (and no wonder then that he should confute
him) he, as one concerned to buoy up his Credit above those Assaults, writes
the Continuation, or Second Part, endeavoring to make appear, that he had not
wronged us in his first. I undertook to consider them, and that in a Spirit of
Moderation, to the people of his Profession, and to him, at most, but in a Way
of grave Rebuke of his Unchristian Practice. In this I represented his Forgery,
with many other of his Unrighteous Dealings toward our Persons and Profession.
At this he fumed and raged; and where he might safely do it, in City and
Country, I was a Knave, and I know not how many more Hard Names, that both suit
his Envy, pred^minan^ Passions and sordid Practice, to the Disgrace of his
Religious Pretenses. But it has so happened, that about ^ Year's time after, he
has thought it requisite to give us six Sheets, which are to advocate his Cause,
and prove to the World that I am an ^rrogant, Abusive, Prophan^, Imperti^ent
Man, with abundance of the like Dirt, out of his foul Pit, which he loads
almost every Page withal.

The Intent of this last Undertaking, is to condemn us out of our ow^ Mouth,
and show to the World, that we verify what before he had charged upon us, and
we so confidently denied: But if upon Examination, it shall appear, that my
Charges against him remain firm, and that by the Assistance of this last
Dialogue it self, I hope, notwithstanding his high Rants, mighty Confidence,
most positive and dogmatical Say-so's, and hard and scornful Names, with which
he endeavors to over-bear us, he shall be reputed the man we have described
him, and therefore unworthy of the Name of Christian, which he untruly gives
himself in his Dialogues.

. 1. Tho. Hicks proved guilty of Forgery.
I Shall begin with an Account of his Title Page, and what he promises his
Reader there; The Quaker Condemned out of his own Mouth, or an Answer to W.
Penn's Book, entitled, Reason against Railing, and Truth against Fiction;
wh^rein W. P. has confessed, That if those things objected against the Quak^rs
in two former Dialogues be true, that then a Quak^r is quite another thing then
a Christian. That those Matt^rs heretofore objected were and are real T^uths,
and no Fictions is fully cleared and evinced in this Third Dialogue between a
Christian and a Q^aker, by THOMAS HICKS, Tit. Page

That a Quak^r is Condemn^d out of Tho. Hicks's Mouth, is no Wonder to me; but
that he should be Condemned out of his own, would be strange, and is, we hope,
a Task too difficult for him to surmount. However, he tells us, that what
things he objected against us in his former Dialogues, called Fictions by us,
are cleared and evinced to be no Fictions, but real Tr^ths by him: This is
either true or false; if true, we are wrong; if false, T. Hicks is still to be
reputed a Forger.

He that would clear himself from any Charge, must be sure to take into his
Answer the Matter of that Charge, or he shuffles with his Adversary, and makes
no allowable Defense for himself. That this is T. Hick's Case, instead of
Condemning the Quaker out of his own Mouth, and consequently that he is worthy
to be condemned himself for his Enterprise, I shall briefly show.

I charged him at the Entrance into my former Book, with having answered his
own knottiest Questions in our Name, with the most weak and impertinent Returns
he could well invent; and in many Pages there was not so much as a Quotation to
be seen (a Practice to be det^sted of any that have learned but the very
Alphabet of Common Honesty) to which the man says nothing, yet would be
thought a fair Disputant, yea, a Christian too, if any Body will believe him.

Next I charged him with having given some Answers, we could acknowledge ours,
joined to their proper ^uestions, unto such Questions, as they were never
returned to, therefore guilty of Forgery, though not in making them Answers at
all; yet in giving them for Answers to those Questions unto which they never
relat^d, which is a manifest Misapplication of them; But of this neither do we
hear one word.

Again, though what he has said in his Title Page, be enough for u^, and we
shall anon descend to use it, yet does not that contain or reach my Question,
as in Honesty it ought to have done, which was this; Wheth^r those Doctrines
and Expressions charged upon the People called Quakers, by Tho. Hicks in both
his Dialogues, be really the Doctrines and Sayings of that People, or not? And
afterward, Whether what we own, and is by him charged with Error, is
sufficiently opposed or proved such? Reason against Railing, p. 6. which,
Reader, takes in not only what T. H. objects against the Quakers, but what he
invents and answers for them, and under their Name, whether it be about
Doctrine or Practi^e. Nor is this all that may be learned of T. Hicks in his
Title Page; For, to complete his Baseness in that very Passage, observe, that
as he only renders us concerned at his Objections, so does he confine these
words [are real Truths and no Fictions] unto them. Whereas it is notorious to
all that have but turned over my Answer, that it was not only, nor indeed so
much his Objections against us, as those Answers he gave for us, that I charged
with Fiction. But T. Hicks's Policy in this Contrivance is not unworthy of our
notice, though always of our Approbation; for this is the plain Language of it,
If I use not these Stratagems to cloud the Question, and vary the Charge, I am
a Forger, etc. there is no Help for it; and that discards me with all men, even
those of my ^wn Party; wherefore I will so ord^r the Matter, that I will only
bring my self upon the Not that I allow him to have rightly ch^rgd us in every
thing in that Sense neither.
Proof of my own Objections, and overlook theirs. But though this goes a great
way, yet this alone will not do; For I query, Do thou intend by Objections,
which thou say I call Fictions, all or some; if but some of them, thou
should in Honesty have said so; if all, as thy words imply, then ha^^ thou
further abused us; for my state of the Question includes a grant of some of
them in point of Citation, though none as Errors.

But, Reader, this is T. Hicks'^ Fetch (for without them he can do nothing
against us) If I can extend the word Forgery or Fiction, as w^ll to things they
do grant, a^ those they deny, by some such general words, as Matters objected
against the Quakers, etc. Then by proving they acknowledge I have rightly
quoted and charged them in some three or four Particulars, I will clear my self
from the foul Imputation of Forgery in all the rest.

That this is the very Truth it self, and therefore Forgery in the Abstract,
let the Reader know, that this has been his Practice, to wit, Where we have
never charged Forgery upon him, he has taken his Opportunity, and th^^ with the
Confidence of an Innocent to cry out, Is this candid to call me a Forgery, when
you confess the thing -- Then I am not guilty of Forgery -- this clears me from
being a Forger -- Examine these Pages in his 3d Dialogue, viz. p. 4, 5, 6, 9,
29, 36, 39. and mine to which he there refers, and which he pretends to answer,
and thou will have such Evidence of the Truth of what I s^y to thy very Sense,
as must needs render my Adversary's Carriage worthy of thy severe Censure.

But as he has attempted the Proof of his Innocence in this Matter, by ^^aces
that never reflected any such sort of Guilt upon him (therefore still the man
once charged to be) so has he wholely declined meddling with that very Head of
Forgery, under which I rancked near Twenty Answers, set down by him in our
Name, that were ^ever given by us, in either Matter or Form, to those or any
other Questions, as a Demonstration of the Truth of my Accusation; some of
which are so very gross, that had not his Envy over-powred his Wits, Credit
with his sober Neighbors would have dis-swaded him, if the Apprehension of
God's Judgments could not have deterred him.

Before I produce Particulars, I shall recite a Passage in his second Dialogue,
p. 2. as a Proof of the immeasurable Confidence, as well as Folly and
Wickedness of the Man. Quak. Thou have presented the World with a Quaker of
thine own framing, making him to speak those Impertinencies and Falsehood^ that
were never uttered by any real Q^^aker; Therefore it is a Forgery. G. W.
Epistle to D. P^. Anab. You had done well* if you had produced some I^st^nc^s
wherein I made them speak what was never uttered by a real Quaker: But if I can
prove that what is spoken under that Name is the Language of a real Quaker;
then thou have confessed that such may be guilty of Impertinencies and
Falsehoods.

But T. Hicks has made them speak what was never uttered by a Real Quak^^, and
has not so much as attempted to prove the contrary; Therefore T. Hick^ by his
own Argument is guilty of Impertinencies and Falsehoods. This I made appear in
my Answer to his former Dialogues; and therein did well by his own Confession;
For I produced several Passages to make good my Charge of Forgery, unto which
he is wholely silent. I shall instance in three or four of t^^m, that my Reader
may both perceive the Spirit of the man, and see at what rate he has cleared
himself from my Imputations.

Anabapt. Is it hon^st in you to deny the Scripture to be a Rule to others,
when at the same time you make it a Rule ^o your selves? Dial. 1. pa^. 24, 52.


Q^ak. Thou mistakest u^; when we make us^ of the Scriptures, it is only to
quiet and stop their Clamours, that plead for it as their Rule.


Anab. D^ you beli^ve the Scriptures to be the true Sayings of God, ibid. p.
25, 2.


Quak. Yea, so far a^ they agree with the Light within.


Anab. May I not conclud^, that the Reason why you so freely rail against and
reproach your Oppos^rs, is only to secure your Cred^t with your Proselytes,
ibid. p. 72, 73.


Q^ak. I cannot deny but that there may be something of that in it.


Anab. Will this convince me or any other of your Perf^ction? ibid.


Quak. Though it do not, yet thereby we shall render you so Odious to our
Friends, that they will believe nothing that is spoken by you against us.


Anab. Will you be so liberal of your Revilings, whether your Adversari^s give
occasion or no? ibid.


Quak. It concerns us to render them as ridiculous as we can, and to make our
Fri^nds believe, they do nothing but contradict themselves: And if this fail,
we will insinuate something by way of Qu^stion, that may be Reproachful to them.


Anab. But does not this signify a very Dishonest and Malicious Mind? ibid.


Quak. We ^are not what you think, provided our Friends think not so. We will
give it out, that we have both answered and confuted our Adversaries, and our
Friends will believe u^, which is enough to us.


What a Wicked and False Quaker this counterfeit Christian has made to abuse
true ones? If this be not Forgery, palpable Forgery, and that not only against
some one Person, but the People in general, personated by his own mad^ Quak^r,
there is no such thing as Forgery in the World. Oh you that seriously profess
Religion, can you away with this?

But has he vindicated himself from these base Courses, or honestly confessed
them? Neither. How then can he justly call himself a Christian, or be thought
to have answered my Book, that has thus basely de^lined that part of it, which
stood him most upon to disprove? But how grossly soever he has represented us,
and how silently overlookt our Charges, he wants not Confidence to write after
this Strain; I do affirm in seriousness, that the Account I have now, and
heretofore given of the Quakers, is no other then the very Truth, Epist. p. 5.
How serious is this Man in his Lying? Forge first, and then Lie to prop it:
Impudence in Grain!

For what he has said heretofore relating to this particular, I have here
briefly considered it. Let us see if he be any better now; In order to it, I
have already shown you the Shuffle of his Title Page: I will now proceed to
give you an Account of his Progress in this Black Art of Forgery and base Abuse.

Anabapt. I am not conscious of having objected any thing against you in my
former Dialogues, but what I am certainly persuaded to be true, p. 1.

But is not T. Hicks conscious of first making us say that we never said, and
then calling it, A Dialogue between a Christian and a Quaker? That T. Hicks was
a Forger, I have evidenced: That he is one still, his own words show; for
instead of retracting, he pleads Innocen^y in being so: No wonder this man can
write against the Light within; whose Conscience, if we will believe him, is so
seared, that it feels no Risings against the foulest Forgeries. But let us hear
him a little further.


Anabapt. I am so confid^nt of the Truth of those Allegations, that I doubt not
to avouch them, to all impartial men, Ibid.


We never doubted his Confidence, but Honesty. His Allegations must either
respect those Passages, which he book'd, and pag'd, or else all that he
alleges under the Name of Quaker: If the former, he is a Forger still; for
more then Three Hundred in his first Dialogue were neither book'd nor pag'd: If
the latter, he tells a plain Untruth; for he has not so much as attempted to
avouch them, unless it is to be understood of his Confidence.

Seven Instances I shall give of his Continuance in FORGERY.
I. T. Hicks's first F^rgery begins with his Title-Pag^, and in that very
Passage, where he promises an Evinc^ment of his own Objections to be no
Fictions, but real Truths; to wit, that he does not only content himself in
making the Evincement of his own Objections against us (unfairly over-looking
ours) to be all he is concerned in, but in so many words tells the World, That
I confess, if those things objected against the Quakers in the two former
Dialogues be true, that then a Quaker is quit^ another thing then a Christian;
who never said or confessed any such thing in all my Life: For I well knew,
that the Controversy rise higher, and went further then his mere Objections; I
mean, ^o all he gave under our Name; as both the Question stated, and my
Pursuit of it do evidently prove. So that he, to make the clearing of his own
Objections enough (yet more then he can ever do) brings me in with a Confession
of a thing I never thought on, much less ever writ; what shall I call this but
Forgery upon Forgery?

II. His Second Forgery brings me in thus:

Qu. If thy Quotations be true, I do freely acknowl^dge, that a Quaker is quite
another thing then a Christian, Reas. against Rail. p. 2.


There is no Passage so laid down by me; my words are these, T. Hicks has
given us a Second Part, wherein he hopes to make good, what he charged upon us
in his first by Quotations out of our own Books; If faithfully done, I shall
freely acknowledge that a Quaker is quite another thing then a Christian. Where
it is observable, that I do not lay the Hazard of a Quaker's being a Christian,
merely upon the Truth of his Quotations, but the Use of and Application of
them, if they be faithfully done; that is, if he can make those Quotations and
his Charges meet against us, I shall concede; for a Quotation implies an
Agreement. He hoped to creep out at a few right Citings, and to be over looked
all false Applying and Perverting by unnatural Consequences to his Crooked
Purpose. Though had I said, as he sets me down, I should have no Cause to fear
the Issue; since if Naming us may go for quoting, he has done it an Hundred
times, where he has directed to no particular Way of knowing the Truth thereof,
consequently a Forger; and where he has been more punctual, I dare abide by
every such one he ever made, well knowing he cannot get one Letter to speak for
him, but by his mere Sophistry and customary Wrests.

III. His Third Forgery in this 3d Dialogue is thus laid down by him. He begins
with an Answer to the last Passage he quoted for mine.

Anabapt. Art thou well advised in what thou say? p. 1, 2.


Quak. Were we as thou representest us, the severest Plagues and Judgments of
the Eternal God we might justly expect to be our Portion, Reas. against Rail.
page 4.

The Stress lies here, Whether this Answer were ever given by me to the
Question it is now made an Answer to? I say, No; Therefore a Forger. Next, let
us see if it was ever given to a Question of the like Tendency? No; therefore
the greater Forger. I will set down the two Passages unto which this has been
given twice for Answer, that my Reader may be helped to a clearer Sight of the
Man.

In this third Dialogue he queries of me:


Anab. Art thou well advis^d in what thou say, in saying, If my Quotations
be ^rue, thou do freely acknowledge that a Quaker is quite anoth^r thing
th^n a Christian, Dial. 3. p. 1.


Quak. Were we as thou representest us, the severest Plagues and Judgments of
the eternal God we might justly expect to be our Portion, R. against R. p. 4.

Thus T. H. lays it down: But let us see how it is in my Book.


T. ^. queries, Will you be so liberal of your Revilings, whether your
Adversary give occasion or not? He answers for us: Quak. It concerns u^ to
render them as ridiculous as we can, and to make our Friends b^li^ve, They do
nothing but contradict themselves, which is enough to us. Upon which Reader, I
made this Reflection: Certainly these things show such premeditated and
wilful Obstinacy, to be Wicked, that were we what he represents us to be IN
THIS VERY MATTER* the severest Plagues and Judgments of the eternal God we
might justly expect to be our Portion, etc. p. 4. If any said IN THIS VERY
MATTER, then not in every Matter T. Hicks pleases to wrest or twist it to: Oh
gross Abuse! Shall this Man go for a Christian? But his Evil is greatly
hightned, when we consider, that these Words were spoken of such a Passage, as
to this Minute he never so much a^ attempted to clear from the Imputation of
Forgery, though so charged upon him, page 67. of my Answer; because there was
no Quotation for it, nor in sense can be expected for so plain a Fiction: And
yet he makes i^ a formal Answer to ^ Question about right and wrong Quotations,
which were not there in Question; as if it were one and the same thing, to say,
the Plagues and Judgments of God we might expect, etc. if so morally Evil as h^
brought us in spe^king our selves to be, for which he directed us to no
particular Proof, neither could: And to say, We might justly expect the Plagues
and Judgme^ts of God, etc. if he represented us right, as to Quotations about
Doctrines out of our own Books, which was never the Question. He that can thus
invent, add, diminish, and transpose, both Words and Sentence^, may write
Dialogues at Pleasure, and as easily abuse the Prophets and Apostles, yea,
Christ Jesus himself, as the People called Quakers.


IIII. His fourth Forgery he makes, and that I think ^t ^o re^^^k, is this*

Anab. But do thou indeed believe, that those Quotations in the former
Dialogues are Forgeries?


Quak. I do so, Dial. 3. p. 2.

This is all false: I never thought so, much less writ so; nor was that the
Question, taking Quotations for places cited, as to Book and Page. And if
generally accepted by him, he brings me in denying all, which was as much
beside my Thoughts.

Thus he shuffles with me, and endeavors to delude simple People by the word
Quotation (which taken strictly, does not reach the one half of those Answers
he made us to give) by getting a few Passages acknowledged, which he has
punctually made (though miserably perverted) to make them believe, all given
under our Name, not so cited, are also allowed under the same Term [Quotations.]

Besides, he has not referred us for any such Answer in any Book I ever wrote.
This, Reader, is so far from proving and evincing former Charges against us,
that it is to multiply more Fictions, and add to his other Score.


V. His Fifth Forgery is in page 59. and consists of two Parts: The first is,
The foisting in of the Word only, The second of mis-placing and applying my
Answer, that he may the better have his Ends upon me, which is but one of his
many unruly reigning Sins. Observe, because I told him, that E. B. in saying,
That was not a Command to him, which was a Command to another, respected not
those universal and eternal Precepts of fearing God, and working Righteousness
(as T. H. untruly inferred) But more extraordinary and particular Injunctions;
such as the Going of Moses to Pharaoh, with many more. And because I explain an
other Passage out of E. B. by him cited and wrested, viz. You are not dead with
Christ, who are yet subject to Ordinances; after this manner, E. B. pleads ONLY
against such Ordinances, as were but Shadowy, and to pass off; He puts the
Adverb Only, by me mentioned, in what I said to this last Citation out of E. B.
in my Explanation of the first Citation, where I never mentioned it. And that
he might fasten a Contradiction upon me, he omits this last Citation out of E.
B. mentioned in his second Dialogue, and makes the Answer I gave to his Use of
it, to belong to that which I gave to the former about Commands, as if they had
been but one entire Answer to one and the same Passage, which were really two.

The Advantage he hoped to gain, was this, that I should say, E. B. intended by
Commands, only extraordinary Ones, as Mos^s's going to Pharaoh, etc. and yet
say, That E. B. only meant such Ordinances as are Shadowy; if only such
extraordinary, then not only such Shadowy; if only such shadowy, then not only
such extraordinary; as if they had been said of the same Passage, and on the
same Occasion; whereas the first was in page 47. of E. B's Works, and the other
in page 105. as T. Hicks himself quotes them, in his second Dialogue, p. 59, 61.

But that which yet adds Blackness to this Forgery, is first, that, at what
time he foisted into my Explanation of the first Passage, he bas^ly left out
these three Words [with many more] which were on Purpose to show I did not
stint E. B's Use of the Word Command, to the extraordin^ry Ca^es, instanced in
my Answer. And next that, after all that premeditated Injustice, he flings
these stinking Interrogatories at me, Do thou consult thy Credit in
multiplying such Instances of thy Inadvertency and Folly? What Reason has any
Man to b^lieve thee, either in what thou affirmest or denyest, that do so
apparently contradict thy self? This is not only to be bad, but brazen withal.
To contradict a Man's self is reproveable; but to make Contradictions in
another Man's Name, is detestable: To commit Injuries against any is ill done;
but to brave the wronged with insolent Reflections must needs be a great
Aggravation. What think the more sober among the Bap^^sts of the^e Things?

VI. The Sixth Forgery I shall now mention is the Answer T. H. makes G. W. to
give in his second Dialogue, page 1. The Question and Answer I will recite.

Anab. I have form^rly detected you of se^eral perniciou^ Error^, concerning
the Scriptures, Light within, Person of Christ and Resurrection, etc. What say
you thereunto?


Quak. I say, The Plagues and Judgments of God will follow thee.


G. W. denies that this was ever his Answer to that Question, Appendix, p. 13.
Though he at the same time tells T. H. he no ways doubts the Thing. T. H. that
he may not lie under the Charge of Forg^ry, so fixed upon him by G. W. has by
his Legerdemain, p. 69. trapt in Joh. Gladman, to cloak his Fiction, thus;
Whereas G. W. denies that he said, The Plagues and Judgments of God would
follow T. Hicks, th^se may certify, that G. W. and my self being in D^scourse
about the Dialogue between a Christian and a Quaker, he said, The Plagues and
Judgments of God would follow T. Hicks, and all that had a Hand in that
Dialogue, or that dispersed it. J. Gladman, Dial. p. 85.

But the Meaness of the Shift aggravates the Forgery: Did G. W. ever deny that
he had said so to J. G. or was that the Question? Vain Man! or tell us, Does J.
Gladman certify, that G. W. said so to T. H. at what time he controversially
asked him that Question? Which is to come close to the Question: Or does he say,
there ever was any such Question asked him? Clear it is, G. W. never denied that
he had spoken those words, or to the same Effects, to any Body at any time, or
upon any Occasion (Therefore has J. G. also manifestly wronged him in saying,
whereas G. W. denies that he said, etc. this is an Untruth, as is evident by G.
W's own Answer, Appendix p. 13.) and as evident it is, that the Substance of
this Certificate goes no further then to testify that which was never yet
denied; Therefore no Certificate to clear the Matter objected against T.H. to
wit, That he never received by Word or Writing any such Question from T. H.
much less did he ever return him any such Answer; consequently T. H. a Forger
still.

I will briefly parallel the Case: Let us suppose a Dispute between T. Hicks a
Pr^destinarian, and J. Ives an Vniversalist, both Anabaptists, about El^ction
and Reprobation; And J. Ives using his Wits to depaint T. H's Opinion to
greatest Disadvantage; which T. H. looking upon as Unfair, and thinking himself
not to have been doctrinally, gravely and justly dealt with, as by the Law of
Sober Disputation should have been, falls upon J. Ives with this Rebuke, Thou
art an Vng^dly; Vain and Ca^tious Man; the Judgments of God will overtake thee,
if thou Repent not, for thy daring Opposition to the Gospel, and unfair Dealing
with me J. Ives immediately writes a Dialogue; the first Question suppose to be
this.


J. Ives. What do thou say, T. H. to those gross and blasphemous Absurdities
I charged thy Narrow and Ill-natured Opinion with; of damning men
unconditionally from all Eternity to glorify God, thereby rendering God more
Cruel then M^n and Beasts, that naturally take care of their Off-sprin^
representing him partial and double-minded, as having a reveal^d Will that
speaks of his Desire that all should be saved, and a secret Will
notwithstanding that damns far the great^st part, whether they Obey or Rebel?
with much more of the like cruel and black Aspect. I suppose, thou have
considered them well; have thou any Reasons to offer in Countenance and Defense
of this horrid Opinion? What say thou?


T. Hicks is made by J. Ives to answer thus:

T. H. I say, thou art an Ungodly, Vain an^ Captious Man; The Judgments of God
will overtake thee, if thou Repent not, for thy daring Opposition to the
Gospel, and unfair Dealing with me.


Now, I would ask T. Hicks, if he thinks this Reflection, by him given upon the
supposed disingenuous Carriage of J. Ives, to be a proper and suitable Answer
for J. Iv^s to give in his Name to a doctrinal Question, unto which, it was
never given as an Answer? If not, how injuriously has he dealt with G. W? Are
our Rebukes of T. Hicks's Unrighteous and Profane Carriage in his Dialogues,
the only Reasons we are able to render in Defense of our Belief, or against his
doctrinal Objections? Or may a man honestly take another's Answer, and give it
to his own Question, however impertinent, and that in the other man's Name,
with design to render him so? If not, then certainly T. H. has not acted the
Christian, but the Counterfeit with us: And God will require this Wickedness at
the Church's Hand to which he relates, if they indulge or connive at it.

VII. His Seventh Forgery, and the last which I will now stand to mention, is
^^is, and I entreat my Readers Attention; for He or I must needs be very Guilty.

In his second Dialogue page 5. he thus brings me in:

Anab. Be free and plain with me, how and in what respect is Christ said to
fulfill the Law, and to DYE for Sinners.


Quak. He fulfilled the Law Only as our Pattern or Example. Christ is so far
from telling us of ^uch a Way of being Justified, as that he informs us the
Reason why he abode in his Father's Love, was his Obedience: He is so far from
telling us of being Justified by Virtue of his Obedience imputed, that unless
we keep his Commands and obey for our selves; in all which Christ is but our
Example, Pen. Sand. Found. shak. page 26.

To this, Reader, I returned two Pages of Answer, in Defense of my Book, and to
detect his Forgery, some of which he has ventured to give, but with his wonted
Disingenuity perverted: Let us hear him patiently.


Anab. But for as much as thou seem to grant that Christ's Death was in the
Nature of a Sacrifice, how will this a^ree with what thou have formerly
asserted? viz. That Christ fulfilled the Law, Only as our Pattern or Example,
Dial 3. page 74.


Qu^k. In this Quotation thou have done exactly like thy self; for if thou
can find the word Only there, or such an Answer to such a Question, thou
have not wronged me; But sure I am, there is no such Question, and as sure, the
Fulfilling of the Law was not the Subject treated on, and very certain, the
word Only was not there; Therefore thou art a Forg^r. That which I said, with
the Scripture on which it was grounded, was this: If ye keep my Commandments,
ye shall abide in my Love, etc. Reas. against Rail. page 78. Sand. Found. p. 26.


Anab. H^re it is hard to say, whether thy Dishonesty or Impudenc^ be the
greater; for in this Answer thou are guilty of no l^ss then three notorious
Vntru^hs: First thou insinuatest, as if the Text above named were the only Text
from which thou did argue in thy Sand. Found. page 26. 2 dly, Thou art sure,
the Fulfilling of the Law was not the Subject treated on there. 3 dly, Thou art
very certain, the word Only is not there: Thus have thou aggravat^d thy
Wickedness in adding Lie unto Lie, and all this knowingly, Dial. 3. p. 74, 75.

It Is now Time for me to speak; and I beseech thee, Reader, hear me; for it is
of great moment to determine who is the Forger, who is the Liar; T. H. or W. P.

First, he suggests by this Question, Is Christ's Death was in the Nature of a
Sacrifice, as thou say, how will this agree with thy former Assertion, That
Christ fulfilled the Law, only as our Pattern, as if the Death and Suff^rings
of Christ, as a Propitiation to declare God's Righteousness for the Forgiveness
of Sins that are past, upon Repentance, had been part of that Doctrine in that
part of my Book, unto which those W^^^s relate, viz. Christ fu^fi^^^d the Law
as our Pattern, ^^ich really was no part of that Doctrine, as may be seen page
24, 26.

For because we assert him to have been our Example in Fulfilling the
Righteousness of the moral Law, T. H. would conclude from my words, That he was
only our Example in ending Types, Shadows, Sacrifices, Propitiations, etc. of
the Law; Therefore great Forgery in him, to make me answer two Questions, the
one in page 52. of his second Dialogue; the other in in page 74 of his last
Dialogue, which take in the Death and Sufferings of Christ, that wholely
related to but some part of the personal Obedience of his Life.

I cannot forbear one Instance more of his foul Miscarriage in this particular,
viz.


Anab. Are we no further concerned in the Obedience and Sufferings of our Lord
Jesus without us, then only as our Example or Patttern?


Quack. What more would thou have? I have told thee, that Christ fulfilled
the Law; but Only as our Example.

Where there is nothing clearer then that he thrusts the Sufferings of Christ
into the Question, which was no part of the Question, making me to deny the
Benefit thereof, because I assert him to be only our Example in that which is
our daily Duty unto Acceptance with God; not in being a Sacrifice for Sin. Is
this not to be Guilty of Fiction? Or is this to describe a real Quaker, and act
the part of a true Christian? Oh hateful Injuries!

But 2 dly, In his Quotation of my Answer he has omitted two Pass^ges; for
when I said, If he can find such an Answer to such a Question he has not
wronged me, I placed the^e words between, which he dropped, viz. or the M^^ter
strictly contained in that Question, which I knew he could never compass,
because his Question was, in what R^spect Christ dyed for Sinners; and the
Answer he made me give, truly related to the fulfilling filling of the
Righteousness of the Law in our selves. Oh Injurious Man! Is this the Christian?

His next Omission is this part of my Answer, which followed from my Argument
(by him cited for Proof of his Charge) upon John 15.10. If you keep my
Commandments, etc. Now (said I) that this concerned not the whole Law Christ
came to fulfill; the whole Law he fulfilled, the plac^ of Scripture quoted, the
Nature and Mat^er of the Argument clearly prove. Again, He was our Example in
Holiness, though not in his Ending of Types and Shadows, Reas. against Rail.
page 79. Which Passages R^ader, plainly evidence, that if ever those words were
spoken by me, they never extended to Christ's being but our Example in the
Fulfilling of the whole Law, which T. Hicks by his Sophistry would insinuate.

For Answer to his Three notorious Untruths he charge on me, take what
follows. 1. He says I insinuate as if John 15.10. were the only Text from
whence I argued in my Sand. Found, page 26. which, Reader, is so far from
Truth, that I only charged him with having argued from that Text in which no
such word or matter was to be found, which he denies. 2 dly, He says, That I am
sure the Fulfilling of the Law was not the Subject treated on there; and that I
know therein I have spoken falsely.

But sure I am he has told two Tales in charging one upon me: For first, How
could the Law, as he understands it, to wit, the Whole Law that Christ came to
fulfill, be intended, when the very Text and Argument upon it, show, that it was
the Keeping of Christ's Comman^ments, that they might abide in his Love, and
without which they could not be accepted; that was insisted on.

2 dly, He tells an Untruth in charging me with the Knowledge of that which was
not: But as he declined ^his Scripture, so the Arguments by which I proved the
Impossibility of Christ's keeping his own Commandments in our stead, with
which I made good my Conclusion, viz. The Necessity of Keeping his Commandments
as he kept his Father's, in order to Acceptance with him.

3 dly, He says, I am certain, the Word Only is not there, and so add Lie unto
Lie knowingly; which, Reader, makes other Two Untruths on my Adversary's part:
For first, there is no such Word in all that Argument and Paragraph out of
which he made his Citation, as may appear Sand. Found. Shak. page 26. Argum. 5.
Dial. 2. page 52. Reas. against Rail. page 79. 2 dly, His saying, I should know
of a thing that never was, makes up his other Falsehood: But to the end he may
acquaint all men with my Folly and Madness, as he is pleased to term his own
horrible Fiction, he tells me, that he referred in his Citation not to John
15.10. but Romans 2.13. Not the Hearers of the Law are just before God, but the
Doers of the Law shall be justifi^d. But do men use to refer to Places they
never cite, either as to Words, Chapter or Verse; for they are not mentioned in
his former Dialogues: How then did he refer to them?

If he says, It was to my Argument, I make the same Demand. Do men refer to
Argumen^s they never mention? If to those they do mention, then I can easily
prove, it was not this Scripture or Argument upon it, that T. Hicks referred
to* Reader, peruse Sand, Found. p. 26. Arg. 5. Dial 2. p. 52. Reas. against
Rail. p. 78, 79. and thou shall see his palpable Untruth.

But because he builds here upon this Argument, l^t's bear it: Unless we be
Doers of the Law, which Christ came not to destroy, but as our Example, to
fulfill, we can never be just before God: Let not any fancy, that Christ has
SO fulfilled it for them, as to exclude their Obedience, from being requisite
to their Acceptance, but Only as their Pattern. Here Only is mentioned: But
first, this was not the Place cited, but another that had it not, as before
expressed; Therefore I no Liar, but T. Hicks a Forger. 2 dly, This Law mentioned
Romans 2.13. was the Moral and Eternal Law of God, and not that Shadowy Law
containing Ceremonies, Sacrifices, Propitiatories, Meats, Drinks, and d^vers
Washings, etc. which Christ by his Life, Death and Sufferings fulfilled and
ended, in which T. H. would make me say, That Christ was Only our Example:
That it was not the whole Jewish Law, the two next verses prove; For when the
Gentiles which have not the Law, do the Things contained in the Law, these
having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, which show the Work of the Law
written in their Hearts: Therefore not the whole Jewish Law, for that they had
not; consequently, I do not contradict or make void the Benefit of Christ's
Death and Sufferings, by saying, He was only our Example in keeping that Law
which the best Jews and Gentiles were to keep and kept, and the Righteousness
of which is to be fulfilled in us. Thus has he unworthily added, diminished,
mis-rendred, transposed, etc. from time to time. Certainly, the People called
Anabaptists, are deeply co^cern'd to reckon with him for this great Scandal to
their Profession.

But suppose I meant the whole Law of God in that place, I see no worse
Consequence from my words then this, That so far as man's Obedience to God's
Law is requisite to his Acceptance, so far only Christ became our Example: For
as he was not our Pattern in things that more peculiarly related to him to
perform and finish; so was he no more then our Pattern in that which is our
constant Duty to do. Now let T. H. snap and catch what he can, with all his
Leg^rdemains, page 69. only take this along with him, That by his Reflection
upon that Argument, viz. That Christ has not SO fulfilled the Law for us, as
to exclude our Obedience from being requisite to our Acceptance, he implies a
Denial of the N^cessity of Obeying the Law of God to Acceptance with God; A
Doctrine suited to his Practice, contrived and continued to the Ease of
Hypocrites* no wonder he struggles so hard for it; for without it nothing but
Horror would surround him, though at this rate he must not always expect to
escape the Blow (I mean not, assassinating of him) a Trick that lives nearer
his Complexion then mine, but that Vengeance Which is the Recompense of every
Soul that loves and makes a Lie.

With you* the People called Anabaptists, I leave this Section; Right us, Right
your selves; Right our Profession of such an Unfair Adversary, and your selves
of so Scandalous an Advocate.


II. That T. Hicks has grossly Perverted our Writings.
TO Forge is bad, but to Pervert may in a Sen^e be worse; since it is to
mis-use true words, and by Disguise twist them to a Sense never intended, when
many times that which is false it undiscernably swallowed for the sake of
something that is true.

This was another Charge I exhibited against T. Hicks, and an Argument by which
I proved him no Christian. I frequently in my Book took Occasion to detect him
of this Unworthy Practice and more especially by 26 instances under a distinct
Head, containing ten page^, our Principles in one Column, and his Perversions,
in another; but he seems dumb to the Charge. Shall I enter him mute? that may
alter, but not excuse the Punishment ( Ass^ssinating always excepted.) I shall,
Reader, for thy sake and the Truth's, produce some of them, that those to whom
this may come, may have some Account of his Carriage in his former Dialogues.

I. From our Belief of the Light's Sufficiency to save, he infers, That all
other Means are needless, Dial. 1. p. 36, 37. not considering it was not the
Light's Insufficiency, but man's Weakness, that occasioned them. He might
object Insufficiency as well against God, Christ, Spirit, Grace, etc.

II. From our making the Illumination in man to be a natural Emanation or
Product of the divine Word which made all things, he wickedly turns it to An
Effect of God's Power, and so says, we would make Beasts and Trees, etc. also
divine, Ibid. p. 4.

III. From our asserting that the Light of Christ shines within the Hearts of
Wicked as well as Good Men, He tells People (in our Name) that he is in the
Heart of every Wicked Man, as he is in his Saints, Cont. p. 45, 46. Though
through Rebellion they partake not of his Life, Power, etc.

IV. From our affirming, that God is the Teacher of his people, He infers, That
we deny all Ministry and Visible Worship, though they stand in God's Power and
Spirit, 1 Dial. p. 42, 43.

V. From our believing Christ to be in his People, according to express
Scripture, and that as such he is crucified by Wicked Men, He infers, That we
deny Christ to be as well without as within; or that he was ever crucified in
the Flesh, 1 Dial. p. 44. Contin. page 37, 40, 42.

VI. From our denying of their rigid Satisfaction, that is, that Christ was
punished by his Father for our Sin; and that Sins past, present and to come,
are answered for: And that men may be Holy by Virtue thereof, though not new,
but old Creatures, and so unholy in themselves, He unworthily concludes, That
We disown Christ's Death and Sufferings, as a Propitiation, that it carried
away Sins past, and sealed Remission in his Blood to as many as believe: And
that we expect to be both forgiven and accepted, not for Christ's sake, nor in
his Sacrifice and Righteoussness, but our own Works, 1 Dial. p. 9, 10. Contin.
48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53.

VII. From our pleading for a Perfection from Sin, and the Duty of growing to
the Fullness of the Measure, etc. He infers, Our Denial of Perfection in
Degrees, and our Belief of as high a Degree of Perfection in this World, as
hereafter, Dial. 1 page 48, 49, 50, 51.

VIII. Because we say, that such Works as are wrought by the Holy Spirit in us,
are necessary to Eternal Life, and may in a sense be said to obtain it, since
the Lord has ^o freely offered it upon the Condition of believing and ^being,
which are the Fruits of the Spirit of God in man; T. Hicks suggests in our
Name, That we exp^ct to merit ^ternal Life by our good Works, and those of our
own Working, as the Spider weaves his Webb out of his own Bowels, Dial. page
38. Contin. page 51, 52.

IX. Because we say, All Spiritual Liberty stands in God's Power (that redeems
from Sathan's Snares) He infers, That who are not of our Way, should have no
Liberty, Cont. page 85.

X. Because we say, The Scriptures are not the great Gospel- Rule, but the
Spirit; The Dispensation of the Spirit being that of the Gospel more
peculiarly; and that without it we cannot understand, or savingly believe any
thing declared of in the Scripture, and therefore that it is our Rule for
believing the Scriptures them selves; He basely suggests, That the Quakers cast
off al^ Precepts in the Scriptures; and so will not bring their Cheats and
Impostures to the Test thereof, counting them of no more Authority then Esop's
Fables, Dial. 1. p. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. Contin.
Epist. to the Reader. Behold your Anabaptist-Preacher!

XI. From our preaching men to a lost God and Christ, that is, to God and
Christ whom they have lost Fellowship with, He perverts it to our believing,
That God and Christ were in a lost or undone Condition, Cont. p. 49.

XII. From our asserting, that what was a Command to any Servant of God in old
time, is not so to us, because so to them, that is, such as Moses's going to
Pharaoh, the Performance of Types, Shadows and Figur^s appointed for a Season,
and to pass off, unless required by the same Spirit anew, He falsely infers,
That those Moral and Eternal Precepts, Thou shall have no other God but me,
Thou shall not Murder, Commit Adultery, Steal, Bare False Witness, etc. are not
binding upon us, but that we give our selves the Liberty of such horrid
Principles, as the contrary to those Principl^s, and are therefore incosistent
with Government, Contin. page 59, 60. Who would have expected this from a
professed Baptist and Preacher too?

XIII. From our denying the Resurrection of the natural corruptible Body,
leaving it with the Lord to give us a Body as pleases him, as 1 Cor. 15.36,
37, 38.

This Caviller endeavors to possess People with our Denial of the Resurrection
of any Body to Life eternal, however spiritual or glorified, Dial. 1. p. 56. to
62.

And lastly, from our asserting the Unity of God and the Soul, and Denial of
his carnal Resurrection; he concludes, That the Soul is Part of God, and that
no future Rewards or Punishments are to be expected, Dial. 1. p. 16, 17.

These Reader, are some of the many Perversions this Ungodly Man is guilty of
against our Principles. Is this to condemn the Quaker out of his own Mouth, and
to evince his Objections against him to be real Truths? Is not Counterfeit a
Name good enough for him that has thus counterfeited a Quaker an^ a Christian
too? Will this bring Honor to his Brethren? Or can it be consistent with their
Credit, to encourage such base Attempts, when but a midling Heathen would have
abhorred to have been the Actor of half that Injury T. H. has not only
committed, but continues in, and boasts of.

And that he has betaken himself to no better Refuge from the Pursuit of our
Arguments, notwithstanding the Cautions of our former Book, I shall in a few
Instances make evidently appear to all that dare trust, and will but
impartially use their Eyes?

1. From my saying, That those that crucified Christ were Admirers of the
Scriptures, and pretended out of their own Law, that it was both lawful and
necessary he should be put to Death: Whereas, had they brought that Deed to the
Light, the Light would have shown it not to have been wrought in God; which the
Scriptures without the Light could not effectually do: He makes no Cons^ience
of inferring, That I intimate an Insufficiency in the Scriptures to convince
the Jews that Murder was a Sin, Dial. 3. p. 13. Whereas the Question was not,
whether Murder was a Sin; but whether the Jews thought that Murder, by the
Scripture: if they did, give us an Instance; if they did not, then I have the
End of my Allusion, to wit, If the Scriptures are not therefore insufficient in
T. H's Account, because the Jews were not convinced by them of Murder; neither
ought the Light within to be reputed insufficient, because Men were not
convinced of their Unbelief in Christ by it. I will answer him in setting down
his own Words to me: O Impious Man! says he: The Defect was not in the
Scriptures, but in themselves, in not attending what was therein delivered,
wherein Murder is peremptorily forbidden. Right; But, O Impious Man! say I, the
Defect was not in the Light, but themselves, in not attending to it, whereby
Murder is also forbidden. How much more sufficient now, T. H. is the Scripture
then the Light? Vain Shuffler!

But this is not all his Perversion; for he further infers in my Name, That the
Scriptures did rather countenance and justify, then condemn them in that Fact,
Dial. 3. p. 13. Which, Reader, in plain Terms, is as much as to say, because
the Scriptures do not so effectually discover evil Conceptions as the Light
within; therefore the Scriptures rather countenance and justify them:
Monstrous Baseness! The Truth is, were his Endeavors against us but well
weighed of all that see them, there were little need of our Labor in his
Discovery, or our own Defense. But that which aggravates his Sin, is the hard
Words he gives me after all; I know not why, unless to cover his own Guilt, or
make his credulous Reader think me as hateful as he would have me.

2. The second Perversion I shall instance, is this: Because I told him (in
Answer to his Objection about the Light's Insufficiency, for its not
discovering to the Heathen-Philosophers how Sin came into the World) If he
meant by that Discovery, a clear and distinct Account and particular History,
how Adam and Eve were beguiled by the Serpent, it was nowayes to his Purpose
(unless he can prove the Knowledge of it absolutely necessary to Salvation) He,
according to his usual Baseness, makes me to say, The Penning of that History
was to no Purpos^, Dial. 3. p. 41. thus interrogating of me, Will thou dare to
say, the Knowledge of this is to no Purpose? Why then did sacred Penmen give
such full Account thereof? As if it were one and the same Thing for me to say,
the Penning of that History is to No Purpose, and to say, It is not to T. Hicks
's Purpose. Is this the Way to prove the Quaker no Christian? But since this
full Account is made such a great Instance by T. H. for the Sufficiency of the
Scripture, and Insufficiency of the Light, let him tell me, What Paradise Adam
was put in; and where it was? What was that Serpent that tempted Eve; a fallen
Spirit, or a Beast of the Field? And what was that Fruit and Tree God forbad,
and the Serpent tempted the Woman to eat of? And what was the Voice Adam heard
in the Garden? What were those Fig Leaves he covered himself withal? And what
was that Death that he dyed? And what were those Cherubims and the flaming
Sword and the Tree of Lif^, all mentioned in that History? If he takes the
Account Literally, let him say so; but let him take this with him, that then
Adam bodily dyed, before he begot his Sons and Daughters; and the History gives
us no Account of his corporal Resurrection: But if he take the Account in whole
or in Part mystically, then how is it full, clear and distinct, not
distinguishing Literal and Natural from Mystical and Spiritual Things? Is this
the Way to prove the Insufficiency of the Light within, that sends all People
to the Light within for a sufficient Account, which says Dr. Henry Moor of
Cambridge, spoke in and reproved Adam for his Lapse from God, Philosoph. Cab.
p. 27.

However it be, this lies at T H's Door, that because I said, his Instance of
Moses's Writing was nothing to his Purpose, he makes me to conclude, They were
writ to no Purpose. If he loved his Soul, he would hate these Courses, that
need no Aggravation, their own Infamy is enough.

3. Again, from my acknowledging that the Scripture furnishes me with the
Knowledge ^f Christ's visible Transactions; he infers thus, which is as if thou
should say, God manifeste^ (...) lesh c^uld not have been known by thee, were
it not revealed in the Scriptures, intimating, thou could NEVER have known
it, but by the mere Light in thee, Dial. 3. p. 44, 48.

Which intimates, that Thomas Hicks is an arrant Perverter of my Sen^e. Is
there no Difference between saying, I was informed of a certain Passage by A.
B. and saying, It was impossible I should have known it any other Way then by
A. B. But why all this wre^^ing? Is it to conclude, therefore the Light within
is insufficient? which may as well be inferred against God, Christ and the Holy
Spirit; for he makes me to exclude all other Ways of Di^covery, the^ what is
made by Scripture. If an Account be wanting, the Light of Christ is as
sufficient now, as it was in the Time of Moses and the Prophets, who wrote both
of Things past and to come: But a Relation being with us, the Light of Christ
does n^thing unnecessarily. But it is like T. H. degenerates not from his
Ancestors; he can cry, Come down and save thy self, etc.

4. From our asserting the Works of the Spirit in us necessary to our complete
Justification or Acceptance with God, he insinuates, Our making those Works the
meritorious Cause of our Salvation, Dial. 3. p. 69. which is manifestly denied
and rejected by me, in my Answer, p. 72, 73, 82, 83, 86. which he no more
regards, then if it never were: The Trick of an unfair and shuffling Adversary.

5. From my asserting the Necessity of an inward Work of Righteousnes^, by the
Power of Christ in these Words of the Apostles to the Galatians, Let every Man
prove his own Work, and then shall he have Rejoicing in himself, and not in
another: He, to make his Ends upon me, infers, That the Doctrine of Christ
dying for Sinners, has nothing in it, as the Ground of our Rejoicing: For our
Rejoicing must be in our selves, not in another, Dial. 3. p. 69, 70.

That, Reader, which aggravates this wretched Consequence by him, charged upon
me, is first, that he says, it is plainly deducible, which is so plain a
Wrest: And next, that they are the Apostle's Words, and not mine, of which he
makes so ill an Use.

Is this to make the Scripture his Rule, that is so unruly in his Abuse of
them? I am sure, a lying and an abusive Spirit has been his Rule throughout his
three Dialogues, which God rebuke.

6. The sixth Perversion is as follows: Being formerly assaulted by T. Hicks,
Cont. p. 50. for having said in a Book entitled, The Serious Apology, etc. p.
148. That Justification by a Righteousness wholly without us, is a Doctrine of
Devils; I undertook my Defense, and performed it in my Answer to his other
Dialogues, from p. 68. to p. 98. I distinguished upon the Word Justification,
first as it might be taken barely for the Remission of Si^s, or the acquitting
Men of the Guilt and Punishment due to Sin, which was the free Love and Mercy
of God upon Repentance (d^clared in Christ's Death, as a Prop^tiation for the
Sins of the whole World) and therefore not to be merited by the best Works we
can perform, 2dly, As it imported a being made inwardly just by the bringing in
of Christ's Everlasting Righteousness to the Soul. To leave out this latter,
and make the former only sufficient (whereby Men are left in an unjust and
unrighteous State) I affirmed to be a Doctrine of Devils. But notwithstanding
this plain and scriptural Distinction to satisfy T. Hicks (would he but be
satisfied) what I meant by Justification; He is so unjust to me, as to infer in
my Name, That I account the Doctrine of Christ's Death in the Nature of a
Sacrifice, to declare the Righteousness of God, for the Remission of Sins that
are past (because transacted without us) a Doctrine of Devils, Dial. 3. p. 72,
73, 74.

Can thou, Reader, in earnest think, this Man makes Conscience of his
Endeavors against us, who commits these frequent Abuses against our Books,
Persons and Principles? As if because I acknowledged Christ's Death to be in
the Nature of a Sacrifice, to declare God's Righteousness, in the Remission of
Sins that are past, unto them that believe, etc. to be one Part of
Justification; and that this Transaction was confessedly, without us, even
while we were Sinners, etc. that therefore, I should call this the Doctrine of
Devils, because without us, though the Word wholly be not there, upon which lay
the Stress, and which was only said by me of a Justification, that wholly
excludes Christ's Righteousness revealed within, to the making Man Just;
unworthily applying that Reflection to the begin^ing of Justification, that I
have so expressly owned, which was made against a Doctrine no ways concerned in
this true and Gospel-Justification. In short, If Justification by Christ's
Righteousness without us, be the same, with being justified by Christ's
Righteousness wholly without us; then T. H. is not so bad a man, as I have
represented him: But if there be any Difference, as undeniably there is, and a
material One too; then T. H's Inference and Con^lu^ion in my Name, make a foul
Perversion.

7. The last Perve^sion I at this time think fit to mention, is his last, both
in his Epistle and Book, to wit, from my saying, upon a sad Conside^ation of
his many Miscarriages toward us, That his Head should not go down into the
Grave in P^ace; he thus interprets my Words: I must take them either as a
Prediction, or as a Menace of some Mischief, he himself, or some influenced by
him intend to perpetrate upon me: The former I fear not, the latter is most
Probable; as if Reader, his not fearing a Prediction, implies my not meaning a
Prediction. But why is the former not feared, and the latt^^ more probabl^?
because he would render me a Murder^r, as his following Words sufficiently
evidence. Wherefore, says he, I desire all to whom this Book may come, that if
at any time they hear of any Violence offered me, or that I be ASSASSINATED,
they would remember these Words of W. Penn. that my Head shall not go down to
the Grave in Peace, Epist. Book End. Now though this miserable Construction be
ridiculous with wise Men, and rejected of several of his own Way, and so
unlikely a Thing in it self, that I should proclaim that to be my Design that
leads to the Gibbit, viz. Murder; yet I was unwilling to pass it by, since
first, it rather renders him to be the M^n he suggests me to be: And secondly,
It aggravates the Sin of his false Constru^tion; because to insinuate it the
better, he has left out all these Words going before an^ afte^, that had they
been mentione^, wo^ld have detected his Malice, viz. Though thou have best^w^d
much Time to abuse our Friends in general, and my self in particular, a
Stranger to thee, yet I can forgive thee: Oh, that these heavy Things might not
be laid to thy Charge! God will visit for these Unrighteous Dealings, if thou
desist not. Now, Reader, if I forgive, how can I Assassinate? and if it be
God's visiting Hand, how can it be mine, or any influenced by me? Again, these
following Words were the next to those by him cited, viz. Yea the Light within
will bear Witness to the Truth of these Things on thy DYING-BED, and then
remember me. How comes this T. H. to be omitted? Dying-Beds do not use to be
unnatural Deaths; Nor will the Light within bear VVitness for Murder: Was all
this left out to evince, that the Fictions I charged upon thee, were real
Truths and no Fictions; and that a Quaker is quite another thing then a
Christian? because it is his Honor to be quite another Thing then such a
Christian as thou art, that is, a very Counterfeit.

Reader, Does not thy Soul rise against these abominable Practices? Falseness
was ever hateful to Truth, and Baseness to an honest Mind, which T. H. being
proved thus guilty of, I must conclude him quite another Thing then a Christian.

Thus have I finished my Observations on his Perversions, leaving them also
with the People called Anabaptists, upon whom I cannot choose, but frequently
call for Justice against this their unjust Member; concluding my Complaint in
this Section, in honest John Husse's against the like Adversaries, on the same
Occasion: Some of these Propositions I did write and publish, other some mine
Enemy did feign, now adding, then diminishing and taking away, now falsely
ascribing and imputing the whole Proposition unto me.

III. T. H. proved guilty of Lies and Slanders.
REader, In my Answer to his former Dialogues, I charged him with Eighten Lies
and Slanders under a distinct Head, page 154, 155, 156. of which I find not
that he has taken any notice, saving two by way of further Affirmation, but no
Proof. A few I shall mention to his utter Shame with all men loving Religion.

1st, That the Quakers owning of Christ Jesus, and the Christ they own, are a
mere mystical Romance, Dial. p. 10. Cont. page 9. A profane Untruth!

2. That the Light in the Quakers see^ no Necessity of a Mediator, 1 Dial. p.
35. when, God knows, we feel the daily Benefit of him.

3. That the Quakers account the Blood of Christ no more then they do the Blood
of a common Thief, Ibid. p. 38. An ungodly Aspersion.

4. That we deny his Visible Coming and Appearance in the World, Cont. p. 37.
This he contradicts elsewhere.

5. That the Quakers dissemble when they tell People they own the Scriptures;
and that they render them of no more Authority then Esop's Fables, Cont. Epist.
Both abominable Untruths.

6. That a Quaker should say, The Thing that troubles t^ee is thy Puzling thy
self in that Book the Bible, Thou will never be settled till thou throw that
Book away, Cont. page 76. An arrant Slander.

7. That a Quaker should say to one J Nobbs; What d^est thou tell me of the
Scriptures, They are no more to me t^en an OLD AIMANAK [whereas J. Nobbs, if he
be alive, and have but a little more Honesty then T. H cannot but confess that
he was no Quaker; nor that there was one so called in that Country, when any
thing like those words were spoken] As T. Holbrow, the Person charged by J. N.
related it to me the last Summer, Dial.

8. That the Quakers appoint their Ministers to speak in such a Place, and at
such a Time: And they go to Meetings only to DECOY, TRAPAN and INVIEGLE, Cont.
page 66.

9. That a Woman-Quaker should bid her Husband take another Woman, Ibid. page
63.

10. That the Motions of God's Spirit are pretended by Quakers, at least one of
them, to REFUSE just Debts, Cont. page 69.

What Man that makes Conscience of Lying, would have told so many gross
Untruths; and that cared for his own Reputation, would have passed over their
Proof in such Silence?

Either he thinks it no Sin to render men Heretics and Knaves at Pleasure; or
that there is no Obligation upon him to maintain ^is foul Imputations. But let
see how much better he is grown since his second Dialogue.

1. The first Great Lie he tells in his New Book, is the very first Sentence
that is writ in it, viz. The Quaker Condemned out of his own Mouth: For it is
His foul Mouth that has both Accused and Condemned him; as we have already
proved, and shall yet have further occasion to do.

2. His second Untruth is in the fourth Page of his Epistle, viz. That there
was a Person esteemed by the Quakers a Friend, of whom W. Penn gave this
Character, That he might be trust^d with one's Life (not withstand^ng W. Penn
's Infallible Jud^ment) co^n^erfeited (like an Ungrateful and Unworthy Wretch)
W. Penn 's Hand, took up a considerable Sum of Money in his Name (pretending
for his use) which W. Penn in a little time found (though to his Cost) to be a
mere Cheat.

Reader, He has put the Quaker in this man's Livery, that he might have the
fairer Plea for abusing him. Ungrateful and Unworthy Wretch, are Words not so
much flung at the Fact or the Man, as the Quaker: For, were it the Temper of
Thomas Hicks to be grateful and worthy to them that obliege him, he would never
be Injurious to them, that never hurt him. But, be that as it will, I have
three things to say to T. Hicks: 1st, That this Man was never a Quaker, unless
such as sometimes come to T. Hicks's Meeting are to be reputed Anabaptists,
having never come under any of those external Significations, by which they are
differed from other People; and I think I ought to be believed before T. H.
that knew him, and perhaps he never saw him. 2dly, If he were an Unworthy
Wretch for counterfeiting my Hand in Money matters; how much more Unworthy a
Wretch is T. Hicks who has counterfeited the Faith, Doctrine and Practice of a
great Body of People to the rendering them Infamous with all men, were that
Work as Really Believed, as it was Enviously Contrived. 3dly, But for all my
Infallible Judgment, I was cheated, says T. H. How plentiful, Reader, are the
Instances T. H. gives us, to detect him: For besides the Baseness of his Taunt,
he infers from our Asserting an Infallibility in the Principle, our
arrogating an Infallibility to all our Persons, as well in Civil as Religious
Concerns, whether we obey it, or no. But to turn it back upon himself: Have no
Anabaptists been cheated, notwithstanding they pretend the Scriptures to be
their Infallible Rule? If they have, shall I make one of T. H's Conclusions?
viz. That they are Infallible, because they have an Infallible Rule; Or that
the Rule is Fall^ble, because they are Fallible themselves? Or in Case of being
cheated, should we tauntingly say, Where is your Infallble Judgment, because
you say, You have an infallible Rule?

3. I charge him with slandering our Friends, in saying, That when it has been
demonstrated ^o them wherein (he thinks) I have erred, What do thou tell us
of W. Penn; He is an Heady, Rash Youngman, we take no notice what he says --
Yet acquaint them with the like Extravagancies in the Writings of the former,
G. F. etc. They will either peremptorily deny them so written, or else tell us,
We understand not their Meaning, Epist. page 5. This let him prove if he can.

4. That the Quakers excuse some of of their Villainies, by Pretenses to the
Innocent Life. This we esteem an abominable Falsehood, 3 Dial. Epist.

5. The next Slander is, That the Quakers warn their Proselytes against reading
their Adversaries Books, lest their Wickedness should be detected, p. 76. A
very Falsehood.

6. That W. Penn by the Sense of the Eternal Spirit does declare, that Cursing,
Railing and Lying were the only fit Answers to be given to the Priests
trapanning Questions, page 10, 80, 81, 82. Oh Ungodly Slanderer! The Lord
rebuke thy foul Spirit

.7 That the Quakers have discovered themselves to be no other then the Spawn of
that wicked Brood, the Ranters, having licked up their Vomit, page 80. What say
the Baptists to this? It is known, none so opposed them.

8. The Quakers say, They witness Innocent and Sober Enquirers after their
Faith and Religion to be Beasts, Sots, in the Sorcery and Witchcraft, page 85.
which manifest Slander I suppo^e, proceeds from certain Names, E^w. Borough
gave to a Priest that by subtle Queries endeavored to trapan some of our
Friends, as they of old, our Lord and Master, under the censure of Blasphemy,
and as was attempted upon some about that very time: So that he was an
Innoc^nt, and Sober Enquirer, by the same Figure that T. Hicks has been an
Innocent and Sober Dialoguer, who first invents Lies, and then kicks them up
and down for our Principles and Practices.

9. Another notorious Falsehood committed by T. H. against us, is in page 88. to
wit, That some Overtures have of late been offered to the Quakers, in order to
a public Meeting, to debate the chief Things in Diff^rence betwixt them and
others; which the Q^akers refused, under Pretense of being cau^ious not to run
themselves voluntarily into Jeopardies, and therefore think it their best Way
to Rail at their Adv^rsaries. It is to be hoped T. H. by this time has
suff^ciently showed and vented his Falsehoods and Slanders by the Frequency of
them; and that for the future they will less need our Animadversion. That this
is one, and a Great One too, take what follows.

W. Hayworth, an Empty, but Hotheaded Preacher among the Professors at
Hartford, often making a kind of Challenge to some of our Friends to meet with
any of their Teachers; and being answered that they would not refuse him a
Meeting, he proceeded thereon, and propo^ed Ware for the Place; against which
the Scruple was made, and not about a Meeting, as T. H. falsely relates: This
our Friends Answers to W. Hayworth prove. In Th. Prior's first Answer to W. H.
it is said, I perc^ive they ( the Quakers) are not intended to refuse thee a
Meeting, at a convenient Time and Place agreed on by both Parties; and it is
expected and intend^d, the Book authorized by thee, styled, The Quaker
Converted, be the Subject of the Dispute. And in the second Paper to W.
Hayworth, it is proposed, That the Meeting be at Theobald 's; and that after
the said Book be fully discoursed, if he had not Disputing enough, such other
Questions as tend to Edification be propounded, and a further time taken to
discourse them: But he would nowayes con^ent that his Book should be the
Subject; saying in his Letter, That to undertake it would narrow the Debate.

Judge now Reader, who evaded the Meeting; and if T. Hicks has not falsely
accused the Quak^r with refusing it: yet does he Rant, Revile and add Lie unto
Lie in that very Page where he told this, that he might make the most of his
fancied Advantage against us, to our Disgrace, and his own Triumph. But he
shall fail in his Endeavors, and God will advocate our Cause among Men,
against these foul and provoking Imputatio^s. One Slander more, and we end this
Section.

10. That the Tendency of all the Quakers Reasoning about instituted Religion,
is to DEBAUCH MANKIND, to teach them how to live in Rebellion against God.
Their Religion is a mere Cheat, calculated only to the Service of the Devil and
their own Lusts, and inconsistent with Government, Dial. 1. page 62. Dial. 3.
p. 65.

Here is a great deal in a little; all at once: This shows what the Man would
be at, and makes good what elsewhere he says, That we are inconsistent with
Government, Cont. page 69. The Consequence is plain; A New England Antidote, to
rid Old-England of the Epidemical Disease of Quakerism: For it is a Maxim in
Law, That whosoever is inconsistent with Government, deserves not the
Protection of Government.

But that this Language should drop from the Pen of an Anabaptist to a Quaker,
is justly surprising; since a Multitude of his Profession stand charged on
record with so many gross Immoralities, erroneous Doctrines, and rebel^ious
Practices, as have rendered them and their Profession, the Suspicion of the
Weak, the Abhorrence of the Multitude* and at best the Dislike of many good
men: But though T. H. has invented Crimes to blacken us, I shall not so much,
as recriminate the People that go under that Name, having abundance more of
Charity for them then the softest Passage in T. H's Dialogue can afford us. I
am well satisfied, that I have thus far honestly represented him in his
Inventions, Perversions, Slanders and Aggravations; so inconsistent with the
Spirit, Language and Carriage of a true Christian; and therefore his Pretense
of being such, renders him b^t the geater COUNTERFEIT.

. IV. That T. Hicks, is guilty of Plain Contradictions.
IT is inconsistent with the Credit of any man that writes, to contradict
himself: But for one who pretends himself a Christian, so to do, and that in
Matters of Religion, is shamefully to make void his own Pretenses. That T.
Hicks is the man, I produced several in my Answer to his former Dialogues; But
they were equally disregarded with the rest, not havi^g so much as attempted
the reconciling of them.

I will briefly repeat some of them, and add more out of all three Dialogues.

I. Contradiction. First, I, T. Hicks do acknowledge, that the Light within
checketh for many Evils, and excites to many good things; and that I ought to
shun those Evils, and do that Good, 1 Dial. p. 8. Yet in direct Contradiction
he dares to tell us, That this Light in us directing to its best Actions,
swells men but with proud Conceits; and that it does deceive and mis-guide
such as follow it, 1 Dial. p. 3, 37, 38.


2 Contr. I, Thomas Hicks do and must bear Witness against thy Erroneous
Opinion, if true to the Light in me, Dial. p. 8. I am to do what the Light in
my self directs me, and herein is my Comfort, p. 91. I grant i^ ought to be
obeyed, p. 7. -- Yet in direct Contradiction, and to unsay this, he tells us,
That the Light i^ uncertain; in one man it teaches one thing, and in another
the directly contrary, so that, says he, there can be no Certainty of Truth or
Error, Sin or Duty by this, Dial. p. 42.


3 Contr. Again, T. Hicks says, That it is no Disparagement to the Light
within, to say, That God does make any Thing more known of his Will, then is or
can be known by it; For it is but to say, that EACH DEGREE of Light is
serviceable to its End, 1 Dial. p. 36. -- Yet in direct Contradiction to, and
Undervalue of this, he says within two Pages after, The Improv^ment of the
Light within subverts the Covenant of Grace, the only Way God has revealed for
Salvation; and that it directly Opposes it self to the Ends of the Covenant,
and ought to be rejected, p. 38.

My Animadversion contracted upon these Contradictions I will give: If this be
to argue safely, prudently and like a Disputant, I am greatly mistaken; sure I
am, there is nothing of Truth or Christianity in such Confusion: For that a Man
should be obliged to obey a Light that does mis-guide, or that T. Hicks should
talk of acting according to the Light in him, making his Appeal to it in
others; and yet say, that it may deceive, and oppose the very Ends of the
Covenant of Grace, is with (...) the Top of all Impudence and
Self-Contradiction.


All this, Reader, he passed with his usual Silence.

How concerned he was to consider it, I shall leave with thee to judge, having
hereby so manifestly forfeited his Reputation, both as a Christian and a
Disputant. But I will not leave him here; I shall greaten his Score ere we
part, and yet evidence, that he has said little against us, wherein he has
not said a great deal in Contradiction to himself.

Contr. I. I, T. Hicks, appeal to the Light in thee, Steph. Crisp, whether this
be not an insufficient Proof; for I grant the Light ought to be obeyed; It
cheks for Evil, and excites to good things, Dial. 1. page 7, 8.

Yet in Contradiction to this, hear what he says:

I deny not a Light to be in every man; for the Understanding and Conscience
being Parts of the Reasonable Soul, these do remain still in the Worst of Men,
though the RECTITUDE BE LOST, Dial. 1. page 32.


Observe. Is it not Madness in T. Hicks to appeal to a Light that has lost its
Rectitude (that is Reader, which through Depravity is become Darkness) for an
Evidence about matters of the greatest concern in Religion? Can such a Light
check for Evil, and excite to Good, that T. H. says, has lost its Rectitude?
And is it a Crooked and Depraved Light that he grants, is to be obeyed and
followed? Is this man fit to reprove the Quak^rs for turning men to a
sufficient Light, who himself ^onfessedly follows a Crooked and Depraved Light?
No Wonder if he cannot see the Truth and Streightness of our Light, who judges
of it by a Light that has lost its Rectitude: For, says he, I do and must
bear witness against thy Opinion of the Sufficiency of the Light in every man,
if I be true to the Light in me, that has lost its Rectitude, 1 Dial. page 8,
32.


Contr. II. It will be our Wisdom, yea our Duty (also) to attend to the Light
within, 1 Dial. page 13. as the Place imports.

Yet in direct Contradiction he says page 38.

What intolerable Pride and Arrogance have you Quak^rs arrived to, and all
this in following the Conduct of the Light within?

What say thou to this, Reader? Is this Man like to make the Quaker No
Christian? Is it not a Shame for those called Anabaptists to suffer this man as
well in his manifest Weakness, as great Dishonesty to manage the Controversy
against us?


Contr: III. That which any of you Quakers have said of the Light within, has
been no more then what the Apostle speaks of the Man of Sin. And what may as
well prove Mahomet to be the True Christ, as the Light in you. Again, If thou
say that the Light in every man is Christ, I charge it with Blasphemy, 1
Dial. page 3, 11, 12.

Yet in direct Contradiction T. H. says:

How could you (Quakers) call the Light within Christ, if ^ome Scriptures had
not mentioned Christ in you, and that he is the the Light and Life of men, 1
Dialog. page 22.


Obs^rv. D^e^ Joh. 1.4, 9. chap. 14.20. 2 Cor. 4, 6. chap. 13.5. Gal. 1.16.
which we are wont to offer as well prove the Man of Sin, and Mahomet, to be
Christ as the Light which T. H. acknowledges to check for Evil, to ex^ite to
Good things; and confesses, as before, That the Scriptures have given us to
call the Light within Christ, and Christ the Life and Light of men? Were thou
aware of these things, T. H. when thou wrotest them? Art thou fit to accuse me
of Inadvertency, that committest it thy sell;f. I will not say that any of thy
Friends, being charged with thy Follies, replied, What do thou tell us of T.
Hicks? He is a Heady, Rash Man, we take no notice what he says: But that thou
have proved thy self Rash and Heady, and that they ought to take no further
notice of thee then to check thee, thy wretched Management of the Controversy
against us, sufficiently proves: But let us proceed.


IV. Contr. You Quakers, since you have reprobated the Scriptures from being
your Rule, and given up your selves to the immediate Motions and Government of
the Light within, have arrived to this Degree of Wickedness, to deny Jesus
Christ to be a distinct Person without you, 3 Dial. page 15, 16.

Yet in plain Contradiction he says, That every Man has a Light within him,
is not denied; and that it ought to be obeyed is granted, Ibid. page 8.


Observe. The Consequence, Reader, which is this, That Men ought to obey that
Light, the Government of which leads to deny Jesus Christ, etc. and to persist
in a Reprobation of the Scriptures. Is this Doctrine like to Christian the
Anabaptist, and Unchristian the Quaker?


Contr. V. Verily, I much doubt, that you believe that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God, and that as concerning the Flesh he was put to Death at Jerusalem, 1
Dial. Page 43, 44.

Again, The Quaker denies That Christ was over Visible to Wicked men; and
consequently that Person, called in the Scripture by this Name, who conversed
in the World and suffered Death openly and visibly at Jerusalem, to be the
Christ; So that a Personal Coming in any respect is manifestly denied by you,
Contin. page 37, 45.

Yet to un-say and contradict all this, he says, I never charged you Quakers
for denying that bodily Appearance, 3 Dial. p. 26. I no where accuse you for
denying Christ's Bodily Appearance, Ibid. page 33. Ye have confessed to
Chris^'s Bodily Appearance, Ibid. pg. 31. Which is to say,


Observe. The Quakers do own Christ's Visible Appearance; The Quakers do not own
Christ's Visible Appearance: yet I doubt whether they own Christ's Visible
Appearance or no. Is this Man fit to write Controversy that is of three or
four Minds in the writing it? The End of all this Confusion will be, not our
Confutation, but Vindication in the minds of all impartial Men.


VI. Contr. His sixth Contradiction is this: That the Religion of the Quakers
is a Cheat, calculated only to the Service of the Devil and their own Lusts, 1
Dial. p. 62. yet confesses to us, T^^^ every man is enlightened, that this
Light checks for Evil, and exciteth to Good; That it ought to be obeyed, Dial.
1. page 7, 8. Dial. 3. page 8. And that this is the Quakers first and grand
Principle, Di^^. ^ Pa^. 6.


Observe. Now, Reader, how our Religion can be calculated to the Service of the
Devil, and our own Lusts; and yet the first and grand Principle of that
Religion be unconcerned in that Hellish Service, is more then I can tell.

The plain English of his gross Contradiction is this: Th^^ the Light within,
which checks for Evil, and excites to Good, and ought to be tended upon and
obeyed, is the f^rst and grand Principle of that Religion, which is calculat^d
to the Service of the Devil, and their Lusts that receive it. For which
detestable Blasph^my, with more Reason may I use T. H's Exclamation, Blush O
Heaven! and be astonished O Earth! Was ever such a thing as this heard of
before? I must tell the People called Anabaptists, that the Attempts of T.
Hicks will prove as great a Reproach to their Profession, and bring the
Endeavors of our Adversaries into as utter Abhorrence with all honest-minded
People, as any Opposition ever made against us.


Contr. VII. The seventh Contradiction, and the last I shall here mention, is
very well worth the notice of my Reader; since it does at once invalidate his
whole Enterprise with Persons of Understanding: And that is this.

A Dialogue between a Christian and a Quaker, wherein are faithfully
represented some of the chief and most concerning Opinions of the Quakers, 1
Dial. Title page. Again,

A further Account of their perilous Errors, clearly and plainly represented,
Contin. Title Page. Again,

The Things objected against the Quakers in the form^r Dialogues are fully
cleared and evinced, 3 Dial. Title-pag. Yet as a man infatuated with a Spirit
of Contradiction, thus gives the Lie to his three Title-Pages, and in t^em to
his Three Dialogues.

The Doctrines delivered (by the Quakers) are such, as neither themselves, nor
any for them can give us a distinct and intelligible Account of: And that the
Tendency of all their Writings and Declarings, does but lead People into the
Thicket of Absurd, Inexplicable and Unintelligible Dotages, Contin. Epist. p. 3.


Observe. Now, Reader, if no man can understand them, how can T. Hicks represent
and evince them? Are they inexplicable by every Body, and yet explicated by
him? Be they unintelligible to all People, and yet not only pretended to be
understood by him, but by him made intelligible to others? How can he with
Honesty or Sense pretend to give an Account of our Doctrines to the World, who
confesses not only that he has not, but he cannot have from us or any other a
distinct and intelligible Account of them? Has he not then shot his Bow at
Random? Is this the way to evince and confute them? Never, certainly Reader,
did any man, thought to be in his Wits, give greater Ground for People to
believe him out of them: We have no Cause to fear what a Thousand such
Adversaries can do against us, who thus manifestly help us against themselves,
and fall by their own Weapons: Which leads me to conclude this part of this
Discourse; and that I shall do in this Argument:

He that pretends to be a Christian, and yet commits Forgery, uses Perversion,
tells Lies, publishes Slanders, and in his Endeavors contradicts himse^f, and
that materially, must be a Counterfeit, and no Christian: But such a Man we
have evidently proved Thomas Hicks to be; Therefore, I think I may be held
excusable in concluding that Tho. Hicks is a Counterfeit, and no Christian.


THE REAL QUAKER JUSTIFIED, In a Desence of the Doctrines held by him, against
the Mean Sophistry and Shuffling Opposition of Tho. Hicks the COUNTERFEIT.
I. Of the Light within.
THough it matters not much what so Ill a man says of any Religion, yet lest
some should be so weak as to conclude from our Silence, our Doctrines
indefensible; and that in having the last Word, he has the best Cause. I shall
briefly consider his Opposition.

Counterfeit. I do say, that the Quakers affirm the Light in every man to be
God: And W. Penn ask^, Who of us did ever say, that the Light within is the
whole entire God? Reas. against Rail. p. 7. when I no where express those
words, 3 Dial. p. 4.


Quaker. Nor do I, T. H. in the manner delivered, nor to any such Charge, as
thou now make them to answer: What I said, with the Ground of it, was this:
G. W. inferring from Joh. 1.4. That if the Life was of the Divine Being, the
Light must be the same; (which was against T. H's calling it an Effect) for as
is the Cause, the Effect must be Which was only admitted with respect to its
Illumination or Measure of its Appearance in man; It was never G. W's Principle
or Words, t^a^ the Life which is the Light of men, Joh. 14. is but in it se^f a
me^r Effect, for he owns it in its o^n Being to be no other then God himse^f,
and values not the Counterfeit's Quarrel.
thou made this unreasonable Conclusion, that not only the Light within, but
every Creature, as Beasts and Trees are good, because the Eff^cts of God's
Power and Wisdom. I then charged thee with insinuating, that every Measure of
Light in man is whole God: So that thy not expressing those words will not
acquit thee from not insinuating them; since thou do insinuate upon what G.
W. said, not only every measure of Light, but every Tree and every Beast,
because an Effect of his Power, to be God.


C. Thou say^st the Light within is not a potential, but a natural Effect,
which thou illustratest thus; Men are the natural Off spring and Product of men
etc. Though this be true, yet a Son is a distinct Person from his Father: Is
the Light within such an Effect? Is it another God? ibid. p. 5.


Q. I will answer thee in the Language of thy own Creed: The Son of God is the
natural Offspring of God, is he therefore another God? The holy Ghost proceeds
from the Father and the Son, is he therefore another God? Her^ is Off spring
and Production; what say thou T. H. to this?


C. If the Light within be a natural Effect, then it is a necessary Effe^t, and
that from Eternity: But were Men from Eternity, in whom God had thus naturally
shined? if not, how is the Light within a natural Effect? It is in vain to
pretend to Infallibility, whilst thou talkest thus idly, Ibid.


Q. Both thy silly Sophistry and Reflection are too weak for the Business. If
the Light within had taken its Beginning with Men, as thou asserts, Dial. 1. p.
32. It were a good Consequence, That the Light were not Eternal, and therefore
not God; or if the Light had necessarily been within from Eternity, that Men
were from Eternity: But that Men were from Eternity, because the Light which
shines in Men was from Eternity, is to say, the Word, as manifested in the
Flesh, was from Eternity, because the Word was from Eternity, or that Immanuel,
God with men, was not from Eternity, because he was not with Men, nor Men with
him from Eternity. In short, thy Sophistry plays upon the Word within; we
speak of the Eternity of the Light's Nature, and thou turnest it to an Eternity
of Manifestation; as if because we say the Light within is Eternal, that
therefore it must needs have been Eternally within. This is not to act the
Christian, but play the Jew against the Son of God. For the Term Effect, it is
variously spoken and taken among Men: The Light of the Sun is called an Effect
of the Sun and yet the Light of the Sun, is not another Sun. Howbeit, the
Scripture holds forth the the Life of the Word to be the Light of Men;
Consequently, The Life and Light are one.


C. Though thou will not affirm every Measure of the Light within to be the
Eternal Being; yet thou will not deny, but that it is God. This clears me from
Forgery.


Q. Thy saying so, makes thee but the more guilty, because the Passage thou
pretendest to answer, has no such Charge in it; besides, thou have perverted my
words as thy self have given them, viz. Though every Measure of Light
distinctly is not that entire Eternal Being, yet we are bold to assert, that it
is no other then God, the Fullness of all Light, who searches the Heart, etc.
that does shine into the inward Parts of Man, and does convince, reprove, etc.
These latter Words were omitted by thee, on Purpose to make the Word God,
relate to the Measure of Light, which is joined by me to the Fullness. But this
is frequent with thee; proceed.


C. Either the Light within, in the least Measure, is God, a Creature, or
nothing: Thou will not say it is the entire God; thou dare not say it is a
Creature; it must then be nothing; Might not thy Time and Abilities have been
better improved, then in contending for that, which is neither God nor a
Creature.


Q. This Reflection as well reaches thee for contending against nothing, as me
in contending for nothing: But (Argumentum ad hominem) consider this; either
the Spirit in the least Measure of it is God, a Creature or nothing: I suppose
T. H. will not say, that in the least Measure it is the entire God; T. H. dares
not say it is a Creature; shall W. P. then say in T. Hick's Name, it must be
nothing? Thus through Inadvertency, do Men entangle themselves in their own
Net; we speak of a Measure of the Light and Spirit of God in Man, T. H.
presently profanely takes God into Parts and Pieces, as page 4, 5, 6. and then
charges it upon us, as the Consequence of our Doctrine: Are not Measures and
Degrees Scripture-Terms? Does it strike at God's Immensity, because he measures
forth himself, in his inward Discoveries, according to Man's Capacity; It is
called Measure, with Respect to Man, and not that God is divisible.

But the Truth is T. H. Thou have made it thy Business not soberly to argue,
but vainly to quibble, manifestly aiming to take frothy Minds: A small Share of
such Sophistry might easily obscure the clearest Truths, and seem to lead in
Triumph the strongest Arguments given in its Defense; but the best of it is,
such Attempts are short-lived and, so are thine? not, I promise thee, that I
intend to have thee assassinated. But let us hear what further thou have to say
upon this Passage.


C. For the other Part of thy Discourse, viz. That God searches the Heart, who
denies it? But what is this to the main Point? Because God searches the Heart;
is therefore the Common Light in every Man God? ^urely, no Man, except under
the Power of Delusion would thus reason, p. 6.


Q. The Word Common is neither ours, nor the Scriptures, yet if that be the
main point, it will not be hard to prove, provided, by Common, thou meanest
that which shines in all Men; for if God be the Searcher of all men's Hearts,
and he that shows unto man his Thought^ (as we must believe, till T. H. can
groundedly assign us some other more common Searcher of the Heart, etc. then
God) and if God does this, as he is Light, who is Light, 1 John 1.5. and Ephesians.
5.13. Then this Light which T. H. calls Common, and which we from Scripture
say, enlightens all Men, is God, as Joh. 1.4. In him was Life, and that Life
was the Light of Men. And here is thy main Poi^t concluded against thee. I
shall add, Reader, to this, another Instance of his evasive Carri^ge, which, I
entreat thee to take particular notice of, that thou may see at what rate he
shuffles with us.

In his first Dialogue, page 7. he quotes Stephen Crisp thus, If the Light be
obeyed, then it must be sufficient; and answers, I grant it ought to be obeyed,
so ought the lawful Commands of Masters, etc. Yet who will thence infer, that
they are a sufficient Rule to Salvation?

To this I replied, as he quotes me, Dial. 3. p. 8. By the same Reason, that
such as obey the lawful Commands of Masters, are reputed good Servants, those
who obey the Light, are good Servants to God: And if those who so keep the
Commandments of Masters, obtain their Favor and Recompense; then those who
obey the Light, by T. H's Allusion, obtain God's Favor and Reward of
Righteousness; unto which he makes this Return:


C. This concludes not the Question in Controversy, therefore it can be no
Prejudice to me.


Q. No, T. Hicks? Is it nothing to the Purpose, that those who obey the Light,
are saved from the Wrath, and receive the Favor and Reward of God; as Servants
which obey their Masters Commands, are saved from the Wrath, and receive the
Favor and Recompense of their Masters? Let the Reader judge how much this
concerns the Question.


C. I confess, the Light within ought to be obeyed, and so ought the lawful
Commands of Masters, from whence thou boldly, like thy self, concludes to the
Sufficiency of the mere Light within: Such Extravagancies as th^se, do
ordinarily attend thy peculiar Genius, Dial 3. p. 9.


Q. Soft a little! If the Light ought to be obeyed, it is a su^^icient Rule for
that Ob^dience: To keep to thy ^wn Parallel of a Master and a Servant: How can
a Servant be condemned of his Master for not answering his Command, whilst the
Master's Command is not a sufficient Rule for the Servant's Obedience. The
Command implies a sufficient Rule to the Performance of the thing commanded.


C. 'Ti^ true, that God approves of Servants that do sincer^ly obey the
Commands of their Superiors; will it therefore follow, that their Commands are
sufficient to g^ide us to Salvation, p. 9.


Q. What a wretched Shuffle is this? Was it ever the Question, Whether the
Commands of Masters were sufficien^ to guide us to Salvation? Or are the
Commands of the Light about the Things of God, no more sufficient to Salvation,
then the Commands of Masters (be they about what they will) are sufficient to
Salvation? Is not this a taking away the Comparison, by putting the Subject of
it in the Room of that for which it was brought? making Salvation to be as
natural a Consequence of following the Commands of Masters, as of following the
Requirings of the Light. But we are not so to be shifted off; for by the same
Reason, that the civil Commands of a Master, obeyed, are sufficient to the
obtaining of a civil Salvation from Man's Wrath; The spiritual Commands of the
Light obeyed, are sufficient to the obtaining of a spiritual Salvation, that
is, a being saved from the Wrath to come, which is and shall be further
revealed against all the Workers of Iniquity. Let me use thy own words, T. H.
falsely reflected upon me in this very matter; Where Proof is defective, thou
beggest the Question (nay, I may say, changest it) and triumphest in thy o^n
Confidenc^, which a modest Man would not do: Away with these poor Shuffles for
shame! Is this to evince the Matters objected to be real Truths?

But what say thou to my Argument p. 15. grounded on Jo. 1.4? If God be
Divine and sufficient to Salvation, and the Word be God, and the Life of the
Word, one with the Word, and that Life the Light of men; then the Light of men
is Divine and Sufficient to Salvation.


C. Oh, what profound Divinity and exquisite Logic is this! I perceive thy
Mind abounds with Ignorance, from the Arguments that spring thence. Thou
hudlest the Principal Agent and Ordinary Means together, p. 18.


Q. A rare Excuse for thine -- or something worse. Ought they not to be
together in an Argument designed to prove them one? Ordinary Means are thy own
words, and not mine. A mere Shift for an Answer. But to go on.


C. How can God himself be called a Means? p. 18.


Q. After the same manner that his Power saves us, and his Spirit sanctifies
us, and that he becomes the Teacher of his People; such a Means, if thou will
call it so, my Argument was offered to prove the Light to be. Is this to act
either the Divine or Logician after all thy conceited high Rants, thus
pitifully to beg the Question? But what follows?


C. Thy Argument is fallaciou^, because that which is spoken in the first
should exactly be the Subject of the second Proposition, p. 18.


Q. And so it is. See Reas. against Rail. p, 14.


C. If the Proposi^^on were right, yet thy Conclusion does not reach the plain
Terms of the Question, viz. Therefore the common Light in every man is God, and
sufficient to Salvation.


Q. Though I told thee before, that the word common is none of ours, yet I am
not offended with it: For the Love of God is never the worse for being common,
whatever thy Reprobation-Faith thinks of it. But art thou willing in earnest
this should be the Question between us? For I perceive, when thou art put to a
Pinch, it is frequent with thee to turn me off with such Expressions as these,
Prove this to be the Common Light within; What is thi^ to the Common Light
within men? Mere Evasions; and most times attended with hard words to cover
them, as in page 9, 14, 15, 17, 39, 42, 43, 52, 53, etc.


C. This is the Controversy between us, whether the Common Light in every man
be God, Christ, and sufficient to lead to Salvation, p. 8. If thou could
demonstrate this, it would put an Issue to a great part of the Controversy
between us, Ibid. p. 17.


Q. Very well; Thou have granted, that in the Word was Life, and that Life the
Light of men, as Joh. 1.4. on which I grounded my Argument; and that the Life
and Light there mentioned, are one with the Word (or of its own Being)
consequently God, and sufficient to Salvation. But that such a Conclusion
reaches not the Terms of the Question, to wit, the Common Light in Men; which
thou denyest to be one with the Life of the Word, and therefore Insufficient to
Salvation. Upon this I thus argue; for the bringing of the Controversy to an
Issue.

If the Light of men, John 1.4. be the Light of All men, then is it a Light
common to all men. Thou must deny one of these two, either that Light of Men is
the Light of all Men; or, that the Light of All men is common to all men; The
latter I should think in Point of Reputation thou will not be so unreasonable
as to deny: The former then I must suppose thee to reject, viz. That the Light
of men, is the Light of all men. This I shall maintain by the general Phrase of
Scripture, Eccles. 1.13. -- This sore Travail has God given to the Sons OF
MEN, chap. 2.3, 8. the same chap. 3.10. I have seen the Travail God has given
^o the Sons OF MEN, verse. 18, 19. That which befall^th the Sons OF MEN
befalls Beasts; as the one dies so ^y^th the other, Jer. 32.19. Thine Eyes
are upon all the Ways of the Sons OF MEN, to give every one according to his
Ways. Which prove, that OF MEN is mea^t OF ALL MEN. I will add two Places more
out of Prove. 8.4. Unto you, O Men! I (Wisdom) call, and my Voice is to the Sons
OF MEN. And ver. 31. My Delight is with the Sons OF MEN. This proves Matter and
Phrase: For both Of Men, signifies of all Men; and this Voice comes from him,
in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, even the Eternal
Word, in whom is Life, and that Lif^ the Light of Men. From all which I
conclude, that the Light of men, is the Light of all Men, yea, Every Man that
comes into the World, Joh. 1.9. And that the Light of all men, is a Light
Common to all men; and that the Light that is common to all men, is a Common
Light. Now T. H. thou had done something, if thou had given us as plain
Reason and Scripture for thy Two Lights within, Common and Special; and made
good that Distinction between Light and Light, in Job. 24.13. John 1.4, 9.
chap. 3.20, 21. Ephesians. 5.13. 1 John 1.5, 7. chap. 2.8, 9, 10. and have told us,
if thou could, Where the common Light ends, and the sp^cial Light begins:
And if the Special reprove for Ev^l as well as the Common (which tho^ say,
reveals much, and ought to be attended to) thou should have let us know how
the Discoveries, Motions, Reproofs and Commands of ^he one might be discerned
and distinguished from the other: For we own but one real Spiritual-Light to
the Sons of men, though diverse Manifestations and Operations of that one Light,
suited to the Capacities of all Persons and Ages; and not to shuffle me off
with asking me, How can thou infer with such presumtuous Confidence, will thou dare stand by this Consequence? after thou T. H. have made it as Ugly as
thy Malice and Dishonesty could well contrive. Mean Artifices to bear thy weak
Reader in hand; thou have hit the Mark, when thou have all along shot quite
beside it; Practices, unworthy of any fair Disputant, much more a Man of thy
Pretenses to Religion. Had thou truly regarded that Light of which thou have
writ so many slight things, we should not have seen that Envy, Passion, base
Shuffling, Insolence, etc. that thy Writings now abound withal. Therefore
under all thy higher Conceits thou stand condemned of the Light: Be exh^^ted
first to obey it, before thou undertakest to write of things tho^ vainly
think beyond it.


Testimonies concerning the Light Within.
Munsterius, Castalio, Vatablus, Drusius, Clarius, Co^ureus, upon Job 24.13.
and chap. 25.3. They are of those who Rebel against the Light. Upon whom does
not his Light arise? say, that this Light is of the Divine Wisdom and Fountain
of Light, alluding to the Psalmist, (...); and Mat. 4.19. The People that sa^e
in Darkness saw great Light. Also see ^^ese Men, Erasmus and Camero upon John
1.4, 9.

I shall for a further Defense of the Light, produce some Testimonies from
several Gentiles some Hundreds of Years before Christ.

Orpheus, His Hand reaches to the End of the Sea, his Right Hand is every where
(^hen within) of him alone are all things, Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 5.

Thales thus, There is but one God; he is Glorious forever; he knows Hearts and
tells Thoughts. He makes the Teller of his Thoughts God, as in Amos 4.13.

Pythagoras thus, God resembles LIGHT and TRUTH; he is one; he is not OUT of
the World; he is the SALT of all Ages, ONE HEAVENLY LIGHT, and Father of all
things, only Wise, Invisible, yet Intelligible. The very Language of the
Apostle, Jambl. Just. Mart.

Heraclitus thus, God is not made with Hands.

Pythagoras, What things are agreeable to God cannot be known, unless a man
HEAR God himself.

Again, Having overcome thy Rebellious Appetite, thou shall know the
COHABITATION of the Immortal God and Mortal Men; whose Work is Immortality,
Eternal Life, Tim. de Anim. Mund.

Sophocles, speaking of the Precept^ written in man's Heart, says, God is
their Father, not Mortal Nature. Neither shall they ever be abrogated; for
there is in them a great God that never waxes old. Again, says he, This is
with respect to man's Conscience, a Divine, a Sacred Good, God the Overseer.
Oedip. Tyr. Cl. Alex. Str. l. 5.

Socrates had the Guide of his Life within him, and preached as he was moved by
it, even in ^he Streets; And dyed for Reproving the Corruptions of the
Athe^ians in Manners and Religion.

Plo^in taught, That man had a Divine Principle in (...), which makes a True
and Good Man.

Hi^ron called it, A Domestic God.

They held Victory over their Sins by the Power of it; witness Chilon,
Socrates, Plato, Zeno, Antipater and others; which Doctrine of Perfection, thou
T. H. with all thy pretended super-^d^^d Light, cannot tell how to swallow. As
they pressed Perfect Living, so they clearly laid down Eternal Rewards, the Pure
to God^ the Impure to Chains, said Pythago^as, as if he had read that Scripture
writ Six Hundred Years after him, The Pure in Heart shall see God.

The Good, sa^d Socrates, shall be united to God in an inacc^ssible Place; the
Wicked in conveni^nt Places suffer due Punishment.

And though they might not have the Jewish History and Chronicle, yet they had
a sufficient Law and Light within to Salvation; and such as trusted in it, came
to Salvation by it: and so much the Apostle says, Romans 2.

And for the Fathers, that they confirm the Testimonies of the Gentiles, and
speak not of another Eternal Law and Light; briefly thus.

Justin Martyr in his Apology says, God has built to himself a natural Templ^
in the Conscienc^s of men, as the place wherein he would be worshipped, and
there men ought to look for his Appearance.

Clem. Alex. Admon. ad Gent. It is the Voice of Truth that Light will shine out
of Darkness. Theref^re does it shine in the hidden part of Mankind.

Strom. l. 5. Man cannot be void of Divine Knowledge, who naturally, or as he
comes into the World, par^akes of Divine Inspiration.

Lactant. de Cult. ver The Law of God is made known unto us, whose Light
clearly discovers the Path of Wisdom. That Law is pure and unspotted Reason,
diffused through all the World.

A^hanas. contr. Gent. The Way to attain to the Knowledge of God, is Within us;
which is proved from Moses, who says, The Word of God is within thy Heart; and
from this saying of Christ, The Faith and Kingdom of God is within you.

. II. Concerning the Soul of Man.
Counterfeit. I affirm that G. Fox says, the Soul of Man is Part of God's
being without Beginning, and infinite, which is to say, The Soul is God, Dial.
3. page 19.


Quaker. I have two things to say: First, That in case G. F. so holds, thou
have done unworthily to conclude generally against the Quakers: In thy former
Dialogues thou chargedst it upon the Quakers; and now thou layest it directly
upon G. F. Are such Shiftings and Runnings from Generals to Particulars
allowable in Disputation? Is this equal Dealing? But 2dly, I deny that G. F. so
holds: what say thou to that?


C. G. Fox in his Great Mystery, p. 90. in Answer to one that said, There is a
kind of Infiniteness in the Soul; yet it cannot be Infiniteness in it self,
speaks thus: Is not the Soul without Beginning, coming from God, returning into
God again? Has this Beginning or Ending? and is not this Infinite in it self?
Can anything be clearer then that G. F. mak^s the Soul the Subject, and not the
Divine Life? Ibid. page 20, 21.


Q. Yes, that there may: For it is clear enough that G. F. intends by the Soul
and Breath coming out from God, the Divine Breath, or Soul of the Soul, as
Augustine calls it; and as Match, Neshemah, Pneunia, Anemos and Spiritus
signify. 'Twas this made Adam a living Soul to God [Thou dealest unfairly with
G. F. and us in making his Questions about this, both his and our Affirmation.
That the Soul (or Spirit) of Man is God. A manifest Falsehood and Abuse.] And
was not the Death threathned Adam upon Disobedience, the Loss of this? They
that read G. F's Books with a more impartial mind then thou do, may see that
sometimes he speaks of the Soul, as of the Man, page 91. where he says, That
such as receive the Light, receive Redemption, wh^r by their Spirits, Bodies
and Souls are sanctified; and sometimes he speaks of the Soul, as respecting
that Breath of Life, by which it became a living Soul to God, which is Man in
the Heavenly Image. He that reads page 90, 91, 100. may discern the Truth of
this But why art thou not angry with the PRIEST, for talking of a kind of
Infiniteness in the Soul? It Is at the Quaker and not the Principle, thy Gall is
stirred: For a kind of Infiniteness ^ust be Infiniteness, and not a Finiteness.
Did G. F's words at most rise higher? What further do thou object?


C. But G. F. says page 100. God breathed into man the Breath of Life, and he
became a Living Soul; and is not this which comes out from God, part of God?
which Soul Christ is the Bishop of. Can Fox here intend, that Christ is the
Bishop of the Divine Life, etc.? Yet is he as absurd in calling Christ the
Bishop of the Soul: For if the Soul be part of God's Being, and Christ be God,
th^n one part of God must be B^sh^p over another, Ibid, p. 21, 22.


Q. Suppose this Cavil had any t^ing in it, and that thou had herein
faithfully represented our Belief, might not I retort upon thy own Creed, that
God is the Father of God: And when Christ prayed, God prayed to God; since the
One Nature could not pray without the other, and the Spirit makes Intercession,
that is, God intercedes with God: What think thou of this T. Hicks? Besides I
told thee then, that God inspired man with something of his own Substance in
the Name of R. Nahmanni, Hiskuni, and P. Fagius, That God contributed something
to him, and bestowed something of his own Divinity upon him, and that thou
did manifest thy self an ungodly Person, for inferring that what is vulgarly
called the Soul of Man, to wit, the mere Creature, is part of God's own
Substance, because we asserted, that the Life, Breath or Soul, as it may very
well be termed, which God breathed into man, was of his own Being and
Substance: what say thou to his?


C. If G. F. be understood to speak with Reverence to the Soul, then my
Inference is natural and proper, viz. That the Soul is of God's Substance, and
part of God's Being, p. 22.


Q. Are all thy Brags come to this? Take Soul as before expressed, and it is
granted without any Damage to our Doctrine: For the Scriptures that testify,
God communicated of his own Breath or Life unto Man, whereby he became a living
Soul, do not confound man and that Divine Life; no more does G. F. he never
affirmed Man to be God, his own words distinguish them, viz. God breathed into
man, etc. and consequently, that Man is not that Breath of God which he
inspired Man with. Again, G. F. in many of his Writings, speaks of the Fallen
and Degenerated State of Men, the great Pollution and Wi^kedn^ss they lie and
live in; and that h^avy Wrath and Vengeance which will follow: all which
concerns Man, and not that Divine Life God has breath^d into Man; It was not
That, but Adam which was beguiled: Had Adam lived in That Life, he had been
preserved. But suppose what I said granted the Question, as it did not, Many
Great and Learned Men have run in the same Line, and they escaped the Cries of
Blasphemy, Absurdity, and the rest of thy Exclamatory Terms from Millions:
What make thou keep such a Barking at us? Is it that thou ha^t more
Authority, or less Candor?

Before I conclude this Section, I would put thee in mind of a double Injustice
thou have committed: The one was in making this false and Profane Consequence,
That God sets up a Light in himself, which he himself is to obey, and in so
doing God shall be saved, to follow from G. F's words forecited. The second is
in thy giving this sharp Rebuke for this Passage, as an Answer in thy Dialogue,
without so much as inserting one word of it, that thou might cover thy own
Unrighteousness, and render me severe. These Tricks, T. H. will never compass
thy End, but greatly contribute to fru^^rate it.


. III. Concerning the Redemption of the Seed.
Counterfeit, FOrasmuch as Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost,
I did query, who or what was that which was lost? Ibid. p. 34.


Quaker, I know thou did; and that thou made G. Keith answer, That which is
lost is still in man, that Christ came to seek and save, and all his Ministers
preached People to this, A lost God, a lost Christ, etc. Upon which thou made
this Exclamation, Blush Oh Heavens, and be Astonished O Earth, etc.! Did Jesus
Christ come to seek and save a lost God, a lost Christ's was ever God and Christ
in a LOST CONDITION? I told thee then, and do still, that the Heavens and the
Earth might blush at thy base Dealings with G. K. I also told thee, as thou
have cited me, that he intended no other then that Christ came to seek and to
save, by turning People to enquire after a lost God and a lost Christ.

What say thou to this?


C. If by Lost we must not understand man's lost Condition; what less can be
understood, but that Jesus came to seek and to save a lost God. It Is true, G.
K, speaks of People's FINDING a lost God, whom they had lost, Ibid. p. 35.


Q. If this be true, that G. K. so speaks, to wit, that by lost God, he
understood People's loosing of God, what is become of thy Blush O Heavens, etc.
Is God and Christ in a lost Condition? It is well thou art drawn to confess
this against thy self.


C. But still, if Lost be meant only of God and Christ, how can Christ be said
to seek and save a lost God? Ibid.


Q. No such words ever fell from G. K. to any such Question, as thou make
them an Answer to. Thou have unworthily perverted both his Words and Sense.
Though lost be said of God, yet the Loss is Man's; For every man who has lost
God is truly in a lost Condition: But to apply that lost Condition to God, and
not man, because man has lost God, and is admonished to seek after a lost God,
is to commit great Injury against us, as thou have attempted with thy silly
Ins^nuation, viz. If Lost he meant ONLY of God and Christ, etc. What poor
begging Shifts art thou put to?


C. But to put the Reader out of Doubt, that what I infer is indeed your very
Opinion, G. F. and J. N. tell us, that the Seed wants Redemption, and the Seed
is Christ either then there must be more Christ's then one, or Christ came to
redeem himself, Ibid.


Q. Is it to put us out of Doubt, to leave it in Doubt whether G. F. and J. N.
ever said any such thing, or these words, as laid down together? for tho^
referrest to no Book.

But suppose it be true; will it bear thy Inference; therefore God and Christ
are in a lost Condition? Is it all one to say, that Christ is brui^ed and
oppressed, and crucified afresh by wicked Men, and put to open Shame; and to
say, That Christ is in a lost Condition? If it be not, as every ordinary
Capacity may easily see; how needless, as well as how false is this Rant of
thine? p. 36. viz. Will thou assert the very thing which I infer from your
Words, and yet say, I pervert them; May we not justly esteem of thee, as a
heady, rash and inconsiderate young Man, etc. Thus T. H where it is impossible
for thee to make good thy Conclusions, thou tellest me of granting the Charge,
and then fallest into thy usual Insults, the better to insinuate a Credence of
thy Ability and Honesty with thy Reader.


C. But is it not absurd, yea, blasphemous, to talk of God's redeeming the
Seed? Ibid.


Q. No more Blasphemy then is in the Scripture, which says, Out of Egypt have
I called my Son, a Place of Burdens. But I the less wonder at thy Ignorance in
these Heavenly Things, who never yet drunk of his Cup, nor was baptized with
his Baptism, nor knew the true Fellowship of his Death and Sufferings; but art
now adding to them by as provoaking Impieties, as any man of this Age has
committed against him.

Give me thy Judgment of these Scriptures, and my Consequence from them. And
God saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no Intercessor;
therefore his Arm brought Salvation to him, and Righteousness it sustained him,
Isaiah 59.16. Again, The Year of my Redeemed is come, and I looked, and there
was none to help, and I wondered that there was none to uphold; therefore mine
own Arm brought Salvation unto me, and my Fury it uph^ld me, Chap. 53.4, 5.
Whence it is no Contradiction to say, That God did rid himself of the Enemies
of his own precious Life, or that he brought Salvation to himself.


C. I infer from your Words this horrid Absurdity, that God redeems himself, p.
37. This is thy Truth against Fiction.


Q. It is not from our Words, but the Words of Scripture; and but that thou art
become shameless, I should wonder that any Man pretending the Scriptures to be
his Rule, should charge plain Scripture with Absurdity and Blasphemy.


C. Thus Christ is at one and the same time at Liberty and in Bondage,
redeeming and redeemed, conquering and yet pressed down: And though this kind
of Language be Folly and Madness, yet thou tellest us, thou art content to use
it, p. 38.


Q. And it were well if thou would be contented, not to abuse it: Is this thy
Religion, to vilify the Language of other Peoples Religion; nay, of holy
Scripture it self?

But how dark art thou T Hicks, to make b^th a Wonder and a Scoff at Christ's
conquering and yet being pressed down at the same Time; when the Scripture so
plainly holds forth, that he is crucified by such counterfeit Christians as
thou art, at what Time he reigns in the Hearts of his Children? And is not the
Spirit said to be quenched by some, at what Time it lives in others? And is he
not grieved by the Rebellions of some, whilst he is delighted in others? Was
not God at Liberty at what Time he said, They made him s^rve with their Sins?
And was he not whole, at what Time he said, He was broken, Ezekiel. 6.9. T. H.
takes that literally, which is metaphorically spoken, both in Scripture and our
Books, and makes li^eral Consequences upon metaphorical Premises, as if ^od had
Hands, Eyes, Head, Arms, could be imbondaged, broken, etc. after a Worldly
Manner, or in ^ strict and proper Sense, and ^ot rather in a more hidden ^;c
Metaphorical Signification; He is herein e^ther very blind or very mali^ious.
Can thou reasonably infer, because of these Expressions, used after the
manner of men, that it is Absurdity and Blasphemy, that God heals himself,
delivers, himself, and eases himself of his Enemies; Words of equal Import?
Methinks thy unsavory Carriage should reflect Shame upon W. Kiffin, with his
Elders, etc. to suffer such irreverent Trash to come out of their Congregation;
if they value their Credit, they will not suffer thee any longer thus upon the
Ramble. But before I leave thee in this Section, I have one thing more to
charge thee with, and that is, not only the Abuse of our words, by concluding
from Man's being turned to seek after a lost God and Christ, that God and
Christ are in a lost Condition, but that they only want Redemption, and that
Men and Women are not the Objects of Redemption, as in 3 Dial. p. 37. Then
which nothing can be more false, and consequently, injurious to a People. But I
have left wondering, that thou should be base.


. IV. Concerning our Belief in Christ.
Quaker. ANother Instance by which thou undertakest to prove the Quaker no
Christian, is, his Denial of Jesus Christ to be a distinct Person without him:
Is this true, or no?


Counterfeit. I accuse you for denying Jesus Christ to be a distinct Person
without you, p. 25.


Q. I say that thou have varied thy Charge, and given thy self an Answer to it
out of my Book, which was never an Answer to any such Matter, viz. Herein thou
have shown thy Ignorance and Malice; nor is it so in my Book, but Ignorance or
Malice: Thou also omitteth the Ground of my so speaking, which is not fair,
viz, The Quakers say, that Christ is in them, Christ is God-man; is God-man in
them? Again, there is but one Christ, born of ^ Virgin, that suffered at
Jerusalem: Can that Christ be in Man? In Defense of which strange Construction
of our Belief, thou have offered nothing to what I opposed. Howbeit, I desire
my Reader to take notice, that since thou pretendest to own but one Christ, and
say, that it is impossible that Christ should be in Man, that thou both
denyest the Scripture, and contradictest thy self; there is not any Doctrine
clearer in holy Record, then that of Christ's indwelling with his Saints, Joh.
14.20, 23. Chap. 15.4, 5. Chap. 17.23. Romans 8.10. 2 Cor. 13.5. Call. 1.16. Col.
1.27. Revel. 3.20.

The same Objection thou make against us, holds good against them, as thus,
Christ is God-man; can God-man be in the Corin^hians? What might not a T. Hicks
have cavilled against Christ and his Disciples, ^s well as against us? Is this
the Way to prove the Quaker no Christian, that makes that Thing Error, which
can only constitute Men right Christians: For if Christ be not there, no
Anointing can be there, which John says, leads into all Truth: Besides, thou
contradictest thy self, as thou may see, Dial. p. 22, 23. But to thy present
Charge.


C. This I object against you, your denying Christ to be a distinct Person
without you; to which thou speak nothing, signifying thereby, that y^u are
pinched, Ibid. p. 26.


Q. I told thee under the Head of Perversions, that this was not all thou
made us to deny; for thou did untruly infer Our Denial of Christ's Bodily
Appearance, concerning which thou speak nothing, signifying thereby, that
thou art pinched, unless it be to deny thou ever said so, as p. 26, 31.
thereby adding a Lie to the Shuffile. But why are we pinched, because we say
nothing to a Doctrine the Scripture says nothing of: Give me one Place that
mentions Christ to be a distinct Person without us; art thou so destitute of
common Sense, as to think of proving the Quaker no Christian, because he denies
a Doctrine, not expressed in Scripture; and yet at that Instance to magnify
the Scripture, as thy sole Rule: Verily, thou make thy self a Derision to all
wise Men. But go on, make the best of thy Charge.


C. G. F. in his Great Mystery, p. 16. writes thus, Thou art deceived, who
say Christ is distinct from the Saints: Can any Man eat the Flesh of Christ,
if his Flesh be not in them?


Q. This probably thou may have found in thy Brother Faldo 's Book, and thou
might have found it defended in mine. Wh^re is Distinct among G. F's Words,
which are these, But God and Christ is in his Saints, and dwell (...) them, and
walk in them; and he, the Priest, is Reprobate, and out of the Apostles
Doctrine: which plainly shows that G. F. only opposes Christ's being as a
Distance, as divided from the Saints, because they who know not Christ to be in
them the Apostle terms Reprobates; and not that Christ and his Saints are in
distinct Beings. That Christ's Flesh must be in People if they eat it, is so
far from being either Matter of Error, or any Proof for thee, that, till thou
can prove, how a Man may eat his Victuals without him, thou will but render
thy self ridiculous in talking at such an idle rate. What else have thou to
offer?


C. G. Whitehead says, Jesus Christ a Person without us, is not
Scripture Language, Dip. pl. p. 13. -- We cannot own your Limitations and
un^criptural Notions concerning Christ's Being, R. against R. 1. p. 22.


Q. But (why do thou leave out the Word God-man, which thou usedst at first,
and was repeated by G. W.) what of all this T. H?


C. If these be your Words, wherein is my Ignorance or Malice manifest, in
giving the World an Account of your Belief? Ibid. p. 26.


Q. Thou might as well have said of our Dis-Belief of thy unscriptural
Belief: Can thou upon second Thoughts persuade thy self, that this is the way
to prove the Quaker no Christian, cond^mn him out of his own Mouth and evince
his Errors to the World, that wanderest from sound Doctrine and whols^m Words,
to effect it. Howbeit, not so much for thy sake, who make it thy Business to
render us a Scorn and Reproach among Men, by the most injurious Practices upon
our Persons and Principles; as for theirs in whom there is some Tenderness and
sober Enquiry, I shall endeavor to take away all Occasion of Stumbling, by
this short and sesrious Account of our Belief.

It Is granted, that Christ, who is God over all, blessed for ever, is a
distinct Being (though not at a Distance) from the Saints; Otherwise, it would
be all one indeed to ay, as thou, T. H. wickedly concludest, p. 30. from thy
own Invention of Man's being the Seed, which is God, that it is all one,
whether we call God by the Name of W. Penn or call W. Penn God and Christ; a
Blasphemous Absurdity indeed, as thou says! But then, what art thou that
made it? Next, we never said, that Christ was not as well without us, as
within us; for we cannot comprehend him, but are comprehended of him: We never
set any Limitations to Christ's Presence; they are the false and hateful
Inferences of our Enemies; And let the Reader beware, that he be not abused by
them. For the Word Person (as thou usest it, in telling us of Christ, God-man,
a distinct Person without thee) it is no Scripture Phrase; for in Heb. 1.3.
(...), Hypostasis signifies Substance; and in 2 Cor. 2.10. (...), signifies in
Christ's Stead, Name, Sight or Authority, or for his sake, as ^rotius, Erasmus
and the Ancient Fathers have it. However, I hope for our Tenderness in this
particular, considering that T. H.'s Charge is no Scripture Phrase, and that
such like Expressions occasion People to retain mean and dark Apprehensions of
God, and Christ, and his Place of Residence; we shall not suffer in the Mind of
our sober Reader, as Men undeserving the Name of Christians. Have thou T. H.
any more to offer upon this Head?


C. If the Light be Jesus Christ, and a Measure of it in all Men, but more
eminently in your selves; whether W. P. and G. W. may not as properly be called
Jesus Christ, as well as that Bodily Appearance or Outward Person? And why may
not divine Worship be given as well to you as to him?


Q. That Jesus Christ is the Light of Men, the Scripture holds forth; but that
W. P. or G. W. should be the Proper Body prepared of God, for himself to be
manifested in (as was that in which God was manifested in the Flesh: in whom
dwelt the Fullness of the Godhead) is not scriptural, nor a Consequen^e from
our Opinion; but a blasphemous Inference of thy making, to be abhorred of just
Men. Are we Christ's Body, as that was? Did we ever say, that the Fullness of
the Godhead dwelt bodily in us? He is manifested in us measurably, to save us:
But was he so manifested in that Manhood to save it? Or is either G. W. or W.
P. as properly and peculiarly the Manhood of the Savior as that he took to
manifest himself Savior in? Thou shall see whither thy Sophistry will lead
thee: The Son of God appeared bodily and visibly at Jerusalem: The Son of God
was revealed in Paul; therefore Paul might as well be called Jesus Christ as
he, in that Appearance. Again, Divine Worship is to be given to Christ: but
Christ was in Paul; therefore divine Worship was to be given to Paul. Again, T.
H. doubtless, at least many of the Baptists, believe they have the Spirit of
God, and that the Spirit of God is God, and therefore to be worshipped; will it
be a good Consequence, That T. H. or those Baptists are to be worshipped? These
vain Cavils and Sophisms thou undertakest to entertain thy Reader with, and to
abuse us by; are great Instances of a weak Cause and an evil Mind.


C. Be not angry if again I ask thee, if Christ signify Anointed, and God be
Christ, as thou affirmest; whether God himself be Anointed, Ibid. p. 32.


Q. It seems then, Socinian-like, thou do not affirm that God is Christ; and
yet it is but two Pages before that thou say, The Godhead of the Son, and
the Manhood conjunct is the Christ. And Dial. p. 44, Thou call God manifest
in the Flesh, Christ. Is not God then Christ by thy own words? But what Answer
did I give thee to thy Question about Anointing?


C. Thou say, Christ was not anointed by Halfes but entirely; herein thou
contradictest thy self, and overthrowest thy own Distinction between Christ and
the Bod^ of Christ.


Q. No such matter; for the Distinction came from thy insinuating, that the Man
hood of Christ was the the Christ, because that only could be Anointed, upon
which, knowing it was lately thy Opinion, that Christ was God as well as Man, I
said, that he could not be anointed by Halfes; and therefore Christ was
anointed as God as well as Man: What say thou to this?


C. The Difficulty still remains: If God alone was that which was anointed, the
Question returns upon thee, whether God did anoint himself, and with what, and
to what End?


Q. Thou art mistaken, and miserably begst the Question, and sendest it back
again: For when thou (to prove the mere Manhood to be the Christ or Anointed)
did insinuate the Impossibility of Christ to be God as well as Man, and that
God manif^st in the Flesh, makes the true Christ or Anointed, and that it is
absurd to think he should be anointed by Halfs: Is not God or the divine Nature
also anointed? if so, T. H. who is it that anointed the Godhead, and with
what, and to what End? These are thy own Words, and they belong to thy own
Doctrine. Thou did object against our Principle, and happened to contradict thy
own Principle in it: I sent thee the Objection home again, for thee to
disingage thy own Principle of it, First, Thou growest angry, tellst me of
contradicting my self, and returnest me the Objection never considered; but
back it must go; and when thou have found the way to clear thy own, that shall
serve for thine and mine too. And thus I leave thee and thy Cavils in this
Section.


. V. Concerning the Gospel-Rule.
LEt us hear what thou have to say to the Arguments I gave about the Rule.

C. You deny the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith and Practice unto
Chri^tians, p. 38.


^. Thou would t here insinuate, as if our Faith and Practice ^ere not
according to Scripture, because we do not assert them, but the Spirit that gave
them forth, to b^ the ^ule, especially, in new Covenant Times: I grant the
Scriptures are to be fulfilled, and that many Heavenly Exhortations, Reproofs
and Instructions therein contained, are to be regarded by us; but that which is
my Rule to direct my Under^tanding, what is fit for me to embrace, and what to
reject, and how to understand that which is to be received, m^st be the Spirit
of Truth, which alone g^ves true Discerning: Therefore let us hear what thou
say to my Argument, Reas. against Rail. p. 25. as thou they self has cited
it, Dial. 3. p. 38. viz. That which is more Ancient, more universal, and more
able to inform, rule and guide, that must more eminently be the Rule: But that
has been, and is, the Light within; therefore that has been, and ought to be
the Rule of ^aith and Practice: What do thou offer to invalidate this
Argument?


C. Then her^in I have not misrepresented your Belief, p. 39.


Q. But is this the Way to confute our Belief? Or did we charge thee with
misrepresenting it in this particular? Do thou think thus to evince the Truth
of thy Objections, to grant us the Matter objected: It seems, we are to take
this for thy Answer; and consequently, that the Light within is eminently the
Rul^, for ought thou have said against it. Proceed.


C. ^ut forasmuch as you often say, you own the Scriptures, and the holy Rules
therein contained: In what Sense do you acknowledge them to be your Rule?


Q. Thou make me to answer this Question thus, The Scripture is the Rule of
Historical Faith; the Spirit can only be the Rule of saving Faith, Reas. ag.
Rail. p. 40. But can any Man that has the least Draghm of Honesty or Justice,
think this the Way to confute me, to skip over near 15. Pages, containing
several Arguments made to evidence and confirm the Truth of the first?

Had thou not a Conscience that dares do and say any thing, thou could^t
never have given me such an unhandsom Slip. But let us hear what thou say to
that which thou have cited.


C. If the Light within be more able to inf^rm, rule and guide, and therefore
more ^minently the Rule; What need is there of an historical Rule? p. 39.


Q. Did ever any Man pretending to be in his Wits, talk so idly? what is it
but to say, If the Spirit of God was always more able then the Scripture; what
need is there of having Scripture? Is not this to infer from God's
Condescension to Man's Imbecility, that the Light and Spirit of God are
Imbecil: Is not this to reprobate all external Means, and to conclude God,
Christ, the Light and Spirit insufficient, because that any were ever used: Is
it a good Argument, because the Light does not reveal such a thing, therefore
the Light cannot reveal such a thing, which is the utmost Strength of thy
Opposition. I further told thee, that those who gave forth the Scripture, came
by the Enjoyment of those Things through the Light and Spirit of God, or they
could never have writ them; therefore the Light and Spirit, and not the
Scriptures, were the Rule of their Faith. But of this and abundance more to the
same Purpose, thou take no notice: I further told thee, that the Prophets saw
him with this Light, unless they saw him without Light, and that those that
believed him, when come, could not have received him, had they not beheld him
with an inward Eye. Thus thou quotest me: What Reply make thou to this?


C. That the Prophets saw him by the Light of divine Revelation, I grant: And
that none do believe in him, what do not know him is true; but that this Light
or inward Eye is the common Light in every Man, that thou must prove. p. 42.


Q. It was formerly, and is again proved to be the same Light, though not the
same in Manifestations. Every one had the same Light; but not the same
Prohecies, nor the same Sights: When thou have proved two Lights, it will be
Time for thee to talk at this Rate: Nothing did then, nor can now, lead truly
to know and confess to the Word that took Flesh, in which Word was Life, and
that Life the Light of Men; but ^;uch Discoveries as proceed from a Measure of
the same Light, as has been already proved. And should I admit of thy
Construction, that the Light by which such as had a true Sight of Christ
before, and at his Coming was not the common Light, as thou call it; but
that which thou thy self allowest to be divine; yet will thou give me Leave to
infer in thy Name, that the divine Light was insufficient, before such time as
it reveald those Things to the Prophets, and gave those that were alive at
Christ's Spiritual Coming, a Knowledge and a Sense of them, because they did
no^ know them before they knew them: For at this Rate thou ^reate^^ ^s abo^t
the Light within; the Light within does not do this, (...) the Light within
cannot do it, presumpt^^^sly concluding it insufficient to discover those
things, that either do not need a Discovery, because they are already known, or
that it seems good to God in his Wisdom to conceal.


C. If the Scriptures tell thee ^here was such ^ Man as Moses, David and
Matthew, etc. without which thou could not have known any such ^^ing; so the
Scripture tells thee what they spoke and wro^ of; therefore the Scriptures must
be the Rule of thy Belief, both conc^rning those Men and their Sayings, p. 45.


Q. I grant that the Scriptures tell me, there were such Men, as Moses, D^^id
and Matth^w, and that they wrote: But what is it that gives me to believe the
things they wrote to be true? The Rule of ^aving Faith is that we speak of, and
not that which is historical? It is impossible for me to understand the Truth
of those Things, till I come to that Spirit of Truth that gave them forth; for
no Man can know the Things of God, save the Spirit of God. The want of which
has been the Cause why so many have been bewildred about the things there
declared: I would ask him how he knows the Scriptures extan^ are perfect, both
as to Number, and Copy and Translations? Several Books are ^oft, that is
certain; does the Scripture tell us what they cont^ined? if not, the Rule is
impe^fect by T. H s Consequence. The Copies are above Thirty in Number, at
least, in which there are Thousands of different Readings; the Translators
greatly differ, and have greatly c^rrupted. Also T. H is to look to prove the
present Collection Canonical. If he pleads the Testimony of ^od within, his
Cause is gone; if Tradi^ion, I ask how? Is he assured the first Canon was
rightly made? The Council as either Fa^^ible or Infallible; If the First, what
Assurance ha^ he? If the last, it grants Infallibi^ity, since the Apostles 360.
Years; but begets the Qu^stion, How does T. H. know they were in the right? And
if in one Thing, why not in al^? But those ^ouncils con^radicted; and none ever
gave the Cata^ogue, as now it is; nor can T. H. give a Canon for it. And if he
cannot assure us, that it is e^^ct with the Orig^nal, free from Variation,
Corruption, M^s-translation, etc. as it is not; he can never prove it the Rule,
as he e^^eavour, in Opposition to the Spirit; for tha^ i^ always p^in and
pe^fect. But more of thi^ in the Christ^an Q^aker; not to lessen Scr^pture, but
to con^ound such Cavi^^ers.
Spiritual and heavenly Things are not di^cernable by carnal Men, they are hid
from their Eyes; and till the Light shine out of Darkness, to give them the
Knowledge of the Scriptures; they are as a sealed Book, and they labor in a
Labyrinth of Uncertainties. I do say again, The Light in all Ages has made
known Doctrines, fit to be obeyed, though not the Histories and Narratives of
other Men's Actions; which is thy silly Objection against the Light's
Sufficiency. But one thing I must not forget, on which thou did not depend a
little, as an Instance to prove thy Conceit, viz. How could we have known, that
Swearing in any Case were unlawful, if it had not been written in the 5th of
Matthew Swear not at all, Dial. 1. p. 22. But this I proved to thee, to have
been revealed above 400. Years before that was written; but what is the Reason
thou over-lookest that Answer? Clinias was taught by it rather to suffer a
great Fine, then swear; the Essaeaens had rather dye then swear, which was long
before Christ came in the Flesh: Was not the Light then a sufficient Rule for
their practicing of an Evangelical Doctrine by thy own Argument? But T. H. art
thou not greatly ashamed, that because I supposed upon thy Principle, thy Light
and Rule to be two, Reas. against Rail. p. 39. That therefore I contradict my
self, and overthrow mine own Opinion, saying, If Light be given to understand
the Rule, then it self is not the Rule, much less greater then the Rule; and as
if thou had come rightly by this Consequence, falling into thy customary
Insults, telling me, T^is is so far from being Truth against Fiction, that it
discovers me to be a rash, heady, confident and ignorant Man, one that neither
cares what he says or affirms. Had thou any Regard to God, thy own
Conscience, thy Neighbor, or thy own Reputation, thou would never commit,
much less continue to practice, these horrid Wrongs against me. However, as I
said before, so again: I affirm, that supposing the Scriptures were the Rule,
that which informs me of the Rule, and teaches me how to use it, must be
greater then the Rule, in that it teaches me to know and do what the Rule
cannot do of it self: I query then, if t^is Light be not the Rule, how and
which way I come to understand and use the Scriptures? etc. therefore eminently
the Rule, the Terms of my Argument; for the Question lay not upon particular
Rules.


C. The Primitive Christians took not their Measures from the Light within, but
from the Will of God revealed to them, p. 46.


Q. This is Confusion it self: Are the Light within and the Will of God
revealed inconsistent things? Who was it revealed to them ( Paul turned from
Darkness to (Light the Will of God, but the Light? And what was it taught them
the Truth, when John said, They had received an Anointing, which abode in them,
and taught them all things; unto which he directed, and with which he left
them, John 1. 2, 27. And does not the same Apostle tell us, If we walk in the
Light, we have Fellowship one with another, etc? Was not the Light then the
Rule of their Obedience, and the Way in which they were to walk? for the
Accomplishment of that Prophetic Speech, Isa. 2.5. Oh ye House of Jacob, come
ye, and let us walk in the Light of the Lord.

And is there any thing plainer, then that the Apostle Paul describes the
Children of God, to be such as are led by the Spirit of God, Romans 8.14. and
that he exhorts the Galatians to walk in the Spirit, chap. 5.16 and the
Ephesians to walk circumspectly, which was, according to the Manifestations of
the Light, chap. 5.14, 15, 16. Finally does not the same Apostle pronounce
Peace on as many as walk according to the Rule of the N^w Creature, Gal. 6.16.

I further told thee that the Waldonses, Lutherans, Prot^st^^ts, ^alvinists,
etc. made the Testimony of God in their Consciences the chief Ground of their
Belief of the Scriptures, Reas. against Rail. page 48.


C. That the Walden^es, etc. made the Testimony of their Consciences the chief
Ground of the Belief of the Scriptures, is confidently said, but more then ever
W. Penn is able to prove.


Q. But if W. Penn is able to prove that the Waldenses, Lutherans, Prot^stants,
Calvinists, yea and Independents, and Anabaptists too, have made the Testimony
of God in their Consciences, the Ground of their Belief of the Scriptures, wilt
not thou then appear to have told a confident Untruth? Let us hear what they
say.

That the Waldenses held so thou may inform thy self if thou please, out of
their History, penned by John Paul Perin of Lions, lib. 1. cap. 1, cap. 11,
cap. 13.

Luther taught, That the Spirit is required to the Understanding of the whole
Scripture and of every part thereof Again, The Scriptures are not to be
understood, but by that very Spirit by which they were wrote, Tom. 3. fol. 169.

John Bradford, a worthy Martyr, thus answered the Arch Bishop of York, who
catechized him how he came to know the Scriptures? We do believe and know, said
he, the Scriptures, as Christ's Sheep, not because the Church says they are
the Scriptures, but because they be so, being thereof assured by the same
Spirit that wrote and spoke them, Book Mart. vol. 3. p. 298.

William Tindal, another faithful Martyr in Hen. 8 his time, writes thus; It is
impossible to understand the Scriptures more then a Turk, for him that has not
the Law of God written in his Heart to fulfill it. Again, Without the Spirit it
is impossible to understand them, W. Tind. Work. p. 319. and p. 80.

B. Jewel against the Papists has this Passages; F^esh and Blood is not able
to understand the holy Will of God, without special Revelation, therefore
Christ gave Thanks unto his Father; and likewise opened the Hearts of his
Disciples, that they might understand the Scriptures: Without this special Help
and Prompting of God's holy Spirit, the Scriptures are unto the Reader, be he
never so wise or well learned, as the Vision of a sealed Book.

Calvin says, It is necessary that the same Spirit that spoke by the Mouth of
the Prophets should pierce into our Hearts, to persuade us of the Truth of what
they delivered, Instit. lib. 1. cap 8

Beza says, That the understanding of the Scriptures should be fetched from the
same Spirit that dictated them, Bez in Nov. Test. 2 Pet. 1.19.

Pet. Martyr taught, That it is the Spirit of God, that reveals the Truth in
the holy Scriptures, Com. loc. p. 2 cap. 18.

H. Bullinger asserted in his 4 Decad. and 8 Sermon. dedicated to K. Edw. 6. That
men fetch the Vnder^^anding of heavenly things and Knowledge of the Holy Ghost
from no where else then from the same Spirit.

What say thou to this T. H? Can the Holy Ghost be this Discoverer and
Instructor, and yet not eminently the Rule?

But in as much as thou chargest me with denying the Scriptures Authority, and
then railest, p. 61. because I place it upon the Te^^timony of the Light and
Spirit of God In the Conscience; Hear what D. John Owen says, The only Public
Authentic and Infallible Interpreter of the holy Scripture, is He who is the
Author of them, from the Breathing of whose Spirit it derives all its VERITY,
PERSPICUITY and AUTHORITY, Exerc. 2.7, 9. What would have become of me, T. H.
if I had spoken so broad as this? This makes the Spirit Interpreter, Judge and
Rule of our Knowledge, therefore eminently the Rule.

T. Collier, an ancient and considerable Baptist, shall be my last instance
here; There is the Law and Testimony in the Spirit, says he, as well as in the
Letter.

The Law of God is in the Heart, there it is written; and there it testifies
the Truth of God: And if any man speak not according to this Rule, it is
because there is no Light or Morning risen in him. See his Works, page 249.
Again,

Others know no other Touchstone nor Trial, no other Light by which they judge
of Truth then Scripture; thus putting it in the room of the Spirit, which is
Light, and the Greater Light: For they say, they cannot know Truth till they
bring it to the Letter for Trial; thus making an Idol of the Letter, setting it
up in the room of God, Ibid. page 248.

I could produce a great Cloud of more Witnesses, both of Fathers and other
Authors; But I hope I have discharged my self of my Engagement, and made
appears, That what I asserted was not too hard for me to prove, and therefore
thou T. H. were too confident in saying so: but thy notorious Ignorance in
these things may a little excuse thee.

But thou chargest us with undervaluing the Scriptures, a Fault I abhor to be
guilty of; Let me hear in what.


C. You contemptibly call the Scriptures the Letter, whilst you entitle some of
your own Pamphlets, The Voice of Wisdom, A Message, etc, wherein you manifestly
prefer your own Writings before the Holy Scriptures, page 55.


Q. This Cavil has been answered again and again, I told thee before, and thou
have cited me thus, If at any time we call the Scriptures Letter, it is not
that we mean our Books are the Spirit, or that we irreverently set them (the
Scriptures) below our own Writings, but upon a Comparison only between the
Scriptures and the Spirit that gave them forth. What Return do thou give to
this?


C. It is aggravate, not to excuse your Error.


Q. It is an Error to call the Scriptures the Letter in a Comparison with the
Spirit? And an Aggravation of that Error, to prefere the Spirit before the
Letter? But as this all thou have to say to the Matter?


C. Why have you not respect to this Comparison when you entitle your own
Books? But that you would have us to believe that your Writings are more
eminently from the Spirit then the Sciptures? p. 56.


Q. How do we prefer our Writings above the Scriptures, which we prove by the
Scriptures? I perceive it is become almost impossible with thee to make any
other Constructions, then what rather show thine own Envy then our Sense. Was
there ever the same Reason for a Comparison between our Writings and the
Spirit? Did we ever set them up for the only Rule of Faith and Obedience, and
that in Opposition to the Spirit, as the New Covenant Rule, and those that
maintain that Plea? If there were the same Occasion, thou should quickly hear
of the same Distinction and Comparison. But go on.


C. Hence it is, That when both stand in Competition you thus distinguish them,
Letter, yea, Dead Letter, as the proper Term for the Scriptures; but The Voice
of Wisdom to your Books: Art thou not ashamed of this Bas^ness and
Profaneness? page 56


Q. Whatever I am, I perceive thou art not ashamed of making me base and
profane too, and printing a most horrid Untruth to render me so: There is not
a Sentence in thy Book gives a clearer Testimony of the Injustice of thy
Carriage then this in hand. For nothing is more frequent with thee throughout
thy Dialogues, then first to invent something odious in our Name, and then, as
if none so Modest and Righteous as thy self, cry out, Who would not be
astonished at this Blasphemou^ Absurdity? p. 30. Art thou not ashamed of this
Profaneness and Baseness? p. 59. O Impious Man, etc. p. 13. But let this
determine this Point between us. Produce but one of our Friends, that ever
brought his VVritings in Competition with the Scriptures, calling the
Scriptures the Dead Letter, and his own Books the Voice of Wisdom, etc. and I
will yield thee to have written Truth: If thou can not, thou have but
fastened Baseness, Profaneness and Lying upon thy self: with thee I leave
them; for there thou ought est to rest, till thou can better clear thy self
of them.

I charged thee with having wronged Geo. Fox and Rich. Hubberthorn, in making
them to say, It is Dangerous for ignorant People to read the Scriptures; and
then fixing the Name of Jesuit and Romanish upon us; producing their words at
large, which thou have basely contracted to thy own Ends, leaving out what
might most make for their Innocence, and the evincen^^ent of thy own Forgery.

Thou give the words thus, The Letter kills, is Dangerous: In my Quotation,
and in their own Book, thus, The Letter which kills, 2 Cor. 3.6. is D^ngerous
[ for thou (Priest) take in h^re to war with^l against the Saints, with thy
carnal Mind, giving out thy carnal Expositions upon it.] All this, T. H. thou
have unworthily left out, that thou might the better fasten thy Fiction upon
G. F. and R. H. I ask, Is it not Dangerous to read the Scriptures to these
Ends? And the Ministers of the Letter are the Ministers of Death; here thou
leavest out again [ which is to Condemnation, and you take it to make a Trade
with it, and with what the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles said, so that some
have 60 and some 100 l. a year; but Christ cried Woe unto such Whited Walls]
having left out this part, that concerned the Hireling thou put in again;
And here you read with Danger who speak of them and speak a Lie, because you
speak of your selves: Here again thou let drop [and you wr^st the
Scriptures to your own Destruction] (as the Unlearned and Unstable do; and is
not this Dangerous in them?) Then thou bring in this, And to you it is
Dangerous to read or speak of them; omitting all that here follows by me cited
to clear them of thy Charge, viz. [who know not the Life of them as the
Pharisees, who were learned in the Letter, but knew not Christ: But I say,
Blessed is he that reads and does understand] All this so necessary to give
the Undertstanding of their true Meaning thou have designedly overlookt:
However, let us hear what Defense thou have made for thy self.


C. The Question respects the whole Scripture, which you say, is Dangerous and
Killing; The Ministers of the Scriptures are Ministers of Death, and it is
Dangerous for such to read them: What a shameless Man art thou, thus to confess
what I accuse you of, and yet condemn me as a Forger? page 57.


Q. These foul and confident Questions thou usest to ask me with which thou
would insinuate thy Innocence, do but aggravate thy Forgery. For first, How
do I confess what thou accusest us of, when it is neither to be found in my
words, nor theirs upon whom thou chargest them, viz. It is Dangerous for
Ignorant People to read the Scriptures. 2dly, I told thee they meant by
Ministers of the Letter, Ministers of the Law and Death, because of
Transgression, and thou make it Dangerous for such to read the Scriptures;
whereas G. F. and R. H. said, It was Dangerous for Hirelings and while Walls to
use them against the Saints with their carnal Exp^sitions, opposing them
Pharisee- like, to the Life of them, wresting them to their own ^estruction. It
is Dangerous for such to read them to such Uses and Purposes not in any Sense
as thou untruly say: Of this thou take no notice. So that here the Reader
may plainly see thy first Forgery; since it was not the Man of no Letters, but
the Men of Letters, such as the Scribes and Pharise^s, who used them against
the right Heirs of them, of whom G.F. and R.H. ^poak. And thy second is not
less visible, in that thou have imposed upon the Reader my Confession of thy
Accusation, who never confessed any such thing. These are some of thy wonted
Tricks, ever and anon employed to cover thy Nakedness with, and to get off
unsuspected, from encountering the Difficulty of our Charge, Proof or Argument.
I appeal to God's Witness in my Reader's Conscience, to right us against the
many Injurious Practices against us: And shall conclude with this
Acknowledgment and Argument concerning the Scriptures.

We do receive and believe the Scriptures given forth by Holy Men of God, as
they were moved of the Holy Ghost, and that they are profitable for Doctrine,
for Reproof, and for Instruction in Righteousness; yet since they are Writings
relating to the things of God, no man can understand them, or have an assured
Testimony of them, but by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. which alone reveals the
deep things of God: It was not the Scripture, but the Father that revealed
Christ to Peter, Mat. 16.5.

Further, The New Covenant Times are Times of Fulfilling of the Scriptures, by
the pouring out of the Spirit, therefore Peoples regard should be to the inward
Drawings and Leadings of the Holy Spirit. The Law outward was a Rule to the
Jew, though not eminently unto them (for the Lord gave them also of his good
Spirit; and what for, if not to rule them?) But the Law of the Spirit of Life
promised to be revealed within, under the New and Everlasting Covenant, was
certainly to be the Rule under that Covenant, being a time for the more
immediate Flowings forth of Spirit and Life. We do not say that every one has
hereunto attained: But we affirm, that God has given a measure of his Spirit
unto Men and Women, that they might receive the precious Promises, unto which we
direct them for that End. I know that T. Hicks, according to his wonted
Baseness, page 49. interprets our saying, that we deny the Scriptures to be the
Rule of Faith and Practice in honor to the Divine Light, to be our denying and
rejecting the revealed Will of God, thereby must hate their Parents, because
they are to love Christ first, Mat. 10. This were to say, that Paul's regard to
the Law of the Spirit of Life in him, as his Rule, was not to fulfill, but to
deny and rej^ct the Law without: If this Consequence be false against Paul; How
can T. H.'s Consequence be good against us? Is it to reject and deny the
Scriptures, to have the good things they declare of brought in by the Eternal
Spirit? And since the Scriptures can not fulfill themselves in us, but the
Spirit; is not the Spirit the Rule and Guide to our Divine Knowledge and
Enjoyments. But from our asserting the Spirit to be the Rule, T.H. infers, That
we deny to live according to the Scriptures, a Mi^take he fell into before,
which I offered to help him out of in my Answer; for to own the Scripture to be
the Rule, and to live according to the Scriptures, are not one and the same
thing: For the Gentiles did the things contained in the outward Law, and yet
had not the outward Law for a Rule, Romans 2.14.

Nor is it to be doubted, but that Paul and the primitive Christians lived up
to the outward Law (that is the inward Law outwarly declared) by the Law of the
Spirit of Life, which was the Rule of their Obedience: Yet can any infer, that
the outward Law and not the inward was the Rule of their so living? And I must
tell thee, Th. Hicks, that thy Exalting of the Scriptures, is but an Endeavor
to throw down the Spirit; which Sacrifice, be it known unto thee, the Lord of
Heaven loathes. And I will say to thee, as G. F. and R. H. said to the Priest,
They are Dangerous to be read and used for those Evil Purposes thou employest
them upon: But as they said (though that also thou did overlook) so say I,
Blessed is He that does read, and understands them.


Testimonies concerning the Rule.
Irenaeus, page 242, 384, 389. The Writing in the Heart is the Rule. Again, l.
5. c. 8. The Word gives his Spirit to all, to some according to Condition.
And, l. 4. c. 30. The Fathers justified by the Righteousness of the Law in
them, therefore had no need of REPROVING LETTERS.

W. Perkins Works, 3 Vol. page 220. The Light of Nature and Grace teaches to
do as we would be done to, page 221. It is the Fulfilling of the Law, the Rule
to judge Scripture. That (of God) made the Rule, Something in the Conscience;
Happy Times, if Men would follow it.

Bp. R. Sanderson, De Obligat. Conscient. page 127. A Rule of Discerning
without the Scriptures. Regula discernendi extra Scripturam.

And T. C^llier in plain words says, The Spirit of God, who is God, is the
ALONE RULE of a Christian, Genesis Epist. to the Saints, chap. 12. -- The
Spiritual Man judges all things by the RULE OF THE SPIRIT, ibid. The Law of
the New Testament is written in the Heart, ibid.

But what need is there further of my maintaining this Point, concerning The
Light being the Rule in all Ages; since thou have made such ample Confession,
That the Godly in all Ages before Christ in the Flesh, were turned from the
Darkness to the Light, page 64. This Light must needs be within because the
Darkness is there: And it must needs be sufficient, because thou say it was
that which Paul was sent to turn People to, p. 63, 64. And what could this
Light be for, if not to Guide, Rule and Lead them in the Ways of Godliness,
and consequently the Rule of the Godly in all Ages? Therefore the more General
Rule, because the Scripture was not in all Ages, and suffi^^^nt; because it was
of God appointed for the Godly Man's Way, unless thou will suppose, that they
were turned to an insufficient Light.

. VI. Of Commands and Ordinances; particularly Baptism and the Supper.
Quaker, I Have sufficiently shown under the Section of Forgeries the horrid
Abuse thou have committed in thy last Book against E. Buroughs, concerning
Commands and Ordinances; I shall here further detect thy Miscarriage.

The Matter charged upon E. B. I shall set down with his Name before it.


E. B. You are not yet dead with Christ, who are subject to Ordinances.


T. H. The Spirit of God in the Scriptures assures us, that they that keep the
Commandments of God are the Children of God, 1 John 2.3, 4. Yet this Wicked Man
E. B. says, That they who are Subject to Ordinances are not dead with Christ
[Sec Colloss. 2.19, 21.]


Q. E. B. pleads o^^y against such Performances under the Name of Or^^^ances,
as were but Shadowy, Elementary and Perishing things, appointed for a Season,
and to pass off. Thus thou thy self have quoted me, Dial. 3. p. 59. What say
thou to this?


C. If thus E. B. did plead, why do thou say I b^lyed him? Ibid. p. 59.


Q. Because in thy former Dialogue thou made him as well deny to continue
Obedience to such eternal Precepts of Righteousness, as thou thy self
confessest the Light within dictate, as to Shadowy, Elementary and Perishing
Things. For about his saying, That was not a Command to him, which was a
Command to another, thou did most unjustly infer, That the Law which forbids
Adultery, Murder, Theft, and bearing False Witness, is no Law to us; breaking
forth upon us with Impiously Horrid, Ungodly, Irreverent, Patronizers of
Blasphemy, Countenancers of Novices, Profane Scribler, with abundance more;
whereas p 47. of his Works, whence the Passage was taken, proves it to have
been writ about extraordinary and particular Cases: as, Thy Running to Preach,
because Peter preached; or, Plunging People in the Thames, or elsewhere, because
John baptized many in Jordan: What say thou to this?


C Thou have a strange Confidence! If thou had examined the place my
Quotation referrs to, thou must needs know I have not belied you: If thou have
not, how dare thou thus charge me? p. 58.


Q. My Confidence is grounded upon Examination: And this Ranting Answer will
not clear thee. And the greatest Kindness that can be shown thee is, to believe
thou tookst the Quotation first upon Trust. But in this Dialogue thou art left
without Excuse: For had E. B. intended general Commands, it would not have cost
thee much more Trouble to prove it, then to say it; doubtless it would have
been a Pleasure to thee. But as a man guilty, thou art wilfully silent about
those horrid Constructions made upon his words, as the genuine Sense of the
place, and vainly think to shift it off with accusing me of strange
Confidence: But I return thee thy own Words, If thou, T. H. have examined the
Place thy Quotation refers to, thou must needs know, that thou have belyed us:
if thou have not, how dare thou thus (continue to) charge us? But what say
thou concerning shadowy Ordinances?


C. Forasmuch as ^hou confessest, that E.B. did plead against-such Ordinances
as were but Shadows, appointed only for a Season; and to pass off, that such
Ordinances) are no Commands to us, how will thou prove this?


Q. This is to grant, that thou art for continuing Shadows under a
Gospel Dispensation: My Reason against it is this; Shadows are Members of the
Ceremonial Law, the Substance of which is the Gospel: The bringing in of the
Gospel is the ending of them; because Shadows give way to, and End in their
Substance. But let me see how thou bringst me in to answer thy Question; Let it
be observed, that there is not the least mention in all the Epistle of John of
any of those Ordinances, that stood in visible and corruptible Elements, so
that to bring in things of a shadowy and temporary Nature, amongst the Commands
of Chirst, is to abuse the Apostle. What Is thy Return to this?


C. Let it be observed what an arrogant, abusive, profane and impertinent Man
this W.P. is. Suppose none of the positive Institutions of Christ be expressly
mentioned in his Epistles; did he therefore deny them? p. 60.


Q. To pass over thy hard Names, thou do suggest to the Reader, as if this
were my whole Strength, in Answer to thy first Query, viz. How will thou prove
shadowy Ordinances to be no Commands to us? whereas it was never given by me to
any such Question; nor indeed would it have been Proper to do so: But since
thou hardst so little Sense, as to quote John's Words, viz. They that love God
keep his Commandments, in order to prove the Continuance of shadowy Ordinances,
I had so much Sense in me, as to make use of thy own citation against thee,
where no such Ordinances are mentioned, upon which thou foolishly queries, did
he therefore deny t^em? which was not the Question. But whether that Place
proves them: But this I am bold to infer, That it was not John 's Message to
recommend and perpetuate them, as thou do: And it is strange to me, that they
should be of such Weight in the Christian Religion, and not one mention them in
all their Epistles, save Paul once, in denying Baptism a Share in his
Commission; and another Time in regulating the Corinthians about their
disorderly Use of the Type. If bodily Exercise profits little in Religion, much
less Shadows. If Men run into external Performances, without the Leadings and
Preparings of the Spirit; such Duties cannot be acceptable with God, running
into external Imitations without internal Qualifications, gives but to boast in
another Man's Line: And such Oblations are so far from being accepted, that
they are abominated. To this let us hear what T. Collier will say, a Man of
greater Eminency and Antiquity that T. H. in the Baptist Way; I see, says he,
that external Actings according t^ a Rule without, is nothing, if not flowing
from a Principle of Love and Life within, Works p. 247. I perceive T. H. thou
art not of that Mind, so far from it as to account it Error: But let us hear
what else thou ha^ to say, in Defense of thy formal unwarranted Practice


C. We are certain, that our Lord did walk in the Observance of positive
Institutions; and he that abides ^^ Christ, ought to walk as he walked, 1 John
2.6. p. 61.


Q. What make thou forge, pervert, lie, sland^^ and abuse us then? If thou
would be a Chr^stian, thou should walk as he walked: He was lovi^^ thou art
envious; he meek, thou passionate; he lo^^ Suffering, thou froward; he was good
to his Enemi^^ thou base to thy Neighbors. Surely thou have forg^^ that if
thou walk, as he walked, thou must have do with that dangerous Doctrine of
Perfection, as thou else where reputest it. But at thy Rate of quoting this
Scripture, and following of Christ, thou may as well bring in Circumcision
and the Passover, as Baptism and the Supper. Christ told his Disciples, The
Spirit should lead them into all Truth, after his Ascension; and his beloved
Disciple John referred the Churches to the Anointing.


C. You tell us these Ordinances were used as Figures and Shadows, no longer to
endure, then till the Substance comes, viz. The Baptism of the holy Ghost. The
Reason can be no other then the vain Conceit of a deluded mind; for they are no
Figures of the Baptism of the Spirit; therefore this can be no Reason for the
abolishing of them: Christ commands his Apostles to teach and baptize,
promising to be with them to the End of the World.


Q. Who ever said, that Breaking of Bread was a Figure of the Spirit's Baptism?
It Is a mere Fiction of thy making, as p. 107. of Reas. against Rail. will show.
But if Water Baptism and Breaking of Bread are no Figures nor Shadows, they
must be Substances* and what Difference then there is between thee and Popery
in this Point, let the Reader judge. And for Christ's bidding his Disciples,
Go, teach, baptizing, Matthew. 28. I told thee, That no Water was mentioned; and
that Luke, in the first of the Acts, says, before the Commission mentioned by
Matthew could be given, at least executed, John baptized with Water, but ye
shall be baptized with the holy Ghost, not many Days hence: And then comes the
Commission in Force; Go, teach, baptizing; how? with the holy Ghost, turning
People from Darkness t^ Light, from the Power of Satan unto God.


C. If the Baptism of the holy Ghost do put this Commission in Force, as thou
say; then the Obligation to those Duties signified in the Commssion cannot be
taken off: If so, thy Argument falls.


Q. A poor Shuffle indeed! Does my Argument fall, because thou beggest the
Question? which is, Whether their Baptism be with Water or the holy Ghost?


C. If Baptism of Water be not intended, then none: not the Baptism of
Afflictions; for the Apostles were not to persecute: Not the Baptism of the
holy Ghost; for that was a Promise, not a Commission, p. 63.


Q. Thou do but triffle with us still: Though to be baptized was a Promise,
yet to baptize was a Commission: To be baptized not many Days hence, was the
Promise of Christ, but go and baptize all Nations, which follows, was a
Commission; and that it was with no other Baptism, Christ's Distinction
sufficiently proves, viz. John indeed baptized with Water, but ye shall be
baptized with the holy Ghost not many Days hence; stay till then; and go, and
teach, baptizing all Nations, etc.


C. To baptize with the holy Ghost, was none of their Duty, it being properly
Christ's Work, p. 63.


Q. It was both their Work and Duty, witness that Simon Magus would have bought
that Gift of Peter: And that Paul baptized with the holy Ghost, Acts 19. Did he
not therein do his Duty?


C. Is it proper to say, I baptize you with the Spirit into the Name of the
Spirit?


Q. Yes, if thou have the Spirit; unless thou would make a counterfeit
Christiaen of him, whom thou, without the Spirit baptizest into the Name of the
Spirit: would thou have a Man baptized into the Name, and not into the Nature
of the Spirit? Can a Man baptize into Spirit and into Life, without Spirit and
Life? God did convert, reconcile, baptize, beget and build up Thousands to
himself by them; unto whom the Word of Reconciliation was committed, and who
were Ambassadors in Christ's stead. Now, as for Water Baptism, what Paul says
of himself, I may say of his Commission, It was not behind any of the rest; yet
he denies Water Baptism to be any Part of it, and is as plainly rejected of
him, in Point of Institution, as any Thing in Scripture. So that either
Water Baptism is none of Christ's Institutions; or else Paul had no Commission
to perform Christ's Institutions, which were strange. T. Collier determines
this, The Baptism of Christ is the Baptism of the Spirit.

But if any of you can show a larger Commission then Paul had, let him produce
it: if not, I must conclude they Run, and are not Sent.


. VII. Of the Doctrine of Justification
I Perceive ^y what thou have writ of Justification, thou inten^st to end at
the rate thou have managed the Controversy all along; I mean with the same
shuffles and injustice. I will set down thy Charge, the Answer thou make me
give, and thy Reply.

C. Thou have holdly affirmed that Justification by that Righteousness Christ
fulfilled for us, wholely without us, to be a Doctrine of Devils, Apol. page
148. What say thou is this?


Q. This Apology cited, was written against a malicious Priest in Ireland,
Reas. ag. Rail. p. 68. If thy Position cannot be proved it will be no Excuse to
say, It was given to a malicious Priest, yea, thy Folly and Rashness is the
more aggravated, etc. p. 96.


Q. As if I had given that Answer, not to inform Persons against whom the Book
was writ, and the Occasion of the Passage, but (as one unable to say any thing
in my Defense) to extenuate the Fact, and Excuse my writing it. I perceive,
rather then want Occasions to Abuse me, thou will make them. But what say
thou concerning Justification?


C. Thou supposest the Doctrine of Justification by that Righteousness which
Christ fulfilled wholely without us, to be a Sin-pleasing and dangerous Notion:
What Reason have thou so to esteem it? p. 67.


Q. I do so; taking my Words in my Sense, and my Reasons are, 1st, Because
wholely wit^out us, is an unscriptural phrase: 2 dly, It takes away the
necessity of all Inward Work. 3 dly, No man is justified without Faith. No man
has Faith without Sanctification and Works; therefore the Works of
Righteousness, by the Spirit, are necessary to complete Justification.


C. Whether a sincere Faith is necessary to our Justification, is one thing:
But whether such a Faith be our sole Righteousness by which we are Justified,
is another, p. 67.


Q. And whether T. H. be not a^ idle Shifter is another thing. Was it the
Question, Whether our Faith were the sole Righteousness to Justification; or
whether Justification were by a Righteousness wholly without us and our Faith
too? If a sncere Faith be necessary; then because Faith is not Faith without
Work, Justification is not wrought wholely without. I told thee before, that
this Doctrine of thine speaks Peace to the Wicked, whilst wicked. But there is
no Peace to the Wicked, says my God.


C. It is horrible wicked to conclude, that what Christ has done and suffered
without us, is to speak Peace to the Wicked, whilst such.


Q. R^g^t; but who is the Man? Not W. P. for opposing a Doctrine which leaves
men as wicked as it found them; yea, encourages them in it. I appeal to the
sober Reader, if it be all one, to say, that Justification by the Righteousness
of Christ wholely without, which leaves the Conscience as polluted as ever, is
to speak Peace to the Wicked, whilst Wicked, and to affirm, that what Christ
has done and suffered without us, is to speak Peace to the Wicked, whilst
wicked. Thy indirect Consequences T. H. are to obvious and numerous to deceive
any ordinary Reader. But what say thou to my Distinction about Justification?
Christ's Work was twofold; 1st, to remit, forgive or justify from the
imputation of sins past, such as truly repent and believe. 2dly, By his Power
and Spirit working in the hearts of such, to destroy and remove the very Nature
of Sin, to make an end of it, to finish Transgression present and to come: The
first removes the Guilt, the second, tne Cause of it: Me thinks this should a
little allay thy Clamours.


C. This Distinction of the Work of Christ proves not what thou have asserted:
viz. That Justification is not by imputation of another Righteousness; much
less that such a Justification is a Doctrine of Devils. p. 72.


Q. This shows thee weary of the Work, or else ^hou would not so soon after
my Distinction continue in thy mis-construction of my Words, for the clearing
of which, my Distinction was made: I grant, that such as Repent and Believe
receive Remission, or a justifying from former Sins through the Righteousness
of God declared in and by Jesus Christ. But is this Complete Justification? it
is a making Inwardly Just, through a Purging out of Iniquity, and Mortifying of
Corruption, and bringing in Christ's Everlasting Righteousness? If not, then to
exclude this, and yet conclude men completely justified, by what Christ has
done wholely without, is a Doctrine of Devils; for it leaves men in an impure
state, and allows the Devils Kingdom to continue in being. In short, it is as
much as to say, that W. Pen calls what Christ has done for Men without, a
Doctrine of Devils, because W. P. asserts that to be a Doctrine of Devils,
which makes all that is necessary for Man's complete Justification before God,
to have been wrought by Christ wholely without, thereby excluding the necessity
of the Just-working, or Just-making Power of Christ from Man to that Work.
Well, but I also told thee of the necessity of Faith and Repentance, even to
the first part of Justification; consequently, that men cannot be justified in
any sense, without regard had to any inward Work, viz. Of Sanctification,
without which there can be no true Believing.


C. Though this be more close to the point then any thing thou have spoken, yet
it is not close as to prove thy Position: For if Repentance be but a Condition,
then it is not the sole Righteousness for which we are justified, p 73.


Q. Produce me but one Passage of ours that ever spoke that Langu^ge, and I
will yet say thou have not wronged us. Besides this Answer is wide from thy
purpose, though it comes very close to mine: For from contending for
Justification by a Righteousness wholely without (the Question) thou art come
now to contend against, a Justification by a Righteousness wholely within,
which was not the Question.


C. But thou say Abraham 's personal Obedience was the Ground of his being
accounted Righteous: If so, Then we are not made Just by a Righteousness
performed without us, but by a Righteousness performed by our selves. But then,
What will thou say to this Text; If Abraham were justified by works, he has
whereof to glory, but not before God? Romans 4.2. p. 77, 78.


Q. The Apostle James bears me out in what I said; for if Abraham were
justified by works, as said James, then his Obedience to God's Spirit, which
makes up those Works, gave him acceptance in God's sight: and let T. H. say,
if he dare, that Abraham was not justified in God's sight, in his resigning up
Isaac for a Sacrifice; and if he were, how do I err?

But that I might not be thought to oppose one Apostle to another, know,
Reader, that the Apostle James speaks of such Works, as were not performed in
Abraham's own strength, but through Faith and his Obedience to God's Spirit;
and therefore Evangelical. And the Justification they lead to, was a daily
Acceptance with God. The Works the Apostle Paul speaks of, were merely Abraham
's in his own power (as those of the Jews from the Law) therefore not
justifying before God in any sense; least of all could they merit Remission, or
purchase Abraham those great Blessings and peculiar Favors that it pleased
Almighty God to bestow upon him above others. Works and Justification thus
distinguished and allowed, prevent Men's setting one in opp^sition to the other;
and here Paul may come in without contradiction to James: If Abraham were
justified by Works he has whereof to glory, but not before God. The whole
Chapter concerns a justifying by the Remission of Sins that are past, as the
following Verses evid^n^e: Even as David also describes the Blessedness of the
Man unto whom God imputes Righteousness without Works; saying, Blessed are
they whose Unrighteousness are forgiven, and whose Sins are covered. Blessed is
the Man to whom the Lord will not impute Sin, Romans 4.6, 7, 8. So that the
Righteousness not obtainable by the Works of the Law, ver. 16. and the
Justification (which Abraham's own works could not procure) which is obtained
by Faith in the Love of God, is here explained to be, the Forgiving of
Iniquity, and the covering of Sin. But this is far from maintaining the
Compleatness of Justification from a Righteousness wholely without.


Testimonies concerning Justification.
Erasmus. We grant to be justified by Faith, that is, Hearts to be purged, See
Fascul. rerum expetend. p. 129. De amabili Eccles. concord.

The Fathers were just by the Righteousness of the Law in them, Iren. l. 4. c.
30.

Noah, Abraham, etc. were just by the Law natural (that is eternal) Tertullian
Adv. Jud. p. 184.

Clem. Alex. says, That Abraham was justified by Faith, but that Faith he
calls (...), a per^ect purgation. lib. 1. praed.

Justin. Martyr. Defens ad. Anton. says, Socrates ^ved with the Word; and that
he knew Christ in part, Defens. ad Senate. That was by the Light within: How
could he know him otherwise?

Scultetus p. 38. of his Medulla, says, There are some at this day of his
Opinion, and that do reckon Melchizedek, Abimelech, Ruth, Rachab, the Queen of
Saba, Hiram, Naaman, etc. among Christians.

H. Bullinger D^cad. 1. sermon. 6. de Justif. To justify signifies to ^^m^t
offenses, to cleanse to sanctify and to give utterance of Life Everlasting.
Again, Justification is taken for Remission of Sins, for Sanctification and
Adoption into the number of the Sons of God.

. VIII. Of Personal Reflections. T. H's Scurrulous Language. The Conclusion.
THou accusest me with defending and jus^^^ying E. B. in Cursing, Railing and
Lying, and that in the Name of the Lord, Dial. 3. p. 10, 82, 83. where it is to
be observed, that thou do not only esteem it so thy self, but supposest me
both to confess it to be such, and that notwithstanding I warrant it from the
Lord. These are thy black and odious Insinuations and Conclusions, as may at
large be seen in the pages, before mentioned as if to deny them to be such,
were to affirm them such; for I know not by what other Figure I allow them
such. But because this cannot appear less then an absurd and incredible Lie, to
all that have their senses, I shall the less heed it; But what Proof do thou
bring that E. B. curses, lies and railes? To call what he says by such hard
Names, concludes no such thing. All I see is, that thou ry^'st to the words by
him uttered, as if a Repetition were a Proof: Poor Man! This it is to be upon
the Fret, Proud and Passionate: E. B. must curse, lie and rail, because thou
sarst so. Is not this to act the Dictator with a witness? The Truth is I scarce
think there ever was a fouler. But thou stomackst my saying that the Scripture
allows those Names, and retor'st, it seems you can make the Scripture your Rule
for Lying, Cursing and Railing. But this is as irreverently said of the
Scripture as abusively of us, and absurdly in it self; can any man make them
his Rule for that which is impious? I had thought that at what time any act
wickedly, they cease to make them their Rule. Shall I make one of thy
Conclusions now against thee? T. Hicks says, the Scripture may be a Rule for
Lying, Cursing and Railing. But is every Example a Rule? a Rule always relat^s
to Duty; a President or Example not. Is it my Duty to call bad men by all the
Names mentioned in Scripture, because there are such Examples? What then
should I call Thee, that art as bad a man, every jot, as the worst of them?
This shows that the Scripture cannot be a Rule in an hundred such Cases, but
the particular measure of Wisdom from God, that is always present, and gives to
und^rstand and apply things suitably, and not upon mere Imitation, where thy
Religion, such as it is, stands. I say, that our justifying our Practice by the
Example of Scripture, does not conclude it our Rule, or any man's whatsoever,
in so citing it: And therefore thy threadbare Answer, it seems you are forced
to make Scripture your Rule to prove this or that, is out of doors and to be
despised, as plausible as it looks: Again, ^f the Scriptures be our Rule in any
particular cases (and I think we live up to it more then thou d^est, witness
thy three impious Dialogues) yet this concludes not the matter in Question for
thee; since it proves not the Scriptures to be eminently the Rule, or the most
eminent or general Rule, etc. But T. H. why has E. B. transgressed more than
either Prophets or Apostles, yea then Christ himself, when he (to such carn^l
men as thy self) seemed so unkind and harsh in his Answer and Rebuke of Peter's
Love and Care of him, as to say, Get thee behind me Satan? The Priest that E.
B. gave those Names (no one of which was harder then Satan) was never half so
kind to him, as Peter was to Christ; Nay, they were entrapping Questions; such
as they used to assault Christ with, when they sought occasion against him,
whom he called Children of the Devil. And we know that some of thy race T. H.
in the former times when power was in your Hands, diligently sought matter
against us: G. Fox was about the same time indicted for Blasphemy, and
endeavors great in some of the old Pharisaical stock, thy Brethren, to take
away his Life. E. B. knew whom and what he answered: And I do say, that by thy
Argument about the Scriptures being the Rule, without, further Regard thou
ought to stop thy Mouth, unless thou can prove that E. B. had not the same
Warrant the holy men of old had, to name thy Predecessors by; to do which, thou
must come to the discerning of Spirits: And by what will thou perform that
enquiry and Judgment? How can thou tell, whether a man using Christ's Words
to Peter, to a loving Disswader of him from Sufferings, that only intends his
Good, is well or ill done? The Scripture is no Rule for our discerning aright
this case; nor is it his Duty, in case he be in the right, because Christ's
words are there recorded, unless he be thereto prompted, of the same Power: Yet
if he say so, and be reproved by any; it is and must be granted that there is an
Example which shuts the Mouths, or should do, of all who respect the
Scripture; which is our case with thee. Well, but Christ had no Provocation by
Peter's words, but the Spirit that lurkt in them, which savored not the Work
of God then doing; To relish the like case aright there must be the same
Spirit; which T. H. rejecting for the Rule of right Judgment, to be sure he can
be no right Judge of E. B. But upon his own Opinion ought to be silent from
further Clamor against him, and repent of his scurrulous reproachful Language,
with which he has so often run over his Grave.

But thou chargest p. 86. Nicholas Lucas with saying, That if the Bible were
burnt, as good an one might be writ, and though he denies it, yet thou tell
us, it is never the less a Lie for that; and that he knows his Accusers. But
suppose it were true, had it not more become an Anabaptist, and a Preacher too,
(especially, when one of the Scriptures in thy Title Page is, A Man that is an
Heretic, after the 1 st and 2 d Admonition reject, who never dealt so with
either him or us, that thou so have publicly writ against as such) first to
have dealt with N L. about it; and granting he had been so obstinate in a
wicked Saying, as thou Dialoguest him to be, had this been a sufficient Ground
for thee to charge it upon the Persons and Principles of the People called
Quakers? But now thou have given the World a Saying to measure us by, that
first is of several years standing, and but lately raked up, and might have
been either at first mis-apprehended, or some word forgotten or mis-placed.
2dly, That N. L. denies that he ever spoke it, by a serious Certificate in G.
W's Append. confirmed by H. Stout, appealed to by thy Anabaptist Informers,
which thou have not so much as attempted to invalidate. 3dly, That he abhors
the Matter contained in the Story, and that without all mental Reserves. And
4thly, That it is charged upon, and made to be the Measure of Us and our
Principles and Motions, thereby making us to blaspheme God's Spirit, as well as
reprobate Scripture, (and that with no small Aggravation) who are innocent, by
never speaking the Words, by never countenancing such Words, and by not holding
the Matter directly or indirectly contained in them; and we do utterly renounce
and abhor both the one and the other. Well, T. Hicks! God will plead our Cause
against the Malignity of thy Slanderous Spirit: No Justice, no Discretion could
ever have led thee to this monstrous pitch of Abuse: thou show how glad thou
art to bedirt us, by making other Folks Lies thy Charges, and then insisting on
them with as much Confidence, as if thou were infallibly assured of every jot.
But we have some cause to suspect thee more then ever; thy Tale wears so many
Dresses: One while it is, Thou may burn thy Bible, and write as good an one
thy self, Contin. p. 5. Another while, We may burn our Bible, and make as good
an one our self, Dial. 3. page 3. And last of all, it is to go thus, If the
Bible were burnt, as good an one might be writ, ibid. p. 86. Now, T. H. answer;
thou that pretendest to such punctuality, which of these are we to take? The
first is unlikely, because what ever we think we could do, to be sure thou
can not think that a Quaker should have so good an Opinion of an Anabaptist
Woman, as that she could write another Bible as good as this, that we are sure
understands not this. If we must take thee in thy second Account, then the
Woman is out in her first Story: If in the last Relation of this Fiction, then
it concerns the Quakers no more then the Anabaptists. For suppose the World
were under one Emperor, and he so impious as to enjoin the burning of all the
Bibles, and all were burnt; I hope they are not so irreligious as to limit
God's Power, who is Almighty, that he could not furnish us with one as good as
this, especially, since Christians would else, as you must hold be without a
Rule: for I would have thee take notice T. H. that thou have so materially
varied in thy Charge, that now it is not, whether, if the Bible were burnt, any
Man could make as good an one; but whether if it were by such Impiety burnt, as
good an one might not be writ, which words are general. Here, T. H. to give the
-- his due, thou have helped thy Fiend Quaker, by bringing him in, saying, what
T. H. unless he would question God's Omnipotency, dare not deny.

But to conclude, either these Mistakes proceed from the first Authors, or from
T. H. If from the first Authors, why should they be credited at all, who show
such incertainty? if from T. Hicks; what Reason has he to be so infallibly sure
of their Memories, who is not sure of his own Books, much less of his own
Memory being found in such manifest Variations? But since every just Judge
accounts that Accuser and Witness of little Credit, that are found diverse and
inconsistent in their Stories; I hope my sober Reader, who is made judge
betwixt us, will in justice cashier T. Hicks from all Credit with him in these
attempts. But as against N. L. so against S. Eccles T. H. has publish^ a foul
Slander, viz. That he should say, the Scriptures are a Lie. This G. W. Appe^d
p. 12. reflected upon thee, as an abusive and false Charge; To which I cannot
find that thou say any more then this, that one of thy Witnesses against N.
L. can testify that S. E. said, he used Scripture, only to satisfy him,
Dial. 3. p. 86. Doubtless that Witness has long Ears, thou hangst so fast by
them. But he can witness it. But why does he not? Is that Put-off like to
confirm the Charge? But granting thy Witness remembers better against S. E.
then N. L. Does S. E' s. saying, that he used Scripture to satisfy his
Opponent, prove, that he said, the Scriptures were a Lie? Do men use to prove
Truths by Lies? Does not this make S. E. imply the Lie to his own Principles,
which he quoted Scripture to prove real Truths; What say thou T. H. Is this
to ^vince the truth of thy Objections and Charges against the Quakers, and
secure thy Credit with thy own and other People, that carries with it what
merits the Detestation and Rebuke of every honest mind?

But that thou may go out with the same braving Rant thou came in with, and
the like Honesty, thou tellest thy Reader, that W. P. is guilty of wilful
Lying, in saving, that thou disingenuously slankedst from a public Meeting,
and evadedst the offer made thee by G W to that purpose: It is not unlikely but
thou take thy old Way of proving, which is in the end to detect thy self of
that thou chargest me with the Guilt of. First thou say, that long before my
Book was out, thou did desire to meet with me, and I refused. But does this
prove me guilty of wilful Lying, in charging thee with evading the offer made
for a public Disputation? Are the terms of a Meeting for a public
Disputation in thy Answer? If not, How does thy Answer reach the Question?
Well, But I refused; to do what? To meet a Man in private that had twice
printed a Knave, a Fool, an Heretic* a Blasphemer^ and I know not how much
more, either in those Terms or in Circumlocution, to the World: No such
matter, T. H. I never intend to release thee from the Burden and Shame of so
many public and manifest Villainies as thou have committed against me, a
Stranger to thee in all respects, and my Friends in general, that it may be
never heard of such a man. Besides, Let me tell thee, I look upon thee to be so
base a Person, that as I shall always desire to have nothing to do with thee
(for that cause, and not thy Abilities) so I never intend to trust my self in
such private manner with any man, that is detected of such notorious
Perversion, Lying and Forgery; there being no Security to any one in common
conversing with thee; save that thou deservest no Credit against any man, who
have so publicly forfeited all Credit in thy numerous fictions against us. But
to prove thou have not evaded the public Meeting, thou tellest thy Reader,
that thou did send six Questions to G. W. to debate them upon notice in a
convenient time and place; that he refused; therefore G. W. did both shuffle
and lie; which is the great shuffle of thy 3d. Dial. in little, or the Evasion
or thy whole Book Epitomized: For as thou have pretended in thy 3d. Dial. that
the Evincement of the own Objections, was all that we required or stood thee
upon to do; so here thou make as if the Discussing of those Objections
(herein considered) had bin all, there was any ground to dispute upon; which
was for thee, who art the Abuser, to choose a Char^^ for the abused to insist
upon. But why did thou no^ ^ell thy Reader, that G. W. first sent thee a
Charge in writing; and that he offered in a public Auditory to prove thee
guilty of Forgeries, Self-contradictions and gross Errors, from thy own
Dialogues? Instead of yielding to the Test, even about matter of Fact, where
thou have grossly abused us, thou did in plain terms shuffle by a fresh
proposal of Question; as if thou were to teach us where and what to charge our
Enemies with; and then prescribe Rules (with many taunting Expressions, omitted
in thy 3d Dial,) how to behave our selves, on purpose to evade the Meeting. I
would have thee know, it was our Right to make the Complaint; and had thou
been a man of any Honesty, thou would readily have considered it, and joined
issue upon our Charge: This, in Reputation to thy self, as well as Justice to
us, thou oughtst not to have declined; And yet to aggravate these shuffles G.
W. proffered in his 4th paper to thee a note of the particulars charged as
Forgeries etc. if thou desiredst it; so willing was he and others to have seen
thee in a public Auditory. B^t seeing this would not do, he and I went to John
Gladman's, desiring him to offer thee from us, we wou^d meet thee and who else
to defend thee, in a public Auditory with thy Dialogue in one band and the
Bible in the other; the fairest of tenders; to make thy own Book the Subject;
and the Scriptures, (thou say we reprobate) A Rule. But this thou can not
but know was also rejected: So that to conceal these Shifts, nay, to say thou
art Shuffler, and which is worse, to charge G. W. with both Shuffling and Lying
at what time thou art so manifestly guilty of both, is to highten thy
Unworthiness to a monstrous pitch.

But as the Matter of thy Book is injurious, so thy Languague insolent and
scurrulous; intitling us Cheats, Impostors, a mad, arrogant, abusive, profane
M^n, Knave, in discourse [ Coxcomb] impious Cursers, Liars, Blasphemers, most
implacable Enemies to the Christian Religion, as vile Impostors as ever were,
influenced and inspired by the grand Impostor the Devil; calling our Religion,
malignant Errors, a mystical Romance, Satan's Snar^s, Blasphemy, blasphemous
Absurd^ties, I proclaim to the World, that your Religion is a mere Cheat,
calculated only to the Service of the Devil, and your own Lusts: and abusing
our religious Language with such like Expressions as these, Impertinent
Canting; your idle non-sensical and blasphemous Prating; Terms that as much
unbecome thy Pretenses, as they resemble the rest of thy Practices. Can thou
with good Conscience upbraid E. B. with rebuking a Priest in Scripture
Language, whilst thou have taken the Liberty; throughout thy Dialogues, when
and where thou went never provoked, of such foul and frothy Expressions, as
becomes not any Man writing of Religion? Is this to make the Scripture thy
Rule; or to act the Christian against the Quaker? and to prove the Quaker none?
No such matter T. H. but much the contrary, and that in the minds of not a few,
and those too, of thy own Way, though of a better Spirit, who have disowned
them, Root and Branch. I would not, after thy Example, reprobate all with thee,
God forbid: That God has turned these ill designed Attempts to our Advantage,
remember what sort of Salute was lately given thee, by a Religious and
Ingenious Person in Bristol (once a Preacher among the Independents) at thy
reflecting upon his adhering to the Way we profess, viz That he read thy
Dialogues before he ever read the Quakers Books (or Answers) and that the
disingenuity of that Dealing (apprehending it to be no real Dialogue) was a
FURTHERANCE of his INQUIRIES, and so of his CONVICTIONS, grounded upon thy
ABUSES; an Argument never to be answered by thee, T. H. if thou should write
Three Dialogues more, unless they were as remote from these as thou were from
Honesty when thou writ'st them; who do first Forge, and then Lie and Rail to
maintain it.

Think not with these Comical Courses to obtain thy Ends upon us, nor raze the
Foundation of our Religion by thy abusive Interludes; in which thou have not
imitated Christ, but Ap'd the profane Stager; writing a sort of Mock Religion
instead of solid Controversy; therein playing the Humourist with the Vulgar,
like Aristophanes of old, (though with worse Malice, and less Wit) who
sacrificed the Virtue and Gravity of Socrates and his Friends, to please their
Enemies, and profit himself; the Hinges on which thy Dialogues turn. The First
is manifest, and so is the Last to the value of 300 Books at an Impression [if
some of thy Assistants do not wrong thee, as we suppose not] (ask the
Bookseller else) besides ^erquisites; hereby proving thy self, one of those
unruly Vain-Talkers, who writest things thou ought not for filthy Lucre
sake, applied to us in thy Title Page but due to thy Self.

And however sweet these Courses may relish to thy worldly Palate, thou will
find them deadly Poisonous in the End; at what time thy own Dialogues, and not
I, nor any influenced by me, will prove so many ASSASSINATORS in thy own
Bowels. God, if it please him, give thee Repentance, that thou may escape his
fierce Wrath to come. Amen.

Now sober Reader, I shall address my self to thee, and God's righteous
VVitness in thy Conscience, whether I have acquitted my Self in this
Controversy as becomes a Christian-man, against the Violent and U^fair
A^^^ults of my Adversary? and if I may not with very good Reason conclude, that
he has all this while but counterfeited the Christian, and abused the Quaker;
and consequently, that he (and not the real Quaker) is quite another thing then
a Christian? Let Righteous Judgment take place.

23d 6th Mon. 1674. A true Lover, and hearty Wisher of thy Souls Felicity, W. P.

Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven,

Mat. 7.21. For he is not a Jew which is one outward; neither is that
Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh: But he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart in the Spirit; and not in the
Letter, whose Praise is not of Men but of God,

Romans 2.28, 29. But us then he that was born after the Flesh persecuted him
that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now,

Gal. 4.29. But be of good cheer I have overcome the World,

Jo. 16. last.
Page 13. line 7. read two first Dialogues. p. 34. l. 32. r. Dial. 3. p. 41. p.
35. l. 28. r. spoak. l. 31. r. was p. 41. l. 26. r. 76. p. 46. l. 14. r. of
^his.

A Postscript by another Hand.
WE expect to hear what the Baptists in and about London will say (as being
appealed to) concerning their Brother Thomas Hick's Proceeding in his Three
Dialogues, and whether they approve thereof, or of such Play-Books, or Romances
about Religion, yea or nay; for they are highly concerned to give Judgment, and
to be plain to the World herein, as they tender the Glory of God, and
Reputation of Religion, etc.

NOw, if you the Teachers and Elders, etc. among the Baptized People, do not
publicly clear your selves of Thomas Hicks, and these his unjust Proceedings
against us; and hereafter he further persists therein. We may take it for
granted, that you own his Work; and may justly deal with him, and pursue him,
not only as Tho. Hicks, but as the Baptists great Champion, peculiar Agent, or
Representative. But if you ingenuously clear your selves of him and his
Corrupt, Perverse Work, then his future Miscarriages will be chargeable only
upon T. Hicks himself, and you will appear to the World, so far clear thereof;
and approve your selves the more honest and sincere toward, God, Truth and
Religion.

THE END.

