CONSIDERATIONS Moving to a Toleration, AND Liberty of Conscience. WITH
ARGUMENTS Inducing to a Cessation of the Penal Statutes against all DISSENTERS
Whatever, upon the Account of RELIGION, Occasioned by an Excellent Discourse
upon that Subject, Published by His GRACE The Duke of Buckingham.

Humbly offered to the Parliament at their next Sitting at Westminster.

Tantaene animis Coelestibus Irae?
LONDON, Printed for R. Hayhurst, 1685.

The Epistle Dedicatory. To His GRACE the DUKE OF Buckingham.
My Lord,
It Is with the Highest Veneration due to Your Graces Illustrious Worth and
Quality, that I presume to make this Address to a Person of Your Graces
Eminence and Greatness. And indeed, the only Encouragement for that Confidence,
is, That this Discourse is only Listed under Your Graces Banner. Your Grace
has been pleased to be the first Assertor of that Justice, which in this Age of
the World, wanted only so Great a Name to Espouse and Vindicate it. For alas,
whatever (tho never so rational) has or could be urged in the Defense of
Christian Clemency and Tenderness, by any less Hand, would have been overbourn
by the present Impetuous Torrent against it; And therefore they only wanted so
uninterested a Champion as Your Grace to Patronize them. If any less Person had
attempted it, presently the opprobious Name of a Non-con, or a Tub-Preacher,
would have been thrown in his Teeth, and all Reasons whatever, upon a
Toleration, tho never so Convincing, would have been instantly Blasted (how
unjustly soever) with the Old Brand of Great is Diana of Ephesus, as if
Published, Maintained, and cried up only for the Service or Interest of a Party
or Faction. But Your Grace has the happiness of a Station and Character above
the Reach of so feeble and stingless a Calumny, whilst Your Generous Pen has
been pleased to adapt that Truth which Malice may Snarl at, but cannot Bite.

I confess indeed, the General, nay only Arguments urged against a Toleration,
is that Clamorous pretense, of its Danger to the Government, through an
Indulging of Rebellious and Antimonarchical Principles, which under the Mask
and Cover of Tenderness of Conscience, have been, or may be diffused through the
Kingdom, and several Republic Machinations and Poisonous Designs, have or may
be hatched and nourisht under the unhappy Consequences of Liberty of Conscience.

And truly, Persecution for Dissent, in matter of Faith, without this plausible
Apology, would not have so much as a Shadow of Excuse to Protect it from the
Infamy of a more than Pagan piece of Cruelty. But alas, this weak Pretext, when
truly and duly weighed, will quickly fall to the Ground. For that there have
been, and may be again, those Atheistical and Diabolical persons, who
Villanously, under the Veil of Religion, play the blackest of Hypocrites, and
carry on their own ambitious and damnable Intregues, under that Golden Visor,
is a most undoubted and too sad Truth. But is that a sufficient Plea, why
those, whose utmost Aim is the Innocent Worship of God, untainted with any
such Disloyal Thoughts, should not only be Loaded with their Reproach, and
Stigmatized with their Brand, but also be equally involved in their
Condemnation, viz. Fined, Harast, Imprisoned, Beggard, and Ruined as such. If
the Government has had Experience of those Antimonarchical Principles so
fomented, undoubtedly that Experience has given it Discretion enough to prevent
the future Effects of them, and to distinguish betwixt the Guilty and the
Innocent. Let every Judas therefore have his Judas Fate; which may the Wisdom
of the Nation and Government take care to see Executed: And those that urge the
denial of a Toleration from their Jealousy only of the forementioned Danger,
must certainly suspect a very great Imbecility in the Administration, that can
find no better Expedient, then rooting up the Flower, to keep the Spider from
sucking Poison out of it.

This whole Discourse therefore, being absosolutely free from the least
intention of favoring any of those false Pretenders to Religion and
Christianity, those wicked Enemies of Magistracy, the Sacred Ordinance of God,
is only an Endeavor to evince the Reasonableness of a Christian forbearance to
our weak Brother, purely and only as such. With this Integrity and Innocence,
these Considerations are made Public, and with no other Recommendation durst
the unknown Author lay himself at Your Graces Feet.

CONSIDERATIONS Moving to a TOLERATION, AND Liberty of Conscience, etc.
CONSIDERATION I.
IT is not the Will of the Great and Wise God, to appoint any Forcible Ways or
Courses to bring Men and Women to Conform to his Worship: But Christ was
pleased to Commissionate his Apostles (to whom he committed the Keys of his
Church) to Preach and Declare the Christian Doctrine: And they that succeed
them in their Office, are not by Might or by Power, but by gentle Invitation,
and the influence of his kind Spirit, to inform the Judgment, convince the
Conscience, and so to persuade the Children of Men to be Reconciled unto God.
And who is Man that he should take another Course, and will not rest in God's
Wisdom? Now we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you
through us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

CONSIDERATION II.
THe using outward Compulsion in matters of Conscience, does only serve to make
Men Hypocrites, but works no saving Conversion. If Men conform to any Worship
or way thereof, with an unwilling Mind, they cannot serve God aright, though
the Worship be Right, because the Heart of the Worshipper is not Right. God
calls for the Heart, My Son, give me thy Heart. If it were not for Compulsion,
the Man would be in some other Practice or Profession; and when he Conforms
only to save his Person or his Purse, he is the Servant of Man, and not the
Servant of God, and this is not to Save his Soul. Not by Constraint, but
willingly; not for filthy lucre, but a ready mind.

CONSIDERATION III.
ALL sorts of Persons are for Liberty of Conscience for themselves, even those
that are most Imposing upon others. They would account it hard measure to be
constrained to perform, or forbear such and such things which concern their
Religion, or to suffer unproportionable Penalties. And why should not the
Church Protestants make the Presbyterians, the Independents, the Papists case
their own in this Point, seeing they are all Fellow Christians: Therefore,
whatsoever things ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye so unto them, for
this is the Law and the Prophets.

CONSIDERATION IV.
THe good Rules of Humanity, and common Civility, which is carefully observed
in smaller matters, are openly violated, by using of force in the matters of
Conscience. Men abhor to thrust that Meat and Drink down their Neighbors
Throat, which will not agree with their Stomachs. They say commonly, Pray take
that which best likes you: and why are they not as civil in the matter of
Religion? Have compassion on one another, Love as Brethren, be Pitiful, be
Courteous.

CONSIDERATION V.
THe Church Protestants in England have been distressed by hot doings
heretofore in the Reign of Queen Mary, when they were accounted Criminals for
not conforming to that Worship which was then the Established worship of the
Kingdom: And they should have taken heed before now of what they did, and of
what Spirit they be still of, in Prosecuting others, seeing they know not how
soon that part of the Wheel which has been, or is on the Ground, may come to
be at Top, and fall the heavier on them upon this Account, For with the same
measure Men meet withal, it shall be meeted to them again.

CONSIDERATION VI.
THe Conforming and Nonconforming Protestants, and the Protestants and Papists,
all do agree as to the substance of Christianity, in the same Articles of
Faith, and the same Rule of Manners, in the Apostles Creed, and the sen
Commandments. There is one Body, one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism. As a variety of Flowers may grow on the same Bank, so may Protestants
and Papists live in England, Union in Affection, is not inconsistent with
disagreement of Opinion. There is much more Reason to love one another for the
many things wherein we agree, then to fall out for those wherein we differ; and
though we cannot have Communion in the same External worship, we can and have
Communion in the same Internal Adoration of the same Blessed Trinity, and in
the one hope of our Calling unto Life Eternal, through Jesus Christ. We cannot
come together in the same Church, but may live together in the same Land; and
as we are under the same Gracious King, he may Protect both and suffer no Party
to Persecute one another. The Woolf shall lie down with the Lamb, the Leopard
with the Kid, they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my Holy Mountain.

CONSIDERATION VII.
THe French Protestants, who are the Dissenters from the Established Worship of
that Kingdom, are kindly received and succored by England. And when the
French King is highly blamed by English Protestants, and perhaps too by some
English Catholics, for Persecuting his peaceable Subjects, shall we do the
same things in our Kingdom which we condemn in another? Therefore art thou
inexcusable Man, whosoever thou art, for thou that Judge another, do the
same things.

CONSIDERATION VIII.
THe Prosecuting Dissenters and Recusants for matters of Conscience is of great
disadvantage to the Trade of the Kingdom, the Dissenters being a chief part of
the Trading People of the Nation, considered as Merchants, Shopkeepers,
Clothiers, Farmers, etc. by which many Thousands of the Kings poor Subjects are
maintained, and consequently Liberty of Conscience must be a most effectual
means for the restoring of it.

I will mention a Story or two which may be easily attested, if they be called
into Question. One Thomas Peard about 16 Years since of West Dean near
Barnstable, who kept many Poor People at work in the Clothing Trade, was
Prosecuted upon the Act for Twenty Pound a Month, so many Months for not coming
to Church, that he was forced to quit his Habitation and Employment. Upon this
the Poor People of many Parishes go a Begging, and the numbers presently were
so great, that the Justices were fain to meet, and consulting together,
conclude upon it to get the Man's Fines to be discharged. This being done, Peard
returns to his business, takes the Poor off their hands, and finds them again
the same Living.

In like manner, about 14 Years since, the Bishop of Sarum sends forth
Instructions into all the Parishes of his Diocese for bringing them to Church,
or citing them to his Coutt. There were Eighty Clothiers Nonconformists of
several Judgments in the County of Wilts, who being Alarmed by this Summons,
think of withdrawing their Trade, (the time for Provision of their Wool
favoring such a suspention) but considering what a Number of Poor depended on
them, some Employing 500, some a 1000 People under them, who were capable of
getting no other maintenance: Besides that, the Farmer was no less concerned
than the Spinner and the Carder, who could have no Money for his Wool; fearing
also that if they should give over on a sudden, there might so much Clamor
ensue as might turn into some uproar, they agree upon sending up eight or ten
of their sufficient Men to represent their Case to the King and Council. Orders
are taken hereupon that the Archbishop Writes to the Bishop to desist, and
assurance is given by both the Secretaries to the Clothiers for their safety in
keeping on their Employment.

What those Justices and what the Council at that time saw convenient for that
Shire, and those Towns, will be discerned (I doubt not) by the considerate, to
be of the like Emolument throughout the Nation.

And this brings to my remembrance a certain Prophecy, that is now much in
Men's Mouths, and has been going for Scores of Years, That after Eighty Five,
England shall Thrive: which though I have hitherto regarded (I must confess,)
when I have heard the words but as Rhyme only, yet if it shall please the King
at his coming now to the Throne, to give Liberty of Conscience to his People,
according to the design of this Paper, I shall not doubt but to see the matter
really accomplished. The Riches of a Nation are the Bodies of Men; for the
greatness of a Kingdom certainly consists not in a vast continent of Ground,
but in the Multitude of its Inhabitants; and the Thriving of the People, lies
in the increase of Trade, Manufacture and Commerce, as is intimated. An Act for
Universal Toleration (Stated rightly, that is, of all, so far as they are
Tolerable, whereof the Wisdom of a Parliament is the fittest Judge) would
produce both these; It would bring People that are Persecuted in our Neighbor
Nations about their Religion, to England, as it does, or has done to Holland;
and they must bring their Hands and Business with them. Besides, the Infinite
Encouragement it would give to many, who now keep in their Monys, by Reason of
their Obnoxiousness to the Law, which they would bring forth most Industriously
into Employment, as soon as they could see themselves safe, and their
Consciences out of danger. And when Issachar saw that Rest was good, and the
Land that it was Pleasant, he bowed his Shoulder to Bear, and became a Servant
unto Tribute.

CONSIDERATION IX.
IT has pleased our most Gracious Sovereign, King JAMES the Second (whom God
Bless with a gentle Mind, and good days) to declare to his Council, and then to
the Nation, that he will follow his Deceased Brother in his Example of
Clemency, which we may hope for in this point of Indulgence. We have his Royal
Word for thus much, and his Word, we all hear, may be Presumed upon, so far as
the meaning may be Presumed. I do not therefore here Presume upon his meaning,
but the Clemency of the late King, and Tenderness to his Subjects in his
Gracious Purposes to indulge them in the point of Liberty of Conscience, does
appear sufficiently to all Men on Record. In his Declaration from Breda, April
1660. We do declare (says he) a Liberty to Tender Consciences, and that no Man
shall be disquieted, or called in Question for differences in Opinion, in the
matters of Religion, which does not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom; and that
We shall be ready to consent to such an Act of Parliament as upon mature
deliberation shall be offered to us, for the full granting of that Indulgence.

In his Declaration Dated October 1660. We do again renew what we have formerly
said in our Declaration from Breda, for the Liberty of Tender Consciences. That
no Man shall be disquieted or called in Question for differences in Opinion in
matters of Religion, which do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, and if any
have been disturbed in that kind since our Arival here, it has not proceeded
from any direction of ours.

At the opening of the Parliament on the Eighth of May, 1661. I do Value my
self much upon keeping my Word, and upon making good whatsoever I Promise to my
Subjects.

Again in his Speech to both Houses on July the 8th 1661. It is to put my self
in Mind, as well as you, that I (I think so often as I come to you) mention to
you my Declaration from Breda; and let me put you in mind of another
Declaration Published by your selves about the same time, which I am persuaded
made mine the more effectual, an Honest, Generous, and Christian Declaration,
Signed by the most Eminent. Persons that had been the most Eminent Sufferers,
in which you Renounced all former Animosities, and Memory of former
unkindnesses: And my Lords and Gentlemen, let it be in no Man's Power to charge
Me or You with the breach of our Words or Promises, which can never be a good
Ingredient for our future Security.

Again in his Declaration of December. 1662. Concerning the Non performance of our
Promises, we well remember the very words from Breda, viz. we Remember well the
Confirmations we have made of them, since upon several occasions in Parliament,
and as all these things are still fresh in our Memory, so are we still firm in
the Resolution of performing them to the full. And further, We do still
conceive our selves so far engaged both in Honor, and what we owe to the Peace
of our Dominions, which we Profess we can never think secure whilst there shall
be a color left to the Malicious and Disaffected to Inflame the Minds of so
many Multitudes, upon the score of Conscience, with despair of ever obtaining
any effect of our Promises for their Ease. After all, we have his Indulging
Declaration indeed, for fulfilling all his Promises, and putting an end to a
preceding violent Prosecution of the Act against Conventicles, March 1672.

It being Evident, by the sad experience of Twelve Years, that there is little
Fruit of all those forcible courses; we think our selves obliged to make use of
that Supreme Power which is not only Inherent in us, but has been declared and
Recognized to be so by several Statutes and Acts of Parliament, and therefore
do now accordingly Issue out this our Declaration for the quieting the Minds of
our good Subjects in these points, for Inviting of Strangers in this
Conjuncture to come and Live under us, and for the better Encouragement of all,
to a cheerful following their Trade and Callings, from whence we hope (by the
blessing of God) to have many good and happy advantages to our Government.
There are many Gracious Sayings here might be added upon this, which the late
King uttered in return to the Ministers who brought him the Thanks of several
Counties for this his Declaration, fit to be Recorded, as of extraordinary
kindness, but seeing it has pleased the Divine Providence to take him from us,
who should have made them good, I am content they be Interred with him.

The Words of our present Sovereign are I am sure of more concernment now to
us, which as they make all this which is brought to be material, and for which
the whole Nation is Addressing him with their Thanks (among whom I know no
cause why I may not bring also my oblation) must not be omitted. Since it has
pleased Almighty God to place me in this Station, and I am now to succeed so
Good and Gracious a King, as well as so very kind a Brother, I think it fit to
declare to you, That I will endeavor to follow his Example, and most
especially in that of his Clemency and Tenderness to his People. Then after
Five Days Ananias the High Priest descended with the Elders, and an Orator
Named Tertullus, who when he was called forth, spoke thus, Seeing that by thee
we enjoy great Quietness, and that by thee very Worthy Deeds have been done to
this Nation, we accept it always and in all places, most Noble Felix, with all
Thankfulness.

These are some Reasons (among Multitudes) that fly abroad for Toleration, and
they are no picked chosen ones, but the most plain and obvious to the meanest
Capacity, such as I have caught up most easily, from the Papers only of two
ordinary Sedulous Men; the one of them having had Public Employment about the
Wool and Manufacture of the Nation, and so is Versed in these things; the other
having got, or kept such as these Public Speeches by him, and Collected these
Passages to my Hand, only I have changed their Style, and abbreviated them, to
avoid the baldness and Prolixity: I will now add some Testimonies for the same
thing, out of an Author of another Character, but I will name neither one nor
other, that I may not offend them or any body. And these Testimonies which are
Argumentum ab Authoritate, shall be my Tenth and Last Consideration.

CONSIDERATION X.
IT is not like in the Three first Centuries of the Church, that any thing is
to be found in the Christian writings, for the use of the Sword in Religion,
whilst themselves were under it. In the next ensuing, we have Constantine,
Constantius, Jovian, Valentinian, Valens, Theodosius, and after those, Honorius
and Arcadius may be cited for their larger Permissions, especially toward the
Jews, by those that will be at the pains to do it.

In the Year 386, Idacius and Ithacius were condemned by the Gallican Bishops
for being Authors of bringing the Priscillianists to Execution. And St.
Augustine no doubt with the Fathers, generally are against any Sanguinary Laws
in this matter. Nullis bonis in Catholica Ecclesia hoc placet, si usqus ad
Mortem in quemquam Haereticum saeviatur. Contra Or sconium lib. 3. cap. 50.
Hence were they called Ithacians, and held for Heretics, who maintained, That
those who erred in Religion, ought to be put to Death. And it is observed, it
was Dominick was the first that brought up the Fire among Christians upon that
account. Withdraw from them, avoid them (says the Scripture) (...), but not
beat or Persecute them as the Heathens do, says Ignatius. For it is an unheard
of, strange kind of Preaching the Gospel (says Gregory) to exact Belief (as the
Egyptians their Bricks) with Stripes. Decere arbitramur (says Theodosius and
Valentinian) nostrum imperium subditos nostros de Religione commonefacere; They
chose not to say [imperare] but [commonefacere] signifying thereby, that
Religion ought not to be forced. Nihil enim (says Lactantius) tam voluntarium
quam Religio, in qua si animus est Sacrificantis aversus, jam sublata, jam
nulla est. Religio imperari (says Cassidoce) non potest. And, suadenda est
(says St. Bernard) non imperanda. Praecepit Sancta Synodus (says the Toletan
Council, de Judaeis) nemini deinceps ad credendum vim infer. And the New Law
(says Tertullian) does not vindicate it self Ultore gladio. The Jews took no
such course (as Pestilent as their Doctrine was) with the Sadduces, nor Christ
with the Samaritanes, See Luke 9. 35. Matthew. 13. 28, 29. John 18. 36. John 6.
67. And will ye also go away, says Christ to the Twelve? Which are words
removing all force and necessity from Man in the choice of his Religion. So
Chrysostom, Athanasius, Cyprian, I may also add Augustine and Salvian.

We may read in the Life of Josephus, when some of the Traohonites came in for
Rescue to the Jews, where himself was Governor, and the Jews would thereupon
constrain them to be Circumcized, or else not let them abide with them, he
would not permit that injurious Zeal, alleging, That every Man ought according
to his own Mind, and not by Man's compulsion to serve God. In our English Story
(to fuit this) by Bid, when Ethelbert the first Prince that received
Christianity of the Saxon Heptarchy, was converted by Austin, sent hither by
Gregory, and many thereupon came into the Church, it is said, He especially
embraced those that came in, but compelled none; for he half learned that the
Faith and Service of Christ ought to be voluntary, and not of constraint. It
helps much (says the Imperial Edict of Constantine and Lirinus) to establish
the public Tranquillity, for every Man to have Liberty to use and choose what
kind of Worshipping himself pleases; and for that intent is this done of us, to
have no man enforced to one Religion more than to another. A Prince who would
draw his Subjects (divided into Sects and Factions) to his Religion, should not
(in my Opinion) use Force, says Bodin; which he Enhances more particularly from
the example of Theodosius toward the A^rians.

John Barclay (not William that Wrote Adversus Monarchomachos) has a Discourse
on purpose to this effect about the Calvinists, (as it is thought) under the
Name of the Hyperephanians, in one chapter of his Argenis. And Camerartus in
his Historical Meditations, has a chapter as Learned, Full, and Grave, as need
to be on this Subject, lib. 3. cap. 18. It was observed by the Popes Council
(says Guicciardine) that the Prosecution of Luther, since it was not
accompanied with their own Reformation, did increase his Reputation; and that
it had been a less Evil to dissemble the knowledge of such a matter, which
would perhaps have dissolved of it self, than by blowing at the Brand, to make
the Fi^e burn the more. There may be some Notes conferred with this out of
Davilah, upon the deliberations of the Politic Ka^, Regent of France, about
the Pacification in her Son Henry the Thirds time; I will rest in one after
Henry the Fourth succeeded. That great Prince thought fit to declare himself
Catholic, but gets that same Edict for Liberty to the Hugonots, to be renewed
and passed the Parliament of Part. By which means endeavoring to remove
Suspicion from their minds, and confirming them by good Usage together with
some Gifts and Promises to the chief Heads, he insensibly took away (says the
Historian) the pulse and strength of that Party, so that those that are versed
in the Kingdom, believe that a few years of such sweet Poison (if he had not
been disabled in this course through want of Money) would have extinguished
that Faction, which so many years of desperate Wars had not, with the Effusion
of so much Blood, been able to weaken. Violent courses (says my Lord Cook) are
like hot Waters, that may do good in an Extremity, but the use of them does
spoil the Stomach, and it will require them stronger and stronger, and by
little and little they will l^ssen the Operation.

They that have this Commonwealth (says Judge Jenkins) will use means together
with the Restitution of the King, to procure an Act of Oblivion, and tender
Consciences a just and reasonable satisfaction, else we must all Perish first
or last.

I will Crown these Testimonies with the experienced advice of CHARLES the
First to our late Sovereign: Beware of Exasperating any Faction by the crosness
and asperity of some men's Passions, Humors for private Opinions employed by
you, grounded only on the differences in lesser matters, which are but the
Skirts and Suburbs of Religion, wherein a charitable Connivance, and Christian
Toleration, often dissipates their Strength, whom a rougher opposition
fortifies, and puts their despised and oppressed Party into such Combinations,
as may most enable them to get a full Revenge on those they count their
Persecutors, who are commonly assisted by that vulgar Commiseration, which
attends all that are said to suffer under the notion of Religion.

There are two Rules in the Preamble of the Statute Primo Mariae; the one is,
That the State of a King stands more assured by the love of his Subjects,
than in the dread and fear of Laws. The other is, That Laws justly made,
without extreme Punishment, are more often, and for the moct part better
obeyed, than those that are made with that extremity. Unto which my once before
named Lord chief Justice Cook, Subjoyns this Sentence, M^tius imperanti melius
Paretur.

I will close up all with the end of a Speech of Sir Orlando Bridgeman to the
Parliament, when he was Lord Keeper.

If any just grievances shall have happened, his Majesty will be as willing and
ready to redress them, as you to have them Presented to him; and his Majesty
doubts not, but you will give Healing and Moderate Counsels, and Imprint that
known Truth in the Hearts of his Subjects, that there is no distinct Interest
between the King and his People, but the good of one, is the good of both.

Now this is the Copy of the Letter which Artaxerxes gave unto Ezra the Priest,
I make a Decree, that all they of the People of Israel, and of his Priests and
Levites in my Realm, which are minded of their own free will to go up to
Jerusalem, go with thee.

And Gamaliel stood up in the Council, and said, Ye Men of Israel, take beed to
your selves, refrain from these Men, and let them alone, for if this Counsel or
this Work be of Men, it will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot
Overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to Fight against God.

FINIS.

