THE GREAT CASE OF Liberty of Conscience Once more Briefly Debated and
Defended, BY THE Authority of Reason, Scripture, and Antiquity:

Which may serve the Place of a General Reply to such late Discourses, as have
Opposed a Tolleration.

The Author W. P.

For whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, that do you unto them,
Matthew. 7. 22. Render unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's; and to God, the
things that are Gods, Matthew. 12. 27. Printed in the Year, 1670.

ERRATA.
Reader,
Grant the common Civility of excusing the Author from the Errors of the Press;
some of which are here Corrected.

Page, Line, Error, Corrected. 9. 15. of for 10. 8. defected defective 11. 10.
ten fourteen 18. 10. impo'd imposed 19. 12. pervert perverts 22. afflictions
reflections 20. 29. conform conforms 22. 2. when what 4. conscience consciences
23. 29. one he 26. 17. for from 32. demur demure 27. 33. hat that 30. 10. Book
Cook 39. 7. kinds kind 45. 16. one once 48. 5. reverence revenge. Page, Line,
Error, Corrected. 25 21 are pleased are not pleased. 55 15 defined defended. 19
point Faith point of Faith.

TO THE Supreme Authority OF ENGLAND.
TOLLERATION (for these ten years past) has not been more the Cry of some, then
PERSECUTION has been the practice of others, though not on Grounds equally
rational.

The present cause of this Address, is to solicit a Conversion of that Power
to our Relief, which hitherto has been imployd to our Depression; that after
this large experience of our innocence, and long since expired Apprentiship of
Cruel Sufferings, you (...) pleased to cancel all our Bonds, and give (...) of
those Freedoms, to which we are (...) English Birthright.

This has been often promised to us, and we as earnestly have expected the
performance; but to this time we labor under the unspeakable pressure of Nasty
Prisons, and daily Confiscation of our Goods, to the apparent ruin of entire
Families.

We would not attribute the whole of this severity to Malice, since not a
little share, may justly be ascribed to Mis-intelligence:

For it is the infelicity of Governors to see and hear by the Eyes and Ears of
other men; which is equally unhappy for the People.

And we are bold to say, that Suppositions and mere Conjectures, have been the
best Measures, that most have taken of Us, and of our Principles; for whilst
there have been none more inoffensive, we have been marked for Capital
Offenders.

It Is hard that we should always lie under this undeserved imputation; and
which is worse, be Persecuted as such, without the Liberty of a just Defense.

In short, if you are apprehensive, that our Principles are inconsistant with
the Civil Government, grant us a free Conference about the Points in Question,
and let us know, what are those Laws, essential to preservation, that our
Opinions carry an opposition to? And if upon a due enquiry we are found so
Hetrodox, as represented, it will be then but time enough to inflict these
heavy penalties upon us.

And as this Medium seems the fairest, and most reasonable; so can you never do
your selves greater Justice, either in the vindication of your proceedings
against us, be we Criminal, or if Innocent, in dis-ingaging your service of
such, as have been Authors of so much Misinformation.

But could we once obtain the favor of such debate, we doubt not to evince a
clear consistency of our Life and Doctrine with the English Government; and
that an indulging of Dissenters in the Sense defended, is not only most
Christian and Rational, but Prudent also. And the contrary (how plausibly
soever insinuated) the most injurious to the Peace and destructive of that
discreet Balance, which the Best and Wisest States, have ever carefully
Observed.

But if this fair and equal Offer, find not a place with you, on which to rest
its Foot; much less that it should bring us back the Olive Branch of
TOLLERATION; we heartily embrace and bless the Providence of God; and in his
Strength resolve, by Patience, to outweary PERSECUTION, and by our constant
Sufferings, seek to obtain a Victory, more glorious, than any our Adversaries
can atchive by all their Cruelties.

Vincit qui patitur.
Newgate, the 7th of the 12th Month, called February, 1670. From a Prisoner
for Conscience Sake, W. P.

The PREFACE.
Were some as Christian, as they boast themselves to be, 'twould save us all
the Labor we bestow in rendering Persecution so unchristian, as it most truly
is: Nay were they those men of Reason they Character themselves, and what the
Civil Law styles good Citizens, it had been needless for us to tell them, that
neither can any external Coercive Power convince the understanding of the
poorest Idiot, nor Fines and Prisons be judged fit, and adequate Penalties for
Faults purely intellectual; as well as that they are destructive of all civil
Government.

But we need not run so far as beyond the Seas, to fetch the sense of the
Codes, Institutes, and Digests, out of the Corpus Civil to adjudge such
practices, incongruous with the good of civil society, since our own good, old,
admirable Laws of England, have made such excellent provision for its
Inhabitants, that if they were but thought as fit to be executed by this
present Age, as they were lightly judged necessary to be made by our careful
Ancestors: We know how great a Stroke they would give such, as venture to lead
away our Property in Triumph (as our just Forfeiture) for only Worshipping our
God in a differing Way, from that which is more generally Professed and
Established.

And indeed it is most truly lamentable, That above others (who have been found
in so Un-natural and Antichristian an Employment) those, that by their own
frequent Practices and voluminous Appologies, have defended a Separation from
the Papacy) should now become such earnest Persecuters for it, not considering,
that the Enaction of such Laws, as restrain Persons from the free Exercise of
their Consciences, in matters of Religion, is but a knotting Whip cord to lash
their own Posterity; whom they can never promise to be conformed to a national
Religion. Nay, since Mankind is subject to such Mutability, they cannot ensure
themselves, from being taken by some Persuasions, that are esteemed Hetrodox,
and consequently ketch themselves in Snares of their own providing. And that
men thus liable to change, and no ways certain of their own Belief to be the
most infallible,) as by their multiplied Concessions, may appear) to enact any
Religion, or prohibit Persons from the free Exercise of theirs, sounds harsh in
the Ears of all modest and unbya'st men. We are bold to say our Protestant
Ancestors thought of nothing less, then to be succeeded by Persons
Vainglorious of their Reformation, and yet Adversaries to Liberty of
Conscience; for to People in their Wits, it seems a Paradox.

Not that we are so ignorant, as to think is within the reach of humane Power
to fetter Conscience, or to restrain its Liberty strictly taken: But that plain
English, of Liberty of Conscience, we would be understood to mean, is this;
namely, The Free and Uninterrupted Exercise of our Consciences, in that Way of
Worship, we are most clearly persuaded, God requires us to serve him in
(without endangering our undoubted Birthright of English Freedoms) which being
matter, of FAITH, we Sin if we omit, and they cannot do less, that shall
endeavor it.

To tell us, we are Obstinate and Enemies to Government, are but those
Groundless Phrases, the first Reformers were not a little pestered with; but as
they said, so say we, The being called this, or that, does not conclude us so;
and hitherto we have not been detected of that Fact, which only justifies, such
Criminations.

But however free we can approve our selves of Actions prejudicial of the Civil
Government; it is most certain we have not suffered a little, as Criminals, and
therefore have been far from being free from Sufferings; indeed, in some
respect, Horrid Plunders: Widows have lost their Cows, Orphans their Beds, and
Laborers their Tools. A Tragedy so said, that methinks it should obliege them
to do in England, as they did at Athens; when they had sacrificed their Divine
Socrates to the sottish fury of their lewd and commical Multitude, they so
regreeted their hasty Murder, that not only the Memorial of Socrates was most
venerable with them, but his Enemies they esteemed so much theirs, that none
would Trade or hold the least Commere with them; for which some turned their
own Executioners, and without any other Warrant then their own Guilt, Hanged
themselves. How near a kin the wretched Mercenary Informers of our Age are to
those, the great resemblance that is betwixt their Actions manifestly shows.

And we are bold to say, the grand Fomenters of Persecution, are no better
Friends to the English State, then were Anytus and Aristophanes of old to that
of Athens, the Case being so nearly the same, as that they did not more
bitterly envy the Reputation of Socrates amongst the Athenians for his grave
and religious Lectures (thereby giving the Youth a diversion from frequenting
their Plays) then some now emulate the true Dissenter, for his Pious Life, and
great Industry.

And as that famous Commonwealth was noted to decline, and the most observing
Persons of it, dated its decay from that illegal and ungrateful Carriage
toward Socrates (witness their dreadful Plagues, with other multiplied
Disasters) So is it not less worthy Observation, that Heaven has not been
wholly wanting to scourge this Land, for, as well as their Cruelty to the
Conscientious, as their other multiplied Provocations.

And when we seriously consider the dreadful Judgments that now impend the
Nation (by reason of the Robbery, Violence, and unwonted Oppression; that
almost everywhere, have not only been committed, upon the Poor, the Widow, and
the Fatherless; but most tenaciously justified, and the Actors manifestly
encouraged) in mere pity, and concern, for the everlasting welfare of such as
have not quite sinned away their Visitation (for some have) we once more bring
to public view, our Reasons against Persecution, backed with the plainest
Instances, both of Scripture and Antiquity. If but one may be persuaded, to
desist from making any farther progress in such an Anti-protestant, and truly
Antichristian Path, as that of persecuting honest and virtuous English men,
for only worshipping the God that made them, in the Way they judge most
acceptable with him.

But if those, who ought to think themselves oblieg'd to weigh these affairs
with the greatest deliberation, will obstinately close their Eyes, to these
last Remonstrances; and slightly overlook the pinching Case of so many
thousand Families, that are by these Severities exposed for Prey, to the
unsatiable appetites of a Villainous Crew of broken Informers (doubing
themselves with that deluding Apprehension of pleasing God, or at least of
profiting the Country; (whilst they greatly displease the one, and evidently
ruin the other) as certain as ever the Lord God Almighty destroyed Sodom, and
laid waste Gomorah, by the consuming Flames of his just Indignation; will he
hasten to make desolate this wanton Land, and not leave an Hiding Place for the
Oppressor.

Let no man therefore think himself too bigg to be admonished, nor put too
slight a value upon the Lives, Liberties, and Properties of so many thousand
freeborn English Families, Embarqu't in that one concern of Liberty of
Conscience. It will become him better to reflect upon his own Mortality, and
not forget his Breath is in his Nostrils, and that every Action of his Life the
everlasting God will bring to Judgment, and him for them.

The CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I. WHat is meant by Liberty of Conscience. What by Persecution, etc.
The Question Stated. That Gods Prerogative is Invaded by Imposition, Restraint,
and Persecution: 1. They robb God of his Right of Creation: 2. They suppose
infallibility in man, contrary to Protestant^Principles 3. They attribute all
to Man, and take Gods share and his own too: 4. They defeat the Work of his
Grace: 5. They assume the Judgment Seat. CHAP. II. They overturn the Christian
Religion; 1. In the Nature of it; which is Meekness 2. In the Practice of it,
which is Suffering; 3. In the Promotion of it, since all further Discoveries
are prohibited; 4. In the Rewards of it, which are Eternal. CHAP. III. They
oppose the plainest Testimonies of Divine Writ that can be, which condemn all
Force upon Conscience, CHAP. VI. They are Enemies to the Privilege of Nature;
1. as rendering Some more, and Others less then Men; 2. as subverting the
universal Good that is Gods Gift to men; 3. as destroying all natural
Affection. Next, they are Enemies to the noble Principle of Reason, as appears
in eight great Instances. CHAP. V. They carry a Contradiction to Government; 1.
In the Nature of it, which is Justice; 2. In the Execution of it, which is
Prudence; 3. In the End of it, which is Felicity. Seven Common, but Grand
Objections, fairly stated, and briefly answered. CHAP. VI. They reflect upon
the sense and practice of the Wisest, Greatest, and Best States, and Persons of
Ancient and Modern Times; as of the Jews, Romans, Egyptians, Germans, French,
Hollanders, nay Turks and Persians too. And Cat^, Livy, Tacitus, Justin Martyr,
Tertullian, Jovianus, Chaucer, Dominicus Soto, Malvetzy, Grotius, Raleigh,
Doctor and Student, French and Duch Protestants in England, Dr. Hamond, Dr.
Tailor, A nameless but great Person, Lactantius, Hillary, Jerome, Chrysostom,
Polish and Bohemian Kings, King James, and King Charles the first. A Postscript
to the whole; explaining the terms of the Act, and vindicating peaceable
Meetings from Sedition, etc.
CHAP. I.
That Imposition, Restraint, and Persecution for Conscience sake, highly Invade
divine Prerogative, and Divest the Almighty of a Right, due to none beside
himself, and that in five eminent Particulars.
THe great Case of Liberty of Conscience so often Debated and Defended (however
dissatisfactorily to such as have so little Conscience as to Persecute for it)
is once more brought to public view, by a late Act against Dissenters, and
Bill of an additional one, that we all hoped the wisdom of our Rulers had long
since laid aside, as what was fitter to be passed into an Act of perpetual
Oblivion. The Kingdoms are allarum'd at this Proceedure, and Thousands greatly
at a stand, wondering what should be the meaning of such hasty Resolutions, that
seem as fatal as they were unexpected: Some ask what Wrong they have done;
others, what Peace they have broken; and all, what Plots they have formed, to
prejudice the present Government, or occasions given, to hatch new Jealousies
of them and their Proceedings, being not conscious to themselves of guilt in
any such respect.

For mine own part, I publicly confess my self to be a very hearty Dissenter
from the establish'^ Worship of these Nations, as believing Protestants to have
much degenerated from their first Principles, and as owning the poor despised
Quakers in Life and Doctrine, to have espoused the Cause of God, and to be
undoubted Followers of Jesus Christ, in his most Holy, Straight and Narrow Way
that leads to the eternal Rest. In all which I know no Treason, nor any
Principle that would urge me to a Thought injurious to the Civil Peace. If any
be defected in this particular, it is equal, both Individuals and whole
Societies should answer for their own Defaults, but we are clear.

However, all conclude that Union very Ominous, and Unhappy, which makes the
first discovery of it self, by a John Baptists Head in a Charger, They mean
that Feast some are designed to make upon the Liberties and Properties of
Freeborn Englishmen, since to have the I^^ail of those undoubted hereditary
Rights cut off for matters purely relative of another World) is a severe
beheading in the Law; which must be obvious to all, but such as measure the
justice of things only by that proportion they bear with their own interest.

A sort of men that seek themselves, though at the apparent loss of whole
Societies, like to that barbarous Fancy of old, which had rather that Rome
should burn, then it be without the satisfaction of a Bone-fire. And sad it is,
when men have so far stupefied their Understandings with the strong doses of
their private interest, as to become insensible of the Publicks. Certainly such
an Over-fondness for self, or that strong inclination, to raise themselves in
the ruin of what does not so much oppose them, as that they will believe so,
because they would be persecuting, is a malignant Enemy to that Tranquillity,
which all Dissenting Parties seem to believe, would be the consequence of a
Toleration.

In short we say, there can be but two ends in Persecution, the one to satisfy
(which none can ever do) the insatiable appetites of a decimating Clergy (whose
best Arguments are Fines and Imprisonments) and the other, as thinking therein
they do God good Service; but it is so hateful a thing upon any account, that we
shall make it appear by this ensuing Discourse, to be a declared Enemy to God,
Religion, and the Good of humane Society.

The whole will be small, since it is but an Epitomy of no larger a tract then
ten sheets; yet divides it self into the same particulars, every of which we
shall defend against Imposition, Restraint, and Persecution, though not with
that scope of Reason (nor consequently Pleasure to the Readers) being by other
contingent disappointments, limited to a narrow stint.

The Terms explained, and the Question stated.
First, By Liberty of Conscience, we understand not only a mere Liberty of the
Mind, in believing or disbelieving this or that Principle or Doctrine, but the
Exercise of our selves in a visible Way of Worship, upon our believing it to be
indispensibly required at our hands, that if we neglect it for Fear or Favor
of any Mortal Man, we Sin, and incur divine Wrath: Yet we would be so
understood to extend and justify the lawfulness of our so meeting to Worship
God, as not to contrive, or abet any Contrivance distructive of the Government
and Laws of the Land, tending to matters of an external nature, directly, or
indirectly; but so far only, as it may refer to religious Matters, and a Life
to come, and consequently wholly independent of the secular affairs of this,
wherein we are supposed to Transgress.

Secondly, By Imposition, Restraint, and Persecution, we don't only mean, the
strict requiring of us to believe this to be true, or that to be false; and
upon refusal, to incur the Penalties enacted in such Cases; but by those terms
we mean thus much, any coersive let or hindrance to us, from meeting together
to perform those Religious Exercises which are according to our Faith and
Persuasion.

The Question stated.
For Proof of the aforesaid Terms thus given, we singly state the Question
thus.

Whether Imposition, Restraint, and Persecution, upon persons for Exercising
such a Liberty of Conscience, as is before expressed, and so circumstantiated,
be not to impeach the Honor of God, the Meekness of the Christian Religion,
the Authority of Scripture, the Privilege of Nature, the Principles of common
Reason, the Well-being of Government, and Apprehensions of the greatest
Personages of former and latter Ages.

First, Then we say that Imposition, Restraint, and Persecution, for matters
relating to Conscience, directly Invade divine Prerogative, and Divest the
Almighty of a Due, proper to none besides himself. And this we prove by these
five Particulars.

1. First, If we do allow the honor of our Creation, due to God only, and that
no other besides himself has endowed us with those excellent Gifts of
Understanding, Reason, Judgment, and Faith, and consequently that he only is
the Object as well as Author, both of our Faith, Worship, and Service, then
whoever shall interpose their Authority to enact Faith and Worship, in a way
that seems not to us congruous with what he has discovered to us, to be Faith,
and Worship (whose alone property it is to do it) or to restrain us from what
we are persuaded; is our indispensible duty, they evidently usurp this
Authority and invade his incommunicable right of Government over Conscience:
For the Inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding: And Faith is the Gift
of God, says the divine Writ.

2. Secondly, such Magisterial determinations carry an evident claim to that
infallibility, which Protestants have been hitherto so jealous of owning, that
to avoid the Papists, they have denied it to all, but God himself.

Either they have forsook their old Plea, or if not, we desire to know when,
and where they were invested with that divine excellency, and that Imposition,
Restraint, and Persecution, were deemed by God ever the Fruits of his Spirit:
However, that it self were not sufficient; for unless it appear as well to us,
that they have it, as to them who have it, we cannot believe it upon any
convincing Evidence, but by Tradition only; an Anti-Protestant way of believing.

3. Thirdly, It enthrones man as King over Conscience, the alone just claim and
Privilege of his Creator, whose Thoughts are not as men's Thoughts, but has
reserved to himself, that Empire from all the Caesar's on Earth; for if men in
reference to Souls, and Bodies, things appertaining to this and to'ther World,
shall be subject to their Fellow Creatures, what follows? but that Caesar
(however he got it) has all, Gods share, and his own too; and being lord of
both, both are Caesar's, and nothing Gods.

4. Fourthly, It defeats the Work of his Grace, and the invisible Opperation of
his eternal Spirit, which can alone beget Faith, and is only to be obeyed, in
and about Religion and Worship, and attributes men's conformity to outward force
and corporal punishments. A Faith subject to as many revolutions as the powers
that enact it.

5. Fifthly and lastly, Such persons assume the Judgment of the great Tribunal
unto themselves; for to whomsoever men are imposedly or restrictively subject
and accountable in matters of Faith, Worship and Conscience; in them alone must
the power of judgment reside; but it is equally true that God shall judge all
by Jesus Christ, and that no man is so accountable to his fellow Creatures, as
to be imposed upon, restrained, or persecuted for any matter of Conscience
whatever.

Thus and in many more particulars are men accustomed to entrench upon divine
Property, to gratify particular Interests in the world (and at best) through a
misguided apprehension, to imagine they do God good service, that where they
cannot give Faith, they will use force, which kind of Sacrifice is nothing less
unreasonable, then the other is abominable: God will not give his honor to
another, and to him only that searches the heart and tries t^^^^ins, it is our
duty to ascribe the gifts of Understanding and (...) without which none can
please God.

CHAP. II.
THe next great evil which attends external force in matters of faith and
worship, is no less then the overthrow of the whole Christian Religion, and
this we will briefly evidence in these four particulars. 1. First, that there
can be nothing more remote from the nature 2. Secondly, the practice. 3.
Thirdly, the promotion. 4 Fourthly, the Rewards of it.

1. First, it is the privilege of the Christian Faith above the dark
suggestions of ancient and modern superstious Traditions, to carry with it a
most self evidencing verity, which ever was sufficient to proselite believers,
without the weak Auxilaries of external power; The son of God, and great
Example of the world, was so far from calling his Father's omnipotency in
legions of Angels to his defense, that he at once repealed all Acts of force,
and defined unto us the nature of his Religion in this one great saying of his,
MY KINGDOM IS NOT OF THIS WORLD. It was spiritual, not carnal, accompanied
with weapons, as heavenly as its own nature, and designed for the good and
salvation of the soul, and not the injury and destruction of the body: no
Goals, Fines, Exiles etc. but sound reason, clear truth, and a strict life. In
short, the Christian Religion entreats all, but compells none.

2. Secondly, that Restraint and Persecution overturn the practice of it; I
need go no further then the allowed Martyrologies of several ages, of which the
Scriptures claim a share; begin with Abel go down to Moses, so to the Prophets,
and then to the meek example of Jesus Christ himself; How patiently devoted was
he, to undergo the contradictions of men? and so far from persecuting any, that
he would not so much as revile his Persecutors, but prayed for them; thus lived
his Apostles and the true Christians, of the first three hundred years: Nor are
the famous Stories of our first Reformers silent in the matter; witness the
Christian practices of the Waldenses, Lollards, Hussites, Lutherans, and our
noble Martyrs, who as became the true followers of Jesus Christ, enacted and
confirmed their Religion, with their own blood, and not with the blood of their
Opposers.

3. Thirdly, Restraint and Persecution obstructs the promotion of the Christian
Religion, for if such as restraint, confess themselves miserable sinners, and
altogether imperfect, it either follows, that they never desire to be better,
or that they should encourage such as may be capable of further informing and
reforming them; they condemn the Papists for enco^^ening the Scriptures and
their Worship in an unknown tongue, and yet are guilty themselves of the same
kind of fact.

4. Fourthly, they prevent many of eternal Rewards, for where any are Religious
for fear, and that of men, it is slavish; and the recompense, of such Religion
is condemnation, not peace: besides, it is man that is served, who having no
power but what is temporary, his reward must needs be so too; he that imposes a
duty, or restrains from one, must reward; but because no man can reward for
such Duties, no man can or ought to impose them, or restrain from them. So that
we conclude imposition, restraint, and persecution, are destructive, of the
Christian Religion, in the nature, practice, promotion and rewards of it, which
are Eternal.

CHAP. III.
WE further say, that imposition, restraint, and persecution are repugnant to
the plain Testimonies and precepts of the Scriptures.

The inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding, 1. Job 32. 8.

If no man can believe before he understands, and no man can understand before
he is inspired of God, then are the impositions of men excluded as
unreasonable, and their persecutions for non-obedience as inhumane.

Woe unto them that take counsel, but not of me, 2. Isa: 30. 1.

Woe unto them that make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him
that reproves in the gate, and turns aside the Just for a thing of naught, 3.
Isa. 29. 15, 21.

Let the Wheat and the Tares grow together until the time of the harvest, or
end of the World. 4. Mat. 13. 27, 28, 29.

And Jesus called them unto him, and said ye know that the Princes of the
Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are greatest exercise
authority upon them, but it shall not be so amongst you. 5 Ma^t: 20* 25, 26.

And Jesus answering said unto them, Render unto Caesar the things that are
Cesars, and unto God the things that are Gods, 6 Luke 20. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.

When his Disciples saw this (that there were Non-conformists then as well as
now) they said, will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven and
consume them, as Elisha did; But be turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know
not what spirit ye are of; for the Son of Man is not come to destroy men's lives
but to save them, 7. Luke 9. 54. 55. 56

Howbeit, when the spirit of truth is come, he shall lead you into all Truth.
^. John 16. 8, 13.

But now the anointing which ye have received of him abides in you, and you
need not that any man teach you (much less impose upon any, or restrain them
from what any are persuaded it leads to) but as the same anointing teaches you
of all things and is truth, and is not lie. 9. John. 1, 9, 27.

Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves but rather give place unto Wrath (much
less should any be Wrath that are called Christians where no occasion is given)
therefore if thine Enemy Hunger Feed him, and if he Thirst, give him Drink;
Recompense no man Evil for Evil. 10 Romans 12. 19, 20, 21.

For though we walk in the flesh (that is in the body or visible world) we do
not war after the flesh, for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal. 11 2.
Cor. 3. 4, 5. (but Fines and Imprisonments are, and such use not the Apostles
Weapons that employ those) for a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3. 23 (says Paul) must be of a
good behavior, apt to teach, no striker, but be gentle unto all men, Patient
in Meekness, Instructing (not Persecuting) those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them, Repentance to the acknowledgment of the Truth, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25.

Lastly, We shall subjoyn one Passage more, and then no more of this
Particular; Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto
them. 12. Matt. 7. 12. Luke 6. 31.

Now upon the whole we seriously ask, Whether any should be Impo'd upon, or
Restrained, in matters of Faith and Worship? Whether such Practices become the
Gospel, or are suitable to Christ's Meek Precepts and Suffering Doctrine? And
lastly, Whether those, who are herein guilty, do to us, as they would be done
unto by others?

What if any were once severe to you; many are unconcerned in that, who are yet
liable to the Lash, as if they were not. But if you once thought, the
Imposition of a Directory Unreasonable, and a Restraint from your way of
Worship Unchristian, can you believe that Liberty of Conscience is changed,
because the Parties in points of Power are? or that the same Reasons do not yet
remain in vindication of an Indulgeance for others, that were once Employed by
you for your selves? Surely such Conjectures would argue gross Weakness.

To conclude, Whether Persecutors at any time, read the Scriptures we know not;
but certain we are, such practice as little of them as may be, who with so much
Delight reject them, and think it no small Accession to the discovery of their
Loyalty, to lead us and our Properties in Triumph after them.

CHAP. IV.
WE further say, That Imposition, Restraint, and Persecution are also
destructive of the great Privilege of Nature and Principle of Reason. Of
Nature in three Instances:

1. First, If God Almighty has made of one Blood all Nations, as himself has
declared, and that he has given them both Senses Corporal and Intellectual, to
discern things and their differences, so as to assert or deny from Evidences
and Reasons proper to each; then where any Enacts the Belief or Disbelief of
any thing upon the rest, or Restrains any from the Exercise of their Faith to
them indispensible, such Exalts himself beyond his Bounds, Enslaves his
Fellow Creatures, Invades their Right of Liberty, and so pervert the whole
order of Nature.

2. Secondly, Mankind is hereby robbed of the use and benefit of that instinct
of a Diety, which is so natural to him, that he can be no more without it, and
be, then he can be without the most essential Part of himself; For to what
serves that divine Principle in the universallity of Mankind, if men be
restricted by the Prescriptions of some Individuals? But if the excellent
Nature of it, inclines men to God, not Man; if the Power of Accusing and
Excusing be committed to it; if the troubled Thoughts and sad Afflictions of
Forlorn and Dying men, make their tendency that a way only, (as being hopeless
of all other Relief and Succor from any external Power or Command) What shall
we say? but that such as invallid the Authority of this Heavenly Instinct, (as
Imposition and Restraint evidently do) destroy Nature, or that Privilege which
men are born with, and to.

3. All natural Affection is destroyed; for those who have so little
tenderness, as to persecute men that cannot for Conscience sake yield them
compliance, manifestly act injuriously to their Fellow Creatures, and
consequently are Enemies to Nature; for Nature being one in all, such as ruin
those who are equally entitled with themselves to Nature, ruin it in them, as
in Liberty, Property, etc. and so bring the state of Nature to the state of
War, the great Leviathan of the times, as ignorantly as boldly does assert.

2. But secondly, We also prove them destructive of the noble Principle of
Reason, and that in these eight Perticulars.

1. First, In that those who Impose or Restrain are uncertain of the truth and
justifiableness of their actions in either of this, their own Discourses and
Confessions are pregnant Instances, where they tell us, that They do not
pretend to be infallible, only they humbly conceive it is thus, or it is not.
Since then they are uncertain and fallible, how can they impose upon, or
restrain others whom they are so far from assuring, as they are not able to do
so much for themselves? What is this, but to impose an uncertain Faith upon
Certain Penalties?

3. As he that Acts Doubtfully is Damned, so Faith in all Acts of Religion is
necessary* now in order to believe, we must first Will; to Will, we must first
Judge; to Judge any thing, we must first Understand; if then we cannot be said
to Understand any thing against our Understanding; no more ca^ we Judge, Will,
and Believe against our Understanding: and if the Doubter be Damned, what must
he be that conform directly against his Judgment and Belief, and they likewise
that require it from him? In short, that Man cannot be said to have any
Religion, that takes it by another man's choice, not his own.

4. Where men are limited in Matters of Religion, there the Rewards which are
entailed on the free acts of men, are quite overthrown; and such as superceed
that Grand Charter of Liberty of Conscience, frustrate all hopes of Recompense,
by rendering the Actions of men unavoidable: But those think perhaps, They do
not destroy all Freedom, because they use so much of their own.

5. Fifthly, They subvert all true Religion; for where men believe not because
it is True, but because they are required to do so, there they will unbelieve,
not because it is False, but so commanded by their Superiors, whose Authority
their Interest and Security obliege them rather to obey, then dispute.

6. Sixthly, They Delude, or rather Compel people out of their eternal Rewards;
for where men are commanded to act in reference to Religion, and can neither be
secured of their Rewards, nor yet saved harmless from punishments; their so
acting and believing dispriviledges them forever of that Recompense, which is
provided for the Faithful.

7. Seventhly, Men have their Liberty and Choice in external matters; they are
not compelled to Marry this Person, to Converse with that, to Buy here, to Eat
there, nor to Sleep yonder; yet if men had Power to Impose or Restrain in any
thing* one would think it should be in such exterior Matters; but that this
Liberty should be unquestioned, and that of the Mind Destroyed issues here,
that it does not Unbruit us, but Unman us; for take away Understanding, Reason,
Judgment, and Faith, and like Nebuchadnezar, let us go Graze with the Beasts of
the Field.

8. Eighthly and lastly, That which most of all blackens the Business is
PERSECUTION; for though it is very unreasonable to require Faith, where men
cannot choose but doubt, yet after all, to punish them for Disobedience, it is
Cruelty in the abstract; for we demand, Shall men Suffer for not doing when
they cannot do? Must they be Persecuted here if they do not go against their
Conscience, and punished hereafter if they do? But neither is this all; for
that part that is yet most unreasonable, and that gives the clearest sight of
Persecution, is still behind, namely, The monstrous Arguments they have to
Convince an Heretic with: Not those of old, as Spiritual as the Christian
Religion, which were to Admonish, Warn, and finally to Reject; but such as were
employed by the Persecuting Jews and Heathens against the great Example of the
World, and such as followed him, and by the inhuman Papists against our first
Reformers, as Clubbs, Staves, Stocks, Pillories, Prisons, Dungeons, Exiles,
etc. in a word, Ruin to whole Families, as if it were not so much their Design
to Convince the Soul, as to Destroy the Body.

To conclude, There ought to be an Adequation and Resemblance betwixt all Ends,
and the means to them, but in this case there can be none imaginable; the End
is the conformity of our Judgments and Understandings to the acts of such as
require it, the Means are Fines and Imprisonments (and bloody Knocks to boot.

Now what Proportion or Assimulation these bear, let the Sober judge: The
Understanding can never be convinced, nor properly submit, but by such
Arguments, as are Rational, Persuasive, and Suitable to its own Nature;
something that can Resolve its Doubts, Answer its Objections, Enervate its
Propositions, but to imagine those Barbarous Newgate Instruments of Clubbs,
Fines, Prisons, etc. with that whole Troop of external and dumb Materials of
force should be fit Arguments to convince the Understanding, scatter its
scruples, and finally, convert it to their Religion is altogether irrational,
cruel, and impossible. Force may make an Hipocrite; it is Faith grounded upon
knowledge, and consent that makes a Christian. And to conclude, as we can never
betray the honor of our Conformity (only due to Truth) by a base and timorous
Hypocrisy to any external Violence under Heaven, so must we needs say,
unreasonable are those Imposers, who secure not the Imposed or Restrained from
what may occur to them, upon their account; and most inhuman are those
Persecutors that punish men for not obeying them though to their utter ruin.

CHAP. V.
WE next urge, that Force in matters relating to Conscience, carry a plain
Contradiction to Government in the Nature, Execution, and End of it.

By Government we understand, an external Order of Justice or the right and
prudent Disciplining of any Society, by just Laws, either in the Relaxation, or
Execution of them.

1. First it carries a Contradiction to Government in the Nature of it, which
is Justice, and that in three Respects.

1. It is the first Lesson that great Synterisis, so much renowned by
Phylos^phers and Civilians, learns Mankind, to do as one would be done to,
since he that gives, what he would not take, or takes what he would not give,
only shows care for himself, but neither Kindness nor Justice for another.

2. Secondly, The just Nature of Government lies in a fair and equal
Retribution; but what can be more unequal, then that men should be rated more
then their Proportion, to answer the Necessities of Government, and yet that
they should not only receive no Protection from it, but by it be disseiz'd of
their dear Liberty and Properties; we say to be compelled to pay that Power,
that exerts it self to ruin those that pay it, or that any should be required
to enrich those, that ruin them, is hard, and unequal, and therefore contrary
to the just Nature of Government. If we must be Contributaries, to the
maintenance of it, we are entitled to a protection from it.

3. Thirdly, It is the Justice of Government to proportion Penalties to the
Crime committed. Now granting our Dissent to be a Fault, yet the infliction of
a Corporal or External Punishment, for a mere mental Error (and that not
voluntarily too) is Unreasonable and Inadequate, as well as against particular
directions of the Scriptures, Tit 3. 9, 10, 11. For as Corporal Penalties
cannot convince the Understanding; so neither can then be commensurate
Punishments, for Faults purely Intellectual: And for the Government of this
World to intermed^^e with what belongs to the Government of Another, and which
can have no ill Aspect or Influence upon it, shows more of Invasion then Right
and Justice.

2. Secondly, It carries a Contradition to Government in the Execution of it,
which is Prudence, and that in these Instances.

The state of the Case is this, That there is no Republic so great, no Empire
so vast, but the Laws of them are Resolvable into these two Series or Heads, Of
Laws Fundamental, which are Indispensible and Immutable: And Laws Superficial,
which are Temporary and Alterable: And as it is Justice and Prudence to be
punctual in the Execution of the former, so by Circumstances it may be neither,
to Execute the latter, they being suited to the present Convenience and
Emergency of State; as the Prohibiting of Cattle out of Ireland, was judged of
advantage to the Farmers of England, yet a Murrin would make it the good of the
whole, that the Law should be broke, or at least the Execution of it suspended.
That the Law of Restraint in point of Conscience is of this number; we may
further manifest, and the imprudence of thinking otherwise: For, first, if the
saying were as true as it is false; No Bishop, no King, (which admits of various
readings; As no decimating Clergy, or no Persecution, no King, we should be as
silent, as some would have us: but the confidence of their Assertion, and the
impollicy of such as believe it, makes us to say, that a greater injury cannot
be done to the present Government. For if such Laws and Establishments are
fundamental; they are as immutable as mankind it self; but that they are as
alterable as the Conjectures and Opinions of Governors have been, is evident;
since the same fundamental indispensable Laws and Policy of these Kingdoms
have still remained, through all variety of opposite Ruling Opinions and
Judgments, and disjoynt from them all. Therefore to admit such a fixation to
temporary Laws, must needs be highly imprudent, and destructive of the
essential parts of the Government of these Countries.

2. Secondly, That since there has been a time of connivance, and that with no
ill success to public Affairs, it cannot be prudence to discontinue it, unless
it was imprudence before to give it, and such little deserve it that think so.

3. Thirdly, Dissenters not being conscious to themselves of any just
Forfeiture of that Favor, are as well grieved in their Resentments of this
Alteration, as the contrary did oblige them to very grateful Acknowledgments.

4. Fourthly, this must be done to gratify all, or the greatest Part, or but
some few only; it is a demonstration all are pleased with it; that the greatest
Number is not, the empty public Auditories will speak: In short, how should
either be, when six Parties are sacrificed to the seventh; that this cannot be
Prudence, common Maxims and Observations prove.

5. Fifthly, It strikes fatally at Protestant-sincerity; for will the Papists
say, Did Protestants exclaim against us, for Persecutors, and are they now the
Men themselves? Was it an Instance of Weakness in our Religion, and is it become
a Demonstration in theirs? Have they transmuted it from Antichristian in us, to
Christian in themselves? Let Persecutors answer.

6. Sixthly, It is not only an Example, but an Incentive to the Romanists, to
Persecute the Reformed Religion abroad; for when they see their Actions (once
void of all Excuse) now defended by the Example of Protestants, that once
accused them (but now themselves) doubtless they will revive their Cruelty.

7. Seventhly, It overturns the very Ground of the Protestants Retreat from
Rome; for if men must be Restrained upon pretended Prudential Considerations,
for the Exercise of their Conscience in England; why not the same in France,
Holland, Germany, Constantinople, etc. where matters of State may equally be
pleaded? This makes Religion, State-pollicy; and Faith and Worship, subservient
to the Humors and Interests of Superiors: Such Doctrine would have prevented
our Ancestors Retreat; and We wish it be not the beginning of a Back-march; for
Some think it shrewdly to be suspected, where Religion is suited to the
Government, and Conscience to it is Convenience.

8. Eighthly, Vice is encouraged; for if Licentious Persons see Men of Virtue
molested for Assembling with a Religious Purpose to Reverence and Worship God,
and That are otherwise most serviceable to the Commonwealth, they may and will
infer, it is better for them to be as they are since not to be demur, as they
call it, is half way to that kind of Accomplishment, which procures Preferment.

9. Ninthly, For such persons as are so poor spirited as to truckle under such
Restraints; What Conquest is there over them? that before were Conscientious
men, and now Hypocrites; who so forward to be aveng^^ of them, that brought
this Guilt upon them, as they themselves? And how can the Imposers be secure of
their Friendship, whom they have taught to change with the Times?

10. Tenthly, Such Laws are so far from benefiting the Country, that the
Execution of them will be the assured ruin of it, in the Revenues, and
consequently in the Power of it; For where there is a decay of Families, there
will be of Trade; so of Wealth, and in the end of Strength and Power; and if
both kinds of Relief fail; Men, the Prop of Republiques; Money, the Stay of
Monarchies; this as requiring Mercenaries, that as needing Freemen (farewell
the Interest of England; it is true, the Priests get (though that is but for a
time) but the King and People lose; as the event will show.

11. Eleventhly, It ever was the prudence of wise Magistrates of Obliege their
people; but what comes shorter of of it then Persecution? What Is dearer to them
then the Liberty of their Conscience? What cannot they better spare then it?
Their Peace consists in the enjoyment of it: And he that by Compliance has lost
it, carries his Penalty with him, and is his own Prison. Surely such Practices
must render the Government Uneasy, and beget a great Disrespect to the
Governors, in the Hearts of the people.

12. Twelfthly, But that which concludes our prudential part, shall be this,
That after all their Pains and Goodwill to stretch men to their Measure, they
never will be able to accomplish their End: And if he be an unwise Man, hat
provides Means where he designs no End, how near is be kin to him that proposes
an end inobtainable. Experience has told us. 1. How Invective it has made the
Imposed. 2. What Distractions have insued such Attempts. 3. What Reproach has
followed to the Christian Religion, when the Professors of it have used a
coercive Power upon Conscience. And lastly, That Force never yet made, either a
Good Christian or a Good Subject.

3. Thirdly and Lastly, Since the proceedings we argue against, are proved so
destructive to the Justice and Prudence of Government, we ought the less to
wonder that they should hold the same malignity against the End of it, which is
Felicity, since the Wonder would be to find it otherwise; and this is evident
from these three brief Considerations.

1. First, Peace (the End of War and Government, and its great Happiness too)
has been, is, and yet will be broken by the frequent Tumultuary Disturbances,
that ensue the Disquieting our Meetings, and the Estreeting Fines upon our
Goods and Estates. And what these things may issue in, concerns the Civil
Magistrate to consider.

2. Secondly, Plenty (another great End of Government) will be converted into
Poverty by the Destruction of so many thousand Families as refuse Compliance
and Conformity, and that not only to the Sufferers, but influentially to all,
the rest; a Demonstration of which we have in all those Places where the late
Act has been any thing considerably put in Execution. Besides, how great
Provocation such Incharity and Cruel Usage, as stripping Widows, Fatherless,
and Poor of their very Necessaries for human Life, merely upon an account of
Faith or Worship, must needs be to the Just and Righteous Lord of Heaven and
Earth; Scriptures, and plenty of other Stories plainly show us.

3. Thirdly, Unity (not the least but greatest End of Government is lost) for
by seeking an Unity of Opinion (by the ways intended) the Unity requisite to
uphold us, as a Civil Society, will be quite destroyed. And such as relinquish
that, to get the other (besides that they are Unwise) will infallibly lose both
in the end.

In short, We say, that it is unreasonable we should not he entertained as men,
because some think we are not as Good Christians as they pretend to wish us; or
that we should be deprived of our Liberties and Properties, who never broke the
Laws that gave them to us: What can be harder, then to take that from us by a
Law, which the great indulgence and solicitude of our Ancestors took so much
pains to intail upon us by Law; An. 18 Ed. 3. stat 3. also stat. 20. Ed. 3.
cap. 1. again Petition of Right, An. 3. Car. and more fully in Magna Charta;
further peruse 37 Ed. 5. cap. 8. 28. 42 Ed. 3. cap. 3. 28 Hen. cap. 7.

And we are persuaded, that no Temporary Subsequential Law whatever, to our
Fundamental Rights (as this of Force on Conscience is) can invalid so essential
a part of the Government, as an English Liberty and Property: Nor that it is in
the power of any on Earth, to deprive us of them, till we have first done it
our selves, by such Enormious Facts, as those very Laws prohibit, and make our
Forfeiture of that benefit we should otherwise receive by them; for these being
such Cardinal and Fundamental Points of English Law-Doctrine, individually, and
by the collective body of the People agreed to; and on which as the most solid
Basis, our Secondary Legislative Power, as well as Executive is built; it seems
most rational that the Superstructure cannot quarrel or invalid its own
Foundation, without manifestly endangering its own security, the Effect is ever
less noble then the Cause, the Gift then the Giver, and the Superstructure then
the Foundation.

The single Question to be resolved in the case, briefly will be this, Whether
any visible Authority (being founded in its primitive Institution upon those
Fundamental Laws, that inviolably preserve the People in all their just Rights
and Privileges) may invalidate all, or any of the said Laws, without an
implicit shaking of its own Foundation, and a clear overthrow of its own
Constitution of Government, and so reduce them to their Statu quo prius, or
first Principles: The Resolution is every man's, at his own pleasure. Read Hen.
3. 9. 14. 29. 25 Ed 3. Book Justit. 2. 19. 50, 51.

Those who intend us no Share or Interest in the Laws of England, as they
relate to civil Matters, unless we correspond with them in Points of Faith and
Worship, must do two things: First, It will lie heavy on their parts to prove,
That the Ancient Compact and Original of our Laws, carries that Proviso with
it; else we are manifestly diseized of our Free-Customs.

Secondly, They are to prove the Reasonableness of such Proceedings to our
Understandings, that we may not be concluded by a Law, we know not how to
understand; for if I take the matter rightly (as I think I do) we must not Buy
or Sell unless of this or that Persuasion in Religion; not considering civil
Society was in the World before the Protestant Profession; Men, as such, and in
Affairs peculiarly relative of them, in an external and civil capacity, have
subsisted many Ages, under great variety of Religious Apprehensions, and
therefore not so dependent on them as to receive any Variation or Revolution
with them. What shall we say then? but that some will not that we should Live,
Breath, and Commerce as men, because we are not such modeled Christians as they
coercively would have us; they might with as much Justice and Reputation to
themselves forbid us to look or see unless our Eyes were Gray, Black, Brown,
Blew, or some one color best suiting theirs: For not to be able to give us
Faith, or save our Consciences harmless, and yet to persecute us for refusing
conformity, is intolerable hard measure.

In short, That coercive way of bringing all men to their height of Persuasion,
must either arise from Ex^rbitant Zeal and Superstition; or from a
consciousness of Error and Defect, which is unwilling any thing more sincere,
and reformed should take place; being of that Cardinals mind, who therefore
would not hearken to a Reformation, at the sitting of the Counsel of Trent;
because he would not so far approve the Reformers Judgment (for having once
condescended to their Apprehensions, he thought 'twould forever inslave them to
their Sense) though otherwise he saw as much as any man, the grand necessity of
a Reformation, both of the Roman Doctrine and Conversation.

Some grand Objections in the way must be Considered.
Objection 1. But you are a People that meet with Designs to Disaffect the
People, and to ruin the Government.

Answer, A Surmis^ is no Certainty, neither is A may be, or Conjecture, any
Proof; That from the first we have behaved our selves inoffensively is a
Demonstration; that our Meetings are open, where all may hear our Matter, and
have liberty to object or discuse any Point, is notorious. Ignorant Calumnies
are Sandy Foundations to build so high a Charge upon: Let us fairly be heard in
a public Conference, how far we can justify our Principles from being
deservedly suspected of Sedition or Disloyalty, and not overrun us with mere
Suppositions. We declare our readiness to obey the Ordinance of man, which is
only relative of Human or Civil Matters, and not Points of Faith, or Practice
in Worship: But if Accusations must stand for Proofs, we shall take it for
granted, that we must stand for Criminals; but our Satisfaction will be, that
we shall not deserve it otherwise then as prejudice seeks to traduce us.

Object. 2. But you strike at the Doctrine, at least the Discipline of the
Church, and consequently are Heretics.

Answ. This Story is as old as the Reformation; If we must be objected against
out of pure Reputation, let it be in some other matter then what the Papists
objected against the first Protestants; otherwise you do but hit your selves in
aiming at us? To say you were in the Right, but we are in the Wrong, is but a
mere begging of the Question; for doubtless the Papists said the same to you,
and all that you can say to us: Your best Plea was, Conscience upon Principles,
the most evident and rational to you: Do not we the like? What if you think our
Reasons thick, and our ground of Separation mistaken? Did not the Papists
harbor the same Thoughts of you? You persuaded as few of them, as we of you:
Were you therefore in the Wrong? No more are we: It was not what they thought
of you, or enacted against you, that concluded you: And why should your
Apprehensions conclude us? If you have the way of giving Faith beyond what they
had, and have the faculty of Persuasion, evidence as much; but if you are as
destitute of both, as they were to you; why should Fines and Prisons, once used
by them against you, and by you exclaimed against, as Unchristian Ways of
reclaiming Heretics (supposing your selves to be such) be employed by you as
rational, Christian, and Convincing upon us? To say we deserve them more, is to
suppose your selves in the Right, and we in the Wrong, which proves nothing.
Besides, the Question is not barely this, whether Heretics or no Heretics;
but whether an Heretic should be Persecuted into a disclaiming of his Error;
your old Arguments run thus, as I well remember.

1. Error is a Mistake in the Understanding.

2. This is for want of a better Illumination.

3. This Error can never be dislodged, but by Reason and Persuasion, as what
are most suitable to the Intellect of man.

4. Fines, Goals, Exiles, Gibbets, etc. are no Convincing Arguments to the most
erring Understanding in the World, being slavish and brutish.

5. This way of Force makes, instead of an honest Dissenter, but an
Hypocritical Conformist; then whom nothing is more detestable to God and man.

This being the Protestants Plea, we are not to be disliked by Protestants, for
following their own avowed Maxims and Axioms of Conscience in defense of its
own Liberty.

In short, either allow separation upon the single Principle of, My Conscience
owns this, or disowns that; or never dwell in that Building, which knew no
better Foundation (indeed good enough) but accusing your Forefathers of
Schism, and Heresy, return to the Romish Church. What short of this can any
say to an Anti-liberty-of-Conscience-Protestant.

Object. 3. But at this rate ye may pretend to Cut our Throats, and do all
manner of savage Acts.

Answ. Though the Objection be frequent, yet it is as foully ridiculous. We are
pleading only for such a Liberty of Conscience, as preserves the Nation in
Peace, Trade, and Commerce; and would not exempt any man, or Party of men, from
not keeping those excellent Laws, that tend to Sober, Just, and Industrious
Living. It is a Jesuitical Morral, To Kill a man before he is Born: First, to
suspect him of an Evil Design, and then kill him to prevent it.

Object. 4. But do not you see what has been the end of this Separation? Wars,
and Revolutions, and Danger to Government; witness our late Troubles.

Ans. We see none of all this, but are able to make it app^ar, that the true
cause of all that perplexed Disturbance, which was amongst the Homousians and
Arrians of old, and among us of later years (as well as what has modernly
attended our Neighboring Countries) tooks its first rise from a narrowness of
spirit, in not Tollerating others to live the Freemen God made them, in
External Matters upon the Earth, merely upon some difference in Religion.

And were there once but an Hearty Tolleration established, 'twould be a
Demonstration of the truth of this Assertion. On this Ground, Empire stands
safe; on the other, it seems more uncertain.

But these are only the popular Devices of some to traduce honest Men, and
their Principles; whose lazy Life, and intolerable Avarice become questioned,
by a Tolleration of people better inclined.

Object 5. But what need you take this Pains to prove Liberty of Conscience
Reasonable and Necessary, when none questions it; all that is required is, That
you meet but four more then your own Families; and can you not be contented
with that? Your Disobedience to a Law, so favorable, brings suffering upon you.

Answ. Here is no need of answering the former part of the Objection; It Is too
apparent throughout the Land, that Liberty of Conscience, as we have stated it,
has been severely prosecuted, and therefore not so franckly enjoyed: The latter
part, I answer thus, If the words Lawful or Unlawful, may bear their
signification from the nature of the things they stand for, then we conceive
that a Meeting of Four Thousand is no more Unlawful, then a Meeting of Four;
for Number singly considered criminates no Assembly: but the reason of their
Assembling; the Posture in which; and the Matter transacted, with the
Consequences thereof.

Now if those things are taken for granted, to be things dispensible (as
appears by the allowance of Four besides every Family) certainly the Number can
never render it Unlawful; so that the Question will be this, Whether if Four
met to worship God, be an Allowable Meeting, Four Thousand met with the same
Design be not an Allowable Meeting?

It is so plain a Case, that the Matter in the Question resolves it.

Object. 6. But the Law forbids it.

Answ. If the enacting anything can make it lawful, we have done; but if an
Act so made by the Papists against Protestants, was never esteemed so by a true
Protestant; and if the nature of the matter will not bear it; and lastly, that
we are as much commanded by God to meet Four thousand as Four; we must desire
to be excused, if we forbear not the assembling of our selves together, as the
manner of some is.

Object. 7. But the reason of the prohibition of the number is (for you see
they allow all that can be said to Four Thousand to be to said the Family and
Four) that Tumults may arise, and Plots may be made, and the like
Inconveniences happen to the Government.

Answ. Great Assemblies are so far from being injurious, that they are the most
inoffensive; for, First, They are open, exposed to the view of all, which of
all things Plotters are the shyest of; but how fair an opportunity 'twere, for
men so principled, to do it in those allowed Meetings of but four besides the
Family, is easy to guess, when we consider, that few make the best and closest
Council; and next, that such an Assembly is the most private and clandestine,
and so fitted for Mischief and Surprise.

Secondly, Such Assemblies, are not only public and large, but they are
frequented, as well by those that are not of their Way, as of their own; from
whence it follows, that we have the greatest reason to be cautious and wise in
our Behavior, since the more there be at our Meetings, the more Witnesses are
against us, if we should say or act any thing that may be prejudicial to the
Government.

Lastly, For these several years none could ever observe such an ill use made
of that Freedom, or such wicked Designs to follow such Assemblies; and
therefore it is high Incharity to proceed so severely upon mere Suppositions.

To this we shall add several Authorities and Testimonies for further
confirmation of our sense of the matter, and to let Imposers see, that we are
not the only Persons, who have impleaded Persecution, and justified Liberty of
Conscience, as Christian and Rational.

CHAP. VI.
A Brief Collection of the Sense and Practice of the Greattest, Wisest, and
Learned Commonwealths, Kingdoms, and particular Persons of their Times,
concerning Force upon Conscience.

1. First, Though the Jews above all people had the most to say for Imposition
and Restraint within their own Dominions, having their Religion instituted by
so many signal Proofs of Divine Original, it being delivered to them by the
Hand of God himself, yet such was their indulgence to Dissenters, that if they
held the common received Noachical Principles tending to the acknowledgment of
one God, and a just Life, they had the Free Exercise of their distinct Modes or
Ways of Worship, which were numerous. Of this their own Rabbis are Witnesses,
and Grotius out of them.

Secondly, The Romans themselves, as strict as they were, not only had Thirty
Thousand Godds (if Varro may be credited) but almost every Family of any note,
had its distinct Sacra, or peculiar Way of Worship.

3. Thirdly, It was the sense of that grave, exemplary Commonwealths man,
Cato, in Salust, that among other things which ruin any Government want of
Freedom of Speech, or men's being obliged to humor Times is a great one; which
we find made good by the ^^wrentine Republic, as Guicceardine relates.

4. Fourthly, Livy tells us, It was a Wonder that Hannibals Army, consisting of
diverse Nations, diverse Humors, differing Habits, contrary Religions, various
Languages, should live 13 years from their own Country under his Command
without so much as once mutining, either against their General, or among
themselves. But what Livy relates for a Wonder that ingenious Marquess,
Virgilio Malvetzy gives the Reason of, namely, that the difference of their
Opinion, Tongues, and Customs, was the reason of their Preservation and
Conquest; For said he, 'Twas impossible so many contrary Spirits should
Combine, and if any should have done it, 'twas in the Generals power to make
the greater Party by his equal hand; they owing him more of Reverence, then
they did of Affection to one an another: This, says he, some impute to
Hannibal, but how great soever he was, I give it to the variety of Humors in
the Army. For (adds he) Romes Army was ever less given to Mutining when joined
with the Provincial Auxilaries, then when entirely Roman; thus much and more,
in his public Discourses upon Cornelius Tacitus.

5. Fifthly, The same, best Statist of his Time, C. Tacitus, tells us in the
Case of Cremtius, That it had been the interest of Tiberius not to have
punished him, in as much as Curiosity is begotten by Restriction of Liberty to
Write or Speak, which never mist of Proselites.

6. Sixthly, Just. Martin. I will forbear to quote, in less then this, two
whole Apollogies, dedicated to Adrian and Antonius Pius, as I take it.

Seventhly, Tertullian ad scapulum, that learned and juditious Appollogist,
plainly tells us. That it is not the Property of Religion to Compel or Persecute
for Religion, she should be accepted for her Self, not for Force; that being a
poor and beggarly one, that has no beeter Arguments to Convince; and a manifest
Evide^ce of her Superstition and Falsehood.

8. Eighthly, Of this we take the nine Months Reign of the Emperor Jovianus to
be an excellent Demonstration, whose great Wisdom, and admirable Prudence
ingranting Tolleration (expressly saying, He would have none (...) for the
Exercise of their Religious Worship) Calmed the impetuous Storms of Dissension
betwixt Homousians and Arrians; and reduced the whole Empire, before agitated
with all kinds of Commotions during the reign of Constantine, Constantius, and
Julian, to a wonderful Serenity and Peace, as Socrates Scholasticus affirms.

9. Ninthly, That little Kingdom of Egypt had no less then Forty Thousand
Persons retired to their private and separate Ways of Worship, as Eusebius out
of Philo Judeus, and Josephus relates.

10. Tenthly; And here let me bring in honest Chaucer, whose Matter (and not
his Poetry) heartely affects me: 'twas in a time when Priests were as rich, and
lofty, as they are now, and Causes of Evil alike.

The primative State of things observed by a Poet, more then 300. year old; by
which the Clergy may read their own Apostasy and Character.
THe time was once, and may return again,
(for often may happen that has been before)
when Shepherds had none Inheritance,
ne of Land, nor Fee insufferance,
But what might arise of the bare Sheep,
(were it more or less) which they did keep,
Well ywis was it with Shepherds tho:
naught having, naught feared they to forgo,
For PAN (God) himself was their Inheritance,
and little them served for their Maintenance,
The Shepherds God so well them guided,
that of naught were they unprovided;
Time and Prosperity corrupted them, and then they grew Statesmen.
Butter enough, Honey, Milk, and Whay,
and their Flock Fleeces them to array.
But Tract of Time and long Prosperity,
(that Nurse of Vice, this of Insolency)
Lulled the Shepherds in such security,
that not content with Loyal obeisance,
Some began to gap for greedy governance,
and match themselves with mighty Potentates.
'Twas now they began to Persecute; they hated any that were more devout then
themselves: Devotion was counted Disaffection; Religious Assemblies,
Conventicles; primitive Spirited Christians, Upstart Heretics; thus the
Tragedy began, Cain slaying Abel about Religion.
Lovers of lordships and troublers of states;
then began Shepherds Swains to look aloft,
And leave to live hard, and learn to lig soft,
though under color of Shepherds some while
There crept in, Wolves full of fraud and guile,
that often devoured their own Sheep,
And often the Shepherd that did them keep,
He truly makes their Avarice the cause of their Degeneration; for it is the
Root of all Evil.
This was the first source of the Shepherds sorrow.
that nor will be quit, with hale, nor borrow.
II. Who knows not that our first Reformers were great Champions for Liberty of
Conscience, as Wicklif in his Remonstration to the Parliament. The Albigences
to Leuis the 11th and 12th of France. Luther to the several Dye^s under
Fredrick and Charles the fifth; Calvin to Francis the first, and many of our
English Martyrs, as the poor Plowman's Famous Complaint, in Foxes Martyralogy,
etc.

12. The present affairs of Germany, Plainly tell us that tolleration is the
preservation of their states; the contrary having formerly, almost quite wasted
them.

13. The same in France: who can be so ignorant of their Story, as not to know
that the timely Indulgence of Henry the fourth, and the discreet Tolleration of
Richlieu and Mazarin saved that Kingdom from being ruined both by the
Spaniards; and one another.

14. Holland, then which, what place is there so improved in Wealth, Trade and
Power, chiefly owes it to her Indulgence in matters of Faith and Worship.

15. Among the very Mahumetans of Turkey, and Persia, what variety of opinions,
yet what Unity and Concord is there? we mean in matters of a Civil Importance.

16. It was the opinion of that great Master of the sentences, Dominious a
Soto, that every man had A natural right to instruct others in things that are
good: and he may teach the Gospel truths also; but cannot compel any to
believe them, he may explain them, and to this (says he) every man has a right,
as in his 4 Sent: Did. Art. 510. Page 115. 7.

17. Strifes about Religions said Judicious and learned Grotius, are the most
pernicious and destructive; where pravision is not made for Dissenters: the
contrary most happy; As in Muscovy; he further says upon the occasion of
Campanella, that not a rigid but easy Government suits best with the Northren
people; he often pleads the relaxation of temporary Laws to be reasonable and
necessary. As in the case of the Curatij and Heratij, and Fabius Vitulanus; and
others stincted to time and place, as the Jewish Laws etc. Polit. Maxims P. 12
18. 78, 98.

18. The Famous Raleigh tells us, that the way for Magistrates to govern well
and gain the esteem of their People is to Govern by Piety, Justice, Wisdom, and
a Gentle and Moderate Carriage toward them: And that Disturbance attends those
States where men are ruined or depressed by Parties. See his Observations and
Maxims of State

19. If I mistake not, the French and Duch Protestants enjoy their Separated
Ways of Worship in London, if not in other parts of these Lands, without
Molestation; we do the like in remote Countries, but not in our own.

20. This must needs be the meaning of the learned Doctor to his inquisitive
Student, in their Juditious Diologue about the Fundamental Laws of the
Kingdoms, when he says, That such Laws as have not their Foundation in Nature,
Justice, and Reason are void ipso Facto. And whether Persecution or Restraint
upon Conscience be congruous with either, let the Impartial judge. lib. 1.
chap. 6.

21. Doctor Hammond himself, and the Grand Patron of the English Church, was so
far from urging the Legallity of Restriction in Matters relating to Conscience,
that he Writ, Argued, and left upon his Dying Bed his sense to the Contrary: As
the Author of his Life might have been pleased to observe, but that interest
stood in the way; the Doctor exhorting his Party, not to seek to Displace those
then in the University; or to Persecute them for any matter of Religious
difference.

22. That a Person of no less ability In the Irish Protestant Church did the
same, I mean D. Jer. Tailor, his whole discourse of Liberty of Prophesy, is a
most pregnant demonstration.

23. It was the saying of a Person once, too great to be Named Now. That
liberty of Conscience is every man's Natural Right, and be who is deprived of
it, is a Slave in the midst of the greatest Liberty: And since every man should
do as he would be done to, such only don't deserve to have it, that will not give
it.

24. Lactantius reflects upon Persecutors thus, If you will with Blood, with
Evil, and with Torments defend your Worship, it shall not thereby be Defended
but Polluted, lib. 5. cap. 20.

25. Hillary against Auxentius, says, The Christian Church does not persecute,
but is persecuted.

26. Jerome, thus, Heresy must be cut off with the Sword of the Spirit, Proam
lib. 4.

27. Chrysostum says, That it is not the manner of the Children of God to
persecute about their Religion, but an evident Token of Antichrist -- Relig.
Uris. page 192.

28. Stephen King of Poland declared his mind in the point controverted thus, I
am King of Men, not of Conscience; a Commander of Bodies, not of Souls.

29. the King of Bohemia was of Opinion, That men's Consciences ought in no sort
to be Violated, Urged, or Constrained.

30. And lastly, let me add (as what is, or should be now of more force) the
sense of King James, and Charles the first, Men famed for their great natural
abilities, and acquired Learning; that no man ought to be punished for his
Religion nor disturbed for his Conscience; In that it is the duty of every man
to give what he would Receive. It is a sure Rule in Divinity, said King James,
that God never loves to plants his Church by Violence and Bloodshed. And in his
Exposition on Revel. 20. he says, That PERSECUTION is the note of a false
Church. And in the last Kings advice to the Present King, he says, Take heed
of abetting any factions; your Partial adhearing to ANY ONE SIDE gains you not
so great advantages in some men's hearts (who are prove to be of their Kings
Religion) as it loses you in others, who think themselves, and their
profession, first dispis'd, then persecuted by you.

Again, Beware of exasperating any Factions by the Crosness, and Asperity of
some men's Passions, Humors, or private opinions employed by you, grounded only
upon their difference in lesser matters, which are but the Skirts and Suburbs
of Religion. Wherein a Charitable Connivence, and Christian Toleration often
dissipates their strength, whom rougher opposition fortifies; and puts the
despised and oppressed Party, into such combinations as may most enable them to
get a full revenge on those they count their Persecutors, who are commonly
assisted by that vulgar Commiseration, which attends all that are said suffer
under the notion of Religion.

Always keep up SOLLID PIETY and those fundamental Truths (which mend both
hearts and lives of men) with Impartial favor and Justice. Your Prerogative is
best shown and exercised in remitting, rather then exacting the rigor of Laws;
there being nothing worse than Legal Tyranny. --

NOW upon the whole, we ask, What can be more Equal, what more reasonable then
Liberty of Conscience; so correspondent with the Reverence due to God, and
Respect to the Nature, Practice, Promotion, and Rewards of the Christian
Religion; the Sense of Divine Writ; the Great Privilege of Nature, and Noble
Principle of Reason; the Justice, Prudence, and Felicity of Government; And
Lastly, to the Judgment and Authority of a whole Cloud of Famous Witnesses,
whose Harmony in Opinion, as much detects the Unreasonableness, and Incharity
of Persecutors, as their Savage Cruelties imply an highcontempt of so sollid
determinations; of which number I can not forbea^ the mention of two, whose
Actions are so near of kin to one another, and both to inhumanity, as the same
thing can be to it self.

The first is a great Lord of Buckingham-shire; but so hearty a Persecutor of
the poor Quakers, that rather then they should peaceably enjoy the Liberty of
Worshipping God, (and to supply the County-defect of Informers) he has
encouraged a pair of such Wretches, that it had bin a Disgrace for the meanest
Farmer to coverse with; one having been Prisoner in Alsbury for Theft, and said
to have bin burnt in the Hand; and the other of a Complexion not much less
Scandalous and Immortal.

To give an undeniable testimony of their Merit once for all, I shall briefly
relate a most notorious piece of Perjury. They suspecting a Religious Assembly
to be at a certain place in the same County came, and finding one in reallity,
repaired to one they call Sr. Tho Clayton, and a Justice, where they deposed,
That not only a meeting was at such an House, but one Tho. Zachery and his Wife
were there, who at the same time (as at the Trial upon Indictment for Perjury
at Alsbury was proved by snfficient Witnesses from London) were then in that
City, yet fined not only for being there, but for the Speaker also, though none
spoke that day.

Upon the prosecution of these Men, as perjured men, and by the Law
dispriviledged of all Imply, and never to be credited more in evidence, several
delays were made, much time spent, and not a little pains bestowed, all in
hopes of an Exemplary Success; which proved so, but the wrong way; for the very
last Sessions, when the matter should have received an absolute Decission, and
the Attendants have been dismissed (especially on the score of the Witnesses,
that came from London the second time, upon no other account) a Letter was
reported to have bin writ from the aforesaid Lord, in favor of these
Informers, to this purpose, That since Sr. Tho Clayton was not present, the
business could not well be determin^d, but if the Court would undertake the
ending of it, he beseecht them to be favorable to those HONEST MEN. If this be
as true as said, it is a most aggravated shame to Nobility: what! to protect
them from the Lash of Law, who went about to destroy Truth the Life of it: It Is
a Dishonor to the Government, a Scandal to the County, and a manifest Injury
to an inoffensive and useful Inhabitant.

'Tother is as well known by his Cruelty, as by his Name, and he scarce
deserves another; However, he is understood by that of the Reading Knight,
Arrant, and always in Armor for the Devil; a man, whose Life seems to be
whole BONNER reviev'd: Hogestraut, the Popish Inquisiter, could not hate Martin
Luther more, then he does a poor Dissenter; and wants but as much Power, as he
has Will, to hang more then he has Imprisoned. The Laws made against Papists,
he inflicts upon the Quakers; And makes it Crime enough for a Prim^^ire to have
an Estate to lose.

The single Question is not, Were you at such a Meeting? which the Act intends:
But will you Swear, which it intends not; and Women escape him as little for
this, as those of his own Tribe do for SOME THING ELSE: but what of all things
most aggrivates the man's Impiety, is the making a devilish snare of a
Christian Duty; since such as have come to visit the imprisoned, have been
imprisoned themselves for their Charity; so that with him it seems a current
Maxim, that those must not come to see Prisoners, and not be such themselves,
who will not take the Oath of Allegiance to do it.

To relate the whole Tragedy would render him as Bad, as the Discourse Big; and
the latter not less Voluminous, then the former Odious. But three things I
shall observe.

First, That he has clouded 72 Persons (of those called Quakers) Men and Women,
immodestly into Goal, not suffering them to enjoy common Conveniences. And for
his Divertion, and the Punishment of little Children, he pours Cold Water down
their Necks.

2d His Imprisonments are almost perpetual. First he premunires them, without
any just cause of Suspicion; thea Impris^ns them; and lastly, Plunders them,
and that by a Law enacted against Romanists; which, if all be true, that is
said, is more his concern then theirs, If without offense, it may be supposed
he has Religion at all.

3d Some have been there about Eight Years, and should be Eighteen more, were
he as sure to live (being more then 70.) and enjoy his Power, as doubtless he
hopes to die before those good Laws over-take him, that would make an Example
of such an Oppressor; in short, Wives, Widows, Poor and Father less, are all
Fish for his Net; and whether over or under Age he casts none away, but seems
to make it his privilege to correct Law by out-doing it. When we have said all
we can (and we can never say too much, (if enough) he is still his own best
Character.

Such are the Passion, Follies, and Prejudices, Men devoted to a spirit of
Imposition, and Persecution, are attended with, Non enim poss^mus quae vidimus,
et audivimus non loqui.

In short, What Religious, what Wise, what Prudent, what Good-natured Person
would be a Persecuter? Certainly it is an Office only fit for those who being
wide of all reason, to evidence the verity of their own Religion, fancy it to
be true, from that strong Propensity and greedy Inclination they find in
themselves to Persecute the Contrary; A Weakness of so ill a consequence to all
civil Societies, that the admission of it ever was, and ever will prove their
utter Ruin, as well as their great Infelicity who pursue it.

And though we could not more effectually express our Revenge, then by leaving
such Persons to the scope of their own Humors; Yet being taught to Love and
Pray for our very Persecutors, we heartily wish their better information, that
(if it be possible) they may Act more suitably to the good pleasure of the
Eternal just God, and beneficialy to these Nations.

To conclude, Liberty of Conscience (as, thus Stated and Defended) we ask as
our undoubted Right by the Law of God, of Nature, and of our own Country: It
has been often promised, we have long waited for it; we have Writ much, and
Suffered more in its Defense, and have made many true Complaints, but found
little or no Redress.

However, we take the Righteous Holy God to Record against all Objections that
are ignorantly, or designedly raised against us. That.

1st We hold no Principle destructive of the English Government.

2^ That we plead for no such Dissenter (if such an one there be.)

3^ That we desire the Temporal and Eternal Happiness of all Persons (in
submission to the Divine Will of God) heartily forgiving our Cruel Persecutors.

4thly, And Lastly, We shall engage, by Gods assistance, to lead peaceable,
just, and industrious lives amongst men, to the good and example of all. But if
after all we have said, this short Discourse should not be credited, nor
answered in any of its sober Reasons, and Requests; but Sufferings should be
the present Lot of our Inheritance from this Generation, be it known to them
all, THAT MEET WE MUST, and MEET, we cannot but encourage all to do (whatever
Hardship we sustain in Gods Name, and Authority, who is Lord of Hosts and King
of Kings; at the revelation of whose Righteous Judgments and Glorious Tribunal,
Mortal Men shall render an Account of the Deeds done in the Body; and whatever
the Apprehensions of such may be, concerning this Discourse, 'twas writ in
Love, and from a true sense of the present State of things: and TIME, and the
EVENT will vindicate it from Untruth. In the mean while, it is matter of great
Satisfaction to the Author, that he has so plainly cleared his Conscience, in
pleading for the Liberty of other Men's, and publicly born his honest Testimony
for God, not out of Season to his POOR COUNTRY.

Postscript.
A few brief Observations upon the late Act, and the usual Terms of Acts of
this Nature.
That which we have to say, relates, either to the Terms of the Act, or the
Application of them to us.

As to the Terms of the Act, they are these, Seditious Conventicles, Seditious
Sectaries, and Meetings under Color or Pretense of Religion, P. 1.

1 SEditious, from Sedition, imports as much as Turbulent, Contentious,
Factious, which sowes Strife, and Debate, and hazards the Civil Peace of the
Government.

2. Conventicle, is a diminutive private Assembly, designning and contriving
Evil to particular Persons, or the Government in general, see Lamb. p. 173. In
Tertullians sense it is an Assembly of immedest and unclean Persons, at least
it was so taken in those days, and objected against the Christians as their
practice, whom he defends.

Ter. Apol. 3. Sectaries, must be such as disjoyn or dis-member themselves from
the body of Truth, and confess to a strange and untrue opinion. If any Subject
of this Realm being 16 years of age or upwards, shall be present at any
assembly, Conventicle or pretense of Religion etc. which can signify no more
then thus much, that true it is some may meet and assemble to Worship God, and
upon a religious account, that are dissenters, such we censure not, but those
who under color or pretense of any exercise of Religion conspire etc. they are
to be suspected and Prosecuted. This being the true explanation of the terms
of the Act; we proceed to show how unreasonably they are applied to us.

1. Words are but so many intelligible Marks, and Characters set and employed,
to inform us of each others conceptions, and therein of the nature of those
things they stand for; Now because we take the Act to mean what it speaks, and
that the Law concludes no man guilty upon conjectures, but from the detection
of some fault; we affirm our selves altogether unconcerned in that word
Seditious, because 'twas never our practice in words, or actions to disturb the
Government; or suggest Principles that might hatch Conspiracies, or feed the
vulgar with disaffection to their Rulers; but before the Kings coming in, at
his coming in, and ever since, notwithstanding our frequent suffering, we have
made it our business to heal Animosities, Preach forgiveness and Charity
amongst men, and that they would by an hearty repentance turn to God, rather
then hunt after revenge upon one another: therefore we assert we have not done
one thing that may be proved Seditious in the sense above mentioned.

2. That we are Strangers to Conventicles is most evident, for where the parts
that render it such, are wanting, there can be no Conventicle; but that they
are in our Assemblies, appears.

First, Because our Meetings are not Small. 2. Neither are they private or
Clandestine; but in the view of all People. 3. Nor are they riotous,
liscentious, or otherwise immodest, or immorall; but on purpose to diswade
persons from such impieties; so that we are clear in the Interpretation of the
Law. 13 H. 5. cap. 8. 19. and 19. H. 7. cap. 13. and in the sense of the famous
Father Tertullian.

3. Sectaries, is a word, that whosoever has but confidence enough to conceit
himself in the Right, by consequence wants none to suppose the contrary in the
wrong, and so to call him a Sectary; but this is but a mere begging of the
Question; For to say those are Sectaries, does not conclude them such, nor does
the Act speak so plainly of Dissenters: but granting it did, yet they must be
Seditious Ones, or else all will be in vain; where we may observe, that purely
to be a Sectary, is not what the Act strikes at, but to be a Seditious One: for
a man may differ in judgment about matters of Faith, from the national
Religion, and yet correspond with the Government in matters civil: so that ACT
upon the whole, aims not at Sectaries simply, but they must be such as are
Enemies to the civil constitution to be rendered Seditious Ones, from which we
have sufficiently cleared our selves.

4. That we meet under Color and Pretense, and not really to Worship God; we
deny, and none can prove. 'Twere high Incharity to affirm positively, This, or
that People meet only under a Color of Religion; yet unless the Act had so
expres'd it self, we conceive their Authority lame and imperfect that Persecute
us by it. It will help but little to say, The King, Lords and Commons, by the
following words, in other manner then acc^rding to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, meant, that such meet under a Pretense that did not conform to that
Worship; since the precedent words say, under Color or Pretense of any
Exercise of Religion in other manner, etc. So that they are only struck ar, who
are not sincere Dissenters, but that are such, with Design to carry on another
End.

Obj But may some say, It Is granted, you have very evidently evaded the Force
of the Act, so far as relates to these recited Expressions; but what if a Bill
be ready, for an Explanatory and Supplementory Act to the former, wherein this
Scope for Argument will not be found, because your Meetings will be absolutely
adjudged Seditious, Riotous, and Unlawful.

To which we Answer, That as the granting of the first, which none reasonably
can deny, is a manifest Impeachment of such as have violently prosecuted people
for being present at Religious Assemblies (almost to their utter Undoing) so
shall we as easily answer the second, which amounts to the force of an
Objection, and briefly thus.

First, It is not more impossible for Mankind to preserve, their Society
without Speech, then it is absolutely requisite that the Speech be regular and
certain. For, if what we call a Man, a Lion, a Whale to day, we should call a
Woman, a Dog, a Sprat to morrow; there would be such Uncertainty and Confusion,
as it would be altogether impossible to preserve Speech or Language
intelligible.

Secondly, it is not in the power of all the men in the World to reconcile an
absolute Contradiction, to convert the nature of Light into that of Darkness,
nor to enact a thing to be that which it is not; but that Those endeavor to
do, who think of making our Religious Meetings Routs and Riots; for first they
offer Violence to our common Propriety of Language, it being the first time
that ever a Religious and Peaceable Assembly would be enacted a Rout or Riot:
Nature, Reason, the Law of the Land, and common Practice, and Observation, give
a clear contrary definition of a Rout and Riot.

Secondly, They endeavor to reconcile Contradictions; for they would have a
thing that which by nature it cannot be; for that which is Peaceable cannot be
Riotous, and what is Religious can never be Seditious. For any to say our
Meetings are not R^ligious, is not only a poor Evasion, but great Incharity;
for that is properly a Religious Assembly where Persons are co^gregated with a
real purpose of Worshipping God, by Prayer, or otherwise, let the Persons met
be esteemed Doctrinally Orthodox, or not. Can any be so Ignorant, or so
Malitiou^, as to believe we do not Assemble to Worship God, to the best of our
Understanding? If they think otherwise, they must, and do assume unto
themselves a Power beyond the Arrogance of the POPE himself, that never yet
adventured to tell man his Thoughts, nor the Purposes and Intents of his Heart,
which he, or they must do, that definitively judge our Assemblies, void of
Sword or Staff, Drum or Musket, Tumult or Violence, and circumstantiated with
all the Tokens of Christian Devotion, a Rout or a Riot. And truly, If
Protestants deny the Legallity of those Acts or Edicts, which were contrived
and execu^ed in order to their suppression, by the respective Kings and
Parliaments that owned the Romish Faith and Authority, where they either did or
do live, let them not think it strange, if we on the same Terms (namely,
Scruple of Conscience) refuse compliance with their Laws of Restraint. And as
the first Reformers were no whit daunted at the Black Characters the Romanists
fastened on them, neither thought their Assemblies in away of professed
separation, the more unlawful, for their representing them such; no more are we
surpised or scared at the ugly Phr^ses, daily cast upon us by a sort of men,
that either do not know us, or would not that others should: For we are not so
easily to be Braved, Menaced, or Persecuted out of our Sense, Reason, and
Privilege.

They say, LOSERS have leave to Speak, at least, we take it; none being greater
Losers, then such as for Dissenting from national institutions in point of
Faith or Worship, are deprived of their Common Rights and Fr^edoms, and hindered
as much as may be, from reverencing the God that made them, in that Way which
to them seems most acceptable to him.

To Conclude, we say, and by it let our Intentions in our whole discourse be
measured, that we have not defined any Dissenters, whose quarrel or dissent is
rather Civil and Politticall, then Religious and Concientious; for both we
really think such unworthy of Protection from the English ^overnment, who seek
the ruin of it; and that such as are Contributries to the pres^rvation of it,
(though Dissen^ers in point Faith or Worship) are unquestionably Entitled to a
Protection from IT.

THE END.

