THE New Witnesses PROVED OLD HERETICS: OR Information to the Ignorant; in
which the Doctrines of John Reeve and Lodowick Muggleton, which they style,
Mysteries never before known, revealed, or heard of from the Foundation of the
World, are proved to be mostly ancient Whimsies, Blasphemies and Heresies, from
the Evidence of Scripture, Reason, and several Historians.

ALSO An Account of some discourse betwixt L.M. and my self, by which his
Blasphemous, Ignorant and Unsavory Spirit is clearly and truly manifested, in
love to the immortal Souls of those Few, who are concerned in the belief of his
Impostures.

By a Living true Witness to that one Eternal Way of God, revealed in the Light
of Righteousness. W.P.

Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these ( Reeve and Muggleton)
also resist the Truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith.
But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be manifest unto all
men, as theirs also was,

2 Timothy 3 8, 9. Printed in the Year, 1672.

TO THE READER.
READER,
Amongst the many strange Pretentions, that have been made to Religion, and the
Authors and Abettors of variety of Sects, through every Generation, from the
most primitive Christian Times, there has not appeared (though not a less
formidable yet) a more complete Monster on the Stage of Controversy and
Opinion then John Reeve and Lodowick Muggleton, Brethren and Associates in the
Blackest Work that ever fallen Men or Angels could probably have set themselves
upon. What many Ages singly were infested by, we are assaulted with at once;
and as if the scattered Limbs of Heresy had rallied and re-enforced themselves
for a new Combat; no sooner was the Glorious Truth appearing, then they were
ready to make their utmost Opposition, either by their Enchantments, to delude
the Souls of some; or through their unparalleled sottish Folly, to scandalize
the World in general against all Religion, as ridiculous; and amongst others,
the true as also Fabulous: Yet the Lord God of Eternal Power, whose Thoughts
and Ways are not as Mortal Men's, but Infinite and Almighty, like himself;
having decreed the Redemption of the fallen Souls of Men, by the Illumination
of their Understandings, and Quickening of their Minds, dead in Trespasses and
Sins, by the living powerful Operation of is own Eternal Spirit of Holiness,
did appear in so great Glory and Majesty, that those Foggs and Mists, which
began to overspread the Earth, were soon scattered, and the Everlasting Light
rise, and has effectually shined forth unto the Convincement and Conversion of
Thousands from the Ungodliness of this present Evil World, and the Fruitless
Religions that are professed therein, to live a Sober, Heavenly Righteous Life
and Conversation.

But Alas! Some few have strayed by the Way, One hither, and Another thither,
for want of that Subjection and Holy Watch they ought to have lived in, unto
the Blessed Living Truth of God: And as many Snares have been presented to
Delude, so amongst others, their Sottish Imaginations have not been without the
power of a Temptation, and too effectual upon some, the Lord knows, which
though their Number be but very small, yet the Concernment of their Immortal
Souls is great: For who living, that have tasted of the sure Mercies of God,
and enjoyed of the Reward of Faithfulness to the Truth, but must needs Pity,
Sorrow and Lament on their behalf; some that might have run well, and would
not; others that began to do it, and Satan hindered?

No sooner was Adam and Eve made sensible of the Blessedness of their Innocent
State, then the Serpent endeavored to beguile them; How? by Preaching
Righteousness, Holiness, Watchfulness and Godly Fear, as without which none
should ever see the Lord? No, nothing less, but by Idle Dreams, Lucifican
Thoughts and Exalted Imaginations, above the lowl^ Awe and Fear, they ought to
have lived in toward their Almighty Creator: And thus in some measure has it
faired with a few unhappy Souls, that have been beguiled by these Imposters.

I shall not altogether make it my Business to confute his Tenants; but since
they more then once, with an intolerable Pride, boast of these things, as New
Revelations, and challenge the whole World to disprove them, and upon this
single credit it is that their credulous Adherents are so mightily persuaded of
their Patrons Sincerity and Infability (it being their first Lesson at
entrance, To abandon all Scripture or inward Witness) And that Muggleton to my
knowledge, in his Discourses, and otherwise, makes it his brag, That he not
only knows more then all men ever did or shall know to Eternity; but that the
Doctrines Reeves and he say they are deputed to declare (by virtue of an
immediate oral Commission from God himself) are such divine Revelations, as
were never known to Men or Angels before them.

And consequently, since their Followers have nothing for a Proof, besides
their bare Assertion (which is most arrogant and false (for they deny all
inward Witness). It will appear both reasonable and necessary, that by an
external Judge and Witness they should be tried; and if upon their Arraignment
at the Bar, they be found only to have patcht up old Phantisms together, and
published them under the Name of Transcendant Spiritual Treatises, Divine
Looking-Glasses, and the like; I hope they will be judged by every sober Person
to be both horrible Imposters, and their Commission to be a mere Counterfeit.

THE New Witnesses Proved OLD HERETICS, etc.
I now proceed to perform what has been promised by most Undeniable Proof.

First,

REeves and Muggleton declare as a great Secret to the World, That God is not
an Infinite Spirit in every Place at all Times (contrary to the Scriptures,
which say, He measures out the Heavens with his Span, nor can the Heaven of
Heavens contain him) but against men and Angels, and by Authority from the holy
Spirit (to use their own words) God is but in the shape of a man; and that man,
in respect of his Body, is the Image of God. Trans. Spirit. Treat. p. 15. Deu.
Look. Glass p. 3, 4.

That this is against Scripture we prove.

First, There is none like to the God of Jeshurun, who rides upon the Heaven
in thy Help, and in his Excellency on the Sky: The Eternal God is thy Refuge,
and underneath are the Everlasting Arms, Deuteronomy. 33.26, 27.

If the God of Jeshurun be the true God, and none be like to him, then cannot
man's bodily shape be the Likeness of the true God; consequently, if Muggleton's
God^ be in the likeness of man's bodily shape, he is not the True God, because
he is not that God of Jeshurun, which none is like unto.

Again, If the Almighty God were but of the dimention of a middle statured man,
how could he be said to ride upon the Heavens and the Sky; and to have his
Everlasting Arms under a People, many of whom being singly bigger then himself;
for by Muggleton's Principles, We are still to keep to the Litteral sense.

Secondly, But will God indeed dwell on the Earth? behold the Heaven and Heaven
of Heavens cannot contain him, 1 Kings 8.27. 2 Chronicles. 2.6. chap. 6.18.

If the Earth, on which dwells so many Millions of Men, be not able to receive
God, as he is, and in comparison of limiting him to any place, (suitable to
such a Body as Muggleton says he has) the very Heaven and Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain him; Certainly this immence and infinite Being must be of a
larger extent, then the Proportion of a Mortal Man, his own Creature.

Thirdly, Who has measured the Waters in the hollow of his hand, and meeted
out the Heaven with his Span, and comprehended the Dust of the Earth in a
measure, and weighed the Mountains in scales, and the Hills in a Balance, Isa.
40.12.

He that cannot measure the Waters in the hollow of his Hand? and meet out the
Heaven with his Span, and comprehend the Dust of the Earth in a Measure, and
weigh the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance, is not the true
God; but a Godd of man's stature can never do that; therefore the true God is
not such a one, neither can such a one be the true God.

Fourthly, To whom then will ye liken God? What Likeness will ye compare unto
him? the Workman melts a Graven Image, and the Goldsmiths spreads it over
with Gold: Have ye not known? have ye not heard? has it not been told you from
the Beginning? have ye not understood from the Foundations of the Earth! It is
he that sits upon the Circle of the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof are as
Grass-Hoppers, that stretches out the Heavens as a Curtain, and spreads them
out as a Tent to dwell in, Isa. 40.18, 19, 21, 22.

In this Passage is a most pregnant Overthrow of this vain Opinion.

1. That God of whom man can make a Likeness; is not the true God; but such a
one is Muggleton's, therefore not the true God.

2. If God was of man's figure and stature, then Goldsmiths were able to make
his Likeness; but this the Scriptures utterly deny, and ask, what likeness will
ye compare unto him? therefore God is not in the bodily shape of a man.

3. God by his Prophet disdaineth all such vain Conceits, and lest any should
think so meanly of him, he gives his own Character, Have ye not heard? has it
not been told you from the Beginning? it is he that sits on the Circle of
the Earth, and to whom the Inhabitants thereof are as Grass-Hoppers; who
stretches out the Heavens as a Curtain, and spreads them out as a Tent to dwell
in.

Fifthly, God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in Spirit
and in Truth, John 4.24.

If God be a Spirit, he is either a finite or an infinite Spirit; a finite he
cannot be, and be God; therefore an infinite one.

If God be an infinite and immence Spirit (which are terms reciprocal) then
not a Body of a little more then five Foot high, as blasphemous, ignorant and
sottish Reeve and Muggleton darkly imagine; but the only wise and invisible God
is that infinite Spirit, therefore not confined to any bodily shape.

Sixthly, For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the Flesh,
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, for sin condemned sin
in the Flesh, Romans 8.3. But made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him
the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of men, Phil. 2.7.

By the likeness of sinful Flesh, and was made in the likeness of men, we
understand and grant Christ's taking upon him not only a shape of a man, but
the Flesh and Blood of a Virgin; the Question will then be this, Whether Christ
had this shape before he took it? If he had, he took it after he had it, which
is absurd; if not, he was before he had it; and if he was before he had it,
either he was like his Father, or he was not; if not, then not his Son; if he
was, then because the Scripture declares him to have taken upon him the
likeness of a man, which supposes him to have had a Being before he took it:
God is not in the likeness of sinful Flesh* nor made in the likeness of men;
but is the divine immortal Substance, of which Christ was the express Image
before he took upon him the form of a Servant, or was made in the likeness of
men* which take notice are both joined together, as Expressions of his
Condiscension, as the following verse also shows; and in being found in the
fashion of a man (as being a new and uncouth thing to him) he humbled himself,
and became obedient unto Death, etc. This was in the day he took upon him the
form of a Servant and likeness of Man, making himself of no Reputation; and not
whilst he was in the form of God, when he thought it no Robbery to be equal
with God.

In short, If that only makes equal with God, which is found in the form of
God; then that which is in the form of a Servant, and in the likeness of men,
is not in that state equal to God; and if that be so, as it is, if Scripture be
true, certainly there is ground to believe, that Reeve and Muggleton are not a
little out of the Way, in asserting, That God's Form is the Pattern or Image
man's Body was made by.

But here I expect to meet with an Objection, that it may be fit to remove, as
that only one which can carry any color of an Answer with it.

Object. Most of these Scriptures, especially out of the Prophets* only intend
to show God's Sovereign Power, and not that he is not a Peson, as I assert him
to be. Thus far Muggleton and his Company.

I Reply, All Scriptures either import a literal or a mystical sense, and
either would serve us against this false Witness; if he says they should be
construed mystically, I will tell him, that he must give us the same liberty in
that place to do the like, Let, us make man after our own Image; for they only
collect from that Passage God's Image by man's likeness; but in many of the
places urged by me, those Members, which in a litteral sense denote a Body like
to man's, are particularly mentioned: We will never allow him to allegorize the
more litteral, and litterize the more allegorical; if the one must be litteral,
let the other be so too, especially there being more ground for it.

To Conclude, if he will interpret God's Hands, and Arms, and Span to signify
his Power, as is most true; then will I also explain God's Image to be
Holiness, which is also true. But if he will have it, that because God made man
after his Image, and that man has an Head, Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Ears, Hands, etc.
therefore God has such too; I will infer, because the Scriptures say, He span'd
the Heaven with his Right hand, and rid upon the Circle of the Earth, That he
really and bodily did so span the Heavens with a great Hand, and rid with a
mighty Body upon the Circle of the Earth; which how ridiculous and false soever
it is, is as true as Reeve's or Muggleton's Conceit: Thus far indeed they would
be in the right, by such a Consequence, That Almighty God would have a Body,
but they would grossly lie in the dimensions of it, who say, It Is no bigger then
a middle statured man. Thus much, If not too much upon this piece of old vain
Anthropomorphitism.

That this idle Opinion is against that Understanding which God has given Men
to judge of the Difference of Things, we also prove.

First, If God were a Person of man's stature; it would destroy his Ubiquity or
Omnipresence, which is one of his most divine Properties, rightly attributed to
him: For, how is it possible so inconsiderable a Body can be at all places at
one and the same time, by which to see and understand all things, or to
administer Strength and Comfort to his scattered Flock throughout the World?

Secondly, If they would say, he is present by his Spirit (as read Reeve's
Epistle to his Divine Looking-Glass) I affirm against all Muggletonians upon
Earth, That then not that Body, but that Omnipresent Spirit is the truly in
infinite God.

Thirdly, But I would fain know how God and his Spirit can be divided or
separated; Can any man be truly such, whose spirit is absent from him? What
Body is a living Body without a spirit, any more than Faith can be living
without Works? How then can God's Body, no bigger then a Mortal Man's, be
contained in Reeve's and Muggleton's conceited Heaven, and his Spirit every
where? Where God's Spirit is, God is; he can never be divided from his own Life
and Spirit: for God is that Spirit, or that Spirit is God; they are
synonimously or equivolently to be taken. This the Apostle believed, when he
told the Athenians, That God was nigh to every one of them, and in him they
lived, moved, and had their Being.

Fourthly, How was it possible for Reeve to hear God speak with a Voice of
words from beyond the Stars, as one Body speaks to another, and no Body hear
besides himself, nor the visible Firmament or Air to receive any Alteration or
Disposure, as ever was when Voices of Words have been uttered, whether to
Moses, or of Christ, or otherwise?

If any say, It was a spiritual Voice, such talk sottishly; no Carnal Ear can
hear a Spiritual Voice, as Reeve himself teaches, page 47. T.S.T. concerning
which something may be fitly hinted elsewhere.

Fifthly, But I would add from their wicked Principles, That if Man be God's
Image, in reference to his Body, then, because Reeve and Muggleton declare that
a select number of men's Bodies and Souls are pre-ordain'd to be eternally
damned, therefore God has decreed his own Image to everlasting Vengeance, and
that to glorify himself too; which one Horrible Impiety I desire all to weigh,
and then there needs no farther undertaking to his Confutation.

That this OLD, and also Exploded HERESY I prove.

This wonderful dark Secret is to be read in Theodorus of Heresies, the 4th
Book, and 10th Chapter, where he speaks of one Audaeus, who lived in
Coelosiria, in the time of Constantius the Emperor, and grounded his Conjecture
upon these words, Let us make man after our Image. Also several Monks
inhabiting Egypt conceited, the God that made Heaven and Earth to be no bigger
then a Man. Of which Opinion, with Muggleton, was one Theaphilus of Alexandria,
they were called Anthropomorphits, as may at large be seen in Eusebius
Pamphilus his 6th Book and 36th Chapter; also in Socrates Scholasticus his six
and seven Books: this was about the Year after Christ 403. and One thousand two
hundred sixty nine years since.

Secondly,

THeir second Secret is That God did not create the Heavens and Earth out of
Nothing, but the Substance was with God from Eternity, T.S.T. p. 12.

That this also inconsistent with SCRIPTURE we prove.

First, In the beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth, and the Earth
was without form and void, Genesis 1.1, 2.

If they were created before they were formed, as says the place, then
Creation and Formation are not one and the same thing, as Reeve and Muggleton
assert in their Transcendent Spiritual Treatise, p. 16. so that either the
Authority of Scriptures must be denied, or else Creation is first a bringing
forth of the Chaos or rude Substance, and Formation the Disposition of it into
such Parts, and Designation unto such Ends or Services, as that all wise
Creator might think most befitting his great Work. Enough might be said on this
one particular to confute all with whom the Scriptures remain of any force.

Secondly, Hearken unto me O Jacob, and Israel my called; I am he, I am the
first, I also am the last; my Hand also has laid the Foundation of the Earth,
Isa. 48.12, 13.

To be first, and to have laid the very Foundation of another Being,
supposes that thing neither to be before it, nor so much as in time equal with
it; and therefore denotes priority and superiority: Wherefore thus I argue, If
God was before so much as the Foundation of the Earth was laid, then was
neither the Earth, nor Foundation of it, from Eternity with God. But the Text
affirms, That God was first, or before the very Foundation was ever laid,
therefore neither the Earth, nor Superstructure, as to its Form, nor yet its
Foundation or first material Principle was Coeternal.

In short, Nothing can be said to create any thing that is equal in time with
it, because such Creation supposes the one to receive its being from the
other: and since God gave its Foundation, or first bottom, the very material
Principle, it follows, there could be no Co-eternity betwixt them.

Thirdly, -- And the Word was God: All things were made by him, John 1.1, 13.

If all things were made by him, then both Heaven and Earth, because they are
part of all things, were made by him; but the place says, all things (or
whatever has being) were made by him; therefore a^^ Co-eternity of Earth or
Heaven with the Everlasting God is excluded and refuted.

To this answers that Passage of the Apostle Paul in the Acts, God that made
the World, and all things therein, etc.

Fourthly* To c^nclude this Head, For by him were all things created, and (...)
before (...) things; and by him all things c^n^^st, Collos* 1 16.17. And thou
Lord in the beginning have laid the Foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens
are the Works of thy Hands, Heb. 1.10.

That which had a Beginning, which was made and which was and is upheld by
another, neither can have been contemporary nor coeternal with that from which
it received its Being; but that did the Heaven and the Earth, and from
Almighty God, as the place proves: Therefore not Coeternal with him.

Nor can their idle shift any ways secure them from the dint of these
Scriptures, nor the Arguments built upon them, viz. making is fashioning, so
God made the Heavens and the Earth, as a Carpenter makes a Door or a Chest, he
fashions it of Wood* but he does not make the Wood: A Distinction fitted for
Bodlam, then* men pretending to be in their Wits: Can any rationally think,
that when God is said to lay the Foundation of the Earth, and to make the
Heavens, and all that live therein, that he only fashioned them up? Who made
the Trees, Plants, Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, and rational Creatures? Do they
strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Cammel? Can they think that it was harder to
Almighty God, to create out of Nothing the more inanimate or Lifeless part of
Heaven and Earth, then to compose that variety of excellent Creatures, and to
infuse that great Spirit and Soul, by which they are respectively instincted or
acted.

But how pertinent his Distinction is betwixt fashioning and making, we will
manifest by that remarkable Passage to our purpose in Paul's Epistle to the
Philippians, Chap. 2. And being found in fashion as a man; he humbled himself,
etc.

Was Christ a real Man, or not? if not, then Reeve and Muggleton's Fleshly
Mortal Notion of the Immortal Son of God falls to the Ground; if a real man,
then to be fashioned may import to be, and the Fashion of a thing passes for
the Being of a thing.

Of what value now their Distinction is, they may consider if they please.

But this Opinion is also against REASON.

First, It is the nature of what is Eternal, or from all Everlasting to be
Infinite, Unalterable and Almighty; for it owes no Original or Preservation to
another, and is equivolent in all other Properties to Eternity: Now where there
is not proportion, it is highly to be suspected, That there is no such thing at
all; but is a mere Chimera, and real only in a Fiction.

Secondly, That there is no resemblance is manifest, the whole visible World is
full of Time, inconsistent with Eternity, as having Beginning and End; the
Heavens have their set Motions, the Earth her distinct Seasons, in which are
various Revolutions, and both filled with diverse Temporary Agitations and
Motions: Therefore it is impossible that Heaven and Earth could have been from
Eternity, which are so filled with and made up of all the Instances of Time and
Mutation; for should they, The Sun must always shine, the Rain descend, the
Tide flow, the Winds blow, the Winter last, and every Alteration that is in
Time be perpetual.

Thirdly, It is utterly impossible, that Temporal Beeings could receive their
sustenence and growth from what is by nature Eternal; there being as great
Contrariety, at least, Difference between them, as there is betwixt visible and
invisible, spiritual and carnal things.

Fourthly, Such as is the Food, such should the Life be; now if this visible
World be eternal, then the Food that springs from it should nourish to a Life
as Eternal as that World which does produce it. Nay, since man's Body was made
of the Earth, we might well infer, That man's Body* as so made, is Eternal; and
if Eternal, as such, not Mortal, which Experience tells us is an idle Tale. But
let this suffice at present.

But that this Conjecture had other Founders then Reeve and Muggleton, I prove,
and that by two Instances.

Augustine says, That there were several that affirmed, That the Water was not
made by God, but was Coeternal. Next, a certain Sect called S^luciani taught,
That the substance of the Creation, or whereof the World was made, was not made
by God, but Eternally with God (then no Creature, and then God) as may at large
be read in the said Augustine's Book of Heresies; this Heresy reigned about
Anno 300. after Christ. To say nothing of that known Philosopher Aristole, who
was sometimes Idolator; sometimes Athiest.

Thirdly,

THe third Secret, which only was revealed to Reeve and Muggleton, if we will
believe them, is, That the Soul of man is generated or got by the Man and Woman
with the Body, and that the Body and Soul are inseparable.

That this is contrary to SCRIPTURE Testimony I prove.

First, And the Spirit to God that gave it, Eccle. 12.7.

No Carnal Generation can bring forth a pure Spirit* External Matter producing
only External Matter of its own kind.

But the soul of Man is a spirit, as the words expressed in Reeve's and
Muggleton's own T.S.T. p. 44. Therefore no man gets the soul or spirit of a man
when he generates the Body.

Secondly, That which returns to God came from God; but the soul of every man
returns to God, and consequently came from him.

I omit mentioning more Scriptures, because the following Principle being a
Consequent of this; what I prove there is proved here, namely, The Immortality
of the soul, against the Atheistical Assertion, of the soul's mortality with
the body: For where there is no Corruption, there could be no proper
Generation; and if the soul be Immortal, it was not descended of Mortal Race,
or begotten of elementory visible matter.

That this is against all Right UNDERSTANDING, I prove.

First, Such as is the Soul, such must that be which produces it; but it is
Spiritual. Now that which generates the Body of Man, being only and merely
visible Matter, it cannot produce or generate an intellectual Soul or Spirit.

Secondly, If Man got the Soul, then would that Soul be as well the Image of
the Father as the Body, and partake as entirely of the Father's Nature and
Disposition in all respects: But Experience shows us, That Sober Parents have
Wild Children, and Religious Children Debaucht Parents; therefore Parents do
not generate the Soul.

Thirdly, If Soul and Body be inseparably generated, then the Sexes as well
belong to Souls as Bodies; the which as it is absurd, so would there be Men and
Women in that very distinction to all Eternity: And who ever read of She Souls,
or Female Souls?

Fourthly, If Soul and Body were intermixtly and inseparably generated by Man,
then in all Anatomies it were no more difficult to find out the Soul then any
other Part: and in case of opening or dissecting of Living men, as I have at
the University, seen living Beasts by Anatomists, it would not be impossible,
but rational, that one should behold the very Thoughts, Purposes, and Intents
of such Men's Hearts and Souls. But because this were most vain, we shall
conclude, The Soul is not generated with, nor inseparable from the Body, but of
an Immaterial Nature.

That this is no newer then the rest, and was esteemed Heresy in the Primitive
Times, I will Evidence.

There was a Sect called Lucifrians, from one Lucifer of Sardania, and the
Tertullianists, who held, That the Soul was transfused by generation from the
Parents to their Children, and that the Soul is of the Flesh, and Substance of
the Flesh of which read Socrates, in his 3d Book, and 7th Chapter; also,
Augustine of Heresies; and Theodorus, his 3d Book and 5th Chapter, about Anno
350.

Fourth,

THE Fourth sublime Mystery of those Fantastic and Imaginary Persons is a
Consequence of the former, namely, the Mortality of the Soul, That the Soul and
Body go to Dust, and rise together at a general Resurrection.

That it is inconsistent with SCRIPTURE, I prove.

First, And the Lord God formed Man of the Dust of the Ground, and breathed
into his Nostrils the breath of Life, and Man became a Living Soul, Genesis 2.7.

If the Breath of Life made a dead Body live, then the Privation of the Breath
of Life makes a living Body dead; since the life it has was from and is whilst
that Breath inspired remains in it; and if so, then not the Soul, but the Body
dies.

2. This is further proved thus, If it was living Breath before it entered into
the Body, it must be living Breath after it is withdrawn from the Body; since
the Body makes no alteration upon it, but it upon the Body; as from a life-less
Heap to a living Body, and from a living to a dead Body again.

3. Though some of those things which are living may dye, because they live by
the borrowed or lent Life of another; yet very Life, as Life, cannot dye; for
since Life and Death are contrary, as Light and Darkness, because very Light
can never in it self be utterly extinguished by Darkness, so as to become very
Darkness, nor Truth Untruths by Error, it is impossible that the Breath of
Life, or Soul of Man, can suffer death, as here understood; for that were very
annihilation it self, or being from an intelligent Something made Nothing.

Secondly, And he cried unto the Lord, and said, O Lord my God have thou also
brought Evil upon the Widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her Son? And he
stretched himself over the Child Three times, and cried and said, O Lord my
God, I pray thee, Let this Child's Soul come into him again: And the Lord heard
the Voice of Elijah, and the Soul of the Child came into him again, and he
revived, 1 Kings 17.20, 21, 22.

If the Soul was withdrawn when the Body lay dead, as the place proves, then
the Soul lay not dead from all Motion, Life and Heat in the Body, as one
inseparable Lump. But the Soul was separated, and when it did return, according
to Elijah's Prayer, and had resumed its forsaken dead Body, it revived the Body
again; therefore the Soul dyed not with the Body, nor at all; inasmuch as if it
had dyed, when separated, it could not have revived the dead Body, when
returned.

In short, This place most expressly proves, 1st, The Body's death, from the
Soul's separation: 2dly, The Soul's certain departure from the Body: 3dly, The
Soul's living after separation.

Thirdly, Then shall the Dust return to the Dust, as it was; and the Spirit to
God, that gave it, Eccl. 12.7.

This place very evidently harmonizeth with the former, and is a pregnant
Instance to the Confutation of that Atheistical Opinion, and as pertinent here,
as where mentioned. For, as Man is composed of Body and Spirit, so they have
two Originals; the one from below, Dust; the other from above, the Breath of
Life: They have also two Dooms, the Dust to the Dust, from whence it came; the
Soul to God, from whence it came, to be by him sentenced to the Blessed or
Cursed State forever, according to the end of that Chapter, For God will bring
every secret thing to Judgment; from whence I argue,

1. That only can properly return to Earth that came from it, that is Dust.

But the Soul never came from Dust nor Earth, as Reeve and Muggleton affirm, p.
45. T.S.T.

Therefore it is impossible that the Soul can truly be said to return to the
Earth.

2. That which returns to God is what more immediately and eminently came from
him, and that cannot dye.

But the Soul does to the end aforesaid.

Therefore the Soul came from him, and dies not, neither can it with the Body
return to Dust.

Fourthly, Be not afraid of them that kill the Body, and after that have no
more that they can do, Luke 12.4.

If Reeve and Muggleton speak Truth, then he that kills the Body kills the Soul
too; for he cannot kill the one without the other.

But Christ Jesus, the Author of Truth and Salvation, says, The Body may be
killed by Man, and the Soul remain alive; therefore Reeve and Muggleton are
Liars against Christ and his Doctrine.

The Body's Death is Natural, the Soul's Spiritual; Man's Power extends but to
one, and consequently the latter is independent of the former.

Fifthly, For me to live is Christ, to dye is Gain; but if I live in the Flesh
(or Body) this is the Fruit of my Labor: yet what I shall chose, I wot not;
for I am in a straight betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and be with
Christ, which is far better, Phil. 1.21, 23. From whence I plainly argue,

1. If to dye was Gain, then he was not to enjoy less of that divine
Consolation which he had living, since to live was Christ. But he that has lain
Body and Soul One Thousand Six Hundred Years in the Grave, and may for ought we
know One Thousand Six Hundred more, must needs have lost not only a little, but
all that he enjoyed Living, instead of further Gain: Therefore I infer, Their
Principle of the Soul's Mortality is contrary to the Testimony of the Apostle;
for with him to dye was Gain. That this was the Apostle's sense I proceed yet
further to make appear from his own words.

2. The Reason of his straight was, Whether to live to serve Christ, or dye to
enjoy him: But this had been no straight, if he was to lose what he had, and
not to enjoy him after departure in any sense, as the Dead don't; therefore it
was not the Apostle's Judgment, though it was Wicked Reeve's, and Blasphemous
Muggleton's, That the Soul is deprived with the Body by Death, of all Divine
Enjoyments of God, or Punishment from him, till the Day of Resurrection. For
the Apostle counted it far better, to depart, and be with Christ; which had
been a Vain, if an In-obtainable Desire, as would follow from their
Anti-Scriptural Opinion.

Sixthly, And when he had opened the Fifth Seal, I saw under the Altar the
Souls of them that were slain for the Word of God, and for the Testimony which
they had held; and they cried with a loud Voice saying, How long, O Lord Holy
and True, do thou not Judge and Avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the
Earth? Revel. 6.9, 10.

If their Souls lived after their Bodies were Slain, then they did not dye
together; but the Scripture proves, their Souls lived after their Bodies were
Slain: for they cried for Vengeance on the Blood-thirsty Inhabitants of the
World; therefore Souls are not Mortal, as Bodies are.

In short, Their Bodies were slain, their Souls were alive; their Bodies were
in the Grave, their Souls under the Altar, worshipping God Day and Night
forever and ever.

That this is against REASON I further Prove.

First, There is nothing Mortal that is not Elementary, or composed of visible
Matter or Substance; but the Body is that only part of Man, which is so
composed.

And consequently, the Body is the only Mortal Part of Man.

Secondly, That only can be subject to visible and material Generations,
Agitations, Motions, Privations, Diminutions, Increases, Alterations,
Operations, and Corruptions, which is of a Visible, Elementary, and Corporal
Substance (for an Invisible none ever saw subject to any one of them) but of
such is the Body, and not the Soul (by Reeve and Muggleton their own assertion,
of Man's Nature to be of the Faith which is God's Nature.)

Therefore the Body is subject only to Generation and Corruption* and not the
Soul.

That the Soul is not of the same Nature of the Body, I thus prove;

Thirdly, That which is intellectual, which in its pure Nature knows,
comprehends, governs and orders all visible, elementary and corporical Beeings,
and yet is Invisible, Spiritual, Rational, and Internal (as is manifest from
its Heavenly Meditations, its secret Thoughts, its serious Reflects, acute
Memory, and profound Reasonings about the Causes and Effects of all things)
cannot but be of a Nature more refined, exellent and noble, then to fall under
the same Generations Revolutions and Corruptions, those inferior visible
Beeings are subject to. But such is the Nature of Man's Soul, as daily
experience manifests to all that will not wilfully Blind their Eyes; therefore
though Man's Body be Mortal as being of that grosser Substance and elementary
Nature, yet his Soul is of an immortal Nature, and can receive no Alteration of
Being by any that may or can happen to the Body, which is but a Well* Organz'd
and disposed Instrument for the Soul to exert or put forth it self by,
according to the good Pleasure of God, and that creaturely Prudence necessary
to be eyed in and about all Worldly Concernments.

Thus much and enough to this Point.

That this is as Gray Headed as Atheism, we may suppose; and that it is not
only their only Revelation I prove.

John the 22th Bishop of Rome, and some in the Countries of Arabia, held this
very Doctrine, affirming, That Souls and Bodies dyed and rose together; of
which read Origin, and Eusebius Pamphilus, lib. 6. chap. 36. nor can any be
ignorant that converse with Story, that long before, since, and at this day,
where Reeve and Muggleton were never thought on, this wretched Opinion is but
too rise, Anno 249. 1423. years since.

Fifthly,

BUt their most admirable Secret of all is, That God descended with his Body in
the shape of a Man, and dissolved himself into the Virgin's Womb, and so
brought forth himself a Man; who after he had lived to such an Age, was
Crucified, and really dyed, or ceased to be either God or Man for Three Days
and Nights.

That this is in three Paticulars highly inconsistent with Scripture I prove.

First, God did not so transmute his divine Nature into Fleshly Mortal Nature.

1. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: Then said the Jews unto him,
Thou art not yet Fifty Years old, and have thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto
thems Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am, John 8.56, 57,
58.

If that which was before Abraham, and yet then in being the same, was God, as
none that own the Scriptures do deny; then because that outward visible Body
was not before Abraham, that was not God: The first all grant, the second none
reasonably doubt; for Christ was crucified about the Three and Thirtieth year
of his Life: And then I hope none will believe the Eternal Deity was
Transmuted, or Transubstantiated into that Visible Body; for so Christ's Answer
would not have been true: for that Mortal Body, which say Reeve and Muggleton
was the Eternal God, had a Beginning, and was not of that Age the Jews said it
to be.

2. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the Flesh Christ came, who
is over all, God blessed forever, Romans 9. 5.

If Christ, as concerning the Flesh, was not God, as the Text manifestly
implies ( by a Distinction betwixt his Appearance in that Body of Flesh, and
his Divine Essence or Being, with their Originals) then that fleshly Body was
not God, or the Eternal God was not Substantially Transmuted into that Fleshly
Body.

Secondly, Neither could Elias be God's Deputy to transact in his stead the
Affairs of Heaven, during that Journey which these Impostors affirm God to have
taken, from any Scripture Evidence.

1. For my Father is greater then I, John 14.28.

And he kneeled down and prayed, Father, if thou be willing, remove this Cup
from Me; nevertheless, not my Will, but thine be done, Luke 22.41, 42.

If Elias was that Father which Christ spoke of, and prayed and cried to, as
Reeve and Muggleton assert; then either he that cried to him was not God, but
Elias really God (and so they both contradict their own Doctrine, who tell us,
That he that was born of the Virgin, and dyed on the Cross, was the Everlasting
Father) or else, that which needs and cries for help of another, was greater
then that, which was able to succor and deliver it; which how absurd it is let
all sober men judge: therefore he to whom he cried and prayed in all Streights,
and whom he had affirmed to have received all his Doctrine and Commission from,
and who was greater then all, was the only true God, and not any glorified
Creature. For God could not leave Elias his Deputy, and not leave him his
Power, which if he did, be left Himself; since without his Almighty Power he
were not God.

Secondly, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have
hid these things from the Wise and Prudent, and revealed them unto Babes. The
Hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee. And this
is Life Eternal, to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent. And now Father, glorify thou me with the Glory which I had with
thee before the World began, John 17.1, 3, 5.

On this place I raise these three brief Arguments;

1. If Elias was not the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, nor Lord of Heaven
and Earth, but a created Being, as all confess, then it was not unto Elias that
Jesus returned that Heavenly Thanksgiving, but to his own Father, greater then
all, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth.

2. If he to whom he prayed be that only true God, and that to know him, and
Christ Jesus whom he has sent, be Life Eternal, then was it not Elias to whom
he prayed, because all grant, that he is not the only true God, nor did he so
love the World as to send his only begotten into the World, that through
believing in him it might obtain Eternal Life. This most plainly knocks down
all Conceits of a Deputed God, that Christ should pray unto, because supposing
that such a thing could be, yet he could not be that only true God. whom to
know were Life Eternal: but this to whom Jesus prayed, whom say Reeve and
Muggleton was Elias, says Christ Jesus, was that only true God, whom to know
is Life Eternal.

3. This God to whom Christ prayed, that he would glorify him, was the same
Eternal God with whom he had Glory before the World began; but Elias was Two
Thousand Years or more after the World was made, instead of being before the
World began; and consequently, Elias was not that God and Father, unto whom the
Lord God made his Supplications.

Object. But Muggleton will tell me, That Elias was enthroned with that
God-like Power, Glory, Wisdom and Majesty, that rendered him all that which was
needful to make able to answer all those Petitions, and what ever else was
necessary.

Answ. If the Majesty, Power, Wisdom and Glory of God were left with Elias, I
would fain know what God had to dye with; for it is his Power, Glory and Divine
Wisdom that makes him, God; If Elias had them, God left himself destitute of
what made him God: for how can a man leave his Properties alive behind him that
truly man him, and yet be said to dye in Reeve and Muggleton' s sense, which
is, That all those Faculties And Properties dye with a man? would one not
rather say, that such one does not dye, because, that which makes him a true
man lives? So that their Conceit is spoiled in the over-turning of this one
thing; for, show the impossibility of God's dying, and yet leaving his Power,
Wisdom and Glory with Elias, and the whole Fabric, filled with their many
Chambers of Imagery, will fall to the Ground; for, say they, without a God's
dying, and becoming from Immortal, Mortal, and from Mortal, Immortal again, the
whole Heaven and Earth would be out of order, and no right Knowledge or
Salvation can be procured or arrived at.

Much might be urged from many other Scriptures, as that God raised him, and
that he is set down on the Right Hand of the Most High, but let this suffice.

Thirdly, Nor is there any thing in the whole Scriptures of Truth, that so much
as incourages any to believe the Mortality of the Immortal God.

1. Even from Everlasting to Everlasting, thou art God, Psalm. 90.2.

He that was from Everlasting, and is to Everlasting, never cease to be, as
that which dies* does; but the true God was from Everlasting, and is to
Everlasting; therefore Reeve and Muggleton's Mortal God is not the true God;
or, the true God never cease to be.

2. Have thou not known, have thou not heard, that the Everlasting God, the
Lord, the Creator of the Ends of the Earth, faints not? Isa. 40.28.

He that could never faint, could never dye, because Death is more then a
Degree beyond fainting (though fainting be a Temporary withdrawing of Life)
but the true God and Creator of the Ends of the Earth never could faint;
therefore the true God could never dye.

3. And one of the Malefactors said, Lord, remember me when thou come into
thy Kingdom? And Jesus said, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, To day shall thou
be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.42, 43.

If Christ, the Author of all Truth, spoke Truth, as most unquestionably he
did; then both himself and the Malefactor were in Paradise that day, and
consequently, it was untterly impossible that they should both dye from all
visible and invisible Life, Sense, Understanding and Enjoyment. But I hope,
none are so impudent as to say, Christ spoke not the very simple Truth, and so
would have deceived the poor man; and yet I know not how far Muggleton will go
in this matter, since he told me, that Moses in his Discourse of the Creation,
set the Cart before the Horse; and that if Paul were alive, he would reprove
him, and so censure that holy Spirit by which he wrote.

Therefore it was not the Eternal Deity that suffered Death, but that Body of
outward Flesh, subjected to all those natural Passions of Heat, Cold, Hunger,
Thirst, Life and Death (as ours are, sin only excepted) which the Eternal
Infinite Creator had provided, through which to manifest his everlasting
Wisdom, Council and Mercy for the Redemption of Mankind.

That these three Branches, of this sottish Opinion are all of them greatly
repugnant to that Understanding God has afforded men to measure and distinguish
things by, I prove.

First, It was impossible for God to transubstantiate himself from an Immortal
Deity to a mortal Man.

1. It must suppose God's begetting himself, which is absurd, and impossible;
since being begotten, supposes him to have had a Beginning (that gave
Beginning to all) and to beget, supposes him to have been before he was
begotten, and so before he was.

2. Such as is the Begetter, such must the Begotten be: We see, Men get Men;
Horses, Horses; Fish, Fish, and every Seed has its own Body, as say Reeve and
Muggleton; then, by good consequence, the Immortal God must have begotten
himself an Immortal God, one that could not dye by the Hand or Cruelty of his
own Creature.

3. It is as impossible for God to become a Creature, or to dissolve his own
Infinite, Immortal, Eternal Nature, into a Finite, Mortal, Created or Generated
Nature; as for a Mortal Created Nature to be refined, preferred, and transmuted
into an Infinite, Immortal, Creating Nature. In short, It is as impossible for
God, as God, to become a dying Man, as for a dying man to be changed into an
Immortal Eternal God: They are reciprocally impossible and Blasphemous.

Secondly, It is absurd, and Untrue affirm, that Elias was God's Deputy, and he
to whom Christ prayed when in that Body of FLESH.

1. He that is Infinite, is every where, and circumscribed to no particular
place; but Scripture, Reason, and Reeve and Muggleton (yet they are seldom of
one mind) own and declare the Infiniteness of God, therefore God is every
where, and if every where, then not excluded Heaven, the Habitation of his
Throne, and consequently Elias was not God's Deputy, neither was it any ways
needful that he should be.

2. That which in any sense may be said so want, is not God, who is all in all
to himself; but who needed a Deputy, neither was Omnipresent, nor Almighty, and
therefore not the only True God.

3. Either Christ did not stand in need when on Earth, or he did; if not, then
he was not sincere in his Supplications; if he did, then the Omnipotency was
with Elias (he that supplies Wants is greater then he that is supplied) and
consequently, he that cried was not that Everlasting God and Father, but Elias.

4. Elias was not so considerable as Moses, who was the first Grand
Commissioner of God's Dispensations to the Sons of men (as Reeve and Muggleton
affirm) why then should Elias be preferred to Moses, a Meek Man, Israel's
Leader; and who said of Christ himself, That a Prophet like unto me shall the
Lord your God raise up unto you, him shall you hear in all things (then not
Reeve and Muggleton in any new thing) It Is strange therefore, that Moses was
not rather of the two, elected to represent him in Heaven, who was a Figure of
him on Earth. But though Reeve would not tell us so, I am of the mind I know
the Reason of it, namely, That Christ did not call, Moses, Moses, but Eli, Eli,
when upon the Cross; and I am persuaded he had no other Ground for that
Conceit, not considering that Eli, Eli, are Hebrew words, importing no more
Elias, Elias, then they do Moses, Moses, but My God, My God, as the place
expressly shows us.

Much more might be said, but let this serve.

Thirdly, That the Immortal God could never Dye; or cease to be, is manifest,
and the contrary Blasphemously False.

1. If God was he that made all things, and by whom they are upheld, as all
believe, that believe there is a God at all, then had he ceased to be, the
Creation had ceased to have been upheld; and consequently all had fallen into
its first Chaos, or the World can subsist without Him.

2. That he, whose Nature it was never to have Beginning, and ever to live
without Variation, could never become so contrary to his own Nature and Being,
as to change, dye or cease to be; but such was the true God, therefore he never
dyed.

3. If Saints live, move, and have their being in God, as say Reeve and
Muggleton, page 201. D.L.G. then either God never dyed, or there were no Saints
when the Jews Crucified Christ, or the Saints dyed too. They deny them all;
they say, God Dyed, and there were Saints, and they Lived, Moved and had their
Being in God, though Dead; which how all, or any of them can hang together, let
sober People judge.

4. If God dyed, who lived, and by whom? for nothing can live of it self, that
had beginning from, or dependence on another, as had all the visible World on
God; therefore because all lived, and was preserved, that had its Being from
God, He from whom they had their Being, could not be annihilated whilst they
remained in being.

4. If God was raised by Elias, then either Elias was the True God, or Elias
the Creature was stronger then Jehovah the Great Creator. Let this serve to
confute, and forever to overturn these idle Chimera's of those filthy Dreamers
Reeve and Muggleton.

That this Blasphemous Conceit of the Immortal God's Mortality, is not new, I
shall make appear.

1st, Valentinus is said, opened, to have published, at Rome, That Christ
brought a Body down from Heaven, and that he after some time passed through the
Virgins Body again. Noetus affirmed, That the Father, Son and Holy Ghost were
Flesh, or that one Person of the Son of Man, or that Person so long since at
Jerusalem, to be Father, Son and Spirit; and that when he suffered on the
Cross, the Father, Son and Holy Spirit dyed. See Eusebius. his 4th Book and 10th
Chap. Ireneus Epiphanius Here Is. 31. and 57. about Anno 150. which is 1522.
years since. What Strange New Revelation this is!

Lastly,

I May mention another of their Tenets, held at this day by all Calvinists
abroad, and of several Sects in these Nations; namely, Predestination, or that
God from all Eternity, without any other Inducement then his own Pleasure, has
decreed some for Salvation, and some for Damnation; contrary to which, all
their Obedience or Rebellion shall be in vain, to alter his Determination.

That this Principle is Accursed by SCRIPTURE, I prove.

First, The Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him, and the
Wickedness of the Wicked shall be upon him; but if the Wicked will turn from
all his Sins that he has committed, and keep my Statutes, he shall surely
live, he shall not dye, Ez. 18.20, 21.

1. If Righteousness or Wickedness are the Grounds of God's Rewarding or
Punishing the Souls of men, then is there no Predestination previous, without
consideration had to their Works; but the Text affirms most plainly, therefore
such Decrees are denied and disowned.

2. If Man may turn from his Righteousness and Wickedness, then are the Means
no more inevitably predestined for men to use, then before mentioned; but men
may turn from either, and accordingly they will be rewarded; therefore no such
Predestined Damnation or Salvation.

Secondly, For it is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who
will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the Knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2.3, 4.

If the Apostle writ by the Spirit of God, that gives to know the Mind of God;
then it was the Good Will of God, that all men, not excluding any upon a
Predestination, should come to the Knowledge of the Truth, and be saved: And
consequently, there is no Predestined Restraint upon men's Understandings,
from knowing the Truth, nor fore-appointed Bar from their enjoying the End of
such True Knowledge, even the Salvation of their Souls.

Thirdly, The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise (as some men count
slackness) but is long*suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to Repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9.

The Long-suffering of God either related to the Elect, or Reprobate, or
Neither.

Not to the Elect, because there is no need of fearing their Perishing.

Not to the Reprobate, for there is no possibility of their Repentance.

Therefore to neither; and consequently, either the place is spurious, or
deceitful; or else those kind of Elections and Reprobations are mere Phantisms.
Let these few Instances serve, of those hundreds that might be mentioned, most
expressly to confirm the same.

That this is highly Inconsistent with REASON, I briefly prove.

First, It renders God most Unwise, to make so many thousand Creatures on
purpose to Rebel against him, to Kill, Lie, Steal, Blaspheme, and commit all
manner of Outrageous Wickedness to the grieving of his own Spirit, the making
him Repent he had made the World, and Obstructing of his Glorious Work of
Reformation.

Secondly, It greatly Disparageth his Justice, which consists in proportioning
Rewards and Punishments to the Good and Evil Works of Men, and overturns both,
by making the Eternal States necessary and unavoidable upon a Predestination,
without any Regard to their Works; so that man is damned for not doing what he
cannot do, no more then it is possible for him to break an Almighty Decree.

Thirdly, It quite destroys his Mercy, and renders him the most Cruel of all
Beings; for instead of not being willing, or desiring the Death of a Sinner, He
is here made to desire, and take Pleasure in it too; nay, so essential is this
Unutterable Cruelty to his Glory (as say the Asserters of this Opinion) that it
would be lessened or ecclipsed without it: Oh Infamous!

Fourthly, But above all things, it strikes at the very Root of God's
Rectitude, and Faithfulness, and makes him worse then the worst of Men or
Devils: for whilst he says, Your Sins have kept good Things from you; as I
live, I delight not in the Death of a Sinner; Repent, and that Iniquity shall
not be your Ruin; How long would I have gathered you, and ye would not? But now
God commands all to Repent; God is no Respecter of Persons, but they that fear
him in every Age shall be accepted, etc. with many more; they make him but to
Complement with Wicked Men, and speak them fair in words, meaning nothing less
in his Heart, having Pre-ordained them to eternal Wrath.

Fifthly, This Principle would defile his eternally inherent Holiness, by
making him as well the Father of Sin, as of Destruction; for men are either
Damned for something, or for nothing; if for nothing, that were most Wicked in
these Predestinarians account, then for something; and what is that? Sin: very
well; and how came they to this sin? they committed it; and how came they to do
so? they would do it; why? could they have avoided it? by no means; where is the
Difference then betwixt being Damned for not doing what they could not, and
doing nothing? The Predestination was not, that all Evil Men, that wilfully
withstood Mercy, should be Damned; for they were ordained never to receive it;
but that such a Number, consisting of such and such particular Persons, should
Vnalterably and Vnavoidably be Damned only to Glorify God.

Sixthly, But this would stain the Glory of the Almighty, in that neither in
himself, nor from the Redemption and Salvation of the souls of men, his Glory
is great enough, unless it be completed in the Eternal Destruction of far the
greatest part of Mankind.

Seventhly, This destroys, all Good Works; for, may all say, Neither can my
Good nor Evil Works make one Hair white or black, add or diminish, in reference
to God's unalterable Decree; and therefore will I give my self unto the Liberty
of the Flesh, and enjoy the Pleasures of this Life, whilst I can have them.

Eighthly, It destroys all Government, since who cares how desperate he is, or
what Injury he does, who conceiting to himself his Post is pitched, his State
set, and that unchangeably; but breaking all Laws, takes his Revenge on what
would bring him to condign Punishment for his Exorbitancies.

To conclude, and come somewhat closer to the Persons concerned: What signifies
their coming to call them to repent, that cannot be saved if they do? Or to
warn such to repent that cannot be damned? What signifies their Commission? or
their Cursing, or Blessing? For can they bless him to Life that is ordained
beforehand to be damned? Or can they curse him to Death who is pre-ordained to
Eternal Life? If therefore Men are pre-ordained to Salvation or Damnation, to
what purpose should any fear their Curse, or prize their Blessing, since
neither can alter or change the Condition of any Person; and what more contrary
to the Mind of the Merciful God, who is willing that all should come*unto the
Knowledge of the Truth and be saved?

That Antiquity both knew and abhorred this Opinion is Manifest.

Josephus, in his 18th Book of Antiquities, and 2d Chap. also Epiphanius in his
Preface to his first Book of Heresy: again, Eusebius in his 5th Book chap. 13.
and Socrates in his 1st Book and chap. 17. and you will be fully informed of
the Abettors of this dangerous and Wicked Opinion, about Anno 200.
namely a Sect of the Pharisees; also Florinus and Blastus, against whom
Ireneus Bishop of Lions in France wrote two Epistles, and a Book called Ogdous,
wherein he tells Florinus, 1472. years since.
That when himself was a Child and with Famous Christian Polycarpus, who
conversed with John that conversed with Christ, he remembered him to be busy
about the Emperors Court; and further tells him, that had the Apostle John but
lived to have heard that Damnable Doctrine which makes God the Author of Evil,
he would have said, Good God, unto what times half Thou reserved me? and tells
him, that in Publishing so Wicked an Opinion, he had declared that which all
the Heretics before had never durst to pronunce plainly, with much more to
this purpose, against him, the Sect called Manichees, from one Manes, held and
promoted this Opinion of Fatal destiny, who Muggleton-like, is reported to have
called himself Christ, and the Comforter, and published the Work of one Buddas
in his own Name, calling It a New Dispensation; All which, Reader, I assure
thee Histories do inform Us to have been known in the 2d, 3, 4, 5, and 600.
Years after Christ, which is above a 1000. Years since; In which Time many were
the Impudent Spirits that assumed to themselves as great Authority as Muggleton
in Reeve's Absence does at this time; namely, Simon Magus, who had so far
possessed the Romans with his Sorcery, of his (pretended) Divinity (calling
himself to the Samaritans the Father; to the Jews the Son, to the Gentiles the
Holy Spirit) as the Heathens erected a Statue or Image of him in the time of
Claudius at Rome having this Inscription, Simoni Deo Sancto, to the Holy God
Simon. Next, One Helen a Woman, that accompanied him, whom he called the
Principle Understanding, much like Muggleton's Daughter, who Reeve said should
be the Chiefest of Women. Eusebius in his 2d Book, and 12, 13, and 14, Chap.
after this One, Menander, said, to have been a Sorcerer, and the Disciple of
Simon, went up and down, deluding Silly Credulous People, by affirming to them,
he was the great Power of God, come down from Heaven, and that all were to
believe in him, and be baptized in his manner, or they could not be saved, but
those that did should never dye, read Eusebius in his 3d Book Chap. 23. Ireneus
Book 1. Chap. 21. Epiphan. haeres. 22. Again, Carpocrates is reported to have
(like Reeves and Muggelton) patched his Opinion (who was so vain Glorious as to
affirm he knew all things) out of Simon, Menander, Nicholas, (from whence came
the Nicolaitans in the Revelations) Saturninus Basilides, etc. and see Epiphan.
Haeres. 27. also Augustine of Heresies. Again, We find that Eusebius tells us of
one Montanus (whereof Montanists or Catafrygians are called) taught in Phrygia,
that he was the Holy Ghost, as may be seen in the 5th Book of Eusebius 13, 14,
15, 16, 17, Chapters. Also that one Buddas affirmed, that he was born of a
Virgin (as true as Muggletons being the Last Witness of God) This Buddas writ a
Book, and in his swelling Pride styled it Mysteries, much like the Whimsies of
Reeve and Muggleton, in their Transcendent Spiritual Treatise; next, he wrote a
Book called the Gospel, of the Nature of Reeve and Muggleton's Divine Looking
Glass: His End was to break his Neck; It Is to be feared that a worse will be
miserable Muggletons, even Torment of Spirit, as Reeve is said to have left the
World in. To conclude, Noetus, the Ringleader of that great Mystery, (never
revealed till within these 20. years, says Reeve and Muggleton) namely the
Godheads being a Man, and so absolutely Flesh and Blood, as that when the Body
dyed, the Godhead ceased, and lay under Death's Power three days and three
Nights: He through the height of his Imaginations, called himself Moses, and
Aaron his Brother, as Reeves called* himself and Muggleton, T.S.T. see
Epiphanius Haeres. 57. By all which, Reader, I am not without hopes, but it
does appear, how Falsely, and with what Treachery these Persons have dealt with
poor silly People, who not being satisfied in what they did know, hay pined
their Faith on the sleeves of such as told them things they did not know, and
so have been given up to believe a Lie; For what is more evident, then that in
this very Trial he, and his deceased Colleague are found guilty of Error,
Treachery, and great Deceit; Therefore, Reader, delay not to pass the Just
Sentence of Impostor and Counterfeit upon them, and their Commission, who would
raise to themselves a New Sect out of the Ruins of old Heresies, and that under
the Pretense, of Choice Revelations, wherein there is no Proof beyond their
bare Assertions, and to make them pass, forge an Authority from Heaven (which
loathes both them, and their Lies) to back and recommend them as unheard of
Mysteries.

O! sell not thy Reason, who ever thou art, enslave not thy Judgment, nor rob
God's Light and Grace of its Office, to guide and teach thee in the Denial of
those Evils that are to be forsaken, and in Embracing whatsoever ought to be
followed; Bring not thy self under the Power of an Ignorant, Arrogant,
Blasphemous, and Sottish Man, but remember that God Almighty, who cannot lie,
has promised, that in the last days He would be the Teacher of his People by
his Spirit of Truth, and where is the Habitation of the most-High, but in the
Contrite and Humble Hearts of Men? For whasoever may or can be known of God, is
manifested within, who having illuminated all, and given to every Man a Talent;
into it, Reader, have thy Mind retired, and wait to have it subject thereunto,
and thou shall come to know him, ( whom to know aright is Life Eternal) But as
I have plainly shown their abominable Cheat in obtruding Old Fables for New
Revelations upon People (whereby I have discharged the first part of my
Promise) So for a Confirmation of my Judgment concerning Muggleton, and to
accomplish this abridg'd Discourse, take my following Relation, with the same
impartiallity that I give it thee.

I Have been twice to visit Lodowick Muggleton, and at each time I staid too
long to repeat all, or the very words which passed betwixt us; yet shall I
faithfully write something of the matter and words, as near as I at present do
remember them.

P. Art thou the last Witness that ever shall be? Muggleton, Yes; and there
shall never be another.


P. Who sent thee?


M. God spoke to John Reeve, and he spoke to me.


P. Is that all thou have to produce, only J. R's word for it? to this he
avoided. Again,


P. Thou say, God did not create the Earth and the Heavens, he only fathomed
them; making them Coeternal with God; but Moses said he did: Let me see a
Bible!


M. Moses put the Cart before the Horse.


This I bore for the next Question's sake. P. Paul the Apostle, who also wrote,
by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, says, God created all things, or made
them; and the World is a great part of all things: besides, if it was before he
made it, in this sense, must it not be God? since nothing which is uncreated
can be a Creature?


M. If Paul were living, I would have reproved him for that: Come not here to
Dispute, but Believe; I say it, that is enough.


P. Can thou reprove the Holy Ghost; for he spoke by it?


M. Yes.


P. That Is Blasphemy; besides, if thou say it, must I therefore believe it,
because thou say it?

At this he grew enraged; and but for an Acquaintance by, and a Friend of his,
I had doubtless been Cursed at that time.

The next time I came (which a Friend in company) I found him sitting by the
Chimny Corner, quaffing with some of his Followers and Benefactors, as what we
saw before us did Evidence. My first salute was thus,


P. How is it Lodowick? methinks thou lookst with thy old threadbare black
Suit, like a sequestered begging Priest.


M. I am a Priest.


P. Art thou? Of what Order?


M. The Order of Aaron.


P. Aaron? where be thy Bells then?


M. I have them in the Mystery.


P. Mystery? for shame don't talk of a Mystery; for there was some such thing
that did belong to that Order; things were altogether External, Typical and
Figurative: Methinks this were enough to show, that thou art no ways concerned
in any Christian Commission, who art not a Priest after the Order of
Melchisedeck, but Aaron, whose Priesthood is at an end, as said the Apostle to
the Hebrews, chap. 7. so that thou have Vnchristian'd thy whole Commission, and
brings it under the Law of a Carnal Commandment; and therefore has no Part nor
Portion in the Power of an Endless Life, as says the same Apostle. He
interrupted.


M. Have a care, Life and Death's before thee; therefore choose Life and live,
etc.


P. But Lodowick, Thou pretendest to know the Dimensions of God, how high may
he be?


M. Betwixt your Height and his, (meaning a Friend then present.)


P. O Abominable! Well L. Muggleton, God will blast thee forever, thou
Presumptuous and Blasphemous Wretch, If thou turnest not from the Wickedness,
with much more.


M. Thou shall be Damned, God has decreed thou shall be Damned; thou art of the
seed of the Serpent.


P. Why then did thou set Life and Death before me just now, (saying thou
had more mind I should be saved, then any of the Quakers) if I am ordained to
be damned? Is it not great Deceit, to exhort a man to choose what he cannot
have, though he bid for it, and to refuse that which he is unable to avoid? But
Muggleton, I will not say, that I serve such a God; no, my God never ordained
thee to be Damned, whether thou do Well or Ill: this destroys all Rewards
and Punishments, and makes Evil and Good unavoidable.


M. I would not give a Pinn for that God which would save us both, now I have
Damned thee.


P. Why do thou talk of a God; for thou say, Thy God can dye; did the
Immortal God ever cease to be?


M. I would not give a Rush for that God which cannot dye.


P. I say, thou and thy God shall to the Pit, from whence ye came, where is
Death and Darkness forever: how can God cease to be, and yet be God; since if
he ceast, every thing that remained in being must have been greater, since
below ceasing to be is nothing? But suppose this Nonsense and Blasphemies; how
rose he again?


M. God left Elias with Power.


P. Then Elias was greater then God; for that which raises is greater then
that which is raised; but if the Power never dyed, the Power was God, and that
which dyed not God: O, Hellish Impudence and Blasphemy! O, Muggleton, thy End
will be Destruction.


M. W. P. I say thou art a Damned Devil; remember Thomas Lo, who was the
Wickedst Devil that ever I knew, who never went out of his bed after I Cursed
him.


P. Thy Curses are under my Feet; Tho. Lo was known to be an infirm Man in his
Natural Constitution (as well as by his great Labors) for near these sixteen
years, who is gone to rest: But art thou not ashamed to say, he never went out
of his Bed; who was as well as he used to be, and often after abroad? and when
he fell sick, was often up, and changed his Lodging before he dyed, having been
ill three Weeks. Is this thy Infallible Spirit, that thou suggests Lies to thy
self and others?


M. I heard so.


P. Is that enough for one that pretends, to be the last Witness of the High
and Mighty God, to say for a Lie, I heard so? Cover thy Face for Shame.


M. He writ me a Curse, and he writ a very good Hand too; but for all that, He
was a Damned Devil, and thou W.P. art as arrant a Devil as he, and you shall be
Damned together.


P. Lodowick, in this thou have told another Lie; for it was an Apprentice that
writ it: Where is thy Unerring Spirit now, thou vile Impostor? And for being
Devils, and Damned together, God rebuke thee; only this know, that I am willing
to go where he went, and whither we go thou can not come, without great and
unfaigned Repentance.


M. Just so, many of you Quakers have dyed after my Curse, amongst others
William Smith.


P. This is another Notorious Lie; for the man is yet Living: Well, Muggleton,
God will reckon with thee for all thy Wickedness.


M. Thou art a Cheat, and a Deceiver W.P. (my Friend spoke)

G.W. Muggleton, have a care what thou say: for though it is our Religion, to
forgive Injuries; yet perhaps his Friends would question thee, and make thee
prove it.


M. I care not a Part for Him, nor his Friends, nor the Greatest Man in England.


P. Thy Black Mouth is no Slander; but know, Muggleton, That from my Youth I
have sought God, and dared not willingly to abuse a Worm: and as my Friend has
said, thou know there are Laws, other People make use of to vindicate their
Credit by* but I forgive thee; thereby thou may know the Difference betwixt
our Gods, and our Religions: thou Revilest, and possessed Curses upon me, I
Freely Forgive thee.


M. I care not a TURD for you, nor the Laws neither.

This, with many more Unsavory Foul Expressions fell from his Mouth. He also
affirmed, That God never gave a Law, but to Devils; and that Moses and the
Israelites were so. I asked him, If he received a Law? He said, Yes. I asked him
for whom? He said, For the People of these Nations to whom he was sent. I told
him, Th^^ that rendered both himself, and those to whom he was sent, Devils by
his own Assertion.

In short. Such Impertinency, such Blasphemy, such sottish Nonsense, and such
Unsavory, Ill-bred Expressions, I don't remember to have heard from the Mouth
of any man, pretending to Religion. If this be your Prophet (you that believe
in him) your last Witness, the only Messenger of the Spiritual Dispensation,
and Grand Commissioner of Heaven, whom all must credit, or be damned: For Shame
own not so manifest an Impostor, so foul a Wretch, so ill an Example; his
Arrogance, his Ignorance, his Sottish Life, his Cowardliness, and finally, his
Abominable Lying spirit is far from the Holy, Patient, Suffering, Self-denying
and Heavenly Life of Christ and his Apostles, who being Reviled, they Blessed.
I therefore entreat, nay, warn the Reader hereof; and to fear the Infinite
Almighty God, whose Mighty Judgments (for Sin in the Consciences of Men and
Women) are come; and not to Worship, this Beast, nor any Evil Thing, by bowing
to his dark Imaginations: For know of a certain, the Time is at hand, when
every Word, Faith and Work shall be tried, that they who believe the Truth, and
live in it, may have Rejoicing in themselves, and not in another; when
Muggleton's airy Stories (which may perhaps swell and puff up the Minds of
silly People) shall vanish; and such as have made his Lies their Refuge, shall
be swept away, and their place not to be found among the Living. Therefore mind
the Light, the Grace, the Gift of God in your selves, which leads to
Repentance, and all manner of Godly Conversation ( a thing Muggleton meddles
not with) that by it your Hearts may be sanctified, and settled in the Belief
of the Truth, as it is plainly revealed to every particular in Christ Jesus; so
shall you obtain a sound Understanding, and possess the Habitations of True
Peace, when Muggleton and his obstinate Brats shall Howl in the Lake that burns
with Brimstone and Fire forever and evermore.


William Penn.

JOHN REEVE AND LODOWICK MUGGLETON, Contradicting Themselves, and One Another.
IT can be no Wonder unto such as have impartially read thus far, that these
men should contradict themselves, and one another; who are filled in their
Discourses (or rather Ravings) with nothing sober and consonant; but Confusion
heaped upon Confusion, to the astonishing of every man that is in earnest about
Religion, and has any due Fear and Reverence for God: but because they lay it
down, as the Mark only of the True Commissioners of Heaven, in nothing to Jar
or Contradict, I am the more induced to add to my own pains and the Readers, in
a Comparison of their Contradictions.

Does not this Demonstrate those to be the Commissionated Witnessers of the
Unerring Spirit, that are indue with a Divine Gift, to write a Volumn as large
as the Bible, and as pure a Language as that is, with as much Variety of
Matter, without looking in any Writing whatsoever, or HAVING ANY REAL
CONTRADICTION IN IT, R. and M. Div. Look Glass, page 112.

Contradiction I.
Therefore it is written, Dust thou art, and unto Dust thou shall return: When
the Lord spoke those words, he did not speak to the Flesh, or outward Form, or
Body of the Man; but he spoke to the Inward Spirit or Soul, that understands
the words of a Spirit. Look in his Transc. Spiritual Treatise, p. 44.

Wherefore it may be queried by some, What was that which entered into the Dust,
and brought forth Angelical Bodies; was it any thing else, but the Divine
Nature of God himself?

Unto this curious Query, from the true Light of Life I answer.

That neither the Spirit of Angels, nor any other Creatures were formed of the
Divine Nature; but the Souls of Adam and Eve only, His Divine L. Glass, page 8.



Animadversion I.
If that which returns to Dust, cannot be said to return to Dust, unless it
first came from Dust; then, if the Soul returns to Dust, it consequently came
from Dust, and if from Dust, then was it not formed of the Divine Nature, as on
the other side is affirmed, and therefore a Contradiction.

Contradiction II.
Again, I declare, That when the Elect are Glorified, they are absolutely of
the very same Glorious Nature, both in Spirit and Body, as God is. T.S.T. p.
46.

Therefore the most Wise and Holy Creator created the Bodies of Angels
Spiritual, and their Natures Rational; and he made the Body of the Man Adam
Natural, and his Soul Spiritual: For, if their Spirits and Bodies had been both
of the Divine Nature, then it would have been impossible for them to have been
capable of any Sin or Evil, no more then the Creator Himself; for what would
have been formed, but Creators only, instead of Creatures? D.L.G. page 9, 10.



Animadversion II.
If to be in Body and Spirit Spiritual, be to be Creators, then Gods; and if
the Saints are to be of the same Body and Spirit, then they are to be Creators,
and consequently Gods; which is absurd: For if the Reason, why Man was not at
first made all Spiritual, but the Soul Spiritual, and the Body Natural, was,
because he had been a Creator, as they say, which was impossible; then, if Man
is to be of the same Body and Spirit that God is, as they affirm; Man is to be
a Creator in the next World. Monstrum Horrendum*

Contradiction III
If the very Godhead had not dyed (that is) If the very Soul of Christ, which
the Eternal Father, had not dyed in the Body, or with the Body, to quiet or
satisfy the Cry of the Guilt of Sin in Men's Spirits, all men would have
perished to Eternity: Thus the Father and the Son was but one unseparable
Person in Immortal Glory, from all Eternity; and became, in time, one
unseparable Person in Mortality. T.S.T. p. 25, 26.

If Angels and Men had been both of God's Divine Nature in their Creation, then
instead of their being capable to be changed, into a higher or lower Condition,
at the Divine Pleasure of the Creator; would they not rather have been
Unchangeable Creators, then Changeable Creatures? D.L.G. p. 9.



Animadversion III.
If the Reason why Men and Angels are not of the Divine Nature, be, That they
are subject to Change, and that if they had been made of it, they would not
have been capable of Mutation into lower or higher Degrees, at Divine Pleasure;
then because God is of that Divine Nature, it is inconsistant with his Nature
to Change, or be Transmuted, as they often speak, from an higher State to a
lower: and so, their whole conceit of the Deity's Mortality, is vain, and by
themselves Contradicted.

Contradiction IV.
Again, Many seeming wise men do imagine the Lord to be a vast Spirit. D.L.G.
p. 16.

Others blasphemously say, that the spirit of Man is God, and that the Body
only dies: These say also, God is an Infinite Spirit. T.S.T. p. 44.

Is not that Infinite Spirit, and its Glorious Properties, but only one
Essence, or Godhead Substance? D.L.G. p. 106.

You may know, that all things are possible and very easy for an Infinite
Spirit to bring to pass. D.L.G. p. 114.



Animadversion IV.
It can be no Crime, for any to believe, God to be an Infinite or Vast Spirit,
as one while they would have it, whilst presently they call the Godhead
Substance, an Infinite Spirit, and confess all things to be possible unto an
Infinite Spirit. O Gross Contradiction*

Contradiction V.
I say, In the Great and Notable Day of the Lord, by his Decree, they shall
every one of them rise out of the Dust together; not with the same Bodies that
dyed, because there was somewhat of God in those Bodies. T.S.T. p. II.

So likewise that Infinite Spirit abiding within the glorious Body of Christ,
is so unspeakably fiery Glorious, that no Created Spirit of Man nor Angel is
able to bear the In-dwelling Essence of it. D.L.G. p. 69.



Animadversion V.
If something of God dwells in this Life in the Souls and Bodies of Men, then
it is not so fiery Glorious, but it may abide in them, and they not be
consumed: For God's Nature or Essence is irreconcilable to nothing but Sin;
the Righteous shall behold him Face to Face: So that one while, God dwells in
Men; another while, if it should be so, Man would be Consumed. Behold the
Self-Opposition of these Miserable Witnesses!

Contradiction VI.
How can any Rational Wise Man possibly think, that Man, or any other Living
Forms, should ever be without a Glorious Creator, to give them their Beeings at
first. D.L.G. p. 16.

This was the Creator's very case in the matter of Creation; and who dares
speak against it? no Spiritual Wise Man, I am sure, only some Lustful Persons,
may dispute against it, though it be contrary to their own Reason, when it is
sober. D.L.G. p. 12.

I confess, it is not only contrary to Reason, but far above all Reasons Reach,
truly to understand the Mysteries of the Creation. D.L.G. p. 114.



Animadversion VI.
If an Appeal be made to rational Men, concerning the Creation by a God, and if
it be contrary to sober Reason not to believe so, then it is not far above, nor
contrary to all Reason, to understand the Creation; for else, why is it
rendered by them so agreeable to Reason, and an Appeal made unto Rational Men
concerning it?

Contradiction VII.
Again, For your Information, in whose Persons, the Lord by his Holy Spirit
Delights to dwell, T.S.T. p. 22.

Whoever thou art, that boastest of a God, and a Christ, and his Ordinances,
and of a Glory to come without thee, in the highest Heavens; if thou should
be left to the Pride and Envy of thy Formal spirit, to condemn the Invisible
Teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ in his Innocent People, because they are
contrary to thy Opinion; I say, from the Everlasting Emanuel, That thou art
also but a Reprobate, D.L.G. p. 68, 69.

For in him dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily, and from his
Fullness we all receive, and Grace, for Grace. If Christ, or his Spirit, were
within men when they uttered those words, all Faith or Hope, in reference to
Eternal Glory was vain, D.L.G. p. 67, 68.



Animadversion VII.
If Christ delights to dwell in the Persons of his People, by his Eternal
Spirit, and that he thereby teaches their Souls what he requires from them, as
say they; then it is not in vain to believe or hope, though Christ, or his
Spirit, were within, as they also say: nay, they affirm, That the Souls of the
Redeemed is the Throne of God, on which he now sits, D.L.G. p. 46. And
therefore, though Christ, or his Spirit were in Believers, yet that would not
make their Faith and Hope void; Why? Because they stand therein.

Contradiction VIII.
Is that Eternal Spirit, in its Heavenly Virtues, any thing else, but Immortal
Crowns of bright Burning Glories? Though the Eternal Spirit, be that Invisible
God, that by the Power of his Almighty Word has created all things; and though
all Power, Wisdom and Glory proceeds only from an Invisible Eternal Spirit,
D.L.G. p. 106.

Can this Infinite Spiritual Glory, be sensible of its Divine Excellency, or be
a perfect Blessedness, except he has a distinct Body, suitable to his Eternal
Spirit; yet without a Body, Face, or Tongue, or a Majestical Person, like unto
Earthly Monarchs, he could not possibly have spoken distinct words, nor his
Glory have been perfect. D.L.G. p. 106.



Animadversion VIII.
If that which is requisite to define or render God, truly such, be singly
attributed to the eternal Spirit, without the mention of a Body, then is the
Eternal Spirit the Invisible God, as they themselves prove. If the Eternal
Spirit, be nothing else then Crowns of Immortal Glory; and that it is the
Invisible God, whose Power created all things; and if all Wisdom, Glory and
Power proceed ONLY from this Invisible Eternal Spirit, as they say; then not
unto a Body, but unto that, who ALONE has all Power, Wisdom and Glory, is the
Godhead to be ascribed; but that is unto the Invisible Spirit: And if the
Eternal Spirit be thus qualified, how possibly can its Glory be ecclipst for
want of a Body, Face or Tongue? Is the Eternal Spirit Crowns of Immortal
Imperfect Glory? And how can all Glory alone be given unto the Spirit, whose
Glory is imperfect, without a Body? He should have said, From the Spirit and
Body Alone proceeds all Glory, etc. But this Confusion is like the rest.

Contradiction IX.
Moreover, You may know, That those Men, called, Independents, Anabaptists,
Presbyterians, are the Literal Apostolical Jews. D.L.G. p. 191.

Furthermore, Those Anabaptist, Independent, Presbyterian Men, which hold it
Lawful to Persecute Men, in their Persons and Estates, upon a Spiritual
account; I say from the Eternal Spirit, That they are for the most part, the
Offspring of those Bloody-minded Jews that Crucified the Lord of Glory upon
the account of Blasphemy, D.L.G. p. 192.



Animadversion IX.
That Exception should have been made before: for, if those that are called
Independants, Presbyterians and Anabaptists, are Apostolical Jews, and yet such
as are for Persecution for Conscience, are of their Race that put Christ to
Death, then they are not of the Apostolical, but Mosaical Jews: But how can
they make that hold together? The Apostolical Jew, is one, not outward in the
Letter, but in the Heart, and in the Spirit; if so, either they are
Independents, Presbyterians or Anabaptists; or else those three Opinions are
come to be of theirs, since at the Distance they stand, they cannot be under
the same Covenant and Circumcision. But to be short, By their declaring them
(whilst not their Followers) Apostolical Jews, we may conclude, That Reeve and
Muggleton count themselves none of them, but Men of another Dispensation; and
therefore not of the Circumcision in Heart, which is not according to the
Letter, but the Spirit; beyond which Dispensation, all other Pretensions are
Imaginations and vain Exaltations.

Contradiction X.
It is not thy Natural or Allegorical Whimsies, that can blind the Elect, nor
pacify the Judge of Life and Death within thee, D.L.G. p. 168.

And now I desire no other Witness, to bear Record in the Consciences of Men to
this Epistle, whether it be Truth, or no, but the Everlasting Jehovah, or
Eternal Spiritual Jesus himself, D.L.G. p. 208.

Again, If every man have the Spirit of Christ living in his Conscience, as
many men vainly imagine; What then is become of the Spiritual Body of that
Jesus that ascended into the Throne of his Glory, in the visible sight of Men
and Angels? D.L.G p. 68.



Animadversion X.
If the Judge of Life and Death be in man, then Christ unto whom all Judgment
is committed, is in man, to justify or condemn him; therefore Christ, or his
Spirit, or both are in man, and consequently, it is no Impediment to, nor
Denial of Christ's Ascension with a Glorified Body: Neither is it vain to
believe, that the Spirit of Christ lives in the Consciences of Men. Observe
their Folly, The Judge of Life and Death is within thee; again, It is vain to
Imagine, that the Spirit of Christ lives in men's Consciences: Thus they say and
unsay almost in a Breath. But above all, That the Everlasting Jehovah, and
Eternal Spiritual Jesus, should be in men's Consciences the true Witness, and
yet not be in Men: Who can understand this strange Riddle?

Contradiction XI.
But you may say, Did God the third day arise from the Dead, by his own Power,
or by the Power of his Deputy, Elias? To which I answer, He by his own Decree,
and Spiritual Compact, with Elias, and by that Spirit of Faith, in his Innocent
Body, the which Faith dyed in his pure Body, and quickened immediately, and
brought forth that Natural Innocent Body, out of the Grave, a pure Spiritual
Body, T.S.T. p. 32, 33.

Therefore whosoever says, that any other Body ascended into Glory, but that
very same Body of Flesh and Bones that suffered Death upon the Cross, he is an
Antichrist, and in utter Spiritual Darkness, D.L.G. p. 15.



Animadversion XI.
If the Body dyed a Natural Body, and was brought forth, a Spiritual Body;
then, unless that Spiritual Body laid down it self, and resumed its Natural
Body, as at the first, it could not be the very same Body, of Flesh Blood and
Bone, that Dyed, which Ascended; but it must have been a Spiritual Body. In
short, If Natural and Spiritual be not all one, as say they elsewhere in these
Contradictions; then was it no more the same Body, then Natural is Spiritual,
and Mortal Immortal, upon their own Principles; and consequently, Reeve and
Muggleton are the Antichrists, and in utter Darkness.

As for the threefold Answer he gives to the Objection, it is wretchedly
Blaphemous; 1. God's Decree; 2. His Compact with Elias; 3. His own Spirit of
Faith. To the first I reply, What did the Decree avail, when the Power was in
another, and when he that made it, was dead? To the second I return, That God's
rising lay on the side of Elias's Honesty, in performing Obligation, and
keeping Covenant, and not in any other thing. 3. As to that Spirit of Faith,
they confess it died, if so, how did the Faith raise him? Besides, In whom
should God have Faith? in Himself? He was dead; In Elias? He could not exercise
it, when in the Grave. Again, He that believes, injoyes not fully; and has
Confidence in one Greater then Himself; but God wants nothing, and can have no
Object for Faith, and therefore no Faith. O, the Unparalleled Sottish ^olly,
and Raveing Conceits of these men!

Contradiction XII.
So likewise, I positively affirm, against all Gainsayers under Heaven, That I
John Reeve am the Last Commissionated Prophet, that ever shall declare Divine
Secrets, according to the Foundation of Truth, until the Lord Jesus Christ
appear on his Throne of Glory, D.L.G. p. 119.

A True Interpretation of all the chief Texts, and Mysterious Sayings, and
Visions opened, of the whole Book of the Revelation of St. John; wherein is
unfolded, and plainly declared, those Wonderful Deep Mysteries, and Visions
interpreted, concerning the True God, the Alpha and Omega; with variety of
other Heavenly Secrets, which has never been opened, nor revealed to any man,
since the Creation of the World to this Day, until now: By Lodowick Muggleton,
etc.



Animadversion XII.
Who shall we believe of these two? they both pretend the same Commission, and
yet Contradict: but how can any Credit be given thereunto? when (though Reeve
says, he was awake, at the receiving of it, yet presently after tells us,
that) he knew not, whether he was an Immortal God, or a Mortal Man: what ground
is there for any Belief, of what Reeve himself was so far from a clear
knowledge of, as that he was not more unable to resolve, whether he was an
Immortal God, or a Mortal Man, then to know the Truth of all his Revelation? O,
the willingness in men to be Blind! Certainly if the Devil himself should, as a
Devil, seek Proselytes, some would follow him.

A few Additional Observations upon some Passages, of John Reeve and Lodowick
Muggleton, in the before-cited Books.
THe Spirit of Faith and Love, infinitely in the Glorious Person of God,
overfloweth as a Fountain, continually with Revelation of New Heavenly Wisdom,
from whence flows New Joys, and Glory to Himself, T.S.T. p. 46.

Observation, That unto which any thing may be added, cannot be said to be
Perfect, and consequently cannot be God; but be unto whom Wisdom is renewed,
wanted that Wisdom before he had it, and consequently was not Perfect, and
therefore not the True God; unto whom there is no Increase of Wisdom, Power or
Strength; but was, and is, and will be forever the same Unalterable Being;
Infinite in Wisdom, Power, and all other Divine Excellencies, without any
Diminution or Addition.

The Reason why Men's Bodies in Death, or after Death, do Rot or Stink, in the
Grave, and come to Dust, is, because there was Sin in their Bodies; whilst they
Lived; but on the contrary, if Men had no Sin in their Natures or Bodies, they
might Live and Dye, and Naturally Rise again, by their own Power, in their own
Time, T.S.T. p. 33.

Observe. O the Exceeding Folly and Blindness of this Sottish Man! Why should
Sin only cause the Body to Rot, Stink and go to Dust? Does not the Scripture,
and Reeve himself, in his T.S.T. page 44. give another Reason, namely, That what
came from Dust, is that which must go to Dust? besides, If the Flesh of Beasts,
is capable of Dying, Rotting, and going to Dust, who never Sinned, why should
not man have Dyed, and gone to Dust, though he had never Sinned? For though
there is a vast Difference betwixt Men and Beasts, in reference to their Souls,
and Bodies too, so far as may concern the distinction of Kinds; yet as to their
being liable to one and the same External Casualities, and Sufferings, by
Hunger, Thirst, Sickness, Death and Corruption, no man can rationally
contradict: But above all, this deserves our Observation, That since Reeve is
Dead, Rotten, and gone to Dust, he was not cleansed from Sin, as he is said to
have pretended; but by Reason of his Wickedness, Death holds him in the Grave,
and consequently, he cannot have been God's Last Witness, whose Witnesses he
has always cleansed from that, against which they were to Witness. And it is
further evident, That Sin is not the cause of Men's Bodies crumbling into Dust.
from Reeve's own words, who says, The Most High God, by his Unsearchable
Wisdom, has Decreed, that all Light of Life in man, shall become Dead, Dust,
or Earth, D.L.G. p. 17. So that God's Decree, and not Man's Sin, in his own
sense, must be the Reason of such Conversion and Corruption.

Therefore you may know, that the Lord's Reasoning with the Jews, was only by
his Prophets, which were Rational Men, like unto themselves, which were sent to
Convince those Stony-Hearted Jews, by declaring the Glorious God, and his
Spiritual Truth unto them, in the Balance of their Own Reason, D.L.G. p. 117.

Observe. It is remarkable, with what unusual Nonsense, and Contradiction he
proceeds, in his whole Affair, since herein he Contradicts one of his main
Foundation Principles; namely, That God has not in his Glorious Spirit, one
Motion of Reason inherent, nor yet the Elect of God, as may be seen, D.L.G. p.
18. and T.S.T. p. 17. Whereas its manifest unto all men, who would not deny
themselves the use of their Understandings, That none can properly reason of
any Subject, unto whom Reason cannot be, or is not inherent; so that if God,
did both Reason with the Jews, and his Prophets were Rational Men, then may we
safely conclude, That Reason is Inherent, to God, and his Elect Children; and
that Pure Reason, is not inconsistent with, or distinct from the Nature of Love
and Faith; not only, because it is most Rational to believe in, and love God
most uprightly; but because John Reeve himself (that great Enemy to all sober
Reason) makes it the Balance, in which the Prophets Declaration of the
Glorious God, and his Spiritual Truth, should be weighed.

Again, I Declare from the Holy Spirit, The Lord spoke by Voice of words, to
his Three Commissioners, which he has sent unto the World; yea, I know God the
Father spoke unto Moses, as a Man speaks unto his Friend; and I know, that God
spoke unto the Apostles, in the Person of his Son, because I know the Lord God
spoke unto me in the Person of the Holy Ghost; only the two former Witnesses,
saw the Person of God, in Part Visibly, but I saw the Glory of his Person
Invisibly, or within me; because I am the Messenger of the Holy Invisible
Spirit, T.S.T. p. 35.

Observe. Upon all this I make my following Observations, as regular as this
Irregular Confused Matter, will permit me.

First, Then I would fain know, how he came to this Mighty Confidence in God's
speaking to Moses; for it is in no part of his Commission, and Muggleton says,
Moses set the Cart before the Horse; and they both of them despise the
Scripture, in comparison of their own Writings.

Secondly, Though God might (...) the Person of his Son to his Apostles, yet I
utterly deny; upon Reeves Principles, that the Lord Jesus could speak unto him,
in the Person of the Holy Ghost, because this would necessarily imply a Trinity
of Persons, (...) by him elsewhere absolutely denied, therefore the Lord Jesus
could speak to him in no other Person, then his own, if at all:

Thirdly, If God spoke to J. Reeve by Voice of Words, because he affirms him to
have so spoken to Moses, and the Apostles; then may we plainly infer, that God
should as well have shown his Person unto J.R. as he believes him to have done
to Moses, and the Apostles, since if he did not decline to utter words to the
Carnal Ear, in this third Commission, as is pretended, any more then in the two
former, (...) is no Reason in the World, why John Reeve's Carnal Eye should not
have had equal Privilege with the former Commissioners; in Visibly be holding
Gods Person also: but since he makes God so differ to in the one, we ought the
less to believe him in the other; that is, If his Carnal Eye could never see
Him, because of the Spirituality of the Commission, his Carnal-Ear could never
hear him, for one and the same Reason; therefore all a Counterfeit.

Fourthly, Suppose he had seen the Glory of God's Person within him, yet that
had been impossible, unless God's Person had been within him, since his Person
and his Glory are inseparable, as he largely affirms, D.L.G. p. 106. and if so,
how manifest a Contradiction is it to several places of his Writings?
particularly this, The Spirit or Person of Christ, may fitly be compared unto
the Face of the Natural Sun; you may know, that the Natural Spirit of the Sun,
is so ^^^^^dingly Fiery Glorious, that no created thing, that has Natural
(...), is capable of its in-dwelling Brightness, but its own Body or Face only:
If this be true, then Reeve could not behold the Glory of God's Person within
him.

Fifthly, But let us suppose, that by Reeve's Principles, the Glory of God's
Person, may be beheld, yet it is highly against them, that it should be beheld
within; for if the Body and Soul of man, are one indivisible and inseparable
Substance, as he says they are, then can there be no Invisible Eye, distinct
from that which is Carnal, to behold an Invisible Glory; and if so, then could
Reeve never see God's Glory Invisibly within him; and consequently, he had us
Commission: but out of his own Mouth he is proved a Liar and Impostor. I shall
conclude the whole with Queries to L. Muggleton, and his Companions.

Ten Queries Propounded.
IF J. Reeve and L. Muggleton were the two True Last Witnesses, mentioned in
the Revelation; how comes it, that they bear not the same Testimony, when
risen, that was born before the slaying of the Witnesses; since they were not
other Witnesses, that rise, then those that were slain; and consequently, the
Testimonies no more to vary then the Witnesses themselves?

II. If they be the same Witnesses, should they not have Prophesied, 1260.
Days, that is Years; and have been slain Three Days and an Half in spiritual
Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord was crucified, and then have risen from the
Dead?

III. How did they Prophecy so many years? How were they (Visible Witnesses)
slain in spiritual Sodom and Egypt, where Christ was crucified? Does not this
show the Witnesses to be Spiritual and Mystical, like the Place in which they
were slain (the Hearts of men) and their Death to be the same? And were they
ever such Witnesses, so slain, so long slain, and in that Place, as in the
Revelation expressed?

IV. If they be the same Witnesses, were they not to Live, and Dye, and Rise
together? Has not Reeve been Dead many Years?

V. If they were the True Witnesses, when did they shut the Heavens, that it
Rained not, turn Water into Blood, and Smite the Earth with Plagues?

VI. If John Reeve was the Moses, or Principal Understanding; and L. Muggleton
the Aaron, or Mouth only, as says Reeve; then whether Muggleton be anything,
but an Empty Month, now his Understanding Moses is gone?

VII. How can Muggleton, upon Reeve' s Principle, be a Witness or Commissioner
for God, who confesses, He never had any Commission by Voice of Words, but
from Reeve only, whom he trusted* though Reeve himself affirms, That there is
no True Commission, but by Voice of Words to the Party sent?

VIII. Whether Men's Trusting upon Muggleton (who relied upon Reeve) without
any Internal Convictions from the Eternal Spirit, be not as Sandy a Foundation
at the Darkest Popery?

IX. Whether, there ever was a Pope on Earth, that usurped, or exercised a more
Arbitrary Enslaving Power over men's Consciences, in Imposing his Faith upon
Penalty of Immediate Curse, and Eternal Damnation, then J. Reeve and L.
Muggleton have done, and the last remains to do; by affirming, That whom he
Curses, God Himself cannot Bless; and whom he Blesses, God Himself cannot
Curse: though Reeve and Muggleton have Cursed, and Blessed, and Cursed the same
Person, and that more then once?

X. And Lastly, Whether upon the whole, these men, in their Commissions,
Doctrines, Jurisdictions, Sentences, Lives and Conversations, are like unto the
Last Witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ; or those Ungodly, Proud Boasters;
Wandering Stars; Clouds without Rain; Raging Waves, Exalted above all that is
called God; Perverters of the Truth, whose Belly is their God, who Glory in
their Shame, whose End is Destruction and Perdition?

Postcript.
SInce the finishing of the foregoing Paper, it came into my Mind, that if I
affixt a Postscript, touching the Commission it self, that might remove all
Credit in the same, the rest would dye of it self. It Is true, this might have
been better placed in the Front, as the best Preludium to the Discourse it
self; but it failing of that place, I was rather willing it should go for a
Postscript, then lose that Service, I am not without Hope, it may perform in
Publication of it.

A Brief Examen of REEVE his Commission.
Says he, I Declare from the Lord Jesus, That no man can understand any thing
of those things that are Invisible to our Natural Eyes, but by the Spirit of
Revelation; therefore it is written, That Faith is the Substance of Things
Hoped for, and the Evidence of Things not seen: in his Transcendent Spiritual
Treatise, as he calls it, page 16.

If these things are Invisible to Natural Eyes, then are they Inaudible by
Natural Ears, both being Capable and Natural alike: And if no man ever can or
could See them, no man could or can ever Hear them; and if no man could or can,
then Reeve never did: And if he never heard with his Carnal Ears, for He
implies so much that denies the Power of seeing such Spiritual and Invisible
Things, to natural Eyes, then was his Commission a Counterfeit: For he
affirmed, That the 3d, 4th, and 5th of February, 1651. He Heard God resident
above the Stars, speaking to Him then a Bed on Earth, by a Voice of Words,
giving to him his Pretended Commission, T.S.T. page 5.

In short, Four Things I recommend to the Serious Consideration of all
Sober-minded People, with a Story to conclude.

1. That a Commission should be given by a Voice of Words, from the farthest
Heaven to any man upon Earth, and neither any other Hear the same, no, not so
much as Muggleton Himself; nor yet the Heavens nor Earth to re^^ive any
impression or Alter^^ion, is an Incredible Thing with all Persons that are in
their Wits.

2. Not only in this does his Commission strangely vary from that of Moses, but
in the Consequence thereof more dangerously, in as much as no man living is
assured of the Verity of this Commission, from any Convincing Testimony, either
from without, or within him; a Credulity God himself never exacted, or expected
from his Creatures: for, the Reason of God's Complaint against a Rebellious
People, never was for not believing without Convictions; but because the
Creation without, and his Good Spirit within, had so plentifully proved a God,
and that Fear, Reverence and Obedience which were due to Him, and yet that they
were not delighted to retain the Most High in their Knowledge.

3. That this should beget an utter and perpetual Abhorrence in us of all such
Impostures; do but call to mind, what an Overthrow this gives to all those
Famous Prophecies, of God's Tabernacling in His People, His Teaching them,
pouring out His Spirit upon them, and of their beholding Him Face to Face;
since in this one Conceit, all that believe it, are brought under the Verge of
these men's Imaginations, without the least Convincing Ground for any such
Belief, unless the Fear of their Insolent Curse.

4. To Conclude, if his Commission was after a Visible External Manner, like
unto Moses, as he affirms, He must needs have Visible and External Miracles to
confirm such a Visible and External Commission: For, to deny Visible Miracles
to a Visible Commission, is to deny that Commission; and to pretend Invisible
Ones, is Improper, Unnatural and Untrue.

My Story is this, and not Unknown to some of the Creditors of this Counterfeit
Commission.

A Considerable Commander of the English Army, in Ireland; and but too stiff
against Lay Preachers (esteemed Presbyterian) hearing in his Bed a still Voice,
Requiring Him to go Preach the Gospel to the Indians, was so much Amazed, that
he questioned if he were not Asleep, as Reeve's did, whether He was an Immortal
God, or a Mortal Man; and finding himself Awake (though he could rather have
wished it but a Dream) it greatly Terrified him; to leave his Family, Command
and Station, to go Preach the Gospel (who scarcely ever adventured to Preach
(whatever he did to Pray) in all his Life) was Matter of much Disquiet to him;
till in the end, he rather inclined to incur the Curse that followed his
Disobedience, then to leave his wonted Course of Life, and take up one so
difficult to him, and in which he was so Unable, as well as Unwilling to acquit
himself: But it ended not so; for I think, the next Night, or Morning, or in a
little time after, the same Voice came to him, with the same Command, which
increased his Perplexity; but still, as I was informed, he continued averse
from such a Voyage and Enterprise, till the Third Time of his being thus
Allarum'd, and then, as the Story went, he gave (for ought I know, as Freely)
up to Preach to the Indians, as Reeve did to go to Muggleton, and J. Robbins,
etc. and I am strongly of the mind, the Authority may have been much alike, for
it proved in the End, to be the Abuse of some of his Companions, in a way of
Vnjustifiable Waggery and Merriment, through a Trunk, or some such hollow
thing, placed with its Mouth or Muzzle near the Commander's Bed. What shall we
say then of Reeve's Voice of words? A Man swelled with Conceits, more ready and
deserving to have been Abused, then the Persons concerned in this Story: and
concerning whom Muggleton told me, He thought Him Hot-brained, and Distempered
in his Head, and that he had told him so; a thing not hardly to be credited by
such as read his Folly. Certainly God never gave a Commission yet, in that Way
wherein man's Wit or Malice could Equal it. And I would know, what one
Extraordinary Circumstance attended the giving of this Commission to Reeve,
that may Groundedly Engage any to the Belief of it? But indeed, it was notably
done of Him, to pretend an Authority of which he was the sole Judge, and
Witness; and a Power to Curse all such as Refused his Testimony, without his
rendering a Reason for the Hope that was in him. Never did the Devil more
Befool himself, nor any of Mankind, then in his Divulging, and their Believing
of these Sottish Blasphemies.

THE END.
Reader,
I Am sorry I have so often occasion to entreat thy Kindness, not to impute the
Errors of the Press to the Author of the Discourse, as well as to desire thy
Pains and Patience to correct them: but when thou see how many greater are
refuted by it, I hope it will not trouble thee to have answered my Request.

Page, Line, Errors, Corrected. 4 18 have has 29 Lucifian Lucifrian 5 7
infability infalibility 22 Phantisms Phantasms 8 31 a the 11 16 disposure
discomposure 16 11 -- T.S.T. P.42. 25 the their 18 13 -- T.S.T. p. 43, 44. 22
22 corporical corporial 23 2 it her 16 rise rife 23 -- T.S.T. p.23, to 30. 25
12 -- Mat. 11.25. 26 2 God Jesus 31 3 opened openly 17 -- D.L.G. p. 72, 73, 74.
24 are be 33 21 that blot it out 35 5 chap. 17. and chap. 17. read, and 38 12
fathomed fashioned 39 7 some no 42 2 to blot it out 43 17 indue endued 46 3
which the which is the 57 27 differ to to differ.


