William Penn's ANSWER TO JOHN FALDO's PRINTED CHALLENGE.
IT would seem Strange, as well as Unreasonable to me, that J. Faldo should of
all Times and Places choose the Barbican Meeting of the 28th of the 6th Month,
so surreptitiously gotten and partially managed, to divulge his Challenge
against me, did I not give off Wondering at the Injust Carriage of some men
toward us.

For first, He could not but know, I was at a great Distance from the Place;
that I had twice defended our Belief in Print against him; and that a
considerable Book lies at his Door unanswered. To make then that Swagger in my
Absence, and yet be Debtor to my Desences; to come ten Miles to tell the World,
he would do great Things against me, and when he had done, to print, and as I
may say, spit in our Faces at our Entrance into the last Barbican-Meeting,
before he had sent me a Copy, or atleast to know of my Receipt of it, and
Answer to it, who am as near a Neighbor to his Residence as the
Barbican-Meeting, I think cannot be reputed fair by Indifferent Persons: How
Unfair then is the Complaint, that he has had no Answer?

Again, Was I not then, and am I not still engaged against other Persons, and
that mostly about the same things? Why did he not send me word he intended to
be there, and exhibit a Charge publicly against me? The English Custom as to
Common Right. Is this to prove Quakerism no Christianity; or himself No
Christian? I cannot believe he did to me herein, as he would be done by.

But that I may acquit my self of that Duty incumbent on me for the Truth, I do
hereby signify, That inasmuch as the Controversy depending between T. H. etc.
and us, takes in the most of the Particulars of his Charge, we freely consent,
that he should come in with them for a Share as Confederate in the same Work,
and use his utmost Abilities to maintain his Accusations; And if in any Thing
his Charge is singular, we shall be ready to hear and fairly debate it at the
same Meeting or Meetings, to avoid fresh and unnecessary Contests, as much as
justly may be: Though still let it be remembered, these very Things are at large
discoursed in my Rejoinder to him; our Faith relieved from his Unworthy
Misrepresentations, and confirmed by Scripture, Reason, and a Cloud of
Honorable Ancient and Modern Witnesses.

London the 12th of the 8th Month, 1674.

