A Portraiture of the City of Philadelphia in the Province of PENNSYLVANIA in
America by Thomas Holme Surveyor General. Sold by John Thornton in the Minories
and Andrew Soul in Shoreditch. London.
map of Philadelphia

A LETTER FROM William Penn Poprietary and Governor of PENNSYLVANIA In
America, TO THE COMMITTEE OF THE Free Society of Traders of that Province,
residing in London. CONTAINING A General Description of the said Province, its
Soil, Air, Water, Seasons and Produce, both Natural and Artificial, and the
good Increase thereof. Of the Natives or Aborigines, their Language, Customs
and Manners, Diet, Houses or Wigwams, Liberality, easy way of Living, Physic,
Burial, Religion, Sacrifices and Cantico, Festivals, Government, and their
order in Council upon Treaties for Land, etc. their Justice upon Evil Doers. Of
the first Planters, the Dutch, etc. and the present Condition and Settlement of
the said Province, and Courts of Justice, etc.

To which is added, An Account of the CITY of PHILADELPHIA Newly laid out. Its
Situation between two Navigable Rivers, Delaware and Skulkill, WITH A
Portraiture or Platform thereof, Wherein the Purchasers Lots are distinguished
by certain Numbers inserted, directing to a Catalogue of the said Purchasors
Names And the Prosperous and Advantageous Settlements of the Society aforesaid,
within the said City and Country, etc.

Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane in
Shoreditch, and at several Stationers in London, 1683.

A Letter from William Penn, Proprietary and Governor of PENNSYLVANIA, etc.
My Kind Friends;
THE Kindness of yours by the Ship Thomas and Anne, does much oblige me; for by
it I perceive the Interest you take in my Health and Reputation, and the
prosperous Beginnings of this Province, which you are so kind as to think may
much depend upon them. In return of which, I have sent you a long Letter, and
yet containing as brief an Account of My self, and the Affairs of this
Province, as I have been able to make.

In the first place, I take notice of the News you sent me, whereby I find some
Persons have had so little Wit, and so much Malice, as to report my Death, and
to mend the matter, dead a Jesuit too. One might have reasonably hoped, that
this Distance, like Death, would have been a protection against Spite and Envy;
and indeed, Absence being a kind of Death, ought alike to secure the Name of
the Absent as the Dead; because they are equally unable as such to defend
themselves: But they that intend Mischief, do not use to follow good Rules to
effect it. However, to the great Sorrow and Shame of the Inventors, I am still
Alive, and No Jesuit, and I thank God, very well: And without Injustice to the
Authors of this, I may venture to infer, That they that wilfully and falsely
Report, would have been glad it had been So. But I perceive, many frivolous and
Idle Stories have been Invented since my Departure from England, which perhaps
at this time are no more Alive, than I am Dead.

But if I have been Unkindly used by some I left behind me, I found Love and
Respect enough where I came; an universal kind Welcome, every sort in their
way. For here are some of several Nations, as well as diverse Judgments: Nor
were the Natives wanting in this, for their Kings, Queens and Great Men both
visited and presented me; to whom I made suitable Returns, etc.

For the PROVINCE, the general Condition of it take as follows.

I. The Country it self in its Soil, Air, Water, Seasons and Produce both
Natural and Artificial is not to be despised. The Land contains diverse sorts
of Earth, as Sand Yellow and Black, Poor and Rich: also Gravel both Loomy and
Dusty; and in some places a fast fat Earth, like to our best Vales in England,
especially by Inland Brooks and Rivers, God in his Wisdom having ordered it so,
that the Advantages of the Country are divided, the Back-Lands being generally
three to one Richer than those that lie by Navigable Waters. We have much of
another Soil, and that is a black Hasel Mould, upon a Stony or Rocky bottom.

II. The Air is sweet and clear, the Heavens serene, like the South-parts of
France, rarely Overcast; and as the Woods come by numbers of People to be more
cleared, that it self will Refine.

III. The Waters are generally good, for the Rivers and Brooks have mostly
Gravel and Stony Bottoms, and in Number hardly credible. We have also Mineral
Waters, that operate in the same manner with Barnet and North-hall, not two
Miles from Philadelphia.

IV. For the Seasons of the Year, having by God's goodness now lived over the
Coldest and Hottest, that the Oldest Liver in the Province can remember, I can
say something to an English Understanding.

1 st, Of the Fall, for then I came in: I found it from the 24th of October, to
the beginning of December, as we have it usually in England in September, or
rather like an English mild Spring. From December to the beginning of the
Month called March, we had sharp Frosty Weather; not foul, thick, black
Weather, as our North-East Winds bring with them in England; but a Sky as
clear as in Summer, and the Air dry, cold, piercing and hungry; yet I remember
not, that I wore more Clothes than in England. The reason of this Cold is given
from the great Lakes that are fed by the Fountains of Canada. The Winter before
was as mild, scarce any Ice at all; while this for a few days Froze up our
great River Delaware. From that Month to the Month called June, we enjoyed a
sweet Spring, no Gusts, but gentle Showers, and a fine Sky. Yet this I
observe, that the Winds here as there, are more Inconstant Spring and Fall,
upon that turn of Nature, than in Summer or Winter. From thence to this
present, Month, which ends the Summer (commonly speaking) we have had
extraordinary Heats yet mitigated sometimes by Cool Breezese. The Wind that
rules the Summer-season, is the South-West; but Spring, Fall and Winter, it is
rare to want the wholesome North Wester seven days together: And whatever
Mists, Fogs or Vapors foul the Heavens by Easterly or Southerly Winds, in two
Hours time are blown away; the one is always followed by the other: A Remedy
that seems to have a peculiar Providence in it to the Inhabitants; the
multitude of Trees, yet standing, being-liable to retain Mists and Vapors, and
yet not one quarter so thick as I expected.

V. The Natural Produce of the Country, of Vegetables, is Trees, Fruits,
Plants, Flowers. The Trees of most note are, the black Walnut, Cedar, Cyprus,
Chestnut, Poplar, Gumwood, Hickery, Sassafrax, Ash, Beech and Oak of diverse
sorts, as Red, White and Black; Spanish Chestnut and Swamp, the most durable of
all: of All which there is plenty for the use of man*

The Fruits that I find in the Woods, are the White and Black Mulbery,
Chestnut, W^^lnut, Plumbs, Strawberries, Cranberries, Hurtleberries and Grapes
of diverse sorts. The great Red Grape (now ripe) called by Ignorance, the
Fox-Grape (because of the Relish it has with unskilful Palates) is in it self
an extraordinary Grape, and by Art doubtless may be Cultivated to an excellent
Wine, if not so sweet, yet little inferior to the Frontimack, as it is not much
unlike in taste, Ruddiness set aside, which in such things, as well as Mankind,
differs the case much. There is a white kind of Muskedel, and a little black
Grape, like the cluster-Grape of England, not yet so ripe as the other; but
they tell me, when Ripe, sweeter, and that they only want skilful Vinerons to
make good use of them: I intend to venture on it with my French man this
season, who shows some knowledge in those things. Here are also Peaches, and
very good, and in great quantities, not an Indian Plantation without them; but
whether naturally here at first, I know not, however one may have them by
Bushols for little; they make a pleasant Drink and I think not inferior to any
Peach you have in England, except the true Newington. It Is disputable with me,
whether it be best to fall to Fining the Fruits of the Country, especially the
Grape, by the care and skill of Art, or send for foreign Stems and Sets,
already good and approved It seems most reasonable to believe, that not only a
thing grows best, where it naturally grows; but will hardly be equalled by
another Species of the same kind, that does not naturally grow there. But to
solve the doubt, I intend, if God give me Life, to try both, and hope the
consequence will be as good Wine as any European Countries of the same Latitude
do yield.

VI. The Artificial Produce of the Country, is Wheat, Barley, Oats, Rye, Pease,
Beans, Squashes, Pumkins, Note, that Edward Jones, Son-in-Law to Thomas Wynn,
living on the Sckulkil, had with ordinary Cultivation^ for one Grain of English
Barley, seventy Stalks and Ears of Barley; And it is common in this Country from
one Bushel sown, to reap forty, often fifty, and sometimes sixty And three
Pecks of Wheat sows an Acre here.
Water-Melons, Mus-Melons, and all Herbs and Roots that our Gardens in England
usually bring forth.

VII. Of living Creatures; Fish, Fowl, and the Beasts of the Woods, here are
diverse sorts, some for Food and Profit, and some for Profit only: For Food as
well as Profit, the Elk, as big as a small Ox, Deer bigger than ours, Beaver,
Racoon, Rabbits, Squirrels, and some eat young Bear, and commend it. Of Fowl of
the Land, there is the Turkey (Forty and Fifty Pound weight) which is very
great; Phesants, Heath-Birds, Pigeons and Partridges in abundance. Of the
Water, the Swan, Goose, white and gray, Brands, Ducks, Teal, also the Snipe and
Curloe, and that in great Numbers; but the Duck and Teal excel, nor so good
have I ever eat in other Countries. Of Fish, there is the Sturgeon, Herring,
Rock, Shad, Catshead, Sheepshead, Ele, Smelt, Perch, Roach; and in Inland
Rivers, Trout, some say Salmon, above the Falls. Of Shelfish, we have Oysters,
Crabbs, Cockles, Concks and Mushels; some Oysters six Inches long, and one sort
of Cockles as big as the Stewing Oysters, they make a rich Broth. The Creatures
for Profit only by Skin or Fur, and that are natural to these parts, are the
Wild Cat, Panther, Otter, Wolf, Fox, Fisher, Minx, Musk-Rat; and of the Water,
the Whale for Oil, of which we have good store, and two Companies of Whalers,
whose Boats are built, will soon begin their Work, which has the appearance of
a considerable Improvement. To say nothing of our reasonable Hopes of good Cod
in the Bay.

VIII. We have no want of Horses, and some are very good and shapely enough;
two Ships have been freighted to Barbados with Horses and Pipe-Staves, since
my coming in. Here is also Plenty of Cow-Cattle, and some Sheep; the People
Plow mostly with Oxen.

IX. There are diverse Plants that not only the Indians tell us, but we have had
occasion to prove by Swellings, Burnings, Cuts, etc. that they are of great
Virtue, suddenly curing the Patient: and for smell, I have observed several,
especially one, the wild Myrtle; the other I know not what to call, but are
most fragrant.

X. The Woods are adorned with lovely Flowers, for color, greatness, figure
and variety: I have seen the Gardens of London best stored with that sort of
Beauty, but think they may be improved by our Woods: I have sent a few to a
Person of Quality this Year for a trial.

Thus much of the Country, next of the Natives or Aborigines.

XI. The NATIVES I shall consider in their Persons, Language, Manners, Religion
and Government, with my sense of their Original. For their Persons, they are
generally tall, straight, well built, and of singular Proportion; they tread
strong and clever, and mostly walk with a lofty Chin: Of Complexion, Black, but
by design, as the Gypsies in England: They grease themselves with Bears-fat
clarified, and using no defense against Sun or Weather, their skins must needs
be swarthy: Their Eye is little and black, not unlike a straight-look't Jew:
The thick Lip and flat Nose, so frequent with the East-Indians and Blacks, are
not common to them; for I have seen as comely European-like faces among them of
both, as on your side the Sea; and truly an Italian Complexion has not much
more of the White, and the Noses of several of them have as much of the Roman.

XII. Their Language is lofty, yet narrow, but like the Hebrew; in
Signification full, like Shorthand in writing; one word serves in the place
of three, and the rest are supplied by the Understanding of the Hearer:
Imperfect in their Tenses, wanting in their Moods, Participles, Adverbs,
Conjunctions, Interjections: I have made it my business to understand it, that
I might not want an Interpreter on any occasion: And I must say, that I know
not a Language spoken in Europe, that has words of more sweetness or
greatness, in Accent and Emphasis, than theirs; for Instance Octorockon,
Rancocas, Ducton, Shakan^a^on, Poque^^^, all which are names of Places, and
have Grandeur in them: Or words of Sweetness, Anna, is Mother, Issimus, a
Brother, Netap, Friend, usque oret, very good; pone, Bread, metse, eat, matta,
no, hatta, to have, pay^, to come; Sepassen, Pass^ion, the Names of Places;
Camane, Secane, Menanse, Secatereus, are the Names of Persons. If one ask them
for any thing they have not, they will answer, matta ne hatta, which to
translate is, not I have, instead of I have not.

XIII. Of their Customs and Manners there is much to be said; I will begin with
Children. So soon as they are born, they wash them in Water, and while very
young, and in cold Weather to choose, they Plunge them in the Rivers to harden
and embolden them. Having wrapped them in a Clout, they lay them on a straight
thin Board, a little more than the length and breadth of the Child, and swadle
it fast upon the Board to make it straight; wherefore all Indians have flat
Heads; and thus they carry them at their Backs. The Children will go very
young, at nine Months commonly; they wear only a small Clout round their
Waste, till they are big; if Boys, they go a Fishing till ripe for the Woods,
which is about Fifteen; then they Hunt, and after having given some Proofs of
their Manhood, by a good return of Skins, they may Marry, else it is a shame to
think of a Wife. The Girls stay with their Mothers, and help to hoe the Ground,
plant Corn and carry Burdens; and they do well to use them to that Young, they
must do when they are Old; for the Wives are the true Servants of their
Husbands: otherwise the Men are very affectionate to them.

XIV. When the Young Women are fit for Marriage, they wear something upon their
Heads for an Advertisement, but so as their Faces are hardly to be seen, but
when they please: The Age they Marry at, if Women, is about thirteen and
fourteen; if Men, seventeen and eighteen; they are rarely elder.

XV. Their Houses are Mats, or Barks of Trees set on Poles, in the fashion of
an English Barn, but out of the power of the Winds, for they are hardly higher
than a Man; they lie on Reeds or Grass. In Travel they lodge in the Woods about
a great Fire, with the Mantle of Duffills they wear by day, wrapped about them,
and a few Boughs stuck round them.

XVI. Their Diet is Maze, or Indian Corn, diverse ways prepared; sometimes
Roasted in the Ashes, sometimes beaten and Boiled with Water, which they call
Homine; they also make Cakes, not unpleasant to eat: They have likewise several
sorts of Beans and Pease that are good Nourishment; and the Woods and Rivers
are their Larder.

XVII. If an European comes to see them, or calls for Lodging at their House or
Wigwam they give him the best place and first cut. If they come to visit us,
they salute us with an Ita^ which is as much as to say, Good be to you, and set
them down, which is mostly on the Ground close to their Heels, their Legs
upright; may be they speak not a word more, but observe all Passages: If you
give them any thing to eat or drink, well, for they will not ask; and be it
little or much, if it be with Kindness, they are well pleased, else they go
away sullen, but say nothing.

XVIII. They are great Concealers of their own Resentments, brought to it, I
believe, by the Revenge that has been practiced among them; in either of
these, they are not exceeded by the Italians. A Tragical Instance fell out
since I came into the Country; A King's Daughter thinking her self slighted by
her Husband, in suffering another Woman to lie down between them, rose up, went
out, plucked a Root out of the Ground, and ate it, upon which she immediately
dyed; and for which, last Week he made an Offering to her Kindred for
Atonement and liberty of Marriage; as two others did to the Kindred of their
Wives, that dyed a natural Death: For till Widdowers have done so, they must
not marry again. Some of the young Women are said to take undue liberty before
Marriage for a Portion; but when married, chaste; when with Child, they know
their Husbands no more, till delivered; and during their Month, they touch no
Meat, they eat, but with a Stick, least they should defile it; nor do their
Husbands frequent them, till that time be expired.

XIX. But in Liberality they excel, nothing is too good for their friend; give
them a fine Gun, Coat, or other thing, it may pass twenty hands, before it
sticks; light of Heart, strong Affections, but soon spent; the most merry
Creatures that live, Feast and Dance perpetually; they never have much, nor
want much: Wealth circulateth like the Blood, all parts partake; and though
none shall want what another has, yet exact Observers of Property. Some Kings
have sold, others presented me with several parcels of Land; the Pay or
Presents I made them, were not hoarded by the particular Owners, but the
neighboring Kings and their Clans being present when the Goods were brought
out, the Parties chiefly concerned consulted, what and to whom they should give
them? To every King then, by the hands of a Person for that work appointed, is
a proportion sent, so sorted and folded, and with that Gravity, that is
admirable. Then that King sub-divideth it in like manner among his Dependents,
they hardly leaving themselves an Equal share with one of their Subjects: and
be it on such occasions, at Festivals, or at their common Meals, the Kings
distribute, and to themselves last. They care for little, because they want but
little; and the Reason is, a little contents them: In this they are
sufficiently revenged on us; if they are ignorant of our Pleasures, they are
also free from our Pains. They are not disquieted with Bills of Lading and
Exchange, nor perplexed with Chancery-Suits and Exchequer-Reckonings. We sweat
and toil to live; their pleasure feeds them, I mean, their Hunting, Fishing and
Fowling, and this Table is spread every where; they eat twice a day, Morning
and Evening; their Seats and Table are the Ground. Since the Europeans came
into these parts, they are grown great lovers of strong Liquors, Rum
especially, and for it exchange the richest of their Skins and Furs: If they
are heated with Liquors, they are restless till they have enough to sleep; that
is their cry, Some more, and I will go to sleep; but when Drunk, one of the
most wretchedst Spectacles in the World.

XX. In Sickness impatient to be cured, and for it give any thing, especially
for their Children, to whom they are extremely natural; they drink at those
times a Teran or Decoction of some Roots in spring Water; and if they eat any
flesh, it must be of the Female of any Creature: If they dye, they bury them
with their Apparel, be they Men or Women, and the nearest of Kin sling in
something precious with them, as a token of their Love: Their Mourning is
blacking of their faces, which they continue for a year: They are choice of the
Graves of their Dead; for least they should be lost by time, and fall to common
use, they pick off the Grass that grows upon them, and heap up the fallen Earth
with great care and exactness.

XXI. These poor People are under a dark Night in things relating to Religion,
to be sure, the Tradition of it; yet they believe a God and Immortality,
without the help of Metaphysics; for they say, There is a great King that made
them, who dwells in a glorious Country to the Southward of them, and that the
Souls of the good shall go thither, where they shall live again. Their Worship
consists of two parts, Sacrifice and Cantico. Their Sacrifice is their first
Fruits; the first and fattest Buck they kill, goes to the fire, where he is
all burnt with a Mournful Ditty of him that performs the Ceremony, but with
such mavelous Fervency and Labor of Body, that he will even sweat to a foam.
The other part is their Cantico, performed by round- Dances, sometimes Words,
sometimes Songs, then Shouts, two being in the middle that begin, and by
Singing and Drumming on a Board direct the Chorus: Their Postures in the Dance
are very Antic and differing, but all keep measure. This is done with equal
Earnestness and Labor, but great appearance of Joy. In the Fall, when the Corn
comes in, they begin to feast one another; there have been two great Festivals
already, to which all come that will: I was at one my self; their Entertainment
was a green Seat by a Spring, under some shady Trees, and twenty Bucks, with
hot Cakes of new Corn, both Wheat and Beans, which they make up in a square
form, in the leaves of the Stem, and bake them in the Ashes: And after that
they fell to Dance. But they that go, must carry a small Present in their
Money, it may be six Pence, which is made of the Bone of a Fish; the black is
with them as Gold, the white, Silver; they call it all Wampum.

XXII. Their Government is by Kings, which they call Sachema, and those by
Succession, but always of the Mothers side; for Instance, the Children of him
that is now King, will not succeed, but his Brother by the Mother, or the
Children of his Sister, whose Sons (and after them the Children of her
Daughters) will reign; for no Woman inherits; the Reason they render for this
way of Descent, is, that their Issue may not be spurious.

XXIII. Every King has his Council, and that consists of all the Old and Wise
men of his Nation, which perhaps is two hundred People: nothing of Moment is
undertaken; be it War, Peace, Selling of Land or Traffic, without advising
with them; and which is more, with the Young Men too. It Is admirable to
consider, how Powerful the Kings are, and yet how they move by the Breath of
their People. I have had occasion to be in Council with them upon Treaties for
Land, and to adjust the terms of Trade; their Order is thus: The King sits in
the middle of an half Moon, and has his Council, the Old and Wise on each
hand; behind them, or at a little distance, sit the younger Fry, in the same
figure. Having consulted and resolved their business, the King ordered one of
them to speak to me; he stood up, came to me, and in the Name of his King
saluted me, then took me by the hand, and told me, That he was ordered by his
King to speak to me, and that now it was not he, but the King that spoke,
because what he should say, was the King's mind. He first prayed me, To excuse
them that they had not complied with me the last time; he feared, there might
be some fault in the Interpreter, being neither Indian nor English; besides, it
was the Indian Custom to d^liberate, and take up much time in Council, before
they resolve; and that if the Young People and Owners of the Land had been as
ready as he, I had not met with so much delay. Having thus introduced his
matter, he fell to the Bounds of the Land they had agreed to dispose of, and
the Price, (which now is little and dear, that which would have bought twenty
Miles, not buying now two.) During the time that this Person spoke, not a man
of them was observed to whisper or smile; the Old Grave, the Young Reverend in
their Deportment; they do speak little, but fervently, and with Elegancy: I
have never seen more natural Sagacity, considering them without the help, (I
was a going to say, the spoil) of Tradition; and he will deserve the Name of
Wise, that Out-wits them in any Treaty about a thing they understand. When the
Purchase was agreed, great Promises past between us of Kindness and good
Neighborhood, and that the Indians and English must live in Love, as long as
the Sun gave light. Which done, another made a Speech to the Indians, in the
Name of all the Sachamakers or Kings, first to tell them what was done; next,
to charge and command them, To Love the Christians, and particularly live in
Peace with me, and the People under my Government: That many Governors had
been in the River, but that no Governor had come himself to live and stay here
before; and having now such a one that had treated them well, they should never
do him or his any wrong. At every sentence of which they shouted, and said,
Amen, in their way.

XXIV. The Justice they have is Pecuniary: In case of any Wrong or evil Fact,
be it Murder it self, they Atone by Feasts and Presents of their Wampon,
which is proportioned to the quality of the Offense or Person injured, or of
the Sex they are of: for in case they kill a Woman, they pay double, and the
Reason they render, is, That she breeds Children, which Men cannot do It Is
rare that they fall out, if Sober; and if Drunk, they forgive it, saying, It
was the Drink, and not the Man, that abused them.

XXV. We have agreed, that in all Differences between us, Six of each side
shall end the matter: Don't abuse them, but let them have Justice, and you win
them: The worst is, that they are the worse for the Christians, who have
propagated their Vices, and yielded them Tradition for ill, and not for good
things. But as low an Ebb as they are at, and as glorious as their Condition
looks, the Christians have not outlived their sight with all their Pretensions
to an higher Manifestation: Wha^ good then might not a good People graft, where
there is so distinct a Knowledge left between Good and Evil? I beseech God to
incline the Hearts of all that come into these parts, to outlive the Knowledge
of the Natives, by a fixed Obedience to their greater Knowledge of the Will of
God; for it were miserable indeed for us to fall under the just censure of the
poor Indian Conscience, while we make profession of things so far transcending.

XXVI. For their Original, I am ready to believe them of the Jewish Race, I
mean, of the stock of the Ten Tribes, and that for the following Reasons;
first, They were to go to a Land not planted or known, which to be sure Asia
and Africa were, if not Europe; and he that intended that extraordinary
Judgment upon them, might make the Passage not uneasy to them, as it is not
impossible in it self, from the Easter-most parts of Asia, to the Wester-most
of America. In the next place, I find them of like Countenance, and their
Children of so lively Resemblance, that a man would think himself in
Dukes-place or Berry-street in London, when he sees them. But this is not all,
they agree in Rites, they reckon by Moons* they offer their first Fruits, they
have a kind of Feast of Tabernacles; they are said to lay their Altar upon
twelve Stones; their Mourning a year, Customs of Women, with many things that
do not now occur.

So much for the Natives, next the Old Planters will be considered in this
Relation, before I come to our Colony, and the Concerns of it.

XXVII. The first Planters in these parts were the Dutch, and soon after them
the Sweeds and Finns. The Dutch applied themselves to Traffic, the Sweeds and
Finns to Husbandry. There were some Disputes between them some years, the Dutch
looking upon them as Intruders upon their Purchase and Possession, which was
finally ended in the Surrender made by John Rizeing the Sweeds Governor, to
Peter Styresant, Governor for the States of Holland, Anno 1655.

XXVIII. The Dutch inhabit mostly those parts of the Province, that lie upon or
near to the Bay, and the Sweeds the Freshes of the River Delaware. There is no
need of giving any Description of them, who are better known there then here;
but they are a plain, strong, industrious People, yet have made no great
progress in Culture or propagation of Fruit Trees, as if they desired rather to
have enough, than Plenty or Traffic. But I presume, the Indians made them the
more careless, by furnishing them with the means of Profit, to wit, Skins and
Furs, for Rum, and such strong Liquors. They kindly received me, as well as the
English, who were few, before the People concerned with me came among them: I
must needs commend their Respect to Authority, and kind Behavior to the
English; they do not degenerate from the Old friendship between both Kingdoms.
As they are People proper and strong of Body, so they have fine Children, and
almost every house full; rare to find one of them without three or four Boys,
and as many Girls; some six, seven and eight Sons: And I must do them that
right, I see few Young men more sober and laborious.

XXIX. The Dutch have a Meeting Place for Religious Worship at New Castle, and
the Sweedes, three, one at Christina, one at Tenecum, and one at Wicoco, within
half a Mile of this Town.

XXX. There rests, that I speak of the Condition we are in, and what Settlement
we have made, in which I will be as short as I can; for I fear, and not without
reason, that I have tried your Patience with this long Story. The Country lies
bounded on the East, by the River and Bay of Delaware, and Eastern Sea; it has
the Advantage of many Creeks or Rivers rather, that run into the main River or
Bay; some Navigable for great Ships, some for small Craft: Those of most
Eminency are Christina, Brandywine, Skilpot and Skulkill; any one of which have
room to lay up the Royal Navy of England, there being from four to eight Fathom
Water.

XXXI. The lesser Creeks or Rivers, yet convenient for Sloops and Ketches of
good Burden, are Lewis, Mespilion, Cedar, Dover, Cranbrook, Fevershan, and
Georges below, and Chichester, Chester, Toacawny, Pemmapecka, Portquessin,
Neshimenck and Pennberry in the Freshes; many lesser that admit Boats and
Shallops. Our People are mostly settled upon the upper Rivers, which are
pleasant and sweet, and generally bounded with good Land. The Planted part of
the Province and Territories is cast into six Counties, Philadelphia,
Buckingham, Chester, Newcastle, Kent and Sussex, containing about Four Thousand
Souls. Two General Assemblies have been held, and with such Concord and
Dispatch, that they sat but three Weeks, and at least seventy Laws were past
without one Dissent in any material thing. But of this more hereafter, being
yet Raw and New in our Geer: However, I cannot forget their singular Respect to
me in this Infancy of things, who by their own private Expenses so early
considered Mine for the Public, as to present me with an Impost upon certain
Goods Imported and Exported: Which after my Acknowledgements of their
Affection, I did as freely Remit to the Province and the Traders to it. And for
the well Government of the said Counties, Courts of Justice are established in
every County, with proper Officers, as Justices, Sheriffs, Clarks, Constables,
etc. which Courts are held every two Months: But to prevent Lawsuits, there
are three Peacemakers chosen by every County Court, in the nature of common
Arbitrators, to hear and end Differences betwixt man and man; and Spring and
Fall there is an Orphan's Court in each County, to inspect and regulate the
Affairs of Orphans and Widows.

XXXII. Philadelphia, the Expectation of those that are concerned in this
Province, is at last laid out to the great Content of those here, that are any
ways Interested therein: The Scitu^tion is a Neck of Land, and lies between
two Navigable Rivers, Delaware and Skulkill, whereby it has two Fronts upon
the Water, each a Mile, and two from River to River. Delaware is a glorious
River, but the Skulkill being an hundred Miles Boatable above the Falls, and
its Course North-East toward the Fountain of Susquahannah (that tends to the
Heart of the Province, and both sides our own) it is like to be a great part of
the Settlement of this Age. I say little of the Town it self, because a
PLATFORM will be shown you by my Agent, in which those who are Purchasers of
me, will find their Names and Interests: But this I will say for the good
Providence of God, that of all the many Places I have seen in the World, I
remember not one better seated; so that it seems to me to have been appointed
for a Town, whether we regard the Rivers, or the convenience of the Coves,
Docks, Springs, the loftiness and soundness of the Land and the Air, held by
the People of these parts to be very good. It is advanced within less than a
Year to about four Score Houses and Cottages, such as they are, where Merchants
and Handicrafts are following their Vocations as fast as they can, while the
Countrymen are close at their Farms: Some of them got a little Winter-Corn in
the Ground last Season, and the generality have had a handsome Summer-Crop, and
are preparing for their Winter-Corn. They reaped their Barley this Year in the
Month called May; the Wheat in the Month following; so that there is time in
these parts for another Crop of diverse Things before the Winter-Season. We are
daily in hopes of Shipping to add to our Number; for blessed be God, here is
both Room and Accommodation for them; the Stories of our Necessity being either
the Fear of our Friends, or the Scare-Crows of our Enemies; for the greatest
hardship we have suffered, has been Salt-Meat, which by Fowl in Winter, and
Fish in Summer, together with some Poultery, Lamb, Mutton, Veal, and plenty of
Venison the best part of the year* has been made very passable. I bless God, I
am fully satisfied with the Country and Entertainment I can get in it; for I
find that particular Content which has always attended me, where God in his
Providence has made it my place and service to reside. You cannot imagine, my
Station can be at present free of more than ordinary business, and as such, I
may say, It is a troublesome Work; but the Method things are putting in, will
facilitate the Charge, and give an easier Motion to the Administration of
Affairs, However, as it is some men's Duty to plow, some to sow, some to water,
and some to reap; so it is the Wisdom as well as Duty of a man, to yield to the
mind of Providence, and cheerfully, as well as carefully embrace and follow the
Guidance of it.

XXXIII. For your particular Concern, I might entirely refer you to the Letters
of the President of the Society; but this I will venture to say, Your
Provincial Settlements both within and without the Town, for Situation and
Soil, are without Exception: Your City-Lot is an whole Street, and one side of
a Street, from River to River, containing near one hundred Acers, not easily
valued, which is besides your four hundred Acres in the City Liberties, part of
your twenty thousand Acers in the Countery. Your Tannery has such plenty of
Bark, the Saw-Mill for Timber, the place of the Glass house so conveniently
posted for Water-carriage, the City-Lot for a Dock, and the Whalery for a sound
and fruitful Bank, and the Town Lewis by it to help your People, that by Gods
blessing the Affairs of the Society will naturally grow in their Reputation and
Profit. I am sure I have not turned my back upon any Offer that tended to its
Prosperity; and though I am ill at Projects, I have sometimes put in for a
Share with her Officers, to countenance and advance her Interest. You are
already informed what is fit for you further to do, whatsoever tends to the
Promotion of Wine, and to the Manufacture of Linen in these parts, I cannot
but wish you to promote it; and the French People are most likely in both
respects to answer that design: To that end, I would advise you to send for
some Thousands of Plants out of France, with some able Vinerons, and People of
the other Vocation: But because I believe you have been entertained with this
and some other profitable Subjects by your President, I shall add no more, but
to assure you, that I am heartily inclined to advance your just Interest, and
that you will always find me

Philadelphia, the 16th of the 6th Month, called August, 1683. Your Kind
Cordial Friend, William Penn.

A short Advertisement Upon the Situation and Extent of the CITY of
PHILADELPHIA And the Ensuing PLATFORM thereof. By the Surveyor General.
THe City of Philadelphia, now extends in Length, from River to River, two
Miles, and in Breadth near a Mile; and the Governor, as a further
manifestation of his Kindness to the Purchasers, has freely given them their
respective Lots in the City, without defalcation of any their Quantities of
purchased Lands; and as its now placed and modelled between two Navigable
Rivers upon a Neck of Land, and that Ships may ride in good Anchorage, in six
or eight Fathom Water in both Rivers, close to to the City, and the Land of the
City level, dry and wholesome; such a Situation is scarce to be paralleled.

The Model of the City appears by a small Draught now made, and may hereafter,
when time permits, be augmented; and because there is not room to express the
Purchasers Names in the Draught, I have therefore drawn Directions of
Reference, by way of Numbers, whereby may be known each man's Lot and Place in
the City.

The City is so ordered now, by the Governor's Care and Prudence, that it has
a Front to each River, one half at Delaware, the other at Skulkill; and though
all this cannot make way for small Purchasers to be in the Fronts, yet they are
placed in the next Streets, contiguous to each Front, viz. all Purchasers of
One Thousand Acres, and upwards, have the Fronts, (and the High Street) and to
every five Thousand Acres Purchase, in the Front about an Acre, and the smaller
Purchasers about half an Acre in the backward Streets; by which means the least
has room enough for House, Garden and small Orchard, to the great Content and
Satisfaction of all here concerned.

The City, (as the Model shows) consists of a large Front-street to each River,
and a High Street (near the middle) from Front (or River) to Front, of one
hundred Foot broad, and a Broad-street in the middle of the City, from side to
side, of the like breadth. In the Center of the City is a Square of ten Acres;
at each Angle are to be Houses for public Affairs, as a Meeting House,
Assembly or State-House, Market-House, School-House, and several other
Buildings for Public Concerns. There are also in each Quarter of the City a
Square of eight Acres, to be for the like Uses, as the Moore-fields in London;
and eight Streets, (besides the High Street, that run from Front to Front, and
twenty Streets, (besides the Broad-street) that run cross the City, from side
to side; all these Streets are of fifty Foot breadth.

In each Number in the Draught, in the Fronts and High Street, are placed the
Purchasers of One Thousand Acres, and upwards, to make up five Thousand Acres
Lot, both in the said Fronts and Hightstreet) and the Numbers direct to each
Lot, and where in the City; so that thereby they may know where their Concerns
are therein.

The Front Lots begin at the South-ends of the Fronts, by the Numbers, and so
reach to the North-ends, and end at Number 43.

The High Street Lots begin toward the Fronts, at Number 44. and so reach to
the Center.

The lesser Purchasers begin at Number 1. in the second Streets, and so proceed
by the Numbers, as in the Draught; the biggest of them being first placed,
nearest to the Fronts.

Directions of Reference in the City-Draught of Philadelphia, to the Lots of
the Purchasors, etc. by way of Numbers, being too small to insert their Names,
so that by the Numbers the Lots may be known.
The Purchasors from a 1000 Acres and upwards, are placed in the Fronts and
High-Streets, and begin on Delaware-Front, at the South-end, with Number 1. and
so proceed with the Front to the North end, to Number 43.

Names. Number. WIlliam Penn, jun. 1. W. Lowther, 2. Laurence Growdon, 3.
Philip Ford, 4. The Society, 5. Nicholas Moor, Presid. 6. John Marsh, 7. James
Harrison, 8 Thomas Farmborrow, 9. James Boyden, N. N.
10. Francis Borough, Robert Knight,
11. John Reynolds, Nathaniel Bromley, Enoch Flower,
12. John Moor, Humphry South, Thomas Barker, Sabian Cole, Samuel Jobson,
13. James Claypoole, 14. N. N. Alexander Parker, Robert Greenway,
15. Samuel Carpenter, 16. Christopher Tailor, 17. William Shardlow, 18. John
Love Nathaniel Allen, Edward Jefferson,
19. John Sweetaple, Thomas Bond, Richard Corslet, Robert Tailor, Thomas
Rowland,
20. Thomas Herriot, 21. Charles Pickering, Thomas Bourne, John Williard,
22. Edward Blardman, Richard Webb, John Boy, Daniel Smith,
23. Letitia Penn, 24. William Bowman, 25. Griffith Jones, 26. Thomas
Callowhill, 27. 28. William Stanley, 29. Joseph Fisher, 30. Robert Turner, 31.
Thomas Holme, 32. Clement Milward, Richard Davis,
33. Abraham Pask, William Smith,
34. John Blakelin, Allen Foster,
35. William Wade, Benjamin Chambers, Samuel Fox, Francis Borough,
36. George Palmer, John Barber,
37. John Sharpless, Henry Maddock, Thomas Rowland,
38. John B^zer, Richard Crosby, Josiah Ellis, Thomas Woolrich, John Alsop,
John Day,
39. Francis Plumstead William Tailor,
40. Thomas Brassey, 41. John Simcock, 42. William Crispin, 43.


The High-Street-Lots begin at Number 44. and so proceed on both sides of the
High Street upwards to the Center-Square.

Names. Number. N. N. 1. N. N. 2. Thomas Bond, John Sweetaple, Thomas Rowland,
John Love, Margaret Martindall,
3. James Claypoole, 4. John Barber, William Wade, Thomas Bourne,
5. Griffith Jones, 6. John Day, Francis Plumstead, Abraham Pask,
7. James Harrison, 8. Josiah Ellis, Samuel Jobson, Samuel Lawson, John Moon,
John Sharpl^ss,
9. Christopher Tailor, 10. George Palmer, 11. Clement Milward, 12. Samuel
Carpenter, 13. Thomas Herriot, 14. Nathaniel Allen, Robert Tailor, Thomas
Woolrich, Alexander Parker,
15. John Simcok, 16. John Bezer, John Rennolds, Daniel Smith, Francis
Borough,
17. Richard Davis, 18. Enoch Flower, Nathaniel Bromly, James Bowden,
19. Moses Charas, 20. William Bowman, 21. Robert Turner, 22. Thomas Holme, 23.
Joseph Fisher, 24. William Stanley, 25. William Shardlow, 26. Thomas
Farnborough, 27. Edward Blardman, Richard Webb, Edward Gefferson, Henry
Maddock,
28. Robert Knight, Thomas Rowland,
92. John Boy, Humphry South, John Blaklin, Richard Crosby, Thomas Barker,
30. William Crispin, 31. Thomas Callowhill, 32. Richard Corslet, John Alsop,
Sabian Cole Charles Pickering,
33. John Williard, William Smith, Robert Greenway, William Tailor,
34. Thomas Brassey, 35. Thomas Harley, 36. Richard Thomas, 37. Benjamin
Furley, 38. John Simcock, etc. 39.
Here follow the Lots of the Purchasers under [a thousand Acres, and placed in
the back-streets of the front of Delaware, and begin with Numb. 5. at the
Southern-side, and so proceed by the Numbers, as in the Draught.

Names. Number. Thomas Powel, 5. George Simcock, 6. Bartholomew Coppock, 7.
William Yardly, 8. 9. William Frompton, 10. Francis Dove, 12. 13. 14. John
Parsons, 15. John Goodson, 16. John Moon, 17. Andrew Grescomb, 18. John Fish,
19. Isaac Martin, 20. William Carter, 21. John Southworth, 22. Richard Ingelo,
23. John Barnes, 24. Philip Lehnmann, 25. 26. Richard Noble, 27. 28. 29. John
Hiccock, 30. 31. 32. 33. N. N. 34. William Gibson, 35. Robert Lodge, 36. John
Bur^eat, 37. James Park, 38. Leonard Fell, 39. 40. John Harding, 41. John
Kinsman, 42. Israel Hobbs, 43. Edward Lamway, 44. William Wiggan, 45. Richard
Worral, 46. 47. Thomas Zachary, 48. John Chambers, 49. 50. 51. John Songhurst,
52. John Barnes, 53. Sarah Fuller, 54. 55. Thomas Vernon, 56. Randal Vernon,
57. Robert Vernon, 58. Thomas Minshell, 59. William Moor, 60. John
Stringfellow, 61. Thomas Scot, 62. 63 Henry Waddy, 64. Thomas Virgo, 65.
William Boswel, 66. Jane Batchlo, 67. Thomas Callowhill, 68. Thomas Paget, 69.
James Petre, 70. Jone Dixon, 71. Thomas Paskall, 72. 73. Priscilla Shepherd,
74. Walter Martin, 75. Sarah Hersent, 76. Elizabeth Simmons, 77. William Lane,
78. Israel Brench, 79. Edward Erbery, 80. Roger Drew, 81. John Jennet, 82. Mary
Woodworth, 83. John Russel, 84. Thomas Berry, 85. Georg Rendal, 86. Thomas
Harris, 87. William Harmor, 88. Thomas Rouse, 89. Nehemia^ Mitchel, 90. 91.
David Brent, 92. 93. Sarah Woolman, 93. John Tibby, 94. Charles Lee, 95. Id.
96. William East, 97. Thomas Cross, 98. 99. Arch. Mickell, 100. John Clark,
101. Israel Self, 102. Edward Luffe, 103. John Brothers, 104. Edward Bezer,
105. Anthony Elton, 106. John Gibson, 107. Daniel Smith, 108. Edward Brown,
109. John Fish, 110. Robert Holgate, 111. John Pusey, 112. Caleb Pusey, 113.
Samuel Noyes, 114. Thomas Sagar, 115. William Withers, 116. John Collet, 117.
William Cotes, 118. Humphry Marry, 119. Elizabeth Shorter, 120. Joseph Knight,
John Guest,
121. Robert Key, 122. William Isaac, 123. Edward Gefferies, 124. Anne Crawley,
125. Robert Somer, 126. Thomas Geri^h, 127. William Clowes, 128. William ^aily,
129. James Hill, 130. Thomas Hatt, 131. William Hitchcok, 132. William Bryant,
133. Robert Downton, 134. John Buckly, 135. William Ashby, 136. Edward Simkins,
137. Henry Paxton, 138. Edward Crew, 139. John Martin, 140. Henry Geery, 141.
John Geery, 142. Robert Jones, 143. John Kirton, 144. Thomas Sanders, 145. Amy
Child, 146. Richard Wooler, 147. Gilbert Mace, 148. Thomas Jones, 149. Thomas
Livesly, 150. John Austin, 151. Robert Hodskin, 152. William Tanner, 153.
Daniel Jones, 154. Joseph Tanner, 155. Richard Townsend, 156. John Beckly, 157.
Samuel Miles, 158. Daniel Quare, 159. David Kinsey, 160. Edward Blake, 161.
David Jones, 162. Henry Sleighton, 163. Thomas Jones, 164. John Hicks, 165.
166. Thomas Barbury, 167. John Glean, 168. Amos Nichols, 169. Richard Jordan,
170. Samuel Bamet, 711. Thomas ^obb, 172. John Barber, 173. John Re^ye, 174.
George Andrews, 175. Robert Stevens, 176. William Bezer, 177. Thomas Hayward,
178. Oliver Cope, 179. John Bu^ce, 180. ^ilbert Mace, 181. John Nield, 182.
Nathaniel Pask, 183. Bartholomew Coppock, 184. William Neak, 185. Joseph
Milner, 186. Edward Bailey, 187. Peter Leicester, 188. Henry Hemming, 189. John
Evans, 190. Randal Malin, 191. Allen Robinet, 192.


Hitherto the Lots of Delaware Front, to the Center of the City.

Here follow the Lots of Skulkill-Front, to the Center of the City.
The Purchasers from One Thousand Acres, and upwards, are placed in the Fronts
and High-streets, and begin on Skulkill Front, at the South-end, with Number 1.
and so proceed with the Front to the North-end, to Number 43.

Names. Numb. WIlliam Penn, junior, 1. W. Lowther, 2. Laurence Growdon, 3.
Philip Ford, 4. The Society, 5. Nicholas Moor, Presi. 6. John Marsh, 7. Thomas
Rudyard, Andrew Soul,
8. Herbert Springet, George White, Henry Child,
9. Charles Bathurst, William Kent, John Tovey, William Philips,
10 Robert Dimsdall, 11. William Bacon, 12. James Wallis, Philip Lehnmann,
Margret Mar^indall, Nicholas Walne,
13. Charles Marshall, 14. George Green, William Jenkins, John ^evon,
15. Edwa^d Prichard, William Pardo, William Powell,
16. Charles Lloyd, 17. John ^art, Jo^hua Ha^tins, Edward Betrice, Thomas
Minchin,
18. John ap John, William Smith, Richard Collins,
19 Richard Snead, Dugel Gamel, William Russel, John Cole,
20 Richard Gunton Bazeleon Foster, John Marsh, Richard Hanns, James H^nt,
21. John Blunston, Henry Bayley,
22. John Penington, William Penington, Edward Penington,
23. Mary Penington, 23. Vac. 24. Francis Rogers, etc. 25. Samuel Clarridge,
26. James Craven, Richard Pearce, Thomas Phelps, Samuel Taverner, Thomas
Pearce,
27. Solomon Richards' Arthur Perryn, John Napper, John Dennison, Benjamin
East,
28 John West, 29. Vac. 30. Francis Fincher, Thomas Roberts, Robert Toomer,
John Gee,
31. Jacob and Joseph Fuller, 32. George Shore, 33. Edward Stubbard, 34. John
Thomas, 35. Hugh Lamb, Sarah Fuller, Samuel Allen,
36. Edmund Bennet, William Lloyd, Richard Thetcher, John Mason,
37. Thomas Elwood, John ^ing, Henry Pawling, George Pownal, Richard Baker,
38. John Clowes, John Brock, James Delworth, Edward Wesh, Henry Killinbeck,
39. Richard Vickris, Charles Harford, William Brown, William Beaks,
40. Charles Jones, Thomas Crosdal, Walter King, John Jones,
41. Francis Smith, 42. Richard Penn, Samuel Rolls, Isaac Gellius, John Mason,
William Markham, Edmund Warner,


The High-street-Lots begin at Number 44. and so proceed on both sides of that
Street to the Center Square.

1. 2. Benjamin Fast, John West, William Philips, William Smith,
3. Thomas Minchin, John Bevan, Samuel Allen,
4. John Thomas, 5. Andrew Soul, James Delworth, John Jones, John King, John
Mason,
6. Samuel Clarridge, 7. John Gee, Jacob and Joseph Fuller,
8. William Markham, 9. John Blunston, George Wood, Edward Prichard,
10. John Brock, Robert Tanner, John Ambry, Nicholas Walne, Henry Killinbeck,
11. Samuel Rolls, 12. Solomon Richards, Arthur Peryn, John Napper, John
Dennison,
13. John, Edward, William, and Mary Penington, 14 Richard Penn, 15. Samuel
Fox, John Cole, William Russel, Henry Bayley,
16. Lewis David, Joshua Hastins, Philip Lehnmann,
17. John Mason, Thomas Elwood, James Wallis, Bazeleon Foster,
18. Charles Marshall, 19. William Lloyd, Thomas Crosdall, George Pownall,
William Beakes,
20. Charles Jones, Henry Child, George Green,
21. Charles Lloyd, 22. Edward Stubbard, 23. George Shore, 24. Richard Vickris,
Samuel Barker, John Heart, James Hunt,
25. Richard Collins, John Rowland, John Tovey, William Pardo,
26. Robert Dimsdal, 27. John ap John, Herbert Springet William Brown,
28. Francis Smith, 29. John Marsh, Charles Harford, John Clowes, Edward West,
Edmund Bennet,
30. William Kent, Edward Bettrice, Charles Bathurst, William Powell,
31. John Nort, Richard Hanns, Henry Pawling, John Shires, Richard Thatcher,
32 Hugh Lamb, George White,
33. Isaac Gellius, 34. William Bawn, 35. Thomas Rudyard, Thomas Roberts,
36. Richard Baker, William Jenkins, Richard Gunton, Edward Martindall,
37. Walter King, Dugdel Gamel, Allen Foster, Francis Finsher, Edmund Warner,
38. James Craven, Richard Pearce, Thomas Phelps, Samuel Taverner, Thomas
Pearce,
39. Richard Snead, 40. Francis Rogers, George Rogers,
41. 42. 43.


Here follow the Purchasors under a 1000 Acres, placed in the back of the front
of Skulkill, and begin on the Southern-side with Number. 1. and so proceed by the
Numbers, as in the Draught.

Shadrech Welsh, 1. John Nixon, 2. Peter Bland, 3. Henry Green, 4. Morris
Lenholme, 5. John Bevan, 6. John Clare, 7. William Mordent, 8. John Poyer, 9.
John Price, 10. Alexander Beardsly, 11. Thomas Symmons, 12. Thomas Cowbourne,
13. Thomas Dell, 14. Richard Few, 15. John Swift, 16. William Lawrence, 17.
Henry Comb, 18. Anne Oliffe, 19. Vac. 20. John Harper, 21. Robert Adams, 22.
John Hughes, 23. Sarah Ceres, 24. Richard Noble, 25. John Longworthy, 26. James
Clayton, 27. Henry Lewis, 28. Lewis David, 29. William Howell, 30. John Burgo,
31. Reece Redrah, 32. William Chardley, 33. William Bostock, 34. Joseph Hall,
35. James Lancaster, 36. Thomas Briggs, 37. Peter VVorral, 38. Samuel Buckley,
39. Cutbert Hayhurst, 40. John Burchal, 41. Thomas Morris, 42. Daniel
Midleco^, 43. John Jones, 44. Roger Beck, 45. Richard Hunt, 46. Robert
Sandilands, 47. George Keith, 48. John Snashold, 49. William Bingley, 50.
Thomas Parsons, 51. Peter Dalbo, 52. William East, 53. William Clark, 54.
George Strode, 55. John Summers, 56. Joseph Richards, 57. John Bristo, 58.
Peter Young, 59. George Powell, 60. John Sansom, 61. John Pesson^, 62.
Christopher Forford, 63. James Hill, 64. William Saloway, 65. Francis Harford,
66. John Wall, 67. William Cecill, 68. John Spencer, 69. Arthur Bewes, 70.
Thomas Bayley, 71. Joel Johnson, 72. Richard Mills, 73. Thomas Pleas, 74.
Francis Harrison, 75. John VVorral, 76. Thomas Came, 77. Joseph Jones, 78.
Robert VVardel, 79. Richard P^nder, 80. Henry Wright, 81. Henry Liechfield, 82
Francis Jobson, 83. Roger Evan, 84. John Millington, 85. Mary Southworth, 86.
Matthew Marks. 87. Joshua Holland, 88. John Elson, 89. 90. Thomas Langhorn, 91.
John Funnier, 92. Joseph Potter, 93. David Hammon, 94. Thomas VVorth, 95.
Edward Carter, 96. 97. 98. 99. Robert Heart, 100. 101. 102. Matthew Grange, 103.
Jane Lownes, 104. Ralph Kinsey, 105. Ralph Ward, 106. Philip Alford, 107.
Samuel Atkinson, 108. Edward Walter, 109. Thomas Powel, 110. Joseph Pownall,
111. Shadrech Walley, 112. Edward Cartridge, 113. John Brown, 114. James Dicks,
115. John Pearce, 116. 117. John Stephens, 118. Elizabeth Lovet, 119. John
Oldham, 120. 121. 12^ 123. 124. 125. 126. 127. 128. Bethuel Longstaff, 129.
Richard Pearce, 130. Henry Parker, 131. Dennis Lincey, 132. Philip Cordry, 133.
John Skeen, 134. Id. 135. William Thratle, 136. John Skarborrow, 137. Robert
Barrow, 138. Randal Croxton, 139. Edward Edwards, 140. Robert Frame, 141.
Philip Runnige, 142. Henry Barnard, 143. Thomas Wolf, 144. Richard Richardson,
145. Richard Amor, 146. John Edge, 147. Mark Keinton, 148. Thomas Lawson, 149.


THE END.

