The FRAME of the GOVERNMENT OF THE Province of Pennsilvania IN AMERICA:
Together with certain LAWS Agreed upon in England BY THE GOVERNOR AND Diverse
FREEMEN of the aforesaid PROVINCE.

To be further Explained and Confirmed there by the first Provincial Council
and General Assembly that shall be held, if they see meet.

Printed in the Year MDCLXXXII.

THE PREFACE.
When the Great and Wise God had made the World, of all his Creatures it
pleased him to choose Man his Deputy to Rule it: And to fit him for so great a
Charge and Trust, he did not only qualify him with Skill and Power, but with
Integrity to use them justly. This Native Goodness was equally his Honor and
his Happiness; and whilst he stood here, all went well: There was no need of
Coercive or Compulsive means; the Precept of Divine Love and Truth, in his own
Bosom was the Guide and Keeper of his Innocence. But Lust prevailing against
Duty, made a lamentable Breach upon it; and the Law, that before had no Power
over him, took place upon him and his Disobedient Posterity, that such as would
not live conformable to the holy Law within, should fall under the Reproof and
Correction of the just Law without in a Judicial Administration.

This the Apostle teaches in diverse of his Epistles: The Law (says he) was
added because of Transgression: In another place; Knowing that the Law was not
made for the Righteous Man, but for the Disobedient and Ungodly, for Sinners,
for Unholy and Profane, for Murderers, for Whoremongers, for them that Defile
themselves with Mankind, and for Men-stealers, for Liars, for Perjured Persons,
etc. But this is not all, he opens and carries the matter of Government a
little farther; Let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers; for there is no
Power but of God. The Powers that be, are ordained of God: Whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God. For Rulers are not a
Terror to good Works, but to Evil: Will thou then not be afraid of the Power,
Do that which is good, and thou shall have Praise of the same -- He is the
Minister of God to thee for good -- Wherefore, ye must needs be subject, not
only for Wrath, but for Conscience sake. This settles the Divine Right of
Government beyond Exception, and that for two ends: First, To Terrify
Evildoers: Secondly, To Cherish those that do Well; which gives Government a
Life beyond Corruption, and makes it as durable in the World, as Good Men shall
be. So that Government seems to me a part of Religion it self, a thing Sacred
in its Institution and End: for if it does not directly remove the Cause, it
crushes the Effects of Evil, and is as such (though a lower, yet) an Emanation
of the same Divine Power, that is both Author and Object of Pure Religion; the
Difference lying here, that the One is more Free and Mental, the Other, more
Corporal and Compulsive in its Operations: But that is only to Evildoers;
Government in it self being otherwise as capable of Kindness, Goodness and
Charity as a more private Society. They weakly Err, that think there is no
other use for Government, than Correction, which is the coursest part of it:
Daily experience tells us, that the Care and Regulation of many other Affairs,
more soft and daily necessary, make up much the greatest part of Government;
and which must have followed the Peopling of the World, had Adam never fell,
and will continue among Men on Earth under the highest Seize they may
arrive at, by the Coming of the blessed Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven. --
Thus much of Government in General, as to its Rise and End.

For particular Frames and Models, it will become me to say little; and
comparatively I will say nothing. My Reasons are, First, That the Age is too
nice and difficult for it, there being nothing the Wits of Men are more busy
and divided upon. It Is true, they seem to agree in the end, to wit, Happiness;
but in the means they differ, as to Divine, so to this Humane Felicity; and the
cause is much the same, not always want of Light and Knowledge, but want of
using them rightly. Men side with their Passions against their Reason; and
their sinister Interests have so strong a Bias upon their minds, that they
lean to them against the good of the things they know.

Secondly, I do not find a Model in the World, that Time, Place and some
singular Emergencies have not necessarily altered; nor is it easy to frame a
Civil Government, that shall serve all places alike.

Thirdly, I know what is said by the several Admirers of Monarchy, Aristocracy
and Democracy, whith are the Rule of One, a Few and Many, and are the Three
Common Idea's of Government, when men discourse of that Subject. But I choose to
solve the Controversy with this small Distinction, and it belongs to all
three: Any Government is Free to the People under it (whatever be the Frame)
where the Laws Rule, and the People are a Party to those Laws, and more then
this is Tyranny, Oligarchy or Confusion.

But Lastly, when all is said, there is hardly one Frame of Government in the
World so ill designed by its first Founders, that in good hands would not do
well enough; and Story tells us, The Best in Ill Ones can do nothing that is
great or good; witness the Jewish and Roman States. Governments, like Clocks,
go from the motion Men give them; and as Governments are made and moved by Men,
so by Them they are Ruined too: wherefore Governments rather depend upon Men,
then Men upon Governments. Let Men be good, and the Government cannot be bad; if
it be ill, they will cure it: but if Men be bad, let the Government be never so
good, they will endeavor to warp and spoil it to their Turn.

I know some say, Let us have good Laws, and no matter for the Men that Execute
them: But let them consider, that though good Laws do well, good Men do better;
for good Laws may want good Men, and be abolished or evaded by ill Men; but
good Men will never want good Laws nor suffer Ill Ones. It Is true, good Laws
have some Awe upon Ill Ministers, but that is where They have not Power to
escape or abolish them, and the People are generally wise and good: But a loose
and depraved People (which is to the Question) love Laws and an Administration
like themselves. That therefore which makes a good Constitution must keep it;
(viz.) Men of Wisdom and Virtue; qualities, that because they descend not with
Worldly Inheritances, must be carefully propagated by a virtuous Education of
Youth; for which After-Ages will owe more to the care and prudence of Founders
and the successive Magistracy, then to their Parents for their private
Patrimonies.

These Considerations of the Weight of Government, and the nice and various
Opinions about it, made it uneasy to Me to think of publishing the ensuing
Frame and Conditional Laws, foreseeing, both the Censures they will meet with
from Men of differing Humors and engagements, and the occasion they may give of
discourse beyond my design.

But next to the Power of Necessity, (which is a Solicitor that will take no
denial) this induced me to a Compliance, that we have (with Reverence to God
and good Conscience to Men) to the best of our Skill contrived and composed the
Frame and Laws of this Government to the great End of all Government, viz. To
support Power in Reverence with the People, And to secure the People from the
abuse of Power; that they may be Free by their just Obedience, and the
Magistrates Honorable for their just Administration: For Liberty without
Obedience is Confusion, and Obedience without Liberty is Slavery. To carry this
Evenness is partly owing to the Constitution, and partly to the Magistracy;
where either of these fail, Government will be subject to Convulsions: but
where both are wanting, it must be totally subverted: Then where both meet, the
Government is like to endure: Which I humbly pray and hope, God will please to
make the Lot of This of Pennsilvania: Amen.

William Penn.

THE FRAME OF THE Government of Pennsilvania IN AMERICA, etc.
To all People, to whom these Presents shall come:
WHEREAS King Charles the Second, by his Letters Patents, under the Great Seal
of England, for the Considerations therein mentioned, has been graciously
pleased to Give and Grant unto Me William Penn (by the Name of William Penn
Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir Willam Penn deceased) and to My Heirs and Assigns
forever, All that Tract of Land or Province, called Pennsilvania, in America,
with diverse great Powers, Preheminencies, Royalties, Jurisdictions and
Authorities necessary for the Well-being and Government thereof.

Now know Ye, That for the Well-being and Government of the said Province, and
for the Encouragement of all the Freemen and Planters that may be therein
concerned, in pursuance of the Powers aforementioned, I the said William Penn
have Declared, Granted and Confirmed, and by these Presents for Me, my Heirs
and Assigns do Declare, Grant and Confirm unto all the Freemen, Planters and
Adventurers of, in and to the said Province These Liberties, Franchises and
Properties to be held, enjoyed and kept by the Freemen, Planters and
Inhabitants of and in the said Province of Pennsilvania forever.

Imprimis, That the Government of this Province shall, according to the Powers
of the Patent, consist of the Governor and Freemen of the said Province, in
the Form of a Provincial Council and General Assembly, by whom all Laws shall
be made. Officers chosen and public Affairs Transacted, as is hereafter
respectively declared; That is to say,

II. That the Freemen of the said Province shall on the Twentieth day of the
Twelfth Month, which shall be in this present Year One Thousand Six Hundred
Eighty and Two, Meet and Assembly in some fit place, of which timely Notice
shall be beforehand given by the Governor or his Deputy, and then and there
shall choose out of themselves Seventy Two Persons of most Note for their
Wisdom, Virtue and Ability, who shall meet on the Tenth day of the First
Month next ensuing, and always be called and act as the Provincial Council
of the said Province.

III. That at the first Choice of such Provincial Council, One Third part of
the said Provincial Council shall be chosen to serve for Three Years then next
ensuing, One Third part for Two Years then next ensuing, and One Third part for
One Year then next following such Election, and no longer; and that the said
Third part shall go out accordingly. And on the Twentieth day of the Twelfth
Month, as aforesaid, yearly, forever afterward, the Freemen of the said
Province shall in like manner Meet and Assemble together, and then choose Twenty
Four Persons, being One Third of the said Number, to serve in Provincial
Council for Three Years, it being intended, that One Third of the whole
Provincial Council (always consisting and to consist of Seventy Two Persons,
as aforesaid) falling off Yearly, it shall be yearly supplied by such new
yearly Elections as aforesaid. And that no one Person shall continue therein
longer than Three Years: And in case any Member shall decease before the last
Election, during his time, that then at the next Election ensuing his Decease,
another shall be chosen to supply his place for the remaining time he was to
have served, and no longer.

IV. That after the first Seven Years, every one of the said Third parts that
goes yearly off, shall be incapable of being Chosen again for one whole Year
following: That so all may be sitted for Government, and have Experience of the
Care and Burden of it.

V. That the Provincial Council in all Cases and Matters of Moment, as their
Arguing upon Bills to be past into Laws, Erecting Courts of Justice, giving
Judgment upon Criminals Impeached, and Choice of Officers in such manner as is
herein after mentioned, Not less than Two Thirds of the whole Provincial
Council shall make a Quorum; and that the Consent and Approbation of Two Thirds
of such Quorum shall be had in all such Cases or Matters of Moment. And
moreover, that in all Cases and Matters of lesser Moment, Twenty Four Members
of the said Provincial Council shall make a Quorum, the Majority of which
twenty four shall and may always Determine in such Cases and Causes of lesser
Moment.

VI. That in this Provincial Council the Governor or his Deputy shall or may
always preside and have a Treble Voice; and the said Provincial Council shall
always continue and sit upon its own Adjournments and Committees.

VII. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall prepare and propose to
the General Assembly, hereafter mentioned, all Bills, which they shall at any
time think fit to be past into Laws within the said Province; which Bills shall
be Published and Affixed to the most noted Places in the Inhabited Parts thereof
Thirty Days before the Meeting of the General Assembly, in order to the
passing of them into Laws, or rejecting of them, as the General Assembly shall
see meet.

VIII. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall take Care, that all
Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, which shall at any time be made within the said
Province, be duly and diligently Executed.

IX. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall at all times have the Care
of the Peace and Safety of the Province; and that nothing be by any Person
attempted to the Subversion of this Frame of Government.

X. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall at all times settle and
order the Situation of all Cities, Ports and Market Towns in every County,
modelling therein all public Buildings, Streets and Marketplaces; and shall
appoint all necessary Roads and Highwayes in the Province.

XI. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall at all times have Power to
inspect the Management of the public Treasury, and punish those who shall
Convert any part thereof to any other use, than what has been agreed upon by
the Governor, Provincial Council and General Assembly.

XII. That the Governor and Provincial Council shall erect and order all
public Schools, and encourage and reward the Authors of useful Sciences and
laudable Inventions in the said Province.

XIII. That for the better Management of the Powers and Trust aforesaid, the
Provincial Council shall from time to time divide it self into Four distinct
and proper Committees, for the more easy Administration of the Affairs of the
Province, which divides the Seventy Two into four Eighteens, every one of which
Eighteens shall consist of Six out of each of the Three Orders or Yearly
Elections, each of which shall have a distinct portion of Business, as
follows. First, A Committee of Plantations, to situate and settle Cities,
Ports, Market Towns and Highways, and to hear and decide all Suits and
Controversies relating to Plantations. Secondly, A Committee of Justice and
Safety to secure the Peace of the Province, and punish the Maladministration
of those who subvert Justice to the Prejudice of the public or private
Interest. Thirdly, A Committee of Trade and Treasury, who shall regulate all
Trade and Commerce according to Law, encourage Manufacture and Country-growth,
and defray the public Charge of the Province. And Fourthly, A Committee of
Manners, Education and Arts, that all Wicked and Scandalous Living may be
prevented, and that Youth may be successively trained up in Virtue and useful
Knowledge and Arts; the Quorum of each of which Committees being Six, that is,
Two out of each of the three Orders or yearly Elections, as aforesaid, make a
constant or standing Council of twenty four, which will have the Power of the
Provincial Council, being the Quorum of it, in all Cases not excepted in the
fifth Article; and in the said Committees and standing Council of the Province,
the Governor or his Deputy shall or may Preside, as aforesaid. And in the
Absence of the Governor or his Deputy; if no one is by either of them
appointed, the said Committees or Council shall appoint a President for that
time, and not otherwise; and what shall be resolved at such Committees, shall
be reported to the said Council of the Province, and shall be by them Resolved
and Confirmed before the same shall be put in Execution: And that these
respective Committees shall not sit at one and the same time, except in cases
of necessity.

XIV. And to the end that all Laws prepared by the Governor and Provincial
Council aforesaid, may yet have the more full Concurrence of the Freemen of
the Province, It is Declared, Granted and Confirmed, that at the time and Place
or Places, for the Choice of a Provincial Council, as aforesaid, the said
Freemen shall Yearly choose Members to serve in a General Assembly, as their
Representatives, not exceeding Two Hundred Persons, who shall Yearly meet on
the Twentieth Day of the second Month, which shall be in the Year 1683.
following, in the Capital Town or City of the said Province, where during Eight
Days the several Members may freely Confer with one another; and if any of
them see meet, with a Committee of the Provincial Council (consisting of Three
out of each of the Four Committees aforesaid, being Twelve in all) which shall
be at that time purposely Appointed to receive from any of them Proposals for
the Alteration or Amendment of any of the said proposed and promulgated Bills;
and on the Ninth Day from their so meeting, the said General Assembly, after
the reading over of the proposed Bills by the Clark of the Provincial Council,
and the Occasions and Motives for them being opened by the Governor or his
Deputy, shall give their Affirmative or Negative, which to them seems best,
in such manner as hereafter is expressed: But not less than two Thirds shall make
a Quorum in the Passing of Laws and Choice of such Officers as are by them to
be Chosen.

XV. That the Laws so prepared and proposed as aforesaid, that are Assented to
by the General Assembly, shall be Enrolled, as Laws of the Province, with this
Style, By the Governor, with the Assent and Approbation of the Freemen in
Provincial Council and General Assembly.

XVI. That for the better Establishment of the Government and Laws of this
Province, and to the end there may be an Universal Satisfaction in the laying
of the Fundamentals thereof, the General Assembly shall or may for the first
Year consist of all the Freemen of and in the said Province; and ever after it
shall be yearly Chosen, as aforesaid: which Number of Two Hundred shall be
Enlarged as the Country shall Increase in People, so as it do not Exceed Five
Hundred at any time: The Appointment and Proportioning of which, as also the
Laying and Methodizing of the Choice of the Provincial Council and General
Assembly in future times most Equally to the Division of the Hundreds and
Counties, which the Country shall hereafter be divided into, shall be in the
Power of the Provincial Council to Propose, and the General Assembly to Resolve.

XVII. That the Governor and the Provincial Council shall Erect from time to
time standing Courts of Justice in such Places and Number, as they shall judge
Convenient for the good Government of the said Province. And that the
Provincial Council shall on the Thirteenth Day of the First Month Yearly Elect
and Present to the Governor or his Deputy a double Number of Persons to serve
for Judges, Treasurers, Masters of Rolls within the said Province for the Year
next ensuing. And the Freemen of the said Province in their County-Courts,
when they shall be erected, and till then, in the General Assembly shall on the
Three and Twentieth Day of the Second Month yearly Elect and Present to the
Governor or his Deputy a Double Number of Persons to serve for Sheriffs,
Justices of Peace and Coroners for the Year next ensuing; Out of which
Respective Elections and Presentiments the Governor or his Deputy shall
Nominate and Commissionate the proper Number for each Office the Third day
after the said respective Presentiments, or else the First named in such
Presentment for each Office shall stand and serve for that Office the Year
ensuing.

XVIII. But for as much as the present Condition of the Province requires some
Immediate Settlement, and admits not of so quick a Revolution of Officers, and
to the end the said Province may with all convenient Speed be well ordered and
settled, I William Penn do therefore think fit to Nominate and Appoint such
Persons for Judges, Treasurers, Masters of the Rolls, Sheriffs, Justices of the
Peace and Coroners, as are most fitly qualified for those Employments; to whom
I shall make and grant Commissions for the said Offices, respectively to hold
to them to whom the same shall be granted, for so long time as every such
Person shall Well behave himself in the Office or Place to him respectively
granted, and no longer. And upon the Decease or Displacing of any of the said
Officers, the succeeding Officer or Officers shall be chosen as aforesaid.

XIX. That the General Assembly shall continue so long as may be needful to
Impeach Criminals, fit to be there Impeached, to pass Bills into Laws, that
they shall think fit to pass into Laws, and till such time as the Governor and
Provincial Council shall declare, That they have nothing further to propose
unto them for their Assent and Approbation: And that Declaration shall be a
Dismiss to the General Assembly for that time; which General Assembly shall be
notwithstanding capable of Assembling together upon the Summons of the
Provincial Council at any time during that year, if the said Provincial Council
shall see occasion for their so Assembling.

XX. That all the Elections of Members or Representatives of the People to
serve in Provincial Council and General Assembly, and all Questions to be
determined by both or either of them that relate to Passing of Bills into Laws,
To the Choice of Officers, To Impeachments made by the General Assembly, and
Judgment of Criminals upon such Impeachments by the Provincial Council, and to
all other Cases by them respectively judged of Importance, shall be resolved
and determined by the Ballot; and unless on Sudden and Indispensible
Occasions, no Business in Provincial Council, or its respective Committees
shall be finally determined the same day that it is moved.

XXI. And that at all times, when and so often as it shall happen, that the
Governor shall or may be an Infant under the Age of One and Twenty years, and
no Guardians or Commissioners are appointed in writing by the Father of the
said Infant, or that such Guardians or Commissioners shall be deceased, that
during such Minority the Provincial Council shall from time to time, as they
shall see meet, constitute and appoint Guardians or Commissioners, not
exceeding Three, one of which three shall Preside as Deputy and Chief Guardian,
during such Minority, and shall have and execute with the Consent of the other
Two all the Power of a Governor in all the public Affairs and Concerns of the
said Province.

XXII. That as often as any day of the Month, mentioned in any Article of this
Charter, shall fall upon the First Day of the Week, commonly called the Lords
Day, the Business appointed for that day shall be deferred till the next day,
unless in case of Emergency.

XXIII. That no Act, Law or Ordinance whatsoever, shall at any time hereafter
be made or done by the Governor of this Province, his Heirs or Assigns, or by
the Freemen in the Provincial Council, or the General Assembly, to Alter,
Change or Diminish the Form or Effect of this Charter, or any Part or Clause
thereof, or contrary to the true Intent and Meaning thereof, without the
Consent of the Governor, his Heirs or Assigns, and Six Parts of Seven of the
said Freemen in Provincial Council and General Assembly.

XXIV. And Lastly, That I, the said William Penn, for My Self, my Heirs and
Assigns have Solemnly Declared, Granted and Confirmed, and do hereby Solemnly
Declare, Grant and Confirm, That neither I, My Heirs nor Assigns shall procure
or do any thing or things, whereby the Liberties in this Charter contained and
expressed, shall be infringed or broken: And if any thing be procured by any
Person or Persons contrary to these Premises, it shall be held of no Force or
Effect

In Witness whereof I the said William Penn have unto this present Charter of
Liberties set my Hand and Broad Seal this Five and Twentieth Day of the Second
Month, vulgarly called April, in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred
Eighty and Two. William Penn.

Laws agreed upon in England BY THE GOVERNOR And Diverse of the Freemen of
Pennsilvania,
To be further Explained and Confirmed there by the first Provincial Council
and General Assembly that shall be held in the said Province, if they see meet.
I. THAT the Charter of Liberties Declared, Granted and Confirmed the Five and
Twentieth day of the Second Month called April, 1682. before diverse Witnesses
by William Penn, Governor and Chief Proprietor of Pennsilvania, to all the
Freemen and Planters of the said Province, is hereby declared and approved,
and shall be forever held for a Fundamental in the Government thereof,
according to the Limitations mentioned in the said Charter.

II. That every Inhabitant in the said Province that is or shall be a Purchaser
of One Hundred Acres of Land or upwards, his Heirs and Assigns; and every
Person who shall have paid his Passage, and taken up One Hundred Acres of Land
at One Penny an Acre, and have cultivated Ten Acres thereof; and every Person
that has been a Servant or Bonds-man, and is Free by his Service, that shall
have taken up his Fifty Acres of Land, and cultivated Twenty thereof; and every
Inhabitant, Artificer or other, resident in the said Province, that pays Scot
and Lot to the Government, shall be deemed and accounted a Freeman of the said
Province; and every such Person shall and may be capable of Electing or being
elected Representatives of the People in Provincial Council or General Assembly
in the said Province.

III. That all Elections of Members or Representatives of the People and
Freemen of the Province of Pennsilvania, to serve in Provincial Council or
General Assembly, to be held within the said Province, shall be Free and
Voluntary: And that the Elector, that shall receive any Reward or Gift in Meat,
Drink, Moneys, or otherwise, shall forfeit his Right to Elect: And such Person
as shall directly or indirectly give, promise or bestow any such Reward as
aforesaid, to be Elected, shall forfeit his Election, and be thereby incapable
to serve, as aforesaid. And the Provincial Council and General Assembly shall
be the sole Judges of the Regularity or Irregularity of the Elections of their
own respective Members.

IV. That no Money or Goods shall be raised upon, or paid by any of the People
of this Province, by way of a public Tax, Custom or Contribution, but by a Law
for that purpose made: And whosoever shall Leavy, Collect or Pay any Money or
Goods contrary thereunto, shall be held a public Enemy to the Province, and a
Betrayer of the Liberty of the People thereof.

V. That all Courts shall be open, and Justice shall neither be sold, denied
nor delayed.

VI. That in Courts all Persons of all Persuasions may freely appear in their
own Way, and according to their own Manner, and there Personally Plead their
own Cause themselves, or if unable, by their Friends. And the first Process
shall be the Exhibition of the Complaint in Court Fourteen Days before tho
Trial. And that the Party complained against may be fitted for the same, he or
she shall be summoned no less than Ten Days before, and a Copy of the
Complaint delivered him or her at his or her Dwelling House. But before the
Complaint of any Person be received, he shall solemnly declare in Court, That
he believes in his Conscience, his Cause is Just.

VII. That all Pleadings, Processes and Records in Courts shall be short, and
in English, and in an ordinary and plain Character, that they may be
understood, and Justice speedily administered.

VIII. That all Trials shall be by Twelve Men, and as near as may be, Peers or
Equals, and of the Neighborhood, and men without just Exception. In cases of
Life there shall be first Twenty Four returned by the Sheriff for a Grand
Inquest, of whom Twelve at least shall find the Complaint to be true, and then
the Twelve Men or Peers, to be likewise returned by the Sheriff, shall have the
final Judgment. But reasonable Challenges shall be always admitted against the
said Twelve Men, or any of them.

IX. That all Fees in all Cases shall be Moderate, and settled by the
Provincial Council and General Assembly, and be hung up in a Table in every
respective Court: And whosoever shall be convicted of taking more, shall pay
Twofold, and be dismissed his Employment, one Moiety of which shall go to the
party wronged.

X. That all Prisons shall be Workhouses for Felons, Vagrants and Loose and
Idle Persons, whereof one shall be in every County.

XI. That all Prisoners shall be Baylable by sufficient Sureties, unless for
Capital Offenses, where the Proof is evident, or the Presumption great.

XII. That all Persons Wrongfully Imprisoned, or prosecuted at Law, shall have
Double Damages against the Informer or Prosecutor.

XIII. That all Prisons shall be Free, as to Fees, Food and Lodging.

XIV. That all Lands and Goods shall be liable to pay Debts, except where there
be Legal Issue, and then all the Goods, and One Third of the Land only.

XV. That all Wills in Writing, attested by two Witnesses, shall be of the same
Force, as to Lands, as other Conveyances, being legally proved within Forty
Days, either within or without the said Province.

XVI. That Seven Years quiet Possession shall give an Unquestionable Right,
except in Cases of Infants, Lunaticks, Married Women, or Persons beyond the Sea.

XVII. That all Briberies and Extortions whatsoever shall be severely punished.

XVIII. That all Fines shall be moderate, and saving men's Contenements,
Merchandise or Wainage.

XIX. That all Marriages (not forbidden by the Law of God, as to nearness of
Blood and Affinity by Marriage) shall be encouraged; but the Parents or
Guardians shall be first consulted, and the Marriage shall be published before
it be solemnized, and it shall be solemnized by taking one another as Husband
and Wife before Credible Witnesses: And a Certificate of the whole, under the
hands of Parties and Witnesses shall be brought to the proper Register of that
County, and shall be Registered in his Office.

XX. And to prevent Frauds and Vexatious Suits within the said Province, That
all Charters, Gifts, Grants and Conveyances of Land (except Leases for a Year,
or under) and all Bills, Bonds and Specialties above Five Pound, and not under
three Months, made in the said Province, shall be Enrolled or Registered in the
public Enrollment-Office of the said Province, within the space of two Months
next after the making thereof, else to be void in Law. And all Deeds, Grants
and Conveyances of Land (except as aforesaid) within the said Province, and
made out of the said Province, shall be Enrolled or Registered, as aforesaid,
within six Months next after the making thereof, and settling and constituting
an Enrollment-Office or Registry within the said Province, else to be void in
Law against all Persons whatsoever.

XXI. That all Defacers or Corrupters of Charters, Gifts, Grants, Bonds, Bills,
Wills, Contracts and Conveyances, or that shall deface or falsify any
Enrollment, Registry or Record within this Province, shall make Double
Satisfaction for the same; half whereof shall go to the Party wronged, and they
shall be dismissed of all Places of Trust, and be publicly disgraced, as False
Men.

XXII. That there shall be a Register for Births, Marriages, Burials, Wills and
Letters of Administration distinct from the other Registry.

XXIII. That there shall be a Registry for all Servants, where their Names,
Time, Wages, and Days of Payment shall be Registered.

XXIV. That all Lands and Goods of Fellons shall be liable to make satisfaction
to the Party wronged Twice the Value; and for want of Lands or Goods, the
Fellon shall be Bonds-man, to work in the Common-Prison or Workhouse, or
otherwise, till the Party injured be satisfied.

XXV. That the Estates of Capital Offenders, as Traitors and Murderers, shall
go one third to the next of Kin to the Sufferer, and the remainder to the next
of Kin to the Criminal.

XXVI. That all Witnesses coming or called to testify their Knowledge in or to
any Matter or Thing in any Court, or before any lawful Authority within the
said Province, shall there give or deliver in their Evidence or Testimony by
solemnly Promising To speak the Truth, the Whole Truth, and nothing but the
Truth to the Matter or Thing in question. And in case any Person so called to
Evidence, shall afterward be convicted of Wilful Falsehood, such Person shall
suffer and undergo such Damage or Penalty as the Person or Persons, against
whom he or she bore false Witness, did or should undergo, and shall also make
Satisfaction to the Party wronged, and be publicly exposed as a False Witness,
never to be credited in any Court or before any Magistrate in the said Province.

XXVII. And to the end that all Officers chosen to serve within this Province,
may with more care and diligence answer the Trust reposed in them, It is
agreed, that no such Person shall enjoy more than one public Office at one
time. --

XXVIII. That all Children within this Province of the Age of Twelve Years
shall be taught some useful Trade or Skill, to the end none may be Idle, but
the Poor may Work to live, and the Rich, if they become Poor, may not want.

XXIX. That Servants be not kept longer than their time; and such as are
Careful be both justly and kindly used in their Service, and put in fitting
Equipage at the expiration thereof, according to Custom.

XXX. That all Scandalous and Malicious Reporters, Backbiters, Defamers and
Spreaders of false News, whether against Magistrates or private Persons, shall
be accordingly severely punished, as Enemies to the Peace and Concord of this
Province.

XXXI. That for the Encouragement of the Planters and Traders in this Province,
who are incorporated into a Society, the Patent granted to them by William
Penn, Governor of the said Province, is hereby ratified and confirmed.

XXXII. --

XXXIII. That all Factors or Correspondents in the said Province wronging their
Employers, shall make Satisfaction, and one third over to their said Employers;
and in case of the Death of any such Factor or Correspondent, the Committee of
Trade shall take care to secure so much of the deceased Party's Estate as
belongs to his said respective Employers.

XXXIV. That all Treasurers, Judges, Masters of the Rolls, Sheriffs, Justices
of the Peace, and other Officers or Persons whatsoever, relating to Courts or
Trials of Causes, or any other Service in the Government, and all Members
elected to serve in Provincial Council and General Assembly; and all that have
Right to elect such Members, shall be such as profess Faith in Jesus Christ,
and that are not convicted of Ill Fame, or unsober and dishonest Conversation,
and that are of One and Twenty Years of Age at least: and that all such so
qualified, shall be capable of the said several Employments and Privileges, as
aforesaid.

XXXV. That all Persons living in this Province, who confess and acknowledge
the One Almighty and Eternal God, to be the Creator, Upholder and Ruler of the
World, and that hold themselves obliged in Conscience to live peaceably and
justly in Civil Society, shall in no ways be molested or prejudiced for their
Religious Persuasion or Practice in matters of Faith and Worship, nor shall
they be compelled at any time to frequent or maintain any Religious Worship,
Place or Ministry whatever.

XXXVI. That according to the good Example of the Primitive Christians, and for
the ease of the Creation, every First Day of the Week called the Lords Day,
People shall abstain from their common daily Labor, that they may the better
dispose themselves to Worship God according to their Understandings.

XXXVII. That as a Careless and Corrupt Administration of Justice draws the
Wrath of God upon Magistrates, so the Wildness and Looseness of the People
provoke the Indignation of God against a Country; Therefore, --

That All such Offenses against God, as Swearing, Cursing, Lying, Profane
Talking, Drunkenness, Drinking of Healths, Obscene words, Incest, Sodomy,
Rapes, Whoredom, Fornication and other uncleanness (not to be repeated:) All
Treasons, Misprisions, Murders, Duels, Fellonies, Sedition, Mayhems, Forcible
Entries and other Violencies to the Persons and Estates of the Inhabitants
within this Province: All Prizes, Stage Plays, Cards, Dice, May-games,
Gamesters, Masks, Revels, Bull-baitings, Cock-fightings, Bear-baitings and
the like, which excite the People to Rudeness, Cruelty, Looseness and
Irreligion, shall be respectively discouraged and severely punished, according
to the appointment of the Governor and Freemen in Provincial Council and
General Assembly, as also all Proceedings contrary to these Laws, that are not
here made expressly penal.

XXXVIII. That a Copy of these Laws shall be hung up in the Provincial Council
and in public Courts of Justice, and that they shall be read Yearly at the
opening of every Provincial Council and General Assembly and Court of Justice,
and their Assent shall be testified by their standing up after the reading
thereof.

XXXIX. That there shall be at no time any Alteration of any of these Laws
without the Consent of the Governor, his Heirs or Assigns, and Six parts of
Seven of the Freemen met in Provincial Council and General Assembly.

XL. That All other Matters and Things not herein provided for, which shall and
may concern the public Justice, Peace or Safety of the said Province, and the
raising and imposing Taxes, Customs, Duties, or other Charges whatsoever, shall
be and are hereby referred to the Order, Prudence and Determination of the
Governor and Freemen in Provincial Council and General Assembly, to be held
from time to time in the said Province.

Signed and Sealed by the Governor and Freemen aforesaid, this Fifth Day of
the Third Month, called May, One Thousand Six Hundred Eighty and Two.

