A DEFENSE Of a PAPER, Entitled, GOSPEL-TRVTHS Against the EXCEPTIONS OF THE
BISHOP of CORK'S Testimony.

By W. Penn.

The Second Edition.

Printed in the Year, School.

THE PREFACE.
Reader,
IT was the Wise Counsel of an Ancient and Great Prelate, of the Kingdom of
Ireland, at a late Visit I made him there, to discourage Controversy, and
endeavor to abate Strife among Christians: For, said he, Heaven is a Quiet
Place; there are no Quarrels there, and Religion is a Holy and Peaceable Thing,
and Excites to Piety and Charity, and not to Genealogies, Strife and Debates.
But the Bishop of Cork seems to be of another Mind, that could not pass by so
Inoffensive a Paper as that Styled Gospel Truths (given him by me in a Private
Way, at a Friendly Visit upon his own Desire) without his Public
Animadversions; and those Expressed not with so much Justice and Charity as might
have been expected from him to his Dissenting Neighbors.

I am, I confess, very sorry my Christian Visits to the Bishop have met with no
Better Returns than Controversy: But because that is his, and not my fault, it
shall be my Satisfaction.

I did indeed, Perceiving him Conversant in our Writings, and his Character to
be Moderation, casually Present him with one of those Papers; but as the Nature
of it is Far from Provocation, so my design in it was purely to Improve his
Temper, and not to Excite his Contradiction. Nor was it Writ for an Exact and
Complete Account of our Belief, but Occasionally, to prevent the Prejudices
that the Attempts of a Course and Scurrilous Pen at Dublin, just before, might
provoke in some against us, as to the Points touched upon in the Gospel Truths.
And though we have been so Unhappy as to be therein Mistaken by the Bishop, yet
it is some Comfort to Us that our Christian Declaration has had quite another
Reception with the Generality of those to whose Hands it has come: And I
heartily wish That has not been the most prevailing Motive to his Undertaking.
However, since he has been pleased to fault it both with Shortness and Error,
which we thought Healing, at least Inoffensive, I esteem my self Answerable for
it, and shall, with God's Assistance, Defend it against the Force of his
Exceptions, and I hope with Clearness and Temper: For, though I may be plain,
as he may expect, I desire to be neither Rude nor Bitter.

I ask, Reader, but the Common Justice due to all Authors, especially in
Controverted Points of Religion, to wit, Attention and Impartiality; and then
judge whether our Pacifick Paper deserved so Sharp a Censure, and the Manner of
its being given him, so Public a Return: Though I hope the Consequence will be
Good. To Almighty God I leave the Success, and am in all Christian Obligation,

Thy Assured Friend, W. Penn.
Bristol, the 23d of the 7th Month, School.
GOSPEL TRUTHS Held and briefly Declared by the People called QUAKERS, for
Satisfaction of Moderate Enquirers.
SOBER READER,
IF thou had rather we should be in the Right than in the Wrong, and if thou
think it but a Reasonable Thing that we should be Heard before we are
Condemned, and that our Belief ought to be taken from our own Mouths, and not
at theirs that have prejudged our Cause; then we entreat thee to Read and Weigh
the following Brief Account of those Things that are chiefly Received and
Professed among us, the People called Quakers, according to the Testimony of
the Scriptures of Truth, and the Illumination of the Holy Ghost, which are the
Double and Agreeing Record of True Religion. Published to Inform the Moderate
Enquirer, and Reclaim the Prejudiced to a better Temper, which GOD grant, to
his Glory, and their Peace.

I. It is our Belief; that GOD Is, and that He is a Rewarder of all them that
fear Him, with Eternal Rewards of Happiness; and that those that fear him not,
shall be turned into Hell. Heb. 11. 6. Rev. 22. 12. Romans 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. Psalm.
9. 17.

II. That there are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and
the Spirit, and these Three are really One. 1. John 5. 7.

III. That the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among Men, and was and is the
only Begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth: His Beloved Son in whom
he is well pleased, and whom we are to hear in all things; who tasted Death for
every Man, and Dyed for Sin, that we might Die to Sin, and by his Power and
Spirit be raised up to Newness of Life here, and to Glory hereafter. John 1.
14. Matthew. 3. 17. Heb. 2. 9.

IV. That as we are only Justified from the Guilt of Sin by Christ the
Propitiation, and not by Works of Righteousness that we have done, so there is
an absolute Necessity that we receive and obey, to unfeigned Repentance and
Amendment of Life, the holy Light and Spirit of Jesus Christ, in order to
obtain that Remission and Justification from Sin: Since no Man can be Justified
by Christ, who walks not after the Spirit but after the Flesh; for whom he
Sanctifies, them ^e also Justifies: And if we walk in the Light as he is Light,
his precious Blood ^leanseth us from all Sin; as well from the Pollution as
Guilt of Sin, Romans 3. 22. to 26. Chap. 8. 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 John 5. 7.

V. That Christ is die Great Light of the World, that lights every Man that
comes into the World, and is full of Grace and Truth, and gives to all Light
for Light, and Grace for Grace; and by his Light and Grace he Inwardly Appears
to Man, and teaches such as will be taught by him, That Denying Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, they should live Soberly Righteously, and Godly, in this present
World. John 8. 12. Chap. 1. 9, ^14. Tit. 2. 11, 12.

VI. That this Principle of Light and Grace, which is GOD's Gift, through
Christ, to Man, is that which shows us our Sins, Reproves us for them, and
would Lead all all out of them that obey it, to serve GOD, in Fear and Love,
all their Days. And they that turn not at the Reproofs thereof, and will not
Repent, and Live, and Walk according to it, shall die in their Sins, and where
Christ is gone, they shall never come, who is Undefiled, and separated from
Sinners. Ephesians. 5. 13. John 16. 7. Prove. 1. 20. to 24. John 8. 24.

VII. This is that Principle by which GOD prepares the Heart to worship him
aright; and all the Duties of Religion, as Praying, Praising and Preaching,
ought to be performed through the sanctifying Power and Assistance of It; other
Worship being but Formal, and Will Worship, with which we cannot, in
Conscience, join, nor can we maintain or uphold It. Romans 8. 26. 1 Pet. 4. 10,
11.

VIII. Worship in this Gospel-Day is Inward and Spiritual; For GOD is a Spirit,
as Christ teaches and he will Now be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, being most
suitable to his Divine Nature: wherefore we wait in our Assemblies to feel
GOD's Spirit to open and move upon our Hearts, before we dare offer Sacrifice
to the LORD, or Preach to others the way of his Kingdom, That we may Preach in
Power as well as Words, and as GOD Promised, and Christ Ordained, Without
Money, and without Price. John 4. 23, 24. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Isa. 55. 1. Rev. 22.
17. Matt. 10. 8.

IX. This also leads us to deny all the vain Customs and Fashions of the World,
to avoid Excess in all things, that our Moderation may be seen of all Men,
because the LORD is at hand, to see and judge us, according to our Deeds. Tit.
2. 12. Romans 12. ^. Philip. 4. 5. Eccl. 12. 14. Mat. 16. 27. Romans 2. 6. Rev. 20.
12.

X. We believe the Necessity of the One Baptism of Christ, as well as of his
One ^upper, which he promises to Eat with those that open the Door of their
Hearts to him, being the Baptism and Supper signified by the Outward Signs;
which though we disuse, we judge not those that conscientiously practice them.
Mat. 3. 11. Ephesians. 4. 1. 1. Pet. 3. 21, 22. John 6. Rev. 3. 20.

XI. We Honor Government: For we believe it is an Ordinance of GOD, and that
we ought in all things to submit, by Doing or Suffering: But esteem it a great
Blessing where the Administration is a Terror to Evil Doers, and a Praise to
them that Do Well. Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

This has all a long been the General Stream and Tendency both of our Ministry
and Writings, as our Books will make appear, notwithstanding what Ill-minded
and Prejudiced Persons may have strained to Mis-represent Us and our Christian
Profession.

Dublin, the 14th of the 3d Month, School. William Penn. Thomas Story. Anthony
Sharp. George Rooke.


THE TESTIMONY OF THE BISHOP OF CORK As to a Paper Entitled, GOSPEL^TRUTHS,
held, etc. by the PEOPLE called QUAKERS: And Delivered to Him by an eminent
Member of them.
Friends,
I Am such a Reader as in your Paper you desire. I have read and soberly
weighed the account you give of those things, which you say are chiefly
Received and Professed amongst you. And I will exercise so much Moderation and
Charity as to lay a great weight on that word [ chiefly] hoping these are not
the Only Things, or All that you Believe: I should have been heartily glad to
have found that you had been in the Truth, as I am well assured I my self am;
But as I professed, when the Paper was given Me, That if I took it, you must
expect I should bear my Testimony touching It or against It; So I now must tell
you, I think my self bound in Conscience to perform what I then professed; and
that upon more Reasons than I will now trouble the World with. You must not be
offended if I say, You have such a way of Writing and Speaking, that it is very
hard in many matters of Religion to know what you mean. But, as far as I
understand you, I will heartily acknowledge what Truths you have sufficiently
or tolerably expressed; I will show you, with meekness, how far your Faith, if
this be your Faith, comes short of being sufficient or Christian; and I will
sincerely tell you, what I apprehend to be the cause of your Delusion, and how
dangerous a condition I really fear, nay believe, you to be in.

And first; The only Articles, in which you have expressed a sufficient Christian
Belief, are your IV. which is touching Justification; and your last touching
Government and your Submission thereto. I wish you may always stick to this
Belief and Practice: And I heartily rejoice to find you acknowledging the
Necessity of Christ as a Propitiation, in order to Remission of Sins, and
Justifying You, as Sinners, from Guilt. It Is the first time I have heard of it
amongst you.

As to all the rest of your Articles, I mean those which I understand, I must
tell you, the declaration of your Faith comes so short, of what is required
from People to denominate them Christians, that except, under each Article you
believe more than you have declared, you cannot be accounted Christians. For
first; in those Articles of Faith, which you have thought fit to mention, you
have set down only some little Ends, I had almost called them Snaps, of the
Article: And Secondly; many more whole Articles, of the true Christian Faith,
and which are of no less import, you have entirely omitted, waved or suppressed.

You acknowledge in your I. Article, there is a God, and you own his Providence
as to the other Life. But that He made Heaven and Earth, that He is the
Almighty, and at present by his Sovereign Power, most wisely and holily,
Governs, Orders, and Sustains all (by his Mercies as well as Judgments, even in
this World, not ^^aving Himself without witness) you say not (...) word.
Creation in the beginning and Providence as to this World at present, are not
here acknowledged by You. We hope you believe both.

Your II. Article is wholly true; for it is express Scripture, 1 John V. 7. But
it is only what the Apostle there had occasion to say, and what was to his
purpose touching the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; far from being the sum of
what the Holy Scripture, teaches of them; and therefore i^ not a sufficient
Confession of Faith on that head.

In your III. Article you acknowledge indeed the Son of God to have been made
Flesh, but neither Conceived by the Holy Ghost, nor Born of the Virgin Mary: So
that it does not appear, by this your Confession, but that He was at first an
ordinary corrupt sinful Person: Nay you own Him not so much as Jesus or the
Christ; (the great Savior, who delivers from the wrath which is to come; or
the Great Prophet, Priest, Lord and King of his Church:) You acknowledged him
indeed to have dyed for Sin, but (not to mention the Articles inferible from,
and relating to, the Circumstances of his death) You have not one word of His
Resurrection from the Dead or of His Ascension into Heaven: which i^ may be
proved some of you have expressly denied, saying, He is not ascended into
Heaven, He is in us. Nor again, of H^ sitting now at the right hand of the
Majesty o^ high. And so you seem not to own any thing of His Mediation,
Intercession, or Appearing now in Heaven for us. Nor further have you said a
word of his coming again to Judgment, or the End of the World. Thus indeed You
have here neither owned the Creation nor Dissolution of the World; so that it
does not appear, by this Account of your Faith, whether you do not judge it
Eternal, and so otherwise Infinite. Yet again; Not a word of One Church, which
it may be feared you strike out of your Belief, because you are resolved never
more to return into the Unity of the Church, but to make and maintain a Schism
or Party for ever. Nor further have you a word of the Resurrection of the Body,
which diverse of you have been known to deny, and others of you only say. It may
be so. And Lastly, Though you acknowledge Everlasting Rewards for them that fear
GOD, yet nothing of the Everlasting Punishment of Wicked Men: You mention Hell
indeed (in a very unnatural place, viz. in your first Article of ^he Being of
GOD) but whether you mean thereby the Grave, as most commonly in ^cripture is
meant; or a place of Temporal Punishment after this Life, as some have ^one; or
a State of total Destruction and Annihilation, as many now a days do, no one
knows.

Upon the whole; As to the Sum of the Christian Faith, which you have been
pleased to set down, there is not any one Article of our common Twelve, that
you have owned entirely; and Eight at least, if not more of them, that you have
here totally suppressed or waved. And how influential to a holy Life, those
which you have waved are, and therefore how necessary to Salvation, I must
require and conjure you, on your own Eternal Account, to consider. I will only
mind you of two passages out of the Scriptures of Truth: 1 Cor XV. 16, 17. If
the Dead rise not (that is, if there be no Resurrection of the Flesh) then is
not Christ Raised. And if Christ is not raised, your Faith is vain, you are yet
in your Sins, Hence it appears All other points of Faith are in vain, if this
be not true. The other is Romans X. 9. If thou shall confess with thy Mouth the
Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thy Heart that GOD has raised Him from the
Dead, thou shall be saved. This Article alone is of such force and influence on
Mens^Hearts, that if believed as it should be, such belief will save Men. But
both Christ's Resurrection and Our own, are by You in this Paper, left out of
your Faith. I judge You not, but judge Your selves, lest you be condemned of
the LORD.

Your V, VI, and VII. Articles treat of what you call The Light of Christ
within Man: This You have never been able yet, that I could find, to make out
what You mean by. For You will not allow it to be either the Natural Rational
Faculty, or common innate Notions, or Natural Conscience, or Conscience
Illuminated, by the Preaching of the Gospel and the Operation of the Holy Ghost
thereby: Till You can make us understand your meaning, or indeed till You
understand it Your Selves, (that is, till you are less confused in this, the
very Fundamental Principle or Rule of what you profess) You must not think of
Declaring (or Publishing) an Account of your Faith: See you understand it
first. There are some Men who have a Faculty to speak things seemingly
profound, but in the End neither themselves nor others can make any distinct
sense of what they have said. This we usually call Banter; And I must
acknowledge, as far as I can see, your Discourse of his Light within, is
perfectly such. Take notice We in our Preaching require People to look within,
as much as You do: We strictly charge all to walk according to the Convictions,
and Light they have received. We daily appeal unto Conscience; but then we
teach, that Conscience (opened by the Holy Spirit, under the Ministry of the
Word, Acts XVI. 14.) does and must take in its Light from Holy Scripture. The
Commandment of the Lord is pure inlightning the Eyes, Ps. XIX. 8. [viz. of the
Mind, Ephesians. I. 18.] Thy Word is a Lamp to my Feet, and a Light to my Path. Ps.
CXIX, 105. To the Law and to the Testimony; If they [even Men in their
Consciences] speak not according to this Word, it is because there is NO LIGHT
in them. Isai. VIII. 20. Now these things are intelligible. This Rule is fixed
and certain, nothing of which can be said of Your Light within.

In Your VIII Article You tell us, Worship under the Gospel is Inward and
Spiritual. If You mean hereby, that all Outward and Bodily Worship ought to be
accompanied with an Inward and Spiritual Worship, it is what we daily Preach
and Practice, and even in private press. But if, as it would seem, You mean all
the Worship GOD now requires, is from the Inward Man, or from the Spirit, this
is abominably false: For Our Bodies are GOD's handiwork* and Christ's
Purchase, as well as Our Souls; on which reason, GOD by His Apostle commands,
Glorify ^OD in Your Body and in Your Spirit, [(...)] which (in the Plural
Number that is, both which) are GOD's. Not to tell You, that You your selve now
a days perform somewhat of Bodily Worship. And indeed, if there be not a
worship of the Body, as well as of the Spirit, there can be no Public Worship.
This Article therefore must also be mended, to make it Christian.

In your IX Article, You tell us of you^ Denying all the vain Customs and
Fashions of the World, as also Excess in all things. I know no sort of
Christians who teach otherwise; I wish I could say I knew none (even of your
selves) that practice otherwise. It is one part of the Catechism We teach our
Children, to renounce all these. But there are many Innocent and laudable
Customs which You call vain. Would it not almost make a Man's Stomach turn to
hear one forbear, in point of Conscience, ^^ying [ You] to a single Person,
because it (...) improper; and at the same time, while ^e is speaking to his
Superior, because Thou do; sounds a little rudely, to soften the Thou, and
say Thee do, which is commonly Your Peoples Practice, and much more
improper. Will You ever be able to prove, the Primitive Christians ^sed a
Dialect or Dress different from others of their Nation and Qualities, and
placed Religion in it? Does not Christ require Saluting even those who salute
not us? And no doubt his, and his Apostles Salutations, were in the common
form. In a word, There is more Vanity in Singularity and Affectation, than in
moderate following a common innocent Phrase, Garb, or Custom.

In your X Article you believe (you say) a Spiritual Baptism, and a Spiritual
Supper and Communion; but acknowledge you Disuse the Outward Signs, by us
commonly called Sacraments: Now did not Christ command Water Baptism? Go ye and
Baptize all Nations, Matthew. XXVIII. 19, 20. The Baptism here commanded was
Water Baptism: For Baptising with the Spirit was GOD's work, not the Apostles;
and tho the Baptism of the Spirit commonly accompanied Baptism with Water, yet
not always, as in the Case of Simon Magus, and many others. Yet, did not Christ
promise to be with them (Preaching to all Nations and Baptising) to the End of
the World Further, Did not the Apostles in Obedienc^ to Christ's Command, both
constantly practice, and also require, Water Baptism to all Initiated
Christians? Can any Man forbi^ Water, that these should not be Baptized which
have received the Holy Ghost as well as we* And he [Peter] commanded they
should b^ Baptized: Acts X. 47, 48. Then as to the Outward use of Bread and
Wine for the Lord's Supper, can any Command be more Express than This do in
Remembrance of Me* Four times repeated in the New (which you call the better)
Testament. To which St. Paul adds, It is a showing forth the Lord Death until
He come, 1 Cor. XI. 26. Now if Christ and his Apostles have commanded this, who
has Authorized you to disuse it? Remember what St. Paul tells the Corinthians,
he received from the Lord that which on this Subject he delivered to them, 1
Cor. XI. 23. And it is a severe Passage in another Epistle of his, Gal. I. 8. If
we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which
we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. That which lays aside so much
of the Old Gospel, and sets up a New and Variable Rule o^ Faith, (we know not
what Light within) is Another and New Gospel.

To draw toward a Conclusion: I have written this short Paper in much and true
Compassion to you; It had been far easier to me to have said more, than thus to
have confined my self: I look upon many of you as an harmless well-meaning
People, but under strong Delusions.

This your Deluded State proceeds from your making what you call The Light
within you (which is in many Cases nothing but your own Presumptive Persuasion
or Fancy) a Rule of Faith and Practice, Coordinate, if not Superior and
Antecedent to the Holy Scriptures: These words in your Paper [ Which are the
Double and Agreeing Record of True Religion] intimate at least thus much, That
you will not believe what Scripture says, except the Light within you dictate
the same, and so make a Double Record. Now my Friends, do not flatter your
selves, GOD is not mocked; you must Answer at the Dreadful Day of Judgment,
amongst other Points, to such as these; and therefore Examine your Consciences
beforehand.

1. Is it not your main End and Study, by pretended Mortifications, and
Renouncing the World, (while there are no sort of Men* alive that more eagerly
pursue it, nor have more effectual, wily, and secret ways o^ getting Wealth
than your selves) Is it no; I say, your main Aim and End to make your selves a
Party considerable, and such, t^ which, for Reasons of State, peculiar
Privileges must be Indulged?

2. Are not, to this purpose, many of your Distinctive Characters, such as you
Different Garb (for it is plain not a few o^ your Peoples ^loaths, as to
materials, are more costly than many of ours) your way of speaking, yea, even
your Looks and Gestures, assumed rather to make your selves remarkable, and at
first sight known from other People, than out of any Persuasion, Sense of Duty,
or Conscience of Obligation.

3. What reasonable or tolerable Warrant can you plead for waving, suppressing,
at least, not confessing, much the greater part of the Christian Faith, and
Rejecting all Outward Positive Parts of Worship (especially Baptism and the
Lords Supper) which have such plain and Repeated Evidences in Holy Scripture.
Your Light within, (or Sense and Persuasion which you say you have, and are
sure is from Christ) forasmuch as, in the present Cases, it dictateth against
Holy Scripture can never be proved even to your selves, much less to others, to
be from Christ: But must rather in all reason, be resolved to be one of the
Heights or Depths of Satan, transforming himself into an Angel of Light. And
for any Persons to yield to such Conduct (besides or against Holy Scripture) is
plainly to abandon themselves to the Delusions of the Devil.

In a word therefore, I again require you, as you will answer all your Secret
Arts and high Pretensions at Christ's Tribunal, that you either Embrace and
Profess the entire Christian Faith, in the Points wherein I have shown you to
be defective; and that you receive the Christian Seals or Badges, Baptism and
the Lord's Supper; or else that you desist to lay claim to the Name of
Christians.

It is not for me to Judge you, but again I say unto you, (truly from GOD, as
His Minister) Judge your selves. This is the Case. If Men who take away even
from the Faith once delivered to the Saints, at least Two Thirds, besides many
main Points of the other Third; who Equal their own Presumptuous Conceits to
the Divine Oracles, and Revelations; who use and disuse at pleasure, what parts
of GOD's Instituted Worship they think fit, even the very Badges of
Christianity, (I will not here Interpose your Making Gain your Godliness) but
if the aforesaid Men are in a Way of Perdition, what can you conclude of your
selves? In the Name of GOD Repent and Return: And from my Soul I pray, That GOD
will please to give you Repentance.

EDW. CORK and ROSS.
Cork, July the 2d. School.
A DEFENSE OF a PAPER, Entitled, GOSPEL TRUTHS, etc.
I Have given the Bishop's Exceptions together at Large, as he did our Paper,
and shall now Consider their Validity.

He is pleased to say at the beginning of his first Paragraph, he is such a
Reader as in our Paper ^we desire: Words that gave me great hopes, of not only
fair, but friendly dealing; and I heartily wish it had been so: But since it
seems to me the Reverse of his Promise, he must not take it ill from me, if I
stop a while, and show him a little to himself, and how much he is mistaken in
his own Temper, as well as in our Principles. For though he begins with the Names
of Moderation, Charity and Meekness, that is all: He quickly Loses sight of
them, and forgets them, with himself, almost all the way. And unless my Taste
be Extremely Depraved, there is little Relish of those Virtues in his
Management, or a tolerable Temper shown toward us, respecting either our
Belief, or Practice. We desire such a Reader indeed as had rather we were in
the Right, than in the Wrong; One that did not Prejudge our Case, and would
give us (and not our Enemies) the wording of our own Belief; While the Bishop
but too plainly shows, he would not have us in the Right, Even where he dares
not say (however freely he suggests it) that we are in the Wrong. Which appears,

First, by his Unnecessary Exceptions to such Truths, as we have Declared in
our Paper (and he cannot deny) as imperfectly Expressed, because we have not said
all that might be said, to Branch them out, or Illustrate them; though enough to
be understood by such as are not Captious.

Secondly, by Suppositions Incongruous, and that can have no other Service than
to Expose us, and that in a very ill Manner.

Thirdly, by rendering us to Deny, what we don't Express in our Paper: Though
indeed we Believe it.

Fourthly, in not taking due notice of what is Implied, as well as Expressed.
Which had been but Just.

Fifthly, in making the worst of what is not concurrent with his Belief, and
not the best where we believe the same thing.

Sixthly, by Grossly Misrendering our Pretenses to Strict Living.

Lastly, by Condemning us upon Rumor. All which, is more than leaning to that
side, that had rather we were in the Wrong, than in the Right; and Consequently
not such a Reader as we desired. That this is so, let it but be observed, how
he Unchristians us in his third Paragraph; though Immediately in a Contradiction,
what he just before Acknowledges in his second. Nor will he allow us to be so
much as Deists in his fourth, or at most but very Imperfect ones, because, we
have not said all of God, that may be ascribed to him. In his sixth, he
supposes us Capable of believing that Christ Came of Corrupt and Sinful Flesh,
because we say no more in that Place, of the Manner of his Incarnation than the
Evangelist does, John 1. 14. Also, that we are Defective, at best, Ambiguous,
about Eternal Rewards and Punishments. He makes us, in his seventh Paragraph,
to Deny the Resurrection of the Dead, at large, and without Distinction, though
we there Acknowledge a Future State, which implies it; and have not said one
word against it; but upon all Occasions, in Print, or otherwise, have Expressed
our Belief of that Branch of Christian Doctrine, according to Scripture. In his
Tenth, he derides our Plain (though Proper) Language, of Thou to a single
Person, though it is what he himself gives to God in his Prayers. In his
Fourteenth, and Fifteenth, he is pleased to slight and render our Stricter
Living, a Trick to promote a Party, and that our Garb, Looks and Gestures, are
more to make ourselves Remarkable, than out of any Persuasion of Duty, or
Conscience: As bad a Construction, as he could make. In his Sixteenth, he tells
us, the Light within us, that we say, we have from Christ, is rather one of the
Highths or Depths of Satan Transformed, and that we are Abandoned to his
Delusions. So that We and most of our Principles too, are stark Naught with the
Bishop. In his Eighteenth, and last Paragraph, he suggests, We take away two
Thirds of the Christian Faith, besides many Points of the other Third; and
equal our Presumptuous Conceits, to the Divine Oracles, and Revelations, and
use, and dis-use at pleasure, what part of God's Instituted Worship, we think
fit; Even the very Badges of Christianity. I will not, says the Bishop,
interpose (yet suggests it) your making Gain your Godliness; but if the
Aforesaid Men, are in a way to Perdition, what can you Conclude of your selves?
In the Name of God Repent and Return: Thus the Bishop, upon a whole People,
without any other Provocation, than has been Expressed.

I hope, after this, He will not Expect, (I am sure he ought not) that any Body
should think him such a Reader, as we desired for our Gospel Truths, and which
he promised us to be; or that he has treated us with the Moderation, Charity,
and Meekness, he made us hope for; since none of our Adversaries have used us
much worse, in so little a Compass. I heartily wish him a better sight of
himself, as well as of us, that he may be less mistaken in both another time;
for I have a Respect for him, and desire not to be upon these Terms with him,
any Longer, than he thinks fit to make it necessary.

The rest of his first Paragraph is only a Strain of Fair and Pastoral
Promises, forgotten by him, and not to be remembered any more, at this time, by
me; and therefore shall proceed to his Second. Only observe this one thing to
my Reader, and the Bishop too, that he is pleased to place Moderation and
Charity to our Account, because he does not take us by out wor^ Chiefly to mean
Only, or All in reference to the things, by us believed: Which, under favor,
he could not do in Justice;. an^^ therefore he needs not bring us in Debt^^ for
that, which is our Due, since no Bod^ ever took Chiefly, for Only, any more
tha^ an Eldest, for an Only Son, or an Arch, for an Only Bishop. Nor does
Chiefly imply Al^^ any more than Only; for whether It regards things Humane, or
Divine, It imports the Best Part of any thing, but n^^ All: The most valuable,
that which deserve^ and commands our Regard and Estee^^ in the first place. And
I leave it with m^^ Reader, whether Believing in God, an^^ Christ, and the Holy
Spirit; and Believing the Scriptures, and the Necessity of Holiness, and Divine
Worship, and finally of Eternal Rewards and Punishments, are no^^ Points of
Faith, Chiefly to be Received, and Professed by Christians? And if they are
such, the Bishop must have been, Super-finely Critical, upon our word Chiefly,
as well as that he might have been a better Husband of his Moderation, and
Charity, and have kept them for an Occasion where they might have been more
needed, and Consequently better bestowed.

His Second Paragraph allows us to have ^iciently Expressed our Christian Belief
in ^o Articles, but with this Censure, that (...)leven, we are only Clear in
these Two, (...) Justification by Christ, And Submission to (...) Civil
Government, wishing we may always (...)to this Belief, and Practice; and adds,
I ^^tily Rejoice to find you acknowledge the ^^essity of Christ, as a
Propitiation, in order to the Remission of Sins, and Justifying you, as
Sinners, from Guilt. It Is the first time I have heard of it among you.

If so: It is the Bishops Fault, and seems to me, next to Impossible; since
before that Paper was given him, he was pleased to Acknowledge he had read
several of our Books; particularly, my Rise and Progress of the People called
Quakers, taking it out of his Pocket at that time; also Robert Barclay's
Apology, which States, and Vindicates our Principles at large, in which the two
Doctrines aforementioned, are very Clearly Declared, and Maintained;
notwithstanding he seems to make this look like a New Discovery. But however, I
am pleased, that the Bishop is so, at two of the Gospel Truths: I am of Opinion
if he had well considered the Force and Comprehensiveness of our Belief
concerning Christ, that pleases him so well, he might have saved himself the
Trouble of what he h^^ published to the World upon the rest (...) them: For,
whoever believes in Christ, (...) a Propitiation, in order to Remission of Si^^
and Justification of Sinners from the Guilt (...) Sin, can hardly disbelieve
any Fundament^^ Article of the Christian Religion; since, (...) very such
Person, must Necessarily belie^^ in God, because it is with Him alone M^^ is to
be Justified. To be sure he must b^lieve in Christ, for that is the very
Pro^^sition. He must also believe in the H^^ Ghost, because, He is the Author,
of (...) Conviction, Repentance, and Belief. He mu^^ believe Heaven, and Hell,
Rewards, a^^ Punishment, and Consequently the Resurr^^tion of the Just, and
Unjust: For, wh^^ should he be Concerned about being free^^ from the Guilt of
his Sin, if he were una^countable in another World? So that Acknowledging the
Necessity of Christ, as Propitiation, in order to the Remission ((...) Sin,
comprehends the main Doctrine ((...) Christian Religion; and as so many Line^
drawn from the Circumference to the Center, they all meet and center in Christ:
An^ indeed it is as the Navel of Christianity, an^ Characteristick of that
Religion.

(...) would entreat Him again, to reflect well (...) his own Acknowledgment,
and Com^endation of our Belief, concerning the End (...) Benefit of Christ, to
Mankind; and he (...) not think us so deficient; much less, un^^ such strong
and dangerous Delusions, as he (...) been pleased to represent us.

His Third Paragraph will not suffer us (...) be Christians, notwithstanding
what (...) have said of our Belief in Christ, in our Paper called
Gospel Truths. In one sense I shall easily agree with him, for I think nothing
makes any Man a True Christian, but Regeneration, the Power of the Son of God
Revealed in the Soul, Converting (...) to God: For the Devils Believe, and
Tremble, too, and yet are Devils still; they Believe what is True, but they do
not Truly Believe in him that is True: They know and assent to the Propositions
of Truth, or Articles of Faith, and knew Him to be Christ too, when He came of
old, and called him by His Name, but this did not make True Christians Then of
them: Nor yet does an Assent Now to all the Truths of the Gospel, Truly
Qualify Men Christians, unless they feel the Power of them, upon their Hearts.
And I would have my Reader reflect well upon rhis Great and Essential Truth,
though he were as Big as a Bishop: For a new Creature is the B^siness; an
Orthodox Life, the Cross of Christ which is the Narrow way of Self-denial (...)
I must say, That whoever declares, he believes in Christ as his Sacrifice and
Sanctif^^^ which is to save both from the Guilt (...) Pollution of Sin, is a
Professor of Christian^^^ and may reasonably be allowed to be^^ Christian at
large. And that what we ha^^ declared, in our Third, Fourth, Fifth, a^^ Sixth
Gospel Truth, comprehends the Be^^ beforementioned, my Just and Sober R^^der
may satisfy himself in the peru^^ thereof

His Fourth Paragraph faults our first Article, as he is pleased to call it,
with gre^^ Shortness and Imperfection concerning our Belief of God; for though he
says we own his Pr^vidence as to the other Life, yet we say n^thing, as to the
Creation of this present Work* and Providence over it: But with the Bishop
leave, He that believes in God, believes (...) all that is necessary to the
Supreme Being It Is what he, and all Christians, take for granted, and allow, as
often as they hea^ any one say, He believes in God. For no^ to believe Him
Omnipotent, Omnissie^t, and Omnipresent, is not to believe him to be^^ God,
being inseparable from the Divine^ Nature. I must appeal to the Bishop, whe^^er
a small Grain of Charity would not have excused us from his Reflection upon
this Head. We have said more then Moses ^^d to Pharaoh: For besides that, I am,
is ^o more then, He is; We have added that He is, the Rewarder of all Men,
according to their Works. We gave the Text, as it is, and the very Text seems
expressed for a Decla^^tion of Faith in God, viz. He, that will come to God, must
believe that He is, and that He is a Rewarder, of them that seek Him. ^he Text
does not Enumerate and require ^he belief of all the Divine Attributes, and
Properties that are in God, but the bare ^elief of his Being, and what He is to
Mankind that fear him. And whatever the Bishop says, this is enough for a Man
to come to God, though not enough, it seems, to come ^^o the Bishop in the
Quality of a Believer: He must help the Holy Ghost to speak Properly, or we,
that speak after him, must be deficient in our Expressions, if not our Belief.
But when any one affirms, that Man was created by God, is he Short, Fallacious,
or Equivocal because he does not say how God made Man, or what he made him?
^^is not his Body, Soul, and Spirit, his Will, Understanding, Memory, and
Affections comprised, and meant, under that word Man? Besides, could the Bishop
think that while we owned God's greater Providence, his lesser could be
disbelieved by us? He that has the alone Power of Rewarding Men, in the other
World, according to their Works in this, must certainly be the Sovereign of
Both; and his Providence, in Justice, is to be so understood. And as it is most
certain that we believe of God, all that the Holy Scriptures declare of him,
and whatsoever is proper to that Great and Glorious Being so, had we not
thought it unnecessary to be more particular, from the Common Notion all Men
have of the Deity, the Bishop could have had no room left for the Exercise of
his Charity.

In his fifth Paragraph he Blames us of being Defective in our Confession of
the Holy Trinity: Though we give it in the very Terms of the Holy Ghost, 1 John
15. 7. If this is not a sufficient Text to prove the Trinity, that Antiquity
Urges, and also Modern Writers of the Church of England to prove it, I know not
where to find one, in the Scripture.

It is Generally believed the Apostle John gave this Declaration to the first
Christians, to prevent their being deluded by Cerinthius. How come the Bishop
then to render it but (...) by passage, and otherwise intended by the Apostle,
than for an Article of Faith about the Trinity? Is there a plainer, or a fuller
any where in the Writings of the New Testament? Three and yet One, is the
Doctrine of the Trinity: And no other Apostle has gone so far, or been so
Express: Insomuch that the Text has been doubted, and rendered Apocryphal by
such as do not believe the Common Doctrine of the Trinity; and Foisted in to
serve the turn of Trinitarians: So plain it has been thought to their purpose,
even by the Anti-Trinitarians. How then is the Text defective with the Bishop?
But he says the Apostle writ it upon occasion: Doubtless he did so. But what
other Occasion, I pray, than that of the Holy Trinity? He adds, and it was to
the Apostles purpose, touching the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: But what
purpose could the Apostle have, but that of Declaring the Trinity, and yet
Unity? What other Use does be make of it? The Bishop must be very hard put to
it, certainly, to shift off, and lessen our Confession in this Point, and
Rather then fail, render the Text it self short; which, with submission, I
think is a bold Attempt in one of his Station, if he Believes the Thirty Nine
Articles.

The next and sixth Paragraph, relating to our third Gospel Truth, is large,
and consists of diverse Branches, and therefore I shall Consider them distinctly
and apart. In the third Article, You acknowledge indeed the Son of God to have
been made Flesh, but neither Conceived by the Holy Ghost, nor Born of the
Virgin Mary: So that it does not appear, by this your Confession, but that he
was at first an^ Ordinary, Corrupt and Sinful Person. I think it is hardly to
be supposed that we could intend so Gross a thing, or that it is inferrible
from the Manner of Expressing of ourselves, in Reference to Christ's
Manifestation in the Flesh. Where Enough is said, to Comprehend the Rest, all
is Meant, though all be not Expressed: We call him the Beloved Son of God, the
only Begotten of the Father: Pray what is that short of being Conceived by the
Holy Ghost? To be sure, it is very far from a Corrupt and Sinful Person, a
Supposition as remote from what we said, as from what the Bishop promised, viz.
Charity. He that Confesses the Word was made Flesh, Confesses Him made Flesh by
God, and therefore made Holy Flesh: For God never made any Corrupt or Sinful
Flesh. If the place is read, as some do, viz. the Word took Flesh, the Flesh
must be Holy, for he would not take, or dwell in Sinful Flesh.

And had the Bishop well remembered what he Acknowledged, upon our Believing
Christ to be a Propitiation for Sin, not many lines before, he could never have
Suggested so unreasonable, as well as uncharitable a conceit, since Sinful
Flesh, or a Corrupt Person could never be any part of a Sacrifice for Sin: So
that in Commending that part of our Belief, he has sufficiently secured us
against this part of his Insinuation. But the Bishop proceeds to Aggravate our
Shortness in Expression to a Severe Imputation, viz. that we own him not so
much as Jesus or the Christ.

This must be a great oversight of the Bishop, not to say worse, when the very
Fourth Head about Justification by Christ, of which he declares himself so well
satisfied, Thrice confesses him to be Christ, viz. in the First, Third and
Fourth Lines. Again, we call him Christ in the First Line of the Fifth Gospel
Truth; likewise in the First and Fourth Lines of the Sixth we call him Christ:
We do the same in the First and Fifth Lines of the Eighth, and in the First
Line of our Tenth Gospel Truth: How the Bishop came to miss in so Palpable a
Point of Fact, in the Compass of one half side of a Sheet of Paper, I cannot
Imagine, and am unwilling to Censure. Nor would I willingly think the Bishop so
Trifling, as Well as Disingenious, as to Excuse himself herein, because we do
not call the Word that took Flesh by the Name of Christ in that place, since
the Bishop Repeats it from us, out of our aforesaid Fourth Head, about
Justification by Christ, where we call him by the Name of Christ, as may be
seen in the Second and foregoing Paragraph of his Reflections. Besides, we have
not Confessed his Name less than Nine times in that Paper. But if the Bishop
could yet insist upon the word Christ not being in our Third Head, I say the
Thing is there, though the Word be not. For what is Christ but the Word made
Flesh, and who is the Word made Flesh but Jesus Christ? Again, who is the
Beloved Son of God but Christ, and who else but Christ is the Beloved Son of
God, and Only Begotten of the Father, full of Grace and full of Truth: For
these High and Distinguishing Characters are to be found in That very Head of
Doctrine, where the Bishop will not have us to acknowledge him to be Christ. So
that unless a Corrupt and Sinful Person can be full of Grace and Truth, I
wonder how the Bishop came to suppose a thing in our Name, so very Gross. But
he proceeds in the same Paragraph. You acknowledge indeed he died for Sin, but
you have not one Word of his Resurrection from the Dead, or of his Ascension
into Heaven, which it may he proved some of you have expressly denied, saying,
he is not ascended into Heaven, he is in us: With more to this Effect. I should
be sorry to tax the Bishop here of Absurdity and Uncharitableness; but who can
help it? For if Christ be not Risen, He is still in his Grave; He is no more.
How then do we assert him to be a Propitiation, and the Light and Life of his
People? See Gospel Truth 3, 4, 5, and 6. Can that which is Dead Sanctify and
Justify Believers? Can the Dead give us Grace and the Holy Spirit? Or have we
not said so of Christ, that he is the Giver thereof? And if we have said so,
must not the Bishop be Extremely beside the business? His Uncharitabliness is
as obvious, I will not say his Untruth; but I must pray him to Reflect a little
better upon what he has writ; for unless he would make us to mean the Grave,
when we say that Wicked Men shall never come where Christ is gone, Gospel Truth
6, he must allow that we acknowledge Christ to be in Heaven, and Consequently
Ascended. What shall I say to his Story of some of our Friends, whom he makes
to affirm that Christ is not ascended into Heaven, he is in us? Can it touch
us, or should he have said it, and not have proved it? Is that fair and candid?
Is it Charitable, Supposing it were true, which does not appear? Or is it Just
to Insinuate it upon the People as Dubious? But let it be never so true, it
cannot Conclude the People, if not the Act of the People, The Church of England
has Doctors of very different Sentements; would the Bishop think it fair the
Common Belief of the Church should thereby be concluded? It is true, and a
great and Comfortable Truth, that Christ is in us, according to 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Gal. 2. 16. Col. 1. 26. 27. but not Confined to Man: He is not so there, as
that he is no where else, and least of all that he is not in Heaven. For the
Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 4. 10. that He Ascended far above all Heavens, that he
might fill all things; then he is in Man certainly. So that our asserting that
Doctrine of the Indwelling of Christ in Man, does not make void his being
elsewhere because he is every where: Though in Heaven most Gloriously, without
doubt, being there Glorified with the Glory that he had with the Father before
^he World began. And they that Thus believe in Christ cannot deny his being at
God's Right Hand, which signifies, according to Scripture, Philip. 2, 9, 10,
11. the Highest Exaltation: Nor yet to be their Mediator, for that is
inseparable from his being their Propitiation. So that tho we did not dwell
upon Points, but were Concise in our Expressions, yet whatever is Implied or is
Implicable from any Assertion, Justice, as well as Charity always grants; and
so wound the Bishop have done, had they been Uppermost in his Mind when his Pen
ran so fast against us. I must own it was not writ for Critics, but for such
Readers as the Bishop says he was, or should have been, to wit, who Exercise
Moderation, and Charity; more of which, I hope he thinks as well as I, will do
him no harm.

But it disturbs the Bishops that we have said nothing of Christ's coming to
Judgment, nor of the end of the World, whether it be Dissolvable or Eternal.
For the first, it is implied in our making all Men Accountable to God, for
their Deeds done in the World. For the Other, it was not under our
Consideration, being not objected to us. But they that say as much of Christian
Doctrine as we have done in those Eleven Heads of our Paper, did never yet,
that I have heard, believe the Eternity of this World, Heb. 1. 10, 11, 12.

Yet again says the Bishop, Not a word of one Church, which it may be feared you
strike out of your Belief, because you are resolved never more to return into
the Unity of the Church, but to make and maintain a Schism or Party for ever.

These are very harsh Constructions, besides that they beg the Question, and in
my Opinion would have past better from a Person whose Office was less concerned
in Charity than That of a Bishop: But why, pray, must Interest and Obstinacy
Rule our Dissent? What Is to be got by it? Profit and Preferment go the Bishops
way, I will not say he goes Theirs. But why not Conscience, though it were
mistaken, since we have been all along of the Loosing side? which is not
usually espoused by the Men of Interest; nor are Men ordinarily Obstinate
against their Interest. Let us at least be Honest Men and allowed to mean well
though we were mistaken. But what Church, of the many Churches in Europe is the
Bishops One Church, to which he would have us return? He has not told us.
Methinks (...) that censures our Shortness so much, should not have been
deficient himself in so material a Point. So that if we are out of the way, we
must be so still for all the Bishop; since we are yet to seek what Church ^e
Err from, or should repair to. But I ^ill suppose he means his Own, by which he
excludes the Lutheran and Calvinist; the Presbyterian, Independent and Baptist,
as well as the People called Quakers, from being of his One Church; to say
nothing of the Roman Catholic or Greek Churches. But unle^ss the One Church,
as he phrases it; by which I understand him to Intend the true One, may be of
two minds, it will be difficult for him to recommend his own above the rest,
because that is not only broken in Sentiments, but Practice too, and which the
Bishop knows is no longer a Secret. I might mention the Differences warmly
managed between the Doctors of it, about Grace and Free Will; one taking the
Calvinist, the other the Arminian way; as they also do about the Doctrine of
Satisfaction and Justification. Likewise the late Controversy between two
Famous Men of the Church, about the Trinity, who are followed in their
differing Sentiments by great Numbers of the Learned of the Bishops One Church:
And for that Reason (if no other) I cannot be so well satisfied of his exact
Correspondence with all the Articles of that Church himself. And I hope I am
not beside the business, when I say it would very well have become the Bishop
to have told us what it is he would have us believe, when he found so much
fault with what that Paper says we do believe. It would be too long, and
perhaps he might think (...) besides the business, at least the brevity the
Case requires, to give him the reasons o^ our Separation and Dissent or
Disagreemen^. with the Church. I put these Words together, because some were
never Members of it, and so they could not properly be said to separate from
it, but true it is, we may all b^ said to Dissent or Disagree; and I would
think the Bishop should not be much to seek for the Reasons of it. And yet
where we are vulgarly apprehended to differ most, we dissent least, I mean in
Doctrine, which is the reason so many have upon occasion said, as indeed did
the Bishop at the Visit I made him: viz. Why we believe the same, it is what we
Preach as well as you. For except it be the wording of some of the Articles of
Faith in School Terms, there are very few of them ^^ofest by the Church of
England, to which ^^e do not heartily Assent. And this I have ^^prest for my
self, and in behalf of my ^^iends in my Key, and Primitive Christianity
revived. But of this and the more material Reasons of our distance from the
church, I may have occasion to express my (...) at the Closure of this
Vindication.

But the Bishop proceeds in his Sixth Paragraph: Nor have yon a word of the
Resurrection of the Body, which diverse of you have ^^en known to deny, and
others of you only say (...) may be so. I shall consider this Immediat^ly upon
the next Paragraph, where he ^eats upon the same Subject, and apply my (...) to
his conclusion of this: Lastly, Though (...) acknowledge everlasting Rewards for
them that fear God, yet nothing of the everlasting ^unishment of wicked Men. I
think we do, and that the Bishop aggravates his disinge^uity to us upon this
Head: For the Words of the Paper are these, It is our Belief that ^od is, and
that he is a Rewarder of all them that fear him, with Eternal Rewards of
Happiness; and that those that fear him not, shall be turned into Hell. The
Scriptures are, Heb. ^1. 6. Rev. 22. 12. Romans 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. Psalm ^^. 17. Now
though Eternal is not joined to Hell, yet Justice as well as Candor would have
understood it so, and to mean the Hel^ of the damned, the Punishment of Evil
Doer^ after this Life, according to, the Ancient Common Belief. But the Bishop
that seldom fails to make the Worst of every thin^ for us, Thus comments upon
our Word^* You mention Hell indeed, but whether y^ mean thereby the Grave, as
most commonly in Scripture is meant, or a Place of Temporal Punishment after
this Life, as some have done or a State of total Destruction and Annihilation
as many now adays do, no One knows. B^^ with the Bishops leave, what if we mea^
None of These, may we not be in the righ^ for all that? For what if none of
these an^^ the Ancient, Common and Scripture Belie^ what will the Bishop do
then? Since On^ would think that one of them is the Bishop^ Hell, because he
gives Us and his Reade^ no more Room for our meaning, or any other Belief of a
Hell. And either one of these is an Article of his Belief, or else he keeps the
true Hell to himself, and was not so just as to include that in the Question
with the rest, lest he should be thereby guilty of supposing us capable of
meaning the True One is our Gospel Truths, viz. The Worm that never dies, the
Fire that never goes out, where is weeping and gnashing of Teeth for ever: ^^e
2 Thessalonians 1. 9. Jude 6, 7. And which, I think, is none of the Three the
Bishop mentions. However, he abundantly ^^^ws his Inclination to represent us
rather ^^rong than Right, in our Belief: For if the ^^riptures by us cited are
consulted, they ^ainly show we never meant the Grave, and ^^at they Equally
Referr to the Future, State (...) the Souls of Men; viz. That all shall re^^ive
the Recompense of their Works, and the ^ewards of their Deeds, according to the
nature and Quality of them. And if the Re^ards of the Righteous are Eternal,
then so ^^ust those of the Wicked be, or both must (...) Temporary: For the
Holy Ghost makes (...) Difference as to the Duration of the one ^^ore than of
the other. One Grain of a Truly Christian Temper, had saved the Bishop, and he
me, the Trouble of this as ^ell as of other Reflections.

I am now come to his Seventh Paragraph, ^he first part of which is a heavy
Complaint of our Shortness and Deficiency in Expressing of our Belief. We, it
seems, are too General in some Points, and Wave Others; he is pleased to say
Eight of Twelve, but Instances only in that of the Resurrection; though he
conjures us at the same time, upon our Eternal Account, to consider what he
say* Now if being General and keeping to the terms of Scripture be a Fault, we
are lik^ to be more vile with the Bishop: For thank be to God, That, only is
our Creed, and wi^^ good reason too, since it is fit That shou^^ only conclude
and be the Creed of Christians, which the Holy Ghost could only Propose and
Require us to believe. For (...) the Comment is made the Creed instead the
Text, From that time we believe not God but in Man. I heartily wish none (...)
been wise above what is written, and the Generals had Concluded Christians: The
Charity had been better Maintained, an^ Piety Promoted: Whereas Strains or
R^fines upon the Text, have thrown us into those Labarinths of Controversy,
that the Zeal which should have been Employed t^ suppress Sin in all its
Branches, has too G^nerally been used to Fire one Party upon Another, till
Practice, which is Religion indeed, was blown up by the Generallity. S^ much
for our Shortness or Wavering, as the Bishop calls it.

I shall now attend his only necessary Poin^ of Eight, that he thought fit to
mention which, he says we either suppress or wave viz. The Resurrection of the
Dead: I confess I did not think that any Body would have been so uncharitable
to us, after our Acknowledging the Future State of the Just and Unjust, since
that implies it, and every Medium to it. However I will attend what ^he Bishop
urges for Proof of what we don't ^eny, but always must the Slander of doing so.
I will (says he) only mind you of two Passages out of the Scriptures of Truth,
1 Cor. 15. 16, 17. If the Deadrise not, your Faith is vain, you are yet in your
Sins. Hence it appears (says the Bishop) all other Points of Faith are in vain,
if this be not true. And so say I, as well as the Bishop, and shall always say
as he says, while he says no more than the Text says: For who can think that
allows himself to think, that we should not believe an Immortality, who have
exposed our selves, and suffered so much that we may obtain an happy One. But
the Question is not whether Dead Rise, but with What Bodies: For if the Dead
rise not, then may we say with the Apostle, Verse 19. in the same Chapter, We
are of all Men most miserable. So that the Resurrection of the Dead is out of
all Dispute with us: But with What Body, will I believe, be One, till the Dead
Rise.

Here it is we are Cautious, and tread Softly; Remembering what the Apostle says
to the Curious and Inquisitive upon this Head, Ver. 35, 36, 37, 38. But some
Man will say, How are the Dead Raised up, And with what Bodies do they come?
Thou Fool, thou sowest not that Body which shall be but bare Grain. -- But God
gives it a Body as it had Pleased him, and to every Seed his own Body. Here is
the Ground of our Caution, which the Bishop is pleased to call Suppressing, and
others denying of the Resurrection. We have indeed been Negative to the Gros^
Conceits of People concerning the Rising of this Carnal Body, we carry about us
which better agrees with the Alcoran of Mahomet, than the Gospel of Christ. But
that there is a Resurrection of the Just and Unjust to Rewards and Punishments,
we have ever believed. And indeed we cannot but wonder that any should be
displeased with us for being Pleased with that which God i^ pleased to give us.
Bodies we shall have, but not the same says the Apostle, and so Believes the
Quaker; but God gives every one a Body as pleases him, and that Pleases us,
whoever it displeases: For we had rather be called Fools Ten times by the
Bishop, than Once by the Apostle, which we think we think we should deserve, if
we should ^are to stretch the Text, or presume to de^ine the Secret.

The other Scripture urged by the Bishop, ^n defense of what we never opposed,
is Romans 10. 9. If thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe
in thine Heart, that God has raised him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. He
adds, Those who believe this as they should do, shall be saved. But that we
have left out both Christ's Resurrection, and our Own in our Faith. In the
first part of his Note, I agree with him, that ^^ll who Rightly believe the
Text, will be saved: For that must be by the Illumination and Working of the
Saving Power of Christ in the Heart, that he can so believe. But that we have
left out Christ's Resurrection and our Own, is a mistake already observed,
because they are both plainly Implied; one in our Belief of Christ's being a
Propitiation for Sin, and the Light, Life and Strength of his People, and in
giving us his Grace and Holy Spirit, which that which is Dead cannot do: And
our own Resurrection is sufficiently secured in our declared Belief of Rewards
and Punishments; though the Mode of it be not Expressed: Nor was there any reason
for saying more upon that Head with respect to the Occasion of our Papers being
Published.

I am now come to the Bishop's Eighth Paragraph, which Comprehends his
Exceptions to Three of our Gospel Truths, viz. the 5th, 6th, and 7th, which
wholly relate to the Doctrine of the Light of Christ within Man. And I am truly
sorry to find the Bishop at so great a loss, as that Paragrap^ shows him, about
so Excellent and Evident Principle, and which so very much concern him, and
indeed All Men to know. And that my Reader may lnform himself thoroughly in this
Matter, I must desire him to look back and read those Three Gospel Truths and
compare them with the Bishop's Eighth Paragraph, and he will make himself much
a better Judge of the Vallidity of the Bishop's Answer and my Reply, and which
(...) us two keeps closest to the Doctrine and Language of the holy Scriptures,
that h^^ in the same Paragraph seems so much to Respect.

His first Exception in this Paragraph i^ at our Incapacity: For he says we
have never been able yet, that he could find, to make out what we mean by the
Light of Christ within. Perhaps the Bishop has never sought, or has sought
amiss; which as great and learned Men as himself have done before ^ow, and so
mist what they have sought ^or: And then it cannot be a wonder, that he has not
found out what we mean by the Light of Christ in Man. But that a Bishop should
represent this an unintelligible doctrine, after reading so distinct and plain
an account of it in R. B's Apology, not to mention diverse other Books; and
which is of ^reater Authority, the Scriptures of Truth, ^s no ordinary Surprise
to me. Has the Bishop forgot the first of John, and the 4th, ^th, and 16th,
Verses, where speaking of ^he Word-God, he says in him was Life, and the Life
was the Light of Men.

This is that Light of Christ the Quakers Assert, and desire to turn the Minds
of all People too. For all must have it, if it be the Light of all, as the Text
plainly tells us it is. The Ninth Verse is yet more express, viz. That was the
True Light which lights Every Man that comes into the World; then which,
nothing can be more Express to our purpose. And that the Bishop should feel no
share in this Glorious Light of Men, renders him very unfit, methinks, for an
Over^seer of them.

I know some read this Text otherwise, a^ indeed he did to me in Cork, viz.
That wa^ the true Light, That Coming into the World lights all Men; referring
the word Coming to Christ, and not to Man. But all the Versions I ever met
with, and I have see^ more than twenty, render the verse as it^ in our English
Translations: And all C^^ticks and Commentators, except the followers of
Socinus, Read and Render it as ^word do. And while we have so much Company and
so great Authority, I think we nee^ not be solliscitous about the success of
thi^ point. But besides that the foregoing veri^^ tells us, that the Divine
Life of the Word God, is the Light of Men, which shows all Mankind have it in
them (for it is the Light of their Minds, and not of their Bodies) it is
impossible that Interpretation should be true in a strict Sense: For the Coming
of Christ in that Blessed manifestation was to the Jews only: He says it
himself, he was not sent but to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel, Matthew.
13. 24. Again, he came unto his own, and his own received him not John 1. 11.
And within that narrow ^ompass he could not be said to be the Light of all
Mankind that had, did and should come into the World, for so both the ^th and
9th Verse plainly import, viz. The Light of Mankind, without restriction to
This or That Manifestation of God to Men.

But the Bishop is still at a loss what to ^ake of this Light, and what we
would be ^t; for, says he, You will not allow it to be ^ither the natural
Rational Faculty, or common ^nnate Notions, or natural Conscience, or
Conscience Illuminated, by the preaching of the Gospel, and the Operation of
the Holy Ghost ^hereby. We say, we would have it to be what the Scriptures say
it to be, viz. The Light of Christ, the Son of God, who called himself, John 8.
12. the Light of the World; and if so, then Every Man's Light; the Light of
every Mind and Understanding, and consequently the Light of Christ within, too
hard it seems for the Bishop to comprehend, and yet so very easy, to the
meanest Capacity that observes the Discoveries and Convictions of it in their
own Hearts.

But since it is, as he rightly terms it, a Fundamental with us, we will follow
the Bishop, in his Inquiries a little further. We say first then, It is not the
Natural Rational Faculty of Man; for then It would be Man, or a part of his
Composition, merely as Man: But that It is not, but a Manifestation in the Soul
of Man, of Christ, the Word-God, the Light of the World, the Second Adam, the
Lord from Heaven, the Quickening Spirit; who was full of Grace and Truth, and of
whom Man has received, Grace for Grace: To wit, a Tallent, a Proportion suited
to his Want and Capacity, to Convince and Convert him, to Renew and Restore him
from his great Lapse unto God, his blessed Maker, again. In short, our Natural
Rationa^ Faculty is our Sight, but not our Light^ That, by which we descern and
judge wha^ the Divine Light shows us, viz. Good from Evil, and Error from
Truth. But as the Ey^ of the Body is the Sensible Faculty of seeing External
Objects, through the Discovery that an External Light (as the Sun in the
Firmament) makes to the Eye, but is not That Light it self; so does the
Rational Faculty of the Soul see Spiritual or Immaterial Objects, through the
Illumination of the Light of Christ within, but is by no means That Light it
self, any more than the Eye is the Sun, or John the Baptist was our blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that was but Servant and Forerunner of his
blessed Manifestation in the Flesh.

As for the Bishop's Innate Notions, and Natural Conscience, if by them he
means Impressions, or Principles which are born And come with us into the World,
viz. the Law of God in the Heart of Man; I must tell him, first, that this is
not the Language of the Law and Testimony he referrs us to in the same
Paragraph: And next, that as the Work is not the Workman, so They are not
properly the Light of Christ, but the blessed Fruit and Effect of the Light of
Christ, the Word-God in Man, which shines in the Heart, and gives him the
Knowledge of God, and of his Duty to Him. So that the Innate Notions, or Inward
Knowledge we have of God, is from This true Light that lights every Man,
coming into the World, but is not that Light it self. Just so the Bishop's
Natural Conscience, must only mean a Capacity that Man has by Nature; that is,
in his Creation, of making Judgment of himself, his Duty, and Actions,
according to the Judgment of God manifested to him by the Light of Christ
within. Not that such a Capacity is That Light; but that It sees or understands
by the Inshining of the Divine Light, the things that belong to Man's Duty and
Peace.

Nor is it Conscience, Illuminated, by the preaching of the Gospel, and the
Operation of the Holy Ghost thereon, which is the last of the Bishop's
Constructions; but That very Principle of Life and Light, which Illuminates the
Conscience, and was the very Spring and Force of the Apostolical Ministry, and
of the Conviction and Conversion of their Hearers, and which Opened their
Hearts to receive the Gospel when preached unto them. In short, this Excellent
Principle is in Man, but not of Man, but of God. The Nature of it is to
Discover Sin, Reprove for It, and Lead out of It, all such as Love and Obey the
Convictions thereof. It is a Principle of Divine Life that Quickens the
Obedient Heart to Newness of Life: It Raises, the Mind above the World to God,
and searches out and reveals the Deep things of God to the humble and waiting
Soul. And be it known to the Bishop, and all that with him profess Ignorance
about what we mean by the Light of Christ within Man, This is It, I have been
treating of; and I have writ, I bless Almighty God, My own Experience, the
Taste and Relish I have had of Its Excellency and Sufficiency in the Course of
far the greater and best part of my Life.

But the Bishop must excuse me if I say, I cannot but take it very Ill at his
hands, to ^orbid us in his following Words, to pretend ^o give an Account of
what we Believe, unless ^e can make him understand our meaning: And, because he
does not penetrate our Sense, to ^all our way of Wording that blessed Prin^iple
of the Light of Christ in Man, a Per^ect Banter. This to me is one of the
seve^est Persecutions, because Spiritual things, ^re only to be Spiritually
discerned and un^erstood. I would fain know how a Rege^erate Man can possibly
make a Carnal Man understand the New Birth? It is cer^ainly the Gift of God to
understand Divine Truths, as well as Rightly to Believe. So that supposing our
Assertion of the Nature, Power, and Excellency of the Light of Christ in Man to
be true, not to have leave to say so, unless we could make every Man rightly
take our Sense and Meaning, whether he be Spiritually Discerning, or not, looks
Antichristian as well as Unreasonable. We speak Wisdom, says the Apostle, among
them that are perfect, 1 Cor. 7. 6. It seems others understand him not, must He
therefore not have wrote of the things of God? The very Preaching of the Gospel
was Foolishness to the Wiselings of Jews and Greeks; they could make neither
Head nor Tail of It, by Their way of Judging of Truth: Must not the Gospel
therefore be preached? When the Apostle Paul preached to the Athenians, some of
the Men of the Gown, the Philosophers of that Time, Opposed and Despised him,
saying, What will this Babbler say? But had they known what he meant, we cannot
think they would have said so to Him. Wa^ the Aposlte then, or the Athenians in
faul^ that they did not understand Him? Or was it Bantering as well as
Babbling, because he did not make them understand his meaning; which is only
the Work of the Holy Ghost to do? Who was it, I pray, tha^ said The World by
Wisdom knew not God? And can we suppose any thing else blinded the Scribes and
Pharisees and the High Priest of the Jews, from discerning the Messiah when He
came? For they wanted not Academical Learning, if that could have enlightened
them; nor yet the Scriptures, but they Resisted the Holy Ghost their only True
Interpreter, and so stumbled and fell. Let the Bishop also have a Care.

In the Second Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, he will find
that the A^ostle spoke the Wisdom of God in a, My^tery, which the Prinees of
this World knew ^ot, with all their Wisdom: For the things ^f God, fays the
Apostle, knows no Man, but the Spirit of God; by which those Christians, knew
those things that were freely given to them of God. Which thing also we speak,
says He, not in the Words which Man's Wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost
teachetb, comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual. But the Natural Man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him: Neither can he know them, because they are Spiritually discerned. Now,
according to the Bishops treatment of us, the Apostle ought not to have writ of
Faith and Salvation, unless he could have made all that read his Writings
understand his Meaning. And it must be a perfect Banter, to talk of speaking
Wisdom in a Mystery, and not in the Terms that Man's Wisdom teaches.

But the Lord Jesus Christ was of another Mind, when he said, I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things (the
Truths of the Kingdom) from the Wise and Prudent, and Revealed them unto Babes;
Even so Father, for so it seemed Good in thy sight. It is hence beyond all
Dispute that God hides the Mysteries of His Kingdom from the Wisdom of Man,
when Simplicity and Sincerity fail not to Reach and Understand them. Here it
was that poor Nicodemus was absolutely at a loss for Christ's meaning, when
Christ said, Unless a Man be born again, he can in no wise enter the Kingdom of
God, John 3. Insomuch as he asked Christ, upon his Discourse of the New Birth,
How can these things be? At which Christ seems to admire, in a sort of Reproof
upon Nicodemus, Art thou a Master of Israel, and know not these things? As
much as to say, Art thou, a Man of thy Station in the Church of God, Ignorant
of the Way to Heaven? Whoever reads that notable Interview between Christ and
Nicodemus, will find that Christ resolves the Matter into Two Births, That
which is Born of the Flesh, and That which is Born of the Spirit, and these are
Contrary: And therefore no wonder if they differ in their Understanding of the
Holy Scriptures, being a Declaration of the Faith and Experience, as well as
Doctrine and Practice of the Servants of God that were Enlightened and Born of
the Holy Ghost. Nor is this all; for they that are Born of the Flesh, Persecute
them that are Born after the Spirit: So that when they can no longer commit
Violence upon their Persons and Estates, they will Persecute them with their
Tongues and Pens: They are Heretics, Blasphemers, Illiterate and Ignorant, yet
Presumptuous; Enemies to Caesar, and Disobedient to Government, if they will
not give God's due unto Man, viz. Conscience. And if they choose to deliver
themselves in Scripture Style, and speak earnestly of the Necessity of the Work
of the Spirit of God, in order to an Experimental and Saving Knowledge of the
Truth, declared in Holy Scripture; and that Christ's Ministers are made by the
Holy Ghost, and not by Humane Learning; and that the Worship which is
acceptable to God, must be in the Spirit and in the Truth; that is, with Clean
Hearts and Right Spirits, Kindled and Inflamed with the Holy Spirit of God;
They must be called Enthusiasts, Unintelligible, Men of Cant and Banter. And
here I leave the Bishop, upon this Paragraph, desiring him to Consider, whether
his Knowledge of God the Father, and Jesus Christ, whom rightly to know is Life
Eternal, John 17, be by the Revelation of the Son of God in his own Soul, since
Christ himself Teaches and Affirms, that no Man knows the Father but the
Son, and He to whom, the Son Reveals Him: I should be glad to see the Bishop's
Evidence for this Knowledge. For in the Conclusion of this Paragraph; he turns
us to the Scriptures, who in the beginning of it, makes us Unintelligible and
Banterers in Religion, for Expressing Ours in the Terms of It; which may well
merit the Bishop's Serious Reflection.

His Ninth Paragraph refers to our Eighth Article, as he calls it of which he
cites these Eight Words only. Worship under the Gospel is Inward and Spiritual;
upon which, he says, If you mean, that Outward Worship ought to be accompanied
with Inward and Spiritual Worship, it is what we Preach, Press and Practice; but
if (as it would seem) you mean that all the Worship, God now requires, is from
the Inward Man, or from the Spirit, this is abominably false; for our Bodies
are God's Handiwork, and God by the Apostle commands, Glorify God in your
Body, and in your Spirit, which are God's. Not to tell you, that you your
selves, now adays, perform somewhat of Bodily Worship, Indeed we do, and Ever
did, and Ever shall, I hope, while we have Bodies to Worship God in. We are so
^ar from denying the Body what share is ^ue to it, that with the Apostle, 1
Cor. 6. ^9. we say, What, know ye not that your Bo^ies is the Temple of the
Holy Ghost, which is ^n you, which ye have of God, and you are not ^our own? Of
which I would have the Bi^hop well Consider: For, if our very Bodies are under
the Influence of the Holy Ghost, how much more reasonable is it to believe,
that It dwells in our Souls, and that our Hearts must be Prepared, and Animated
by the Holy Spirit, in all our Devo^ion toward God. But two things I must
Remark to the Bishop, First, That we did not give him the least Occasion to
suspect we denied Bodily Worship, as appears by the Gospel Truth now in
question: For it is plain there, by these words, Worship in this Day is Inward
and Spiritual, That we only distinguished between Gospel Worship, and the
Ceremonial, and Pompous Worship of the Law; and that by Spiritual Woship, we
understand Praying, Praising, and Preaching by the Preparation and
Sanctification of the Spirit of God; which the Bishop does not, and, I hope,
dares not. Deny: Yet Unkindly, and I think Unjustly brings in His, as it would
seem, to make us by an Uncharitable Innuendo look to his Reader, as if we
denied Bodily Worship. And yet, to avoid so hard a Chapter, as Maintaining this
Aspersion would prove to the Bishop, he is forced to confess that now adays we
perform somewhat of Bodily Worship; as if we did not perform any formerly, and
but a little now: Which shows not that Candor, that his Character ows us, and
but too plainly tells every Impartial Reader, how muck more mind he has that we
should be in the Wrong than in the Right. I must Confess we have le^ Pomp and
Gaudiness in our Worship, as wel^ as in our Clothes, than is the Custom o^ some
other Churches, and think it our Happiness that we are freed from such an
Unprofitable as well as Unsuitable Incumberance. Whatever It be, it is such as
we believe God by his Holy Spirit has led us into: And though it be not so
Entertaining to those who are Governed more by their outward Senses than their
Souls, yet, I hope it will be allowed us to be Grave, Solemn and Fervent.

The other Remark I make upon the Bishop's Exceptions is this, That the
Spiritual Worship he there allows of, seems to be but the Worship of Man's
Spirit, and not of the Spirit of God, working upon the Spirit of Man. I would
not Imitate him, lest I should be Uncharitable too: For if my ^eader can make
more of it, he has my ^onsent; but that seems to me to be the ^ishop's
Interpretation upon Christ's words ^ted by us on this Occasion, viz. God will
(...) worshipped in Spirit and in Truth: Though ^ere is a Truth in that also, yet
this nor ^eing so peculiar to the Gospel Dispensa^on, could not be the Extent
of Christ's ^ords, whose Drift certainly was, to draw Men's Minds to a more
Inward and Spiri^ual Worship: Not only to have less Cere^ony than was Practiced
among the Jews, ^ut to feel more of the Power and Spirit of God in our
Adoration and Praises, than be^ong'd to the Former Dispensation; and, with
which, I heartily wish the Bishop a ^etter Acquaintance. Upon the whole Mat^er,
I am apt to think my Reader believes with me, he might as well have spared his
Pains upon us, about the first Part of this Gospel Truth, as he is Silent of
the latter, viz. That we may Preach in Power, as well as Words, and as God
Promised, and Christ Ordained, without Money / and without Price.

The Bishop, in his Tenth Paragraph, is pleased to Endeavor to lessen the
Authority and Credit of our Ninth Gospel Truth relating to the vain Fashions
and Customs o^ the World. His words are these. You te^ us of denying all the
vain Customs and Fashion of the World, as also Excess in all things; (...) know
no sort of Christians who teach otherwise^ I wish I knew none (even of your
selves) tha^ practiced otherwise; it is one part of our C^techism we teach our
Children. He first Concurs with our Doctrine, for he says, (...) knows none
that Preaches otherwise; and the they do the like in their Catechism. S^ far
then he allows us to be sound. But h^ wishes he knew none (even of Us) that
Practice otherwise. This is a sort of Charge, and being not Proved, looks like
a Calumny^ Some perhaps do not walk quite so strictly as becomes them to their
Profession; but are they owned by us therein? Or Indulged it self? If not, what
are we to Conclude^ but that the Bishop's Insinuation is to Balance Accounts
with us for the failures of his own People? But, pray, are our Excesses equal,
or the Numbers, that in Proportion do transgress? I would not have him Comfort
himself with his Uncharitableness to his honest and friendly Neighbors: As it
will not Excuse his less exact Friends, that any of ours live larger, than they
profess. so it cannot justly affect our Body, ^here so few are faulty, when
it is so well ^nown that such are sure to meet with due ^eproof.

But he adds, that There are many Innocent and Laudable Customs, We call vain:
This (...) all in a Heap, and a Reflection by Whole^ale, I can truly tell him,
I know of none: and if he had been more particular, so would too: Perhaps he
thought Generals bes^ (...) make his Reflection Safe: But if it were ^y place
to be Plaintiff, I could treat the ^ishop with a large Catalogue of very
Of^ensive Customs, that would concern him ^o think upon. However, he is pleased
to ^e particular upon us in one of them, which ^lmost turns his Stomach, he
says, to think of, viz. Would it not make a Man's Stomach ^urn, to hear one
forbear, in point of Conscience, saying [you] to a single Person, because ^t is
Improper; and at the same time, while ^e is speaking to his Superior, because
Thou ^ost sounds a little rudely, to soften the Thou, and say Thee do, which
is commonly your Peoples practice. It is pity the Bishop could find nothing
else to observe from us, that might have better edified us and his Readers: Yet
if this be that, among the Laudable Customs which we call Vain, which is most
Offensive to his Stomach, it shows him to have a very weak one. However, a weak
Stomach is better then a weak Head and such an one I should take mine to be if
my Instances were no more to the Purpose and my Readers Instruction.

But I have somewhat to say to the Bishop, before I leave him, upon the Old
Topic of Sincerity, and Charity, in this Reflection, as I have had in most of
the other viz. That he makes the Ground of our Conscientiousness, about the
saying of You to (...) single Person, to be only Propriety of Speech which he
(I was going to say) in his Conscience must know is not so: But that the true
Reason of it is, first, That It is the Language of the Scriptures of Truth; and
next, that the Original of You to a single Person, was Pride and Flattery,
being a Plural Honor to a Single Person; given first to Potentates, and then
gradually to all Subordinate Ranks of People. In Ancient and Unmixt Tongues,
Thou to a Single Person is kept still, as also among the Common People of the
present Languages and particularly in that Kingdom where he is a Bishop. I
refer him to a Book entitled, No Cross, No Crown, where he will find other
Reasons ^or our Tenderness in that Matter then he ^lledges, or we have Room for
here; though ^he Bishop confines us to Propriety as the ^nly Reason of our
Practice, that he might ^e better Lash us with the Impropriety of Thee for
Thou; which yet he might have ^pared, since nothing is more common with ^ll
People, than to take the like freedom in ^peech, in Cases as well as Tenses;
not ^xcepting the Learned themselves. But be ^t so, we keep Numbers, and intend
not ^lipping of Cases, and that is Our Point, though ^ot the Bishop's, it seems;
which it should ^ave been, would he have been just to us upon the Question. As
for the Levity and Scorn, with which he is pleased to treat us upon this Head,
I shall only say, it unbecame him, and Confirms us more than it Exposes us,
whatever it does Him.

But I Confess, I am surprised, to find a Man of his Character, and
Pretensions, propose so loose a Question as that with which he closes this
Paragraph: viz. Will you ever be able to prove, the Primitive Christians used a
Dialect or Dress, different from other of their Nation or Quality, and placed
Religion in it? Does not Christ require Saluting, those that Salute not us? And
no doubt, Ho^ and His Apostles Salutations were in the Common Form. Doubtless,
we are able, most easily and fully: And it is admirable to conceive how he could
be Ignorant of these Proofs, who ought to be so well read in Scripture and
Antiquity. I beseech you therefore Brethern, says the Apostle, by the Mercies
of God, that you present your Bodies a Living Sacrifice, Holy, Acceptable unto
God which is your Reasonable Service: And (...) not Conformed to this World/
but be (...) Transformed by the Renewing of your Minds, Romans 12. 1, 2. Again,
the Apostle Peter, Chap. 1. 13, 14. Exhorts the Believers, to Gird up the loins
of their Minds, and be Sober, as Obedient Children, not Fashioning themselves,
according to the former Lusts in their Ignorance; which was the Custom of their
Country. And Chap. 3. 3, 4. Whose Adorning let it not be that of Plaiting the
Hair and of Wearing of Gold / or of Putting on of Apparel: But let it be the
Hidden Man of the Heart / in that which is not Corruptible, even the Ornament
of a Meek and Quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God, of great Price. Thus
the Apostolical Counsel to the Churches. But for all this, the Bishop of Cork
cannot tell how to think We are ^ble to prove, that the Primitive Christians
^iffered in their Dress, from other People of their Country and Quality. Nor
was this ^nly the Strictness of that Time; for the ^ame Apostle adds, Verse 4.
as an Argument (...) Enforce his Advice; for After this man^er, says he, in the
Old time, the Holy Wo^en also, who trusted in God, Adorned them^lves. But can a
Man of his Letters, realy ^e at a Loss for a Proof of the Singularity of
Primitive Christians, in Dress, Speech and Behavior? Or is it to try if we
have any ^o resolve his Question? or taking our Il^iterature for Granted, that
he puts upon ^^s? I beseech him to Converse with Ouze^ius upon Minutius Faelix,
and he will tell him that the first Christians were taxed, and despised for
Ill-bred, in Manners, Unpolished in Speech, Unfashionable in Behavior; in
^fine, Rustichs and Clowns: As the Christians Irronically returned their
Scorners the ^stile of Well-bred and Eloquent. This, and much more he cites out
of Arnobius, Lactantius, Theodoret, etc. And Jerome writing to Celantia and
Dometias, Noble Women of that time, sets them a Singular Form of Life from that
of the People of their Quality: And Paulinus Bishop of Nola, was so far from
pleading for Christians Temporizing with the People of their own Nation, or
Quality, according to the Bishop of Cork, that he sharply reproves Sulpitius
Severus for It, in a letter to him; as the learned Casaubon in his Discourse of
Use and Customs, observes. If the Bishop would look into the Constitutions,
that go under the Name of Clemens Romanus, with Tertullian, Gregory Naz.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Austin, Gregory the Great, and other Ancients, he would
perceive the Care and Zeal of those Eminent Men to suppress the Education and
Custom^ of the Gentiles, and to encourage and recommend the Simplicity and
Moderation of the Manners and Behavior of the first Christians, Which
Machiavel in his 2d Book of Disputations takes notice of, and is none of the
least proofs to our Point.

And to finish my Authorities, passing by Petrus Belonius, Gratian, Cardan,
Luther, etc. I must recommend to the Bishop the History of the Waldenses (an
Early People, if not Successive from the Primitive Times) written by one
Perrin, more especially containing their Faith, Worship and Discipline; and
there he may, if he please, observe the Simplicity, Plainess and Distinction of
that People from the Customs of the Countries ^hey lived in, and those that
have the name ^f Reformed ones now.

But he tells us, Christ and his Apostles had ^alutations; and I tell him, so
have We ^ut he will have it that Christ and his A^ostles Saluted after the
Fashion of the Coun^ry they were in; which is sooner said then ^rov'd. For
Christ asked the Jews, How ^an you believe that receive Honor one of another,
and seek not the Honor that comes from God Only? Now this certainly must be
Unlawful to Give or Receive, which hinders true Faith. And what was this
Ho^our, but Salutations after the fashion of the Times? As the Text shows, Mat.
23. and for Calling, and being Called of Men Rabbi Christ was so far from
Commanding, or Imitating them in such things, that He expressly forbids it. But
the meaning of Christ's ^aying, Mat. 5. And if ye Salute Your Brethren only,
what do ye more then Others? do not even the Publicans so? is this, That in all
Acts of Love, Mercy, and Goodness they were to Exceed the Practice of that
time: They were to take more notice of, and to look more kindly and friendly
upon All Men. But in another sense, He that bid them Salute Enemies as well as
Friends, also forbids his Disciples to Salute any Man, or call any Man Rabbi or
Master; for that One was their Lord and Master, and they were all Brethren,
Mat. 23. 6, 7, 8. and Luke 10. 4. And between such Relations Worldly Honors
were of no use, as well as of no value. And did a Primitive Spirit Prevail in
those that so much pretend to be the Successors of the Apostles, we should see
them more Exemplary in Self-denial and Holiness; Encouraging and not
Undervaluing and Brow-beating the Serious and Conscientious. But Trees are
known by their Fruit; for Grapes are not gathered of Thorns, nor Figs of
Thistles.

In the mean time, if my Reader please to peruse the Ninth and Tenth Chapters
of that Book Entitled, No Cross, No Crown, he will, I hope be satisfied, that
we are for Honor, Respect and Civility according to Scripture; though
Non-conformists to the Empty and Troublesome Ceremonies of the Times, left by
us, not of Rudeness, but Conviction; and forbore of Duty and no otherwise of
Choice. For, Humanely Speaking, that Contradiction to Custom cannot be Pleasant
to us. I have detained my Reader longer upon this Head than I expected, or
perhaps he desired: I shall therefore proceed to the Bishops next Paragraph,
which contains his Exceptions to our Tenth Gospel Truth about Baptism and the
Supper, and the ^ast he has to take notice of, the Eleventh, about Government,,
being by him already granted in the beginning of his Paper.

He begins thus, In your Xth Article you believe a Spiritual Baptism and a
Spiritual Supper and Communion, but acknowledge, you disuse the outward Signs,
by us commonly called Sacraments: Now did not Christ command Water Baptism? Go
ye and Baptize all Nations, Matthew. 28. 19, 20.

He goes on, The Baptism here commanded was Water Baptism: His reasons are
first, that Baptizing with the Spirit was God's work, not the Apostles. 2dly,
Primitive Practice, Acts 10. 47, 48. in Cornelius's Case; Who can forbid Water?
But this is also gratis dictum: For the first Reason is no Reason, since it is
not true: And the second seems to me Defective and Short. I am very sensible of
the Disadvantage I am under, and that I touch a tender Place, and what I say
upon this Head, as also anon upon the Supper, will be against Wind and Tide
with the Generality. But as I hope I shall express my self Reverently as well
as Plainly upon this Occasion, so I beseech my Reader, for his Own sake as well
as Ours, not to Prejudge us; as I am sure he will not if he be a Searcher after
Truth, and that I charitably suppose of him.

I say then The Bishop's first Reason is not true; for God by the Apostles did
Baptize Believers with the Holy Ghost. It fell-upon them, through the Powerful
Preaching of the Word: Thus, Acts 10. 44. While Peter yet spoke these words,
the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the Word. By which it is evident
that Peter, in that Sermon, was the Minister of the Spiritual Baptism to
Cornelius and his Company.

And Peter gives this account to those of the Circumcision at Jerusalem, Acts
11. 15. And as I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them as on us at the
beginning: Then remembered I the Word of the Lord, how that he said John indeed
Baptized with Water, but ye shall be Baptized with the Holy Spirit. So that
Peter evidently declares the Gift of the Spirit by the Ministry of the Gospel,
to be the Baptism of Christ, or the Baptism of the Holy Spirit and Fire, which
Christ promised at his Ascension into Heaven.

But the Apostle Paul puts this Matter beyond all Doubt, in his Excellent
Account ^e gives of his Conversion and Commission to King Agrippa, Acts 26.
where my Reader will find these words dropping from the Mouth of the Lord Jesus
to Saul; Delivering thee from the people, and from the Gen^iles, to whom now I
send thee, to open their Eyes / and to turn them from Darkness to Light / and
from the Power of Satan unto GOD / that they may receive Forgiveness of Sins,
and an Inheritance among them which are Sanctified through Faith that is in Me,
Verse 17, 18. Now if this could be done without the Holy Ghost, let my Reader
judge. 'Twas with the Holy Ghost that Peter's Hearers were Pricked to the
Heart, and fitted to receive more of It: And it was by the same Holy Ghost that
Paul's Hearers had the Eyes of their Minds opened, to see the Mysteries of
God's Kingdom, and by which they were Converted from Darkness to Light, that
they might receive the Forgiveness of their Sins, and Inheritance among them
which are Sanctified. So that the very End and Benefit of the Apostolical
Ministry was Converting, that is, Baptizing them into Christianity; in the
Nature, Power and Life of It, by the Holy Ghost.

Now for the Bishop's Second Reason, viz. Practice: I say it is granted that
Water Baptism having got place among them by John's Ministry, the Forerunner,
it held after Christ's Coming; but that was Ex Gratia, and of Condescension,
not of Commission? for that properly ceases when his Ministration begins, of
which John's was but the Forerunner. For Moses and the Prophets were till
John, and John till Christ. And this, John the Water-Baptist tells us, Mat. 3.
11. I indeed Baptize you with Water unto Repentance, but he that comes after
me is mightier than I, He shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with Fire,
see Mark 1. 8. Luke 3. 16. Here Is a different Baptism and Baptizer, the Servant
and the Master, the Water and the Holy Ghost. One Transcient, the Other
Permanent: One the End of the Jewish, and the Other the Beginning of the Gospel
Dispensation. Wherefore says our Lord Jesus Christ, the least in the Kingdom of
Heaven is Greater than John, Matthew. 11. 11. Why is not John in Heaven? No doubt
of it at all, and a Glorious Saint too: But the Least in Christ's Dispensation,
viz. The Kingdom of God in the Soul, the Work of Christ, the Baptizer with the
Holy Ghost and Fire, is Greater than John, as to the Nature of his
Administration. See John 3. 30, 31. He must Increase, but I must Decrease.
What! John decrease, or his Ministration? His Ministration certainly, which he
calls Earthly in Comparison of Christ's. So that the Baptist in his Watery
Dispensation did but Fore-run Christ, in reference to the Kingdom that he was
to set up in Men. He pointed to Christ, and showed what Christ was to do, viz.
to Wash, Fan, and Thoroughly Purge his Floor; that is, His People, and Sanctify
them throughout, by his Spiritual Baptism, according to the Apostle, in Body,
Soul and Spirit, 1 Thessalonians 5. 23. So that in short, Practice Properly can be no
Institution, where the thing Practiced has no Commission, which I suppose the
Bishop will not think fit to deny: But, says he, It has a Commission, Mat. 28.
19. which is, under favor, bur his say so; and that I think it is no more, I
do with all Humility and Submission say, First, I cannot tell how to reconcile
it to Good Sense, or Common Usage in Sacred or Civil Matters, that any thing
should be in force by a Commission that is not so much as once named in the
Commission. I say, to me it does not appear Congruous any more than Cogent, or
obliging. And this is the Cause in hand: For there is not a word of Water in
the Text alleged for Water; nor yet in the Context. And unless there were no
other Baptism than that of Water, as there are several, it must at least be
allowed to be a Question, what Baptism Christ meant in that Commission, when he
said. Go ye therefore and Teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

But it may be returned upon me; nor does the Text say it is the Baptism of the
Holy Ghost, and so the Bishop is upon equal Terms with me. Grant it, that the
word Holy Ghost is not literally joined to Baptizing, any more than the word
Water in that part: But if I am able to show that the thing is there, and that
the Baptism of the Holy Ghost was the Subject of Christ's Discourse, when he
gave that Commission at his Farewell, I presume it will be granted me, that
Christ intended a Spiritual, and not a Water Baptism; and that is what I shall
do, I hope with much Clearness. First, the Fact, and then my Arguments.
Matthew, the Evangelist, large in his History upon other Points, seems short
and abrupt in the Context of this Commission, as the Reader may observe. And as
it is usual for one Evangelist to explain another, which was the great Wisdom,
as well as Goodness of God, that those Christian Memorials might come with less
Suspicion to the World of any Humane Contrivance; So Luke supplies the
shortness of the other Evangelist in his Context to this Commission. Luke 24.
45 to 50. particularly the 47, 48, 49. verses. And that Repentance and
Remission of Sins should be Preached in his Name, among all Nations, beginning
at Jerusalem. And ye are Witnesses of these things. And behold I send the
Promise of my Father upon you: But tarry ye in the Ci^y of Jerusalem until ye
be endued with power from on High. Where, as it is plain that this Evangelist
in his Account of Christ's Commission, to wit, the Work Christ gave his
Disciples to do, Names no Baptizing at all, though that which it Implies, in my
Sense of the Word, is there, viz. the Promise of the Father, which is the Power
from on High They were to tarry at Jerusalem for. So is there not one Word of
Water here mentioned, to induce us to think that Christ intended to give it any
Place in his Commission. In short, it appears that the Disciples were to be
Qualified before they were to go forth as His Witnesses, and that this
Qualification is the Promise of the Father, that he would quickly send them.
Now I must desire my Reader to turn to the Acts of this Evangelist, Chap. 1. 4,
5. where he further opens the Manner and matter of Christ's Discourse, and
Farewell to his Disciples: And (Christ) being Assembled with them, commanded
them, that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but Wait for the Promise of
the Father, which, says He, ye have learnt of me: For John truly Baptized with
Water, but ye shall be Baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence. It can
be, methinks, no longer a doubt what Baptism it is that Christ's words, Mat.
28. 19. refers to, since we see not only that Christ distinguishes between
John's Baptism and His own, and between Water and Holy Ghost; but also He
assigns Water Baptism to John, as his Baptism, and not Christ's, and thereby
declares the Holy Ghost to be his own Baptism, and none of John's, and which
yet is no more than what John had said before.

So that Comparing both Texts together, Mat. 28. 19. with Acts 1. 4, 5. we may
see, if we please, that the Commission in the one, is to be explained by the
Qualifications in the other, which was omitted by the first Evangelist. There
They are bid to Go, here They are bid to Stay: That is to say, Stay, before you
Go, and receive your Qualification before you go to Qualify, viz. the Promise
of the Father; that is, the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, which is followed by the
Power from On High, verse 8. And indeed, had we not this express force on our
side from the Text it self, the Word Therefore in the Commission, (referring
plainly to the foregoing Verse, as the Reason of what follows) justifies our
sense. For whereas the Bishop has objected against our Assertion, that it must
not be a Spiritual Baptism, because that was the work of God, and not of the
Apostles: It is plain that our Lord takes off the force of his exception, since
the Reason why he bid them Go, etc. is because, says he, all Power in Heaven
and in Earth is given unto me. Verse 18. As much as if he had said, Go, do all
that I have said unto you, and be not Doubting or Fearful / about the
performance of It, for All Power in Heaven and Earth is given unto me that bids
you Go, and Lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the World, Which need
not have been said, as an Encouragement to them, in reference to Water Baptism,
since that was practiced by them, as well as by John's Disciples long before.

Nor is this all; for the very Text, duly considered, will not have It to be
Water, since that could Baptize none Into the Name of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, and so the Bishop knows the Greek Text runs, (...) for they that are
Baptized Into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
must be baptized with the Baptism of the Holy Ghost. Since it is to become
their Likeness, and bear their Image, which is Holiness. And had not the
Apostles understood their Commission as I render it, when they had Baptized
with Water, they would certainly have used the Terms that bore the Force of
their Commission, viz. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; of which there is not one Instance in all the Scripture.

But that which further shows that Water cannot be understood, to be meant in
the Apostolical Commission, is, that one of the Greatest of the Apostles, He
that came behind (and was added to, by) none of them, denis It, 1 Cor. 1. 17.
to be any Part of his Commission; for, says he, Christ sent me not to Baptize
but to preach the Gospel: And thanks God for that reason, in the foregoing
Verses, that he had Baptized so few: Which to be sure he ought not to have
done; but on the Contrary to have been sorry he had Baptized no more, had
Water Baptism been Part of the Apostolical Commission, Mat. 28. 19. Again this
Eminent Apostle, the Great Grand Father [not to say God-Father] of Gentile
Christians, delivered to them for Doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 5. that there was but One
Lord, One Faith, and One Baptism. And if so, That must be the Baptism of Fire
and the Holy Ghost, which is Christ's Baptism, and Proper to the Gospel
Dispensation. Now could any other make a Man a True Christian, or a Child of
God then; nor can any be so now without It. That Baptism therefore, without
which a Man cannot be a True Jew, or Christian, or of the Circumcision made
without hands, that Worship God in the Spirit, and has no Confidence in the
Flesh, must needs be the One Baptism; but such is the Baptism of the Holy
Ghost: Therefore the Spiritual Baptism is the Apostles One Baptism, Romans 2. 28,
29. Phil. 3. 3. Again; the One Baptism must be Christ's Baptism, but Christ is
the Baptism of the Spirit, therefore That, and not Water Baptism, must be the
One Baptism that is in force, according to the Apostle. As John was the
Forerunner of Christ, so was Water, of the Holy Ghost: But that which
Fore-runs, in Nature Ceases, and that which succeeds, of course Remains:
Therefore the Baptism of the Spirit, is the One Needful, and Permanent Baptism.

Yet further; If it be Gospel, That he is not a Jew that is one Outward, nor
that Circumcision that is Outward in the Flesh; but that he is a Jew that is
one Inward, and that is Circumcision that is of the Heart, in the Spirit, and
not in the Letter; whose Praise is not of Men but of God, as Romans 2. 28, 29.
Then unanswerably, He is not a Christian that is one Outward, nor is that
Baptism that is of the Flesh: But he is a Christian that is one Inwardly, and
that is Baptism that is of the Heart / in the Spirit; whose Praise is not of
Men but of God. For indeed in all Ages Men cry him down, as a Slighter of God's
Ordinances; but his Praise however is of God, let Men say what they will; and
this is the Inward Christians Comfort, in all Undervaluings and Reflections he
meets with from Outside Christians. For it is not to be thought that the Apostle
meant or designed to undervalue one Observation, as that of Circumcision,
because it is Outward, and set up another Outward Observation instead of it,
viz. Water Baptism.

Again, If in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but a New Creature / as says the same Apostle, Gal. 6. 15.
Then by the same Reason, neither being baptized with Water avails any thing,
not being unbaptized with Water, but a New Creature. I will repeat the Apostles
Discourse at large upon this Subject, in the same Chapter, because it is very
Instructing, and seems Discissive in this Case; As many, says he, as desire to
make a fair show in the flesh / they constrain you to be Circumcised; only
least they should suffer Persecution for the Cross of Christ. It seems they
were Outside People, that laid stress upon Outside things; or something else
instead of the Cross of Christ; for they Temporized in this matter, to shun the
Shame and Persecution that then attended the Christians Cross: Which stood
partly in laying down of outward Observations; and which they that desire to
make a fair show in the Flesh stand most for. But the Apostle goes on; For
(says he) neither they themselves who are Circumcised keep the Law, but desire
to have you Circumcised, that they may Glory in your Flesh. They were not exact
in the other parts of the Law, it seems, as strict as they seemed to be for
this Sacramental Practice, which is the Case of too many now: Yet they pressed
it, that they might glory and value themselves upon gaining others to be
conformable to them, whether to excuse their Compliance with Custom, that they
might avoid Persecution, or out of love to Ceremonial Religion.

But says that clear-sighted and plain-dealing Apostle, God forbid that I
should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the World is
Crucified unto me, and I unto the World. If he rejoiced in nothing but in the
Cross of Christ, then in no other Elementary Rite, Service or Ordinance, any
more than in Circumcision.

But he proceeds: For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing,
nor Uncircumcision, but a New Creature. That is to say, for according to Christ
Jesus, or in the Religion of Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision nor
Uncircumcision avails, but a New Creature, a regenerate Soul; One born again
by the Spirit of God: For the Apostle in these excellent Words, not only
strikes at Circumcision, but all Outward and Elementary Observations: Neither
This, nor That Outward thing avails in the Christian Religion, or according
to Christ Jesus, but a New Creature: He does not say, but Water Baptism, as
some would have it, who tell us that It succeeds Circumcision by Divine
Institution, by no means: But that which avails with Christ, and in the
Religion of Christ Jesus, is a New Creature, a ^ew Man, one Changed,
Regenerated, or Born gain by the Word and Baptism of the Holy Ghost. And says
the Apostle (to confirm them in this Doctrine of Inward Circumci^ion, that is
of the Heart, in the Spirit; which ^s the same thing with the Baptism of the
Spirit) As many as walk according to this Rule, Peace shall be upon them. So
that We the ^oor despised Quakers, take Comfort in this Apostolical
Benediction, and can say to God's Glory, his Peace has been upon Us in our
Belief and Confession of this blessed Doc^rine of the New Creature. It is what
we have Aimed at, and has been the great Drift of our Testimony since we were a
People; and in order to it have directed all to the Gift of God's Grace in
themselves, that by believing in it, and resigning up their Wills and
Affections, and whole Man to the Teaching and Conduct of it, they may be
leavened and sanctified by it, throughout; by which the State of the New
Creature, which is Christianity indeed, will be Experienced, though It was and
is a Mystery to the World.

As for the Apostle Peter's Question, Acts 10. 47, 48. Can any Man forbid
Water, that These should not be Baptized, which have received the Holy Ghost as
well as We? It Imports, with submission, no more than this; That Peter well
knowing the Narrowness of his Country Men's Spirits, was Cautious lest his
Latitude should Distaste them: For the Gentiles being Unholiness to the Jews,
and even Peter himself, without a Vision from God, too narrow Spirited for the
Convictions and Devotion of that excellent Centurion, Cornelius; It behoved him
to ask if any body had any thing to say, Why they might not be baptized as well
as the Jews, being Proselites to the Christian Profession. In all which he
seems more concerned to save his Own Credit, than to recommend or establish
that of Water Baptism: As if he had said, Why should this Custom be forbid to
the Gentiles more than to the Jews? But this will not warrant the Practice in
General, because Practice is no Institution, and that their appears no Command
to make It one. So that asking who can forbid what was not commanded,
strengthens his Question instead of weakening it; since what was done of
Condescension, could not have been forbid upon Authority. There needed not so
much Care or Strickness in the Matter. And indeed, the Apostles themselves seem
not to have been so clear about the abolishing of the Jewish Observations, as
appears by the want Peter had of a Vision, his own apprehension of the
straightness of his Brethren, and their calling him to Account for what he had
done, as may be seen in the same Chapter.

But I confess I cannot see why the Bishop should assume the Power of
Unchristianing Us, for not practicing of that which he himself practices so
unscripturally, and that according to the Sentiments of a considerable part of
Christendom; having not one Text of Scripture to prove that Sprinkling of Water
in the Face, was the Water Baptism, or that Children were the Subjects of
Water Baptism, in the first times. And yet this is all the Baptism the Bishop
practices, who seems so severe upon us. I think our forbearing of Water Baptism
from a Belief and Sense of the coming of the Invisible Grace, signified by that
Visible Sign, cannot be reputed such a slight to Water Baptism, as presuming to
alter the Manner and Substance of its first Institution: For then it was in the
River of Jordan, now in a Basin; it was then unto Repentance, now to Children
Incapable of Repentance. But that which perhaps misled the Doctors of the
Declining Church first into this Practice, being at the distance of some
Hundreds of Years from the Apostolical Times, might be the supposition that
Water Baptism came in the place of Circumcision, and that being to Children, so
might Water Baptism too. But they forgot (among other things, which even before
that time were crept into the Church, without Precept or Evangelical Example)
that Repentance was not made a Condition to Circumcision, at it was to
Water Baptism. I would beseech the Bishop to tread softly in this Matter; for
if Water Baptism should indeed prove a Badge of Christianity, he would be at a
loss for one that would pass current in Scripture. Thus much for this Point.

What I have said upon this Head of Water Baptism may serve also for what is
commonly called the Lord's Supper, which the Bishop Reproves us for Omitting to
Practice: Urging Luke 22. 19. This do in Remembrance of me. And the Apostles
words, 1. Cor. 11. 24. 25. It is true indeed Christ said, when he eat it with
his Disciples. That they should do it in remembrance of him till he came. And
this seems much more of the Nature of a Commission than that cited by the
Bishop for Water Baptism: But the Limitation Christ ^ives to the Practice of
it, and a Right and ^roper Consideration of the Import of his ^ords, and the
Nature of the thing will best ^ad us to undestand his Mind therein.

1st, This was also a Jewish Practice, as ^ell as Water Baptism, and so in
Nature of ^o Gospel Institution, but Temporary in its ^se.

2dly, Christ seems by this to break or ^pen to them what was so hard for them
to ^ear, to wit, his Departure and Death, by a ^oken of Memorial till he should
come to them again.

3dly, Christ takes occasion from thence ^o show forth to his Disciples the
Mystical Supper they should eat, and the Fellowship ^hey should have with him
when he came again.

Now we believe this Coming was Spiritual, suitable to that saying of his, I
will drink no more of This Fruit of the Vine till I drink it New with you in
the Kingdom of my Father: And some here shall not taste of Death till they see
the Son of Man coming in his Kingdom, Matthew. 16. 28. Again, He that dwells
with you shall be in you, John 14. I in them and they in me, Chap. 17. All
which plainly Imports a Spiritual Coming. Also Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at
the Door and knock, if any Man hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come
into him, and will sup with him and he with me, which was said near Forty
Years after his Ascension. Now since this is acknowledged to be an Outward Sign
of an Inward and Invisible Grace, what can Outward Bread and Wine more properly
Signify and Resemble, than Inward Bread and Wine? And an Outward than an
Inward Supper? And if so, the words may reasonably be read thus, Eat this
Supper of Outward Bread and Wine, till I come into and sup with you, and be
your Supper, that am the Bread and Wine from Heaven which Nourishes the Soul
unto Eternal Life.

4thly. The Kingdom of God being Spiritual and in the Soul, such should be the
Ordinances of that Kingdom. Now Christ tells the Pharisees, Luke 17. 20. The
Kingdom of God is within. And the Apostle Paul, Romans 14. 17. says, The Kingdom
of God is not Meat and Drink / but Righteousness / and Peace and Joy in the
Holy Ghost: But the outward Supper is Meat and Drink, and therefore not of the
Kingdom of God which is not Meat and Drink/ but Righteousness / Peace and Joy
in the Holy Ghost. And this was made Use of by Christ in the State of
Humiliation, before his Death, and the pouring forth of the Holy Ghost, to
fasten upon his Disciples that were weak, and of little Faith, the Remembrance
of him till they should know him with them and in them by his Spiritual
Appearance (as he was the Lord from Heaven, the Quickening Spirit) according to
his Promise. For if the Scripture be consulted, we shall not only find that
Christ Reproves the Apostles for their Infide^ity in him, but after all the
Example, Precepts and Miracles they saw by him, and that he had so very lately
left them with such Assurances of his Coming to them again; yet when Mary, etc.
brought them the Tidings of his Resurrection, it is said, Luke 24. 10, 11.
Their words seemed to the Disciples as Idle Tales, and they believed them not.
Which sufficiently shows the low State they were in, or that at least they
needed a Sign or Token, as that of the Supper to Commemorate Him. But this
Reason, which is yet true, does not Credit its Continuation; for when the
Spirit was come, or Christ in his Spiritual Appearance, their Eyes were opened
and they saw then it was the Spirit that Quickens, the Flesh profits nothing.
John 6. 63.

5thly, Most certainly Christ meant no less, when he Preached himself the Bread
that came down from Heaven, John 6. 31 to 52, and that they that would have
Life Eternal, must eat his Flesh and drink his Blood: That is, they must feed
upon Spiritual Food: Not the Outward but Inward Supper; the thing signified and
Substance it self. For Christ opposes Himself, who is the Bread of God, to the
Bread their Fathers eat in the Wilderness who were Dead, which was of an
Elementary Nature; therefore it can never be that such Bread as perishes
should be the Bread of the Evangelical Supper, when Christ by Companion
undervalues it to the Bread he had to give them.

6thly, Our blessed Lord, Mark 7. 18. taught, That it was not that which went
into the Man that defiles the Man, because it went but into his Body, and not
into his Heart; and if so, the Argument is undeniable, that it is not that which
goes into the Man, that is, into his Body, and not into his Heart, that
Sanctifies the Man: But Material Bread and Wine goes only into the Body, and
not into the Heart; therefore they cannot Sanctify. The Import of Christ's
words is plainly this, Meats and Drinks neither Defile nor Sanctify; they
neither Benefit nor Harm any one upon a Spiritual Account: Consequently
Elementary Bread and Wine cannot be the Evangelical Supper, but a Figure of It,
which is ended in Christ the Bread of God, that comes down from Heaven, John
6. 31, 32, 48, 49, 50. That a Man may eat of and not dye: The Substance of all
Shadows; for says the Apostle, the Body is of Christ; and where that is, our
Lord tells us, Luke 13. 37. the Engles are gathered together: Where the
Apostles; Wise Men, 1 Cor. 10. 15. seek for the true Supper, which nourishes
their Souls unto Eternal Life.

7thly, But the Bishop will have this Supper four times repeated in the
Scripture of the New Testament, besides that of the Apostle Paul, which must be
his mistake -- since there is no Command to practice it beyond that very Time,
but in Luke 22. 19. If there it self. For though his Eating of the Passover is
there related, as also in Mark and Luke, It was but once done; and the Command,
this do in Remembrance of me, is only Once Related among the Evangelists, as
well as it is but Once Commanded. And would we be strict with the Bishop, we
need not allow him that Command to reach further than the present Time in which
it was Given; for This Do, or Take Eat, are Equally in the present Tence, for
thereby you show forth my Death. And the following words, viz. I will Drink no
more of This Fruit of the Vine, until that Day when I Drink it New with you in
my Father's Kingdom, Mat. 26. 29. further explains it. Thus Mark has it, 14.
25. Verily I say unto you, I will Drink no more of the Fruit of the Vine until
that Day that I Drink it New in the Kingdom of God. Luke 22. 18. gives it thus,
I say unto you, I will not Drink of the Fruit of the Vine till the Kingdom of
God shall come. Now it is plain that Christ refers them to the Spiritual
Supper, which we Prefer and Practice, and which is the Supper Signified by That
of outward Bread and Wine, that was to serve till the Kingdom of God came, and
then he would Communicate with them in a way Suitable to the Kingdom: which
Kingdom, as before said, is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, Peace and
Joy in the Holy Ghost. And as the same Apostle has it, 1 Cor. 4. 20. The
Kingdom of God is not in Word but in Power; of which Power, and its coming from
on High upon the Apostles, Read Acts 1. 6, 7, 8.

For when they asked Christ, Lord will thou at this time Restore the Kingdom
again to Israel, and that he told them, 'twas not for them to know the Times or
the Seasons which the Father had put in his own Power. He also adds, But ye
shall receive Power after the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be
Witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem and Judea, and in Samaria, and in the
uttermost Parts of the Earth. This Power was the Kingdom of God, for it stands
in Power, says the Apostle; but it seems he thought fit to wave their Question,
as to a direct Answer, and left it a Secret to be revealed unto them, when the
Holy ghost should Come, and the Power from on High should fall upon them: And
thus he takes his leave of them, and is Immediately received by a Cloud out of
their Sight.

Before I conclude with this Paragraph, I would observe, First, that it was the
Passover and Custom of the Jews, which properly speaking, we conceive has no
just plea to continue as a Gospel Ordinance or Institution; since it was a Type
of Him to come, and therefore ended, as to Institution by his coming.

Secondly, That the Evangelist John, the Beloved Disciple, that lay in the
Bosom of Christ, does not so much as mention It, or Water Baptism, as left by
Christ to be continued by his Followers, Concerning the Spirit's Baptism, though
he uses not the word Baptism, yet he is very full, John 14, 16, 17. Chapters,
where he tells them, that he would send them the Comforter the Spirit of Truth,
to lead them into all Truth, and that he would dwell with them for ever. I say
It seems very Improbable if not Incredible, that what the Bishop styles the
Badges of Christianity in his 17th Paragraph, should be wholly forgotten by so
great an Apostle of Christianity.

3dly. And as the Beloved Disciple says nothing of these visible Signs, which
the Bishop calls the Badges of Christianity, so neither are they made an
Article of any of the Ancient Creeds Extant, which certainly does not make for
their Credit or Authority: Since had they then been of that Importance they are
now by some esteemed, we cannot think they would have been forgot by the
Compilers of those Creeds.

4ly. The Apostle Paul, though he repeats the Tradition he received of the
Lord's Supper, that night he was betrayed, does not Enjoin it; but as often as
the Corinthians did it, he tells them they should do it in remembrance of
Christ: Which is far from commanding it, as it would be for the Bishop, if he
should say to his Friend, as often as he comes to Cork he should come and Eat
with him, obliges that Person to come often to Cork. So that though the Apostle
bids them, that as often as they did it, they should do it in Remembrance of
Christ, yet he does not thereby bid them do it often, if at ail.

5ly. And whereas the Bishop would make it a fresh Revelation to the Apostle,
when he says for I have received of the Lord, that which also I delivered unto
you, I must dissent from him. I cannot apprehend that means any more than this,
that what account he had received of Christ's Eating the Supper with his
Disciples, the Night he was Betrayed, the same also he had Delivered unto them:
For what need could there be of an Immediate Revelation for so late a Fact, so
well Witnessed by the Disciples? But if my Reader will peruse that Part of the
Chapter which relates to the Supper, he will find the Stress lies upon
Remembering of the Lord, which is indeed our Daily, Indispensible Duty, and he
that lives without it, may be said to live without God in the World; of which
those Corinthians at that time seemed to Insensible, and as such are severely
reproved by the Apostle, being Irreverent, Greedy and Drunken, hardly fit for
the Sign, and less able to discern the Thing Signified.

6ly. Nor does the Apostle seem to recommend this practice, but rather
reprehend their Abuse of it; and if my Reader will look back to the foregoing
Chapter, from the beginning to die 18 Verse, he may find a more Spiritual
Supper, and Mystical Bread and Cup hinted at by the Apostle, as well as Mat.
26. 29. Rev. 3. 20. by our Lord Jesus Christ himself: Which is indeed very
copiously expressed by Luke in the Parable of the Supper, chap. 14. from the 16.
to die. 24. Verse, where One that was at Meat with Christ, speaking of the
Blessedness of eating of Bread in the Kingdom of God, Christ takes occasion to
show forth the Gospel Supper by a Parable, viz. A Certain Man made a Great
Supper, and bid many, but they refused, upon diverse pretenses, and came not; He
sent out a second and third time to invite an inferior sort of Guests, and
they came to the Supper; that is, they received the Gospel, which is the Power
of God to Salvation, and the evidence, as Well as means of It: Which Christ in
the 27th verse further expresses, thus ( viz.) and whosoever does not bear my
Cross and follow me cannot be my Disciple. Now the Cross of Christ, the same
Apostle also says, is the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1. 18. all which referrs to an
Inward and Spiritual Work, and Supper, and that they who receive Christ in
Spirit, Sup with him in Spirit, being the partakers of his Spiritual Supper,
which Christ promises and prepares for all those that open at his knocks the
Door of their Hearts unto him, Rev. 3.

7ly. But besides what I have said, both from Scripture and the Nature of the
thing, in Proof of Christ's Spiritual Supper and Defense of our disuse of the
visible Sign, the Bishop himself does the same thing in relation to another
Ordinance: For our Lord Jesus Christ did as solemnly Command his Disciples to
wash one another Feet, as to eat the Supper. The Passage is large and
edifying, and I must recommend it to my Reader to peruse in his Bible, John 13.
But that part of it which more strictly concerns this point, between the Bishop
and me, I shall repeat here, verse 12, 13, 14, 15. So after he had washed their
Feet, and taken his Garments and was set down again; He said unto them, Know ye
what I have done to you? Ye call me Master and Lord; and ye say well; for so I
am, If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your Feet, ye also ought to
wash one another Feet: For I have given you an Example that ye should do as I
have done to you. Thus Christ Commanded his Disciples, not only by his
Authority but Example. Now does the Bishop and his Friends follow Christ's
example and obey this Precept? He and they know they do not. What must I Infer
from thence, that the Bishop is no Christian? I suppose he would take it very
ill from me. Though he has treated me and my Friends after that sort. But I will
show him a better example, and suppose he thinks, that if Christian Ministers
and People, walk Humbly toward God and one with another, they fulfill this
Commandment, though they disuse the Sign, by which the Lord Jesus expressed and
recommended Humility to his Followers: Now that which excuses the Bishop in
reference to this Ordinance of Washing of Feet, will also excuse our disuse of
the Supper, viz. Our eating of the Spiritual Bread and Wine of the Kingdom; the
Thing Signified by the Outward Supper. But it is an Error incident to srail
Man, to prefer the Practice of those things that have a Show of Religion, and
have least of Uneasiness, and of the Nature of the Cross of Christ in their
Performance. Just thus it is easier to receive the Supper than to be Humble, if
not easier than to wash Feet: For one is but a Memorial of Christ, but the
other perhaps is a Reproach of present Practice, and to be sure a Command to
Mortification and Self-denial, the hardest Lesson in Religion. And who knows
but for the Reason it has been dropped so long; since it must be very uneasy for
People to continue a Custom, to which their Daily Practice is so visible a
Contradiction: Though I hear the Roman Bishop ^^mocks the Text Once a Year.

8ly. But in Relation to the Supper, we farther say, the Practice is varied:
Then they Sat, ^ow one sort Stands, another Walks, a third Kneels, a fourth
Lies down upon the Ground, as in the East Countries. The Romans have one
Opinion, the Greeks another, and the Lutherans and Calvinists Divide, to great
Bitterness, in their Sentiments about It.

9ly. Again, in those Days they were Disciples, such as followed Christ, now
all are admitted that profess Christianity, though they do not follow him or
forsake any thing for his Name sake, or keep any of his Holy Precepts, Matthew.
5, 6, 7 Chapters.

10ly. Nor is this all we have to say to Justify our Disuse of this Practice;
It is too much Looked at, and Relied upon by the People: And indeed is become a
kind of Protestant Extreme Unction; for if the Generality of them can but have
it administered just before they Die, they are too apt to presume upon it for an
acceptance in the other World. And indeed it is very frequent, if not natural,
for many Men to excuse their Disobedience by Sacrifice; and where Ceremonies or
Shadowy Services are continued, People rest upon their observance of them, and
Indulge themselves in the Neglect of the Doctrine of the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ. I need not look far, nor yet the Bishop for a proof of what I
say; we can hardly miss, which way soever we throw out Eyes, the more is the
pity: And as this is no small Abuse of Primitive Practice, so no small Argument
for our disuse of it. For when the Brazen Serpent was over-valued by the Jews,
God, that had commanded It, for their benefit, stirred up Hezekiah to Destroy
it.

11ly. Besides, these things are become matter of Gain, and made a Sacerdotal
Revenue, not to say Merchandise; which has also helped to Scandalize People to
Tender Consciences, who think it a Profanation of Religion to suffer any part
of it to be Excised to the People that ought to be Free.

12ly. But passing that by at present, and supposing Water Baptism and the
Supper were not Antiquated, but still in Force, Who is there Qualified to
Administer them? Who has received a Commission, or the Mind of the Holy Ghost,
and Power from on High to perform these things? For if those that hold they are
in Force, have no Divine Force or Authority to qualify them to Administer
them, there will be but a Lifeless Imitation, instead of an Edifying Reality.
Which ^eads me to what I promised long since, That I would at the Close of this
Discourse ^ay something of the True Ground of our Difference and Dissent.

I say then, that where we are supposed to ^iffer most, we differ least; and
where we ^re believed to differ least, we most of all differ: Which I explain
thus. It Is generally thought, that we do not hold the Common Doctrines of
Christianity, but have Introduced New and Erroneous Ones in lieu thereof:
Whereas we plainly and entirely Believe the Truths contained in the Creed that
is commonly called the Apostles; which is very Comprehensive as well as
Ancient. But that which has affected our Minds most, and engaged us in this
Separation, was the great Carnality and Emptiness both of Ministers and People,
under their Profession of Religion: They having hardly the Form of Godliness,
but generally speaking, denying the Power thereof; from whom, the Scripture
warns Believers to turn away.

Next Ministers being made such, and preaching, and the People worshipping
without the Spirit, confining the Operations of it, to the First or Apostolical
Times, as if these did not want them, as much, or that Christ would be less
Propitious, where his Gifts were not less needful. I say, an Humane and
Lifeless Ministry and Worship, together with the great Wordliness of
Professors, have occasioned our Separation; and the Persecution that has
commonly followed it, has abundantly confirmed our Judgment In that Matter.
Hence it was we Retired our selves to wait upon God together, according to the
Gift of his Holy Spirit, and as the Apostle Paul exhorted the Athenians Acts
17. We felt after him (with our Souls) if by any means we might find him, and
hear what God the Lord would say unto us; who speaks Peace unto his People and
his Saints, but let them never turn to folly any more. We could not, I say,
tell how to think that such as God had never sent, but run of themselves, and
were made Ministers by Humane Learning and Authority, not knowing the Work of
the Spirit to their own Regeneration, could possibly Profit or Edify the
People unto their Regeneration: And yet that is the very Work and End of the
true Gospel Ministry, for no Man can guide another in the way he never trod.

Besides, we apprehended the Ministry was ^ery much a Temporal Preferment, and
therefor few were to be found among them, that ^^d not court the Better
Places, I mean those ^^at gave the Greatest Pay; and by those ^ethods mounted
to Worldly Wealth and honor, as the rest of the World did: Turn^^g Alms into
Dues and by Law, making ^ifts Rents; and vexing those extremely, ^^at for
Conscience sake could not uphold ^^em: Which we thought very Foreign to
Primitive and an Apostolical Spirit; and ^ort of a True and Through
Reformation. This is not said with any disrespect to their ^ersons, or yet
Calling, simply Considered; for ^e that desires the Office of a Bishop,
certainly ^esires a good thing; but the Holy Ghost in those days, had the
Making of them; and the ^ood thing then was their Service, and not ^evenue or
Worldly Dignity. They were then ^ot only no Lords (one being their Lord) ^ut
they lorded it not over God's Clergy or He^itage, which was the People in those
days, ^or ^o the word (...) signifies, though it is now ^^scribed only to the
Ministry. Then the Ground of Prophecy, or Ministry, was the Revelation of the
Spirit, in those ancient Assemblies, as may be read 1 Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31, 32.
For all might Prophecy, that is, Preach as the Spirit of God moved upon their
Spirit, and gave them utterance, be it to Reproof, Instruction, or Consolation:
Now Study, Collection and Memory. In those Days they Preached their Own
Experience of die Work of God upon their Hearts, but most now Preach of the
Experiences of Others, recorded in Scriptures, but according to their own and
others. Humane Apprehensions. To be brief, we Ground our Conviction,
Conversion, Ministry, Prayer, and Praise upon the Light and Spirit of our Lord
Jesus Christ, as the Powerful and Effectual Spring of our Religious
Performances, and that alone which prepares the Soul, and Enables it to Perform
those respective Services and Duties in a Manner Acceptable to God. And that
Ministry and Worship which stands not in the Spirit, and is not performed in
the Preparation and Inspiration thereof, but according to the Compilings,
Traditions and Precepts of Men, we cannot allow to be Primitive and
Evangelical, and consequently cannot join in them. And we are satisfied that it
is the good Pleasure of God, that all who profess the Name of his Dear, and
Only Begotten, and Well-beloved Son, should Acquaint themselves with the Spirit
of His Son in their own Hearts, in its Reproof Instruction, Conviction, and
Consolation, that they may become Spiritually Minded, such as mind Spiritual
Things more than Earthly Ones; and that Daily sow to the Spirit; that is, bring
forth the Fruits of the Spirit, and become the Children of God, who are led by
the Spirit of God. Now the Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance: Against such
there is no Law. And they that are Christ's have Crucified the Flesh, with the
Affections and Lusts thereof. But the Works of the Flesh are manifest which are
these, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies,
Envyings, Murder, Drunkenness, Revilings and such like: Of which I told you
before, as also in time past, that they which do such things shall not Inherit
the Kingdom of God, Romans 8. 6. 14. Gal. 5. 16. to 24. Chap. 6. 7. 8. And under
these Marks, and Directions all People may examine themselves, and know their
Birth, Family and Inheritance, whether they are the offspring of God, and true
Christians, or Children of the Evil One: Those that are born of the Spirit, for
whom is reserved an Inheritance With the Saints in Light, or the Seed of Evil
Doers, for whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever. And truly it
seems just with God, that those who love Darkness better than Light in this
World, should have their Fill of It in the next; from which, God Almighty
redeem Thee, Reader, that thou may walk in his blessed Light, as he is in the
Light, then thou will have fellowship with the Children of Light, and the Blood
of Jesus Christ (the Great Atonement) shall Cleanse the from All Sin, 1 John 1.
5, 6, 7. yea, from the filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit; and being
sanctified throughout in Body and Spirit; thou may live to serve God in the
Newness of his holy Spirit, Romans 7. 6. and come to be made a New Man; that is
an other Man. From a Proud, an Humble Man; from a Passionate, a Patient Man;
from a Rough, a Meek Man; and of a Cruel, Covetous, Unjust, Lascivious,
Intemperate, Vain and Ungodly Man; thou becomest a Merciful, Liberal, Just,
Chaste, Sober and Godly Man: And where this Change, this New Birth, or New
Creature is not known, Sacrifices avail nothing, Religion is but Formality and
the Peace of God will never be their Recompense of Reward. But they that walk
after this blessed unerring Rule of the New Creature, Peace be on them, and
Mercy, and upon the Israel of God, Gal. 6. 15, 16. who are the Circumcision
made Without Hands, in putting off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the
Circumcision of Christ, Col. 3. 11. even that of the Heart, in the Spirit,
whole Praise is not of Men but of God, Romans 2. 29. And who therefore Worship
God in the Spirit, and have no Confidence in the Flesh, Phil. 3. 3. that is, in
fleshly Ordinances, or the observation of Figures and Signs compounded of
Outward Elements, which represent Heavenly Things: Wherefore the Apostle
Exhorted and Commanded, Col. 2. 16, 17. Let no Man Judge you in Meat or in
Drink or in respect of an Holy Day etc. which are Shadows of things to Come,
but the Body is of Christ; that is, Christ is the Substance of all outward
representations, and they that have Christ have the End of all those things:
Whom Reader we Labor and Pray, may be better known, received and obeyed by the
Professors of his holy Name and Religion. That as he is Given of God to be our
Priest, Prophet and King, we may all Know Feel and Enjoy him such in our
selves, and then the Kingdom of God will be come in us, and his will done in
our Earth as it is in Heaven: Which God Grant, I most Humbly beseech him.

For the Conclusion of the Bishop's Paper, it is either Repitition, or
Reflection; the one needs no Answer, and the other wants a Defense. However, I
will not have it said that I either wave or suppress It, and therefore without
any Reflection I will consider his: Which should have no weight with my Reader
but against him.

He says in his 12 Paragraph, He pities us, thinking many of us Harmless and
Wellmeaning, but under the Power of strong Delusions. And in his 13 Paragraph
he gives us his sense of the cause thereof, viz. that we make the Light within,
a Rule of Faith and Practice, Coordinate, if not Superior and Antecedent to
the Holy Scripture. To prove which to be our Sentiment, he cites these words
out of our Gospel Truths, where speaking of the Holy Spirit, and the
Scriptures, we say, they are the Double and Agreeing Record of true Religion.
Now if the Light and Spirit agree with the Scripture, there is no fear of
contradicting the Scripture, and so we can have nothing to answer for on
account of that Expression, for what agrees with the Scripture, establishes it,
instead of Slighting or Superceeding the Authority of it.

And though we used no such words as Coordinate, much less Superior and
Antecedent, which is the Bishop's Gloss to render our most True and
In-offensive Expression suspected, and make way to fasten his supposed Strong
Delusions upon us; I will be very frank with him in this matter, that we
Believe the Scripture to be the Declaration of the Mind of the Holy Ghost, and
therefore not Superior to the Holy Ghost, but Credited, Confirmed, and
Expounded by the Holy Ghost; so that without the Illumination of It, the
Scripture cannot be understood by them that read It. The Grammatical and
Critical Sense of the Words and Allusions therein may be understood, but the
Inside and Spiritual Signification of them, is a Riddle to those that are not
Spiritually instructed therein, though they were never such Grammarians or
Linguists.

Again Christ says, He that loves the Light brings his Deeds to the Light, to
see if they are wrought in God, John 3. 21. which was before the New Testament
Scripture was in being; and this makes It both Rule and Judge of the Life and
Deeds of Men. What says the Bishop to this? Also John 14, 15, 16 Chapters,
Christ promises the Spirit to lead them, his People, into all Truth, and this
was not the Scripture, but something at least Coordinate, if not Superior and
Antecedent to the Scripture, which is more than we said before. Also the
Apostle Paul tells the Romans, Chapter 8. that as many as are led by the Spirit of
God, they are the Sons of God; Then the Spirit is to Lead Believers, or they
cannot be the Children of God. And that which Leads, Rules, and that which
Rules is a Rule to them that follow it. And the same Apostle referred the
Galathians, Chap. 6. 15, 16. to the Rule of the New Creature to walk by, and
that must be the Spirit which begets the New Creature, viz. Christ formed in
them, of whom he tells them, Chap. 14. 19. He traveled in Birth again. And the
Beloved Disciple expressly says to the Christians in his First Epistle, Chap. 2.
20. that they had an Unction from the Holy One, and they knew all things / that
is, all things they had to Believe, Know and Practice. And Verse 27. he adds,
But the Anointing which ye have received abides in you, and ye need not that
any Man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you of All things, and is
Truth. If the Bishop will break through all these Scriptures to undervalue the
Light and Spirit of Christ (for no other Light or Spirit do we Assert,
Recommend People to, or Contend for) that he might render us Guilty of Strong
Delusions, I cannot help it, but must be truly sorry for him. But I beseech him
to have a care that he does not, like the Jews of old, Undervalue, and indeed
Blaspheme against the Holy Light and Spirit of God, and by miscalling the
Fruits and Effects of its Power, Strong Delusions and Transformations of Satan:
For God will not hold such Guiltless in his Great and Terrible Day of Judgment.

And after all, the Best and First Reformers and Martyrs, as well as Fathers,
Concur in our Assertion and Testimony. As Zuinglius, Luther, Melanchton,
Calvin, Beza, Bucer, Peter Martyr, and Erasmus too. Also our own Excellent
Martyrs, viz. Lambert, Rogers, Philpot, Bradford, Hooper, Woodman, etc. that
the Double and Agreeing Testimony of the Spirit of God within, and the
Scripture of Truth without, is the Rule and Judge of Faith, Doctrine and
Practice; yea that the Spirit is given to Believers to be the Rule and Judge by
which they are to understand the true Sense and Meaning of the Scriptures. Now
let the Reader judge who gives the Truest Honor to the Scripture, the Bishop,
or the People called Quakers? They say the Scriptures have a Double Record,
that is, the Evidence of the Spirit of Truth in the Hearts of Believers, as
well as their Own: Or the Bishop, who by his way of Treating us and our
Principle, will allow us no other Evidence of their Truth, but Themselves. For
to say the Evidence of the Spirit of God, with that of the Scripture, make a
Double and agreeing Testimony is with him to undervalue the Scripture, and the
Ground, in his Apprehension, of our Strong Delusions. It must be my turn now to
pity the Bishop, and truly I do it with all my Heart, to see him strain so
Sound, as well as Inoffensive an Expression, as that which he makes the Reason
of our Delusion, that he might have an occasion to lessen our Credit with the
Professors of Christianity, and especially Protestants. Can it Dishonor the
Scripture to deny the Evidence of the Principal and Author of the Scripture, to
back the Authority of the Scripture? Or does not he rather lessen the Authority
of Scripture, that will not allow us another Evidence of the Truth of Scripture
than its own, for fear of Co-ordinacy, which was not so much as once intended
to be insinuated by us, nor do the words import any such thing; yet it had been
no strong, nor any Delusion at all to give the Holy Ghost the Preference. But I
shall keep to the Terms of the Paper, whatever the Bishop is pleased to do;
knowing that whoever Concludes an Argument in terms not in the Question, nor
plainly deduceable from the Premises, is not a fair Dealer in Controversy: In
which the Bishop, if he pleases, may reasonably enough think himself more than
once concerned.

Blessed be God we have known the Power and Efficiency of this Holy Light and
Spirit of Christ in our selves, and being in good measures Witnesses thereof,
we do not only speak by Report, but by Experience. We had the Scriptures in the
Days of our Ignorance and Worldly-mindedness, but disregarding the Reproofs and
Instruction of the Light of Jesus in our Hearts, we never could come to know
the Power of those Truths the Scripture declares of. But when it pleased God,
in the Riches of his Love, to cause his blessed Light, that had shined in
Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended it not, to shine out of Darkness, and
gives us the Knowledge of himself in the Face (or through the Manifestation) of
his Son Jesus Christ, we saw and bewailed our selves, and by an unfeigned
Sorrow and Repentance, returned as Penitent Prodigals toward our Fathers
House; and in this Turn, we were brought to die daily to that Love and
Satisfaction we once had in the Glory, Pleasures, Honors, Friendships and
Diversions of the World, which now became Burdensome, more than ever they were
pleasing to us.

Hence it was, and from no Sinister Ends, or Self-righteous Conceits, that we
became an altered and a distinguished People, in our Behavior, Garb and
Conversation: More Retired, Watchful, Silent and Plain, than formerly, equally
avoiding Luxury and Avarice. I say, it was the Work of God's Spirit upon our
Hearts, who by his Light gave us to see the just difference of things, and to
distinguish between that which pleased Him, and that which pleased Him not. And
this Holy Pattern he gave us in the Light of his beloved Son, which we design
to follow, as did the Holy Ancients; and is a full Answer to the Bishop's
Unfriendly Queries upon our distinguishing Behavior, in his 14th and 15th
Paragraph, as if it were not out of Fear toward God, or upon a Conscientious
Bottom, but to serve a worldly Turn? For he asks us Is it not your main Aim,
End and Study, by pretended Mortifications, to make your selves a Party
Considerable? Again, Are not to this Purpose your different Garb, Speech, Looks
and Gestures, and to make your selves remarkable, rather than out of a Sense of
Duty, or Conscience of Obligation? Which, as it is the worst Construction that
the most Irreligious and Profane could make upon our Behavior, so I beseech
God to forgive the Bishop, and make him sensible how little such Treatment of
strict and sober Living advances the Common Cause of Religion, and how much it
indulges those that know no Reins or Check to their Excesses in his own Church.
But to go no farther than the Bishop and his Clergy, pray who distinguish
themselves more by their Garb from other People then they? Though I cannot say as
much of their Behavior. So indeed did the Chemerims or black Coats of old, and
Those that wore long Robes in our Saviors time, but as I take it, they went
not without his Censure, while I think the Bishop will find none in Scripture
against our Plainness. But the Bishops Pontifical Robes, do in my Opinion look
much more like Singularity and a Sight than ours; for our Garb is like other
Men's, only freed of their Superfluity. In short I wish him a better
Understanding of the true Grounds of our stricter Conduct, and Where and Who
they are that make a Trade of Religion; that if he has any Shot left against
Mercinary Religionists, he may not miss the Mark next time, but may make it his
main Aim, End and Study, to Expose Hirelings and Hypocrites in their Proper
Colors: And some are of Opinion he need not go far to find too many of them.

It is strange the Bishop should be so unsensible of the Advantage he gives me
by his Queries, and what a wide Door he opens to a severe Retaliation; but my
desire to be Modest, and to be Silent upon such Advantages, is, I think, to be
abundantly so.

Howbeit, I must take Notice of one Expression, for it may too seriously affect
us not to be observed to him. When he asks, If it be not our main End and
Study, by pretended Mortifications, to make our selves a Party Considerable? He
adds, and such to which, for Reasons of State / Peculiar Privileges must be
indulged. If this were not more than Mockery, I should wave my Notice; but
calling the meaning of the Government in Question about the Liberty of
Conscience we enjoy, He must forgive me if I bestow a few Remarks upon that
Expression. It seems then our Liberty flows not from the Inclination of the
Government to Liberty, less from Compassion, and least of all from Justice and
a Christian Principle. Which Motives carry with them a Prospect of the
Continuance of Liberty, if not for Liberties sake. But the Bishop believes no
such thing, and if he would not have us of his mind, he did weakly to tell us
so. Well then, we are all of us to take his Advertisement, that our Liberty
hangs but by slender Threads, and a Reason of State, and not of Nature, Right
or Christianity; which certainly is not to bespeak this Considerable Party to
the advantage of the Government: And for which I think the Bishop a very
moderate Statesman, and the Government as little beholding to his Politics as
we are to his Charity. However, we will have a better Opinion of our Superiors
Regards to Liberty, and conclude that their Inclination equals their
Discretion, and that their Judgment as well as Prudence is of that side. Let
the Bishop say what he pleases. And though he deserves it not at my Hands, I
could almost persuade my self to think that he does not begrudge us, and means
not so loosly as he writes. But be it as it will, That God that has upheld us
by hit free Spirit to this Day, through many and great Afflictions, we firmly
believe will suffer nothing to attend us, that shall not in the Conclusion work
for his Glory and our Good, if we continue steadfast to the End, in the blessed
way of Righteousness, wherein he has so often and signally Owned and Preserved
us; notwithstanding the Violence of Open Enemies, and the Treacherous and
Restless Endeavors of False Friends.

His 16th Paragraph multiplies Reflection, as before observed, and Repeats what
I have already largely answered; particularly that we own the Christian Faith,
which he makes us to Wave, Suppress, or at least not to Confess; and have
expressed it even in the Paper, he has faulted so much of Shortness, and that
more fully, in all Points, than in the Creed commonly called the Athenasian;
except that about the Trinity, which seems to me less plain by that Copious way
taken to explain It.

He also says, We Reject all Outward, Positive Parts of Worship, which we deny:
For we own and use Prayer, Preaching and Praising in the Spirit, without which
they cannot be Owned or Joined with; for they cannot be so performed to
Edification by a true Christian Worshipper; since God, who is a Spirit, will be
Worshipped in Spirit, and in Truth, which Christ's Spirit must enable us to
perform. And such Worshippers Only God the Father seeks to Worship him:
Implying he regards not other Worshippers.

But Especially, the Bishop says, we reject Baptism and the Supper. We say we
do not Reject but Disuse the Signs, because we felt the Invisible Graces in our
Souls they were Signs and Shadows of; and therefore not in Disrespect to the
Signs, but in Reverence to the Divine Substance they show forth, we discontinue
their use among us. They obtained place in the Infancy and Twilight of the
Church; in her more weak and Ceremonious time, directing, as I may say, that
Inter-regnum between the Law and Gospel, before the Dispensation of the Holy
Ghost had Fully obtained Place and Pre-eminence in the Church. But of this I
have been already very particular.

He grows warm in his 17th Paragraph and Episcopal; for he says, In a word, I
again Require you, as you will answer all your Secret Arts and Pretensions at
Christ's Tribunal, that you either Embrace and Profess the Entire Christian
Truth, in the Points wherein I have shown you to be Defective; and that you
receive the Christian Seals or Badges, Baptism and the Lord's Supper; or else
that you Desist to lay claim to the Name of Christians.

But first I must return the Bishop his Secret Arts and Pretensions, In all
which he is Greviously Mistaken. For either I do not understand his meaning, or
I abhor it. Next, be it known to him, we Wave not, we Suppress not, but
heartily Embrace and Profess before the whole World, all Points of Christian
Doctrine, according to the mind of the Holy Ghost, as I have amply signified
before upon this subject. And where the Bishop takes leave of the Text, he must
excuse me if I leave him to keep company with it. We did not Entitle our Paper
All Gospel Truths; but Gospel Truths, which extended so far as we were Taxed
with Error about those Truths: And yet he must have but a little Charity that
will not allow a Believer and Follower of those Truths to be a Christian. Nor
indeed has the Bishop given us the Articles of Faith he says we Wave or
Suppress, or told us his own, or that One Churches Faith he would have us
receive, as I have Complained already. But that the Bishop should forbid us so
much as to lay claim to the Name of Christians, unless we will Practice what he
calls the Seals or Badges of Christianity (which diverse Churches in Christendom
think he misuses) is very Uncharitable and Dogmatical. But besides what I have
said at large in our Excuse and Defense in that Matter, he produces not one
Scripture that calls them either Seals or Badges. But yet there are other
things that are so represented by our blessed Savior and his Apostles, which
he takes no notice of. As Mat. 16. 24. where, they that will he reputed
Christ's Disciples must take up his Cross and follow him. Christ's Cross is a
Christians Badge and Seal of Discipleship. Again, John 13. 35. He said to his
Disciples, By this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples if ye love one
another. Likewise Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36. The Distinguishing Character of the last
Day is not Water Baptism and the Outward Supper, but Love, Mercy and
Compassion; Bowels and Charity; not being Ashamed or Afraid of Owning and
Helping the Lord's Servants in their Afflictions, viz. I was an Hungry and ye
gave Me Meat: I was Thirsty and ye gave Me Drink: I was a Stranger and ye took
Me in: Naked and ye Clothed Me: I was Sick and ye visited Me: I was in Prison
and ye came unto Me. This is the Christian Badge that will be Recognized by our
Lord Jesus Christ at the last day: We have his own Word for It. In all which,
He is so far from mentioning either of the other Badges that Luke 13. He brings
in the Unhappy, that are on his left hand, using this Argument to engage him to
receive them into blessedness, viz. We have Eaten and Drank in thy Presence,
and thou have taught in our Streets. A plain Instance they had the use of such
Ordinances as the Bishop reputes Badges of Christianity; but it is as plain
that such Pleas would not do: For behold the Lord Jesus says unto them in the
Parable, I know you not, depart from me ye workers of Iniquity! I recommend the
perusal of the following Verses to my Reader, which confirm my sense of the
Text: For He spoke to an outside People that counted themselves the People of
God, and were observers of Meats and Drinks, and Diverse Washings: And that
which was Doctrine and Caution then, is Doctrine and Caution now; for Truth
holds the same to the End.

I might add, Holiness for a Characteristick, without which no Man shall ever
see the Lord: And that neither Circumcision avails any thing nor
Uncircumcision, but a New Creature, Gal. 6. Also the Fruits of the Spirit,
Chap. 5. among which there is not one word about Water- Baptism or the Outward
Supper, with many more Passages that are Close and Cogent.

His 18th and last Paragraph tells us, He will not judge us, and yet his whole
Paper is but one Continued Judgment of us. But, from God, as he says, and as
his Minister he bids us Judge our selves. First, We thank God we are
beforehand with the Bishop, having Judged our selves, and that by the Judgment
of God upon us, and so have right to Judge others according to that Judgment.
Secondly, We have no proof that the Bishop speaks from God to us: Nor can I
tell how he should, that does not acknowledge the Inspeaking Word of God in the
Soul. Thirdly, For his being God's Minister, he has not shown us his Commission
yet, and I fear it will not be from Heaven when ever he does. But if my Reader
will take the pains of perusing this very Paragraph, he will not only see a
Judging Spirit, but that the Bishop holds out abusing of us to the last,
rendering us as bad as bad can be, viz. That we Subvert the Faith once delivered
to the Saints, and equal our Conceits to the Divine Oracles, Using and Disusing
what Parts of God's Instituted Worship we please; adding, I will not Interpose
your making Gain your Godliness. But as I have already taken ample notice of
this Charge, so I shall say no more of his Irreligious Slant at our Sincerity
than this, That I cannot pretend to tell the Bishop what Tribe of Men in
Christendom it is that have long made Gain their Godliness, and the Pretense of
it their Worldly Inheritance; since he has been so much more Sensibly
instructed in this Affair than my self: But one thing I am sure of, that if
Gain and not Godliness was our Motive to be the People we are, we mightily
Mistook our way when we left the Bishops: For Afflictions, Spoils, Prisons,
Banishments, yea, and Death it self have attended us since God was pleased to
manifest his Truth to us: And if under all those Calamitys that have followed
us since we were a People, for the sake of our Unfashionable Profession, the
Bishop or any else is so Unnatural, as to envy us the Blessing of God upon our
honest Industry, and to render that which is an Effect of God's Goodness, the
Reason and End of our Religion, God forgive them. I could Enlarge upon this
Topic, but time would fail, and the Discourse swell beyond Bounds, as indeed
it has already beyond my Expectation: for which I should Excuse my self to my
Reader, but that it was not Simply from the Regard I had to the Bishop's Sheet,
since that could not have deserved this Notice from me, but might have been
answered as Concisely as that was written, had I only considered his
Undertaking and Treatment, and not my Readers Satisfaction, in the better
Knowledge of our so much Misrepresented Persuasion: Especially in a Nation,
where of late I had occasion so Generally to Travel, and the Bishop's Paper
has been I suppose as Generally Dispersed. I owe it therefore to My Profession,
to My Self, and to the Country, to Vindicate the One, and to Express my
Christian Regard and Acknowledgment to the Other; having received a more than
common Civility from the Inhabitants in General: To whom I wish, as to my own
Soul, the Saving Knowledge of the Truth, as it is in Jesus: That Christians
Indeed and at Heart They may be, to the Glory of God their Creator, and the
Eternal Salvatiou of their Souls, through Jesus Christ, the alone Redeemer, and
to whom with the Father, by the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory,
Thanksgiving and Praise, World without End.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by T. Soul, next Door to the Meeting House, in
White-Hart-Court, in Gracious-Street. And at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street,
near the Market, School.
SAmuel Fisher's Works, in Folio.

The Works of the Long, Mournful, and Sorrowful Distressed Isaac Pennington's,
in Folio.

William Bayly's Works, Quarto.

The Works of that Memorable and Ancient Servant of Christ, Stephen Crisp;
containing also a Journal of his Life, giving an Account of his Convincement,
Travels, Labors, and Sufferings in, and for the Truth. Price Bound 5 s.

A Collection of the several Writings and Faithful Testimonies of that
suffering Servant of God, and patient Follower of the Lamb, Humphry Smith.
Price Bound 2 s. 6. d.

A Collection of certain Epistles and Testimonies of Divine Consolation,
Experience, and Doctrine: Written by that Faithful, Patient and Long-suffering
Servant of Christ, William Bennit. Price Bound 1 s. 8 d.

The Memory of the Righteous Revived, being a brief Collection of the Books and
Written Epistles of John Camm and John Audland: Together with several
Testimonies relating to those two Faithful Laborers. Price Bound 2 s.

Truth Vindicated, by the Faithful Testimony and Writings of the Innocent
Servant and Handmaid of the Lord, Elisabeth Bathurst, Deceased. Price Bound 1 s.

Baptism and the Lord's Supper, Substantially Asserted; being an Apology in
behalf of the People called Quakers, concerning those Two Heads. By Robert
Barclay. Price Bound 1 s.

A Catechism and Confession of Faith. By R. Barclay. Price Bound 9 d.

No Cross, No Crown. A Discourse showing the Nature and Discipline of the Holy
Cross of Christ. By W. Penn. In Two Parts. The Fifth Edition. Price 3 s.

An Address to Protestants of all Persuasions; more especially the Magistracy
and Clergy, for the Promotion of Virtue and Charity. In Two Parts. By W. Penn,
a Protestant. The Second Edition, Corrected and Enlarged. Price Bound 1 s. 6 d.


