THE CHARACTER Of That Glorious Martyred King, CHARLES I: BEING A Brief
Description of His Religious Reign, from his Coronation to his unhappy Death.

Wherein is laid open, 1. His outward Actions. 2. His Piety. 3. His Zeal to
Gods Ordinances. 4. His Wisdom. 5. His Justice. 6. His Mercy. 7. His Humilty.
8. His Bounty. 9. His wonderful Patience.


By W: P: Esquire

Heb. 12.1, 2. Let us run with Patience the Race that is set before us; looking
unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our Faith; who for the Joy that was set
before him, endured the Cross and despised the shame, and is set at the right
hand of the Throne of God. LONDON, Printed for T. B. 1660.

The true Character of a Glorious KING.
First, for his outward Actions.
THe best pulse to discover the inward temper, is by his outward Actions; he
was always Grave, Serious, and deliberate, and made them bear for the most
part the impressions of Wisdom, piety and a composed settledness upon them; yet
when ever moving upon just Principles (Grounds of Reason, and Religion) to
engage in any undertaking, he was most vigorously pursuing it, by all fair and
honorable means; knowing that a good end ought not to be aimed at by bad
actions: which made him bring the least grain, as well as the greatest wedge,
the Circumstancials as well as the essentials of all his actions to the
highest; and never would allow (or at least least maintain) the most
pale-faced, modest, insinuating error in any action; but ever accounted it his
glory to confess and reform it when detected, rather then maintain it.

And in regard of his private indulgences to himself, he ever walked with all
preciseness, (as the Apostle commands 1 Thessalonians. 5.) knowing, that though
Religion allows great and just Liberties to humane Nature, it was not safe
what he might, lest it proved a perversion of blessings into temptatious; for
as he was (as I formerly hinted) temperate and moderate in all things: as did
ever appear in his Recreations, Expenses, Apparel, Diet, and the like; for
though he fed liberally, it was orderly, (twice a day only) and to the size of
nature, not desire, being never known to oppress but relieve it, by eating or
drinking, and always chose rather to shorten then stretch his Teacher, or
strain the conjugal and Matrimonial knot that fastened him to his Savior in an
Judivorceable Espousal: but preserved himself pure, chaste and unspotted of the
world, as far as Humane nature (by the Power of Divine grace) was capable,
knowing that the least way given to any lust or vice, will soon make it grow
and spread, for (as all rivers fill by drops, and the first issue disposes the
Orifice to become greater) he strove to nip every temptation in its first
springing, declining to come near the brink of any Precipice, lest he might
slip or fall in by weakness or giddiness, which the empty eariness the (vain
pleasures) of this world often intoxicate the brain with, like the best Wines
taken in excess, which cause distempers instead of cheering Elevating the
spirits.

Secondly, Of his Piety, wherein (especially in his latter time) he was as much
beyond Imitation, as President, making much of his life (so far as it admitted
of a Sequestration from his calling, as a King to that of a Christian) but one
continued Act of Regulated Devotion, both in regard of his retirements, (in
that, non est vera religio, quae cum templo relinquitur, says Lactantius) and
more public duties of Holiness, wherein he was constant in paying his Debt of
homage and out-rent to God in Prayers, both in his own house and the Church,
(as the Exchequer wherein God is best pleased to reserve them) when the
Sacrifice is not raw and indigested, (made up of the passions and humors of
men,) but of the finest of the flower, the best of the herd, such as the Church
allows; metal that will not fly upon the test, but such as the public stamp
of Law had made current, no embased, but the best coin: for he ever worshipped
God in that way which the Papists call Heresy, and Schismatics Popery,
seeming to take Heaven by a Holy violence, in the fervency of his Devotions,
being as it were eaten up in his zeal to Gods house, and all his Holy
Sacrifices.

Thirdly, In zeal to Gods Ordinances, Temple and Ministers, (like the lamps in
the Sanctuary,) he also sent forth a pure and holy flame, so as (with King
David) it even consumed and fed upon him, not be upon the Church, for he was
always so industrious to preserve them in their purity, and glory, and to
advance them in all just estimation and greatness, as he contemned his own
interest (nay life) for them, when they came in competition, for would he have
sacrificed the Church, he had been the Churches Sacrifice: so as he made his
life, and death but one continued Act of Protection to her, and hers, against
all the open Invasions and secret Stratagems of Atheismes and Heresies.

Fourthly, His wisdom, he was as an Angel of God, knowing both good and evil,
avoiding the one as a Ship, or sand that would sink his vessel, and using the
other as the rudder or Stern to keep it in a safe course (knowing that a
Kingdom is Established by righteousness.)

So as he might have been feared as well as admired for his knowledge, had it
not been tempered with an equal goodness: for he could dive inao the bottom of
the most deep and hidden Magination, unriver the most close fixed designs, see
Effects in their causes (not Judging of causes, according to the vulgar error,
by their effects, nay he could pierce into the center of policy it self, and
have applied ptudential remedies for the killing the Cockatrice in the Egg, and
have plucked up by the roots those dark (though to him known) designs in their
Infancy, that have by their growth produced such unhappy fruits, had he
consulted his Power, and not his Piety, but he always soared upwards, as high
as Heaven in his deliberations, and fetched his conclusions from thence (from
Divine, not Humane Aphorisms) making Religion both the basis and roof, reason
and Humane providence as supporters only of his designs and undertakings: and
would never own his preservation to unlawful ones, but trusted in God for all
events, ever with Ely saying, they were good (though counter to his designs)
because from above, and profitable when unpleasant.

Fifthly, His Justice, he was then truly informed (though Princes see by other
eyes, truth sometime reflected by false glasses) a Melchisedeck without Father,
Mother or other relations; considering no man's person but his cause, not of
Caesar's temper, who said, Melior causa cassii, sed denegare bruto nihil
possum: nor the Emperor, who having been once Niceas his Favorite, wrote to
his Judges (in a cause depending between him and another) if Niceas cause be
good, let Justice prevail, if bad, let favor prevail, however let Niceas
prevail, but standing as the Center in the circumference, equally to distribute
to all parts, and making the known Laws the Rule and measure of his Actions,
though he was sometimes made to swerve from them by his Ministers (being drawn
from his own Bias, and perverted from his aim, by some secret rub in the way)
to the satisfaction of unjust intrests, yet when Justice was most corrupted in
the streams, it was ever pure in him the spring, for he erred sometimes in
Judgment as man, but never I am confident in affections as a Christian, in
that he was always preventing all applications and addresses for relief, where
convinced in himself of any public injury, and never protected any subordinate
Minister from a Legal responsableness for any oppression or irregularity, when
called upon in a calm, not clamorous and tumultuous way, that he might seem to
give, not have it extorted from him, and never accounted them his friends, who
by any act of Justice made him many Enemies, for though I knew he erred in the
high exorbitancies of the Council Table, I am persuaded the ever went with the
Authority of the best Judgments, that misguided him through inconsideration,
or abused his trust, and made their own false Coin to pass under his public
Legal test and stamp, and was more ready to own his sorrow, and make
satisfaction for it, (when evinced of its Irregularity by Law, reason or
Religion) then at the first to countenance it, or his late condescensions and
constant Professions made appear, for he ever accounted his Distributive
Justice as the richest Gem in his Diadem, as that by which the Throne of Kings
are Established, and the sweet Harmony of peace preserved: for when the
boundaries of common interest are plucked up: all is disparked and laid open, so
as the Kings Rights as well as the Subjects, will be trespassed upon, by every
rude and Rebellious hand, and every Beast of prey.

Sixthly, By his mercy; A flower growing always in the Garlands (a stone
shining most in the Crowns) of Princes, he was a Star of the first Magnitude,
advancing it as a Child of his bowels (before that of his body) to be nearest
him in his Throne, yet dispensing it with that prudence as never to encourage
sin, but repentance in any, knowing there might be a cruel mercy, (the
preservation of one being many times the ruin of many) as well as a merciless
cruelty in denying it to all offenders.

Seventhly, In humility, he was above himself, as much as he was exceeding
others in all things else, for he ever set much to low an estimate upon his own
abilities, though always allowing a Just value (if not over weight) to other
parts, he ever looked through the right end of the perspective (examining them
with Justice, if not partiality) but always through the wrong upon himself,
and by a Religious diffidence, many times unhappily embraced and advanced
others Counsels before his own Judgment, the only reason any can Assign of
those little miscarryages (warts rather then Wems) we have seen in his
Government, though he no sooner saw their Error, but endeavored their
rectitude, nay he was so exalted in this virtue, and low in his own
apprehensions, (the richest are lying deepest in the mine,) that (like the Sun
under a Cloud) he strove to conceal as much of himself as he could, and never
unveiled himself wholly for Ostenation, but upon grounds of Piety and honor;
So as he used that fine spun piece of his Meditations (which was too rich for
the grave to consume) only as his Winding Sheet, not owning it till his death,
nor then, but in a Just Vindication of himself and Caves: so that, like Gedeons
Lamp, he did clearly sent forth his shine, till the earthen Picture of his body
was broken.

Eighthly, In bounty, he was Tenacious, and (though many times liberal) never
Profuse, sometime mistaken in the merit of the receiver, but seldom suffering
any service to him to go unrewarded, by it both to encourage industry and
virtue in others, and also to oblige the Person to a future graaitude,
(benefits being one of the great and strongest cords, which holds men active to
their Duties (and he seldom gave to one, but he would oblige many by it, and
where he denied, did it with so much sweetness and Artifice, as he usually made
the refusal of the thing a gaining of the man.

Ninthly, In patience, he was a wonder, Impregnable to the most wicked and
daring attempts of provocations, in making himself above Injures, (even that
piece of earth the Spaniards speak of which however trampled upon overcomes at
last) and so immured and possessed his soul in that Divine grace, as neither
Engine nor force could undermine or batter, lessen or impair it.

This appears in that he could contend with the Axe, blunt the cruelty of his
adversaries, grow by cutting, and enjoy an inward security in the greatest
outward storms: so as we may truly say of him (as Caesar of himself, and
fortitude in a threatened shipwreck) The man might perish, his Patience could
not; for that shined the most glorious, under the greatest difficulties and
obscurities, like Stars that many times borrow luster from the darkness of the
night, making himself not only a perfect mirror, but a a miracle of Patience
it self; he not counting that a weakness in man, which was the Glory of Christ;
a willing bearing and forgiving of injuries, storms, and crucifixion it self,
Heb. 12.1, 2, 3.

Let us therefore strive to write by his Copy, and by his example, both in life
and death, to make the like advantages, both of Gods frowns and favors, though
not so great an improvement, for what if I contemn the worlds pleasure, and get
above misfortunes even to a having nothing, and yet possessing all things) my
conquest is not so great as his, because my enemies were not so numerous and
strong; nor my losses and temptations so many; for a little vessel may pass
those shallows and Rocks, that will sink and split a taller ship, which draws
more water.

FINIS.

