ONE PROJECT For the GOOD of ENGLAND: THAT IS, Our CIVIL UNION is our CIVIL
SAFETY. Humbly dedicated to the Great Council, The Parliament of England.
RELIGION, as it is the noblest End of Man's Life, so it were the best Bond of
Humane Society, provided Men did not err in the Meaning of that excellent Word.
Scripture interprets it to be Loving God above all, and our Neighbors as our
selves; but Practice teaches us, that too many merely resolve it into Opinion
and Form; in which, not the Text, but the Comment too often prevails: whence it
comes to pass that those Bodies of Men, who have but one Common Civil Interest,
are miserably distramed in favor of their adopted Notions, upon whom they are
impatient to bestow an Earthly Crown. And this is the Reason of that Mischief
and Uncertainty that attend Government, No sooner one Opinion prevails upon
another (though all hold the Text to be sacred) but Humane Society is shaken,
and the Civil Government must receive and suffer a Revolution: in so much, that
when we consider the Fury and Unnaturalness of some People for Religion (which
shows they have none that is True (Religion making Men most Natural as well as
Divine) we have Reason to Bewail the Misunderstanding as well as Mis-living of
that venerable Word.

But since it is so hard to disabuse men of their wrong Apprehensions of
Religion, and the true Nature and Life of it, and consequently as yet too early
in the day to fix such a Religion upon which Mankind will readily agree as a
common Basis for Civil Society, we must recur to some lower but true Principle
for the present, and I think there will be no Difficulty of succeeding.

It Is this, That Civil Interest is the Foundation and End of Civil Government,
and where it is not maintained entire the Government must needs decline. The
word INTEREST has a good and bad Acceptance; when it is taken in an ill Sense,
it signifies a pursuit of Advantage without regard to Truth or Justice; which I
mean not: The good signification of the word, and which I mean, is a Legal
Endeavor to keep Rights, or augment honest Profits, whether it be in a private
Person or a Society. By GOVERNMENT, I understand a Just and Equal Constitution,
where Might is not Right, but Laws rule, and not the Wills or Power of Men; for
that were plain Tyranny.

This Government must have a Supreme Authority in it self to Determine, and not
to be Superceeded or Controuled by any other Power, for then it would not be a
Government, but a Subjection, which is a plain Contradiction.

Having thus explained the Terms of the Principle I have laid down, I repeat
it, viz. That Civil Interest is the Foundation and End of Civil Government, and
prove it thus, The Good of the Whole is the Rise and End of Government, but the
Good of the Whole must needs be the Interest of the Whole, and Consequently the
Interest of the whole is the Reason and End of Government. None can stumble at
the Word Good, for every man may easily and safely Interpret that to himself,
since he must needs believe; it is Good for him to be preserved in an
undisturbed Possession of his Civil Rights, according to the Free and Just Laws
of the Land, and the Construction he makes for himself will serve his
Neighbor, and so the whole Society.

But as the Good of the People is properly the Civil Interest of the People,
and that, the Reason and End of Government; so is the Maintenance of that Civil
Interest entire, the Preservation of Government. For where People are sure of
their own, and are Protected from Violence or Injury, they cheerfully yield
their Obedience, and pay their Contribution to the support of that Government.
But on the contrary, where men are Insecure of their Civil Rights, nay, where
they are daily violated, and themselves in danger of Ruin, and that for no sin
committed aginst the Nature of Civil Interest (to preserve which, Government
was instituted) we ought to suppose their Affections will flagg, that they will
grow dead-hearted, and that what they pay or do, may go against the Grain: And
to say true, such unkindness is ready to tempt them to believe they should not
of right Contribute to the Maintenance of such Governments as yield them no
Security or Civil Protection. Which Unhappy Flaw in the Civil Interest, proves
an untoward Crack in the Government; Men not being cordially devoted to the
Prosperity of that Government, that is exercised in their Destruction; and how
far that Fraction upon the Common Interest of the People may Affect the
Government I cannot tell, but to be sure it is insecure to any Government, to
have the People (its Strength) divided, as they will be, where their Interest
is so disjoynted by the Government; One Protected, the Other Exposed.
Wherefore, Wise Governments have ever taken Care to preserve their People, as
knowing they do thereby preserve their Interest, and that how Numerous their
People, so large their Interest. For not only Solomon has told us, That the
Honor of a Prince is in the Multitude of his People, but Experience teaches,
that Plenty of People is the Riches and Strength of a Wise and Good Government;
as that is, where Vice is corrected and Virtue encouraged, and All taken in and
secured in Civils, that have the same Civil Interest with the Government.

But as the Good and Interest of the Whole is the Rise and End of Government,
so must it suppose, that the whole (which takes in all Parties) concurs in
seeking the Good of the Government; for the Reason of the Government will not
suffer it to protect those that are Enemies to its Constitution and Safety; for
so it would admit of something dangerous to the Society, for the Security of
which, Government was at first instituted.

It will follow, that those that own another temporal Power superior to the
Government they properly belong to, make themselves Subjects not of the
Government they are born under, but to that Authority which they avow to be
superior to the Government of their own Country, and consequently men of
another Interest, because it is their Interest to pursue the Advantages of that
Power they acknowledge to be sovereign: But those that own, embrace and obey
the Government of their own Country as their temporal supreme Authority, and
whose Interest is one and the same with that of their own proper Government,
ought to be valued and protected by that Government.

The Principle thus far lies General, I will now bring it to our own Case.

ENGLAND is a Country Populous and Protestant, and though under some Dissents
within it self, yet the Civil Interest is the same, and in some sense the
Religious too. For first, all English Protestants, whether Conformists or
Nonconformists agree in this, that they only owe Allegiance and Subjection unto
the Civil Government of England, and offer any Security in their power to give
of their Truth in this Matter. And in the next place, they do not only
consequentially disclaim the Pope's Supremacy, and all adhesion to foreign
Authority under any Pretense, but therewith deny and oppose the Romish
Religion, as it stands degenerated from Scripture, and the first and purest
Ages of the Church, which makes up a great Negative Union.

And it cannot be unknown to men read in the Reasons of the Reformation, that a
Protestation made by the German Reformers against the Imperial Edicts of
Charles the fifth, imposing Romish Traditions, gave beginning to the word
Protestant.

In short; It is the Interest of the Ruling or Church*Protestants of England,
that the Pope should have no Claim or Power in England. It is also the Interest
of the Dissenting Protestants, that the Pope should have no Claim or Power here
in England, because they are subject to the same Mischiefs and Sufferings in
their Civil and Religious Rights that the Church Protestants are liable to: if
then both are like to lose by Pope and Foreign Authority, their Interest must
needs be one against Pope and Foreign Authority; and if they have but one
Interest, it will follow, that the Church Protestant cannot prejudice the
Dissenting-Protestant, but he must weaken and destroy his own Interest.

The Civil Interest of English Protestants being thus the same, and their
Religious Interest too, so far as concerns a Negative to the Usurpation and
Error of Rome; I do humbly ask, if it be the Interest of the Government, to
expose those to Misery that have no other Civil Interest than THAT of the
Government? Or if it be just or equal that the Weaker should be prosecuted by
the more Powerful Protestants, whose Interest is Positively the same in Civils,
and in Religion Negatively? One would think 'twere Reasonable that they should
not suffer by Protestants, who if Popery ever have a day, are likely to suffer
with them, and that upon the same Principles. Experience tells us, That the
wisest Architects lay their Foundations broad and strong, and raise their
Squares and Structure by the most exact Rules of Art, that the Fabric may be
secure against the Violence of storms; but if People must be destroyed by those
of the same Interest, truly that Interest will stand but Totteringly, and every
breath of Opposition will be ready to shake it.

'Twas the Inconfutable answer Christ made to the Blasphemers of that Power by
which he wrought Miracles; A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand: what
he said then, let me on another occasion say now, an Interest divided against
it self must fall.

I know some Men will take Fire at this, and by Crying The CHURCH, The CHURCH,
hope to silence all Arguments of this Nature; But they must excuse me, if I pay
no manner of Regard to their Zeal, and hold their Devotion both Ignorant and
Dangerous at this time. It is not the way to fill the Church, to Destroy the
People. A Church without People is a Contradiction, especially when the
Scripture tells us that it is the People that makes the Church.

And it is not without an appearance of Reason that some good and wise men are
apprehensive, that the greatest Sticklers for Persecuting Protestant Dissenters
in favor of the Church of England, are men addicted and devoted to the Church
of Rome, or at least animated by such as are; who, disparing of doing any great
Feats, if known, hide themselves under these pretenses; but the meaning of it
is to debilitate the Protestant cause in general, by exciting the Church of
England to destroy all other Protestant Interests in these Kingdoms, that so
nothing may remain for Popery to conflict with but the few Zealous abettors of
that Church.

And that this may not look disingenuous, or like a Trick of mine, I will
enforce it by a demonstration. It is plain fact, that the Church of Rome has
ever since the Reformation practiced the Restoration of her Religion and Power
in these Kingdoms. It is as evident that Religion is with her a word for Civil
Interest, that is, that she may have the Rule over men both Body and Soul. For
it is Government she aims at, to have the rains of Power in her hand, to give
Law and weild the Scepter.

To do this she must either have a greater interest then the Protestants that
are now in possession, or else divide their Interest, and so weaken them by
themselves, and make them Instruments to her ends. That her own force is
Inconsiderable is clear: She has nothing within Doors to give her hope but the
Discord of Protestants. It follows then that she must of necessity bestir her
self and use her Arts to inflame the reckoning among Protestants, and carry
their Dissents about Religious matters to a division in the Civil Interest. And
it is the more to be feared, because whatever she has been to others, she has
been ever true to her self.

If this then be the only domestic Expedient left her, we are sure she will
use it; and if so, it must needs be of great Importance with all Protestants to
let fall their private Animosities, and take all possible care that their
dissents about Faith or Worship (which regard the other World) divide not their
Affection and Judgment about the Common and Civil Interest of their Country:
because if that be kept entire, it equally frustrates the designs of Rome, as
if you were of one Religion. For since, as I said before, Religion, with the
great men of that Church, is nothing else but a softer word for Civil Empire,
preserve you but your Civil Interest from fraction, and you are in that sense
of one Religion too; and that such an one, as you need not fear the temptation
of Smithfield, if you will but be true to it.

This being the case, I would take leave to ask the Zealous Gentlemen of the
English Church, If Conformity to the fashion of their Worship be dearer to them
then Englands Interest and the Cause of Protestancy? if their love to
Church Government be greater then to the Church and her Religion, and to their
Country and her Laws? or lastly, whether in case they are sincere in their
Allegations for the Church (which I confess ingenuously I am apt to suspect) it
is to be supposed that the present Churchmen (Conformists I mean) are better
able of themselves to secure Protestancy and our Civil Interest against the
Attempts of Rome, then in Conjunction with the Civil Interest of all Protestant
Dissenters? If they say yes, I would have them at the same time, for the same
reason, to give it under their Hands, that it is a standing Rule in Arithmetic,
that ONE is more then SIX, and that hitherto we have been all mistaken in the
art of Numbers.

Being brought to this pinch, I conceive they must say, that they had rather
deliver up their Church to the Power and Designs of Popery, then suffer
Dissenters to live freely among them, though Protestant, of one negative
Religion, and of the same Civil Interest; or else hasten to break those bonds
that are laid upon Dissenters of truly tender and (by experience) of peaceable
Consciences; and by Law establish the free Exercise of their Worship to
Almighty God, that the Fears, Jealousies, Disaffection and Distraction, that
now affect the one common Interest of Protestants, may be removed; for it seems
impossible to preserve a distinct Interest from both. But to which of these
they may incline* I must not determine; and yet I hope, they will not be of the
mind of a late Monk of Cullen, that in his public Exercise exhorted the Civil
Magistrates to choose to have their City poor and Catholic, that is Popish,
rather then great and Opulent by the Admission of trading Heretics; but if
they should, may our Magistrates have at least their Prudence; for the
Culleners gave him the hearing, but were as true to their Interest, as the Monk
to his Superstition.

Under favor, the Civil Government is greatly concerned to discountenance such
Biggotrys; for it Thins the People, Lessens Trade, Creates Jealousies, and
Endangers the Peace and Wealth of the Whole. And with Submission, of what
should the Civil Magistrate be more tender, than in suffering the Civil
Interest of a great People to be disturbed and narrow'd for the Humor of any
one Party of them? for since the Civil Interest lies as large, as the People of
that Interest, the people must be preserved in order to preserve that Common
Interest. Other Notions ever did divide and weaken Empire, and in the end they
have rarely mist to pull the Old House about their Ears, that have governed
themselves by such disproportionable measures: By all means, interest the
Affections of the People in the Prosperity of the Government, by making the
Government a SECURITY to their particular Rights and Properties.

I ask, if more Custom comes not to the King, and more Trade to the Kingdom by
encouraging the Labor and Traffic of an Episcopalian, Presbyterian,
Independent, Quaker and Anabaptist, than by an Episcopalian only? If this be
true, why should the rest be rendered incapable of Trade, yea, of Living? What
Schism or Heresy is there in the Labor and Commerce of the Anabaptist, Quaker,
Independent and Presbyterian, more than in the Labor and Traffic of the
Episcopalian?

I beseech you give me leave, is ther^ ever a Churchman in England* that in
distress would refuse the Courtesy of one of these Dissenters? If one of them
should happen to fall into a Pond or Ditch, would he deny to be helped out by a
Dissenters Hand? Is it to be supposed, he would in such a pickle be Stomachful,
and choose to lie there, and be Smothered or Drowned, rather than owe Aid to the
good Will of a poor Phanatick? Or if his House were on Fire, may we think that
he would have it rather burnt to the ground than acknowledge its Preservation
to a Nonconformist? Would not the Act be Orthodox, whatever were the Man? So
in case of being Sick, Imprisoned, Beset, Benighted, out of the Way, far from
Kindred or Acquaintance, with an hundred other cases that may happen daily, can
we think, that such Men would ask Questions for Conscience sake, or charge
Schism upon the Relief given them? No, no; Self will always be true to its
Interest, let Superstition mutter what it will.

But since the Industry, Rents and Taxes of the Dissenters are as current as
their Neighbors, who loses by such narrowness more than England, than the
Government and the Magistracy? For till it be the Interest of the Farmer to
destroy his Flock, to starve the Horse he rides, and the Cow that gives him
Milk, it cannot be the Interest of England to let a great part of her Sober and
Useful Inhabitants be destroyed about things that concern another World. And
it is to be hoped that the Wisdom and Charity of our Governors will better guide
them both to their own real Interest and their Peoples Preservation, which are
inseparable; that so they may not Starve them for Religion, that are as willing
as able to WORK for the good of King and Country.

I beseech you, let Nature speak, who is so much a better Friend to Humane
Society, than False or Froward Opinion, that she often rectifies the Mistakes
of a Prejudiced Education, that we may say, how Kind, how Gentle, how Helpful
does she teach us to be to each other, till that Makebate OPINION (falsely
called Religion) begins the Jangle and Foments to Hatred.

All the Productions of Nature are by Love, and shall Religion propagate by
Force? If we consider the poor Hen, she will teach us Humanity. Nature does not
only learn her to hatch, but to be tender over her Feeble Chickens, that they
may not be a Prey to the Kite. All the Seeds and Plants that grow for the Use
and Nourishment of Man, are produced by the kind and warm influences of the
Sun. Nothing but kindness keeps up Humane race: Men and Women don't get
Children in Spite, but Affection. It Is wonderful to think by what Friendly and
Gentle ways Nature produce, and matures the Creatures of the World: and that
Religion should teach us to be Froward and Cruel, is Lamentable: This were to
make her the Enemy instead of the Restorer of Nature. But I think, we may
without Offense say, That since True Religion gives Men Greater Mildness and
Goodness than they had before, that Religion which teaches them less, must
needs be False. What shall we say then, but that even Nature is a truer guide
to Peace, and better informs us to preserve Civil Interest, then false
Religion, and consequently, that we ought to be true to the Natural and Just
Principles of Society, and not suffer one of them to be violated for Humor or
Opinion. Nor is every Difference in Opinion to be reputed or Nick named a New
or Different Religion.

Let us go together as far as our way lies, and Preserve our Unity in those
Principles, which maintain our Civil Society. This is our Common and our Just
Interest, all Protestant-Dissenters agree in this, and it is both Wise and
Righteous to admit no Fraction upon this Pact, no Violence upon this Concord.
For the consequence of permitting any thing to break in upon the Principles of
Humane Society, that is Foreign to the Nature of it, will distract and weaken
that Society.

We know, that in all Plantations the Wisdom of Planters is well aware of this:
and let us but consider, that the same ways that plant Countries, must be kept
to for preserving the Plantation, else 'twill quickly be Depopulated.

That Country which is False to its first Principles of Government, and
mistakes or divides its Common and Popular Interest, must Unavoidably Decay.
And let me say, That had there been this Freedom granted Eighteen Years ago,
Protestancy had been too Potent for the Enemies of it; nor had there been those
Divisions for Popery to make its advantage by; at least, not in the Civil
Interest of the Nation. And where that has been preserved entire, it has been
never able to Prevail: Witness the careful Government of Holland, where the
Preservation of their Civil Interest from Fraction has Secured them against
the growth of Popery, though it be almost Tolerated by them: So powerful are
the Effects of an United Civil Interest in Government. Now because the Civil
Interest of this Nation is the Preservation of the Free and Legal Government of
it from all Subjection to Foreign claim, and that the several sorts of
Protestants are united, as in the common Protestancy (that is, a General
Renunciation of Rome) so in the Maintenance of this Civil Government as a
common Security (for it strikes both at their Rights Civil and Sacred, their
Conscience, Religion and Law to admit any Foreign Jurisdiction here) it must
follow, that had these several, as well English as Protestant Parties been
timely encouraged to this united Civil Interest, they had secured the
Government from this danger by rendering it too formidable for the Attempt.

But there is a twofold Mistake that I think fit to remove. First, That the
difference betwixt Protestants and their Dissenters is generally managed, as if
it were Civil. Secondly, The difference betwixt Papist and Protestant is
carried on, as if it were chiefly Religious.

To the First, I say, It Is plausible, but false, it is an Artifice of ill men
to inflame the Government against good People, to make base Ends by other Men's
Ruin; whereas they that dissent, are at a Ne plus ultra on the behalf of the
English Government, as well as themselves. They neither acknowledge nor submit
to any other Authority. They hold the one common Civil Head, and not only
acquiess in the Distribution of Justice by Law; but embrace it as the best part
of their Patrimony. So that the difference between Protestants and their
Dissenters is purely Religious, and mostly about Church Government, and some
Forms of Worship, apprehended to be not so pure and Apostolical as could be
desired; and here it is, that Tenderness should be exercised, if in any case in
the World, or St. Paul is Mistaken.

But as to the Second, under Correction, the case is altered, for though it be
mostly managed on the side of Religion, The great Point is merely Civil, and
should never be otherwise admitted or understood. For want of this caution
Protestants suffer themselves to be drawn into tedious Controversies about
Religion, and give occasion to the Professors and Favorers of that way to
exclaim against them, as Persecutors for Religion, who had reprobated such
Severity in the Papists to their Ancestors (a most plausible and very often a
succesful Plea) when in reality the difference is not so much Religious as
Civil. Not but that there is a vast contrariety in Doctrine and Worship too;
but this barely should not be the cause of our so great distance, and that
Provision the Laws make against them; but rather that Fundamental inconsistancy
they carry with them to the Security of the English Government and
Constitution, unto which they belong, by acknowledging a Foreign Jurisdiction
in these Kingdoms. So that drawing into Question and Danger the Constitution
and Government, to which Scripture, and Nature and Civil Pact oblige their
Fidelity and Obedience, there seems a Discharge upon the Civil Government from
any further care of their Protection, that make it a piece of Conscience to
seek its Ruin, and which is worse, a Principle, not to be informed of better
things, for even here not Reason or Law, but the Pope must be Judge.

This being the Brief and Modest state of the Case, I must return to my first
great Principle, That Civil Interest is the Foundation and End of Civil
Government: and that how much Men desert the Interest of a Kingdom, so much
they Wound and Subvert the Government of it. I appeal to all Wise and
Considerate Men of the Truth of this by the present Posture of Affairs and
their proper Causes.

To come then to our Point, Shall English Men by English Men, and Protestants
by Protestants be Free or Oppressed? That is, Whether shall we receive as English
men and Protestants, those that have no other Civil Interest than that which is
purely English, and who sincerely profess and embrace the same Protestation,
for which the Ancient Reformers were styled Protestants, or for the sake of
Humor or Base Ends disown them, and expose them and their Families to utter
misery?

I would hope better of our great Church-mens Charity and Prudence; but if they
should be so unhappy as to keep to their old measures, and still play the Gaudy
but empty Name of Church against the Civil Interest and Religion of the Nation,
they will show themselves deserted of God, and then how long it will be, before
they will be seen and left of all sober men, let them Judge. For to speak
freely, after all this Light that is now in the world, no Ignorance can excuse
such Zeal, nor will wise men believe it to be either, but a Trick to weaken
Protestancy, that her declared Enemy may with less hazard gain the Chair. And
there is not so much reason to fear Professed Roman Catholics, as those
Gentlemen, who valuing themselves by their respects to the Church and
tenderness of her Independent honor, have the opportunity with less suspicion
of letting in Popery at the Back door. These are the men that pay off the
Phanatick in the Name of the Church, but for the good of the Pope, to whose
account those endeavors must be placed.

But it will go a great way to our Deliverance if we are not Careless to
observe the Secret workings of those that have vowed our Misery, and of them
such, as are in Masckarade, and wear the Guize of Friends are most Dangerous:
But some Men are Pur-blind, they can see Danger as near as their Nose, but in a
Difficulty, that is not a Foot from them, they are Presumptive, Rusty and not
to be governed, Could some Churchmen but see the Irreparable Mischiefs that
will attend them (if sincere to their present Profession) unless prevented by a
Modest and Christian condescension to Dissenting Protestant Christians, they
would never suffer themselves to be Mis^guided by Stiff and Rigid Principles at
this time of day.

If Christianity, that most Meek and Self denying Religion, cannot prevail upon
them, me thinks the Power of Interest, and that Self interest too, should have
some Success for in those cases they use not to be obstinate.

But I expect it should be told me, That this is the way to Ruin the Church,
and let in an Anarchy in Religion: Cujus contrarium verum. I am glad to obviate
this, before I leave you, seeing the Contrary is most true; for it leaves the
Church and Churchmen as they are, with this Distinction, that whereas now
Conformity is Coercive, which is Popish, it will be then Persuasive, which is
Christian. And there may be some hopes, when the Parsons, destitute of the
Magistrates Sword, shall of necessity enforce their Religion by good Doctrine
and holy Living; nor ought they to murmur, for that which satisfied Christ and
his Apostles should satisfy them: His Kingdom is not of this World, therefore
they should not Fight for him, if they would be his Servants and the Children
of his Kingdom, Christ and not Civil Force is the Rock his Church is built
upon. Nor indeed has any thing so Tarnisht the Cause of Protestancy, as the
Professors of it betaking themselves to Worldly Arms to propagate their
Religion. David could not wear Readiness Armor, and true Protestants cannot use
Popish Weapons, Imposition and Persecution. In short; It Is the very Interest of
the Church of England, to preserve the Civil Interest entire, or else Popery
will endanger all; but that cannot be unless all of that Civil Interest be
preserved; therefore Protestaat Dissenters should be indulged.

But some will say, There is a Difference even among Dissenters; Some will give
a Security to the Civil Government by taking the Oaths; others will not, and be
it through Tenderness, how do we know, but Papists will shrowed themselves
under the Wings of such Dissenters, and so in Tolerating Protestant Dissenters
to fortify Protestancy, in reality Popery will be hereby sheltered incognito.

I Answer, First, That such Oaths are little or no Security to any Government,
and though it may give some allay to the Jealousy of Governors, they never had
the Effect desired. For neither in Private Cases* nor yet in Public
Transactions have Men adhered to their Oaths, but their Interest. He that is a
Knave, was never made Honest by an Oath: nor is it an Oath, but Honesty, that
keeps Honest men such. Read Story and consult our Modern Times, tell me what
Government stood the firmer or longer for them? Men may take them for their own
Advantage, or to avoid Loss and Punishment: But the Question is, What real
Benefit, or Security comes thereby to the Government? It is certain they have
often ensnared a Good Man, but never caught one Knave yet: we ought not to put
so great a Value upon Oaths, as to render the Security of our Government so low
and hazardous.

God's Providence and the Wisdom of our Ancestors have found out a better Test
for us to rest upon, and that is our Common Interest and the Laws of the Land
DULY executed: These are the Security of our Government.

For example, a Man Swears he will not Plot, yet Plots; pray what Security is
this Oath to the Government? But though it is evident, that this be no Security;
that Law which Hangs him for Plotting, is an unquestionable one. So that it is
not for wise Governors, by Swearing men to the Government to think to secure
it; but all having agreed to the Laws, by which they are to be governed, let
any Man break them at his Peril. Wherefore good Laws, and a Just Execution of
them, and not Oaths, are the Natural and real Security of a Government.

But next, though some may scruple the Oaths, it is not for the sake of the
Matter so much as Form, which you know is not the case of Roman Catholics
(pray distinguish) and those very Persons, whoever they be of
Protestant-Dissenters, I dare say, they will very cheerfully promise their
Allegiance on the same Penalties, and subscribe any Renunciation of Pope and
Foreign Authority, which the Art of man can Pen; nor should it be hard for you
to believe they should subscribe what they have always lived.

To that part of the Objection, which mentions the danger of Papists concealing
themselves under the Character of Protestant Dissenters; under Favor I say, it
is most reasonable to believe, that those who will deny their Faith upon
record, as those that subscribe your Declaration do, will swallow the Oaths
too; for the Declaration flatly denis the Religion, but the Oaths only the
Pope's Supremacy, which even some of themselves pretend to reject. Therefore
those that can sincerely subscribe the Declaration, cannot be Papists.

If it be yet objected, that Papists may have Dispensations to subscribe the
Test, or a Pardon, when they have done it; I answer, they may as well have
Dispensations to take the Oaths or Pardons when they have taken them, and these
last six Months prove as much. There is no Fence against this Flail: At this
rate they may as well be Protestants, as Protestant* Dissenters, Ministers or
Bishops in Churches, as Speakers or Preachers in Meeting Houses: Nay, it is more
probable, where there is least Suffering, and most Preferment. But this
Objection only shows the weakness of both Oaths and Declaration for the Purpose
intended, and not, that they can hide themselves more under one People then
another. For they that can have a Dispensation or Pardon for one act, can have
it for another; especially when the matter of the Declaration is of a more
general weight to them, then that of the Oaths; all which confirms my former
Judgment of the Insecurity of such Oaths to any Government.

Give me leave then upon this to ask you, if you will bring a certain Ruin upon
any Protestant Dissenters for the sake of such an uncertain Security to your
selves? for this is the Question; I beseech you to weigh it as becomes wise and
good men, shall they be Reprobated for tenderly refusing, what being performed,
cannot save or secure you?

Consider, you have no reason to believe, but those that are allowed to
subscribe the Declaration, or that will be pardoned, when they have done it,
may be allowed to take the Oaths, or will be pardoned and absolved, when they
have taken them: but you are certain on the other side, that the Imposing of
the Oaths will be a great Snare to many Protestant* Dissenters, that love the
Government, and renounce both Pope and Popery; They will be ruined; which to me
is of the nature of an Argument for those People: for their not taking the
Oaths, proves plainly, they have no Dispensations nor hopes of Absolution, and
therefore no Papists; shall they then lie under the Severities intended against
Papists, who have none of their Dispensations or Absolutions to deliver them
from them? This is (with Submission, but in plain terms) to make the case of
the Kingdom worse; for it destroys those who are not Guilty, and whom, I
believe, you would not destroy.

Having brought the matter to this, I shall first offer you a new Test; Next,
the ways of taking it, with most aggravation against the Party rejecting or
breaking it; And lastly, how you may secure your selves from Papists disguizing
themselves among Protestant-Dissenters; that so nothing may remain a Remora in
the way, that shall not be removed, to leave you a plain and even Path to Peace
and Safety.

The New TEST.
I A.B. do solemnly and in good Conscience, in the sight of God and Men,
acknowledge and declare, that King Charles the second is Lawful King of this
Realm, and all the Dominions thereunto belonging. And that neither the Pope nor
See of Rome, nor any else by their Authority have Right in any Case to Depose
the King, or Dispose of his Kingdom, or upon any score whatever to absolve his
Subjects of their Obedience, or to give leave to any of them to Plot or
Conspire the Hurt of the King's Person, his State or People; and that all such
Pretenses and Power are False, Pernicious and Damnable.

And I do further sincerely profess, and in good Conscience declare, that I do
not believe, that the Pope is Christ's Vicar, or Peter's Lawful Successor, or
that He or the Sea of Rome severally or jointly are the Rule of Faith or Judge
of Controversy, or that they can absolve Sins: Nor do I believe, there is a
Purgatory after Death; or that Saints should be prayed to or Images in any
sense be worshipped. Nor do I believe, that there is any Transubstantiation in
the Lord's Supper, or Elements of Bread and Wine at or after the Consecration
thereof by any Person whatsoever. But I do firmly believe, that the Present
Communion of the Roman Catholic Church is both Superstitious and Idolatrous.
And all this I do acknowledge, intend, profess and declare without any
Equivocation, or reserved, or other Sense, then the plain and usual
Signification of these words, according to the real Intention of the Lawmakers
and the common Acceptance of all true Protestants.

This is the Test I offer; large in Matter, because comprehensive of Oaths and
Test too, yet brief in words.

The next thing is the Ways of taking it with most Aggravation upon the
Refusers or Violaters of it.

1. That in all Cities and great Towns, notice be given by the Magistrates
thereof to the Inhabitants of every Ward or Parish to appear on such a day, be
it New-Years-Day or Ash Wednesday rather (when the Pope Curses all Protestants)
at their public Hall or other places of Commerce, where the Magistrates shall
first openly Read, Subscribe and Seal the Test. Then that it be read again by
the proper Officer of the Place to the People, and that those that take it, do
audibly pronounce the words after him that reads it, and when they have so
done, that they subscribe and seal it. That such Subscriptions be Registered,
and Copies of each Parish's Subscription transmitted to the Parish, and Affixt
upon some public Place for all that will to see.

That in the Countries the Parishes of each Hundred or Rape may be likewise
summoned to appear upon the Day aforesaid at the head Market Town in the said
Hundred or Rape, and that the Justices of the Peace within that part of the
Country shall first read, subscribe and seal the said Test in view of the
People, and then that the People say, subscribe and seal the Test, as is before
expressed. Which being done, let the said Subscriptious be collected into one
Volumn, and kept in the County Court as a Book of Record; and that to each
Parish be transmitted a Copy of the said Parish's Subscription, to be affixt
upon some public Place within the said Parish for all to see, that please.

Lastly, Let this be done Annually, that is, upon every New Years Day or
Ash Wednesday, as a perpetual Testimony of the Peoples Affection to the King
and Government, and their Abhorrence of the Practices of Rome.

The Abuse of this Discrimination should be very Penal; for it is a great Lie
upon a Man's own Conscience and a Cheat put upon the Government: Your Wisdom
can best proportion and direct the Punishment; but it can scarcely be too
severe, as our Business stands.

But as in case of such Hypocrisy a severe Penalty should be inflicted, so
pray let Provision be made, that if any Person so subscribing should be
afterward called by the Name of Jesuit or Papist, without very good Proof, it
should be deemed and punished in open Sessions for a Slander and Breach of
Peace, yet so, as that the Penalty may be remitted at the Request of the Abused
Party.

I should think that this business, carefully done, might render needless my
Answer to the last Objection, viz. which Way shall we be able to prevent
Papists from passing for Protestant Dissenters, that so the Security propounded
to the Government be not baffled by Disguize? For no Papist can subscribe this
but he will Lie in the Face of the Government and Country, and that Yearly, and
upon Record too; which is ten times more then a Transient Oath, muttered with
one word spoken, and another dropped: However, that we may carry it as far as
humane Prudence can go, --

I yet offer two Expedients;

First, That upon Jealousy of any Persons being a Papist, or Popishly
inclined, who is known to frequent the Assemblies of Protestant Dissenters,
Four of that Party of most Note and Integrity, unto which he pretends to
adhere, should be summoned to appear before those Justices of the Peace, unto
whom the Complaint is made, to testify their Knowledge of the Person
suspected, his Education, Principles and Manner of Life; which way of
Inspection, as it goes as far as Man can reach, so can it scarcely fail; for
those Persons will not only discover their own Hypocrisy if they conceal him,
but expose themselves and their Friends to Ruin. So that to say true, the
Government has the Interest and Security of an Entire Party, for the discovery
of every such suspected Person.

But if this will not do, then

Secondly, Be you pleased to refer the Discrimination of suspected Persons to
the good old way of the Government; that is, the Inquiry and Judgment of Twelve
Men of the Neighborhood, to wit, a Jury; provided always, that they be such as
have taken or will themselves take the Test; else, that they may be Exceptable
by the Party suspected.

Indeed a good Expedient may be made out of both, for the first may be the
Evidence to the last, and I think you will hardly fail of your Ends.

I shall conclude with this Request, First to Almighty God, that he would
please to make us truly and deeply sensible of his present Mercies to us, and
to reform our Hearts and Lives to improve them thankfully. And Secondly to you,
that we may be loving, humble and diligent one to and for another; for as from
such Amendments we may dare promise great and sudden Felicity to England, so
if Looseness in Life, and Bitterness in Religion be not speedily reprehended and
reformed, and the Common Civil Interest maintained entire, God will, I justly
fear, repent he has begun to do us good, Adjourn the Day of our Deliverance to
that of our Repentance and Moderation, and Overcast these happy Dawnings of his
Favor by a thick and dismal Cloud of Confusion and Misery; which GOD AVERT!

These things that I have written, are no wild Guesses or May*be's, but the
Disease and Cure, the Danger and Safety of England; in treating of which, that
God that made the World knows, I have not gratified any private Spleen or
Interest (for I am sorry of the Occasion) but singly and conscientiously
intended his Honor, and the lasting Good of England, to which all Personal and
Party Considerations ought ever to submit.

Amicus Plato, Amicus Aristoteles, sed magis Amica Veritas, i. e. Anglia.
Your own Faithful and Most Affectionate PHIL' ANGLUS.


