The Great Question to be Considered by the KING, and this approaching
PARLIAMENT, briefly proposed, and modestly discussed:
(To wit) How far Religion is concerned in Policy or Civil Government, and
Policy in Religion? With an Essay rightly to distinguish these great Interests,
upon the Disquisition of which a sufficient Basis is proposed for the firm
Settlement of these Nations, to the most probable satisfaction of the several
Interests and Parties therein.
By one who desires to Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God
the things that are Gods.

THat this Nation, and the Nations of Scotland and Ireland concerned with it,
are at present in such a posture, and under such circumstances, as give just
reason both of fear and care more then ordinary both to Rulers and People, is
so without doubt, that it needs no proof; and that we are in a dangerous
Fever* in regard both to our Civil and Religious Interest, all in their wits
must know: which Disease, albeit it be now in the opinion of most come to a
Crisis, yet few can determine whether it will end in a natural cool, or prove a
distemper yet more dangerous and deadly. And truly, at this time we are so far
happy, that though the Evil be great which threatens, us, yet the Cause
thereof is very manifest, so that we are not put to the disadvantage of an
uncertain search in that matter. We see all this trouble proceeds from a
pretense of Religion, and Opinion that men have drank in, that for and because
of Religion, they ought to concern themselves in the Civil Government of the
Nations, yea so far as to overturn it, if otherwise the advancement of their
Religion cannot be procured. How much this Opinion, albeit managed by men
vastly differing as to the Religion they would advance, has wrought to the
shaking of these Nations, few can be ignorant; so that it seems high time, and
no season more opportune then now, that this Question were fully decided, What
is the Interest of Religion in Policy or Civil Government; and again, of Policy
and Civil Government in Religion? And how far men upon the account of Religion
may and ought to meddle in the Government, or with the Governors; and again,
how far the Civil Magistrate, as such, ought to concern himself in the
Consciences of the People? that if possible, such Principles may be pitched
upon, agreeable to the nature of Christianity, and to the soundest Principles
of Government, by which men may be possessed with a Faith, that Christianity
does not oblige them to meddle in Government, and reciprocally that they may be
the more quieted in that belief, that the Magistrate is not to concern himself
in their Consciences: so that in this mutual assurance, the Magistrate may rule
securely, and administer Justice to all equally, without fearing hurt from the
Religion of any of his people; and the people may fear God, and follow piety,
according to the best of their knowledge, without fearing prejudice from the
Magistrate therefore. And truly it cannot but be acknowledged, that it would be
a happy Nation where this were fully fixed; and the establishing of such
Principles seems the less difficult, that in the purest times of Christianity,
(so reputed by all) the true Christian Religion was not at all hurtful nor
dangerous to the Magistrate, though differing from it; nor did the Christians
judge it any part of their Religion, to seek to disturb him in his Government,
or screw themselves into it: and though again they acknowledged his Authority
in Civils to be just and lawful, yet they claimed an exemption from being
imposed upon by him in the exercise of their Consciences; so that a
re-establishing of those Principles and Practices which were believed and
followed, by those who on all hands are affirmed to have been the purest
Christians, and also good and faithful Subjects, will do the business.

But for the more clear understanding of this matter, it will be fit to take it
a little higher, and enquire how those two great Interests of Religion, and
Civil Government, came to be interlaced and mixed together. Cain was the first
that disturbed Civil Society because of Religion; and the Scripture, from which
alone we may expect it, gives no account of any thing like the mixing of these
Interests before the Flood; and after the Flood, the whole tract of the Hebrew
History from Heber to Moses, (for of the particular state of the Jews I shall
speak anon) (...) show, that the matter of Religion was wholly distinct from
the outward Policy and Government then used in the World. Jacob lived in
Laban's Family, though differing from them; and Joseph among the Egyptians,
with which Superstitious Nation we cannot suppose he joined in Worship, and yet
was both a faithful Friend to Pharaoh, and considerable Ruler over the People.
Moreover, if the true ground and rise of Government be considered, this will
more appear; for all Lawyers and States*men derive the first grounds of
Government, from the Posterity of Noah's Sons after the Flood, and do show how
through necessity, Reason and the Law of Nature led them thereunto; for the Law
of Nature giving to every man a natural and paternal Jurisdiction over his own
Family, when as the increase of Mankind, and necessity of Commerce, gave
occasion for several Families to be concerned together, and that these
concernments begot Controversies needful to be determined, and that every
Family stood upon equal foot as to Authority, and to decide by Force would
prove destructive, and not necessarily be just, and that it was unfit every man
should be Judge in his own cause; therefore Reason led them to choose men of
approved Justice and Honesty, to whom all differences were remitted, and whose
decisions served as Laws, and were readily submitted to, the parties resting in
the assurance of their equity: and this all Lawyers generally acknowledge* was
the first foundation of Civil Government, in the joint agreement of several
Families; from whence arose the Institution of Cities, and from their Interest
in the Country about the division of Provinces and Kingdoms. Now as in the
first part of Government in Families, the Authority stood in one* viz. in the
Father of the Family; so they usually chose one for the Government of joint
Families, who thence were called Kings; and this was the Original of Monarchy:
whom the opinion of Honesty, Knowledge and Justice, most readily and without
fear of Emulation advanced to that dignity, whose Judgment and W^ll answering
to the cause of their advancement, was a Law to the People. Afterward when the
respect put upon these Rulers or Kings, and the advantage thence accruing
increased, men began to be ambitious of the Employment, and from thence to use
their influence to obtain it; from which followed Faction, and often Bloodshed,
which made men fall upon the expedient of letting the Government rest upon the
Children of those who formerly had possessed it, the Veneration of their
Fathers, and the supposition and expectation they might inherit their Fathers
Virtues greatly contributing thereto; which laid the foundation of Hereditary
Monarchy. But when the Primitive simplicity and integrity of those first Ages
began to wear out, and that those Kings did extend and advance the Authority
they derived from their Predecessors, but lost their Equity and Justice; and
since the ancient and entire confidence put in the first Rulers, had made their
Government, and consequently their Successors, unlimited, it depending upon
Will, and not qualified by any Laws, whereof there were not written at that
time* Thus Monarchy degenerated into Tyranny, as appeared in Nimrod, and his
Successors, the Kings of Assyria, which gave a rise, as many judge, to the
^^^^itution of Commonwealths amongst the Grecians and others.

Now during these times, although the number of those that truly feared God,
and retained any (...) of pure Religion, were very few and for most part (at
least*so far as is conveyed to us in the Family and Success^^^ of Abraham; yet
that inward and Universal Testimony of a Deity, implanted in the hearts of all
men, (as all sorts of Christians acknowledge) did so far influence men, as to
set their thoughts about Religion; for as Cicero says Nulla Gens tam Barbara
quae Deum aliquem non agnoscat* since it is most certain, that Justice will
gain a Testimony in the hearts of the most barbarous, the ancient Veneration
and esteem to the great Justice and Equity of those Primitive Rulers, being
fixed in (...) and heighned by the depravation of their Successors; and this
compared with daily* (...) afforded to men in the course of Providence, begot a
belief that these things were the Gifts of these Good Kings (...) in Heaven,
from whence they came to be prayed unto, and reputed Gods (...) And thus those
things that did seem immediately to convey those (...) the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, came (...) to be adored, from whence sprung the Religion or diverse*
Nations* and thus (...) any (...) came to receive Power and Domination over
others, (...) became more universally to be received. Now whereas Religion
among the Gentiles had its rise so (...) hence, so every Nation had their
p^rticular (...), among this Roman^ (...), which they were devoted to* The
(...) of Religion with (...) insensibly, since all the Gentiles generally
esteemed it a duty to worship the Gods of that place and Country they came to,
as judging they had a sort of distinct and peculiar Jurisdiction there; so
there was little occasion of observing here a distinct Interest; because there
was no man to claim the liberty of exercising it: so far had blindness and
Idolatry overgrown the World. In which state things continued for many Ages,
until Daniel and the Three Children, after the carrying a way of the Jews by
Nebuchadnezzar, gave a rise rightly to distinguish and clear the Marches
b^twixt Religion and Policy, and claim the liberty of the one, without
prejudice to the other; for this making Religion necessary to Policy, took its
strength from the unlimited Tyranny of the Assyrian Monarchy, and was the
fruits of an Arbitrary Power, standing and exercised in the superlative degree;
(and it is observable, that where there is most of that sort of Government,
there this, to this day, most prevails; this being most suitable to mere
Tyranny, and contrary to a solid and well-ballanced Government:) for such being
the state of the Assyrian Monarchy, as all well read therein know, the
Flatterers of these Kings possessed them with a belief, that the Authority of
no Power even in matters of Religion, was to be acknowledged, nor even the
Counsel of any Deity sought to, above or besides that of the King; for they did
not build the reason of Obedience, upon the intrinsical verity of the thing
commanded by the King, as those that press the same thing now would seem to do,
or for shame pretend to do; but merely upon the Will and Command of the Prince,
whom they think ought not to be disobeyed, whatever he commanded, whose Will
they would have to be the only rule of men's Actions in all things: Hence came
the fury of Nebuchadnezzar against the Three Children, for not obeying him, Dan
3. in falling down before his Golden Image; and against Daniel, for praying
with the Windows open toward Jerusalem; for neither of them are charged for
doing any thing prejudicial to the State, and except in this, were found
faithful Servants to the King in other things wherein they were employed. And
as none will readily justify the Assyrian King in his doings, whereof himself
greatly repented, so the Employments he bestowed upon those and other Jews, and
wherein they proved useful and faithful to him, does sufficiently show, that
the distinct Interests of Religion and Policy under one Prince, may well be
found without prejudice either to Prince or People. The like may be observed in
the case of Ahasuerus, who was influenced by Haman to give out an Edict for the
destruction of the Jews; the reason whereof urged by Haman was, that they had
Laws different from the Kings Laws, and therefore it was not for the Kings
profit to suffer them. I need not bestow pains to refute Haman's reason, since
most men will condemn it.

The same thing took place for the same cause in Nero, and the rest of the
Emperors who persecuted the Christians; for the piety and ancient equity and
sobriety of the Romans wearing out, and the corruption* degeneracy and
effeminacy of the Eastern Nations prevailing, so as the Emperors would be
reputed and adored as Gods, thence came their endeavoring to oblige men to
acknowledge no God but their Will and Pleasure, and no Religion but what
depended thereon; thence they made Religion a necessary part of Government. And
thus I have briefly traced things until such time as Christianity came to be
established by Law, and Christians came to be Magistrates.

After that Christianity came to be received in the Courts of Princes, and that
the Emperors became Christians, their honest zeal was soon abused by the
corruption and covetousness of the Clergy, who for their own ends first
possessed them with a belief that they ought to seek to settle and establish
Christian Religion by their Force and Power, and that it did much contribute to
their Spiritual advantage to bestow large Revenues upon the Clergy, and that as
Supreme Magistrate he had a care and superintendency over the Church; in
meddling with which the Emperor Constantine found himself quickly not a little
embarassed, when he could not find a way to satisfy the Clergy, when they came
to quarrel among themselves; and so each Party afterward in the differences of
these Times* as they could draw the Emperor to their side, made use of this
Power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion, for the destroying each other:
until at last by the growing of Superstition and other great shakings which
happened to the Roman Empire, the Pope instead of being subject to the Emperor*
and appointed by him (which he was for several Centuries) made a shift to turn
him by degrees out of Italy, establish to himself a Temporal Jurisdiction in
Rome, as being forsooth Peter's Patrimony, and at last not only to be
independent from the Emperor, but superior to him, as by the tract even of
their own Historians is manifest, and known to all those who have read the
story of Hildebrand and others. And thus by the like means several Bishops in
Germany, and other places, abusing the zeal and ignorance of the people, came
into the possession of great Temporal Jurisdictions; and not only so, but in
all Nations of Europe they obtained a place in the Government, and became a
distinct State; by means of which, having an immediate dependence upon the
Pope, he came to exercise an Universal Monarchy in the Christian World: And
thus Religion came to be a part of Civil Government among Christians.

And it is greatly to be regretted, that in the Reformation this was not rooted
out, but in a great measure retained not only by the Lutherans, but even by the
Calvinists: So that although those who follow the Geneva Discipline, do pretend
to abstract the Clergy from meddling in State, yet their method of proceeding
proves at last the same; for while they lay an obligation upon the Magistrate,
under pretense of taking care for the Cause and Church of Christ, to establish
one sort of form of Religion, and ruin all others; wherein he must steer by
the Clergies Compass, or otherwise have the people blown up unto a Sedition
from the Pulpit: So that experience has proved, that under the Government of
Presbytery, (especially as it was improved in Scotland, where it came to its
height) the insolency and imperiousness of the Clergy became no less
troublesome and unsupportable to the Magistrates, then that of Bishops, whether
Papal or Protestant; so that it is manifest, the altering from one form to
another, has not cured these Nations of the mischiefs that therethrough has
attended them, so long as that fundamental Error is entertained, of making
Religion a part of the Civil Government. Now this brief Historical hint does
abundantly show, how these Interests are distinct, and ought not be jumbled
together: To which I shall add these brief Considerations.

First, Because Religion and Policy, or Christianity and Magistracy, are two
distinct things, have two different ends, and may be fully prosecuted without
respect one to the other; the one is for the purifying and cleansing the Soul,
and fitting it for a future state; the other is for the maintenance and
preserving of Civil Society, in order to the outward convenience and
accommodation of men in this World. A Magistrate is a true and real Magistrate,
though not a Christian; as well as a man is a true and real Christian, without
being a Magistrate. Christianity, far less this or that form of it, does not
belong to the being of Magistracy; else the Apostles and Primitive Christians
could not have acknowledged the Heathens to have been their lawful Magistrates
and Superiors, as they did, and taught their Disciples so to do, as appeared in
the practice of the Primitive Christians beforementioned.

Secondly, Christ says expressly, his Kingdom is not of this World; the thing he
came for is a business distinct from the external Government of the World, and
has no necessary connection thereto; and therefore there does not appear any
one saying of his or his Followers, to warrant Magistrates as such to meddle in
Religion, or to warrant his Disciples and Followers as such to meddle with the
outward Government of the Nations: And truly the dismal effects this has
produced, both to the ruin of Christianity and Civil Government, may convince
those that are not biased by particular Interest, (as all Clergymen, both
Pope, Prelate and Presbyter generally are) and love the good and advancement
either of Christianity or Civil Government, that it is high time to avoid this
snare.

To this the state of the Jews is usually objected, whose Religion and
Government was mixed together: But that saying of Christ abovementioned is
thereunto a sufficient Answer, for they had an outward Kingdom, which Christ
came not to establish, neither for himself nor Followers; and theirs related to
a particular Race or Family, which is not the case now: besides that their
outward Policy was by Revelation expressly given them of God, who gave them
Rulers, Judges, Kings, oftentimes by the particular appointment of his
Prophets, without respect either to hereditary Right, or the choice of the
People; and unless we would plead for the like thing now, which none I know of
do, I mean of those that strive for the Government, there can be nothing
rationally urged from the state of the Jews in this matter.

But some may be apt to say, that there is a necessity that Religion and Policy
be interlaced, because those things are a part of Religion, which are of
absolute necessity to Government; such as the suppressing of Murder, Adultery,
Theft, Perjury, which surely belongs to the Magistrates to punish. To this I
answer, It is true it belongs to the Magistrate to punish such like crimes; but
as these things are contrary to the Law of God, and such as Religion strikes
against, so they are injurious to Civil Society, and tend to destroy it* and
therefore come under the Magistrates cognizance in this respect, or under this
reduplication, and not upon the mere Religious account; for whatever is
destructive or injurious to Civil Society, comes to be punished by the
Magistrate upon that score, without respect to its concern in Christianity: as
we see these things were punishable by the Magistrates in all well-regulated
Kingdoms and Commonwealths among the Heathens; where they could not be
considered as any part of the Christian Religion. Not that I deny, where both
Magistrate and People are Christian, and agreed in the acknowledgment that such
things are not only hurtful to Civil Society, but destructive to their immortal
Souls, he may improve that reason to deterr the people from these evils* as
also to bear home to them the justice of the punishment: but this he does not
simply as a Magistrate, but as a Christian, even as such Magistrates among the
Heathens as were Philosophers sometimes used to do.

To this I suppose it may be also readily objected; That according to this
Principle both Papists, Presbyters, Anabaptists, yea such as were John of
L^yden and his Accomplices, may and ought to be tolerated, if the Magistrate has
nothing to do with the Consciences of his Subjects: And again, if the
Magistrate should become any of these, the People ought quietly to bear it. To
this I answer, and indeed herein the excellency of this fundamental Principle
both in Religion and Government will appear, That Popery has two parts, the
one is that which is merely Religious, that is, which relates properly to
Religion or Conscience, and are peculiar to them, such as the believing
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Adoration of Saints and Images, yea and the
Superiority of the Bishop of Rome over other Churchmen, as they call them; all
which, and those of this kind, may be believed and professed without prejudice
to Civil Society, and as being matters merely relating to Conscience, come not
properly under the Magistrates cognizance. The other part is the opinion of the
Pope's power over Princes and States, his absolving the people from their
Obedience, his giving them Dispensations to kill and destroy them; and allowing
them not to keep Faith to Heretics, and such like; which as they are
destructive to Government, are truly no part of Religion, but a politic
contrivance long hatched by the Bishop of Rome and his Dependants, for
establishing to himself a firm Monarchy in the World, and therefore ought to be
guarded against and punished by the Magistrate, not as Errors in Religion, but
as destructive to the Government. If it be said, all Papists believe and
profess, and are ready to practice these things: To that I say, then in so far
they are liable and ought to be punished, and not tolerated. But let the reason
of our procedure and sentence against them be, not their opinion in things
merely Religious, but their destructiveness to Civil Government: Thus if we go
upon this sound Principle, we shall preserve the honor of the truly Christian
and Protestant Cause, and take away from them all occasion of glorying in their
Sufferings, or of strengthening themselves against Protestants in Popish
Countries, who live peaceably, and hold no such Principles as oblige them to
make any disturbance in the Government. The like may be said of all others
called Sectaries, whom the Magistrate is to restrain only in so far as they
hold principles, or bring forth practices that are destructive to the
Government. As to the second part of the objection, relating to the Magistrate,
I answer, such are either Elective, or Hereditary; if Elective, there is no
place for the objection, because the Electors have access to choose men of such
Principles as they like best; if Hereditary, it is either absolute, or limited;
if there be any such exyress limitation, as excludes men of such and such
Principles, then the case is solved; if not, the former distinction will hold:
Let the Magistrate entertain such Principles as best likes him, in matters that
are purely Religious; but if he will entertain such as are destructive to the
Government, by which he infringes the privileges of the people, and will rob
them of their Lives, Liberties and Estates, merely upon the account of
Religion, certainly they have great reason to beware how they come under such a
Yoke; which they can do without any blemish, and with full justification in the
face of the Nations, since they deny not the Magistrate the exercise of his
Religion for himself: and herein the people also may be sufficiently secured,
whatever be the M^gistrates Religion, if thus bounded, as in the application to
the state of things here in England, and Scotland also, will appear, to which I
now proceed.

It is to be considered, that these Nations having been long involved in a
Civil War, through which a new people (not formerly, or but little known) have
grown up, who as men have or ought to have an interest in the same Immunities,
Freedoms and Privileges with the rest; as to Civil things at least; for else
in England the Papist might plead Magna Charta, that all but they ought to be
extruded the Nation, or be liable to such troubles as might make it too hot for
them to stay in; and so in Scotland and Ireland, if not by the same, yet by
other mediums: so that as to the Spiritual Constitution, or the Civil
Government of these Nations as to Spiritual things the Laws have not been as
those of the Medes and Persians, but have received alterations according to the
necessity and convenience of times; that those who have given the Law, and in
and for whose favor, for whose protection the Laws were expressly made, had
them turned against them, and for the protection of those against whom the Laws
were made.

Since the coming in of the King that now is, (after a long Civil intestine
War, as has been said) that which has been set up paramount over and above
all, has been that of Bishops, or Episcopacy, to the utter suppression of all
others; with all strenuous endeavors to strengthen and propagate that
Profession, and drive on an Uniformity, which how ineffectual it has hitherto
been, all may see, as may appear by the Kings Declaration in the year 1672. and
though a considerable time has since intervened, it may still be seen there
was good reason for the import of that Declaration, whereby the Ship of these
Nations has been tossed and liable to great hazards, through the tumultuating
humors, surmises, discontents of the severals concerned, in being liable to be
out of the protection of the Law; so that upon these accounts, and the
concurring circumstances that either have been, or might have bern artificially
managed to blow the Coal; I say, considering the combustible matter, it is to
me matter of acknowledgment and admiration, that things have not run unto
confusion long ere now: And truly my hope is, that God Almighty intends better
things for these Nations, then that one size or sort of people should be set up
in matters of Religion, to the utter ruinating and undoing of all others; or
that thereby through the impatience of man, (to whom it is hard to bear to have
his Spiritual and Civil Liberties snapt away at once) or through the artifice
of them who upon other grounds of discontent, may make use of this to blow
these Nations into a flame, which God forbid, my hope and desire is rather,
that those in Authority may consider as Christians and prudent men, how to land
the Ship in a safe Harbor. First, how as Christians they are not concerned to
meddle in this matter; that is, that Christianity lays no obligation upon the
Magistrate to establish any form of the Christian Religion by Law, is above
shown: so that such do say nothing to the purpose, who land this debate (as
most of the Clergy do) in recurring to the Laws in force, saying, So it stands
by Law, so it is settled by Law, for the Law was no less strong in Q. Mary's
days for Popery, then now for that which is set up. Next, if it stand upon a
mere prudent prudential politic foot, and so be settled by the Laws of these
Nations, I apply my self in the second place to consider, how far it is truly
suitable to prudence, how far it is prudential for the Magistrates of these
Nations, how far it is good policy in them to own, assert, lay claim to such a
power, as things are circumstantiated especially; that is to say, to set up by
Law any form of Christian Religion, and by the Civil Power and Authority to
stand by the Professors of it, to the depressing, exterminating,
discountenancing, crushing and discouraging of all others: I say, this seems to
me not only to be Antichristian, but Antiprudential, Antipolitical, and a thing
of a wonderful dangerous consequence, and impracticable for any long
continuance, without the hazarding of all, for these Reasons.

It is not prudential for Magistrates to keep alive Seeds of discord,
emulation, strife, among the people over whom they rule, for this but narrows
his or their power, instead of enlarging it; for as this engages those who are
countenanced, so it alienates more or less all those who are discountenanced or
is liable to do so. Besides all the several other dissenting Judgments in these
Nations, there are three sorts that lay claim to the Magistrates espousing them
and their way, as that which he is obliged to do in a National way; and all
these three lay claim for the limits of their Church to be as broad and long at
least as the Nation, to wit, the Popish, Prelatical, and Presbyterian; all
these pretend to be diametrically opposite to each other, and each of them have
had the advantage to get the Magistrate on their side, and to be settled by
Law; public places and public maintenance have belonged to them: Thus even
the Democratical Government of Presbytery, could cry out on all meddlers with
Church Lands, but especially Tithes, as Sacrilegious persons. Now this has
been especially the Bone of Contention among these three; it was not, nor is
not merely that any of them should be owned to be the Church and Ministry of
Christ only, or before all others, but that they should be set above all
others, so as to have the maintenance and respective privileges due to Holy
Church. Now were it prudential to set up any of these three, as the present
condition and complexion of the Nations are? I say, Nay; as for the Papists,
they are a diminutive Sect to the rest of the Nation respectively, though upon
all other accounts they stood upon an equal foot with the rest differing from
them, as I have shown before they do not: as to those of the Episcopal way,
such as truly are engaged in their Judgments to that way, are not much more
considerable then they, so that they will be found but a diminutive Sect also*
so that to establish them, and drive a Conformity to them, has been hitherto
but to go against Wind and Tide, because the sense of the people (though upon
differing accounts) has been and is against them: as to the Presbyterians, it
is to be confessed they are more considerable then both the other for number,
though not of one Judgment among themselves, albeit all agreeing that they
ought to be set up, owned and countenanced by the Magistrate, and he to be
subservient to them, not to be the Head of the Church, that is lodged in the
General Assembly: yet in prudence it is not ^^t, nor a foot large enough for
the Magistrate to rest upon, so as to crush down all others; for they, taken as
all of one Judgment, will be found but a diminutive Sect, put in the balance
with all others, to wit, the other two beforementioned, and the rest of the
dissenters in the Nation. And as they are a people positive and peremptory, and
liable to fall in differences among themselves, as was manifest in Scotland
about the year 1650. it will be no less hard to satisfy them; then they to
satisfy one another; however this will be the minimum quod sic, that all
others must be crushed and born down, so as it will be found hard to please
them, for they will be found to grow in their Encroachments and Demands, and it
will not be found so easy a matter, whatever cause or occasion should be found
for it, to limit or stop them once being set up as they that are less
considerable: neither do I see it prudential for the Magistrate to countenance
any of these, so as to give them the sole countenance of Public Authority, as
to Church Power, as it has been called and accounted the National Church, and
so these to have Public Authority and Maintenance, and Privilege according to
Law* and the rest only to be tolerated and connived at, for this is only to
keep up the Bone of Contention, that as opportunity serves they in the Saddle
may be unhorsed, and they that are stronger get into their room: For it is
never to be reckoned of, that the Papists though they had their Liberty by way
of toleration or connivance, as the rest of dissenters, will be satisfied so
long as they see Law countenance them that separated from them, and those in
the possession of their Mass-houses and Maintenance, that were originally
settled upon and consecrated by their Church, and which as to its original had
its rise from their Church? Or is it to be reckoned upon that the Presbyters,
whatever countenance or toleration were granted them, though settled by Law,
would be satisfied while excluded from the Public Places and Maintenance? and
they being the stronger, and a growing Interest, would still be lying at catch
to be in again; were it not then good Christianity in the Magistrates, who
profess themselves to be Christians, to deny themselves in giving to Christ
Jesus that which is his due only, that is, to be Head in and over his Church,
and leave the Government to him, and get their hands out of this Thorny matter,
that has produced nothing to themselves but trouble, without which these
Nations can never be firmly settled: I am bold to say, and were it not good
prudence so to do. What has been the Fama clamosa for many years of old, and
of late before the War, and since the coming in of the King, and is so at this
day? Popery! Arbitrary Government! there has a Jealousy entered the minds of
people concerning these things; could a better way be found out to pluck up
these surmises by the Roots, then if all concerned would show a willingness and
ready compliance, and contribute to it in their respective places and stations,
that it might be fundamentally settled and established as a Basis never to be
shaken, that all Christian men should be left to the Government of the Law of
Jesus, to worship him and serve him, as they shall find themselves by him
obliged; the Magistrate not at all to meddle or intermeddle therein, further
then to see that this be kept among all, so that no man nor men may be imposed
upon in the matters of Religion, within the bounds of his Jurisdiction, by any
outward force or violence; nor his Authority be made use of to confirm any
Spiritual sentence more or less, but as every one has been or may be persuaded
to join themselves to any sorts of people, upon a Spiritual or Christian
account, they may be left so to do in matters merely and only relating to
Conscience, and that all Laws to the contrary may be utterly and totally
abolished; and as to all other things, every one from the least to the greatest
to be subject to the Civil Laws of the Nation, and that Order and Good
Government among men may be established, and that none under whatsoever
pretense may plead Immunity from subjection to the Laws, in such things that
come properly and unquestionably under the Civil Magistrates cognizance; so
that he may be an encouragment to those that do well, and a terror to evil
doers, that good and wholesome Laws may be made by those to whom it is proper so
to do, for establishing the Rights and Properties of men as men, and for
encouraging Sobriety; and this is proper for the Magistrate.

But what will become of Holy Church, will some say? She will be where she was,
for the Magistrate withdrawing his hand, leaving every profession and way to
stand upon its own legs, Unchurches neither Papists, Episcopalians, nor
Presbyterians, they are a Church still, if they were so before. But says the
Bishops and Hierarchy, What shall become of us? if the Magistrate withdraw his
hand, where shall we have Maintenance? where shall we have a place to Preach
in? Ye shall have no less advantage or ground to stand in then those that
relate to other people, that account themselves to have Ministers, and to be
Churches; yea this advantage you have above all them, that you have had 18 or
19 years Places and Benefices, so you may the better hear the want, till you
try the benevolence of your People, which is all the rest will have as well as
you, so you will all stand on an equal foot; and it is fit they should* for the
public Preaching places, and the public Maintenance has been the Bone of
Contention in these Nations, and will be found to stand upon the same foot with
Abbeys and Nunneries, and Church Lands: The intent originally was honest and
good, and from ^^al. As the one (...) time of Reformation; and for public
necessity and convenience, was removed and utterly abolished; as to the use
they were first intended for; so may these, and so must these, if ever the
Nation see a firm and thorough settlement; the Church Lands (a suitable case
given to the Tenants) applied to the Revenue of the Crown, and annexed thereto
for ever inviolably; I mean Bishop, Chapte^, and Dean-Lands, and such as have
been accounted in the right and possession of the present Churches
respectively. The Tithes have been a great oppression upon the people of these
Nations* and would be absolutely extinguished both as to name and thing, so as
there may be no footsteps of them; and that no man whatsoever that is a
Proprietor in Land, may be liable to have another to have an Interest in his
Tithe, which has been a great bondage and servitude; and had its Interest upon
the account that they belonged to Holy Church, and was their Patrimony. Now
things being settled upon another foundation and turned quite in another
Channel, by the prudence and care of those to whom it be^^^gs properly so to
do, with a suitable regard every way, that the c^nscientiously tender
Christian, ^ho ha^^ suffered daily upon this account, and the Rights of men, as
men, may be answered, and (...) way and expedient found out to give some
competent satisfaction, suitable to the Rights and Possessions of
Impropriators, so as henceforward the Stock and Tithe may b^ so confounded and
involved, that whoever has the Property of Possession of Lands, may never be
liable to any such bondage more or less, by these accessions of the Bishops;
and other Church Lands not already disposed o^ into the possession of the
Laity, so called, there shall be a considerable addition of Revenue to the
Crown, and hereby the Body of ^^e people of those Nations will be gratified, in
removing the great oppression and servitude of Tithes, the cause of Contention
will be removed, and every sort and size of people will stand upon their own
legs; all unreasonable expectations of setting up one sort of men, and throwing
down all the rest, will be out; all fears and jealousies, and animosities upon
this account will cease, and hereby that which has been a standing fear and
jealousy upon the people of these Nations, will be plucked up by the Roots.

If it be said, What shall become of the Magistrate or Magistrates, things
being thus settled? Where were the hazard? for were it not unreasonable that
the Magistrate or Magistrates should be in worse case then the People? who are
to be left to their absolute liberty as to the matter of Religion, without
being liable to any Civil inconveniency, or abridg'd of any privilege upon the
account of this or that form of Religion, merely as such; then why not the
Magistrate? It being fundamentally settled, as it would be, and is needful it
should be, that except in his or their Family as Chap^ain, and that in a
temporary way, it should not be in the power of the Magistrate or Magistrates,
to make any standing Maintenance, or settlement upon any sort of men in Orders,
or to set them up or countenance them, further then by his or their being of
their persuasion, or allowing them on such account entertainment as Chaplain^;
and that for clearing the people of these Nations of the aforementioned Seeds
of Jealousy, it be fundamentally settled as a Magna Charta for ever, that
whosoever in the Magistracy, or any other from the least to the greatest, shall
be found to alter or innovate this Fundamental settlement, shall be liable to
be judged by this Law, as guilty of Tre^son against the Fundamentals of the
Government, for the Law only is, and is to be declared Supreme; and that
whoever either separately or in conjunction, shall go against this Basis or
Fundamental settlement, were it a single person, or the Parliament, shall ceas^
to be Magistrate or a Parliament, and their Decrees become void and null: for
the ^^ndame^tals are never to be altered, viz. that the Magistrate, as
Magistrate, is to be wholly* shu^ but, as to all meddling in matters of
Religion, but every man as to the Magistrates interposition (...)* be left
free; and that all men, as men born freemen, not having fo^f^i^ed their Liberty
by doing those things which makes them obnoxious, shall be secure in their
Persons and ^^dates from all. Arbitrary proceedings; which will truly be for
the ho^^ur and greatn^ss of the Magistrate or Magistrates, and safety of the
People.

These things being writ by one that hates to be Dogmatical, are therefore only
modestly proposed and humbly submitted to those of more mature Judgment and
greater Experience, especially to the New appro^ching Parliament, by him who in
truth can subscribe himself,

Philo-Britannicus.


