A DECLARATION OR TEST TO DISTINGUISH PROTESTANT-DISSENTERS from PAPISTS and
Popish Recusants, as it was given to the Parliament in the Year 1680. by the
People called QUAKERS, and now Reprinted.
I A. B. Do Solemnly in the presence of God, and in my Conscience Profess,
Testify, and Declare that I do not believe, that the Church of Rome, or Papal
Church, is the true Church, out of which there is no Salvation; Or that the
Pope or chief Bishop of Rome, is Christ's Vicar, or Vicegerent on Earth; Or
that he, or the Sea of Rome, jointly or severally, is Head of, or has any
Supremacy over the true Catholic Church in general, or my self in particular;
Or that he or they is, or are Sole, Chief, or certain Judge, or Judges in
Spiritual matters, or of the sense of the Holy Scriptures; Or that the Pope, or
his Priests have power to Pardon Sins, past, present or to come.

And I do believe that at, or after the Priest pronouncing the Words of
Consecration upon the Elements of Bread and Wine, commonly called the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, or Sacrament of the Altar; There is not any
Transubstantiation, nor any part of the Substance of the Bread or Wine, changed
into Flesh or Blood of Christ. And that the Sacrifice of the Mass, Adoring and
Bowing to Crucifixes, Pictures, and Images, and the use of them in Worship. As
also of the Invocation and Adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint or
Angel, the Doctrine of Purgatory, and Prayers to the Dead, and for the Dead,
are Doctrines and practices Erroneous, Superstitious, and Idolatrous, and
contrary to the truth of the Holy Scriptures. I believe there is no Mediator
between God and Man, but Christ Jesus only the Lord of Life and Glory, who is
the only Head of his Universal Church, as the Holy Scriptures testify.

And I do further believe, that neither the Pope nor any other, by or under his
Authority jointly or severally, have any power to depose Princes, or to Absolve
their Subjects of their Allegiance, on any account whatsoever; Or has power to
authorize, or give leave to me, or any other Subject of their Realm whatsoever,
to Plot or Conspire the hurt of the Kings Person, his State, Government, or
People.

And I do solemnly in the presence of God, Testify and Declare that I make
this Declaration, and every part thereof, in the plain and ordinary sense of
the words read unto me, as they are commonly understood by English Protestants,
without any Evasion, Equivocation, or Mental Reservation whatsoever, etc.

LONDON, Printed March, 1688/9.


