Annimadversions on the Apology OF THE Clamorous Squire AGAINST THE Duke of
Buckinghams SECONDS, As Men of No Conscience.
The Introduction.
IT is a Judgment upon some Men, not only to mistake, but to refuse to be
informed; as it is the worst of Natures to be afraid that other men should be
in the Right.

All Dissenters must be in the Wrong, whether they be or no: And they must not
mean any thing that is Good, by good Words, whether they do or no. Though it
were that they should say they would not have the Government or National Church
destroyed, and only pray for a little room to exercise their own way quietly,
and that they will pray for, and pay Tribute cheerfully to their Auspicious
Caesar.

And why all this Unkindness and Injustice, but for fear such men of Wrath and
Interest should want a pretense to destroy them? Which in my opinion shows them
ill Sons of the Church, that unwillingly believe well of another, and had
rather they were in the Wrong than in the Right.

For in all the late Pamphlets against Liberty of Conscience, there is not one
word of winning one poor Dissenter to the Church, no more than of Tolerating
them out of the Church. But how peaceable soever he be, he is cast out for a
Vessel of Wrath, good for nothing but to be Hanged here, and Damned hereafter.

It is a Melancholy Prospect for him, but not without Instruction, and some
Hope. For Extremes do the Authors of them no good: And these Flashes may be but
a Lightning before Death, I mean, of Severity.

It is always darkest before Day: Ease and Liberty of Conscience, for all this,
may yet dawn under the Government of our Brave King.

And who would not hope a little longer, that has stayed all this while? Will
other Princes give better Terms in their Countries, or keep them better? Let Us
then be Patient and Humble, and pray God to mollify the Hearts, even of them
that hate us. Vincit qui patitur. And so I come to the severe Gentleman against
the DVKE of BVCKINGHAM and his SECONDS, for Men of No Conscience; in which we
shall have a measure of his, of his own giving, and that will show it to be
none of the best.

HE begins, page 3. with the Loyalty of the House of Commons, and the reason of
his Judgment, to wit, If we consider, Who has chosen them, and Who are chosen.
Now, no body doubts their Loyalty, without this lucky Reason given by the
Squire, of Who chose them, and Who are chosen. The case is plain, and needed
not his officious Note upon the House, for Spectacles to the People.

But if it be so, The Dissenters Insolence is insufferable in their Pleas for
Liberty of Conscience. Which I take to be a Reflection upon that great
Assembly; it prejudges their Wisdom and Goodness. What knows he which way
Reason of State may incline their Judgment; or what Motives may induce their
Debates and Resolves. Is it Insolence, and that unsufferable too, for men to
humbly pray, they may have leave to say their Prayers in another way than that
which is common?

If any Man has done ill, must the Principle suffer, and the Party pay the
Reckoning, especially if neither be in the Fault? Here Is a Loyal Parliament,
Ergo, A Million of People must be Ruined. A fine Christian, and as good a
Statesman. I hope, there is Preference of one, without Destruction of the rest,
and Rebuke without Ruin. The Dissenter may live, though the Churchman only be
preferred. And only let him be preferrd, so that the other may not be confounded.

He says, Page 3, 4. Liberty of Conscience has imbroyl'd three Nations in
Blood, and yet the Patrons of it allowed it not to one another, as
Presbyterians, Independents, etc. Nor did they to King Charles the First, the
Church of England, or Roman Catholics. He might have added the Quakers too,
that suffered more Cruelties than any other Party, under them.

But I pray, how does this shake the Reasonableness of Liberty of Conscience?
For, First, that was not any part of the stated Quarrel between the King and
Parliament. Secondly, If they that made the War, disowned it, and denied it,
how were they Patrons of it? Or how did that Principle come to lay three
Kingdoms in Blood? It seems then that Liberty of Conscience must pay the
Reckoning of the Men that are against it; or that because those Men were
against it (and therein doubtless did very Ill) therefore the Church of England
would do ill to give it. Make this good, and he shall be my Oracle.

But why? for fear they should be undone by giving it, because they were undone
that did not give it. Mighty well argued! This Gentleman bids for the first
Doctor next Act at Oxford.

You would not give it to me, that you would not, and therefore why should I
give it to you? No such matter; Truly I don't intend it. This is pretty Logic!
it is Demonstration, backward. But Passion, though it rules Women, it should not
Rule in the Church. Wise and Good Men, consider the Right and Prudence of a
thing, to which private Passions are made submit.

Page 5. But the Protestant Dissenters deserve no Liberty, because in Seventy
Two they were for Liberty with the Papists, in Eighty without them, and now in
Eighty Five it is not only lawful, but necessary that the Roman Catholics have
their Liberty too.

Granting this to be so, what is that to Liberty of Conscience? It only shows
the Partiality of the Men, and perhaps that would have been granted him for a
word's asking. This proves nothing against the Principle, though the Squire
upon this so fiercely concludes, all the Villainies in the World against Liberty
of Conscience. But when he has done all he can, they were not Dissenters, under
Correction, that in Eighty prosecuted the Roman Catholics, and refused them
Liberty, but Church of Englandmen, and such of them too, as would not allow it
to some Protestant Dissenters, for fear that Papists should hide themselves
amongst them, and that they therefore must swallow the most severe Tests that
could be framed to show themselves not Friends to that Communion. And to tell
truth, and I beseech the Gentleman, not to take it amiss that I say, the
Dissenters were invited to the share they had in opposition to Popery, by
Churchmen, ay, they were for a Comprehension, to make the Church stand
broader, the better to receive the Assaults of Rome without hazard. And had the
Dissenter been more modest to his Mistress, and not so malepert and officious,
he had doubtless been upon better Terms with her now. However, her Anger must
not endure forever, nor destroy her Servant for being too busy or eager in the
Service she called him to.

Well, But the Duke of Buckingham's Seconds are Men of no Conscience because
they charge the Exclusion upon the Members of the Church of England, This is so
bitterly resented, that we are told, That an honest Turk would have scorned so
base a Practice, within five years after the Fact, and in a Case wherein the
whole Nation knows the contrary.

If Exclusion, or no Exclusion, be to determine the true from the false Church
of England Men, as page 7. the Proposition will be doubly false; For there are
men that were not for Exclusion, that were not Members of the Church of
England, and there are Members of the Church of England, that were for the
Exclusion. And to this charge in the Reply and the Defense, he gives no Answer,
but Anger, which for a Man to avoid, when the Question lies upon it, and that
grounded upon matter of Fact, shows his fear of Success, and that, the weakness
of his Cause. But since the Dissenters by wholesale are to bear the blame, I
do affirm the Excluders were Conformists, and are yet Communicants of your
Church, and the greatest part of them upon Education and constant Practice too.
And that this is Truth, and no Slander, read the List, and it is a
demonstration. Nay, I challenge the Gentleman to name six Persons of all the
Excluders, that dissent from the established Church.

Nor is this of yesterday; for if we look back, we shall see the most
celebrated Bishops of our Church barring the Succession in the Law of the 13th
and 27th of Q. Eliz. See Sir Sim. Dew. page 140. and 207.
and when that Queen pleaded Conscience in not assenting to a Law to put our
King's great Grand Mother, Mary Queen of Scots to Death, the same Reverend
Bishops undertook to remove the Scruple; yet nothing but, Away with those
Disloyal Dissenters.

Own them then ingenuously, that they are Members of your own Church, and that
their Defection began within your selves, and that, for all your Invectives,
and turning them over now to the Dissenters, because your are ashamed of them,
they are in communion with you still, and daily Conformists to the Worship, and
as such, are admitted to the accustomed Rites and Privileges of your Church.
Page 7. To charge all Addresses and the Oxford Parliament to the account of
Dissenters, is not wise, any more than true, for it is to give the greater
Numbers to the dissenting party, since it is plain, how unequal they were that
fell in with that excluding humor in the Kingdom.

But this is not all he has said, to prevent the Legislative Goodness to
Diss^nters. They must not have Liberty, lest it be charged upon the Government
as a design to bring in Popery and Arbitrary Power.

I remember a Story of Harry Martin, that when Cromwell came to dissolve the
Rump, to justify his Action, among other things, he accused some of their
Members of an evil Life, saying, Here sits a Drunkard, and there (pointing to
him) sits an Whore-master; Harry Martin sitting between two sober grave men,
jogged them, saying, Which of you two does he mean? The Dissenters must be
blamed of those that are Guilty. It Is hard to suffer for Faults, and be chid of
them that did them.

No, 'twas the Gentlemen of that Communion that impeached the Prerogative, in
the Declaration of Indulgence, and set the Political capacity of the King in
opposition to his National, and to make their business more popular, bestowed
that Comment upon it, of a design in the Court to let in Popery and Arbitrary
Government.

Upon the whole matter, it is not unworthy of some thought, that this way of
making Whigs and Fanatics of all, that in every Point come not up to a Hair,
though otherwise Men of Virtue, Piety, Wisdom, and perfectly Churchmen, may
prove of ill Consequence: for it narrows, where it is Wisdom to enlarge, and
greatens, where Prudence enclines to lessen, I mean the Credit of Number.

This makes me the more admire one Expression, viz page 8. That the Members of
the Church of England have turned over to the Dissenters all the Excluders, and
laid the Bill of Exclusion at their Doors, and washed her Hands of them, as
Pilot did of our Saviors Blood, Where, besides the false Politics of making
so many thousand D^ss^nters in two Lines, and that without all hope of
Recovery, he unhappily makes the Church of England men cowardly Pilot, and the
Excluders to answer the place of our blessed Savior. A pretty Allusion to
credit the Church, and disgrace Excluders.

This is not the happiest part of his Apology.

But I would have hoped that a man who shows not to want a share of Wit and
Expression, should be so disingenious as from the Author of the Defensive
Sheet, saying, Take off the thing that Pinches, and see then whether the Church
men or the Fanatics and Catholics will be most governable. To infer,
Pers^cute the Church men, bestow the Bishoprics and Church Revenues amongst
the Catholics and Phanaticks, and see which will be the best qualifi^d, and
most dutiful Subjects. A rare Expedient.

May I not better say, a rare Consequence? as if easing Dissenters, and not
wringing their Backs, were stripping the Church, and clothing Diss^nters in
Velvit, then which, nothing less was thought of. This Incharity and Injustice
ruin all. Such men cannot hope to escape the Judgment of God, that are so
Injurious in their Judgment to men.

But he is angry with his Grace, the D. of Buckingham for leading the Dance,
and if a Dance it must be, it is an old Country one, at which he has been
excellent of long time, and who would not Dance to such a Fiddler? But how
Transubstantiation comes to be beholding to the Duke, whose Conclusion excludes
it utterly, of which a Boy of seven Years old is judge, let the Gentleman
consider once more.

However, his Grace may happen to ask this Gentleman once in his Life, if he be
the man that charges him with leading the Dance to men of no Honor, no
Conscience, no Honesty, and that advocates a Cause of so much Treason and
Impiety, as is laid to the charge of Liberty of Conscience.

To the Dissenters Objection, Page 10. he says, in their Name, That all the ill
things they have done, is because there are Laws made against them, and that
they would be quiet, if they might have their Liberty; and tells us, That their
ill and disloyal Practices in Queen Elizabeth's time, drew the first Law upon
them, and that was the 35 th of the Queen. But that is no Answer to the
Objection, for they were made dangerous, as Conventicles are now, by suspicion
and prevention, not that they did any ill thing deserving that Severity; but
Church Refractoriness, Bishop Whitgist was pleased to translate into Sedition:
The old way, Indeed, my Lord, they are Enemies to Caesar, and Exalters of
another King, one JESUS. So that it is begging the Question, to ground this Law
on the seditious Practices of the Dissenters; and we are to learn when any of
our Time had a toleration to abuse, or when any such thing was in being, to
charge our Political or Ecclesiastical Calamities upon. I only pray to be
informed, I say, when, where and how? For I am entirely of his mind, page 10.
That wise Men will try as few Conclusions in Government (if settled) as is
possible; and yet when only one Conclusion is left to be tried, and that so
necessarily prayed and pressed, methinks it is not unwise to make the Experiment,
when Mercy, Goodness and Charity are on that side.

But alas! the Author of this Apology is not contented to fasten upon an
occasion given, and improve it with all the aggravation of an unkind Nature,
but turns Fortune Tellers, and reads us a Lecture by the slying of his Jack-daw,
of our own insides and future Devices: A downright Divination and Enthusiasm,
as if he had been on an Errand to Delphos. Hear him, page 11. That we were all
thunderstruck, dreaded a Prince we had offended, and that had so much
diligence and courage to repay us, and therefore turned Trimers, went to
Church, took the Sacrament, gave up the Game, set up for Loyal: And that in
this Melancholy frame, it was his Grace found us when he published his Ess^y,
and that no meaner Person durst do it, though enough follow him.

Now the first part of the Story is false, and the last silly and saucy as well
as untrue. I see Dissenters Virtues (as few as they are) must be their Vices
for a need: Their quietness is from the stroke of Guilt, and their Conformity
only Hypocrisy for Safety: They have a fine time of it, and are mightily
obliged to this Gentleman's Goodness and Justice, much good may it do'um. But
the Duke out of measure is made brave in a bad Cause, a Ca^aline at least, or
if you will, a Cor^h, that is leading them back to Egypt again: A mighty
Charge; and but that it is not true, 'twere an Impeachable business; and
because it is not, let this Gentleman take heed of a Scandalum Magnatum.

But this cry for Liberty here, is to break out with Argile's Plot in Scotland.
This is shrewdly hit. Politic every bit of it I thought Argile's Presbyterians
and Liberty had not agreed so well together: I have heard such Folks hold as
ill an Opinion of it, as this Gentleman, for his Ears.

But bes^des all this, he tells us, Our time is short, we must in pure despair
do Fears; and what are they but to maul and disgrace the Church Party at any
rate? But if they will give us as good Quarter as they have received from the
three or four Pamphlets for Liberty, I dare make the Bargain, that the
Dissenters shall look no farther after Bishoprics, nor Church Livings, and I
would to God it might rest there.

What a stir is here that men pray to be quiet? O! but we know you will not be
quiet, and therefore you shall not be quiet: There is nothing so idle, as being
very cunning, and making every thing a Plot. So Tacitus makes Tiberius to have
a deep one, in going to the House of Office: To be sure it was a necessary one.

His Conclusion is hard upon us that advocates the Cause of tender Consciences,
saying, We are men of no Honor, no Conscience, nor Honesty, but leaves the
proof to be understood.

Certainly he cannot have too much of those good Qualities, that advocates
Tertullus like, against tender Consciences, and to give him his due, he is
sensible of it; for he presently acknowledges his sharpness, but excuses it
with the baseness of those that dare affirm the Excluders were Church of
England Men. But for all that, it falls out to be true, and nothing but Truth
pinches any Body.

He concludes in defense of the Church of England's Severity, and says, Tell me
how Christ can be Head of opposite Bodies? But what then? must you persecute
where your Head forbids it? Though he is not Head of opposite Bodies, he does
not destroy the Bodies of which he is not Head. But what does this Man think of
an opposite Head and Body, the Head of one Mind, and the Body of another? An
Head and no Member. Riddle me, Riddle me, what is this?

He bids us, Consider this following place of Scripture, and bless the World
with a Comment, Rev. 11.20.

Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer (or
toleratest) that Woman Jezabel, which calls her self a Prophetess, (a godly
Woman) to teach and seduce my Servants to commit Fornication, and to eat things
sacrificed to Idols. Now says he, I would fain know how long ^oleration has
been a Christian Virtue, Rev. 11.

By this never trust me, one would think him a Divine, every Inch of him, that
can so cleaverly take Not Tolerating IN Communion, for Not Tolerating OUT of
Communion.

But is this the Dissenters case? Have they asked for the Churches, or do they
usurp the Pulpits? or out of your Communion either, do they teach the use of
Fornication, and Idolatrous Food? What stuff is this for a man of some Wit and
Words? Besides, Jezabel was a Persecutor, and believed a Whore, which, with all
the manners I have, I would fain know to whose Church it is the most part of
our English Jezabels go?

For his Query, How long Toleration has been a Christian Virtue? It Is plain,
ever since Christ came, That bid the Tares should grow with the Wheat till the
Harvest, which his own blessed Comment says, Is the end of the World, where I
should be glad to meet this Gentleman, upon my Word. Till then, I would fain
have him and his Friends let us alone, and then do their worst.

Luke 9 54, 55, 56. They said, Lord, will thou that we command that Fire come
down from Heaven, and consume them, even as Elias did? But Jesus turned about,
and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what Spirit ye are of: For the Son of
Man is not come to destroy men's Lives, but to save them.

An Exposition upon which, because the Question is perfectly in the Text, is
humbly begged,

Of his to Command With Liberty of Conscience.

FINIS

