Naked Truth needs No Shift: OR, An Answer to a Libellous Sheet, Entitled, The
Quakers Last Shift Found Out.
IT is with no small Regret, Sober Reader, that I am thus necessitated to
Vindicate my own and my Friends Innocence, against these Unfair Assaults: I
prefer Peace before War; and heartily desire loving Neighborhood, rather then
daily Contest; but this is our Satisfaction, we did not begin with them, but
were begun with by them: And such great and general Accusations call for the
like Defenses; since where Charges go unanswered, Guilt is most usually
reflected, especially where WE are concerned; there being a sort of Men devoted
to misconstrue whatever we say or do, with whom it is become Criminal to defend
our selves; and do deserve to be chid for saying, They wrong us: Such continued
Unchristian Proceedings against us will, I hope, give all Impartial People to
hold me excused for publishing this second Vindication, which I entreat them in
the Love of God to consider, that they may the better find out where the SHIFT
lies, whether in us, or this Nameless Author and his Abettors.

The Intent of my paper was, to meet with the Vox populi, or common Fame, that
as we might be defended, so the People disabused, by declaring, that
notwithstanding those Defamatory Reports City and Country had credited against
us, we had NOT received their Information of the Meeting, much less designedly
avoided it; That it was unfair to concern us in a Meeting without our Consent;
and that we made them a solemn Offer of a Public Meeting, etc.

Now let us see how well he has made good his Title Page, in which he calls
his Paper an Answer to mine.

He tells us, that We made an Appeal to the Baptists against T. Hicks, and that
upon this Appeal the Teachers and Elders among them desired T. H. that he would
in a public Meeting bring forth his Evidences and Witnesses: That Mr. Kissin
and Mr. Knowls wrote Letters the 15 th of Aug. to W. P. and G. W. informing them
of Time and Place.

But what is all this, to prove that we received any certain Account from them
of the Meeting; that we purposely avoided the Meeting; and that we were so far
unconcerned in it, as that our Consent to meet was unnecessary? The Ground of
my Paper.

He says that G. W. had notice at the Vizes, having seen a Letter of T. Hicks,
sent to one in that Town: But suppose it to be true; what is that to me, the
Person most of all concerned in the matter? Or, how does this reach P. Ford's
Letter, writ to inform them of my Absence, and to desire the Meeting might be
suspended, to prevent vain Boasting? Was it suspended? No. And has not vain
Boasting followed? Yes.^ A Surreptitious Meeting! A Vain Triumph! Does not this
Proceeding rather give to suspect a Design to meet in our Absence, that made it
of no moment to the Meeting, after they heard of it, though before they wrote
for, desired and expected our Presence.

But says he, W. P. was at home the Night before: Grant it; Must I therefore
hear or know of any such Meeting, or my Concernment in it? I received no
Account, I say again, of either the Meeting, or my Relation to it, directly or
indirectly, till about Ten the Night after it was over. And for G. W's
Knowledge of the Meeting, it is expressed with Injustice both to him and my self;
for he had not that Account which belonged to him to have; Therefore not His
Account. What was a Rumor to him; or T. Hicks's Letter to another man,
receiving no Account himself, much less any Account of his Concern in the
Meeting till the 29th of the last Month, which was the Day after the Meeting.
Besides, must we take it for granted that G. W. was just then at Leisure to
take Post for the Meeting; under both it had been well nigh impossible for him
to reach it; for this Author tells us, that T. H. writ not till the Tuesday
before the Friday (so called) on which the Meeting was appointed; which was to
give him little above a Day to ride about four score Miles: Moreover, He was
then pre-engaged for Bristol; and so ignorant of his Concernment in the
Meeting, as he after that writ to his Wife to Know if our Friends were
concerned in it. This his SHIFT is too Threadbare to palliate that unworthy
Surprise

But, Others had (...), ^aith he What then? say I. Were not we the Persons
chiefly concerned? Could any Body else have answered for T. Hicks. besides
himself? Who then could fill up our room, e^pecially in matters of Fact? If T.
H. was thought fit to be there to explain and vindicate his Dialogues, then
should we in Defense of our Answers: But, if our Absence might so easily be
dispensed with, why should T. H's Presence have been so requisite? for T. H and
his Books, against our Books only, were unreasonable Odds. The Plea should have
layn between Books and Books, the Controversy being written: And if it was
needful that as well he as his Dialogues should be there, then that as well we
as our Answers; though I cannot see with what Liberty we could have defended
our selves, since Such as offered to say any thing on our behalf, were
interrupted; which gives us Cause enough to believe, that this Person was
beside the matter, when he tells us, that the Baptists were glad to see any of
us there.

But he says, That I Prevaricate, in saying, The Baptists concerned us in that
Meeting, when we concerned the Baptists in that Meeting: A SHIFT to be sure,
though not his Last. I would fain know, if we were not concerned in that
Meeting, because we concerned the Baptists in that Meeting; as I take it, we
were reciprocally concerned in that Meeting, and therefore equally interested
in the Appointment of Time and Place; for was there not the same Reason that we
should be there, viva voce to make good the Charge in our Book, as that T. H.
should be there, viva voce to endeavor to clear his Book from our Charge?
Never can they defend themselves from that Injustice. It is not the part of a
just Judge, to hear and determine for one Party in the Absence of another.
Besides, for what End did they pretend to give us notice, if not that we should
be there? It must not be forgot, that while in their Letter to me they desire
and expect it, in the Letter to J. Osgood they render it needless; nay, it was
asserted by one eminent among them in that Meeting, as I am credibly informed,
That neither G. W. nor W. P. were concerned to be present: If so, why was our
undesigned Absence reputed and reported to be the Consequence of our Fears?

But the Man thinks he has a stronger Argument then all this, in my Book
(entitled, the Spirit of Truth Vindicated, page 78. That to which an Appeal is
made must be capable of giving an Infallible Judgment, and so a true Judge, or
else the Appeal is Foolish. He is so wise as to leave the Application to his
Reader, for which Way he could make it bear to his Purpose, I know not: But let
it suffice, First, That I made not the Appeal by him recited, as the Postscript
of my Book proves: Next, Nor can any sober Man think, we intended by our
Appeal to the Baptists our abiding by their Judgment, be it right or wrong;
They very Words of it show the Appeal to the Baptists, was not to try whether
T. H. was guilty; but for Judgment against him, having proved him guilty; for
that were to admit of their Judgment, to conclude us against our selves; they
themselves will not think us so kind to them: Take the Appeal as this Person
recites it; Now if you the Teachers and Elders among the Baptized People do not
publicly clear your selves of T. Hicks, and these his unjust Proceedings
against us; we may take it for granted, that you own his Work, and may justly
deal with him as the Baptists great Champion, peculiar Agent or Representative,
etc. Now I would fain know which Way this binds us from all further Meeting,
upon the same Score? Nothing can be well clearer, then that this Appeal aimed
no further, then to know whether the Baptists did and would own or reject T. H'
s Proceedings, that we might the better understand whom to address our selves
to next time. There is great Difference in the Nature of Appeals: And the
Reason of my Writing, as he cites me, was, to prove the Light capable of
giving an infallible Judgment, from my Adversary's acknowledging it to be the
Gift of God, and appealing to it, as a right Discerner, for Judgment about what
is right, and what is wrong, which this Person, T. H. like, left out: Howbeit,
thus far what he cites, reaches our present Case; for doubtless, they had
Power to give Judgment against T. H. if they had been but as willing to use it,
having such clear Evidences in our Books before them. Nevertheless, this does
not prove, That we knew of the Meeting, that we were unconcerned in it, or that
we designedly shunned it: The Foundation of our Paper, no ways shaken by this
Libeller's Sheet. The Meeting was pretended for a Church-Examination; but
almost every where, in and about London, noised by the Baptists themselves to
have been for a Disputation, and our Absence accordingly interpreted: A
manifest Injury to our Books, Persons and Profession.

For my Offer to J. Gladman, he meanly shifts it, and seeks to creep out at the
Word FORMAL; so that we are to read it thus, William Penn did offer, but not
formally Challenge, to meet T. Hicks with the Bible in one Hand, and with his
Dialogue in the other. Let it be so; I hope it is enough to satisfy the World,
that an Offer was made and rejected: Nor is my printed One more Formal; for it
was on Purpose made to remove all Obstruction to a Meeting, upon Terms formally
proposed; for which I shall produce a Witness in convenient Time and Place. In
the mean while it is to be considered, that the Person mistakes, when he makes
T. H. to have offered W. P. any such Meeting, whatever he might do to G. VV. as
the very Page he refers to in T. H's third Dialogue proves: Further, that he
never offered me any Meeting, but in private, and that too not till after he
had twice publicly wronged me, which was refused, not to decline a Meeting,
but as reputing it too mean a Satisfaction.

For his reflective Commendation of my Prudence, because I did not, after their
Example, appoint a Meeting without their Notice; it speaks so much the Justice
of my Proceeding, that it reflects Folly upon his Mention of it, and not a
little Falseness too, since a Meeting to be agreed upon by two Parties, cannot
be said to be lodged in any one of their Breasts, without telling a manifest
Untruth.

His Black Menace of us and our Religion, with some Hydr^an Piece, suddenly to
be published, we are very little solicitous about; our Consciences are approved
to God in this Matter; and we hope (through his Assistance (however
misrepresented to the World) before we have done, to approve our Cause Just in
the Minds of impartial People.

To conclude; since he tells us, That the Baptists have received Satisfaction
in T. H's Proceedings against us (and great Cause we have to believe, that some
of them were not ignorant of his Libel) I do hereby soberly renew my solemn
Offer to them, and expect from them a Public Meeting, wherein we may have
Leave, as viva voce, to repeat and defend our Charges, as T. H. manifestly had
to read and vindicate his Dialogues. And be it known to all those Baptists,
that though the Controversy fall in T. Hicks, by our Appeal to them; yet that
it rises in them by their Justification of him: Therefore, as we can never
acquiesce in their Proceedings, which he calls a Satisfaction, that have proved
thus plainly injurious; so from them do we yet expect that Satisfaction, which
we are bold to ask, and in Hones^y they are bound to give us, in the Face of a
so^er Auditory, at such Time and Place, as they and we, on Conference, shall
mutually appoint.

The 11th of the 7th Month, 1674. William Penn.
s POSTSCRIPT.
OUr Inducement to the Publication of these two Papers was not Vain Glory, or
Worldly Reputation (which Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior, has taught us to
dye to) but singly the Glory of God, the Honor of his Truth, and the rescuing
of the Minds of People, from those false Reports they have been lately ensnared
into the Belief of, to the Hurt of their Immortal Souls.




