A PERSUASIVE TO Moderation TO Dissenting Christians, In Prudence and
Conscience Humbly submitted to the KING AND HIS Great Council.

By one of the Humblest and most Dutiful of his Dissenting Subjects.

Let your Moderation be known unto all men, for the Lord is at Hand, Phil. 4.
5. A Christian Toleration often dissipates their Strength, whom Rougher
Opposition fortifies, K. Charles 1. to the late King. London, Printed and Sold
by Andrew Soul, at the Crooked Billet in Holloway-Lane, in Shoreditch, 1685.

THE PREFACE.
IF it was permitted to Ancient Christians to Address Pagan Emperors, and
Infidels to Solicit Christian Caesar's for Indulgence, with Success, 'twere
Rude in us, to doubt the Issue of a Discourse of this Style and Tendency, with
our Superiors, when the Interest of the Monarch, as well as Miseries of some of
His Subjects make it necessary. For if we consider the great Numbers that are
Disabled in their Livelihoods, and some that languish to Death by Confinement,
and the Spoil that is daily made of the Estates of others by Fines, and the
lavish and excessive way of raising them, for pure Dissent in Matters of
Worship: And on the other hand, how Injurious a state of Severity is to the
Interest of the Prince, by the Discouragement and Poverty of so great a Number
of His People; and consequently how much a discreet Indulgence would contribute
to the Trade, Peace and Amity of His Kingdom, we shall be forced to conclude,
That in Prudence as well as Conscience, Moderation is a desirable thing.

It were, doubtless, one of the most agreeable things in the World, that
Mankind were of One Mind, because the occasion that we see is taken at the
Differences Men have about Religion, that should teach them to agree, make them
so uneasy, and unhappy one to another. But the pleasure of that Harmony is a
thing to be wished, rather than yet expected. It Is Fact we differ, and upon a
point wherein Unity is out of our Power: such as we are, what shall we do?
Destroy one another for our Differences, or be moderate, and try a discreet
Liberty?

Men must thank themselves for their Animosity, that suffer their Opinions to
destroy their Affections. Let us reflect what it was confounded the first
Tongue, and if Disobedience has not divided Man's Judgment? yet we do not war
for Mother Tongue, nor ought we for Religion. Man's Fault has been to slight
the Divine Oracle in his persuit of Truth, and he is apt to entitule his own
Thoughts to her Reputation. Too many things in Religion, and those too fine and
nice, made necessary to be believed, have pressed so hard upon the Liberty of
Mankind, that Nature heaves against the Burden.

We ought in Charity to presume, that all men think they choose the best way to
Heaven, especially where the choice is against the Stream, and draws Loss or
Disgrace after it. If they are Mistaken, they must be Rectified there where the
Mistake lies, and that is in the Understanding: And to do it Successfully,
there must be Light and Moderation: God gives one, and it is our Duty and
Wisdom to exercise the other.

Let us then pray to Almighty God, That he would enlighten our Understandings;
And to the end we may obtain our desire, let us be sure to use the Light we
have, and more will be given us. Let us with it see if Expedients may not be
found to unite our Interests, and so our Affections, if not our Faiths. How to
keep the Peace, and Indulge Dissenters safely, serves the Government. And to
see clear, we must put away the Prejudices of former Heats; and not call Wrath,
Zeal, nor Railing, Loyalty.

As things now are, what is best to be done? I take to be the Wise Man's
Question; as to consider and answer it, will be his Business. Moderation is a
Christian Duty. Let your Moderation be known to all Men: And has ever been the
Prudent Man's Practice. Those Governments that have used it in their Conduct
have Succeeded best, and the contrary been unhappy. I remember, it is made in
Livy the Wisdom of the Romans, that they relaxed their hand to the Privernates;
for by making their Conditions easy, they made them most faithful to their
Interest. And it prevailed so much with the Petilians, that they would endure
any Extremity from Hannibal, rather than desert their Friendship, that had
governed them with so much Moderation, even then, when the Romans discharged
their Fidelity, and sent them the Despair of knowing they could not relieve
them. So did one Act of Humanity overcome the Falisci above Arms: Which
confirms that noble Saying of Seneca, Mitius imperanti, Melius paretur, the
Mildest Conduct is best obeyed: A Truth Celebrated by Grotius and Campanella:
Practiced, doubtless, by the bravest Princes. For Cyrus exceeded when he built
the Jews a Temple, and himself no Jew. Alexander Astonished the Princes of his
Train with the profound Veneration he paid the High Priest of that People. And
Augustus was so far from Suppressing the Jewish Worship, that he sent Hecatombs
to Jerusalem to increase their Devotion. Moderation filled the Reigns of the
most Renowned Caesar's: They were Nero's and Caligulas that loved Cruelty then.

But that which in a singular manner makes Moderation the King's Interest, is
that those penal Laws which vex Dissenters seem in themselves Antimonarchical;
and it is therefore less to be wondered if any of them have been tempted to be
so too. For whereas the Prerogative is the peculiar Glory of the King; That
which gives weight and luster to his Crown, it, is so shared by these Laws, to
Poor and Informers, that the KING can but put in for a third of his own Power:
A Triumviratship, or Three Estates of Prerogative: King, Poor and Informers:
For though the King would remit, and the Circumstances of the Person deserve a
Pardon, it cannot be, without the Consent of the other Two: which is a kind of
an Exclusion from two thirds of his Power, and so a Dissolution of that entire
Prerogative that his Ancestors had, and is his undoubted Right in the like
cases. And as some of these Laws injure the Prince, so they deeply affect the
Subject. For People are not only tempted to Inform by Rewards, (to be sure, not
the cleanest way of Justice) but the Oaths of such are made the Evidence to
Convict; which is Swearing in their own Cause, and to their own profit. But
this is not all, Men are Tried, Cast and Fined, without a Jury. An express
Contradiction to one of the most celebrated Branches of the Great Charter. So
that the Interest of Prince and People (as they ever should) conspire in the
Repeal of those Laws that furnish harsh and unkind Folks with the Power of
disturbing their Conscientious Neighbors, and which disable the Prince to
Receive and Redress the Complaints of such of his Suffering Subjects. The
Example is to both dangerous, but to the KING most.

If the Church of England claims the King's Promise of Protection; it is fit she
has it. But her Dissenters cannot forget That of his Clemency: And as they were
both great, and admirably distinguished, so by no means are they inconsistent
or impracticable.

And if his Justice will not let him be wanting in the One, His wonted
greatness of Mind will hardly let him leave the Other behind him in the Storm,
unpitied and unhelpt. Pardon me, We have not to do with an insensible Prince,
but one Touched with our Infirmities. More than any Body fit to judge our Cause,
by the share he once had in it. Who should give Liberty of Conscience like the
Prince that has wanted it? To suffer for his own was Great, but to deliver
other men's, were Glorious. It is a sort of paying the Vows of his Adversity,
and it cannot therefore be done by any one else, with so much Justice and
Example.

Far be it from me to solicit any thing in Deminution of the just Rights of
the Church of England: Let her rest protected where she is, and if in any thing
Mistaken, let God alone persuade her. I hope, none will be thought to intend
her Injury, for refusing to understand the King's Promise to her, in a Ruinous
sense to all Others. For it is morally impossible that a Conscientious Prince
can be thought to have tied himself to compel others to a Communion, that
himself cannot tell how to be of, or that any thing can oblige him to shake the
Firmness of those he has confirmed by his own Royal Example.

Having then so Illustrous an Instance of Integrity, as the hazard of the loss
of Three Crowns for Conscience. Let it at least, excuse our Constancy, and
provoke the Friends of the Succession to Moderation, that we may none of us
loose our Birthrights for our Persuasion; and us Dissenters to live Dutifully,
and so Peacably under our own Vine, and under our own Fig Tree, with Glory to
God on High, to the King, Honor, and Good Will to all Men.

The Publication of the following Discourse is occasioned by an Appeal made by
a late Author, to all Crowned Heads against Toleration and Liberty of
Conscience, in his pretended Answer to the Duke of Buckingham I shall not
Commend it, and I hope, it will need no Excuse. It Is writ with Duty to the
King, and Compassion to many of his peaceable People. The usual Objections
against the Moderation desired, are stated and answered. The Whole recommended
to the Reader,

By his Affectionate Friend, W. P.

A PERSUASIVE TO Moderation, etc.
MODERATION, the Subject of this Discourse, is in plain English, Liberty of
Conscience to Dissenters: A Cause I have, with all Humility undertaken to plead
against the Prejudices of the Times.

That there is such a thing as Conscience, and the Liberty of it, in reference
to Faith and Worship toward God, must not be denied, even by those, that are
most scandal'd at the Ill use some seem to have made of such Pretenses. But to
settle the Terms: By Conscience, I understand the Apprehension and Persuasion a
man has of his Duty to God. By Liberty of Conscience, I mean, A free and open
Profession and Exercise of that Duty: But I always premise, this Conscience to
keep within the bounds of Morality, and that it be neither Frantic nor
Mischievous, but a Good Subject, a Good Child, a Good Servant: As exact to
yield to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, as jealous of withholding from
God the thing that is God's: For he that withholds from Man the thing that God
requires him to pay, withholds it from God, who has his Tribute out of it.
They do not reject their Prince, Parent or Master, but God, who enjoins that
Duty to them: The difference being only this, They deny not God his Due
immediately, and to his face, but they do it too often in the Person of his
Deligate. Those Pathetick words of Christ will naturally enough reach the case,
In that ye did it not to them, ye did it not to me; for Duty to such Relations
have a divine Stamp: And divine Right runs through more things of the World and
Acts of our Lives than we are aware of: And Sacrilege may be committed against
more than the Church. Nor will a Dedication to God, of the Robbery from Man,
expiate the Guilt of Disobedience: For though Zeal could turn Gossip to Theft,
his Altars would renounce the Sacrifice.

The Conscience then that I state, and the Liberty I pray, carrying so great a
Salvo and Deference to public and private Relations, no ill design can with
any Justice be fixed upon the Author, or Reflection upon the Subject, which by
this time I think I may venture to call a Toleration.

But to this so much craved, as well as needed Toleration, I meet with two
Objections of weight, the salving of which will make way for it in this
Kingdom. And the first is a Disbelief of the Possibility of the thing.
Toleration of Dissenting Worships from that established, is not practicable
(say some) without danger to the State, with which it is interwoven. This is
Political. The other Objection is, That admitting Dissenters to be in the Wrong
(which is always premised by the National Church) such Latitude were the way
to keep up the Disunion, and instead of compelling them into a better Way,
leave them in the possession and persuit of their old Errors. This is
Religious. I think I have given the Objections fairly, 'twill be my next
business to answer them as fully.

The strength of the first Objection against this Liberty, is the Danger
suggested to the State; the Reason is, the National Form being interwoven with
the Frame of the Government. But this seems to me only said, and not only (with
submission) not proved, but not true: For the established Religion and Worship
are no other ways interwoven with the Government, than that the Government
makes profession of them, and by divers-Laws has made them the Current
Religion, and required all the Members of the State to conform to it.

This is nothing but what may as well be done by the Government, for any other
Persuasion, as that. It Is true, it is not easy to change an established
Religion, nor is that the Question we are upon; but State Religions have been
changed without the change of the States. We see this in the Governments of
Germany and Denmark upon the Reformation: But more clearly and near our selves,
in the case of Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, Queen Mary and Elizabeth;
for the Monarchy stood, the Family remained and succeeded under all the
Revolutions of State-Religion, which could not have been, had the Proposition
been generally true.

The change of Religion then, does not necessarily change the Government, or
alter the State; and if so, a fortiori, Indulgence of Church-Dissenters, does
not necessarily hazard a change of the State, where the present State-Religion
or Church remains the same; for That I premise.

Some may say, That it were more facile to change from one National Religion to
another, than to maintain the Monarchy and Church, against the Ambition and
Faction of diverse dissenting Parties. But this is improbable at least. For it
were to say, That it is an easier thing to change a whole Kingdom, than with
the Sovereign Power, followed with Armies, Navies, Judges, Clergy, and all the
Conformists of the Kingdom, to secure the Government from the Ambition and
Faction of Dissenters, as differing in their Interests within themselves, as in
their Persuasions; and (...) they united, have neither Power to awe, nor
Rewards to allure to their Party. They can only be formidable, when headed by
the Sovereign. They may stop a Gap, or make, by his Accession, a Balance:
Otherwise, till it is harder to fight broken and divided Troops, than an entire
Body of an Army, it will be always easier to maintain the Government under a
Toleration of Dissenters, than in a total change of Religion, and even then it
self, it has not failed to have been preserved. But whether it be more or less
easy, is not our point; if they are many, the danger is of exasperating, not
of making them easy; for the force of our Question is, Whether such Indulgence
be safe to the State? And here we have the first and last, the best and
greatest Evidence for us, which is Fact and Experience, the Journal and
Resolves of Time, and Treasure of the Sage.

For, First, the Jews, that had most to say for their Religion, and whose
Religion was Twin to their State (both being joined, and sent with Wonders from
Heaven) Indulged Strangers in their Religious Dissents. They required but the
belief of the Noachical Principles, which were common to the World: No
Idolator, and but a Moral Man, and he had his Liberty, ay, and some Privileges
too, for he had an apartment in the Temple, and this without danger to the
Government. Thus Maimonides, and others of their own Rabbles, and Grotius out
of them.

The Wisdom of the Gentiles was very admireable in this, that though they had
many Sects of Philosophers among them, each dissenting from the other in their
Principles, as well as Discipline, and that not only in Physical things, but
points Metaphysical, in which some of the Fathers were not free, the Schoolmen
deeply engaged, and our present Accademies but too much perplexed; yet they
indulged them and the best Livers with singular Kindness: The greatest
Statesmen and Captains often becoming Patrons of the Sects they best affected,
honoring their Readings with their Presence and Applause. So far were those
Ages, which we have made as the original of Wisdom and Politeness, from
thinking Toleration an Error of State, or dangerous to the Government. Thus
Plutrach, Strabo, Laertius, and others.

To these Instances I may add the Latitude of old Rome, that had almost as many
Deities as Houses: For Varro tells us of no less than thirty Thousand several
Sacra, or Religious Rites among her People, and yet without a Quarrel: Unhappy
fate of Christianity! the best of Religions, and yet her Professors maintain
less Charity than Idolators, while it should be peculiar to them. I fear, it
shows us to have but little of it at Heart.

But nearer home, and in our own time, we see the effects of a discret
Indulgence, even too Emulation. Holland, that Bogg of the World, neither Sea
nor dry Land, now the Rival of tallest Monarchs; not by Conquests, Marriages,
or accession of Royal Blood, the usual ways to Empire, but by her own
superlative Clemency and Industry; for the one was the effect of the other: She
cherisht her People, whatsoever were their Opinions, as the reasonable stock of
the Country, the Heads and Hands of her Trade and Wealth; and making them easy
in the main point, their Conscience, she became great by them: This made her
fill with People, and they filled her with Riches and Strength.

And if it should be said, She is upon her Declension for all that. I Answer,
All States must know it, nothing is here Immortal. Where are the Babylonian,
Persian and Grecian Empires? And are not Lacedemon, Athens, Rome and Carthage
gone before her? Kingdoms and Commonwealths have their Births and Growths,
their Declensions and Deaths, as well as private Families and Persons: But it is
owing, neither to the Armies of France, nor Navies of England, but her own
Domestic Troubles.

Seventy Two sticks in her Bones yet: The growing Power of the Prince of
Orange, must in some degree, be an Ebb to that States Strength; for they are
not so unanimous and vigrous in their Interest as formerly: But were they
secure against the danger of their own Ambition and Jealousy, any body might
ensure their Glory at five per Cent. But some of their greatest men
apprehending they are in their Climacterical Juncture, give up the Ghost, and
care not, if they must fall, by what hand it is.

Others choose a Stranger, and think one afar off will give the best Terms, and
least annoy them: whilst a considerable Party have chosen a Domestic Prince,
a Kin to their early Successes by the fore-Father's side (the Gallantry of his
Ancestors.) And that his own greatness and security are wrapped up in theirs, and
therefore modestly hope to find their Account in his Prosperity. But this is a
kind of Digresgression, only before I leave it, I dare venture to add, that if
the Prince of Orange changes not the Policies of that State, he will not change
her Fortune, and he will mightily add to his own.

But perhaps I shall be told, That no body doubts that Toleration is an
agreeable thing to a Commonwealth, where every one thinks he has a share in
the Government; ay, that the one is the consequence of the other, and therefore
most carefully to be avoided by all Monarchical States. This indeed were
shrowdly to the purpose, in England, if it were but true. But I don't see how
there can be one true Reason advanced in favor of this Objection: Monarchies,
as well as Commonwealths, subsisting by the Preservation of the People under
them.

But, First, if this were true, it would follow by the Rule of Contraries, that
a Republic could not subsist with Unity and Hierarchy, which is Monarchy in
the Church; but it must, from such Monarchy in Church, come to Monarchy in
State too. But Venice, Genova, Lucca, seven of the Cantons of Switzerland, (and
Rome her self, for she is an Aristocracy) all under the the loftiest Hierarchy
in Church, and where is no Toleration, show in fact, that the contrary is true.

But, Secondly, this Objection makes a Commonwealth the better Government of
the two, and so overthrows the thing it would establish. This is effectually
done, if I know any thing, since a Commonwealth is hereby rendered a more
copious, powerful and beneficial Government to Mankind, and is made better to
answer Contingencies and Emergencies of State, because this subsists either
way, but Monarchy not, if the Objection be true. The one prospers by Union in
Worship and Discipline, and by Toleration of dissenting Churches from the
National. The other only by an universal Conformity to a National Church. I
say, this makes Monarchy (in it self, doubtless, an admirable Government) less
Powerful, less Extended, less Propitious, and finally less Safe to the People
under it, than a Commonwealth; In that no Security is left to Monarchy under
diversity of Worships, which yet no man can defend or forbid, but may often
arrive, as it has in England, more than five times in the two last Ages. And
truly it is natural for men to choose to settle where they may be safest from the
Power and Mischief of such Accidents of State.

Upon the whole matter, it is to reflect the last Mischief upon Monarchy, the
worst Enemies it has could hope to disgrace or endanger it by; since it is to
tell the People under it, that they must either conform, or be destroyed, or to
save themselves, turn Hypocrites, or change the Frame of the Government they
are under. A perplexity both to Monarch and People, that nothing can be greater
but the comfort of knowing the Objection is False. And that which ought to make
every reasonable man of this Opinion, is the cloud of Witnesses that almost
every Age of Monarchy affords us.

I will begin with that of Israel, the most exact and sacred Pattern of
Monarchy, begun by a valiant Man, translated to the best, and improved by the
wisest of Kings, whose Ministers were neither Fools, nor Fanatics: Here we
shall find Provision for Dissenters. Their Prosoliti Domicilii were so far from
being compelled to their National Rites, that they were expressly forbid to
observe them. Such were the Egyptians that came with them out of Egypt, the
Gibeonites and Canaanites, a great People, that after their several Forms
worshipped in an apartment of the same Temple. The Jews with a Liturgy, they
without one: The Jews had Priests, but these none: The Jews had variety of
Oblation, these People burnt Offerings only: All that was required of them was
the Natural Religion of Noah, in which the Acknowledgement and Worship of the
true God, was, as it still ought to be, the main point; nay, so far were they
from coercive Conformity, that they did not so much as oblige them to observe
their Sabbath, though one of the ten Commandments: Grotius and Seldom say more.
Certainly this was great Indulgence, since so unsuitable an Usage looked like
profaning their Devotion, and a common nuisance to their National Religion. One
would think by this, that their Care lay on the side of preserving their Cult
from the touch or accession of Dissenters, and not of forcing them, by undoing
Penalties to conform, must needs be evident. For if Gods Religion and Monarchy
(for so we are taught to believe it) did not, and would not at a time, when
Religion lay less in the Mind, and more in Ceremony, compel Conformity from
Dissenters, we hope we have got the best of Presidents on our side.

But if this Instance be of most Authority, we have another very Exemplary, and
to our point pertinent; for it shows what Monarchy may do: It is yielded us
from the famous Story of Mordecai. He, with his Jews, were in a bad pleight
with the King, Ahasuerus, by the ill Offices Human did them; the Arguments he
used were drawn from the common Topics of Faction and Sedition, That thy were
an odd and dangerous People, under differing Laws of their own, and refused
Obedience to his; So denying his Supremacy. Dissenters with a witness; things
most render to any Government.

The King thus incenst, commands the Laws to be put in Execution and decrees
the Ruin of Mordecai with all the Jews: But the King is timely entreated, his
Heart softens, the Decree is revokt, and Mordecai and his Friends saved. The
Consequence was, as extreme Joy to the Jews, so Peace and Blessings to the
King. And that which heightens the Example, is the Greatness and Infidelity of
the Prince: had the Instance been in a Jew, it might have been placed to his
greater Light or Piety: In a petty Prince, to the Paucity and Entireness of his
Territory; but that an Heathen, and King of one hundred and seven and twenty
Provinces, should throughout his vast Dominions, not fear, but practice
Toleration with good success, has something admirable in i^.

If we please to remember the Tranquillity, and success of those Heathen Roman
Emperors, that allowed Indulgence; that Agustus sent Hecatombe to Jerusalem,
and the wisest honored the Jews, and at last spared the diverse Sects of
Christians, it will certainly oblige us to think, that Princes, whose Religions
are nearer of Kin, to those of the Dissenters of our times, may not
unreasonably hope for quiet from a discreet Toleration, especially when there
is nothing peculiar in Christianity to render Princes unsafe in such an
Indulgence. The admirable Prudence of the Emperor Iovianus, in a quite contrary
method to those of the Reigns of his Predecessors, settled the most Imoroiled
time of the Chistian World, almost to a Miracle; for though he found the Hearts
of the Arian and Orthodox carried to a barbarous height, (to say nothing of the
Novations, and other dissenting Interests) the Emperor esteeming those
Calamities the effect of Coercing Conformity to the Prince's or States
Religion; and that this course did not only waste Christians, but expose
Christians to the scorn of Heathens, and so scandal, those whom they should
Convert, he resolutely declared, That he would have none Molested for the
different exercise of their Religious Worship; which (and that in a true (for
he reigned but seven Months) calmed the impestous Storms of Dissension, and
reduced the Empire, (before agitated with the most uncharitable Contests) to a
wonderful Serenity and Peace; thus a kindly Amity, brought a civil Unity to the
State; which endeavors for a forced Unity, never did to the Church, but had
formerly filled the Government with incomparable Miseries, as well as the
Church with Incharity; and which is sad, I must needs say, that those Leaders
of the Church that should have been the Teachers and Examples of Peace, in so
singular a juncture of the Churches ferments, did, more then any, blow the
Trumpet and kindled the Fire of Division. So dangerous is it to Super-fine upon
the Text, and then Impose it upon Penalty for Faith.

Valantinian the Emperor (we are told by Socrates Scholasticus) was a great
Honourer of those that favored his own Faith; but so, as he molested not the
Arrians at all. And Marcellinus further adds in his Honor, That he was much
Renowned for his Moderate Carriage during his Reign; insomuch, that amongst
sundry Sects of Religion, he troubled no man for his Conscience, imposing
neither this nor that to be observed; much less with menacing Edicts and
Injunctions, did he compel others, his Subjects, to bow the Neck, or conform to
that which himself worshipped, but left such Points as clear and untouched as
he found them.

Gratianus and Theodsius the great, Indulged diverse sorts of Christians; but
the Novations of all the Dissenters were preferred: which was so far from
Insecuring, that it preserved the Tranquillity of the Empire. Nor till the time
of Celestine Bishop of Rome, were the Novations disturbed; And the Persecution
of them, and the Assumption of the secular Power began much at the same time.
But the Novations at Constantinople were not so dealt withal; for the Greek
Bishops continued to permit them the quiet enjoyment of their dissenting
Assemblies; as Socrates tells us in his fifth and seventh Book of
Ecclesiastical Story.

I shall descend nearer our own times; for notwithstanding no Age has been more
furiously moved, then that which Jovianus found, and therefore the Experiment
of Indulgence was never better made, yet to speak more in view of this time of
day, we find our Contemporaries, of remoter Judgments in Religion, under no
manner of difficulty in this point. The Grand Signior, great Mogul, Zars of
Mnscovia, King of Persia; the great Monarchs of the East have long allowed and
prosper'd with a Toleration: And who does not know that this gave Great
Tamerlan his mighty Victories? In these Western Countries we see the same thing.

Cardinal d'Ossat in his 92d Letter to Villroy, Secretary to H^nry the fourth
of France, gives us Doctrine and Example for the Subject in hand; Besides (says
he) that Necessity has no Law, be it in what case it will; our Lord Jesus
Christ instructs us by his Gospel, To let the Tares alone, lest removing them,
may endanger the Wheat. That other Catholic Princes have allowed it without
Rebuke. That particularly the Dake of Savoy, who (as great a Z^^^ot as he would
be thought for the Catholic Religion) Tolerates the Heretics in three of his
Provinces, namely, A^groyne, Luerne and Perose. That the King of Poland does as
much, not only in Sweedland, but in Poland itself. That all the Princes of the
Austrian Family, that are celebrated as Pillars of the Catholic Church, do the
like, not only in the Town, of the Empire, but in their proper Territories, as
in Austria it self, from whence they take the Name of their Honor. In Hungary,
Bohemia, Moravia* Lusatia, Stirria, Camiolia and Croatia the like. That
Charles' the fifth, Father of the King of Spain, was the Person that taught the
King of France, and other Princes, how to yield to such Emergencies. That his
Son, the present King of Spain, who is esteemed Arch Catholic, and that is, as
the Atlas of the Catholic Church, Tolerates notwithstanding, at this day, in
his Kingdoms of Valentia and Granada, the Moors themselves in their
M^humatisme, and has offered to those of Zealand, Holland, and other Heretics
of the Low Countries, the free Exercise of their pretended Religion, so that
they will but acknowledge and Obey him in Civil Matters. It was of those
Letters of this extraordinary Man, for so he was (whether we regard him in his
Ecclesiastical Dignity or his greater Christian and Civil Prudence) that the
great Lord Fulkland said, A Minister of State should no more be without
Cardinal d' Ossat's Letters, than a Parson without his Bible. And indeed, if we
look into France, we shall find the Indulgence of those Protestants, has been
a flourishing to that Kingdom, as their Arms a Succor to their King. It Is
true, that since they helped the Ministers of his Greatness to Success, that
haughty Monarch has changed his Measures, and resolves their Conformity to his
own Religion, or their Ruin; but no man can give another Reason for it, than
that he thinks it for his turn to please that part of his own Church, which are
the present necessary and unwearied Instruments of his absolute Glory. But let
us see the end of this Conduct, it will require more time to approve the
Experiment.

As it was the Royal Saying of Stephen, King of Poland, That he was a King of
Men, and not of Conscience; a Commander of Bodies, and not of Souls. So we see
a Toleration has been practiced in that Country of a long time, with no ill
Success to the State; the Cities of Cracovia, Racovia, and many other Towns of
Note, almost wholly dissenting from the common Religion of the Kingdom, which
is Roman Catholic, as the others are Socinian and Calvanist, the most opposite
to that, as well as to themselves.

The King of Denmark, in his large Town of Altona, but about a Mile from
Hambrough, and therefore called so, that is, All to near, is a pregnant proof
of our point. For though his Seat be so remote from that place, and another
strong and insinuating State so near, yet under his Indulgence of diverse
Persuasions, they enjoy that Peace, and he that Security, that he is not upon
better Terms in any of his more Immediate and Uniform Dominions. I leave it to
the thinking Reader, if it be not much owing to this Freedom, and that a
contrary course were not the way for him to furnish his Neighbors with means
to Depopulate that place, or make it uneasy and chargeable to him to keep?

If we look into other parts of Germany, where we find a Stout and Warlike
People, fierce for the thing they opine, or believe, we shall find the Prince
Palatine of the Rhine, safe, and more potent by his Indulgence, (...) his
Improvements at M^nhine: And as (believe me) (...) the Prince to his People in
other things, so in this to the Empire; for he has made bold with the
Constitution of it, in the Latitude he gives his Subjects in this Affair.

The Duke of Bradenburg is himself a Calvanist, his People mostly Lutherain,
yet in part of his Dominions, the Roman Catholics enjoy their Churches quietly.

The Duke of Newburg, and a strict Roman Catholic, Brother-in-Law to the
present Emperor, in his Province of Juliers, has, not only at Dewsburg,
Mulheim, and other places, but in Deuseldorp it self, where the Court resides,
Lutherain, and Calvanist, as well as Roman Catholic Assemblies.

The Duke of Saxony, by Religion a Lutherain, in his City of Budissin, has both
Lutherains and Roman Catholics in the same Church, parted only by a Grate.

In Ausburg, they have two chief Magistrates, as their Duumvirat, one must
always be a Roman Catholic, and the other a Lutherain.

The Bishop of Osnabrug is himself a Lutherain, and in the Town of his Title,
the Roman Catholics, as well as Lutherains, have their Churches; and which is
more, the next Bishop must be a Catholic too; for like the Buckets in the
Well, they take turns, one way to be sure, so that one be but in the Right.

From hence we will go to Sultzbach, a small Territory, but has a great Prince,
I mean, in his own extraordinary Qualities; for among other things we shall
find him act the Moderator among his People. By profession he is a Roman
Catholic, but has Simultaneum Religionis Exercitium, not only Lutherains and
Roman Catholics enjoy their different Worships, but alternatively in one and
the same place, the same day; so ballancing his Affection by his Wisdom, that
there appears neither Partiality in him, nor Envy in them, though of such
opposite Persuasions.

I will end these forregin Instances with a Prince and Bishop, all in one, and
he a Roman Catholic too, and that is the Bishop of Mentz; who admits, with a
very Peaceable success, such Lutherains with his Catholics, to enjoy their
Churches, as live in his Town of Erford. Thus does Practice tells us, that
neither Monarchy nor Hierarchy are in danger from a Toleration. On the
contrary, the Laws of the Empire, which are the Acts of the Emperor, and the
Sovereign Princes of it, have tolerated these three Religious Persuasions, viz.
the Roman Catholic, Lutherain and Calvanist, and they may as well tolerate
three more, for the same Reasons, and with the same Success. For it is not
their greater nearerness or consistency in Doctrine, or in Worship; On the
contrary, they differ much, and by that, and other Circumstances, are sometimes
engaged in great Controversies, yet is a Toleration practicable, and the way of
Peace with them.

And which is closest to our point at home it self, we see that a Toleration of
the Jews, French and Dutch Churches in England, both Dissenters from the
National Way: And the Connivance that has been in Ireland; And the downright
Toleration in most of his Majesty's Plantations abroad, proves the Assertion,
That Toleration is not dangerous to Monarchy. For Experience tells us, where it
is in any degree admitted, the King's Affairs prosper most; People, Wealth and
Strength being sure to follow such Indulgence.

But after all that I have said in Reason and Fact, why Toleration is safe to
Monarchy, Story tells us that worse things have befallen Princes in Countries
under Ecclesiastical Union, than in places under divided forms of Worship; and
so, tolerating Countries stand to the Prince, more than upon equal terms with
conforming ones. And where Princes have been exposed to hardship in tolerating
Countries, they have as often come from the Conforming, as Nonconforming
party; and so the Dissenter is upon equal terms, to the Prince or State, with
the Conformist.

The first is evident in the Jews, under the conduct of Moses; their Dissension
came from the men of their own Tribes, such as Corah Dathan and Abiram, with
their pertakers. To say nothing of the Gentiles.

The Miseries and Slaughters of Mauritius the Emperor proves my point, who by
the greatest Churchmen of his time was withstood, and his Servant that
perpetrated the Wickedness by them, substituted in his room, because more
officious to their Grandeur. What power but that of the Church, dethroned
Childrek King of France, and set Pippin in his place? The miseries of the
Emperors, Henry the fourth and fifth, Father and Son, from their rebellious
Subjects, raised and animated by the power of Conformists; dethroning both, as
much as they could, are notorious. It Is as plain that Sigismond King of
Sweedland, was rejected by that Lutherain Country, because he was a
Roman Catholic.

If we come nearer home, which is most suitable to the Reasons of the
discourse, we find the Churchmen take part with William Rufus, and Henry the
first against Robert their elder Brother; and after that, we see some of the
greatest of them make Head against their King, namely Anselm, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and his party, as did his Successor Thomas of Becket to the second
Henry. Stephen Usurpt the Crown when there was a Church Union: And King John
lived miserable for all that, and at last dyed by one of his own Religion too.
The Dissentions that agitated the Reign of his Son Henry the third, and the
Barrons War, with Bishop Grosteeds Blessing to Mumford their General. The
Deposition and Murder of the second Edward, and Richard, and sixth Henry, and
his Son the Prince. The Usurpation of Richard the third, and the Murder of the
Sons of Edward the fourth, in the Tower of London. The civil War that followed
between him and the Earl of Richmond, afterward our wise Henry the seventh
were all perpetrated in a Country of one Religion, and by the Hands of
Conformists. In short, if we will but look upon the civil War, that so long
raged in this Kingdom, between the Houses of York and Laneaster, and consider
that they professed but one and the same Religion, and both backed with numbers
of Churchmen too (to say nothing of the Miserable end of many of our Kings
princely Ancestors in Scotland, especially the first and third James) will find
cause to say, That Church-Vniformity is not a Security for Princes to depend
upon.

If we will look next into Countries where Dissenters from the National Church
are tolerated, we shall find the Conformist not less Culpable than the
Dissenter.

The Disorders among the Jews, after they were settled in the Land that God had
given them, came not from those they tolerated, but themselves. They cast off
Samuel, and the Government of the Judges. 'Twas the Children of the National
Church, that fell in with the Ambition of Absalom, and animated the Rebellion
against his Father David. They were the same that revolted from Solomon's Son,
and cried in behalf of Jeroboam, To your Tents, O Israel!

Not two Ages ago, the Church of France, too generally fell in with the Family
of Guise, against their lawful Sovereign, Henry the fourth: Nor were they
without Countenance of the greatest of their Belief, who styled it an holy War;
at that time, fearing (not without cause) the Defection of that Kingdom from
the Roman See. In this conjuncture, the Dissenters made up the best part of
that King's Armies, and by their Loyalty and Blood, preserved the Blood Royal
of France, and set the Crown on the Head of that Prince. That King was twice
assinated, and the last time murdered, as was Henry the third, his Predecessor;
but they fell, one by the hand of a Churchman, the other, at least by a
Conformist.

It Is true, that the next civil War was between the Catholics and the
Hugenots, under the conduct of Cardinal Richlien, and the Duke of Roan. But as
I will not justify the Action* so their Liberties and Cautions so solemnly
settled by Henry the fourth, as the reward of their singular Merit, being by
the Ministry of that Cardinal invaded, they say, they did but defend their own,
and that rather against the Cardinal, than the King, whose softness suffered
him to become a property to the great Wit and Ambition of that Person: And
there is this Reason to believe them, that if it had been otherwise, we are
sure that King Charles the first would not in the least have countenanced their
Quarrel.

However, the Cardinal, like himself, wisely knew when to stop: For though he
thought it the Interest of the Crown, to moderate their greatness* and check
their growth, yet having fresh in Memory the Story of the foregoing Age, he
saw, 'twaswise to have a Balance upon occasion. But this was more then
recompensed in their first Adhesion to the Crown of France, under the Ministry
and Direction of the succeeding Cardinal, when their Persuasion had not only
Number, and many good Officers to value it self upon, but yielded their King,
the ablest Captain of the Age, namely, Turene: It was an Hugenot then, at the
Head of almost an Hugenot Army, that fell in with a cardinal himself, (see the
Union, Interest makes) to maintain the Imperial Crown of France, and that on a
Roman Catholics head: And together with their own Indulgence, that Religion,
as National too, against the pretenses of a Roman Catholic Army, headed by a
Prince, brave and learned of the same Religion.

I mention not this, to prefer one party to another; for contrary Instances may
be given elsewhere, as Interests have varied. In Sweedland a Prince was
rejected by Protestants; and in England and Holland, and many of the
Principalities of Germany, Roman Catholics have approved themselves Loyal to
their Kings, Princes and States: But this suffices to us, that we gain the
Point; for it is evident in Countries where Dissenters are tolerated, the
Insecurity of the Prince and Government, may as well come from the Conforming,
as Dissenting Party, and that it comes not from Dissenters, because such.

But how happy and admirable was this civil Union between the Cardinal and
Turene? two most opposite, Religions, both followed by People of their own
Persuasion: One says his Mass, 'tother his Directory, both invoke one Deity, by
several ways, for one success, and it followed with Glory, and a Peace to this
Day. O why should it be otherwise now! what has been, may be: Methinks Wisdom
and Charity are on that side still.

It will doubtless be objected, that the Dissenting Party of England, fell in
with the State Dissenter in our late Civil, but Unnatural War: And this seems
to be against us, yet three things must be confessed; First, That the War
rather made the Dissenters, than the Dissenters made the War: Secondly, that
those that were then in being, were not tolerated as in France, but prosecuted:
And lastly, that they did not lead, but follow great Numbers of Church-goers,
of all Qualities in that unhappy Controversy, which began upon other Topics
than Liberty for Church-Dissenters. And though they were herein blameable,
Reason is Reason, in all Climates and Latitudes. This does not affect the
Question: Such Calamities are no necessary Consequences of Church-dissent;
because they would then follow in all places where Dissenters are tolerated,
which we see they do not: but these may sometimes indeed be the effects of a
violent endeavor of Uniformity; and that under all Forms of Government, as I
fear they were partly here under our Monarchy. But then this teaches us to
conclude, that a Toleration of those, that a contrary course makes uneasy and
desperate, may prevent or Cure Intestine Troubles; as Anno forty eight, it
ended the Strife, and settled the Peace of Germany. For it is not now the
question, how far men may be provoked, or ought to resent it; but whether
Government is safe in a Toleration, especially Monarchy. And to this Issue we
are come in Reason and Fact, That it is safe, and that Conformists (generally
speaking) have for their Interests, as rarely known their Duty to their Prince,
as Dissenters for their Consciences. So that the danger seems to lie on the
side of forcing Uniformity against Faith, upon severe Penalties, rather than of
a discreet Toleration.

In the next place, I shall endeavor to show the Prudence and Reasonableness
of a Toleration by the great Benefits that follow it.

Toleration, which is an Admission of dissenting Worships, with Impunity to the
Dissenters, secures Property, which is Civil Right, and That eminently the Line
and Power of the Monarchy: For if no man suffer in his Civil Right for the sake
of such Dissent, the point of Succession is settled without a Civil War, or a
Recantation; Since it were an absurd thing to imagine, that a man born to five
Pounds a Year, should not be liable to forfeit his Inheritance for
Nonconformity, and yet a Prince of the Blood, and an Heir to the Imperial
Crown, should be made incapable of his Inheritance for Church-dissent.

The Security then of Property, or Civil Right, from being forfeitable for
Religious dissent, becomes a security to the Royal Family, against the
Difficulties lately labored under in the business of the Succession. And
though I have no Commission for it, besides the great Reason and Equity of the
thing it self, I dare say, there can hardly be a Dissenter at this time of day
so void of Sense and Justice, as well as Duty and Loyalty, as not to be of the
same mind. Else it were to deny that to the Prince, which he needs, and prays
from him. Let us not forget the Story of Sigismund of Sweedland, of Henry the
fourth of France, and especially of our own Queen Mary. Had Property been
fixed, the Line of those Royal Families could not have met with any let or
Interruption. 'Twas this Consideration that prevailed with Judge Hales, though
a strong Protestant after King Edward's Death, to give his Opinion for Queen
Mary's succession, against that of all the rest of the Judges to the contrary:
which noble President, was recompensed in the Loyalty of Archbishop Heath, a
Roman Catholic, in favor of the Succession of Queen Elizabeth; and the same
thing would be done again, in the like case, by men of the same Integrity.

I know it may be said, That there is little Reason now for the Prince to
regard this Argument in favor of Dissenters, when it was so little heeded in
the case of the Presumtive Heir to the Crown. But as this was the Act and Heat
of Conforming men within Doors, so if it were in Counsel or Desire, the Folly
and Injustice of any Dissenters without Doors, shall many entire Parties pay
the Reckoning of the few busy Offenders? They would humbly hope, that the
singular Mildness and Clemency, which make up so great a part of his Majesty's
public Assurances, will not leave him in his Reflection here.

It Is the Mercies of Princes, that above all their Works, give them the nearest
Resemblance to Divinity in their Administration. Besides, it is their Glory to
measure their Actions by the Reason and Consequence of things, and not by the
Passions that possess and annimate private Breasts: For it were fatal to the
Interest of a Prince, that the Folly or Vndutifulness of any of his Subjects,
should put him out of the way, or tempt him to be unsteady to his Principle and
Interest: And yet, with submission, I must say, it would be the Consequence of
Coertion: For by expossing Property for Opinion, the Prince exposes the
Consciences and Property of his own Family to the Church, and disarms them of
all Defense, upon any alteration of Judgment. Let us remember that several of
the same Parliament Men, who at first sacrificed civil Rights for
Nonconformity in common Dissenters, fell at last to make the Succession of the
Crown the Price of Dissent in the next Heir of the Royal Blood. So dangerous a
thing it is to hazard Property to serve a turn for any Party, or suffer such
Examples in the case of the meanest Person in a Kingdom.

Nor is this all the benefit that attends the Crown, by the preservation of
Civil Rights; for the Power of the Monarchy is kept more entire by it. The King
has the benefit of his Whole People, and the Reason of their Safety is owing to
their Civil, and not Ecclesiastical Obedience: Their Loyalty to Caesar, and not
Conformity to the Church: Whereas the other Opinion would have it, that no
Conformity to the Church, no Property in the State: Which is to clog and narrow
the civil Power; for at this rate, No Churchman, No Englishman, and no
Conformist, no Subject. A way to Alien the King's People, and practice an
Ecclusion upon him, from, it may be, a fourth part of his Dominions. Thus it
may happen that the ablest State-man, the bravest Captain, and the best Citizen
may be disabled, and the Prince forbid their Employment to his Service.

Some Instances of this we have had since his late Majesty's Restoration: For
upon the first Dutch-War, Sir William Penn being commanded to give in a List of
the ablest Sea-Officers in the Kindom, to serve in that Expedition. I do very
well remember he presented our present King with a Catalogue of the knowingest
and bravest Officers the Age had bred, with this subscribed, These men, if his
Majesty will please to admit of their Persuasions, I will answer for their
Skill, Courage and Integrity. He picked them by their Ability, not their
Opinions; and he was in the right; for that was the best way of doing the
King's business. And of my own knowledge, Conformity robbed the King at that
time of Ten men, whose greater Knowledge and Valor, than some one ten of that
Fleet, had in their room, been able to have saved a Battle, or perfected a
Victory. I will name three of them. The first was Old Vice Admiral Goodson;
than whom, no body was more Stout, or a Seaman. The second, Captain Hill, that
in the Sapphire beat Admiral Everson, hand to hand, that came to the Relief of
old Trump. The third was Captain Potter, that in the constant Warwick, took
Captain Beach, after eight hours smart Dispute. And as evident it is, that if a
War had proceeded between this Kingom and France, seven years ago, the business
of Conformity had deprived the King of many Land-Officers, whose share in the
late Wars of Europe, had made knowing and able.

But which is worst of all, such are not safe, with their dissent, under their
own extraordinary Prince. For though a man were a great Honourer of his Prince,
a Lover of his Country, an Admirer of the Government: In the course of his
Life, sober, wise, industrous and useful; if a Dissenter from the established
Form of Worship, in that condition there is no Liberty for his Person, nor
Security to his Estate; As Useless to the Public, so Ruined in himself. For
this Net catches the best: Men true to their Conscience, and who indulged, are
most like to be so to their Prince: whilst the rest are left to Cosen him by
their change; for that is the unhappy end of forced Conformity in the poor
spirited Compliers. And this must always be the consequence of necessitating
the Prince to put more and other Tests upon his People, than are requisite to
secure him of their Loyalty.

And when we shall be so happy in our measures as to consider this Mischief to
the Monarchy, it is to be hoped, it will be thought expedient to dis-intangle
Property from Opinion, and cut the untoward Knot, some men have tied, that has
so long hampered and gaul'd the Prince as well as People. It will be then, when
civil Punishments shall no more follow Church faults, that the civil Tenure
will be recovered to the Government and the Natures of Acts, Rewards and
Punishments, so distinguished, as Loyalty shall be the safety of Dissent, and
the whole People made useful to the Government.

It will, perhaps, be objected, That Dissenters can hardly I obliged to be true
to the Crown, and so the Crown unsafe in their very Services; for they may
easily turn the Power given them to serve it, against it, to greaten
themselves. I am willing to obviate every thing, that may with any pretense be
offered against our entreated Indulgence. I say, No, and appeal to the King
himself, (against whom the Prejudices of our late Times ran highest, and
therefore has most reason to resent) If he was ever better loved or served,
than by the Old Roundheaded Seamen, the Earl of Sandwich, Sir William Penn,
Sir J. Lawson, Sir G. Ascue, Sir R. Stainer, Sir Jer. Smith, Sir J. Jordan, Sir
J. Harmon, Sir Chris. Minns, Captain Sansum, Cuttins, Clark, Robinson, Molton,
Wager, Tern, Parker, Haward, Hubbard, Fen, Langhorn, Daws, Earl, White; to say
nothing of many yet living, of real Merit, and many inferior Officers, expert
and brave And to do our Prince Justice, he deserved it from them, by his
Humility, Plainness and Courage, and the care and affection that he always
showed to them.

If any say, That most of these men were Conformists: I presume to tell them, I
know as well as any man, they served the King never the better for that; on the
contrary, 'twas all the strife that some of them had in themselves, in the
doing that service, that they must not serve him without it; and if in that
they could have been Indulged, they had performed it with the greatest Alacrity
Interest will not lie. Where People find their Reckoning, they are sure to be
True. For it is want of Wit that makes any man false to himself. 'Twas he that
knew all men's Hearts, that said, Where the Treasure is, there the Heart will be
also. Let men be easy, safe, and upon their preferment with the prince, and
they will be Dutiful, Loyal, and most Affectionate.

Mankind by nature fears Power, and melts at Goodness. Pardon my Zeal, I would
not be thought to plead for Dissenters Preferment; it is enough they keep what
they have, and may live at their own Charges. Only I am for having the Prince
have Room for his choice, and not be crampe and stinted by Opinion; but employ
those who are best able to serve him: And I think out of six Parties it is
better picking, than out of one of them; and therefore the Prince's interest is
to be head of all of them; which a Toleration effects in a moment; since those
six (divided Interests, within themselves) having but (...) civil Head, become
one entire civil Body to the Prince: And I am sure, I have Monarchy on my side,
if Solomon and his Wisdom may stand for it, who tells us, That the Glory of a
King is in the Multitude of his People.

Nor is this all, for the Consequences of such an Universal Content would be of
infinite moment to the security of the Monarchy, both at Home and Abroad. At
Home, for it would behead the factions without Blood, and Banish the
Ringleaders without going abroad. When the great bodies of Dissenters see the
care of the Government for their safety, they have no need of their Captains,
nor These any ground for their Pretenses: For as They used the People to value
themselves, and raise their Fortunes with the Prince, so the People followed
their Leaders to get that ease, they see their Heads promised, but could not,
and the Government can, and does give them.

Multitudes cannot Plot, they are too many, and have not Conduct for it, they
move by another Spring. Safety is the pretense of their Leaders: If once they
see they enjoy it, they have yet Wit enough not to hazard it for any Body: For
the endeavors of busy men are then discernable; but a state of Severity gives
them a pretense, by which the Multitude is easily taken.

This I say, upon a Supposition, that the Dissenters could agree against the
Government; which is a begging of the Question: For it is improbable (if not
impossible without Conformists) since besides the Distance they are at in their
Persuasions and Affections, they dare not hope for so good terms from one
another, as the Government gives: And that Fear, with their Emulation, would
draw them into that Duty, that they must all fall into a Natural dependence,
which I call holding of the Prince, as the Great Head of the State.

From abroad, we are as safe as from within our selves: For if leading Men at
home are thus disappointed of their Interest in the People, Foreigners will
find here no Interpreters of their dividing Language, nor matter (if they
could) to work upon; for the Point is gained, the People they would deal in,
are at their ease, and cannot be bribed; and those that would, cannot deserve it.

It is this that makes Princes live Independent of their Neighbors; and to be
loved at home, is to be feared abroad: One follows necessarily the other. Where
Princes are driven to seek a foreign Assistance, the issue must either be the
Ruin of the Prince, or the absolute subjection of the People; not without the
hazard of becoming a Province to the power of that Neighbor that turns the
Scale. These consequences have on either hand an ill look, and should rebate
Extremes.

The Greatness of France carries those Threats to all her Neighbors, that,
politically speaking, it is the Melanchollist prospect England has had to make
since Eighty Eight: The Spaniard at that time, being shorter in all things but
his Pride and Hope, than the French King is now of the same universal Monarchy.
This greatness begun by the eleaventh Lewis, some will have it, has not been so
much advanced by the Wisdom of Richlieu, and Craft of Mazarene, no, not the
Arms of the present Monarch, as by the assistance or connivance of England,
that has most to lose by him.

Cromwell begun, and gave him the Scale against the Spaniard. The Reason of
State he went upon, was the support of his usurped Dominion: And he was not out
in it; for the Exile of the Royal Family was a great part of the price of that
Aid: In which we see, how much Interest prevails above Nature. It was not Royal
Kindred could shelte a King against the Solicitations of an Usurper with the
Son his Mother's Brother.

But it will be told us by some People, We have n^^ degenerated, but exactly
followed the same Steps ever since, which has given such an Increase to those
Beginnings, that the French Monarchy is almost above our reach. But suppose it
were true, what is the cause of it? It has not been old Friendship, or nearness
of Blood, or Neighborhood; Nor could it be from an Inclination in our
Ministers, to bring things here to a like issue, as some have suggested; for
then we should have clogged his Successes, instead of helping them in any kind,
lest in doing so, we should have put it into his power to hinder our own.

But perhaps our cross Accidents of State may sometimes have compelled us into
his Friendship, and his Councils have carefully improved the one, and husbanded
the other, to great Advantages; and that this was more then made for our
English Interest; and yet it is but too true, that the extremes Heats of some
men, that most inveighed against it, went too far to strengthen that
understanding, by not taking what would have been granted, and creating an
Interest at home, that might naturally have dissolved that Correspondence
abroad.

I love not to revive things that are uneasily remembered, but in Points most
tender to the late King, he thought himself sometimes too closely pressed, and
hardly held; and we are all wise enough now to say, a milder Conduct had
succeeded better: For if reasonable things may be unreasonably pressed, and with
such private Intentions as induced a denial, Heats about things doubtful,
unwise or unjust, must needs harden and prejudice.

Let us then create an Interest for the Prince at Home, and Foreign
Friendships (at best, uncertain and dangerous) will fall of course; for if it
be allowed to private men, shall it be forbid, to Princes only, to know and be
true to their own Support?

It is no more than what every Age makes us to see in all Parties of men. The
Parliaments of England since the Reformation, giving no quarter to Roman
Catholics, have forced them to the Crown for shelter: And to induce the
Monarchy to yield them the Protection they have needed, have with mighty
Address and Skill, recommended themselves as the great Friends of the
Prerogative, and so successfully too, that it were not below the Wisdom of that
Constitution to reflect what they have lost by that constiveness of theirs to
Cath^licks. On the other hand, the Crown having treated the Protestant
Dissenters, with the severity of the Laws that affected them, suffering the
sharpest of them to fall upon their Persons and Estates, they have been driven
successively to Parliaments for Succor, whose Privileges, with equal Skill
and Zeal, they have abetted: And our late unhappy Wars are too plain a proof,
how much their Accession gave the Scale against the Power and Courage of both
Conformists and Catholics, that adhered to the Crown.

Nor must this contrary Adhesion, be imputed to Love or Hatred, but necessary
Interest: Refusal in one place makes way for Address in another. If the Scene
be changed the parts must follow; for as well before as after Cromwell's
Usurpation, the Roman Catholics did not only promise the most ready Obedience
to that Government in his Printed Apologies for Liberty of Conscience: But
actually treated by some of their greatest Men, with the Ministers of those
Times for Indulgence, upon the assurances they offered to give of their good
Behavior to the Government, as then established. On the other hand, we see the
Presbyteriens, That in Scotland began the War, and in England promoted and
upheld it to Forty Seven, when ready to be supplanted by the Independants,
wheel to the King. In Scotland they Crown him, and come into England, with an
Army to restore him, where their Brethren join them; but being defeated, They
help, by private Collections, to support him abroad, and after the Overthrow of
Sir G. Booth's Attempt; to almost a Miracle, restore him. And which is more, a
great part of that Army too, whose Victories rise from the Ruin of the Prince
they restored.

But to give the last Proofs our Age has of the power of Interest, against the
Notion opposed by this Discourse. First, the Independants themselves, held the
greatest Republicans of all Parties, were the most Lavish and Superstitous
Adorers of Monarchy in Oliver Cromwell, because of the regard he had to them;
allowing him, and his Son after him, to be Custos Vtriusque Tabule, over all
Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, Supreme Governor. And next, the
Conformists in Parliament, reputed the most Loyal and Monarchical men, did more
than any body question and oppose the late King's Declaration of Indulgence;
even They themselves would not allow so much Prerogative to the Crown.

This proves the Power of Interest, and that all Persuasions center with it:
And when they see the Government engaging them with a fixed Liberty of
Conscience, they must for their own sakes seek the Support of it, by which it
is maintained. This Union, directed under the Prince's Conduct, would awe the
greatness of our Neighbors, and soon return Europe to its ancient Balance,
and that into his hand too. So that he may be the great Arbiter of the
Christian World. But if the Policy of the Government places the Security of its
Interest in the Destruction of the civil Interest of the Dissenters, it is not
to be wondered at, if they are less found in the praises of its Conduct, than
others to whom they are offered up a Sacrifice by it.

I know it will be insinuated, That there is danger in builing upon the Union
of diverse Interests; and this will be aggravated to the Prince, by such as
would engross his Bonny and intercept his Grace from a great part of his
People. But I will only oppose to that mere Suggestion, three Examples to the
contrary, with this Challange, That if after rummaging the Records of all Time,
they find one Instance to contradict me, I shall submit the Question to their
Authority.

The First is given by those Christian Emperors, who admitted of all sorts of
Dissenters into their Armies, Courts and Senates. This, the Ecclesiastical
Story of those Times, assures us, and particularly Socrates, Evagrius, and
Onuphrius.

The Next Instance is that of Prince William of Orange, who by a timely
Indulgence, united the scattered strength of Holland, and, all animated by the
Clemency, as well as Valor of their Captain, crowned his Attempts with an
extraordinary Glory; and what makes, continues Great.

The last is given us by Livy, in his account of Hannibals Army; That they
consisted of diverse Nations, Languages, Customs and Religions: That under all
their successes of War and Peace, for Thirteen Years together, they never
mutinied against their General, nor fell out among themselves. What Livy
relates for a Wonder, the Marquess Virgilio Malvetzy gives the Reason of, to
wit, their Variety and Difference, well managed by their General; for said he,
It was impossible for so many Nations, Customs and Religions to combine,
especially when the General's equal hand gave him more Reverence with them,
than they had of affection for one another. This (says he) some would wholly
impute to Hannibal* but however great he was, I attribute it to the variety of
People in the Army: For (adds he) Rome's Army was ever less given to Mutiny,
when balanced with Auxiliary Legions, then when entirely Roman. Thus much in
his Discourses upon Cornelius Tacitus.

And they are neither few, nor of the weakest sort of men, that have thought
the Concord of Discords the firmest Basis for Government to build upon. The
business is to Tune them well, and that must be by the skill of the Misitian.

In Nature we see, all Heat consumes, all Cold kills: That three Degrees of
Cold to two of Heat, allays the Heat, but introduces the contrary Quality, and
over-cools by a Degree; but two Degrees of Cold to two of Heat, makes a Poize
in Elements, and a Balance in Nature. And in those Families where the evenest
Hand is carried, the Work is best done, and the Master is most reverenced.

This brings me to another benefit, which accrues to the Monarchy by a
Toleration, and that is a Balance at home: For though it be improbable, it may
so happen, that either the conforming or nonconforming Party may be ^^tiful;
the one is then a Balance to the other. This might have prevented much
Mischief to our second and third Henry, King John, the second Edward and
Richard, and unhappy Henry the sixth, as it undeniably saved the Royal Family
of France, and secured Holland, and kept it from truckling under the Spanish
Monarchy. While all hold of the Government, it is that which gives the Scale to
the most Datiful; but still, no farther than to show Its Power, and awe the
disorderly into Obedience, not to destroy the Balance, lest It should
afterward want the means of Over-poizing Faction.

That this is more than Fancy; plain it is, that the Dissenter must firmly
adhear to the Government for his Being, while the Churchman is provided for.
The one subsists by its Mercy, the other by its Bounty. This is tied by Plenty,
but that by Necessity, which being the last of Ties, and strongest of
Obligations, the Security is greatest from him, that it is fancied most unsafe
to Tolerate.

But besides this, the Tranquillity which it gives at Home, will both oblige
those that are upon the Wing for Foreign Parts, to pitch here again; and at a
time when our Neighboring Monarch is wasting his People, excite those
Sufferers into his Majesty's Kingdoms, whose Number will increase that of his
Subjects, and their Labor and Consumption, the Trade and Wealth of his
Dominions.

For what are all Conquests but of People? And if the Government may by
Indulgence add the Inhabitants of Ten Cities to those of its own, it obtains a
Victory without charge. The Ancient Persecution of France and the Low
Countries, has furnished us with an invincible Instance; for of those that came
hither on that account, we were instructed in most useful Manufacturies, as by
courses of the like nature, we lost a great part of our Woollen Trade. And as
men, in times of danger, draw in their Stock, and either transmit it to other
Banks, or bury their Talent at home for security (that being out of sight, it
may be out of reach too (and either is fatal to a Kingdom) So this mildness
entreated, setting every man's Heart at rest, every man will be at work, and the
Stock of the Kingdom employed; which, like the Blood, that has its due
passage, will give Life and Vigor to every Member in the public Body.

And here give me leave to mention the Experiment made at Home by his late
Majesty, in his Declaration of Indulgence. No matter how well or ill built the
act of State was, it is no part of the business in hand, but what effect the
Liberty of it had upon the Peace and Wealth of the Kingdom, may have
instruction in it to our present Condition. 'Twas evident, that all men
Labored cheerfully, and Traded boldly, when they had the Royal Word to keep
what they got, and the King himself became the universal Jusurer of Dissenters
Estates. White Hall then, and St. James's were as much visited and courted by
their respective Agents, as if they had been of the Family: For that which
eclipsed the Royal Goodness, being by his own Hand thus removed, his benign
Influences drew the returns of Sweetness and Duty from that part of his
Subjects, that the want of those Influences had made barren before. Then it was
that we looked like the Members of one Family, and Children of one Parent. Nor
did we envy our eldest Brother, Episcopacy, his Inheritance, so that we had but
a Child's Portion: For not only Discontents vanished, but no matter was left
for ill Spirits, foreign or domestic, to brood upon, or hatch to Mischief.
Which was a plain proof, that it is the Union of Interests, and not of
Opinions, that gives Peace to Kingdoms.

And with all Deference to Authority, I would speak it, the Liberty of the
Declaration, seems to be our English Amomum at least, the Sovereign Remedy to
our English Constitution. And to say true, we shifted Luck as soon as we had
lost it; like those that loose their Royal Gold, their Evil returns. For all
Dissenters seemed then united in their affection to the Government, and
followed their Affairs without fear or distraction. Projects then, were stale
and unmerchantable, and no body cared for them, because no body wanted them:
That gentle Opiate at the Prince's hand, laid the most busy and Turbulent to
sleep: But when the loss of that Indulgence made them uncertain, and that
uneasy, their Persons and Estates being again exposed to pay the Reckoning of
their Dissent, no doubt, but every Party shifted then as they could: Most grew
selfish, at least, jealous, fearing one should make Bargains apart, or
exclusive of the other. This was the fatal part Dissenters acted to their
common Ruin: And I take this Partiality to have had too great a share in our
late Animosities; which, by fresh Accidents falling in, have swelled to a
mighty Deluge, such an one as has overwhelmed the former civil Concord and
Serenity of the Kingdom. And pardon me if I say, I cannot see that those Waters
are like to assuage, till this Olive Branch of Indulgence be some way or other
restored: The Waves will still cover our Earth, and a spot of Ground will
hardly be found in this glorious Isle, for a great Number of useful People to
set a quiet foot upon. And to pursue the Allegory; what was that Ark it self,
but the most apt and lively Emblem of Toleration? A kind of natural Temple of
Indulgence. In which, we find two of every living Creature dwelling together,
of both Sexes too, that they might propagate; and that as well of the unclean
as clean kind: So that the baser and less useful sort were saved. Creatures
never like to change their Nature, and so far from being whip't and punished to
the Altar, that they were expressly forbid. These were Saved, these were Fed and
Restored to their Ancient Pastures. Shall we be so mannerly as to complement
the Conformists with the style of Clean, and so humble as to take the Unclean
kind to our selves, who are the less Noble, and more Clownish sort of People? I
think verily we may do it, if we may but be saved too by the Commander of our
English Ark. And this the Peaceable and Virtuous Dissenter has the less reason
to fear, since Sacred Text tells us, 'Twas Vice, and not Opinion that brought
the Deluge upon the rest. And here (to drop our Allegory) I must take leave to
hope, that thought the Declaration be gone, if the reason of it remain, I mean,
the Interest of the Monarchy, the King and His Great Council will graciously
please to think a Toleration, no Dangerous nor Obsolete thing.

But as Toleration has many Arguments for it, that are drawn from the
Advantages that have and would come to the Public by it, so there are diverse
Mischiefs that must unavoidably follow the Persecution of Dissenters, that may
reasonably dissuade from such Severity. For they must either be Ruined, Fly or
Conform; and perhaps the last is not the Safest. If they are Ruined in their
Estates, and their Persons Imprisoned, modestly computing, a fourth of the
Trade and Manufactury of the Kingdom sinks; and those that have helped to
maintain the Poor, must come upon the Poors Book for Maintenance. This seems to
be an Impoverishing of the Public. But if to avoid this, they Transport
themselves, with their Estates, into other Governments; nay, though it were to
any of his Majesty's Plantations, the Number were far too great to be spared
from Home. So much Principal Stock wanting to turn the yearly Traffic, and so
many People too, to consume our yearly Growth, must issue fatally to the Trade
one way, and on the Lands and Rents of the Kingdom the other way.

And Lastly, If they should resolve, neither to suffer nor fly, but conform to
prevent both. It is to be enquired, if this Cure of Church-Division be safe to
the State; or not rather, a raking up Coals under Ashes, for a future Mischief?
He whom Fear or Policy has made Treacherous to his own Conscience, ought not
to be held True to any thing but his own Safety and Revenge. His Conformity
gives him the first, and his Resentment of the Force that compels it, will on
no occasion let him want the last. So that Conformity couzens no body but the
Government: For the State Phanatick (which is the unsafe thing to the State)
being christened by Conformity, he is Elegible every where, with Persons the
most devoted to the Prince: And all men will hold themselves protected in their
Votes by it.

A Receipt to make Faction keep, and preserve Disloyalty against all Weathers.
For whereas the nature of Tests is to discover, this is the way to conceal the
Inclinations of men from the Government. Plain Dissent is the Prince with a
Candle in His hand: He sees the Where and What of Persons and Things: He
discriminates, and makes that a rule of conduct: but forced Conformity is the
Prince in the dark: It blows out his Candle, and leaves him without
Distinction: Such Subjects are like Figures in Sand, when Water is flap't upon
them, they run together, and are indiscernable: Or written Sedition, made
illegible by writing the Oaths and Canons upon it: The safest way of blotting
out Danger.

And I know not how to forbear saying, that this necessary Conformity makes the
Church dangerous to the State: For even the Hypocrisy that follows, makes the
Church both conceal and protect the Hypocrites; which together with their
Liberality to the Parson, Charity to the Poor, and Hospitality to their
Neighbors, recommends them to the first favor they have to bestow. That Fort
is unsafe where a part of the Garrison consists of disguised Enemies; for when
they take their turns at the Watch, the danger is hardly evitable. It would
then certainly be for the safety of the Fort, that such Friends in Masquerade
were industrously kept out, instead of being whipped in.

And it was something of this I remember that was made an Argument for the
Declaration of Indulgence in the Preamble, to wat, the greater Safety of the
Government, from Open and Public, then private, dissenting Meetings of
worship; as indeed the rest bear the like resemblance. For these were the
Topics, quieting the People, encouraging Strangers to come and live among us,
and Trade by it; and lastly, preventing the Danger that might arise to the
Government by private Meetings. Of greater reason then from private men, not
less discontented, but more concealed and secured by the great Drake of Church
Conformity. It is this will make a Comprehension of the next Dissenters to the
Church dangerous, though it were practicable, of which side soever it be. For in
an Age, the present Government shall feel the Art and Industry of the
comprehended. So that a Toleration is in reason of State to be preferred. And if
the Reasons of the Declaration were ever good, they are so still, because the
Emergencies of State that made them so, remain; and our Neighbors are not less
powerful to improve them to our detriment.

But it will be now said, Though the Government should find its account in what
has been last alleged, this were the way to overthrow the Church, and
encourage Dissenters to continue in their Errors. Which is that second main
Objection I proposed at first, to answer in its proper place, and that I think
this is.

I humbly say, if it prove the Interest of the three considerable
Church-Interests in this Kingdom, a Relaxation, at least, can hardly fail us.
The three Church Interests are, That of the Church of England; That of the
Roman-Catholick-Dissenter; and That of the Protestant-Dissenter.

That the Church of England ought in Conscience and Prudence to consent to the
Ease desired.

I pray first, that it be considered, how great a reflection it will be upon
her Honor, that from a Persecuted, she should turn a Persecuting Church: An
overthrow none of her Enemies have been able to give to her many excellent
Apologies. Nor will it be excused, by her saying, She is in the Right, which
her Persecutors were not; since this is a confidence not wanting in any of
them, or her Dissenters; and the truth is, it is but the begging of a Question,
that will by no means be granted.

No body ought to know more then Churchmen, that Conscience cannot be forced.
That Offerings against Conscience, are as odious to God, as uneasy to them
that make them. That God loves a free Sacrifice. That Christ forbad Fire,
though from Heaven (it self) to punish Dissenters; and commanded that the Tares
should grow with the Wheat till the Harvest. In sine, that we should love
Enemies themselves: And to exclude worldly strife for Religion; That his
Kingdom is not of this World. This was the Doctrine of the Blessed Savior of
the World.

Saint Paul persues the same course. Is glad Christ is Preached, be it of Envy;
the worst ground for Dissent that can be. It was he that ask't that hard, but
just Question, Who art thou that judge another man's Servant? To his own Lord
he stands or falls. He allows the Church a Warfare, and Weapons to perform
it, but they are not Carnal, but Spiritual. Therefore it was so advised, that
every man in matters of Religion, should be fully persuaded in his own mind,
and if any were short or mistaken, God would, in his time, Inform them better.

He tells us of Schismatics and Heretics too, and their punishment, which is
to the point in hand: He directs to a first and second Admonition, and if that
prevail not, reject them: That is, refuse them Church Fellowship, disown their
Relation, and deny them Communion. But in all this there is not a Word of Fines
or Imprisonments, nor is it an excuse to any Church, that the civil Magistrate
executes the severity, while they are Members of her Communion, that make and
execute the Laws.

But if the Church could gain her Point, I mean Conformity, unless she could
gain consent too, 'twere but Constraint at last. A Rape upon the Mind, which
may increase her Number, not her Devotion. On the contrary, the rest of her
Sons are in danger by their Hypocrisy. The most close, but watchful and
Revengeful thing in the World. Besides, the Scandal can hardly be removed: To
overvalue Coin, and Rate Brass to Silver, Beggars any Country; and to own them
for Sons she never begat, debases and destroys any Church. 'Twere better to
indulge foreign Coin of intrinsic Value, and let it pass for its Weight. It Is
not Number, but Quality: Two or three sincere Christians, that form an
Evangelical Church; and though the Church were less, more Charity on the one
hand, and Piety on the other, with exact Church-censure, and less civil
Coertion, would give her credit with Conscience in all Sects; without which,
their Accession it self would be no benefit, but disgrace, and hazard to her
Constitution.

And to speak prudently in this Affair it is the Interest of the Church of
England, not to suffer the Extinction of Dissenters, that she may have a
Counter Balance to the Roman Catholics, who, though few in Number, are great
in Quality, and greater in their foreign Friendships and Assistance. On the
other hand, it is her Interest to Indulge the Roman Catholic, that by his
Accession. She may at all times, have the Balance in her own hand, against the
Protestant Dissenter, leaning to either, as she finds her Doctrine undermined
by the one, or her Discipline by the other; or lastly, her civil Interest
endangered from either of them.

And it is certainly the Interest of both those Extremes of Dissent, that She,
rather than either of them should hold the Scale. For as the
Protestant-Dissenter cannot hope for any Tenderness, exclusive of Roman
Catholics, but almost the same Reasons may be advanced against him; so on the
other hand, it would look imprudent, as well as unjust, in the Roman
Catholics, to solicit any Indulgence exclusive of Protestant Dissenters. For
besides that, this keeps up the Animosity, which it is their Interest to bury:
The consequence will be, to take the advantage of Time, to snatch it from one
another, when an united Request for Liberty, once granted, will oblige both
Parties, in all times, for Example sake, to have it equally preserved. Thus are
all Church-Interests of Conformists and Dissenters, rendered consistent and
safe in their civil Interest one with the other.

But it will last of all, doubtless, be objected, That though a Toleration were
never so desirable in it self, and in its consequence beneficial to the
Public, yet the Government cannot allow it, without Ruin to the Church
England, which it is obliged to maintain.

But I think this (...) not affect the Question at all, unless by maintaing the
Church of England, it is understood that he should force whole Parties to be of
(...) Communion, or knock them on the Head: Let us call to mind, that the
Religion that is true, allows no man to do Wrong, that Right may come of it.
And that nothing has lessened the Credit of any Religion more, than declining
to support it self by its own Charity and Piety, and taking Sanctuary in the
Arms, rather than the Understanding of men. Violences are ill Pillars for Truth
to rest upon. The Church of England must be maintained: Right; but cannot that
be done without the Dissenter be destroyed? In vain then did Christ command
Peter to put up his Sword, with this Rebuke, He that kills with the Sword, with
the Sword shall be killed, if his Followers are to draw it again. He makes
killing for Religion, Murder, and deserving Death: Was he then in the right,
Not to call Legions to his assistance? And are not his Followers of these times
in the wrong, to seek to uphold their Religion by any methods of Force? The
Church of England must be maintained, therefore the Dissenters, that almost
hold the same Doctrine, must be ruined. A Consequence most unnatural, as it is
almost impossible. For besides that, the Drudgery would unbecome the civil
Magistrate, who is, the Image of divine Justice and Clemency, and that it would
fasten the Character of a False Church, upon one that destres to be esteemed a
True one; she puts the Government upon a Task that is hard to be performed.
Kings can no more make Brick without Straw, than Slaves. The Condition of our
Affairs is much changed, and the Circumstances our Government is under, differ
mightily from those of our Ancestors. They had not the same dissents to deal
with, nor those Dissents the like Bodies of People to render them formidable,
and their Prosecution mischievous to the State. Nor did this come of the
Princes neglect or (...): There are other Reasons to be assigned, of which, the
opportunities Domestic Trouble gave to their Increase and Power, and the
Severities used to suppress them, may go for none of the least. So that it was
as involuntary in the Prince, as to the Church Anxious. And under this
necessity to tie the Magistrate to old measures, is to be regardless of Time,
whose fresh Circumstances give Aim to the conduct of wise men in their present
Actions. Governments, as well as Courts, change their Fashions: The same
Clothes will not always serve: And Politics made Obsolete by new Accidents,
are as unsafe to follow, as antiquated Dresses were ridiculous to ware.

Thus Seamen know, and teach us in their daily practice: They humor the
Winds, though they will lie as near as they can, and trim their Sails by their
Compass: And by patience under these constrained and uneven Courses, it is they
gain their Port at last. This justifies the Governments change of Measures from
the change of Things; for res nolunt male Administrari.

And to be free, it looks more then Partial, to Elect and Reprobate too. That
the Church of England is preferred, and has the Fat of the Earth, the Authority
of the Magistrate, and the Power of the Sword in her Sons Hands, which
comprehends all the Honors, Places, Profits, and Powers of the Kingdom, must
not be repined at: Let her have it, and keep it all, and let none dare seek or
accept an Office that is not of her. But to ruin Dissenters to complete her
Happiness, (pardon the Allusion) is Talvauism in the worst sense; for this is
that Horrendem Decretum reduced to Practice: And to pursue that ill-natured
Principle, Men are civilly Damned for that they cannot help, since Faith is not
in Man's power, though it sometimes exposes one to it.

It is a severe Dilemma, that a man must either renounce that of which he makes
Conscience in the sight of God, or be civilly and Ecclesiastically Reprobated.
There was a time when the Church of England her self stood in need of
Indulgence, and made up a great part of the Non-conformists of this Kingdom,
and what she then wanted, she pleaded for, I mean a Toleration, and that in a
general Style, as diverse of the Writings of her Doctors tell us: Of which let
it be enough but to mention that excellent Discourse of Dr. Tailor, Bishop of
Down, entitled Liberty of Prophecy.

And that which makes Severity look the worse in the Members of the Church of
England, is the Modesty she professes about the truth of the things she
believes: For though perhaps it were indefencible in any Church to compel a man
to that which she were infallibly assured to be true, unless she superceeded
his Ignorance by Conviction, rather than Authority, it must doubtless look rude
to punish men into Conformity to that, of the truth of which, the Church her
self pretends no certainty. Not that I would less believe a Church so cautious
then one more confident; but I know not how to help thinking Persecution harsh,
when they ruin People for not believing that, which they have not in themselves
the power of believing, and which she cannot give them, and of which her self
is not infallibly assured. The Drift of this is Moderation, which well becomes
us poor Mortals, That for every idle Word we speak must give an account at the
Day of Judgment, if our Savior's Doctrine have any credit with us.

It would much mittigate the Severity, if the dissent were Sullen or in
Contempt. But if men cannot help or hinder their, Belief, they are rather
Unhappy than Guilty, and more to be, pitied than blamed. However, they are of
the reasonable stock of the Country, and though they were unworthy of Favor,
they may not be unfit to live. It Is Capital, at Law, to destroy Bastards and
By-blows are laid to the Parish to keep: They must maintain them at last: And
shall not these natural Sons, at least, be laid at the Door of the Kingdom?
Unhappy fate of Dissenters! to be less heeded, and more destitute then any
Body. If this should ever happen to be the effect of their own Folly, with
submission, it can never be the consequence of the Government's Engagements.

Election does not necessarily imply a Reprobation of the rest. If God has
elected some to Salvation, it will not follow, of course, that he has
absolutely rejected all the rest. For though he was God of the Jews, he was God of
the Gentiles too, and they were his People, though the Jews were his peculiar
People. God respects not Persons, says St. Peter, the good of all Nations are
accepted. The Difference at last will not be of Opinion, but Works: Sheep or
Goats, all, of all Judgments will be found; and, Come, well done; or Go ye
Workers of Iniquity, will conclude their Eternal State: Let us be careful
therefore of an Opinion-Reprobation of one another.

We see the God of Nature has taught us softer Doctrine in his great Books of
the World: His Sun shines, and his Rain falls upon all. All the Productions of
Nature are by Love, and shall it be proper to Religion only to propagate by
Force? The poor Hen instructs us in Humanity, who, to defend her feeble Young,
refuses no danger. All the Seeds and Plants that grow for the use of Man, are
produced by the kind and warm Influences of the Sun. It Is Kindness that upholds
human Race. People don't multiply in spite: And if it be by gentle and
friendly ways, that Nature produces and matures the Creatures of the World,
certainly Religion should teach us to be Mild and Bearing.

Let your Moderation be known to all men, was the saying of a great Doctor of
the Christian Faith, and his Reason for that command Cogent; For the Lord is at
hand. As if he had said, Have a care what you do, be not bitter nor violent,
for the Judge is at the Door: Do as you would be done to, lest what you deny to
others, God should refuse to you.

And after all this, shall the Church of England be less tender of men's
Consciences than our common Law is of their Lives, which had rather a Thousand
Criminals should escape, than that One Innocent should perish? Give me leave to
say, that there are many Innocents (Conscience excepted) now exposed, Men
honest, peaceable and useful; free of ill designs; that pray for Caesar, and
pay their Tribute to Caesar.

If any tell us, They have, or may, ill use their Toleration. I say, this must
be looked to, and not Liberty therefore refused; for the English Church cannot
so much forget her own Maxim to Dissenters, That Propter abusum non est
Tollendus usus. It suffices to our Argument, it is no necessary Consequence, and
that Fact and Time are for us. And if any misuse such Freedom, and entitle
Conscience to Misbehavour, we have other Laws enough to catch and punish the
Offenders, without treating One Party with the Spoils of Six. And when Religion
becomes no man's Interest, it will hardly ever be any man's Hypocrisy. Men will
choose by Conscience, which at least preserves Integrity, though it were
mistaken: And if not in the wrong, Truth recompenses Inquiry, and Light makes
amends for Dissent.

And since a plain Method offers it self, from the Circumstances, of our case,
I take the freedom to present it for the Model of the entreated Toleration.

Much has been desired, said and pressed in reference to the late King's being
Head of a Protestant League, which takes in but apart of the Christian World;
the Roman and Grecian Christians being excluded. But I most humbly offer, that
our wise men would please to think of another Title for our King, and that is
Head of a Christian League, and give the Experiment here at Home in his own
Dominions.

The Christian Religion is admitted of All in the Text, and by All
acknowledged, in the Apostles Creed. Here every Party of Christians meet, and
center as in a General. The several Species of Christians, that this Genus
divides it self into, are those diverse Persuasions we have within this
Kingdom; the Church of England, Roman Catholics, Grecians, Lutheraus,
Presbyterians Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers Socinians: These I call so
many Orders of Christians, that unite in the Text, and differ only in the
Comment; All owning one Deity, Savior and Judge, good Works, Rewards and
Punishments: which Bodies once regulated, and holding of the Prince, as Head of
the Government, maintaining Charity, and pressing Piety, will be an Honor to
Christianity, a Strength to the Prince and a Benefit to the Public: For in
lieu of an unattainable (at best an unsincere) Uniformity, we shall have in
Civils, Unity and Amity in Faith.

The Jews before, and in the time of Herod, were divided into diverse Sects.
There were Pharisees, Sadduces, Herodians and Essenes. They maintained their
Dissent without Ruin to the Government. And the Magistrates fell under no
censure from Christ for that Toleration.

The Gentiles, as already has been observed, had their diverse orders of
Philosophers, as disagreeing as ever Christians were, and that without danger
to the Peace of the State.

The Turks themselves show us, that both other Religions, and diverse Sects of
their own, are very Tolerable, with seourity to their Government.

The Roman Church is a considerable instance to our point; for she is made up
of diverse Orders of both Sexes, of very differing Principle, fomented
sometimes, to great Feuds and Controversies; as between Franciscans,
Dominicans, Jesuits and Sorbomists; yet without danger to the Political state
of the Church. On the contrary, she therefore cast her self into that Method,
that she might safely give vent to Novelty and Zeal, and suffer both without
danger of Schism. And these Regulars, are by the Popes Graunts, privileged with
an Exemption from Episcopal Visitation and Jurisdiction.

Changing then the Terms, from Church to State, the whole contrivance looks
very Wise and Imitable. For as by this, Schism in their Church, so Faction in
our State may be prevented. And these civil Regulars depending on the civil
Power, as those Religious ones do upon the Popes, will Naturally, like them,
become the Perpetual Votarys of its greatness. And thus all Parties hanging,
like Keys, by one Ring, at the civil Magistrates Girdle, though each has its
several Lock, he that keeps them can open and shut every Door, as the Persons
deserve and the public Safety requires.

To make this more easy a (...) and Practice, I humbly propose; First, that
every Party do present a voluntary Assurance of their Fidelity to the
Government, in Terms the most full and pain that may be: In which, as the King
will have an Account of their Number, so of their Duty to the Government, and
Abhorrence of all Faction and Rebellion.

Secondly, That they should give in a List of their Meetings, as to Place,
Time, and the Persons properly belonging to them.

Thirdly, that once in every Year, the names of Proselytes be delivered into
the Clark of the Peace for every County, and that all of that Party, as well as
those new Adherents, do renew their Obligation of Obedience, by Annual
Subscriptions.

Fourthly, Because it is not impossible that some or other may mis-behave
themselves, and abuse this Liberty, or be abused in the use of it. That in
every County three Persons of most Eminency be Yearly Named to the Magistrates
by each Dissenting Interest, to stand a kind of Representatives, both to inform
them what they can, upon inquiry, of Persons or Things among the People of that
Party, Which may in the least be thought to affect the Government, and to have
redress of injuries done to Persons in the sober use of their allowed Liberty.

These are the Methods that have had most weight with me, and the best I know
to create a Reciprocal Confidence and Interest between the Prince and his
Dissenting People: To be sure, this Course has succeeded well elsewhere, even
in Monarchiacal States. And therefore in it self not inconsistent with
Monarachy.

And Lastly, Because this Freedom will be best kept and improved to the public
Benefit, by maintaining a good Understanding between the diverse Orders of
Christians within themselves. 'Twere farther requisite, That, first, No
Nicknames were continued, and all Terms of Reproach, on all hands, punishable.
Secondly, That Controversial Points were carefully avoided, and Vice declined,
and Holiness pressed, Without which (St. Paul tells us) no-man shall see the Lord.

God Almighty inspire the KING's Heart, and those of his Great Council, to be
the Instruments of this Blessing to the Kingdom.

I shall conclude this Persuasive with the Judgment of some Pious Fathers and
Renowned Princes.

QUadratus and Aristides, wrote two Apologies to Adrian, for the Christian
Faith, and against the Persecution of it.

Justin Martyr, an excellent Philosopher and Christian, writ two learned
Disswasives against Persecution, which he dedicated (as I take it) to Antoninus
Pius, and Marcus Aurelius Antoninus.

Melito, Bishop of Sardis, a good and learned man, (...) smart Defense for the
Christian Religion, and a Toleration, dedicated to Verus.

Tertullian, in his most sharp and excellent Apology for the Christians,
fastens Persecution upon the Gentiles, as an inseparable Mark of Superstition
and Error; as he makes the Christian Patience a Sign of Truth. In his Discourse
to Scapula, he says, It Is not the property of Religion to Persecute for
Religion; she should be received for her self, not Force.

Hilliary, an early and learned Father, against Auxentius, says, The Christian
Church does not persecute, but is persecuted.

Atticus Bishop of Constantinople, would by no means have the Minister of Nice
to respect any Opinion or Sect whatsoever, in the Distribution of the Money
sent by him for the Relief of Christians; and by no means to prejudice those
that practice a contrary Doctrine and Faith to theirs: That he should be sure
to relieve those that hunger and thirst, and have not wherewith to help
themselves, and make that the rule of his consideration. In short, he made the
Heretics to have his Wisdom in Admiration, in that he would by no means
trouble or molest them.

Proclus (another Bishop of Constantinople) was of this Opinion, That it was
far easier by fair means to allure unto the Church, than by force to compel:
He determined to vex no Sect whatever, but restored to the Church the renowned
Virtue of Meekness required in Christian Ministers.

If we will next hear the Historians own Judgment, upon a Toleration, I am of
opinion (says he) that he is a Persecutor, that in any kind of way molesteth
such men as lead a quiet and peaceable Life. Thus Socrates in his third Book:
In his seventh, he tells us, That the Bishop of Sinada, indeed, did banish the
Heretics, but neither did he this (says he) according to the Rule of the
Catholic Church, which is not (...) to persecute, (l. 7.)

Lactantius, tells the angry men of his time, thus, If you will, with Blood,
Evil and Torments defend your Worship, it shall not thereby be defended, but
polluted.

Chrysastom says expressly, That it is n^^ the manner of the Children of God,
to persecute about their Religion, but an evident Token of Antichrist.

Thus the Fathers and Doctors of the first Ages. That Emperors and Princes have
thus believed, let us hear some of greatest note, and most pressing to us.

Ierom, a good and learned Father, says, That Heresy must be cut off with the
Sword of the Spirit.

Constantinus, the Father of Constantine the great, laid this down for a
Principle, That those that were Disloyal to God, would never be trusty to their
Prince. And which is more, he lived thus, and so died, as his great Speech to
his great Son, on his Deathbed, amply evidences.

Constantine the Great, in his Speech to the Roman Senate, tells them, There is
this difference between Humane and Divine Homage and Service, that the one is
compelled, and the other ought to be free.

Eusebius Pamphili, in the Life of Constantine, tells us, that in his Prayer to
God, he said, Let thy People, I beseech thee, desire and maintain Peace, living
free from Sedition to the common good and benefit of all the World; and those
that are


