William Penn's LAST FAREWELL TO ENGLAND: BEING AN EPISTLE Containing a
SALUTATION TO ALL Faithful Friends, A REPROOF to the Unfaithful* AND A
Visitation to the Enquiring, In a Solemn FAREWELL to them all in the Land of my
Nativity.

London, Printed for Thomas Cook, 1682.

William Penn's last Farewell to England: Being, an Epistle containing a
Salutation to all Faithful Friends, a Reproof to the Unfaithful; and a
Visitation to the Enquiring, in a Solemn Farewell to them all in the Land of my
Nativity.

A Salutation to the Faithful
YE are beloved of me above all the Sons and Daughters of Men, who have
received and bowed to the blessed Appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ in your
Hearts, and that have not counted any thing dear for the Testimony of his Cross
and Gospel, but have unfeignedly loved and obeyed his Light within, and not
been afraid to confess it without: You that have not been offended in him,
though the World has not received him, but bitterly mocked and persecuted his
saying Appearance; To you does my Soul reach, in the Love that many Waters
cannot quench, nor Time, nor Distance wear away, beseeching the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be with you, and bless you with his abundant
Goodness and Mercy, Oh, Friends! go on, you are called to an high and heavenly
calling, the Trumpet has given you a certain Sound; follow your Captain, be
Valiant, fight the good Fight of Faith, lay hold on Eternal Life, that you may
finish your Course with Joy; a Crown is at the end, a Diadem that will never
fade away, the Reward of the Righteous at the end of all his Troubles.

Dear Friends, Love the Truth in your Hearts, be inward to the Lord, that you
may grow in the Life and Wisdom of it; And keep all your Meetings in the Faith
and Power of God; and love and honor the Brethren that labor in Word and
Doctrine: Be diligent in his Work, and that will make you Rich in the Heavens
that will never pass away. Have a Godly Care over your Children and Families,
and let your Conversation be in Heaven, and the Earth Under your Feet. Oh! ye
that received the Truth for the* Truth's sake, who have loved it above all, and
for it left all, that being tried, fainted not, but endured; and who to this
Day have not sought your selves, but the Lord, and have counted nothing dear,
that you might lift up his Name amongst men, who being revived, have blessed;
and being persecuted, have suffered; and being defamed, have yet entreated; and
are to this day tempted, buffetted, and accounted by too many as the
Offscouring of the Land; be not discomforted, but Gird up the Loins of your
Minds, be sober, watch, pray and hope to the End; for through many Tribulations
are we to enter the Rest and City of God. And yet, what if I should say, That
the Days of Sorrow and Sighing will even here have an end; And that the Peace,
Righteousness and Glory of the latter days are just at the door! Beloved
Friends, As Clay is in the hand of the Potter, so let us be in the hands of our
God, so will he manifest himself through us, and confound the Wisdom and
Opposition of this World. Nothing can hurt us, but our own Unfaithfulness; for
the God, that has called us, is All-powerful, All-knowing and All-present, and
has given to us that believe, the Witness in our selves, which is the Unerring
Way of the Lord; so that our Religion is of Emanuel, God with us, who has the
Words of Eternal Life. He that cured the Ruler's Son by his divine Presence in
his Bodily Absence, he also is present with us in Spirit, in the Fire, in the
Water, by Sea, and by Land, he works Wonders upon both, who is Glorious in
Holiness, and Fearful in Praises, in the Congregations of his Children: In him
I Love you, in him I Salute you, and in him I dearly bid you all Farewell. His
Grace, Mercy and Peace be with you all, and the Blessings of his Life and
Presence forever rest upon you: Amen.

Your faithful Friend and Brother, William Penn.


A Reproof to the Unfaithful.
HOw long shall the Spirit of the Lord strive with you, O ye careless and
Unfaithful ones! who are convinced of the Truth of God, and come to Meetings,
confess to the Testimony, and profess it in the World, and are yet Unsanctified
and Unregenerated, and so have no part nor lot in this blessed matter of Life
Eternal! what can you hope for from the hand of the Lord at the hour of your
Death and day of your Judgment? Will not God remember unto you the Day of your
Visitation, his Strivings, his Waitings, his Long-suffering? How often he would
have gathered you, that you might have inherited Substance? Awake, awake, ye
Sensual, ye Earthly-minded Professors of the Truth, that Christ Jesus may give
you life! for I may say with the Apostle, and that Weeping, too, There are too
many unworthy of the great Favor and Mercy of God in this Day, who under all
their pretenses to Religion, walk in the way of those, whose God is their
Belly, who Glory in their Shame, etc. who mind Earthly things, pursuing
uncertain Riches, and trusting in their Store, if redeemed from scandalous
things, yet abounding too much in more hidden Evils, Envy, Covetousness,
High-mindedness, meddling in other Folks matters, out of the Watch; out of the
Cross, that crucifieth the Flesh, yet delivers the Spirit to serve God in the
Newness of Life. Oh! as one knowing the Terrors of the Lord, let me persuade
you, while it is to day, to hear his Voice, his living Word, that cleanses the
Young Man's Way; And believe in the Light, whilst you have the Light, that you
also may be the Children of the Light, in which the Nations of them that are
saved must walk, lest it pass away from you, and the Night overtake you, in
which the Works of Peace cannot be wrought! O Friends! your Doom will be most
Dismal, your End the most Terrible of all others, that are called, and would
not make your Calling sure, that knew the Master's Will, and would not do it:
Will not he make such of the Synagogue of Satan, who are not Jews inward,
neither of that Circumcision that is of the Spirit in the Heart and Ear, whose
praise is not of Men, but of God? For it is just with God, to give such up to
strong Delusions, and to commit sin with Greediness, who hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness, and profess it in their own Spirits, not in the Spirit and
Power of God; whose Tongues are their own, whose Wills and Affections are their
own, and under the Profession of Truth, can give them their Swings. Such as
these become the Subjects of Satan's Devices, and too often by a loose
Conversation, or High-mindedness and Unsubjectedness cause Grief, and give
great* Trouble to the Churches of Christ; for many may never leave the
Profession of Truth, that yet may be Troublers of Peace of Jerusalem here, and
Vessels of Wrath hereafter: Be therefore warned, ye foolish Virgins, ye vain
Professors of the Truth! In the Fear and Dread of God, I send this Caution to
you, that ye may Repent, and do your first Works, else be assured, That in the
Day of his Winnowing, you shall go to the Chaff, and the Wind of the Fury shall
drive you from the Joy of his Presence forever: Therefore receive my Counsel in
the Love of God; be faithful to his Truth, wait and watch in it, that you may
be delivered in ^he hour of Temptation: It will tie your Tongues, limit your
Desires, bound your Affections, order all your Ste^s aright: It will make you
Humble, so God will teach you; and Meek, so will he guide you in Judgment, and
cloth you with Salvation. I have a Travail upon on my Soul, and my Spirit is
pained for you! I would have nothing lost, but the Son of Perdition: I would
have you all gathered, and nothing cast away that is called of God; Yea, a
greater than all would have all come to the Knowledge of the Truth, as it is in
Jesus, and be saved. This I send you as a Farewell to you, in the Name and Power
of the God of my Salvation, and in so doing am I clear of you all.

Your True Friend, William Penn.


A Visitation to the Enquiring.
YE are the Workmanship of God as well as I, and he has made us for an end of
Glory to himself; let us see, search and try, how we answer it? Ye have Souls
as well as I, and you must give an Account as well as I; for we must all Die
and come to Judgment: Turn in therefore, and see how it stands betwixt you
and your Judge; for by Jesus Christ, the Light of the World, will God judge all
men. Therefore with the Light of Christ, which is within you, judge your
selves, that you may not be judged: Put away the Evil of your Doings; Love the
Light, come to it, walk in it, and it will give you a sight of the Spirit of
this World, and the Fruits of it, from the Spirit of God, and the Fruits
thereof; by which you will receive an Understanding of him that is true, whom
if ye receive, you shall live in him that is true, and he will give you power
to become the Children of God, born not of Flesh and Blood, but of the
Incorruptible Seed, Word and Will of God: O hear his Voice, that you may be his
Sheep; let him go before you, and do you follow him, and he will give unto you
Eternal Life. O ye Hungry and Thirsty ones, that want, seek and cry for Eternal
Life! It Is his Light within that reveals Life and Immortality! And if it should
he said, Can any good come out of Nazareth? Can such a Day of small things
bring Salvation? I say, Oh, Come and see; for we who have believed, have seen
his Glory to be that of the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace, and
full of Truth: He is the good Samaritan, the Physician of Value; he cures our
Diseases, he heals our Breaches, he leads us in the Ways of Pleasantness,
and in the Paths of Peace; There are Riches in his Reproaches, and a Crown in
his Cross. Remember who desired Eternal Life, and what hindered! Therefore give
up all when he calls, and follow him fully. Out of him the Enemy is too strong
for you, but in him you are too strong for the Enemy: Therefore wait in the
Light of Christ, and watch against him: This is painful to Flesh and Blood,
which must not inherit the Kingdom; but it brings the Soul into the Liberty of
the Sons of God, where the Peace of God, and the Joy of his Salvation flow, as
a pure River that is never dry. Oh! that you may have Eternal Life, that you
may not miss of your Desire through the subtle working of the Enemy of your
Souls, that seeks to divert you from the right way of God by many stumbling
Blocks; but be not offended in him, that he may bless you: And remember, That
all things are Possible with him with whom we have to do; for all Power in
Heaven and Earth is given him that has enlightened you: Therefore do not
murmur, do not despond, do not presume; but hearken to his Voice, in whom the
Prince of this World has no part, and he will give you Power to resist him.
And remember, That to them that Overcome, shall be given a new Name, and they
shall have right to eat of the Tree of Life, that stands in the midst of the
Paradise of God. My God shed abroad his Love abundantly in your Hearts, to the
love and obedience of the Truth, that you may be saved in the day of the Lord,
in whose visiting Love I bid you all Farewell.

Your Well-wishing Friend, W.P.
From the Downs, the 30th of the 6th Mon. 1682.


