CAUTION Humbly Offered ABOUT Passing the Bill against Blasphemy.
THE Caution requisite in the Consideration of the Bill against Blasphemy, is
this, that the Word may be so well Distinguished and Explained, that it may not
prove, in Practice, a greater Snare and Suffering to Good Men, than a Restraint
upon Ill Ones. For if it be left Ambiguous, so that it may Affect Religious, as
well as Lewd and Wicked People, it will, like the Trojan Horse, carry an Army
in the Belly of it, to serve the Spleen or Pride of every Party, in their turn
of Government, to Oppress the Rest.

Charity forbids me to think the Gentlemen, whose Zeal is Employed to Promote
the Success of this Bill, have any such unfair Latitudes in their Design; and
therefore I shall First say, What Blasphemy is in it self. Secondly, How
Blasphemy is Cognoscible to the Civil Authority, and how far It may fall within
Its Province to Consider and Suppress.

Blasphemy. then, in it self, is certainly, a Speaking Evilly of God: But what
that Evil Speaking is, and how to Distinguish and Explain it, to the
Magistrates Purpose, will be the Narrow and Pinch of the Question.

I Grant, a Man that shall Seriously Prosess some Erroneous Opinion concerning
God, upon a weak Judgment, or a mistaken Education, that Contradicts the
Express Text of Holy Scripture, may be said to hold a Blasphemous Opinion, just
as such may be said to take God's Name in vain, that Pray to Him, and yet hate
to be Reformed by Him: And is God Charges Blasphemy on them that say they are
Jews, and are not, but of the Synagogue of Satan: Which, whether it was Error
or Hypocrisy, It does not appear to be of such a Nature as is Punishable by
the Civil Magistrate. I therefore Distinguish and Say, That Blasphemy, as it
falls under the Notice of Civil Power, is not an Humble and Serious Mistake of
the Text, but a Presumptuous and Despiteful Expression, or Opinion about the
Nature and Being of God: An Irreligious and Scornful Treating of the Divine
Majesty in his Nature and Attributes; and not an Incongruous Speculation, or
Erroneous Notion from an Unsound Judgment, or a Misguided Conscience. For what
is true of an Heretic, and is his Characteristick, is also true of a
Blasphemer; that is, not a Mistaken, but a Guilty Man: Not a Conscientious, but
an Irreligious Person: One that is Condemned in himself, who Dares the
Divinity, and Proudly Acts against Knowledge, and so, Conscious to himself of
his own Evil and Error.

Thus the Apostle to Titus; A Man that is an Heretic, after the first and
second Admonition, Reject; Knowing that he that is such, is Subverted and
Sins, being Condemned of himself. And such a Self-condemned Sinner is the
Blasphemer proper for the Magistrates Cognizance.

Not Considering well of this one word Heretic, in the Apostles sense, viz.
One Self-Condemned, or Condemned of Himself, has filled the World with Blood
and Misery through many Generations. Whereas had St. Paul's Definition and
Direction been understood and followed, Mistaken Men had been Pitied and
Informed, and not Persecuted and Killed for Gods sake; while the Impious
Contemners and Blasphemers of God and Religion had met with their Deserts from
the Civil Magistrates.

But I will readily confess, that a Person never so Serious in his Mistake
concerning God, may very well be Disowned by the Church he is a Member of,
because the contrary Sentiment might be one of the Terms of Communion, and no
Wrong done; But Therefore, to say, Take him Jailer, though otherwise a
Virtuous, Peaceable and Charitable Man, is a Method, not to be Justified by
True Christianity; especially when that which is required to be Believed, is
the Comment, and not the Text, which alone should be Sacred and Controuling in
point of Doctrine among Christians. And to say True, 'twould be too hard a
Task, to defend the Imposition of a Doctrine, not delivered in the Terms of
Scripture, which is the Great Creed of Christians, when the Party to Believe
does not refuse to give his Faith in the Terms thereof: For after all, Truth
loses no Ground by fair Concessions, and I know not how we can well deny that
Comments are a sort of Begging of the Question, which have not a Voice from
Heaven to Confirm them.

I perceive the Bill is Framed in favor of the Christian Religion, and of the
Trinity, as a main Pillar of it. But after all, I believe our Good Lives will
best Recommend and Maintain It. Framing of Creeds has cost former Ages so very
Dear, by the Distraction of Churches, and the Destruction of People, that it
were great pity fresh occasions should be given to Revive a Controversy so
well laid.

This Quarrel alone, had so besmeared the Face of Christianity with Blood, in
the first Ages of the Church, that it lost to Christians that Reverence with
the Gentiles, their Piety and Charity had before raised to themselves, and
their Profession: And whatever we may think, nothing else can Repair our
Breaches, and Restore to us Paths to Dwell in.

There are several sorts of Creeds, I know, as the Athanasian, Nicean,
Sabellian, and in short the Real and Nominal Trinitarians. But since none can
be so orthodox as that delivered to us in Gods Book, why should we press the
point further? Who can Determine with equal Authority to that of the Holy
Ghost? Who can express His mind Apter? Or how can we frame a better General to
Center In? At least to maintain Charity by, If our sentiments of the Intention
of the Text are not the same? I speak this with great respect to the secular
Authority. For it is certain, that the several Churches, or Religious Societies
that may hold these several Modes of Trinity, have that Power over their own
Members, by the Common Rules of Fellowship, that as to such Points as are the
Terms of Communion, They may Respectively deal with any of them that may
forsake their usual Belief; so far as refusing them any further Communion. But
for the Civil Authority, at this time of Day, to Interpose, and Penally Impose
any one of them, unless it were the sacred Text (to which all Parties Refer and
Submit) looks something hard: And when we consider the Divided State of the
Nation, the Learning and Freedom of Spirit that is now among the People, and
the Liberty of Conscience they are in the Possession of, I must acknowledge, I
cannot see the Prudence of it. But to make Property a Sacrifice for mistakes
about Religion, if yet it be a mistake; and to make it So by the vote of Civil
Authority, that indeed may Conclude but not Convince, (for that pretends not to
an Infallible Spirit of Decision, as to Truth and Error) has certainly a
Difficulty in it not easily overcome: Since to me it seems to shake those
Fundamental Laws by which Property is Declared and Desended. For it is hard to
apprehend how Faith is the Foundation of Property.

Nor is this all; for if this Bill Pass, to pick a hole in the Coat of any one
Party this time, the rest may say, that perhaps lie open to be hitt upon other
Points, what know we but that it will be our Turn next time; and though as to
this Doctrine we are within the Pale and Safe, yet upon other Articles we may
at another time be equally exposed; and so that which cannot be done at once,
may, in the same manner, by little and little, be accomplished at last, to the
Prejudice of every Interest that Dissents from that which is uppermost? I mean,
a forced Uniformity in Worship, Doctrine and Discipline. Certainly Presidents
in so Nice a Case must be very dangerous, and every Party being concerned in
every Party's Security, it is obliged, by its own safety, to endeavor the
safety of the Rest, though, as to the Point on Foot, They Differed as much from
the Party in Question, as that which holds the Chair.

I confess this Consideration moves much with me; and if their be any ground
for it, then certainly there can be no Good One now, for a Bill against
Blasphemy, without great Caution and Distinction in the wording of it; lest
Virtue suffer more than Vice, and Dissent rather than Impiety.

I have been the Freer in this matter, being neither Deist nor Socinian; and
have no other Exception to the Bill, than that which I have Expressed: For I fear
it will be an Occasion of Animosity, if not of Persecution: And as it has more
than once happened, that part which Affects the Conscientious shall be more
Vigorously Executed, than that which Regards the Irreligious Blasphemer. For it
has been Observed, during the Reign of King Charles the Second, that the
Dissenters Suffered more in One Year that the Laws were put in Execution, for
their Religious Meetings, than the Impious and Debauched did in his Whole
Reign: So much more Inclinable were some Men to Wink at Wickedness than Endure
a Conscientious Dissent: Of which the Ecclesiastical Courts were but too great
an Instance, as well as the Ordinary Sessions of Justice

To Conclude, but with all Submission and Respect to Authority, I say again, to
make a Culpable and Punishable Blasphemy, there must be an Irreligious and
Despiteful Intention and Design in the words of the Person Accused.

And here I conceive the Civil Magistrate has the full and free use and
exercise of his Authority against Blasphemy: For Blasphemy, in this Sense,
Corrupts Good Manner, being a plain and Impudent Indignity and Affront upon the
most High Good and God; and merits not only Law, but the warmest Zeal to
suppress It: For to endure it, as it has been, God knows, too long and too
much already, is the high way to Provoke God to vindicate his own Glory and
Soveraignity at the cost of the whole Nation; wherein the Innocent may happen
to suffer with the Guilty, though to these a Judgment, and to them but an
Affliction.

It is to be Lamented, as well as aborr'd, that a People of so much Light and
Knowledge, and under such pretenses to Reformation, should want Zeal to there
Power, to Root out such Scandalous and Impious Practices from among us. There
are good Laws, if they were but Employed to discourage such Irreligious
Persons, let their Quality be what it will. Law knows No Respect of Persons,
Though it too often happens that many Clothed with Authority Do, that have the
Power and are sworn to Suppress them.

And indeed, as the case stands, If we are in earnest to suppress Blasphemy,
Profaneness and Debauchery, There seems to be but two ways in the Power of the
Civil Magistrates; but they are good ones, and might be in great measure
effectual.

First, to suppress all Play Houses, and Gameing-Houses, and Places of
Looseness and Debauchery, those Seminaries or Nurseries of Impiety: That have
palpably Relaxed the Ancient Discipline of the Nation, and corrupted the Youth
of it, to the Ruin of the Honor, Virtue and Fortune, of many Ancient and
Worthy Families: And which therefore are the Scandal and Aversion of the Sober
Men of every Persuasion.

The next way to Extinguish Vice, is to make a Vicious Man Incapable of being a
Magistrate; who, being conscious of his own Ills, will but faintly Punish other
Men's, and whose Power will Awe others from Informing against him. If Public
Employments and Marks of Favor were made the Rewards of Virtue and Ability,
wherever they are found, we should quickly see an Alteration among the Gentry
of England, and by their Power and Example, a Reformation among the Common
People. And to say true, If Virtue, and not Opinion, were the Test, England
would have the Use and Service of the Sobriety and Good Sense of all Her
People, for the Suppression of Vice, and Introducing of a General Reformation
of Manners: Which God Almighty send.

THE END.

