A LETTER From IRELAND to an Honorable Citizen of LONDON: Communicated to the
Lord Mayor.
SIR,
YOurs I have received, and find that the condition of Affairs in England is
still dubious, and no judgment to be made whether party shall Govern and
prevail, we are here it seems in no such perplexities being not obliged by
Estates unduly purchased to continue their distractions any longer, which you
may see in the ensuing relation.

On Tuesday being the 13. of this instant, about four of the clock in the
evening, here was a very sad uproar, and the Citizens very much afrighted with
the coming into the City of several Troops of Horse with some companies of
Foot; the Horse men being ready drawn, both sword and pistol, All crying out
for a Free Parliament, and a Settlement of the old Protestant Religion,
according unto the Laws and Establishment of several Parliaments; the Foot
likewise with lighted Matches, all things being in a readiness; the Design was
so laid by those men that were the principal heads, as to this enterprise;
Namely, Sir Theophilus Jones, Col. Werden, Col. Bridges, Lieut. Col. Warren,
Major Warren, with diverse other inferior Officers; that when they had notice
from the Castle by firing three Guns, that then they should secure the
Commissioners, who sat in council at the custom House, that being a certain
token that the castle was then their own; capt. Joeir, capt. Bond, with their
companies, entered the castle by a soft knocking at the Gates, one of their men
the Sentinel opening the door, they presently thrust in, very suddenly
surprised all within it, and turned capt. Laurences company out, so that now
they have the castle in possession: the names of those that are seized on and
made their prisoners, are col. John Jones and Miles Corbit, Esquire Sir Matthew
Tomlinson, col. Richard Laurence Lieut. col. Hen. John's, Mr. Standish,
Treasurer, and Capt. Tombs the Store-keeper of the Castle; there came into the
Castle five hundred Barrels of Gunpowder but on Monday: the officers and
soldiers in this City are unanimously consenting to what has been done; and
by the symptoms of joy are shown in all parts of this City the citizens seem
to be very well pleased, for there was Bon-fires in all the streets, Bells
ringing; and I verily believe there never was so sudden a surprizall since the
creation: and in all this action there has not been one man killed nor
wounded, nor no injury proffered to any man. We expect much an account from
London of the state of affairs there; and we hope we have taken the readiest
way toward a settlement, having no other intention then to be isntrumental to
forward that long desired peace, which the Lord of his mercy grant us, and
prosper all the actions and councels conducing thereunto. No more at present
from

Your humble servant W. P.


