Judas and the Jews Combined against Christ and his Followers: BEING A
Re-joynder to the late Nameless Reply, called, Tyranny and Hypocrisy Detected,
made against a Book, entitled, The Spirit of Alexander the Copper-Smith
Rebuked, etc. which was an Answer to a Pamphlet, called, The Spirit of the Hat.

In which Truth is cleared from Scandals, and the Church of Christ, in her
Faith, Doctrine, and just Power and Authority in Discipline is clearly and
fully vindicated against the malicious Endeavors of a Confederacy of some
Envious Professors and Vagabond, Apostate Quakers.

By a Member and Servant of the Church of Christ, William Penn.

To which are added several Testimonies of Persons concerned

He that Dippeth his Hand with me in the Dish, the same shall betray me, Mat.
26.23.

They went out from us, but were not of us, 1 John 2.19.

In Perils among false Brethren, 2 Cor. 11.26.

Nevertheless, the Foundation of God stands sure, 2 Timothy 2.19.

Printed in the Year 1673.

Judas and the Jews Combined against Christ and his Followers.
The Introduction.
THe Just Defense of our so much Reviled Principles and Persons is so ill
resented by our Enemies, that instead of publicly Recanting their Injustice,
They repute us more Criminal for so doing, then themselves in first Traducing
us. It is become a sort of Petty Treason to Reprove them, they are grown almost
incorrigible; and to Control them, though in a Lie, is hateful: so much more
do they prefer our Destruction, then the Truth it self, or their own
Reputation. Strange! That it should be reputed Innocence to Accuse the
Guiltless, and Guilt to Defend them. Are we of God, then shall we stand, maugre
your Assaults; if not, we shall fall without them. What need this Clubbing for
Mischief, and Caballing to our Ruin? The Jews, I believe, never studied the
Crucifying of Christ more vehemently, then you vigorously combine and plot the
Massacring of our Names, Credit and Principles, out of the World: yea, and we
have Cause to suspect our Persons too; or else this Socinian-Defender of the
Hat-Spirit, would never have told the World in almost so many words, that
Blasphemers were to dye by the Law of God, and the Quakers are Blasphemers;
every Man can make the Conclusion; that understands what a Conclusion is, see
page 23. Its a Work becomes Darkness; for such I call your Nameless Pamphlet,
in which you have abused Virtuous and Good People by Name, not daring to stand
the Test of putting your Names to your Abuses; against which can be no Fence
but Innocence, and that remains Unshaken by all your Blustering Epithetes: That
rests with God, who will quell your swelling Rage, and speedily Rebuke that
great Herricane your Envy has raised to over-set us in our Voyage to Eternal
Rest. But he that said to Moses in an Hour of Straight, Stand still, and thou
shall see my Salvation, has once and again Comforted us under all these
Discouragements: Neither are your Combinations Terrible; No, though Evil Spies
have been your Informers. Our greatest Trouble is your own Hardening, and we
are sorry to see you make so much haste to old Jerusalem's Portion: For us, we
know in whom we have believed; And as he that feeds the Fowls of the Air, and
clotheth the Lillies of the Field, preserves us, so that your Buffettings may
prove our Trials, but in the End your own Judgments. For, however you buoy your
selves up, by the Acceptance you find with some Airy or Prejudiced Spirits, God
will certainly enter into Judgment with you for your Envious Proceeding, who
not being able to carry on your own Controversies, now list your selves
Combatants for a few straggling Apostates; not out of Love to true Quakers, but
Hatred to such as are so. What Sense is there in believing you only intend a
False Quaker, who have writ and abetted those Writings that are against us as
Quakers at all? But what shall I say? It is an Age grown to that Degree of
Impiety, that there is no Friendship so Strait, no Relation so Near, no Truth
so Evident, nor Life so Innocent, that some Men are not hardy, and wicked
enough to Break, Violate and Slander, to Avenge some supposed Wrong, or
gratify an Emulous Spirit. Controversy End, upon Socinian Principles, etc. is
risen now in one, about the Hat on in Prayer. What Variety of Shapes do our
Adversaries put on to compass their Ends? It has been their Practice, first to
Abuse our Principles, and then Rail at our Defenses; and for Vindicating our
Religion, to fall foul upon our Persons; and those chiefly who are most active
in that Service. There needs no other Demonstration of this, then the
Scurrilous Libel now to be considered; which with me carries so Mischievous an
Aspect, that the Parties concerned in these Undertakings do by it proclaim,
they only want as much Power, as Will, to send us and our Principles to
New England for a Venture. God deliver us from those Magistrates, that are as
Angry in Government, as these Men are in Religion; But this is our Joy, That
these Enemies speak all manner of Evil against us falsely, for our Lord and
Savior's sake. We maintain our Principles, that angers them; Miscarriages joy
them, whatever they pretend; And if they can bring some Writers and Preachers
out of Request, they think they do their Business. But we cannot believe that
Sober and Judicious Persons will think the worse of us or our Cause, for these
Malicious Endeavors against it. We have only to do with some old Adversaries
new Vampt, with the Slanderous Stories of some modern Apostates. Had not Judas
helped, the Jews had been to seek. A few Vagabond Quakers are their
Intelligencers; its all but a piece of Treachery and Envy: And truly it is fit
we should be tried as well by False Friends as Professed Enemies, that in all
things we may approve our selves complete Conquerors, through the Invincibe
Power, and to the alone Honor of that Eternal Truth professed by us. And so we
enter upon the Libel it self.

WE are told in the Title Page of the Libel, That it was writ in Defense of a
Letter, entitled, The Spirit of the Hat, and against the Deceitful, Defective
and Railing Answer, called, The Spirit of Alexander, etc. Indeed it is
wonderful strange, that to Reprove an Apostate should be reputed Railing; and
that this Secretary to this New-founded Cabal, should Practi^e it in censuring
it. He cannot forbear it in his Title Page.

He begins with ^YRANNY AND HYPOCRISY DETEC^ED; which Four Words he explains
to us thus, Or a furthe^ Discovery of the Tyrannical Government, Popish
Principles, and Vile Practices of the now Leading Quakers. In all which, if
there be no Reviling, there is no such thing in the World; for these Words
reach to the End of all Villainy. Meek Man, that he would be thought! who seems
to engross Railing into a Company, and seems not so Angry at it in us, as that
we use it Unlicenced of his Cabal; for he exercises it at such a rate in
Checking it, as if he might do it cum Privilegio: But it right-well agrees with
the Advocate of an Apostate Cause. I complain of nothing in this kind more,
then that we must not Rebuke Ill-Language without being guilty of it; Nay, such
is the Peevishness of our Adversaries, that to mention theirs, is Criminal: But
we shall run the hazard of their Frowns, rather then be false to the Truth, or
wanting to our selves in its proper place. Let it suffice that the Title
manifestly speaks what the Libel vainly condemns.

This Secretary (I suppose in the Name of the Cabal) begins his Libel thus, How
dangerous a thing it is, for a Man to engage himself publicly for any singular
Party upon the Account of Religion is greatly manifest in the Leading Quakers,
and especially in W. Penn, from whose Parts and Education one would expect more
then ordinary Candor and Ingennity.

By which I perceive he is from a Rageing Socinian become an Vniversalian. But
why then so bitter against us? Sure, he is a Party in that; and how Dangerous a
thing it is, Time will more fully show. However, he declares himself of no
Party, by which I suppose he excludes the Christian; for the Profane of that
Time reputed him a Sectary, and all must acknowledge him to be of a Party. How
I came to be of this Way, is best known to God; But thus much I must say, that
nothing short of the Divine Word of Life and Power has worked that Alteration
upon me from what I once was, to what I now am. The Trials, Travels,
Tribulations and Exercises that from Fourteen Years of Age have attended me,
but more especially since I was brought to own and abet this Holy Way I now
profess, are too many to be related; And from the Hour I was first convinced of
this Eternal Truth, to this of Writing this Discourse, I can with Boldness
declare to all the World, I have had no other Aim nor End then God's Honor,
the Good of others, and my own Salvation in the Day of the Lord. In short, I
have learned to turn my Back to the Smiter, and my Cheek to the Plucker off of
the Hair: And it is not for any Adversary at this time a day, under any
Pretense of Parts and Education, to Dis-ingage my Affection from this Right Way
o^ the Lord, Remembering, my Lord made himself of no Reputation, and that the
Prophet was accounted Mad, and the Apostles Drunk.

But he says, I having embarked my self amongst those People, and having
obtained a high Repute among them, I betook my self to such pitiful Shifts,
Scurrilities and Bravings (he is pincht) to uphold their Detected Cause and
Tottering Kingdom ('twill stand forever) as one would think could not proceed
from any Man professing Christianity; witness my late Controversal Writings,
especially my Winding Sheet, and Spirit of Alexander, etc. ibid.

But I cannot expect to be Well-spoken of by mine Enemies, especially when they
declare themselves to be such, because of that Way I so earnestly defend. But
this Man is not so Ignorant surely, as to imagine I imbarkt my self among this
People to obtain Repute or Grandeur, who lost all with Men when first I came
amongst them. I would have my Implacable Enemies know, that had no more Durable
and Eternal Things been in my Eye, I might have had my Share where more was to
be got then amongst this Despised People; but Envy is Blind, and Rage Foolish.
For my Controversal Writings, they stand Unanswered, among the rest my
Winding Sheet, and Spirit of Alexander, etc. the former being Unmedled with,
and the Strength of the latter foully over-looked, as we shall anon have
occasion to show: perhaps it might have concerned him to clear himself of the
Former, before he had so weakly engaged himself in the Latter; still
Controversy is not Ended, though Changed.

He tells the World, That notwithstanding we call the Spirit of the Hat Lies,
Forgery, Defamation, page 4, 5.
with abundance of Terms of the like Foxonian Leaven (a scornful Nick Namer)
yet when we come to Particulars we either first confess what we deny with an
idle Distinction, except some few things; or secondly, acknowledge them by
Silence; or thirdly, use some Deceitful Terms of Denial, which the Reader
cannot discover; or fourthly; take an Occasion from some Circumstances, perhaps
not rightly set down, to deny the whole Matter; which doubtless are very bad
things, if true.

He has hereby rendered us, not only no Christians, but the worst of Men. All I
can say at present is this, It has never been my Practice to palliate that
which cannot be justified, or to treat any Adversary so deceitfully: But it is
expected he should prove what he says, or else we must invert the Character
upon himself.

He tells us (I suppose, in order to prove what he has said) That W. P. does
in the Name of the Quakers acknowledge, That the Complaint made in the Spirit
of the Hat is true, namely, That we required him to yield [to our Determination
against his Conscience] because the Body would have it so; saying, that was
yielding to the Power: And that I undertake in Opposition to the Author, That
his not so yielding, but persisting, is Dissension; but our Disowning
[Excommunicating and Depriving of a Liberty, of Marrying, Burying, etc.] any
Person for that Cause, is no Breach of the great Gospel-Charter; This, he
says, I Labor to do with the same Arguments Papists use against Protestants,
who pretend to no such Power, and that they may be found everywhere answered in
Protestant- Writings. A mean Answer, bu^ a notable Go-by, in case I had so
expressed my self, but most forgedly does he deliver my words, and tendency of
them.

Was this Man chosen for your prime Tool of Controversy, who can only tell one
big Lie, and then run away? My Arguments (forsooth) are Popish, there is
Confutation enough; but with whom? Ignorance and Prejudice? An easy way to
brand Reason, and render the clearest Truth suspected in a Nation as abhorrent
of Popery as this we live in; a shameful Injustice, that Sectaries should
traduce us with that, which was once their own suffering from others. But what
if I had us (...) any Argument for the True Church, which is employed by the
Papist in Defense of a False one; must Truth not be Truth in it self, because
Misappled? And suppose the Protestant has answered the Papist, Is that any
Answer to me? How great an Untruth has he told in his Title Page, when he calls
his Pamphlet, A Defense of the Spirit of the Hat, against the Spirit of
Alexander; who in four Pages after tells us, he intends not to meddle with the
Arguments of it. But Perhaps he will fault me (for these People are very full
of finding Fault, though they mend none in themselves) in that he has referred
us to Protestant Writers; A Defense boldly begged, but never to be accepted of
by me. Does he think I must turn over Melanchton, Chemnitius, Oecolampadius,
Jewel, Whitaker, Reinolds, and others, for an Answer to the Spirit of
Alexander the Copper-Smith? After this rate it were far easier to Answer then
Accuse. I am of Opinion, that D. Stillingfleet's Adversaries would look upon
their Cause as little injured by any bare reference to ancient
Protestant-Writers, how excellently soever they acquitted themselves at that
time of day; Fresh Opposition requires fresh Vindication. If I had been Popish
the man should have shown me in what; and when he had done, have soundly
confuted it, and not in the midst of his Exclamations against Shifters, give
such just occasion to say, thou art the man. I am willing to forgive him at
this time; But let him be better instructed of his Cabal against the next time,
and see if he can learn more Truth, then to call his Libels Answers, whilst
they prove themselves Evasions; For Truth will work through all odious Names:
And it is not pinning the Pope upon our Tail, and crying, Popery, Popery, that
will confute our Principles; However, till we are better known, it may
disrepute our Persons.

But let his base Constructions be considered. Our Reproving Men for going out
of the decent Order and happy Unity of the Body, he calls Requiring Man to set
down by our Determination against their Conscience; And our Disowning that
Breach upon persistance, Excommunication from Burying and Marrying. They
ejected themselves by their Novelties, and we are not ashamed to repute such as
Publicans and Heathens as will not head the Church of Chris;t, Mat. 18. Had
they Faith? they might have kept it to themselves, and not have disturbed the
Church's Peace with their new Practices, indeed Institutions; for what was it
l^^e then to require our not practicing of the Hat off in (...), who called
pulling it off a Popish Tradition, unless men (...) not to leave off Popish
Traditions: so that they, and not we were to blame, as the Sequel will further
prove; But I could not pass by this part of the Disingenuity of this Libeller.

As the Libel, so our Discourse will consist, of matter of Argument, and matter
of Fact. I shall begin with matter of Argument, which shall consist of a
further Defense of what is asserted in my Book, entitled; The Spirit of
Alexander the Copper-Smith revived and rebuked.

The grand Cause of that Dissension which was begun by Jo. Perrot, long since
happily ended among our selves, though renewed, divulged and aggravated, for
the Strengthening of the hands of our common Enemy, by certain Perverse
Apostates, as delivered in the Spirit of the Hat, and Defense of the same, they
must with me grant to be this.

The Quakers reach that every, Man is enlightened with a sufficient Light to
Salvation, And that all Faith in, and Worship to God, ought to stand upon the
Convictions, and in the Leadings thereof; yet we are obliged by their Body
unto that, which we have no Motion for, but rather against, and upon our
Refusal of such Compliance as they expect, we are disowned as not of them: So
that the Sufficiency, Convictions and Leadings of the Light must vail to the
Body, and not the Body to the Light; wherefore not the Light, but the Body is
become the Quakers Rule. Thus Tho. Hiks's Con. Dial. p. 63, 64, 65. Spir. Hat,
p. 11, 12, 13. Defense of it, p. 5, 6, 7. Their Common Aggravations, especially
of the two latter are these, That they are denied Marrying, Burying, Trading,
that they are distracted, and so deprived of all both Ecclesiastical and Civil
Privileges. The Aggravations we shall consider in their place; And first to
their Objection or Argument, as I have fairly, fully and faithfully laid it
down.

It Is a Truth, and as true, that we urge, both the Universality and Sufficiency
of the Light to Salvation; and that every Man ought to follow only the
Teachings of it about Faith and Worship. This is granted on all hands, even by
the Cabal to credit their present Work, and obtain their envious Ends upon us
and our Principles; Therefore no part of the Question to be controverted. The
matter in difference strictly lies here, that is, by resolving these four
following Questions, the Objection will be fully and plainly answered.

1. Whether Christ has given to his Church, consisting of faithful Believers,
and obedient Walkers by the Light or Spirit within, such a Sense, Taste, Relish
and Savor of the Nature of Spirits, as upon all Occasions the great Enemy of
Christ and his People may take (under never so seeming innocent Appearances and
Transformations) to condemn any thing by his Church practiced, or innovate any
thing by the Church never practiced, but condemned, Yea or Nay?

2. Whether such a Society, Body or Church, after due Admonition given to any
dissenting or innovating Person, may not Lawfully and Christianly deny their
Communion in Testimony against that wrong Spirit, such Person or Persons may be
acted by?

3. Whether such Person or Persons may not hold this granted fundamental
Principle of the Light, etc. before recited, in the Understanding, and yet be
acted by a wrong Spirit to Divisions, and then plead against the Church, under
the Pretense of acting by the Light within; and consequently, whether he can,
or ought to be judged by any for so doing, because every one ought to act
according to the Light that is within them? And lastly,

4. Whether the Body of the Quakers, or their present Opposers be that Church,
Yea or Nay?

The first is so evident in the Affirmative, That to reject it, is nothing less
then to deny Scripture it self. It was the express Promise of Christ, to send
the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth to lead into all Truth; which the Apostle
John assures us, was made good, not only to the Disciples, 1 John 2.20.27.
but the then Churches of Christ, to whom he writ these unanswerable Passages,
Ye have an Vunction from the Holy One, and YE SHALL KNOW ALL THINGS. Again, But
the Anointing, which ye have received of him, abides in you, and you need not
that any Man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you of ALL THINGS,
and is Truth and is no Lie; And even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in
him, By which it is evident, that the Church of Christ had an Infallible
Spirit, by which to discern the Spirit of a Sheep, from the Spirit of a Wolf,
though he came in Sheeps Clothing. This Doctrine Christ himself taught us,
when he said, Beware of False Prophets, Mat. 7.15. and 24.4.
which come to you in Sheeps Clothing. Again, Take heed that no man deceive
you; For many shall come in my Name; saying I am Christ, and shall deceive
many. Whence it follows, that there should be False Prophets, yet in Sheeps
Clothing, which is a deceitful Spirit, acting under refined Appearances: and
to compass its Deceit the better, shall palliate it, with the Pretense of being
led by the Spirit or Light of Christ within: So that as Deceitful Spirits were
foretold, the Way to know them was both promised and enjoyed; Joh. 10.
My Sheep hear my Voice, said the great Shepherd, and a Stranger will they not
hear. Who is this Stranger? Not always False Doctrine, but a False Spirit,
covered with True Doctrine, They shall come in my Name, that is, pretending
Authority from me, and speaking my Words, not having my Spirit: Christ's Spirit
within, is his Voice within, and it is that alone gives to discern the Strange
Voice, let it come with never such True Words. Had Christ left his Churches
destitute of this Touchstone, they had been imposed upon by every False
Spirit, and his Flock devoured by every Wolf in Sheeps Clothing. Sheep know
Sheep, not only by Sight, but Instinct, and Wolves too; For if Shepherds be of
Authority, they tell us, that if a Wolf be near, though out of Sight, the Sheep
will bleat their Antipathy: So do the Sheep of Christ know each other by the
Instinct of that Divine Nature they are mutually Partakers of, and by it do
they discern the Wolf within, notwithstanding the Sheep's Clothing without. It
was for this end they were to have Salt in themselves, the Anointing and Spirit
in themselves, that they might see, relish and discern thereby, who were so
Salted, Anointed and Spirited, which in the ground could never be visibly
discerned.

2ly. The second Question I also take in the Affirmative, and for which there
is both express Scripture, and Unanswerable Reason. This is seen in the very
case of Alexander the Copper-Smith, who was denied and rejected,
notwithstanding that he made Profession of Christianity; And there is cause to
believe, that the Difference began from his emulous Spirit's taking Occasion
against the Apostles Authority, and the Power of the Elders in the Church. It
was doubtless for something not unlike to this, that Paul complained of him to
Timothy, Alexander the Copper-Smith did me much wrong, of whom be thou ware
also; for he has greatly withstood our Words. 2 Timothy 4.14, 15, 16.
Which is the very State and Character of the present Apostates, Who pretend
with Alexander, not to withstand Truth or Christianity; but a Lordly Paul,
Timothy, or such like eminent Laborers: They pretend to own the Churches, but
deny some of their Leading Ministers. That this was Alexander's Disease, the
next Verse proves; At my first Answer no Man stood with me, but all Men
forsook me. I pray God it may not be laid to their Charge. Who was this People
but the Church? for of the Heathen it could not be said. And what was
Alexander's aim besides Ambition? I mean, to discredit the Apostle, that he
might gain the Repute, and being him down from that Authority God had given him
in the Church, that he might usurp it to himself. What did the Apostle do in
the like case? shrink? No; Hear him: For though I should boast somewhat more of
our Authority (which the Lord has given us for Edification, and not for your
Destruction) I should not be ashamed. 2 Cor. 10 8. But no more of this at
present. That Christ as well gave his Church Power to reject as to try Spirits,
is not hard to prove. That notable Passage, Go, tell the Church, does it to our
hand: For if in case of private Offense betwixt Brethren, the Church is made
absolute Judge, from whom there is no Appeal in this World; how much more in
any the least Case that concerns the Nature, Being, Faith and Worship of the
Church her self? The Judgment Christ passes in the matter, is sufficient to
the Resolution of our Question; Math. 18.17.
But if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen and a
Publican. This I say on the Account of those Apostates, who pretend to be the
Men they ever were; For this Man that works with their Tools, is upon his own
Principle, as much an Heathen and a Publican as any thing else, and tells us to
boot, that it is dangerous to be of any one Party; Therefore not of the true
Church's Party. I omit any particular recital of the Apostle Paul's frequent
and earnest Dehortations from so much as keeping company with perverse
Disputers about needless Questions, or any that infested the Church, and
disturbed her Peace and that Practice, in which she was at first settled, with
unprofitable Novelties, under what Pretense soever: They that can read, may
find in his Epistles enough to this purpose. It Is true, They used no corporal
Violence, or any civil Power to punish such obstinate Dissenters; nor is that
Unchristian Practice so much as any part of the Question: But first, to reprove
and admonish, and in case of Persistance, then to disown and reject, which is a
part of the Question, and a part of the Scripture too. And indeed it is most
reasonable, that as a Civil, so a Christian Society should have this Power to
preserve it self from the Taints and Infections of hurtful Spirits, for such
tend not to further Knowledge, Increase in Holiness, or Peace, but Strifes and
Divisions, Animosities and Rents, Backbitings and Revenge, to the laying waste
of God's holy Heritage.

3ly, The third Question we also accept in the affirmative. That men may
believe, confess and subscribe to the Truth of the Doctrine of the
Universality, Sufficiency, and immediate Teachings of the Light, as to Faith
and Worship, and yet be declined from the living Sense, Power and Ordering of
it, so as to be acted by a wrong Spirit to Divisions, and notwithstanding plead
his Following of the Light within against the Judgment of the Church, who
reproves him for so doing. In short, that a man may follow a Wrong Spirit when
he thinks he follows the Right; and though he ought to follow the Light and
Spirit, yet is to be judged when he does not act thereby (though he may think
he does) by such as walk thereby. In this, the Scriptures of Truth are very
positive. The Jews owned the Law at what time they rebelled against it, and
thought they acted according to Scripture, when by their Traditions they made
it of none Effect. There was a certain Generation that were pure in their own
Eyes, Prove. 30.12.
That is believed themselves to be of a Right Spirit, whom the holy Ghost
reproved for being guided by a Wrong one. It was no other State then this that
Christ spoke of, when he said, Mat. 6.22.
If therefore the Light that is in thee be Darkness, how great is that
Darkness? Some doubtless acted by Virtue of this Darkness, not as Darkness, but
as Light; Was it therefore Light because they thought so? When it is manifest
that they were against Christ, the true Light, as you are now. Or, would the
Plea of such an one be so valid against the Body of a Church walking in the
true Light, as to disengage any from her judgment? Or, must we therefore
conclude, that the Light is not a Rule for Men to walk by, because some
mistake, or swarve from it? Or, that he who calls his dark Imagination, a
Motion of Light, is therefore not to be condemned, because it is every Man's
Duty to follow the True Light? Shall this Position, I say, that all Men ought
to follow the Light in themselves, deprive the Church of the Power of Judging
that for a dark Imagination, which from the Savor and Sense of God's Light and
Truth, she feels to be so; because some Person or Persons plead that they
therein follow the Light? This opens a Door to all Licentiousness, and
furnishes every Libertine with a Plea. What might have been said in this Case
against the ancient Christians? Every Man ought to walk in the Spirit, and to
be led by the Spirit; Shall therefore any Man's Pretense to be led by the
Spirit that is not, secure him from the Judgment of those that are really led
by the Spirit? Or, shall the Judgment of those, who are led by the Spirit,
against him that pretends to be so led, be reputed Tyranny, and a going from
the Leadings and Judgment of the Spirit, to the Leadings and Judgment of Men?
Or, because of granting the Light to be obeyed in all its Leadings? and its
Leadings to be waited for in order to Faith and Worship; that therefore there
is no way left to judge which are in the Wrong of the Two that equally say,
they are led by the same Light? For if Men would come to the Salt, Grace,
Truth, and faithful Witness in themselves, which only gives to discern and
savor True Spirits from False ones, they would hereby arrive at certain
Knowledge in the Matter; but where People stand, they can never distinguish,
because they are from under the Conduct of that Spirit, which alone reveals the
deep things of God. In short, as no Man's saying he is in the Right, ought to
conclude him to be in the Right; so neither can that hinder that he should not
be found out by such as are in the Right Spirit, to be in the Wrong, if in it.
He that says he is ruled by the Scripture may err, as well as he that says he
is led by the Light; therefore is he not to be censured? Or is there no certain
Way of knowing him to be in the Wrong? It is the Spirit of Truth that opens the
Truth of Scripture; much more can it only give to relish Spirits. Which leads
to the last Question.

Whether the People, called Quakers, or those few straggling Followers of John
Perrot are this True Church, and acted by this Divine Light and Spirit, yea or
nay? To answer this Question I shall keep very close to the Concessions of
these present Apostates; For it is not so much my Business at this time to
prove us a True Church to them that never had any Relation to us, as against
those who acknowledge themselves once to have been of us, but now decline us.

That God sent forth a Spiritual Ministry; that many were gathered by it, and
settled in the Way of Everlasting Peace, and called by the World Quakers, the
Author of the Spirit of the Hat fully confesses, page 9. That it was then the
Church of God, four lines after undeniably prove. And the Lord did daily add
unto the Church, and raised up many to go forth in the Power, to preach the
Everlasting Gospel; whereby the Church multiplied and increased, to the
Astonishment of the Nations. By this we see, it was then the Church in their
Opinion without dispute; I would fain know it comes now to be no Church? Has
Her Refusing to conform to John Perrot's Innovation of the Hat on in time of
public Prayer unchurched Her? I have hitherto thought, that a Society's going
from, or adding to, what it was when truly called a Church, was that which only
did Unchurch it, and not its continuing as it was; And if this be good Arguing,
The People, called Quakers, remain still the same Chruch, but their Adversaries
not the same Members. In short, where the first Occasion of Offense was given,
there was the first Breach of Unity. Had the Church imposed upon them, there
would be some reason for varying of her Character, and condemning her as
Fallen; But the Innovation being their own, she is not accountable unto them,
but they to her, for such unwarrantable Novelties: so that the Question is not,
Whether the Quakers impose, but Whether they did not innovate? All was well
till this Imagination was hatched; The Spirit of Judgment and Burning had its
course; Their Vessels were filled with Refreshment, Springs of Life broke out
in their Bellies, and Bread of Life dwelt within them; They wanted no good
thing, as that Letter of the Hat relates. Spir. of the Hat. p. 10.
If this may be credited, How comes so sudden a Revolution, that in a Years
time, the Mighty should be fallen, the Stars ceased to give their Light, the
Poor distressed, the Young Ones bruised, and Conscience imposed upon by a Law?
Which wretched Deciet, methinks, should be obvious to every impartial Reader.
There is no Wisdom to believe Men so inconstant to their own Apprehensions, and
who of all times in which to prove this great Alteration, should make Choice of
that, in which was so great a Persecution, and so Noble a Testimony born for
the Truth. viz. 1662. But the Truth of the matter is this. John Perrot (who if
he had been as faithful as his Companion, might with him have been hanged at
Rome (as we have been informed) to his own Comfort, the Truth's Honor, and the
Churches Peace) came home as filled with Conceit, as he pretended his Body had
been oppressed with Sufferings, which kindling so great a Love in the Hearts of
some Tender Friends, as they unwarily became Incouragers of his Ambition in
their too high exilting and lamenting his Sufferings, Which having rendered him
Master of their Affections, they most of them easily became Embracers of his
Invention. We had reason to believe it had almost been impossible for him ever
to have made one Proselyte, had not the noise of his Foreign Trials disposed
the Hearts of some affectionate People to receive his Impression; He that will
please to consider the improbable Account he vainly gave of his own Sufferings,
saying, that since Adam's Day none had ever undergone the like his singular
Style; Proverbial Chapters in imitation of Solomon; his Toyish conceited
Rhymes; his Title page of the Wren in the burning Bush waving her Wings of
Contraction, etc. his peculiar Subscription, which was generally JOHN ( and
could not be so because there was no more of that Name amongst us, but because
he would be the JOHN of JOHN'S) and which is yet more ridiculous, in a Letter to
several grave Women, your dear SISTER JOHN with his absurd new fangled bodily
Greetings, his most Papal Salutations to G. Fox, E. Buroughs, and others (by
them rejected, and himself reproved) as if he had spent his time in Learning
all the Superlative Complements of Rome: I say, he that pleases to consider
these things, must needs think, that the Man had lost his Guide, and was
dangerously elevated above the holy Fear of God, and heavenly Life of the
Truth; and his Standing being soon discerned by several Weighty Friends, he was
soberly, secretly and frequently dealt withal; his Condition represented, his
Danger shown, and a Station of Safety pointed to him: It was the daily Travel
of many, who sought his Welfare, and the Church's Peace, to bring him to a
Sense of his own Condition; But no Argument or Entreaties could prevail, no
Sighs or Tears could soften him, but resolved he was for a Sect-Master, and his
Mark must be, the Hat on in time of Public Prayer. That which yet whetted many
simple Hearts to follow his Example, was with his Sufferings, his Pharisaical
Pretenses to a higher Dispensation, but instead of showing them a readier Way
to an higher State of Holiness, he diverted their Minds from the more weighty
things of the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, to contend for that
rude and unprofitable Practice of the Hat on in time of public Prayer; an
Invention to no Edification, but to the great Disturbance of the Church: Thus
began what rent he sought to make amongst us. Before this, we were at Peace,
our Sion prosperous; and those Apostate Adversaries allowed us to be God's
Church, his chosen People. I appeal now to the whole World of moderate and
impartial People, whether we acted herein, unlike Christian, sober and prudent
Men? And if any of our public Enemies, who pretend to own a Church Authority
(some of them also being Members and Leaders) would not have done the like?
Must we suffer for that which they justify? We rejected a Practice we had no
Authority for, neither without, nor within: We saw Who brought it in, and What
acted him, with the bent and tendency of it; And it was as much our Duty to
withstand the Entrance of that which was Wrong, as to continue in the Practice
of that which was Right, and settled in the Power of God long before among us:
We might invert their Plea much more truly; The Light within enjoined us to
disown them, had we not then sinned to have declined? Or, is our Light
Darkness, because they call their Darkness Light? In short, the Church never
knew it, when so much admired by her present Enemies; And because when it came,
she rejected it, therefore are they become her Enemies, which proves Them, and
not the Church, to be changed. But supposing we had nothing of this to our
Defense. What is become of the once acknowledged Blessed Church, and her
Powerful Ministry? If we have lost both, who has found them? If due to any
Body, in case our Adversaries be in the Right, it must be to them: But I know
of no Church, nor do I hear of any Ministry they have, nor the Power of God
manifest among them, either for the Building up of themselves, or the Gathering
of others. What! Is the Church already returned into the Wilderness? and is the
Power lost, which they acknowledge, was once amongst us, and to God's Eternal
Praise, we daily witness in the City and Country to attend our Travels? But as
they were not of God in their Dissensions; so neither have they stood. We
suffer as we did; The World loves them more then it did; They are Friends, but
both Enemies to us. Their Sect Master returned with the Dog to the Vomit, to
Swearing, Fighting, fine Clothes, Cap and Knee to Men, who could sit on his B
-- with his Hat on his Head, when he prayed to the most high God. Some of his
Followers run into Looseness and Rantism; others into Enmity and
Earthly-Mindedness; but far the more considerable returned to their first Love
and Works, whom God has since frequently blessed with his heavenly Presence,
and sealed to them the Comfort of the holy Communion of the Brethren.

To sum up what we have been saying. First, The True Church of Christ, by the
Gift of the holy Spirit, from Christ, the Head, is enabled to try, savor and
relish Wrong Spirits under never such Right Appearances, as that, without which
she could never be preserved from the Wolves that are in Sheep's Clothing, nor
the Deceivers that come with Christ's Words out of Christ's Power and Life.
Secondly, That this Church has as well Power to reject the false Spirit, as to
try it. Thirdly, That men may be in the Words and not the Spirit of Truth; that
notwithstanding it is the Duty of all Men, to act by the Light and Spirit
within, that hinders not, that such as walk not according to the Light within,
though they may pretend to do it, should be known and judged of them that
really do so. Fourthly, That we were this True Church of God by our Apostate
Adversaries own Confession: And we have proved, that not we, but our
Adversaries have altered (since the time that large Confession mentions) by
giving the Offense, and making the first Breach of Unity, notwithstanding the
many Christian Courses that were taken to restore them, and preserve Concord
among Brethren: Therefore our Judgment of them is not that of a Dark, Dead
Body, but a Living, Spiritual Society, and in the Gift, Discerning and
Authority of God's holy and unerring Spirit, which they acknowledge we once
had, and cannot prove, when, and by what we lost it. And blessed be the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth, his Living Power is with us, be owns our Ministry and
Fellowship in the Hearts of Thousands, yea Ten Thousands have bowed to the
Righteousness of his Scepter, since the, day that perverse Core first troubled
our Israel. No Trials have scattered us, nor Sufferings worn us out; but, to
the Honor of the blessed Name of the Lord, we have been by it kept to this
day, whose Goodness renews with the Morning, and whose Mercies endures forever.
Blessed are they that fear him, such will he always keep in perfect Peace.

But the Author of the Spirit of the Hat, and his Tyrannical and Hypocritical
Defender in his Libel, called, Tyran. Detect. p. 5, 23, 24, 25. Spir. of the
Hat, page 13, 14.
Tyranny and Hypocrisy Detected, cry out, This is arrant Popery. But I will
tell such Licentious Spirits, That it is plainly Scriptural; What if a False
Church assume the Privilege of a True one, does that make the True Church a
False one, for pleading that Privilege? The Papists say, God ought to be
worshipped; must we not therefore worship him, because they say so? It Is just
as good as to say, That because one Man cheatingly calls himself by another
Man's Name, therefore that other Man must renounce his own Name. Prove
Discerning, and Judgment by the Holy Ghost in any Body, or Society, to be the
Mark of a False Church, and ye do your Business, otherwise you must acknowledge
it to be the Privilege of a True Church; but deny it to be ours, as we do,
that it is the Church of Rome's. But we have proved out of your own Pamphlets,
that you acknowledge us to have been the True Church, and in our own Discourse,
that we have continued that, which we ever were: And that God's powerful
convincin^ and converting Ministry remains amongst us; Therefore th^^
Privilege upon their own Principles, does belong to us.

But perhaps they will both endeavor to avoid the Dint of these convincing
Arguments, thus, We deny not the Body of the People, called Quakers, nor as
they act in the Light, that they have true Judgment; But we complain against
your Foxonian Unity, which consists of certain Ministers and Elders, which lift
up G. Fox for a Bishop, a Pope, and a King, making his Papers Edicts, and then
entitle them, the Judgment of the Body; whereas indeed it is but the Mind of a
Cabal of Foxonians; the Leaders are the Men we strike at. See Spirit of the
Hat, page 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Tyran. Defend.

But should we allow this to be True, as we reject it for a Slander, it is
granted to us, that the Body of the People, called Quakers, is not their Aim,
but some few particulars that make not up the hundredth part of the Church (and
who will in the things objected sufficiently clear themselves) so that the
Judgment of the Body is not denied, because of the Judgment of some few Elders
that displease them. the Question then will be, whether the Body in all Places
concerned has given its Judgment against that innovating Spirit of John Perrot,
yea or nay? The Determination of which Question gives a great In-sight into the
present Controversy; In order to which I offer two things to be considered.
First, That in all Places where Jo. Perrot's Spirit and Practice made any
Appearance through the Churches in this or other Nations, there has been a
twofold Judgment given. 1. That of the Church, in the Fear and Presence of the
Eternal God she worships, according to his free Spirit, and that Discerning
which was given her of him, concerning which, if there be any Scruple, in the
public canvas of this Matter, we can readily produce a multitude of
Certificates to verify it. 2. The Judgment of many considerable Persons
against themselves and their own Practice, whose Simplicity was betrayed by
that dissentious Spirit. But it so happens, that some of them, of how good
Report soever, are now not to be credited, because it crosses the Humor of
these Envious Authors, and their prejudiced Adherents. What Name shall we call
this Partiallity by? who praised their Honesty when they espoused the Hat, and
now question their Conscience in declaring their Mistake: And such is the
Fool-Hardiness and Vanity of this Socinian Apologizer in the Defense of the Hat
on in Prayer, That in a great Marginal Note, he cries out, What Is become of
John Osgood' s Integrity, that he should put his Name among such Men as these?
As if we had committed all the Infamies prohibited in the first and second
Table of God's Law, rather then seasonably given check to the boundless
Novelties of an Imaginary Innovatour. This is your Vniversalian, that tells us
how dangerous it is to be of a Party, who has bestowed a whole Pamphlet in
Defense of one, built upon no better Foundation then the irreverent Practice of
the Hat on in time of public Prayer. But his own Revilings and injustifiable
Officiousness have proved it dangerous to be of such a Party indeed.

But why must not the rest be credited? Are they deceived in Returning? Show
it. Was it imposed upon them, as they suggest? Prove it. John Pennyman, if he
has not lost all Conscience and Memory, can tell them another Story; For as
became the People of God, for the Decision of this Controversy, a very great
Meeting was desired and appointed, unto which both sorts willingly resorted; So
that it was not Imposition, but Choice: In which great and earnest were the
Desires and Travels of those who had opposed the Spirit of John Perrot, that
the Lord himself would please in some signal manner to break forth amongst
them, that the Judgment which should pass among them, in order to a
Reconciliation, might not be accounted the Judgment of Man, but the Judgment of
God. These faithful Cries entered the Ears of the God of Peace, whose
Compassions fail not, That with an high Hand and an outstretched Arm, he rent
through the Meeting, that both Sorts were greatly broken, and humbled before
the Lord. In which deep and tender Sense J. P. J. C. (though never in the
Practice of the Hat) J. O. J. C. W. P. W. G. G. W. and John Pennyman himself,
with very many more (not now to be mentioned) in Fear and Trembling, and great
Brokenness of Spirit, to the Astonishment of all Beholders, plainly and fully,
testified against the Spirit and Practice of J. Perrot, to be out of the Life
of the Truth, and Unity of the Body. And who w^^ more Express, Earnest Frequent
in the Judging that Spirit (...) Envious Apostatized J. Pennyman? Did he not
say of those (...) ^^^posed J. Perrot's Spirit* You are more Righteous then we?
And if you had not stood we had perished? And did not he call that Spirit of J.
Perrot that led to keep on the Hat in Public Prayer, THE SPIRIT OF WITCHCRAFT
AND OF THE DEVIL, and to that Purpose? And is he not now in Defense of that
Spirit? What shall we say then upon his present Distance and Enmity? Has he
not pronounced his own Character and Sentence hereby? What heed is to be given
to such a Changeable Self-Contradicting Person? Now that the Government of our
Christian Body should be called Tyranny, and the Confessions of these Men
Hypocrisy, tell me, thou, that art my impartial Reader, what sort of Conscience
our present Enemies have, thus to treat both the one and the other: How evident
is it, that these great Enemies of Imposition would have been the Taskmasters
themselves, who are Insolent and Uncharitable enough to censure these Men in
pulling off their Hats again, to be guilty of Hypocrisy, who in Fear to God,
and the Sense of his Spirit, condemned the keeping of it on. Deceit! Oh, how
unworthily have they dealt with us? and how ill an Use have they made of all
wholesome Counsel to reclaim them? That little Yielding, that our Friends at
first showed to re-gain them, they made use of to confirm them; and their
Obstinacy leading us to more Severity, like Bastard Children, they run away
with open mouth, bauling into the very Ears of some Envious and Busie-body
Professors, Imposition, Popery, Tyranny, Arbitrary Government; and these are
become Theames for such prejudiced Persons as this Adversary, to declaim
against the poor Quakers upon. Where it may not be unseasonably observed; That
if we should as ill bestow our time in gathering up all the Villainous and
Impious Miscarriages of many professed Members of the several Religious Ways
within this Kingdom, I doubt not but we might cut them out more Work then they
would be willing to have. Had we thus begun with them, how Condemnable would
they have thought it? But it having been their Practice toward us, we must not
chide them for Injustice, lest we be reputed Railers; For so big is the Beam in
their own Eyes, that the Vilest buses against us pass for Innocent and
Justifiable things (...).

The second thing (...) offer in order to a full Determination, is this; That
either the whole Church, or that part of it which never was concerned in these
Debates, particularly the North of England, remot from us, yet consisting of a
very great Part of the Body of our Friends, both in Number and Solidity, and
who have never varyed from their first Station, upon any general Proposal the
present Hat-Men shall make for the Demand of their Judgment, provided it may be
conclusive with them, (at least so far as to clear Particulars from that high
Charge of Tyranny and Hypocrisy) will, we do believe, freely declare
themselves, according to that Sense and Understanding they shall receive of the
Mind of Christ therein, from him alone, who is the Leader and Shepherd of his
People. IF none of all this will do, let them take their course, and furnish
these Ishmaelites and Uncircumcised Philistians with all they can, to our
Trouble, God will bring us through it all; And for that Dishonor, they have
hereby brought on the Way and People of the Lord in general, by putting their
pretended Exceptions against some few Particulars into the hands of those Men
(who do not so much study the Disgrace of a few public Laborers, as the
Overthrow of the whole People and Way (improving all they can scrape, how much
soever interlined with Falsehood, to that very end) will God, the Righteous and
Terrible Judge of Heaven and Earth, require an Account; and Woe, Sorrow and
Eternal Perplexity will be the swift Recompense of your Treacherous Doings,
unless you find a place for Repentance, and can yet wipe away all these Scores
by true Contrition.

Some further Ground of our Satisfaction in Proceeding against keeping on the
Hat in time of public Prayer; especially, as we are now concerned with these
sort of Apostate Adversaries: which is not to dispute, but further to declare
our Belief, and the Reason of our Practice in the Matter, and so leave all with
the Lord.
I. AS Man consists of Soul and Body, and as the Body is a kind of Form to the
Soul, so whilst Body and Soul remain unseparated, there will and must be some
Form suited to the Body, whereby to express the public, Spiritual Worship
performed by the Soul: such are Places, Words and Gestures; and in the
Performance of such Worship the Body can no more be exempted from some Form or
Expression, then can the Soul in its inward and spiritual Station. To deny
this, is to denote a Man void of Sense and Reason; so that though we grant the
outward and inward Coming of Christ, to have abrogated such Types and Figures
as foreshewed a further Glory, yet Tokens and Demonstrations of present inward
Reverence a Divine Honor to God in public Performance of Worship, not only we
never denied, but do affirm them to be as adequate or proper to the Body, as
are the Reverence and Honor to the Soul.

II. It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us, in the solemn and
public performance of Prayer unto the Lord, to pull off our Hats, to express
the Unvailing of our Spirits, and that reverent Submission and Supplication,
which becomes poor Petitioners to come in, and offer up their Desires with, to
the great King of Glory, and God of the Spirits of all Flesh; and God has made
it a Token of inward Homage by the Requirings of his own Truth. And it is fit
it should be observed, that these present Opposers not only acknowledged the
People, called Quakers, to be a true Church whilst in this Practice (which I
deny any Church to be that continues in the World's Rudiments) and that they
have frequently suggested us on this Occasion to be Retainers of; But that they
have received heavenly Refreshment by those Prayers, that have been offered up
by uncovered Heads: And that God should send forth such a Spiritual Ministry,
so richly furnished, and rarely qualified, by the Divine Power and Wisdom of
God a few years before, as the Author of the Hat confesses, and that in, their
Performance of Worship to God, they should be worldly, and vainly Ceremonious,
can be no ways consistent. And I do here appeal to all sober Persons, if after
so large a Terstimony, given to the People, called Quakers, as a true Church,
and her Ministry and Worship as powerful and pure, before ever this Imagination
came forth, it could be any thing solid, seasonable or edifying to introduce or
trouble the Church with that Practice, which they acknowledge She was Blessed,
and Prosperous without.

III. But again, it denotes and signifies the Difference that is between
Worship to God, and Ministry to Man; there is not equal Homage, indeed none at
all in declaring God's Will to Man, but the other is all matter of pure Homage,
and to discover this Difference by some due and suitable Posture, is so far
from being unlawful, that the contrary is very condemnable.

IV. It is never to be thought reasonable by People not out of their Senses, at
least upon our Adversaries Principles, that a Man should be moved to Pray, and
yet in that Motion not moved to show it. What! would they have a Man, when he
is moved to pray, wait for another Motion to be led to discover it? But above
all the rest, how do they that stand with their Hats on, testify their Unity
with him, that prays (as they confess a Man may by the Spirit of the Lord)
with his Hat off? I say, what greater Token do they give of their Joining with
such Prayers, then the Publican or Pharisee, who by that very Posture testify
their Dislike. But yet further, suppose a Hat-Man be moved to Pray with his Hat
off, as they confess he may, what becomes of the rest of that Opinion in the
Meeting? If they pull it off merely as having Unity with his Prayer, then they
are gone; for that is our Ground, who say, that Soul and Body, Prayer and
Gesture must go together. If they say, it is upon them not to pull it off, Two
things will follow; First, The Spirit of the Lord moves People in the same
Meeting, at the same instant of time, and in one and the same Duty, unto two
Contrary things. 2 dly, That they may have Unity with the Prayer, and not with
the Gesture; with one Motion, and not the other. That they have Unity with the
Prayer, and give, and wrap up their Spirits in the present sense that is
stirring in the Assembly, with his that is the Mouth, without an extra-ordinary
Impulse to pray with him in their own Spirits; yet require such a Motion to
Join with the Gesture: so that they can pray with the Man moved, but not pull
off their Hat with the Man so moved. The Confusion, Contradiction and Absurdity
of this Imagination ought forever to Justify the Quakers Seasonable, Solid and
Christian Proceedings against the Introducers and Abettors of it; for a
Contradiction in Gesture, when Gesture stands upon Motion, is (proportionably)
as real a Resistance against the Spirit, and committing of Disorder in
Christian Assemblies, as in Matter of Doctrine, or any other essential part of
Worship.

V. The generality of the Friends in the Nation renounced it; where I cannot
but take an Opportunity to defend a Passage in a private, Letter writ by me,
upon the Entreaty of one of John Perrot's Disciples, in much Kindness, to
satisfy and reclaim him, and cited by the envious Author of Tyranny and
Hypocrisy Detected, page 25.

W. P. says that God has given greater Judgment to his Church, then to the
individual Members of it, is a true Position, How came this Letter into this
Socinian's hand? Does not this prove a Cabal? and that Quondam Quakers, now
Apostates, are their Spies? was this my Reward for a loving and courteous
Letter, which kindly invited him to my House, for further Satisfaction?
Treacherous Person! to give it up into proclaimed Enemies Hands (such Baseness
is like an Apostate) and not to grapple with one part of its Strength, so
disingenuous an Adversary.
and the Church of Rome errs not in that, but in accounting themselves a True
Church: These are not my very words; a Disingenuity, if I am not mistaken this
Author wrote once almost a whole Book against; however, I abide by the Passage:
For if Christ bid individuals tell the Church, and yet the Church has no more
Discerning or Judgments then they had themselves before such Appeal, and which
cannot be bettered by it away with Reason: If in the multitude of Counselors
there be safety, respecting Worldly Matters, why not respecting Spiritual
Matters? supposing, as we ever did, that Gods Power, Spirit and presence
preside in any such Church, Body or Assembly. This is more then the Cavil
deserves, but I was willing to express my mind more fully for the Readers
Satisfaction.

VI. This Innovation brought with it Division, instead of Unity; Confusion,
instead of Order; Heart-burnings, instead of Love, and diverted the minds of
some from the more weighty things of God's living and spiritual Law.

VII. Had it been never so Innocent, it cost more then it was worth, and their
insisting so much upon it to the Disturbance of the Church's Concord, was no
small Evidence of the Wrongness of that Spirit, which introduced and maintained
it. This shall sufficiently rebuke and judge, both it and them, that it added
nothing to Life and Salva^tion, nor to the Edification of the Body of Christ,
which is the End of every true Motion; for it carried neither interior nor
exterior Homage, Service or Benefit in the least, either to Persons in their
own Particulars, or to the Church in general.

And whereas they frequently have accused the Body of our Friends, which still
remains, as they once confessed, the Body of Christ, of being guilty of Popish
Customs, in not being guilty of their Irreverence and that the Minds of People,
were not yet inwardly and spiritually exercised in Worship, it is evident, that
their newfangled Practice, Dissent about it, and continual Defense of it, did
more draw out the Minds of some people, and exercise and perplex them about
Postures and Gestures, then ever they were before: so that what they falsely
charge upon the Church is their own proper Character. Our Friends prudent Stop
to this troublesome and endless sort of Innovation, deserves none of those Hard
Names these scurrilous Libels give both them and their Proceedings.

But they object something G. F. and my self have writ against Hat-Honour, as
that we should repute it an Earthly, vain, and mean thing, Tyr. and Hyp.
Detect. p. 9, 60, 61, 62.
minded only of Men in the Fall; that if pulling off the Hat were true
Honoring or Respecting, Vile Persons would be the most Civil; Real Respect is
a more substantial Thing, manifested by Obedience. This our Adversary quotes
out of G. F's Book, called, True Honor among the Jews; and mine, entitled, No
Cross, no Crown; But they forgot to be so ingenuous, or on purpose would not be
so just, as to tell People, that we writ against the fallen Honor of the Hat
to Men. Because we deny it to Men, must we therefore deny it to God? No; but we
therefore deny it to Men, because we give it only to God, as one of those
Gestures, which outwardly distinguishes Worship to God from Ministry to Man.
But this is their Drift and Ground of their citing those Passages, that if it
be so Mean and Earthly a thing, to pull off the Hat to Man, how, comes it so
Eminent a Gesture in Worship, and why not esteemed as earthly and empty a thing
in respect to Worship as Civil Honor? I think I give the Force of their
Objection, and shall as easily answer it.

That which gives Weight to any Gesture, is the Reason inducing to it, and both
the End and Frame of the Mind in using of it. God's Spirit has required this
before ever J. Perrot was born into so much as the Profession of our Living
Way, as a Testimony against the Ranting Spirit, that was then very rise in this
as Dr. Gell. and a certain Person of worldly Quality, said, That had not the
Quakers come, the Ranters had overrun the Nation.
Nation, and has continued it amongst us as a Gospel, Decent, and Reverent
Expression, or Token of the Vnvailing of our Spirits to God in Prayer; Now
strip this Gesture, or rather empty it of this solid Reason inducing, and both
take away that End, and remove that Frame of Spirit, in which that Gesture is
used; and truly we may then very well repute it a mean and beggarly thing for
the Sons of Men to bluster about. To have it in the Sense it is given to God,
they can not. To have it without that Sense, is to have an empty, insignificant
Gesture; And should we allow of it, what Distinction could be found to save us
from performing that to Man which we do to God? since the Gesture denotes none,
neither can (and our Adversary denies a Way to judge the Meanings of an Inward
Spirit by) Besides Man's requiring it upon an earnest Thirst after Honor, that
Posture which we only give to God in his own pure Worship, makes the Doing of
it Sinful, if there were nothing else in it; and therefore we deny it to Men,
at what time in the Reverence and deep Humility of our Spirits, we give it to
God; out of which Sense it is nothing, but in it, acceptable and requisite. We
also ^now that Men in the Fall can give but Fallen Honor; an^ (...) Gestures
are invented or practiced by a Fallen and Earthly Spirit, the Respect they set
upon them is not the true Honor and Respect, but Fallen and Earthly; In this
Sense it is we call it Fallen, Earthly and Vain. More Substantial things may be
so reputed, as Prayer, etc. when not proceeding from a right Ground* much more
a Gesture relating to it. Our Adversaries do ill* to conclude so general; They
should have weighed, that as we can give it to God only in the Restoration out
of the fallen Ways and Worships of Men, so the Use of it in that Estate, must
needs render it a Fallen, Mean, Earthly and Empty Thing, as indeed are all
their Worships, who stand not in the Power and Spirit of God; much more, when
any the like Practice is used to Mortal Man. But they further object a Passage
in a Letter to Je Perrot from R. Hubberthorn. Then no such Reasonings had we
had, if so be, the Free Spirit of the Lord had been minded. Ibid. p. 24
which is not to be limited, neither to the keeping on the Hat, nor off the Hat
in time of Prayer. But what adds this to their Cause, in Defense of which they
brought it? Who go about to limit the Spirit, and not we, as R. H. also says;
for our Business is to be limited by the Spirit, and not to limit it, or, to
outrun it. I hope, none will infer from thence, that Men ought to keep their
Hats on; Or, that the same Spirit would lead to those contrary Gestures, as say
some of J. Perrot's Followers: For R. H. meant nothing less; but he was sure,
if they had kept to that free Spirit (that had already limited to, and
confirmed the pulling it off) there would not have been such Reasonings about
keeping of it on, or off; and why? because they would have felt a
Pre-conclusion, which would have settled them out of the Reach of the Bondage
that Spirit of Delusion had brought them into: For the Liberty of the Spirit
stands not in being moved to contrary things, that is Ranterism; but in being
freed from every high Thought, and exalted Imagination, to abide in the Order
of the Gospel. But our Adversary, who can at times, and for his own Ends engage
for any Cause, tells us J. Perrot's Defense, that he did not enjoin the
Practice; for he left all to the Free, Universal Spirit, page 24. But after
this, our Adversary, if he would have defended J. P. to Purpose, he should not
have told us, page 32, 33. that J. Perrot had received Command against it from
the Lord God of Heaven and Earth in his Captivity at Rome, to testify against
the Custom and Tradition of Taking off the Hat by Men, when they go to pray to
God: And the Truth is, he did at other times call it a Romish Tradition. But
what follows from these two Passages that so greatly justle at one another?
Does not the first imply, that a Man may Lawfully pull off the Hat in Prayer;
and the latter expressly judge it as a Tradition of Men? Either his Command was
False, or he was Deceitful in his Answer to our Friends; For that a Man may be
left to his Liberty, whether he should practice the Traditions of Men in the
Worship of God (upon J. Perrot's Pretenses to Divine Motions altogether in
Worship) is the height of all Contradiction; yet this is the Doctrine of J.
Perrot, as we have it delivered to us by his Apologizer: To give Liberty to
pull it off, or put it on, as it was with People to do, and yet that he was
commanded of God to testify against it positively and generally, as a
Tradition of Man; As if People might use, nay, be moved of God, to perform in
his Worship any of the Traditions of Men, which God himself had given express
Sentence against. It is not short of Blasphemy it self. And for Our Friends,
that is, G. F. G. W. and others, which this Man says, owned J. Perrot's Motion
for Rome, and counted him a good Friend, p. 32. They do aver that they denied
that Motion, and never so reputed him. However it be, this Apologist, vowed to
our Disgrace, bestirs him self not a little in Defense of J. Perrot and his
Followers, as if first he loved the Hat on in Time of Prayer, which he denies
in it self; Secondly, as if he believed and allowed of Motions, which he both
denies and scorns; Thirdly, as if he liked a true Quaker, and was not so much
displeased at the Light, as at Peoples Leaving or Confining it in its Leadings
and Requirings; Who by his great Envy to our Persons, shows his Hate to True
Quakers; and by his base Conclusion from the Pretenses of both Parties to have
been led to a Contrary thing by the Light within, That the Light is a kind of
Miserable, Uncertain Thing; and waiting to be ordered by it, a very Dubious
piece of Business, to the Disgrace of Christ's Light; Reviling then, as well
the one Sort as the other, and bringing his Blow well nigh as hard upon the
Hat-Men as upon us, see page 23, 24, 25, 71, and ult. In which the Drift of his
Business is to drive People off from the Leadings of the Light, instead of
Pleading on the behalf of these Apostates being led into that Practice by it,
as he vainly does, p. 32, 33. Let Disingenuous W. Mucklow, and Furious J.
Pennyman see to what pass they have brought their Affairs, who under the
Pretense of proving the Quakers Apostasy from the Teachings of the Light, have
furnished a Man with Complaints against us, who could so little dissemble his
Dis-like against the Principle it self, as to conclude Uncertainty, Confusion
and Blasphemy to attend that very Assertion about the Light's Teaching, which
the People, called Quakers, in the beginning made, and is by this Adversary in
other places, on these Apostates account seemingly pleaded for. Let them glory
in this Man's Endeavors, if they will; Their wicked Hypocrisy and great
Trachery are herein manifest beyond what may at this time be said by us: They
loved the Motions of the Principle at an odd rate that set a Man to defend them
that is an Enemy to them. His Conclusions prove what I said in mine
Introductoction, that it was against the True Quakers and their ancient confessed
Principle he chiefly levelled his Scoffs, Nicknames, Reflections and gross
Perversions, and not merely against us as False Quakers, or Persons gone from
our first Principle.

To prove this, behold how, and why he triumphs! That our Principle admits of
no Means whereby to discern one immediate Teaching from another. Perrot says
one thing, and Fox another; Who is in the right? or to that Purpose.

It would have done well if W. M. and J. P. had answered this Objection, before
they furnished him to plead their Cause and defend them to be in the Right, from
those Motions their own Apologist denies any Certainty to; and I may now take
Occasion to ask him, why he is so peremptory in his Censures of us to be in the
Wrong, who denies any Certainty of Judgment of either side? How comes he so
Certain in Condemning and Justifying? Partial Man! But no greater Evidence can
well be given of the Wrongness of J. Perrot's Spirit, then has been already
related; viz. The Disturbance of the Church; The Vnprofitableness of the Thing;
The Scandalous Laps and Apostasy of himself and several of his Followers, and
the Judgment others Zealously past against themselves whose Simplicity had been
betrayed. The Fruits testify what Spirit it was, though, upon our Adversary's
saying That there is no inward Test or Trial of Spirits, at least implying so
much, he contradicts Scripture, and undervalues the Gift of God; For he had as
good to say, That a Wrong Spirit, covered with fair and undeniable Pretenses,
is not discernable by the Light and Spirit of God within; A Man may be Wrong
within, and Right without, have the exact Form, but not the Power of Godliness.
What can try Spirits, but the Spirit? No Writing can tell me a Wrong from a
Right Spirit in the ground* though it may describe good and bad Fruits, and
from such Actions Men may by a Writing describe the Right from the Wrong; But
what gives to relish, taste or savor a Wrong Spirit in Sheeps Clothing beside
the Heavenly Instinct of the Divine Nature? As People are turned to that they
can discern, as says the Apostle, The Spiritual Man judges all things, (that
is, of right he may) and is judged of no Man (that is, not discerningly of the
mere Natural Men) And as the Spiritual Man's Discerning is from the Spirit that
searches out the deep things of God; so is God the Judge and Law giver to his
People under this Dispensation. If the Gospel-Fellowship be in Spirit, True
Christians must have an Inward Taste and Sense of one another Spirits; and what
gives to savor aright at the same time gives to relish a Wrong Spirit. The
same Objection he makes against the Light may be made against the Spirit,
(which is but another Name for the same Principle) and I hope, he will not dare
to say that any Confusion can follow upon holding that Men under the Gospel
ought to be led by it: Yet, this granted, suppose Men pretending to be led by
the Spirit, to be gone from the Spirit; or that two equally pretending to be
guided by it, differ, as Paul and Barnabas and Peter, what should determine? No
Writings of the Old Testament could, at least without Meanings; and the same
Difficulty lies about the Meanings of Scripture as about being led by the
Spirit. In this Case what shall be done? Surely the Spirit must not be
upbraided nor branded: Neither will it follow, That there is no Judge; for
Christ is the great Judge, appointed of God. the Spiritual great Prophet that
speaks from Heaven, and in his own time will give Judgment to the View of all
Men. In the mean while he satisfies the Minds of those who are truly led by his
Spirit; and Withering, Decay, Murmuring, Complaining, and finally Apostasy will
follow upon the Pretenders as is fulfilled in the present Judasses. This has
been largely argued elsewhere, yet I was not willing to let this Passage of our
Enemies pass unconsidered, which indeed is the Strength of his Book, and what
the ablest of our Adversaries can say against us an this account.

I have proceeded thus far more particularly in Defense of the Church, against
the Apostate Adversaries and their Apologist, about the Argument by them made
about the Hat, and those Discords that issued; In which I hope, I have not
exceeded the Bounds of Truth and Moderation.

For the latter Objection, which is directed not so much against the Body of
our Friends, as a select Number of Ministers and Elders devoted, as he falsely
and scoffingly suggests, to the Promotion of G. F's Authority and Interest, I
can with all Clearness and Sincerity, and that in the Name of many Brethren,
give this following Testimony.

G. F. I would have all to know, seeks not Himself, but Christ, and as becomes
a true Apostle, and Servant of his Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, Early and
Late, in Season and out of Season, with incessant Pains and Care (not being
Burthensom unto any) endeavors to promote the Work of God in the Earth; and is
so far from Lording it over any, that he daily serves all for the Truth's sake,
thinking no Labor too great, nor Condescension too mean, whereby he may be
Serviceable to any, in what concerns their Eternal Welfare; and this some of
these Apostates must needs know. He has approved himself, and still does among
us, to be a Man of God, and a True Prophet of the Lord; and as such, we do
Value him, and the Rage of Men shall not Dis-settle us from our Sense and
Regard of him, who seeks not himself, nor his own things, but the Things of
God, that Christ, and his Power alone may be exalted in the Hearts of all
People, and all Flesh humbled; and for this alone are all public Laborers of
Value with, our Friends, and no otherwise Respected or Regarded then in the
Lord, which is not Tyranny, but Duty: Wherefore those Terms, of Foxonian, King
George Fox, Foxonian Leaven, G. Fox and his Party or Adherents, are with many
more, Words of Scorn and Abuse; he has no such intended Lordship, nor are we of
his Party, bu^ God's Freemen, and True Christians, being with him Baptized by
One Spirit into One Body; the Unity of which these smiting Apostates and their
abusive Libeller can never break.

I shall touch upon their Aggravations about not Marrying, Burying, etc. before
I come to those other Reflections made against G.F. our Ministry, and My self,
and all before I end my Share in this Re-joynder.

First, He is pleased to say, That we deny them Trading, Marrying, Burying, and
all Ecclesiastical and Civil Privileges to those that dissent from us. p. 7.
These were the Aggravations I before promised to observe.

But alas! What shall we say to a Man thus Hardy, and resolved to be Wicked,
that he may render us so? Did we even forbid Men Trading, or endeavor to take
People off from Trading with them? J. Pennyman can say no such thing without
Lying; for several have lovingly frequented his Shop, since he Enviously
visited and disturbed our Meetings: And how many do we daily trade with, that
are not of us, in Love and full Assurance of their Honesty.

For Marrying, I referred the Author of the Spirit of the Hat to the Apostle's
Dehortation, Be ye not Unequally Yoaked together. It seems, if we cannot own
Persons to be of us, that are not of us, we must be abused. This made the
present Apologizer (if I am not out of my Guess) Angry and Enraged with us at
first. It Is not mere Talking of Christ, and hammering out a few Notions in the
mere Strength of Man's Will and Wisdom, that makes a True Christian; therefore
we could not receive him for our Sect-Master, that angers him. And for
Marriage, we cannot have Unity with any in that solemn Performance of Marrying,
who are acted by a Wrong Spirit, and so gone out of the Union of the Body of
Friends: We do not deny them that are so Married, to be Married at all, as this
Enemy would conclude, though to be Married in the Unity we can never own them.

As to our denying of Burial unto such Apostates, my words in the Book, called,
The Spirit of Alexander the Copper-Smith Rebuked, carry no such unnatural
Sense. Two things I denied (1.) That we therefore denied them a Burial, because
we should always refuse it as of us, whilst they continued in that Dissenting
Spirit from us. (2.) That we Usurped their Property. To the first, says our
Adversary, The (Quakers) would not suffer such to stink above Ground, but he
should be buried, not among the Catholics; but as Heretics in Spain or
Italy, p. 19.

Behold the Candor of this Interpreter! What a strange Improvement has he made
of my Saying? much more resembling the Carriage of that sort of Catholics (he
likens us to) against such pretended Heretics, as the poor Waldenses then, we
do in the Case of Burial.

I say again, That as our Friends intended upon their first Purchase of a
Burying Place, that their Dead Bodies should ^ie together from the People of
distinct Ways, which is warranted from Abraham's Practice in Genesis; so do
they not desire, that such as have been of them, and have afterward run out,
should lie among them, unless it be the Desire of the Deceasing Parties, or
that they declare their Unity with Friends: yet we would not by any means be
thought to deny any Person whatever a Buring-Place, though we could never allow
it to them as one of us, since that were most unnatural. I would fain know, if
this Adversary would observe no Distinction in this Case? or what Injury there
is done, in making that Difference, when Dead, which was observed by the
deceast Party himself, when alive? For the Property that he says some of them
have, it is true, and was never denied; but that we usurpt it, we did and do
reject as a Slander: They never desired their part of the Collection that
bought it, nor did we ever refuse to repay it, but are ready to be quit with
them when they will; a Perverse Apostatized Generation! For Ecclesiastical
Privileges, I know not what he means; and those Scoffs ill become a Man that
pretends to Religion: Such Privileges, as are the peculiar Right of every true
Member of Christ's Church, it must be confessed, that such Starters aside from
the Primitive Fellowship of it, do deprive themselves of Church Priviledges; we
don't. But this, says he, is more then any beside the Papist dare pretend to;
the Protestant, or Church of England challenges no such Power, p. 5. But he
that has ventured to tell so many False Things of us, may dare to bestow one
upon her, especially when it is considered, that he is a Concealed Person, and
may be False and Base with Security. Does not the Church of England, both
Excommunicate, and stir up the Civil Magistrate against such as dissent from
her in mere Circumstances? Does not the long Difference between her and the
ancient Puritans, Presbyterians and Independents, Baptists, and Us more
particularly, sufficiently Disprove that Bold, Assertion? But we pretend not to
Imitate any; but really act according to that Understanding and Sense which God
given us in these things, and in which we commend our selves to him, being
herein willing to abide his Judgment.

To the Rest of those Cruelties he makes us guilty of, he does, with the Author
of the Spirit of the Hat, charge us with Pulling down, p. 14, 15.
Haling out of our Meetings and consequently wanted only Power to punish them;
adding, That my Appeal to God's Witness in all Consciences, for our
Vindication, shows me greatly to be lamented, as either Blind or Impudent; That
we have also Pusht, Pincht, Kicked and Trod upon Feet and Toes, sending us to
Francis Chadwell for Proof thereof.

But, to say nothing of his Ill-Language, my Appeal stands as it did; and as
before, so now I will put it between Impartial and Moderate Men, if ever we so
used any Conscientious Inquirer, or Opposer? No, nor any else after that manner
represented by our Adversary; and God will plead our Innocence against him, in
the Hour of his Rigteous Judgments, he shall not go Uncondemned down to his
Grave.

For Francis Chadwell, he is a Man of no Conscience, nor Credit, in what
relates to us; I my self have known him grossly guilty both of Lying and
Tippling: No frothy Stager is less to be regarded in Religion, then this Man's
Witness, a Light, Scoffing, Taunting, Tumultuous Person; who after an Hundred
Solid Confutations, One of which had been enough to strike an Ingenuous Man to
the Heart, has continued to Bawl and Disquiet our Meetings, time after time:
His Aim has been to raise up an Envious and Scoffing Spirit in People against
us, Jeering, Laughing, Houting, with such Unseemly Carriages, as wholely
unbefit him for a Witness against us; He had as good as confessed, that he has
been Hired by some Professors to Disturb us, and told me, If I would give him
Five Hundred Pounds he would be a Quaker too; yet, this is our Socinian
Adversary's Serious, Conscientious Inquirer, or Opposer.

He also brings in one William King, whom he says, We Haled out of our Gallery
in Grace-Church Street, with such Violence, that he has scarce felt the
Stairs, but that he has often felt our Cruel Hands, witness G. Whitehead 's
Pinching him in the Arm, at Jer. Clark 's House; and that We would not suffer
him a Prisoner among us, though for the same Cause, and all this for some
Disagreement in Judgment.

I confess, I have no great Acquaintance with the Man; but first, deny that
ever he was Haled out of Grace-Church Street, or any where else; but it may so
happen, that he offering to keep the Meeting when ended by our Friends, the
People pressing out, and he speaking, might bear him away with a Crowd, which,
has fallen out to many that have been Speakers, and not Opposers: perhaps some
disturbed and hindered of Hearing, may on their own Account have shoven him, or
put him by; what is that to us?

For G. Whitehead's Pinching him, it is like the rest, full of Slander; He is
known to be a Man of more Temperance and Command of himself, if he had been
provoked. It Is true, He took him by the Sleeve to turn him to a Looking-Glass,
that he might behold his Envious and Passionate Countenance, as G. W. avers,
and others present: But had it been true, how one Pinch can prove that he had
OFTEN felt our Cruel Hands, Unbyassed Readers may best judge.

That he was a Prisoner is confessed; that we Refused him to be among us, is
denied: But that we were not in Unity with him, we are not afraid to own. I
know not that I ever spoak to him but once, and that was in Newgate, being a
Prisoner my self; and if he will speak Truth, he can say nothing hard of me.
For G. Whitehead's Charging Henry ^awson not to entertain him, is false; For
what is it but to suggest, that we would Refuse him common Hospitality? It Is
true, that G. W. as in Conscience-bound, warned them of him, as one of the
Ancient Creepers into Houses, Disaffected to the Brethren, and Prone to
Discords (as by his frequent Disturbances in our Meetings is evident) therefore
not to entertain him as one in Unity with us; but if he, or any of them want
(supposing first their Lawful Endeavors to procure sufficient Maintenance) I
know not one among us, who would not readily Administer to their Nceessities.

But we gave out a Paper against John Pennyman when he was in Prison, page
16.17.
and would not spare that grave, ancient Gentlewoman Ann Mud, who being MOVED
to speak a few Words, T. Matthews pulled her away by Violence, and that we were
the People in former Days that vexed, and disquieted all Sorts of Religious
Assemblies, and clamoured against those as Persecutors, that obtained their
Peace by Thrusting and Carrying us out.

But I will tell him first, that our Paper against John Pennyman was as
necessary to clear us from that Instigation of the Devil that led him to give
up to burn the Scriptures of Truth, and the Writings of Friends (which were
some of those Papers) this Apologizer (fitted for all turns of Deceitful
Evasion) calls Wast, page 37. under the Pretense of the Motion of God's
Spirit, as for an Innocent Man, in Sight of a Murder, to clear himself from
being guilty of so heinous a Fact, We delighted not at his Imprisonment, for we
were wounded by the Cause of it; and had great Reason to deny that Action,
which brought a Reproach upon our Principle and Practice that never belonged to
either. God's Spirit has hitherto lead us to Read, Believe, Obey and Witness
the Scriptures, and not to tare them, as did our Adversaryes Orthodox Elizabeth
B^rens (p. 52.) in the height of Rage before mine Eyes; and offer to burn them,
as did his so much Commended and Defended John Pennynman. I perceive, this
Socinian Author denies our Testimony by his Dislike of it, and consequently
owns that Wicked Position, that the Spirit of God may lead a Man to burn the
Scriptures of God; against which our Testimony was mainly directed.

For his ancient, grave Gentlewoman (as he calls her) she has been so Unhappy
as through her Excess of Affection to J. Pennyman, to be a Sharer with him in
his perverse Outcries against us; yet I can scarcely think that she will
attest any such thing: But if it were true, as I believe it to be false, it can
be no Valid Argument against the Faith, Worship or Actions of the Body of the
Quakers. But, why MOVED? methinks, here and in J. P's Case, he has learned to
pronounce Moved, as if he believed the Spirit in these Days used any such
thing. Is he angry with us for resisting Ann Mud's MOTION, who himself, p. 32,
33, 71. denies the Certainty of any such thing? but Envy blinds Men. We shall
also grant that we are the Men whom the Eternal God from time to time raised to
testify against the Hireling Teachers that took Money for that which was not
Bread, but were like Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, devoured the Flock, and made a
Prey of the People; and God has blessed us in that Service, for before a
Gathering, there was to be a Scattering: And God made us Instrumental to turn
People from Darkness to Light, from the Power of Satan unto God, by directing
their Minds to the Gift of his Holy Light and Spirit, which discovers the Deeds
of Darkness, convinces the World of Sin, reveals the Mind and Will of God,
and gives Power to the Creature that believes in it, to obey and do it.

For this Testimony in the ^irelings Synagogues, did the False Jew or Christian
Hale, Tere, Beat, Bruise, Knock down, Stock, Whip, Imprison, with many such
like Horrid and Inhuman Actions* which became not our Adversaries Interest
(though an Impartial Historian) to mention: But, have we been no otherwise
disturbed? or have we so used our Disturbers? Our Faithful Chronicles of the
Bloody Tragedies of that Professing Generation will tell future Ages other
things. O the Partiality of this Socinian Apologizer for our Disturbers! But to
close this. Either our Adversary condemns our former Testimonies against the
Priests in their Steeple Houses, or he does not; if he does, he cannot justify
the Senseless Bawlings of Proud and Envious J. Pennyman, Francis Chadwel and
the like Disturbers of our Assemblies, upon his own Comparison. If he justifies
their Disturbances of us, especially those given by his Prime and Singular
Witness F. Chadwel, with what Face can he censure our Serious and Solemn
Admonitions, or Reproofs in the National Synagogues. Let it be as it will with
him, we expect an higher Judgment, and to that shall we gladly yield.

And for those two or three Stories of the Wantonness and Uncleanness of some
particutar Persons among us, though it is spoken to in some following
Testimonies, yet I have thus much to say; J. W's. Name is Basely and Falsely
used by the Libeller, though he could not have mentioned it but upon
Information from some of these Defaming Apostates, whom God will judge, for
endeavoring to Murder the Reputation of an Ancient, Solid, Faithful Labourer
in God's Work. Shall Ifs and may be's conclude Men Guilty? It is not the first
Mistake W. M. if he be their Informer, has committed, whose Jealous Surmising
Soul can scarce do any thing else in Cases relating unto us, as I have
experienced: His Worth is lighter to the Man, his Name is brought int to
slander, then the Chaff to the Wheat.

For the Two Young Women, concerning whom M. Y's. Information is cited, they
were examined; Childish, Toyish, page 51.
and Unseemly Carriages were with much Contrition confessed: but for any such
gross Wickedness, as was and is suggested by these Men, they said it was false,
if there was a God in Heaven. For M. Y. we shall say no more till we have a
more express Account of his Concernment in that Libel, or Information mentioned
therein: We see no Name to it, and might as well suspect that with other
things; however, our Friends behaved themselves in that Matter as became God's
People to do.

For T. M One Story is cleared by the Woman's Testimony, and W. M's. Malice
discovered. For his common Uncleanness under Pretense of Physic, etc. We know
not how to allow it for several Years since dealt withal by our Friends, and in
particular by a Physician about it; and what there was any just Ground to
Condemn him for, he was judged, page 50.
his other Unwatchful Carriages denied, and his Conversation turned form by our
Friends.

Lastly, Suppose these Enemies of God, and his Work, and People, could Say and
Prove Ten Times as much; shall those Miscarriages bring many Thousands of
People out of Request, and go for an utter Blast upon their Faith, or Way? Vain
Men! Should we tell the Stories of the Abominable Practices of both such
Apostates, and some Envious Professors; what of Sin could we not find several
that have professed their Way guilty of? But we will make no Music for the
Atheist. Has not every Miscarriage, as Known, been Reproved? Yes; Every
Unfruitful Work of Darkness, as by the Light within, when known only to the
Party Offending, so by the Light in our Friends, as a Church, when known to
them. Is not this Gospel Order? Or must some raw Slips of Unwatchful Persons
Antichrist our whole Society?

Reader, These Things and Persons objected, have been several Years since
examined; who were Innocent, Acquitted; and who were Guilty, Condemned,
according to the Righteous Law of God: And upon this old Condemned Stuff, it is
our Enemies feed, with this they Arm themselves against us, and upon this
Quagmire, as their best Foundation, they stand. In short, They have been False
to God, Abusive to his People, Hurtful to the Moderate, and basely Treacherous
to their Ancient Friends. If being Base to God and Men can render Men
Christian, then they deserve to be so accounted of: But till Religion comes to
be read Backwards, let them go for Enemies to Christianity, and Murderers of
Natural Affection,

To conclude, OUr Ministry is of God; it stands in the Power of the Living
Spiritual Gift of God, to testify against all Ungodliness: And if any
Particular has ever slipped, and brought Dishonor to the Truth, such has been
Reproved in Righteousness, and only Received upon Unfeigned Repentance; which
is God's Way. But to Publish, Proclaim and Aggravate Miscarriages of Any to the
World, who profess Religion, committed many years ago, Examined, Judged, and
they Forgiven, upon Repentance, by the Lord, and therefore Received again by
us; and all this done with Design to Blast our Credit, Disgrace the Way we
profess (though they were no way concerned to meddle or interpose) To do all
this, I say, is not to be acted by the Spirit of God, but That, of an Accursed
Ham, and Treacherous Judas; and the Lord will avenge our Cause, we doubt not,
in due time.

But an Heinous Blasphemy is laid to the Memory of Josiah Coal, page 19.
by this Angry Agent, in behalf of these Apostates; and that is, a Passage in a
Letter writ anciently by him, in his Lifetime to G. Fox, viz.

That G. F. was the Father of many Nations.

But what Blasphemy is in this? Is it any more then to say, That by him, as an
Instrument in the Hand of God, People of many Nations have been by him begotten
to God? Was not Paul a Father of many Nations, who begot the Corinthians, that
were Greeks, and the Romans, that were Latins? But further.

Whose Life has reached through us thy Children, even to the Isles afar off,
to the begetting of many again unto a lively Hope, for which Generations to
come shall call thee Blessed.

Very well; And what Blasphemy lodges in these Words! Is not that which is the
Life of one Good Man the Life of another? Were not the Christians of old by One
Spirit baptized into One Body? What Life G. F. had was from Christ Jesus, and
it was no other Life J. Coal writ of: And I hope, The Life of Christ is one in
All; and who can limit it? And Josiah Coals, with others, were Children in the
Sense aforementioned; and that Life through those Children, by him
(instrumentally begotten, did reach to those Isles afar off, unto which he and
others went to preach the Everlasting Gospel. Paul reached to the Churches,
though afar off, 2 Cor. 13 10. He was Present in Spirit, though Absent in Body;
for, I verily, as Absent in Body, BUT PRESENT IN SPIRIT, have judged already,
as though I were present -- In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are
gathered, and MY SPIRIT in the Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, cast forth (and
taken in too upon Repentance, without going to the Lord Major and Aldermen) 1
Cor. 5.3, 4. His Life and Hope was through Timothy, Titus, and others, extended
unto many. And why shall not Generations to come call an Apostle Blessed; and
bless the Name of the Lord for him, respecting the Benefit any such one might
be in God's Power to a People? Is not the Memory of the Just Blessed? Prove.
10.7. And did not the Lord by his Prophet say of Israel his People, I will make
thee an Eternal Excellency, and the Joy of many Generations? Isa 60.57. What if
J. Coal had so spoak of G. F. and God's Israel now? Would it have been
Blasphemy? But these Err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God,
like the Jews of old.

But yet again, whose Being and Habitation is in the Power of the Highest.

And so is the Being and Habitation of every Child of God, or else he is in the
Power of the Lowest, the God of the World, whose Habitation is in Darkness. Are
we not to turn away from such as stand not in the Power of Godliness? And did
not the Apostle go, to turn People from the Power of Satan unto the Power of
God, which is the Power of the Highest? And is it notwithstanding Blasphemy to
stand in it, or testify of one that does stand in it, that he does so stand?
Oh the Idle Opposition! but great Envy of our Enemies! They seek nothing less
then the Blood of this Upright Man, as the next Words, and their Aggravation of
them prove.

In which Thou Rulest and Governest in Righteousness, and thy Kingdom is
established in Peace, and the Increase thereof is without End.

Upon this our Adversary takes frequent Occasion scoffingly to call him, King
George; suggesting him to be so vile an Impostor, as to assume unto himself the
Complete and Peculiar Dignity, Dominion and Authority due to Christ. See Page
53 54, 55. Which Blasphemy, I am of the Mind, our Adversary thinks deservedly
Punishable after the Severest Sort of Death. But he unworthily traduceth that
Good Man, and lays the Harmless Scripture-Expressions of a departed Servant of
the Lord, upon the Tenters or Rack, that he may stretch them to his own Vile
and Bloody Purposes. Has this Man forgot that there were ever such Passages
writ, as these? The Good Seed are the Children of the KINGDOM, Mat. 13.28. The
KINGDOM of God is within, Luke 17.20. The Saints shall JUDGE the World, 1 Cor.
6.2 3. But ye are a ROYAL Priesthood, 1 Pet. 9.2. And thou (the Lamb) have made
us unto our God KINGS and PRIESTS, and we shall REIGN on the Earth, Rev. 5.10.
And I appoint unto you a KINGDOM, as my Father has appointed unto me, that ye
may Eat and Drink at my Table in the Kingdom, and JUDGE on Thrones the Twelve
Tribes of Israel, Luke 22.29, 30. It is the Father's good Pleasure to give you
a KINGDOM, Luke 12.23. who has translated us into the KINGDOM of his dear Son,
1 Col. 13. [the Untranslated therefore Rage] Wherefore we have received a
KINGDOM that cannot be shaken, Hebr. 12.28. [they then had it] I beheld, and
the same Horn made War with the Saints, and prevailed against them, until the
Ancient of Days came, and JUDGMENT was given to the SAINTS of the Most High;
and Time came that the SAINTS POSSESSED THE KINGDOM, WHOSE KINGDOM IS AN
EVERLASTING KINGDOM, Dan. 7.21, 22, 27. By all which it is manifest, that it is
the Privilege of every Saint and Child of God to be a King, a Royal Priest, to
bave a Kingdom, and to Rule, Govern and Reign in Righteousness and Peace
without End. So that Josiah Coal, and every Heir and Co heir with Christ, Romans
8.17. does as well Reign in an Everlasting Kingdom of Righteousness as G. F.
does, or shall do; for we have One Faith, One Baptism, One Power, One Lord, One
Kingdom. Where let it be noted, that by all these Titles and Privileges, we
only mean and understand, Dominion over, Not Bodies nor Souls, Not Flesh nor
Blood; but in the Sense of the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.12. Principalities and Powers,
the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, and Spiritual Wickednesses in High
Places, which center in the Invisible, Dark Power of the God of the World, that
since the Beginning has drawn and acted Man, out of God's Counsel and Power in
which the Kingdom stands: For though we walk in the Flesh or Body, we do not
War after the Flesh; for the Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, but Mighty
through God, to the pulling down Strong Holds, casting down Imaginations, and
every high Thing, that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, 1 Cor.
10.4, 5. And as our War and Weapons, so our Kingdom is not Carnal, but
Spiritual; not of this World, but that which is without End; and of this we are
not ashamed.

It may not be unseasonable to take Notice of that Passage in his Book so often
mentioned, eagerly insisted upon, p. 19, 20, 21, 29.
and aggravated to the height of Ananias's Belying the Holy Ghost, viz That G.
Fox, this Great Prophet (as he in Abuse calls him) should break open and alter
the Contents of John Whitehead 's Letter, which (as he said) was writ in the
Name of the Lord, and that to a quite contrary Sense; making the Letter to
judge those that kept the Hat on, whereas J, W. therein justified both, those
that kept it off, or on. Thus, says our Adversary, does G. Fox belie both John
Whitehead and the Holy Spirit of God, and that knowingly. He proceeds, Oh
Prodigious Impudence! He that counterfeits any Man's Name in a Matter of any
Concernment deserves to be exposed on the PILLARY, AND TO LOSE HIS EARS; HOW
MUCH GREATER Blood! Blood! thou seek. O Envious Man!
PUNISHMENT DOES HE DESERVE that Counterfeits both the Name of God and Man, in
a Matter of Religious Concern. This, says he, is the Course that G. F. took to
make his Injunctions to be observed.

But this is the Course more truly to make the Impiety of this Adversary more
Notorious. For first, G. Fox never opened his Letter, nor made any Alteration
in it at all, that I dare affirm in so many Words; much less that he belyed the
Holy Spirit; and least of all, that he did it willingly. I perceive by his
Conclusion, he acknowledges that the Holy Ghost as really moved in J. Whitehead
as in Peter, contrary to his own Principle. Any thing will they All grant that
they may Slander or Injure us in the Minds of the People. How knows he it was a
True Motion? Does he not deny it may be known? If so then, how dare he be so
positive in the Censure of G. Fox? Will he make the Motion Uncertain, and yet
certainly judge G. F. for a Forger, who was yet Innocent? I leave it to the
Reader, what to call this part of his Tale. Secondly, J. Whitehead gave Power
by Letter at that time to the Brethren of London, to supervise and alter it, as
they should see convenient: and no otherwise was G. F. concerned in it, then as
one assenting with other of our Friends, that according to Power given and
their best Understanding, did alter it for the better, and herein did J. W.
testify his Unity and Fellowship; for the Spirits of the Prophets are subject
to the Prophets: So that what was done, was no more then what J. Whitehead left
Power to do, and which the Scripture justifies. Wherefore Prodigious Impudence
belongs not to G. F. but this hardy Adversary; and Prodigious Cruelty,
Persecution, if not Murder too, is he guilty of that would have him not only
Pillary'd, and lose his Ears, but his Life too, or something very near a kin to
it. This is confirmed page 33. where he charges us to be Blasphemers, and that
such ought to Dye by the Law of God in former times; The Consequence is plainer
then his Power to execute it. Oh the Mercies! Oh the Forgiveness of these
exceeding Meek, Suffering, Bruised Little Ones! as they would have as think,
But, Oh Deceitful and Blood thirsty Generation! who have endeavored what in
you lies, to betray with your Treacherous Kiss of pretended Love to our Souls,
our Faith, Reputations and Lives too, into the Hands of some Bloody-minded
Jews, who are not of the Circumcision in Spirit, but lust against those that
are, that they may be stirred up against us; But God will reckon with you and
them too, for these things.

This Adversary takes an Occasion to fasten a Lie upon a Paper set forth in the
Name of the Quakers; but he says, page 29.
writ chiefly by G. F. and G. W. in saying, That we have paid our Taxes and
other Dues more then any People, according to our Abilities. When (says our
Adversary) their Neighbors know all over England there are (at least) some
Taxes or Assessments, which they have peremptorily refused. But why must we be
branded for Liars because of that Saying, or our Adversaries base Aggravation?
I do affirm, That we have been oversest more then any; and Paying those Extreme
Assessments gives good Ground for Saying what we did. But indeed, some
Hat-Spirits perhaps could not say so; but why? Because some of them are so
leavened into another Spirit, that they almost question the Payment of any, as
M. Boreman, now called M. Pennyman, did.

I must not be plainer, least the Cabal further represent me one that exposes
Person to the Lash of But is not this to render us Obnoxious to the Government?
I abhor that Practice: But Base and Self-Ended Spirits are to be humbled, and
not think themselves fit to cry down other Peoples Religion, that have by
Treachery, Persecution and Falseness too much reproacht all Religion; Let tehm
leave Scribbling and Snarling with their Writings and Repent.
Government. Wherein we can pay we do, what ever they come for, and in some
Cases wherein we cannot, answer their Demands for Christ's Peaceable GOSPEL
sake. They commonly Take three times the Value, seldom, if ever Returning any
again; But this our Adversary calls no Paying: Sure I am, it is Loosing more
then our Adversary dare adventure; for if I mistake not, he can send out all
those things rather then suffer, though perhaps against his Conscience also.

Well, but, if we will believe him, there is such an Arrogant, Imperious and
Audacious Paper given forth by R. Farnsworth, A. Parker, G. Whitehead, J.
Coal, p. 29, 30, 31, 32.
J. Whitehead, T. Lo, S. Crisp, T. Green, T. Moon, T. Brigs, and J. Parks, as
he thinks, was ever given forth by Mortals. A Charge too great, and a
Reflection so sharp, that it had need be one of the worst Papers that was ever
writ. Now let us hear what it is.

1. They allow not such to have Dominion in the Church, who exalt themselves
above the Body of Good and Ancient Friends.

Now, what hateful thing did they deliver in this wholesome Christian Saying?
It seems, this Enemy of God, and true Righteousness, would have liked us
better, if Bad Friends had been suffered to exercise the Dominion over the Body
of Good and Ancient Friends. But he starts out thus, That by the Body of Good
and Ancient Friends is meant G. Fox and his Adherents; which sort of
Interpretation well becomes such a Caballistick Writer; for after those
Allowances, I will misrender the best Cause, Pretenses or Actions in the World.
It is an arrant Falsehood: He was then far from them; Neither had they him in
their Eye in doing it, but God's Honor, and the Churches Peace.

2. That such as are not in Unity with the Ministry and Body, have no
Gospel-Authority to be Judges in the Church: And that it is abominable Pride,
when any Particular will not yield TO THE WITNESS OF GOD IN FRIENDS.

But what is the Matter with our Adversary? Has he lost his Wits that he makes
this so Criminal? Are any to be Judges in that Church they have no Unity with?
and amongst the Ministry they deny, or are at distance from? Strange
Contradiction.

But why is it so Heinous, to call such Proud or Self-willed, who resist the
Witness of God in Friends? Certainly the Expressions are sound, unless
Scripture be defective: He that can see any thing in them, that deserves such
hard Words, as this Billings-Gate Rhetorician bestows upon us, has better
Eyes then I.

3ly, But they say, That the Church (without Dissenters) has Power to Determine
Controversies.

Very well; and is it not true? Are the Dissenters from the Church part of the
Church they dissent from? For Shame! Thou Learned, and talk so Idly? Scripture
declares, That God has given the Power of Determination to his Church: All the
World knows, That Dissenters are not of that Church they dissent from;
therefore the Church without Dissenters, has that Power of Determination.

4ly, and 5ly, But they add, That such disapproved Ministers, ought to leave
off Ministering till they are Reconciled to the Church: And if approved
Ministers degenerate to Division, the Church has Authority to deal with them in
the same manner; and that no such Persons Writings should be published with
Consent, etc.

What of all this? He that can call this Imperious, Audaoious, etc. can call
any thing. To allow, that Dissentious Preachers and Writers are by the Church
they dissent from to be approved of in the Course of that Ministry and Writing,
is such a Bedlam, Boundless Piece of Stuff, that none but one, who thinks it
Dangerous to be of any Party, would be the Author of such a Wild Expression.

6ly, But they advise, That such whom the Holy Ghost had made Overseers should
not admit of the Weak to that Trust, nor such as seek not the Good of all:
which All this Disingenuous Wrester interprets, The great Body of George Fox
and his Party; But Men of Wisdom and Moderation will not, I am confident, so
spoil the Text with his Comment.

This is the seventh time in two pages that G. Fox is brought in, as the
Explanation of the Word Body, who was then close Prisoner at Scar-brough, where
no Letter was suffered to come to him, and who never knew of any Paper till
sometime after its being out. O the Implacable Envy of these Men! I have
hitherto waited for that Arrogant, Imperious and Audacious Passage, which might
have raized up our Adversary's Choler, and whetted him to this Degree of
Scolding; but find no worse then what I have transcribed and justified, this
last excepted, and I think it justifies it self: such as seek the Good of all
are certainly Fittest. If he dare tell us his Name, and meet me by Day (as he
can post up his Scurrilous Title-Pages on the City Posts, with Flambeux or
Links, and a Guard by Night) I will any where, and in any sober Auditory
maintain the Truth of all these Particulars, and their clear Consistency with
Scripture and Reason, on whom he has bestowed so many hard Names.

But it is to be lamented of his Cabal, that he should with his Passion and Hate
divulge so much Ignorance, as to cry out, That (he thinks) the Pope himself
has never taken such Power as to determine in Matters of this Nature and
Manner, but in a general Council. Poor Man! Brand us he would one way or other:
Has he never read the Council of Trent, nor considered, among many others, the
Life of Paul the 3d? Is he to be informed of that Controversy long on foot
between the Jesuits and the Doctors of Sorbon, and the Followers of Jansenius?
I thought Councils had sometimes been as mere Ciphers in- Italy, as Parliaments
are in France.

But this Man is as Kind to Elizabeth Barns, one of that Backsliding Spirit, as
he represents me else where Unjust to M. Boreman that was; p. 52, 53.
For though she has Torn the Bible (calling it in my hearing, the Pope's Idol,
the Professors Idol, and the Quakers Idol (an Incredible Thing with J. Faldo
and T. Hicks) and committed more then a small History of shameful Miscarriages
since; yet is he pleased to tell us, That she, seeing the Ministers exalted
themselves, cried out, while R. Farnsworth was preaching, You have whored from
the Lord. Farnsworth (says our Adversary) replied, Thou art a Whore; but for
fear of being too great a Forger, he brings it afterward thus in a
Parenthesis, or the Whore; This Michael Stanclift called Unsavory: For which,
says this Secretary, he was cast out, as calling the Spirit of Truth Unsavory.

Oh the Wretched Work these People make! Will our Adversary justify her
Interruption of R. F. in Preaching, who condemned it in us, who did it after a
more seasonable and justifiable manner a little before? Yes, that he will. But
does he think R. F's Reply Unsavory, and not E. Barns Outcry, who only
returned her own Word to herself? Yes, that he will. Strange! But does he take
E. Barns word, Whore, in a spiritual Sense, as Degenerating; and will he seem
to understand R. F's word, Whore, only in a Common and Proper Acceptance, as a
Dishonest Woman? Yes, that he will. Well, but was it Unsavory so to reply, and
not in E. Barns, so to interrupt and speak? Yes, that it was, implies this
present Apologist, both of himself and M. S. O Monstrous! O Partial! But
perhaps M. S. apprehended that R. F. meant by Whore, an Unclean or Dishonest
Woman in the Sense beforementioned, and then there might have been some Ground
for his Answer; but if M. S. took R. F. in the sense in which he spoak it, to
wit, that she was gone out of her Habitation (that is, the Truth) turned Harlot
in Spirit, and so was become Clamorous (as speaks the Wise Man) and should
notwithstanding call that Unsavory, it was a Sign, that he had more Unity with
that Unclean, Ranting, and Envious Spirit in E. B. then the Friends of Truth,
that generally judged her: And truly in that Case it was time for them to tell
that Angry Old Man their Mind of him; In which, they did but that, which I dare
answer for, before the great and terrible Judge of Heaven and Earth.

Mine Own Defense from the most Considerable Reflections, made by this Libeller
against Me.
Spirit of Alexander the Copper-Smith Rebuked, We require not Men to practice
what they are not convinced of; p. 11.
but we will be well satisfied with any Member's Dispractice of an Orderly
Performance, once Cheerfully owned. For this he calls me a Deep-studied Man,
and the Passage, a Learned Distinction. Let the Learned (says he) vail to W.
Penn; but (as one recalling himself) probably he writ by Revelation.

But what Answer do all these words give? O, but it is all one; for two
Negatives (says he) make an Affirmative in English. What, if there be but one,
for two I can not find? but he at last, like a Dim-sighted Man, has fumbled out
the Matter, as he thinks, to wit, That we require not Men to leave off to
practice what they have practiced, Cujus Contrarium ve^um. For shame! What! no
more Understanding, and yet pretend to write Books? Are not my words expressly
otherwise? But I say again, It Is one thing to introduce a Practice not at first
known, when our Adversaries spoak such Glorious Things of our Faith, Worship,
Order and Ministry, and require the Conformity of any of the Church to it; and
quite another Business, for any of the Church to dispractise, as a Romish
Tradition, and Tradition of Men, or leave off any orderly Custom God brought
his Church first forth in, and which all once owned and were in the Practice
of. But I begin to despair of making this Caballistick Libeller any honester
toward the poor Quakers.

Libel has so little Conscience, as yet to say, That the Quakers allow no
Liberty to Presbyterians, Independents and Baptists, because they are not in
the Power of Truth: p. 13.
but says he, W. P. never wants a Salvo for George, let him say what he will;
he means it, says W. P. not of Outward, but of Inward Liberty, and yet W. P.
knew it was spoken to one who pleaded for Liberty of Conscience about his Hat.

But thou Libeller, was he a Presbyterian, Independent or Baptist? or does this
prove that I would defend G. F. Let him say what he will? Art thou a Man
pretending to Truth or Honesty, that art so Untrue and Dishonest to thy
Opposer? But I know no such thing that it was spoken of a Hat-Man; this I know
from G. F's own Mouth, and what I have frequently heard him say on this
Subject, That the Conscience were within, and nothing could give it Liberty
from the Thraldom of Sin, but the Power of God within. He thus Distinguished
from the common Use of the Word, which is the public Exercise of Conscience;
so that what he meant of the Inward State of the Conscience to God, they
pervert to the outward Exercise of public Worship. Now, because the
Presbyterian, Independent and Baptist generally deny, that ever the Conscience
can be Free or at Liberty from Sin, he queried, What! Liberty to the Presbyter,
etc. answered thus, No Liberty out of the Power of God, Christ Jesus ^ and such
as have Liberty, but not in Christ Jesus, the Power of God, it is in old Adam,
and are to be turned from. No Man that is not eaten up with Prejudice, and a
Party with these Traducers, can think that G. F. ever intended any other
Liberty then what was internal, as the Conscience is. I could desire that both
sides in this very Instance, might be the Measure of the Truth, or Dishonesty
of either; for I am in no one thing of this kind better satisfied, then in the
Wilful Abuse of our Adversaries, and our own Unblemished Innocence. God will
Reward all according to their Works, Amen.

There was a Complaint against me of diverse Lies, page 43.
Calumnies and Abuses, committed by me, in my Book, entitled, The Spirit of
Truth, etc. carried to the Bull and Mouth, to the Body of the Quakers, then
sitting there, by half a Score of Citizens and others, but they were not
admitted.

Answ. It Is true that I writ such a Book, and that they came with such a
Complaint; but a Lie, a Calumny and Abuse, that God will Revenge, if not
Repented of, to call any part or parcel of it either Lies, Calumnies or Abuses.
H. Hedworth was nipt for his Nameless, Scurrilous Letter; Dull and Angry Man!
he could never Answer it, therefore strove how he could Defame its Author.
Notable Controvertists indeed! first write Books against Persons, and instead
of Answering, cry out for Justice, as if I had committed some Enormious Fact in
Confuting his Libel: But what Nonsense is it for People to come to a Body for
Justice, which they so manifestly disown, and these Nameless Authors constantly
vilify? Indeed they are grown so Angry at our honest and quick Defenses, that
some are fallen to Personal Criminations, and others to downright Menacing us
with Judges, Courts of Justices, and Corporal Punishments; A Crew of Petulant
Disputants and Bloody-minded Adversaries. Well, but what Reception found they?
G. Whitehead, says he, told them, He would show it to W. Penn, if they would
set their hands to it. And was not this Reasonable? Should Men Complain and not
Subscribe the Complaint? Such Dark-Lanthorn Acts become not good Men. But it
was shown to Stephen Crisp also, and left signed in his Hands, who told them,
that he had shown it to me, and that I had answered it in Print. And was not
that the best Way, that what came by Print, should go by Print? They know their
Malice is ready, and they think their Wits are so too; and all know, they have
their Presses open: What! must we not defend our selves without being brought
upon Trials? Before what Court did we endeavor to bring them for beginning
with us? The World may by this see, what a Way such Peevish Persons would take
to be uncontroled in their Writings, had they so much Power as they have Pride
and Passion. But this is not all; For upon my Saying in my Winding Sheet that
Anabaptists came to Bull and Mouth to demand Judgment against W. P. for ALL
being in the Place of MANY, and asking, whether they were not well employed; at
which he cries out in the Strain of some Great Don. What Penn, Is this the
Custom of G. Fox's Court to Jeer the Poor Petitioners? No, Libeller, it is
neither G. Fox's Court (as thou scoffingly calls it) nor did I Jeer; nor were
they that came, Petitioners: we neither Scorn nor Belly them, as is falsely
charged upon us. And though there were more particulars; yet that the Printers
putting All instead of Many, was one of them, is granted; and that I never
said, They came with no more: what I did say will sufficiently clear; therefore
this Libeller has both scorned and belied me, and Abused and Jeered G. Fox
etc. which indeed is most times the Work of a concealed Author. Well, but it is
for this, he is pleased to confer upon me the Knighthood of the Post, which I
thus far accept of, that I stood my Post when he ran away; but be it as it
will, his Reeling upon it has broken his own Head against it, whether I would
or no. But one Reason why he so entitules me, is my Swearing the Truth of what
I either know to be False, or do not know to be True. This, I suppose, may
startle every Reader that remembers I am called a Quaker, and have writ against
Swearing: But the Man had a notable Way to come off, in which he is singular.
1. in case our Words go for Oaths. 2ly, in that our Appealing to God is an
Oath, page 49. But before his Charge will reach us, he must first prove, That
we ever broke our Words so solemnly given, as he pretends; and secondly, That
an Appeal to any thing is a Swearing by that unto which the Appeal is made: But
the Man being of late Years turned Scholar, may be forgiven his Ignorance in
Definitions, as I heartily do his Malice.

that since I love not to be called bare William, See Plain Dealing. page 7.
as the Quakers do, but do almost beg my due Title of J. Morse, he thinks it be
equal that he calls me Mr. Penn. But I could wish he would let us know what to
call him, who scarcely studies our Destruction more, then to conceal himself in
compassing it? I am contented to be called by my Name; but this scornful
Libeller, besides his Nicknames, often robbs me of half of it, and that after
this very Passage, which shows how little heed is to be given to his Words. But
because he quotes us a book to prove my Ambition, I will give the Reader an
Account of the matter. Some Letters past betwixt J. M. and J; on his part he
used Thou and Thee, conforming himself to that Language to me, which I knew he
practiced not to other People, I told him it ill became one as Angry with the
Quakers as himself to imitate them in Using that Distinction in Language, which
he otherwise denied, saying. I loved Foxes should appear in their own Skins.
This is the Substance of that Petition, this present Adversary represents me to
have made for Titles of Honor against which he knows I have writ, and blamed
me for so doing; But what twigs will not such drowning Causes and Defenders
catch at, to endeavor to save an irrevocable Life?

Adversary takes high Advantage at, as if he had enough to blow us all away at
one Breath; page 48, 58, 59.
That I should exclaim for Proof of that Passage in the Spirit of the Hat, that
our Ministry was Vicious and Wanton, and that Strumpets were amongst them. And
that John Pennyman was willing, as he publicly declared in Gracious Street, to
answer my Challenge, and that I should come with J. Osgood, J. Claypole and
William Brand, to his House next day for a particular Charge, which (says this
Adversary) he soon drew up and sent to W. Penn, to which (he says) according
to my wonted Modesty, I replied, That we wondered to see so empty an Account,
after so great a Charge publicly exhibited, that before we met about it, we
would know if this were all, he intended; for we would not have our Charge by
piece meal. Thus, says this Libeller, These great Champions evaded, etc.

To all which Reader, take this Faithful Answer. A Challenge I made to prove
that Infamous Charge; and it is as true that J. Pennyman made us believe some
such thing as is said (to say nothing of his insolent Carriage) But this I
boldly affirm, for I have his Letter by me, there was scarce one of these 24
particulars that so much as related to that Infamous Charge, upon which my
Challenge was grounded. To accept my Challenge upon one thing, and to offer to
answer it with another, shows their own Shortness, and not our Cowardness. What
he said to the Purpose, was no more then the Charge it self contained, and that
in a Way of Postscript too; He gave us this general Answer, he could say this,
and he could say that, but he cared not to meddle with such dirty Matters. Is
this to Answer our Challenge? Unjust Men! that in your Nameless Pamphlets would
Rape us of our Reputation, which you have never yet dared to our Faces to
Question. God can best rejoyn to such Replies, and with him we leave both our
Cause and Innocence. Oh, but, says our Adversary, We will come to a Trial with
you before 12. Judges, six of each side, equally disinterested, and in case we
fail of such a Number of Persons, we are willing in case of Difference about
them, to refer the Vmprage to the Lord Major of London, or any Aldermen, or
Common Council Men: But as great Knaves as ye would make us, I hope, ye do not
think us such Fools, as to accept a Challenge from no Body; for such I call an
hidden Author: Let us see, Who he is, and What he would be at? Can any wise Man
think, that, if such Infirmities were, this scurrilous and blindfold Way of
using us, ought to prevail with us? No, as we deny far the greatest part of his
Stories, especially as aggravated, so shall we not debase our Christian
Authority so far, as to be accountable to every Fleering, Scoffing, Busy-Body
Adversary; We can Reprove, and Exhort, and Exercise Church Discipline in the
Power of Christ Jesus, without running to twelve Judges. Let these Nameless and
Shameless Adversaries first go with the Ungodly, Numerous Miscarriages of their
own Parties, and make them Judges in that Respect: We need none to give us
Discerning or Judgment; Christ has furnished us already, and does in all
Occasions. But had these things been all true, as represented, yet not being
Injurious to any of our Adversaries, it no ways concerns them to be
satisfied in our Proceedings; nor are we accountable to them by any Law of God
or Man, upon their Envious Requirings. Runnegades Informations are no Proofs.
Has any Wronged them, they shall be Righted so far as we are able; But have
any slipped, must we therefore divulge it? Or are we therefore no Body of
Christians? Though the Principle be never so perfect, Men are no longer so then
in Comformity to it. The Ancient Christian Churches had the Spirit of Truth;
yet some Failers attended some of her Members for Want of keeping that Watch
they ought, must the whole Church of Christ therefore be defiled or condemned,
and the Eminent, and Laborious Servants of God therefore discredited? Or should
the Apostles have gratified the inquisitive Jews, Heathens or Backsliders,
about any Miscarriages within themselves, who were too apt to charge them with
far more Vile Practice then any instanced in either of these two Malicious
Pamphlets. There is no Church, or Religious Society whatever that thinks it
self obliged to inform every Envious Busy-Body with the Infirmities of any
accounted Members, which is, to publish it in Gath, and tell it in Askalem; Or
the Time, Manners, and Matter of any of her Censures, unless the Facts
themselves have been notorious, or are Injuriuos to those without: Let any of
them give me an Instance to the contrary if they can. It is Prejudice to
Religion it self to divulge Censures beyond the Reach of Offenses, since it is
to divulge the Offense it self; We shall therefore give no such Ill President,
by gratifying the Minds of our Clamorours Adversaries, and some Vagabond
Treacherous Quakers: The Church is neither accountable to her Public Enemies,
nor her Apostate and disowned Friends. J. Pennyman and W. Mucklow, with the
rest of the Corish Company first cry out of Evils committed; and next, against
the Order established to prevent or judge them, The one must be called, The Camp
defiled, and the next, Tyranny or Arbitrary Government. This has been judged
Years since, and they now feed upon. In short, The Libel is hereby answered;
What is Right is Defended, and what is Wrong, was long since, and in the Order
of the Gospel Condemned: And if this will not satisfy, We recommend our Cause
and Persons to God, who is hastening to bring forth that Fatal and Unanswerable
Argument of Astonishing Judgment upon the Inhabitants of the Earth, which will
prove us to be the People which God has gathered by the Power of the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead, who is become out Light and Life,
the Head of our Body, in whom we stand, and for whom we now suffer upon the
Earth, to whom be Glory and Dominion for ever.

G. Fox's being accounted King of the Quakers, and that Lordliness we exercise,
he tells the World, That William Penn did not speak unadvisedly, page 55.
when he writes of his Membership in the Quakers Body. That it is an Honor
more desirable then to be a Companion of Kings.

Reader, his Wrestling lies here; Whereas I, in the Humility of my Soul
preferred, that Living and Spiritual Membership, Almighty God in his Rich Mercy
has given me among this People (whose Portion outwardly has been Suffering of
all sorts) abundantly before the visible Pomp, Grandeur and Pleasure of being
the Companion of Earthly Kings, he turns it to the being a Companion to King G.
Fox, as he mockingly calls him; besides the Absurdity which follows such a
Construction: For what is it but to say, That I prefer my being a Companion of
a King, before being the Companion of Kings, and that of such an one too (if he
must be one) as has not One to a Thousand, if to Ten Thousand, with other
Kings; This is to render me Foolish, and not Ambitious. But I never understood
that Membership in any Body was to have a Principality before, especially as I
placed the Comparison. I am persuaded, if he thought one so easily obtainable,
he would not long decline being of some one Party or other, though now upon his
present Principles, a very Stragler; Every thing and Nothing.

Well, Though what I am is far enough from being either Prince or Prince's
Fellow, in our Adversary's Sense; yet I have found such a Station, in which is
that Peace, which I justly prefer before all Worldly Dominion.

Libeller angryly proceeds; For ought I see W. page 56.
P. calls all of us that are Married Rogues, our Wives Whores, and our Children
Bastards. But the Drift of this Scurrilous Consequence is to bring me and my
Relations under these hateful Epithetes. This is like a Man, that would tell a
Lie of himself to fasten an ill thing upon another; But he will not be thought
to be without a Reason for this Unreasonable Consequence; For he will not call
her, says he, by his, but her Widdow's Name, consequently, she is a Whore, and
her Child a Bastard. Such dirty Names become so dirty a Pamphlet. I administered
no just Occasion for such Reflection: I called her not by that Name to fasten
Dishonesty upon her; for I never intended any thing so gross, but to denote who
she was, being better known in her Singularities by her old, then by her new
Name. But if this Man had traveled no further then Holland it self, he might
have learned, that Women are seldom, if ever, called by their Husbands Name;
Are their Husbands therefore Rogues, their Wives Whores, and their Children
Bastards?

But that he may stoutly vindicate him, and wrake his Displeasure upon me, he
proceeds. Is it because they were not married by the Law of the Land? that is
as strong against himself; therefore the true Reason of his Abusing them, must
be their not being married in the Way of the Quakers.

Answ. Suppose us neither to have been married by the Law of the Land, this
Officious Apologist might have saved the Comparison till I and my Wife had
proved our selves as great Bedlams as they showed themselves at
Merchant-Taylers Hall, to the great Scandal of Religion, the Trouble of Wise
and Sober Men, and the Derision of the Multitude. Is that which was once by you
improved to the Disgrace of the Quakers, now vindicated against them? It seems
it had been ill done in the Quakers, but is very defensible in John Pennyman.
We are contented with the Distinction, and the Apology for it. No Wonder their
Books are printed for Francis Smith the Anabaptist, to vend, who (as I am
informed) was one of the Orderers of the Disorderly Feast, being seen with
several others of that Sect that day as busy among the many Pasties, as he
has been since in selling their Libels; who by the way promised in my hearing,
Never to get Printed, or Sell any Books that contained Personal Reflections:
but Gain with such i^ Godliness. All I can say, is, We are not deceived in him.
There is a certain Harmony amongst them, that very well suits the Cause they
promote.

But he says, I am not singular in Judging so hardly concerning Persons not
married after our Way; For, says he, other Foxonians (a Scoffer) have done the
like in their Writings.

This Author will by no means pass for either Liar or Reviler, who, as in other
Passages, so in this, has proved himself both: We deny not those to be
Marriages, which are not according to our Way, but we should unjustifiably
differ from the Common Way, if we did not believe our own to be most according
to the Example of the Holy Men and Women of old. We countenance no Clandestine
Marriages, as we have Reason to believe John Pennyman's was: for he came not to
Merchant-Taylers Hall to be Married, but to declare he had taken Mary Boreman
to be his Wife, whose Consent was only guessed at by her Silence; but when,
how, and before whom he did it, is known to few, if any: We could ask
Questions, that would put them very hard to it, but we delight not in meddling
with such stuff. To conclude, We therefore call her his Wife, because he
confesses her to be such; but not upon those plain, public and orderly
Proceedings toward God, Relations and Friends, as which are owned and
practiced by us the People of God, called Quakers.

But he has not done with me yet; for he counts it special Malice, that I so
described Mary Pennyman in her Apparel, as if, says he, W. P. were as intimate
with her, as he said to be with Gulielma Mar. But M. Pennyman is better known
for an Honest Woman, then W. P. is for a Man.

There is little Reason that I should believe, that this Man has Courage
enough to question my Honesty to my Face, who was afraid to put his Name to his
Slander. I Envy not M. Pennyman her Honesty, and am very well contented with
mine own; however it may be represented by mine Enemies, who are too Partial to
be Judges, and instead of Confuting, can only Revile me, which shows no great
store of Honesty in this Slanderer. My Reflection upon M. Pennyman's Apparel
was Just and Righteous; I knocked her own Spirit with her own Weapon. Were our
Ministers Degenerated because they wore better Clothes? and was M. Pennyman
more Regenerated in leaving off her mean ones? Yes, for she says, that having
come through her Sorrow, the Outside is little to her. Would not the same
Excuse serve us? It seems it is no hard Matter for her to endure Richer
Apparel, that is, of her own Back, but not upon another's; Ranterism is lodged
under this Liberty, which leads to what she once judged as unbecoming Truth.
But me thinks her higher Seize might allow her Equals and Betters to wear
Camelit, whilst she wears Silk; they are all, I know, good in their Places; but
Hypocritical, Self-Righteous Pretenses are not to pass without Rebuke. But I
cannot imagine, what should induce this Libeller to reflect upon my Intimacy
with Gulielma Mar. and that in such suspected Terms, as if she were another
then the Party he represented me to be married to a little before; for he
presently reflects Dishonesty upon that said Intimacy, telling us at the Tale
of it, That M. P. is better known for Honesty then I am; as if that Intimacy
rendered me as culpable, as if it had happened between M. Pennyman and my self.
It were well, if he had been so cautious elsewhere in telling of Lies, as he
is here in speaking the Truth; But do what we can, the Folks of this Man's
Strain will make that a Ground of Reflection upon a Quaker, which is very
allowable in themselves. He tells you above, I was married, and had a Child,
and a little below that I WAS SAID to be INTIMATE with G. M. that is, with the
Person that is my Wife, as if it were to render a Man suspect to be intimate
with one's own Wife. Whether there be most of Folly expressed, or Slander
intended in this way of Writing, let the Moderate Reader judge. But because the
Reflection as well extends it self to her as to me, I will only say thus much
in her Defense, She needs none: and to be questioned from so foul a Mouth, is a
great Addition to her Credit, but his own Guilt. His Comparison of her with M.
Pennyman, that formal Piece of Hypocrisy, gives but such as know both, the
better Mean to judge of either; The well known Innocence, Meekness and
Faithfulness of the one, more lively setting out the Deceitfulness, Pride and
Treacherous Apostasy of the other.

In short; Who would be well spoken of by such that choose Virtuous Persons to
speak Evil of, and Apostates to Commend? But all this, and many more Rude and
Defaming Speeches must I and mine expect from this Perverse Generation, who
have rewarded us Evil for Good. What Scurrility, Railing, Nicknames, Mocks and
Jeers are vented against us, with other Servants of the Lord? But in all these
things our Eye is to him, for whose sake alone (he is Record) we are become
Marks for Furious Men to shoot their Arrows at; But the Lord is our Pavilion,
and his Strength our Fortress: He covers our Heads in these and all other
Battles (at what time these Creeping Judasses and Envious Libellers lurk and
hide) so that we are not moved. We recommend our selves to his peculiar Care
and Providence, that in his Holy Truth we may live, and rather then relaps, for
it constantly dye, that, whether we Live, or whether we Dye, God may be
Magnified in the E^^th, and that shall be our exceeding great Recompense of
Reward.

And for these Apostates, who once dipped with us into the same Dish, and fed at
the same Table, who have tasted of the Word of God, and the Power of the World
to come; but have betrayed the Spirit of Truth to the Spirit of Delusion in
themselves, and given him and his Motions into the Hands of the False Christian
of this day, to Deride and Scorn, and who have had so little Regard to the
Profession, as to bring it under Reproach, and to the Common Law of Friendship,
as Treacherously to divulge the Secrets of some of their ancient Acqaintants;
and finally, who have endeavored the Disgrace and Hazard of the Lives and
Liberties of some of the Servants of God, because of their Faithful Testimony
against their Apostasy; I must tell tkem, and do in the Counsel of God, Their
Bands shall be made strong, and that Eternal Power at which they strike, reigns
over their Dark, Dividing Envious Spirit, in the Hearts of that People, they
have called by so many Scoffing Names; and more then a Millstone will it be
about their Necks, and the Weight of all these Wicked and Treacherous Doings,
will God bring upon them, in a Day, and an Hour, when they shall not be able to
escape the Rod of his Fury. Ah! Poor Men! What have ye been doing? Verily, your
Damnation slumbers not; and the God, whose Name you have caused to be
blaspheamed amongst the Heathen, will one Day require these things at your
Hands, and Recompense Vengeance in Flames of Fire for all your Hard Speeches
and Sinful Contradictions against the Holy Spirit of Truth, and those who are
led by it. I am not in any Rage, God knows; but I am grieved for you. I could
wish a Place of Repentance might be found, if the Lord saw good, though I
rather fear, your many and grievous Provocations have shut the Door against
you: For as Core and his Associates were outwardly swallowed up of the Earth;
so has the Earthly, Sensual and Devilish Spirit of the World received you into
the Bowels of it, and you are become as really One against our Lord and his
Anointed in this Generation, as ever Pilat, Herod, Judas and the Jews were
combined against Him and His in the Days of his Flesh; Who have strengthened
the Hands of the Mocker and Scoffer; greatened the Envy of Professors, and made
the Atheist glad. But may this Lamentable Course your Disobedient,
Watching-for-Evil, Slippery Backbiting and Exalted Spirit has brought you
into, with the sad Consequence of being hardened therein, be a perpetual
Warning upon the Minds of all, who make Profession of God's Eternal Truth, that
they be not high-minded, but fear; minding their own Conditions, and their
Growth and Increase in the Work of the Lord, that so Love and Unity may be
preserved, and all Watchings for Evil, Distrusts, Surmisings, Emulations, and
whatever makes for Discord or Dis-affection, may be judged out, and the Sowers
of that Spirit that leads thereunto, turned from, and rebukt in the Power and
Authority of God, who is able to keep us and preserve us unto his Heavenly
Kingdom, to whom be Everlasting Glory and Dominion, Amen.

Now, The Just shall live by Faith; but if any Man draw back, my Soul shall
have no Pleasure in him,

Hebr. 10.38.
And because Iniquity shall abound, the Love of many shall wax cold. But he
that shall endure unto the End, the same shall be saved,

Matthew. 24.12, 13.
And THIS GOSPEL of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the World, for a
Witness unto all Nations, and then shall the End come.

Verse 14.
Several Testimonies Of Persons Reflected upon in the Pamphlet before answered;
added in Truth's and their own Defense.
Thomas Brigges 's Testimony.
WHereas in page 22. thou or ye say, The poor Man was transported into such an
Angry Zeal, that I told the Opposers, It was of the Lord, and they Opposed the
Mind of the Lord: But the Man was so far (say thou or ye) from knowing the Mind
of the Lord in that Matter, that he did not know who the Persons were of whom
he spoke.

Ans. The Mind of the Lord I do know, who am in the Truth and walk in it; and
the Testimony that I had to bear for the Truth, and God's Power, which thou art
out of, in which I did then bear testimony in the Blessed Power and Presence of
God, that I felt in that Meeting, That that Marriage was to be permitted among
Friends; and it was permitted among Friends and accomplished.

And whereas thou or ye say, The poor Man was transported into such an Angry
Zeal, that he knew not who the Persons were of whom he spoke.

Ans. I was not Transported out of Truth, but in the Truth; but thou art
Transported out of Truth into a Lie, and into the Enmity, and into Cain's Way,
and into Core's Way, and of thy Father the Devil, who is the Father of Lies:
For I have known Elizabeth Bailey this Nine or Ten Years, as she can witness,
and the Man of lesser years; and I have no Shame upon me of this Matter, but
Shame will come upon thee or ye, whatever ye be, that are gone from the Truth,
and turned from the Truth and Power of God; and the Truth and Power of God, in
which I live, is over all False-Accusers and Liars, and will be your
Condemnation who are found in a Lie and False Accusation, who hide your Names
in the Dark. This Testimony I do bear against all Liars. My Name is

Thomas Brigges.
John Whitehead 's Testimony.
WHereas the Author of the aforesaid Pamphlet does charge that Faithful Servant
of God G. F. with the Opening and Altering a Letter written by me, against my
Consent; I declare, That both he and his Author have Maliciously Slandered G.
F. in that Case; for I ordered W. Kerby by a Letter, wherein that Letter was
Enclosed and UNSEALED, to show it to George Fox, and the rest of the Brethren
in Town, that he or they might dispose of it as they saw a Service for Truth.
And it was written as a Testimony against that Spirit, which would have brought
in the Wearing of the Hat in Prayer, and not to Justify that Unheard of
Practice in the Church; for I ever Condemned it in my Heart, and bore my
Testimony against it, knowing the Spirit of the Lord did not lead into it,
though I had a Tenderness to those who intended well, and had their Simplicity
betrayed by the subtle Workings of that Spirit of Error, which I witnessed
against, and Labored not in Vain to pluck them as Brands out of the Fire of
Contention, that with the Light of Christ they might see whither they were
going; and several did see the Error of their Way, and Returned.

And if any have been so bad, as to Mis-apply my Words, and Harden their own
Hearts through my Tenderness, the Hurt will be their own, and I shall be Clear
in the Day of God, though now I am Evilly Requited by those, wh^ to their own
Hurt give and receive Information against me, (as if I Acted or Lived Wantonly)
like those which said, Come, let us Smite him with the Tongue; Report, and we
will Report it: But my Innocence in that Case, without further Defense, is my
sufficient Refuge from the Slanderous Tongues of these Ungodly Men; And through
the Grace of God, whereby I am taught Sobriety and Godliness in this World, I
can and do say, The Lord forgive them.

John Whitehead.
Isaac Penington 's Testimony.
A brief Account concerning the Queries relating to Keeping on the Hat in time
of public Prayer, mentioned in a Book, called, Tyranny and Hypocrisy
Detected, page 61.

AFter it pleased the Lord to give me a Sense of his precious Truth in the
Inward Parts, and to turn my Mind thereto, I met with great Opposition, both
Inward and Outward; and how hard and long my Travel was, God only fully
knows. Every day the Lord visited me, and the Enemy was daily tempting me,
and I felt the Bitterness of his Temptations, and was often sore wounded
through my not understanding the Appearances of the Lord, and through Unbelief.
God knows, I did earnestly desire to know the Motions of God's Spirit, from
the contrary Movings and Stirrings of the Enemy of my Soul (who moved in the
Reasoning Wisdom, out of the True and pure Simplicity) but was many times
filled with Doubts and Fears, till the Season of the Service was over, and the
Opportunity of keeping out the Enemy was lost. When the Business of the HAT
fell out; I being acquainted with several of them, and looking upon them as
tender to the Lord, and that they did scruple it only in Conscience to him, was
persuaded in my heart they were to be born with, and thought the positive
Testimony against it in others too severe, and that a thing of that Nature was
not to be contended about, but every one left to their Liberty; yea, and
somewhat farther did I go in the Sense of my Heart, as if possibly the Lord
might require such a thing of them. In this Frame of Spirit did I give forth
those Queries, not at all intending (the Lord knows) to strength^n that
Practice thereby, but that no tender thing might be hurt, but the Unity of Life
kept unviolabe, notwithstanding such an Outward Difference: But at that time I
did not discern, that the thing came from the Enemy; nor was I sensible, that
the Ministers of the Truth, and such as stood in God's Light and Authority, and
saw the thing coming from the Enemy, with the Evil, Hurt, and Dangerous
Consequences of it to many, yea, and the Grieving the Church of God, I say, I
did not then see and seriously consider, that they were Watchmen, appointed by
God, and had Discerning given them for the Good of the Body, and that by those
Queries I did weaken the Testimony of God's Spirit through them, as to others,
and give Strength thereby to that Spirit, which had prepared and was drawing
this Snare over many. So soon as ever the Lord showed me this in the inwards of
my Spirit, I smote upon my Thigh, and said, What have I done? and was willing
to take Shame upon my self, and to give Glory to the Lord. How hard it went
with me inwardly, none knows: And he that knows how easy it is to let in a
Snare and Temptation, and to have the inward Eye blinded thereby, will not
wonder, nor think too hardly of me; but his Bowels will rather roll in the
Sense of the Misery I underwent. God knows, I did not mistake willingly: Nay,
truly, The Power was upon me when I wrote those Queries, but I did not
understand the Signification thereof, which would rather have led me then (as
it has since) against that Spirit, which brought up that new, Unprofitable and
Unseemly Practice of keeping on the Hat in time of Public Prayer, in the
Assemblies of God's People.

Now, the making use of this, against the Infallible Teachings of God's Spirit,
and the Infallible Way in which he leads his People, is not Just, True and
Equal. What! Was I never Infallibly led, because the Enemy once blinded my E^e,
and deceived me? Did not the Apostle Peter receive the Infallible Spirit, and
was not he led thereby? And did he not walk in the infallible Way, because once
he did that which was justly to be blamed, and doubtless erred in Judgment
concerning the Practice? (Gal. 2.11.) I do not desire that Men should judge me
Infallible, or hearken to me, as to one Infallible: but this I desire, that I
may always understand and follow the Voice and Guidings of God's Holy Spirit,
and then I am sure I shall always walk in the Certain, Unerring, Infallible
Way (besides which, indeed, there is no safe Way) And I desire also, that
others, with Ears and Eyes opened by the Lord, may hear that Living Sound and
Testimony, which comes from the Spirit of the Lord, in those whom he sends;
that the Gathering may be to him, and the Walking with him in the Spirit of his
Son, in the Light which is Eternal, which ever was, and ever will be
Infallible, which is the Path of the Living, in this Day of the Breaking forth
of God's Pure Power and Love, in the Heats of many; Oh Glory, Oh fresh, living
Praises to his Name forever!

Isaac Penington.
John Crook's Testimony.
Having seen a Pamphlet, entitled, Tyranny and Hypocrisy Detected, in which
is printed a Paper of mine, writ by me about Eleaven or Twelve Years since,
about Gestures and Postures, etc. it is thus in my Heart to write.

MY Desires and Breathings, from my tender years* have been after the Living
God; and since I have tasted of his Goodness and Mercy, I have had a Love for,
and Longing after the Eternal Welfare of all, that in any Measure sought after
him in Truth and Righteousness; knowing the Enemy's Devices to be many and
various, seeking by all Means to devour them; And from a deep Sense of the same
I writ the Paper about Gestures and Postures, etc. many years since; knowing
how busy the great Enemy of Man's Soul was at that juncture of time to draw
out the Minds of some, into the Observation and Innovation of Keeping their
Hats upon their Heads in the time of Prayer, in the public Assemblies of God's
People, hoping that those Lines at that time might have been Successful to stop
that Practice, in some of them at least, and also have allayed any thing in any
others, which might be of tendency to hinder their Information and Recovery.
But it was never in the least in my Heart or Intention, to Encourage or
Strengthen that Spirit and Practice, which my own Judgment and Practice was
against; Neither did I intend any other Liberty then what was in the Lord, and
the Maintaining Love and Unity amongst Brethren. And truly, in these various or
contrary Practices, of some keeping on their Hats, and others putting off their
Hats, my Heart was affected, desiring that the Lord would put a Stop to
whatever tended to Discord, which since has appeared manifestly to arise from
that Spirit, which first brought in that Innovation. Therefore in Good
Conscience I cannot but bear my Testimony against the Author of this scurrilous
Pamphlet, for endeavoring, not only to fasten such a Sense and Imputation upon
me, but also for his Attempt and Industry (what in him lies) to render God's
People Odious, and his ever-blessed Truth Contemptible to the World, and
thereby himself becomes a Murderer of Souls, in perverting the Right Way of the
Lord; for which the God of Heaven will undoubtedly rebuke, both him and all his
Confederates in this wicked Undertaking, and in his time bring them to open
Shame, if they Repent not of this their Wickedness and Sin.

For the Epistle subscribed by Edw. Buroughs, John Perrot, and My Self, it was
writ when we were Prisoners together in Newgate, where John Perrot forbore the
Wearing his Hat, on purpose, as we supposed, to avoid Offense; and also, at
that time be writ a Paper, which was Satisfactory concerning the Matter of the
Hat, and had he made it public at that time, it might have prevented what
afterward befell him: At this very juncture, when there was such a Compliance,
and Hopes of his Recovery, was the forementioned Epistle writ. Now let the
Impatrtial Reader judge, whether the Author of this Envious Libel has showed
either Ingenuity or Humanity, in his recital of the forementioned Papers, to
the End for which he has made them public.

John Crook.
Solomon Eccle's Testimony.
FRIENDS,
I Give my Testimony for the Lord, and for this blessed Truth, this Day. The
Lord is amongst us; and through the Riches of his. Love toward us, has he
made himself known unto us by his Eternal Light, which shines in our Hearts*
And this Light is exceeding precious to all that receive it in the Love of it;
for it is Pure and Divine, and to be admired in all that do believe. The Life
is the Light of Men (Jo. 1.4:) and to know this, is the excelent Knowledge: And
by believivg in this Light and walking in the same, We have Fellowship one with
an other (1 Jo. 1.7) and Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. But some
are gone out from us, and gone from their own Mercies, and are turned against
the Truth, yet pretend to follow the Lamb; They would Exclude us, that the
World might Affect them. Of this sort is John Pennyman, who has sought
Occasion against me and G. F. and has printed, and caused to be printed three
times against me, that never did him hurt; first in his own Pamphlet, next the
Baptists, called, the Spirit of the Hat, 3lY, the Tyranny and Hypocrisy
detected: But in this he has not done any ways like a Servant of the Lord, as
he styles himself; nor a Follower of the Lamb; for he never came to me in a
Brotherly Way, according to Gospel Order, ( Mat. 18.15.) first, in secret by my
self, to show me wherein I had done amiss, if I had done amiss: Nor was he so
Ingenuous to have sent Lodowick Muggleton's Principles with my Challenge to
Barbados, that People might know the Occasion of mY so speaking to Muggleton,
that wicked Blasphemer, who said That the Eternal God died, and lef^ Moses and
Elias to keep Count in Heaven till he rose again; and that the Holy Ghost and
the Spirit died in the Grave: and that God sent him to Curse; And that they
whom he curse are cursed to all Eternity and God cannot revoke it. But Christ
siath, that with God all things are possible, Mat. 19.26.

And now whereas I am falsely accused by John Pennyman the Apostate, who is out
of the Bounds of Christianity as aforesaid, or as a Man, a Neighbor, and
published in Print, as a Blasphemer, behind my Back when I was gone beyond the
Seas, and he sent his Books and Pamphlets to Barbados and to Jamaica and other
places in America after me, to raise up Persecution against me; yet this
Pennyman did never so much as speak to me, before he had published the said
Book: And thus he hunts after my Life, as the Pharisees did after my Lord; and
I know nothing of Reason why this J. P. would have Blood, but being gone from
the Truth in himself, seeks the Life of me who keep in Truth which he is gone
from. Also he has set the Baptists at Work in Barbados, Blood-thirsty Men,
who sought my Life there, who read his Pamphlet before hundreds of People, and
One of these was Tho. Hatchman Baptist Preacher, who is a Protest Enemy to the
Light of Christ Jesus within; for there was one asked him, what that was in him
which showed him his Sin? he said, he did not know; She said, she must know and
she would know; he said, it is the Devil for ought he knew. And what are these
Baptists here, which thou have set at work or given Occasion for it? And what
is Muggleton but an Adversary of Jesus Christ? who boasted that he had cursed
G. F. and said, God nor Christ could not revoke it, in his Book, entitled, a
Looking Glass for G. Fox; which neither J. P nor the Spirit of the Hat, nor
Tyranny and Hypocrisy detected, takes notice of: but they can swallow down
Muggleton's Blasphemy, and will not call that Blasphemy; therefore I challenged
L. Muggleton, who cursed G. F. whom God had blessed: And in my Challenge I told
him he was not worthy to take G. Fox's Name into his Mouth, who was a Prophet
of the Lord indeed, and has been faithful in the Lord's Business from the
Beginning, which I and many other faithful Witnesses know to be true. And there
were Prophets before the Law, in the Law, and after Christ, and now according
to the Promise of God, which have been persecuted, and spoken Ill against, as
thou do now, and Muggleton, who curses them. And farther I said -- it was
said of Christ, he was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the
World knew him not (whom John said he was not) and this I say, is true, and no
Blasphemy (as my words farther concerning G. F. were) so it may be said of this
True Prophet. But what is that I said of him, that may be called Blasphemy?
because I say, it may be said of G. F. a true Prophet, to Muggleton that curses
hin, and the World knows him not, though he is in the World? but the World
knows J. P. the World will not hate him; but Christ says, marvel not if the
World hate you (Jo. 15 18.) for it hated me. I am not of the World? nor you are
of the World. And is not this true Scripture? Is this Blasphemy? And does not
the Apostle say that ye are not of the World? for if you were of the World, the
World would hear you (1 Jo. 4.6.) but because ye are not of the World,
therefore they hear you not? but the World can hear J. Pennyman without any
Hatred, but hate them that are of Christ. And must not all be made like unto
the Son of God? (Heb. 7.3.) and made Conformable to his Image? but if I had
said as the Men of God said (viz.) as Christ is, so are we in this World (Joh.
1.4. 7.) or if I had said, that He that sanctifies and They who are sanctified
they are one (Heb. 2.11.) And if I had said, I live, yet not I, but Christ
lives in me (Gall. 2.20.) Then would not J. P. and the Baptists and the Hat
Spirit and Tyranny and Hypocrisy detected have cried Blasphemy, Blasphemy,
Blasphemous Titles? for I did not say, nor did I ever believe that the World
was made by G. F. but by Christ, who was in the World and the World knew him
not. So I say, it may be said of G. F. the World knows him not though he be in
the World, as was said of Christ, he was in the World, though not of the World,
and the World knew him net. And he said of his Followers, ye are not of the
World as I am not of the World (Jo. 17.16.) And I have chosen you out of the
World, (Jo. 15.19.) And this is called Blasphemy by J. Pennyman and his
Company, who are Haters of Christ and Persecutors of his Members (witness the
Baptist Preacher in Barbados, who said, That which convinced of Sin was the
Devil for ought he knew, before a Man and his Wife, who were People of good
Repute in Barbados. And so People may see what Manner of Men these are who
persecute both in Barbados and here in England) and call Christ's Words
Blasphemy; for I did not say that G. Fox, was Christ, not that the World was
made by G. Fox: but this I do stand to, that he and many others are not of the
World, but Christ has chosen them out of the World; and therefore it may be
said of G. F. and hundreds more, the World knows him not, nor them (Jo. 1.3) as
it does not know Christ; and Christ says the same.

And as for all your Evil Language, as Lucifer and Foxonia^^s etc. we know we
must have all Manner of Evil spoken of us for Christ's sake (Mat. 5.11.) but
can say, the Lord forgive you if it be his Will. But it is much that J.
Pennyman and his Confederates have not published against Christ and his
Apostles, as his Forefathers, did, and cast them Blasphemous Titles, and call
them Lucifers; for Christ calls his Children the Light of the World (Mat.
5.14.) and a City, and the Salt of the Earth, and Sons of God, and the Light in
the Lord, and Elect before the World began (1 Pet. 1.2) and they did not live,
but Christ lived in them. And he bath made us Kings and Priests to God his
Father, and we shall reign upon the Earth (Romans 1.5.) And what, are all these
Blasphemous Titles? And these are higher Titles then I spoke of G. F. I spoke
Christ's Words, as in John 17. I have given them thy Word, and the World hates
them (Mark J. Pennyman and Baptists) because they are not of this World, even
as I am not of the World. Do you call this Blasphemy? Then why do you thus seek
after my Life, and publish Books to set the Magistrates and Ignorant upon me?
but I will stand to my Tesitmony of my Lord and Saviors Words, though you call
his Words Blasphemy; it is which I desire all People to read, and see whether
the Spirit of Christ be the Guide of these Men's Actions, or the Spirit of
Envy; for they that have not the Spirit of Christ are none of his: but the
Spirit of Christ Jesus and of the Lamb, which is in G. F. and the Holy Brethren
(the Heirs of Eternal Life) will fall heavy upon these Men (yea) this Stone
which they reject and set at naught will grind them to Powder, Mat. 21.44. And
farther Christ faith in the same Chapter, I pray not that thou should take
them out of the World, but that thou would keep them from the Evil (Jo. 17.)
and mark J. P. and Baptists, and the Spirit of the Hat, and Hyproscrise and
Tyranny detect. who would tyranize over Christ's Testimony concerning his
Saints, and Followers then and now, as your Forefathers did. In the 16th Verse
Christ says, They are not of the World, even as I am not of the World, etc.
which I keep, the Testimony of Jesus, and know the Truth that he speaks, and do
not give Titles to none of his Saints, to G. F. nor none, beyond what Christ
has spoken; and therefore be ashamed who profess your selves Christians, and
call Christ's Words Blasphemy. And farther Christ says, That they all may be
one, as thou Father art in me, I in thee, that they may be all one in us. And
the Glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be one as thou
Father and I am one, I in them and thou in me, that they may be perfect in One.
And moreover John says in his 1. Epistle Chap. 4. Ye are of God, little
Children, and have overcome; because, Greater is he that is in you, then he
that is in the World. They are of the World, therefore the World hears them.
We are of God, he that knows and hears God, hears us; he that is not of
God hears not us: hereby know we the Spirit of Truth and the Spirit of Error.
Beloved, let us love one another, for Love is of God, and every one that loves
is born of God, and knows God, and he that loves not, knows not God, for
God is Love. And it is very like John the Divine, had such Spirits as L.
Muggleton, J. Pennyman and the Baptists, and other to deal withal as I have
now. And Christ, my Lord, says to his Saints and Apostles, If the World hate
you, you know it hated me before it hated you. If you were of the World, the
World would love its own, but because ye are not of the World, but I have
chosen you out of the World, therefore the World hates you, Jo. 15. Remember
the Words that I said unto you, The Servant is not greater then his Lord, Mat.
40.24. but Christ says, Every one that is Perfect shall be as his Master, Luke
6.40. If they persecute me, they will also persecute you; if they kept not my
sayings, they will not keep yours. Here you may see how that you are not the
Keepers of Christ's Sayings, but the Persecutors of them that do: Ye are my
Friends, says Christ, if you do what I command, etc. and says Christ,
henceforth I call you not Servants, but my Friends; for the Servant knows not
what the Lord does: but I have called you Friends, etc. (Jo. 15.14.) You have
chosen me, but I have chosen you, and have ordained you, etc.

And again you say in your Tyranny and Hypocrisy detected, that I should say,
Blessed be the Man that came out of the North; Blessed be the Womb that bare
him, and the Paps that gave him suck. As to the Former Words I might speak
them; but the Latter Words once applied to Christ, I do not remember I spoke
them: But herein ye show your Malice, for had a Cursing Man, like Muggleton,
come out of the North, such a one would have fitted you, J. Pennyman and
Baptists; but Blessed be God, I can say He is Blessed, for God has Blessed him:
And I can say, He is Blessed, though you do speak Evil (with Muggleton) against
him, and others Curse them whom God has blessed; and Christ does bless his
People, Mat. 5. Glory to the Lord; and you cannot curse that which God has
blessed: and Christ and the Apostles say, Bless and Curse not; and you are
offended for my Obeying Christ's and the Apostles Command, manifesting What
Spirit you are of. And was it not Christ which Saul persecuted? and thou and
you Saul like persecute him now, yea, that true Christ by whom the World was
made, in his Saints and Holy Ones, under a Pretense of following the Lord
faithfully; but it is manifest that it is the Worlds God you have followed, out
of whose Mouth comes forth such Envy and Malice: But it had been better for
thee John Pennyman, and thy Confederates, that a Millstone had been hanged about
thine and their Neks, ( Luke 17.2.) then to have lifted up Tongue or Pen
against God's Truth and People, who art in Muggleton's Spirit, speaking against
the Truth, who art like an old Apostate, twice dead, pluct up by the Roots; if
so then, how can thou grow? but art gone out amongst the Dogs, Vomiting,
Biting and Devouring. And J. Pennyman, thou boasts in some of thy Papers, of
speaking the Word of the Lord; suppose it were so, Balaam had the Word of the
Lord, and after was cut off. And was not Judas and Apostle and Partaker of the
Ministry? And art not thou turned a Judas, and now seekst to betray the
Innocent, yea, to Death, if thou could, according to the Sayings of our Lord
Jesus Christ, A Brother shall betray a Brother to Death (Mat. 10.21.) as thou
have done, as much as in thee lies, like a False Brother, in sending thy Papers
to Barbodoes, where the Baptists and Professors running up and down with them
to the Justices of Peace, who would have tried me for my Life, Blood-thirsty
Men! And one Justice of the Peace said, that if S Eccles were not hanged he
would be hanged for him, their Rage was so high against me, by Reason of thy
Pamphlets: but I stayed at the Bridge Town, where the Court sat, waiting and
looking every day, to be called to my Trial; but the Court broke up, and I was
not called nor meddled withal in the least, and so the Blood-thirsty Baptists
and others their Consederates ( J. Pennyman's Correspondents) mist their Ends.
Though the Baptists themselves did confess to the same things here, which thou
and the Baptists call Blasphemy now; yet it is no marvel, for Christ, our Lord,
was called a Blasphemer, who said that which I testified to, in Jo. 17. And as
for all J. Pennyman's unsavory Speeches in his Abusive Pamphlets, and all
unsavory Words in the Spirit of the Hat and their Tyranny and the Hypocrisy
detected, I can say, the Lord lay them not to their Charge, as knowing our Lord
and Master's Words, They shall speak all manner of Evil of us falsely for his
Names sake.

And whereas you say in page 18. of your Tyran. and Hypocr. detect. That G. F.
did approve of those Words, both before and after they were Printed by S. E.
Which is utterly False, and a Lie of your own forging, for G. F. did not know
what I writ before they came forth; for I must clear the Innocent from this
Forger of Lies; and they that have gotten these Lies from him, daub him, and
boulster him up as an Honest Man, that they might get Lies to Print, and to
make Money of them, and feed themselves with such Lies, of which there are many
in their books, which they have from the Father of them, who is out of the
Truth, and the Saying of the Apostle is come to pass, The Wicked grow worse and
worse, Rev. 21.27. 2 These. 2.12. 2 These. 1.8.
and love to make a Lie; and others make Lies their Refuge; and others are
given up to believe Lies: And take heed that you be not all Damned together,
and the Lord does not render Vengeance from Heaven in Flames of Fire upon you;
for, be sure it will come, if you do not Repent. And do not boast your selves,
you Hat-Men, of the Abilities and Endowments, who are inventing and forging
Lies, and publishing them, like a Ballet-Singer to get a Penny, against the
Innocent, yea, to the taking away their Lives, for all that are sober may see,
it is their Blood you seek after: For Men that have an Esteem of Christianity,
and their own Reputation, would not be sound in such Works and Actions, and be
a Companion among them, nor give Ear to them; but all these things shall work
together for good to them that love God, Romans 8.38. and the Secrets of all
Hearts will God reveal and judge by the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5 For did
ever I or G. F. do any Hurt to J. Pennyman, or ever give him an ill Word, who
thus has abused us, and published these things behind our Backs? But I leave
him to the Great God, the Judge of all, who Jusifies and Clears the Innocent,
and Condemns the Guilty: For the Lord knows, that I, and I believe G. F. had
nothing but Good Will for his Eternal Good, and Prosperity inwardly and
outwardlv, though he has thus ill requited us, who never spoke a Syllable to me
before he printed against me; neither have I seen him, nor know not where to
find him since I came to England: nor never spoke he to G. F. as I understand,
although I know, G. F. sent for him, and he would not come. But, as I said,
before, I will leave all to the Righteous Judge who will render to every Man a
Reward according to his Words and Works. And my Desire is, That all sober
People might not feed upon Lies, published by Apostates and Back-sliders, nor
lend their Ear to them, but to Christ Jesus; and feed upon him, the Heavenly
Bread, that comes down from Heaven, by which they may have Life. But truly, as
the Scripture says, The Children of this World are Wiser in their Generation
then the Children of the Kingdom, Luke 16.8 For I had challenged L. Muggleton,
and the Papists, and the Baptists, to Fast with them Seven Days and Seven
Nights, not to ^at nor to Drink, for a Trial of their Faith, which was a Sober
thing; for Fasting and Watching are Ordinances of God: But L. Muggleton and the
Baptists have agreed with J. Pennyman, to get something against S. E. to save
their Bellies; and so J. Pennyman, as a Captain of Cowards, endeavors to
strenghthen the Enemies of God against me behind my Back; but he should first
have answered my Challenge in Muggleton's behalf; but contrary-wise, he sends
to Barbados, a piece of my Paper, writ to that Cursing Man, when he knew I was
out of his reach. Ah poor Man! the Lord forgive thee, for truly I do with all
my Heart, and also all the Baptists here and beyond Sea: And I desire also with
all my Soul, that if it were the Will of God, Poor J Pennyman might yet find a
Place of Repentance, if his Day he not over.

The 24th of the 7th Month, 1673 S. E.

James Claypole 's Testimony.
HAving perused a Pamphlet, called, Tyranny and Hypocrisy Detected, etc. I
find it a very Envious, Reproachful Piece, and that the secret Design of the
common Enemy in the Authors, and their Informers and Abettors, is to root out
Truth and Righteousness from the Earth, and to bring People into Atheism, by
endeavoring to render some of the People of God, called Quakers, guilty of the
foulest Evils acted by the Sons of Men, and the rest of them (mentioning those
they account the Leaders and Chiefest amongst them) to be Connivers at, and
Coverers of such Evils, as if they did secretly allow thereof; and that their
preaching up a Good Life was but a Decoy to gain Proselytes: and not only so,
but rendering the Righteous Principle of Christ Jesus, which is the True Guide,
the Way and the Life, which God has revealed in the Hearts of Thousands, to be
Fallible, Insufficient, Uncertain, or but a pretended Guide, because some that
have professed it have walked contrary thereunto; whereby it is evident that the
God of this World has blinded the Eye of their Minds, and that through Envy,
Malice and Desire of Revenge their Understandings are become darkened, that
they cannot discern things that differ, but in Conclusion jumble all together,
Just and Unjust, he that Loves and he that Hates a Lie; the Motions of God and
of the Devil being in Enmity against that in themselves, which makes the
Separation, and gives the Discerning between the Precious and the Vile; And so
these Judasses, some whereof have been almost accounted as Disciples, have
endeavored, as much as in them lies, to betray the Just into the Hands of
Sinners, and to cause the Truth of God to be Evil-spoken of, by those that
watch for Iniquity, and hate to be Reformed. And for our own Vindication from
these Reproaches, we do appeal to God, who knows the Secrets of all Hearts,
That we do not Own or Countenance any Iniquity in our selves, or others; but
according to our Dotrine and Principles, do desire and endeavor, in that
Ability that God has given us, To approve our selves in all-things in
Sincerity and Vprightness both to God and Man; and that we had rather Dye
outwardly, then sin against God, wherein we have been tried these many years,
God's Witness in the Hearts of our Enemies will plead for us.

And farther; As to the part, which does more immediately concern me, wherein I
am brought in as an Hypocrite, and John Boulton as a Tyrant: He, for Reproving
an Uncomely Fashion and Invention; and my self, for Denying that in Public
which in Private I Owned, I answered it in a former Book, and it might have
been sufficient to Reasonable Men; For, as I then said, I did not Deny what I
had spoke at the former Meeting, but being Mis-understood, I Explained it,
which gave Satisfaction: We pretend not to be above Mis-hearings and
Mis-apprehensions, though above Wilful Evils. Its well they have no greater
Crime to accuse me of, who are so Envious as to make use of such Trifling,
Inconsiderable Matters as this to Discredit us. Well, this I have further to
say concerning the siad book, That Hell has opened her Mouth, and the Dragon
has cast out Floods against the Church, that is coming out of the Wilderness,
which the Lord our God is building upon the Rock Christ Jesus, and the Gates of
Hell shall never prevail against it: And many has the Lord established upon
this Rock, who are Inhabitants thereof, and can sing for Joy, in the midst of
all Trials and Excersises, Storms and Tempests, knowing that our Foundation
stands sure; and as there we abide, we can never be moved, having Salvation for
Walls and Bulworks, and being kept as in the Munition of Rocks, where our Bread
is sure, and our Waters never fall; Praises to the Lord forever.

James Claypoole.
John Osgood's Testimony.
I Having seen a Pamphlet, called, Tyranny and Hypocrisy Detected, in which my
Name is inferred in page 17. saying, That whilst I in general terms deny all, I
do in particular deny nothing at all: I say, My Answer stated the Matter truly
as it was, and many are the yet Witnesses that know it to be so; and to J. P.
at his House, it was so proved to be, since the said Answer was printed. And as
to his Query in page 28. What is become of the Integrity of J. O. that he
should put his Name among such Men as these? I answer; As for these Men, I
believe they would not affirm a thing with Pen or Toungue that they knew to be
Untrue, as this Pamphlet basely insinuates; nor did I so much as in the least
know of their Answer, till I saw it printed. And as for my Integrity, it is
known unto the Lord, and to him have I approved my self in faithfulness, even
in Reproving the Extravagancies of him, that I believe was the Grand Informer
to him or them that made this Pamphlet, and Sorrows many, the Lord knows, I
have, and had for him, and, oh that he had not been above Counsel! then had he
not been found Running the Race of Core, nor Furnishing with Spears the Goliahs
of Gath, that this day Defy the Host of the Living God. How have they made the
Haerts of the Uncircumcised Glad? How does Askalon Rejoice, and Atheism say,
Ah! ha! thus would we have it? How is this Pamphlet furnished with Scoffs, as
Foxonians, King Fox, and Ironically, Oh Innocent, Holy, Harmless People! Well,
the Righteous, Terrible, Dreadful God will Avenge for these things. What,
thought the Apostle said, There where those things amongst the Corinthians,
that were not so much as to be named among the Heathens; what must be their
Portion, that unto the Heathens made known this, and thereby the God of the
Christians Blaspheamed, and the Way of Truth Reproached, as it is at this day?
But with this sad Difference, some of them, that now are Agents in this Work,
have Tasted of, and Witnessed unto theat Immortal and heavenly Power, that was
and is manifest amongst us, and have gone from it, and given heed to Fables;
Being Heady and High-minded, they have stumbled, and caused others to stumble;
they have Offended, and treasured up the Offenses of others unto their own Hurt.

John Osgood.
William Gosnell 's Testimony.
This is my Faithful Testimony for God, his Truth, and People, and the Clearing
of mine own Conscience: As also, given forth for Information of the Sober
Enquirer, and for'Condemnation of J. P. and his Confederates, against whose
Works I am, and hope shall terminate my days in Judgment against that Spirit
they serve; Warning all to take heed of them, who tender the Good of their
Souls, knowing their Ways and Works lead unto Death, by Means whereof the Way
of Truth is Evil-spoken, to the Dishonor of God, and Strengthening of the
Wicked in their Doings.

FOr that my Soul loves the Truth, and such who are the Faithful Servants
thereof, I do therefore reckon my self concerned (with my Brethren) as also for
their sakes, who have any Desires in their Hearts after the Way of Truth; as it
is by a Remnant, Despised of Men, in this our Day made known and testified
unto, to write something in Answer to what is charged against me in a Libel,
called, TYRANNY AND HYPOCRISY DETECTED; which to the truly Sober and
Unprejudiced Reader, can be accounted nothing less then impious Railing, and
from an Ishmaelitish Spirit, and from the Enemy of all Good, in his
Instruments, manifested against such who are Resisters of Tyrrany, and in the
Uprightness of their Hearts Denyers of Hypocrise, and in that give my Testimony
against the said Pamphlet; believing that whosoever is the Author thereof; or
Contributory thereto, shall receive of the Lord our God, the Just Judge of all
(who has pleaded, and will plead the Cause of his Truth and People) the just
Recompense of Reward, according as their Work has been; which unto them who
walk in the Light, are seen to be Evil, and They, the Workers thereof, bound in
Chains of Darkness, reserved to the Judgment of the Great Day: nevertheless, my
Soul's Desire is (if possible) the may find a place for Repentance.

In Page 45. called, Tyranny and Hypocrisy Detected, are these words, When I
first saw Gosnell' s Name in the Spirit of Alexander, I expected nothing less
then a Denial of what is related to have been said by G. F. viz. Friends,
Although I have not told it you, I do now declare, That I have Power to Bind
and to Loose whom I please.

In that thou did nothing less then expect a Denial, etc. does manifest what
Spirit thou art of, viz. That which watches and waits for Evil, and
expects nothing less: Why did thou not set thy Name to that which thou have
heaped up, that so we might have known there, and made some Enquiry after thee?
Its written, That Fear surprizeth the Hypocrite: Were thy Works such as would
bring Honor to thee, it may be, we might have had thy Name at large; but thy
Works are manifest to be Evil, and of the Flesh, as are Railings, Envious and
Scoffing Speeches, Slanders and Evil Suggestions: So, though thou concealest
thy Name, yet by, thy Fruits thou art manifested to be an Evil Tree; For an
Evil Tree brings forth Evil Fruit. And why thou should Expect a Denial
whilst, say thou, it seems is true, let the Sober judge. And so thou go
on, as one of Ishmael's Brood, with a Scoff, saying, How can it be otherwise,
that so Great a King and Prophet as G. F. should not have Power to Bind and
Loose? That there is a Power to Bind and to Loose now (as was in days past) is
evident from that Saying of Christ, Him whose Sins ye Bind on Earth, are Bound
also in Heaven: And did not the Disciples of Christ pray for Forgiveness from
their Father, which was in Heaven, as they FORGAVE them who trespassed against
them? And were not they exhorted, To FORGIVE one another, as God, for Christ's
sake, forgave them? So that had thou not been, with J. P. filled with the
Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity, thou would not surely have
writ as on that wise, nor made such loud Cavilings at that which the wise in
Heart know to have a Consistency with Truth, and is agreeable to the Testimony
of Holy Men, who spoak as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, out of whose
Practice thou art, and thy Contributories, whose Tongues are your own, and
therewith speak to the Vilifying of such whose Habitation is in Heaven: But
they, who served the Lord in their Generation, said, Our Bodies are not our
own; so not our Tongues: And said one, Lord open thou my Mouth, and my Tongue
shall speak of thy Praise. Have thou, or thy Confederates, who have joined hand
in hand together, spoak, or writ, or printed ought in either of your Libels
Spir. Hat. Tyran. Hyp. Detect.
that has redounded to the Praise of God? Has not their Tendency been
otherwise, even to speak Evil of Dignities; and to write of things which for no
Good, but Hurt to Mankind are produced?

In Vain, in vain are you found Fighters against the Lord, his Truth and
Pepple; for it Prospers, it Increases, it Grows in the Hearts of many; Glory to
God for evermore. And that John Pennyman should, as he has done, creep into
the Bosoms of some, who have been more open to him, then he has made good use
of, and that in a time, when he himself both in Word and Deed showed himself a
Friend to Truth, and us also (attending our Meetings, both Public and Private,
not as a Disturber, but Member of us) and, now thus basely to Betray and
Bespatter, is Unworthy with a Witness: His Works of late have manifested the
Contrary; else, how durst he do as he has done, seek all Occasion against
them, who have and still do tender his Good, and the Redemption of his Soul;
which some have, as I may say, laid down, and yet could, their Lives, for his
Restoration. Oh, that he truly saw how he has caused the Heathen to
Blaspheam, and some to say in their Hearts, Sure there is no God no True
Religion nor Worship; and how unto others, who it may be, had some Inclinations
in their Hearts toward God and Godliness, has he given Occasion of Stumbling;
and unto Professors, who have and do Watch for our Haulting, that so they may
Impare the Honor of Truth, not only to their own, but to others Hurt also,
whose Blood he stands guilty of before the Lord. I write not these things, but
to the End that he may be Wise; for Offenses have come through him, and Woe from
the Lord is unto him, unless he Repent.

John Pennyman being at a Meeting appointed for Service to our Suffering
Friends, which we were then to inspect, and some particular Matters were then
in Debate, how such of our Friends might be Relieved, who were ^^concerned in
the Case of Tithes; and somewhat was proposed, and an Instance given of one
Country Friend, who had observed some Directions from R. C. in which afterward
there was not (in the Friend) through Satisfaction; pretty much time was spent
about it, and words spoak by S. N. which G. F. and some others did reckon of
Disservice to the Meeting, as also of Hurtful Consequence to our Friends
Suffering in some Cases; upon which G. F. was very much Grieved, and fervently
stirred up to lay the Charge of that Service upon S. N. also to blame his
Reflections upon R. C. which he doing with Fervency of Spirit, a Fear or
Apprehension entered me, lest (as J. P. has carried it to the World) G. F.
should have struck him; and going home, I spoke to S. N. of some Passages which
past at that Meeting; J. P. being with us, and uttered my Thoughts or Fears in
that Respect; adding at the same time, that the Weight of Friends Sufferings
was much upon G. F. some whereof pretty Eminent being then before us, and
therefore did impute it to his Zeal for their Relief; and so much the more, by
how much any thing was offered by S. N. to the Hurt of the Meeting, and
Prejudice, as was thought, to the Sufferers: some time after G. F. hearing of
it, told me between himself and me, that I should not have said so, and has
often declared, he never had any such Thought; I then told him, I was sorry I
had said so, or feared so (and indeed so I was) others also being there
present, I mean at the Meeting about Sufferings, signifying they had no such
Apprehension, neither did they believe had I any Cause to apprehend or fear any
such thing.

But to proceed to the other Charge of Binding and Loosing whom he pleased.
More then once or twice as (I remember) J. P. had been with me to know if the
Words were whom I pleased: I told him at all times, I could not say nor
remember those words, whom I pleased; yet to bring Reproach to G. F. as also to
sow Discord among Brethren, as much as in him lies, has suggested it to the
World, and that after 'twas buried, and at a Meeting with some Friends,
together with G. F. before he went beyond Sea; for it was all our Desires, that
what was amiss might be cast out, declaring then, as before, I was sorry I
should apprehend or fear any such thing of G. F. Now that J. Pennyman should so
unworthily, and in Enmity and Prejudice to G. F. (whom he has ill requited, in
that he has rendered Evil for Good, and to emit, carried into the World, not
only by Word, but also by Print, things privately and amicably mentioned, upon
Occasion, when he was not as now he is (an open Opposers of Truth and Friends)
so Disingennous, nay Treacherous, that Heathens would blush at it; he should
have let this have dyed with his Sincerity to us, and not have made use of that
against us in his Apostasy, which nothing but my Regard to his Sincerity could
have drawn from me; Is this one of thy higher Seize? O John! these Doings
will seize upon thee in God's Time.

How is John Pennyman changed from what he was? With what, great Readiness of
Mind, and Ardency of Spirit did he himself judge with Sowers of Division, and
that Spirit by which he was captivated, which led him to the keeping on his
Head his Hat in the times of Friends Prayer to God? and with what Show of
Satisfaction and Joy of Soul in the Hearing of many Fiends, in which they also
were refreshed did he once and again express, for that he blessed the Lord he
was broke off from that Spirit which hindered the Growth of Truth in his own
particular, which he signified caused the Love of Brethreng to wax cold, and a
manifes Decay of that that was good, in which our Joy, Rest and Peace daily
abound. In solemn Meetings, with Tears, I believe unfeigned, and true
Contrition of Spirit, as many are Witnesses, gave Judgment against that Spirit
which led into Separation, through means of which he as; well as others had
suffered loss, as with respect to the Good Presence of the Lord, in the daily
Sense thereof, as (before that Spirit entered) was enjoyed; and with what
Openness of Heart did we even in the first Love, raised by the Power of the
Lord, in which alone does our Unity stand, did we embrace one another, and met
often with one another to our mutual Joy and Refreshment: But now is he not found
beating of those, with whom he was a Fellow Servants, and taking of them by the
Throat, and (as I may say) speaking all manner of Evil against them, even them,
who in a Sense have laid down, and can, their Lives to save him? Surely, he who
rewards Evil for Good, Evil will not, whilst in that Spirit, depart from his
House. And how has Enmity entered him in that, that which is a Strength, a Joy
and a Comfort to us, Vexations to him, to wit, to see Brethren together in the
pure Truth, in that which neither speaks nor thinks Evil, to dwell, and so
seek one another's Good, are kindly affectioned one to the other, serving one
another with Love.

And so, though by Complying with G. F. as the Author of, or Assistent to that
Wicked Heap of Stuff, which is for the Fire, scoffingly says, He is now become
a Preacher: To Comply with Truth, and such whose Labor and Service is for its
Promotion, is my Joy, and true Satisfaction, and Quiet to my Soul, and therein,
as the Lord shall open my Mouth, and minister Occasion, I shall preach down
their Pernicious and Soul-hurting Practices; desiring to be found, to the End
of my Days, a Lover of that which is Good, and in it a Witness against that
which is Evil, though found in those who have been my Familiars, for whose sake
I have not suffered a little.

William Gosnell.
Henry Stout's Testimony.
FIrst, They Excuse me with the other two Friends, and within few lines
Contradict their own Excuse, in saying, H. S. being rebuked, he Acknowledged
the Paper, but there was no such in it. Why could they not as well have said by
whom he was rebuked? But this is like some of the rest of their Matter, and
would fain cover it, if any could: So that the Answer already is over their
Heads, as to the Paper. To this I further answer. That to the best of my
Remembrance, I never saw that Paper signed by the Ele^ven at Hartford, in my
Life; about two Months since I saw it at London and I do affirm, there is no
such Tendency in it, as asserted in the Spirit of the Hat, That there is any
Admission in it for any Men or Body, to oppose the Light; but it is possible; to
this purpose may be found in it, That if any have any thing upon them, or are
moved to write, that they lay it before the Body, that so the Body may be
satisfied, that they are indeed moved by the Light, or Spirit, which is one;
and then the Body cannot but have Unity, because all that are in the Light are
in Unity, and One in All; and this for the Prevention of all False Motions, and
those that say they are Jews, and are not; for Greater is the Wisdom of him who
is amongst his People, then the Wisdom of Solomon, who give the true Bearer her
Child, though the Harlot would have had it divided.

But what is the Matter with you Professors, that you are working in such
Muddle, so many years old, as confessed in the Pamphlet? Is the Spirit of your
Brethren, the Pharisees, so far entered you, that you are acting your part, as
they of old did, who joined with an Apostate, a Traitor, a Judas, endeavoring,
if it had been possible, to have destroyed the Heir, Christ Jesus, Root and
Branch, who did outwardly put him to Death? Read your selves; Are not you
joined with an Apostate or Apostates, in all manner of Lies and Slanders? as
instance John Faldo and Thomas Hicks, which I fear have done it against their
grow Knowledge; especially Thou T. H. who say in thy first Dialogue, That our
Sufferings may be to satisfy our Lust. Will any one, but who are filled with
Enmity like thy self, thus conclude, that Lying in Nasty Holes and Prisons, and
Losing our Estates and Lives, Limbs and Banishment, is to satisfy our Lust?
Well Thomas, my Judgment of these is, Thou will never satisfy thine in that
manner; but these are both answered already, who I desire may come to
Repentance, and find Mercy.

But what are you doing, Professors, if you should with your Assistents, the
Apostates, accomplish your Brethren Cruelty from New England? Our Blood would
be upon you, and your Children; For your Works which you have lately done have
the very Tendency, though I am persuaded there are some amongst you hate the
very Thoughts of such a thing; yet I question not but some of your Leaders, do
very much desire it, or else they would never hazard the very Loss of their own
Souls in Lies and Slanders against us; if they believe them to be Sins. Now
consider what is the Cause of this Great Difference between us and the
Professors: Certainly it is about Worshipping of God; and the Occasion of the
Enmity is the same as was in days past; for the first Worshippers that we read
of, the Enmity, arose in him whose Sacrifice was not accepted with God.
Professors, read your selves, and the Cause of your Enmity: for those who are
accepted with the Lord, there is no Cause of Enmity; but Pity arises in their
Hearts toward those who are not accepted and so Christ when he came, it was
not to destroy Men's Lives, but his Gospel was, Peace on Earth, and Good Will
toward all Men; but Enmity is from the Devil, and he the Father of it.

So for your whole Work, let it return from whence it came, even the Bottomless
Pit. And whether the Matter in it be True or False, I am a Stranger to it: The
Intent is Wicked, and I do not much look what those have been, who are chiefly
named in Your Pamphlets, by reason of Tender Age in the Truth, or otherwise;
but now I know them to be Men of Integrity, and Fearing God, which is
Satisfation to me: and so its a Sign, that when Men grow in Grace, and are
better, they are the Beloved of God, to such Grace is not in Vain; but when Men
grow Worse and Worse, and lose their Tenderness once they had, and abound in
Pride and Envy, this is an Evident Token of Perditon, notwithstanding their
pretended Election; for it is not Words only God looks for, but Fruit from a
Clean Heart.

Henry Stout.
Rebecca Travese's Testimony.
A Testimony in the Spirit of Love, against that Malicious Spirit that in
certain Apostates and their Abettors exercises Tyranny and Hypocrisy, every
where.

TO you, Friends, is my Love, who are in the Enquirings after the Lord and his
Truth, that you may come to be Partakers of the same Inheritance of Life and
Glory that many are made Witnesses of through Believing: And the Power thereof
we cannot but testify of, as by the Effectual Working and Operation in our
Hearts, we feel, not only to set us free from that which imbondaged us in times
past as well as others, but has brought us to the Liberty of the Seed of God,
which above and before all, seeks the Glory of God; and this has enriched us
with Grace and enduring Mercy, whereby we feel all our Iniquities taken away,
and Transgressions blotted out, in and for the Name and Power of Christ, which
in us is become the sure Hope of endless Glory; and this has made us, Us, That
hold the Faith, willing to proclaim the good Will of God unto all, that others
with us might come to set down in the Heavenly Places, with Christ, our alone
Head and Life, and be delivered from those Runnings, Strivings, and Inventions,
Tossings, Tumblings and Turmilings, that all Image-Makers are in, not being
possible to find Rest, but in and by the Light, which from the Rest comes and
to the Rest gathers, into which many are entered, and cannot be disturbed or
made afraid, and it is Everlasting: And the Satisfaction and Peace of this true
and abiding Love rests upon us, and constreins us, to call and invite them afar
off, as those near, to come freely to the Fountain of Living Water, without
Money and without Price; For a Remnant are come to know, that there is, and
shall be a daily adding of them to us that shall be saved; for the Work of the
Lord must prosper, notwithstanding all the Force and Subtility of them that
contrive against it.

The Building must be finished, all things are prepared and preparing
thereunto, and the House of the Lord shall be established upon the Top of that
that resists it; and the Foundation is already laid sure and steady, and
every Stone hewn and fitted thereto, is precious; and the Command of our King,
none can reverse, for he is Almighty, and works according to the Counsel of his
own Will; it is Counsel indeed, close hid from all Sorts of Workers in the dark:
So they fret and are angry, the Heathen rage; but theirs is a Fury that
consumes it self, and soon goes out, if not added to by new Fewil. And these of
all Sorts, have manned their Weapons to the utmost, and done what ever they can
to hinder the Increase of this Work; yet these are not the worst Enemies, for
it is the People that imagine vainly, that ever withstood the Appearance of God
in the World (search the Scriptures) Christ came unto his own, them that
professed a Waiting for him, and they rejected him, they crucified him; yea, he
that walked with Christ, and sometimes cried, Hail Master, he, and these
Pretenders are the Betrayers in all Generations, and Hinderers of the Work of
the Lord; here the Power of Darkness in all Generations wrought, mind
Scriptures through, all that desire to be kept from resisting the Just and Holy
One. Though many Enemies, Nations and People; Withstood the Servant of the Lord
Moses, in his great Work whereunto God had called him; yet none did like
Mischief as that gainsaying Spirit in Korah, Dathan and Abiram; and Balaam
that was for and against Israel, who had been a Prophet, and loving the Wages
of Unrighteousness, becomes a Tempter, and lays the Snare, that they might Sin
against God, and be divided from The Blessing: And so mind who hindered the
Building of the Temple of the Lord in the time that Deliverance drew nigh; when
the great and noble Travil of the Holy Servants of the Lord that were Zealous
for the Restoring of the Captivated to their former Liberties and Rights in the
Place that then was owned and appointed of the Lord, and ever to be remembered,
was and is the Courage, Boldness and Constant Watchfulness of those Worthies,
Ezra, Nehemiah and Zerubabel, that discerned the Falseness and Treachery of
those pretending Friends, that did not only seem to approve their Works, and
offer to build the House of the Lord, but to assist them, saying, Let us build
with you, for we seek your God as you do, and that they had done it for a long
time; but they being discerned and refused by Zerubabel and the other Worthies
of Israel, then they manifested themselves to be Hinderers of the Work of God,
and hired Counselors against them to frustrate their Purpose, whose Work a
little before they pretended to be assistent to, and after write against them
with great Accusasations, Ezra the 4th. and the 14th. and Nehemiah the 4th and
the 1st. Sambalet and Tobiah they mocked, taunted and scoffed to make
ridiculous and little Worth the then Endeavors and good Orders, that these
Noble Men put in Practice for the Restoring of the House of God. And so to you,
Friends, to whom my mind is directed that are weak in the Faith, I writ, that
you may be warned, that you may be strengthened against this Treacherous
Spirit: Do not these Scriptures run parallel with them that have brought forth
such Accusations, whether false or true? Is not their End one who have joined
with, and taken Counsel of such, whom they know were and are contrary to the
People and Truth, that they formerly seemed to be of and for, to make Odious
and Ridiculous in the Sight of all Men, with their Orders? And though some of
them under Pretense did act with them, and would have Lorded it as much as any,
until discerned and dealt with for their Unorderly Practice, and
Unsubjectedness to them that in the Spirit serve the Lord continually, So
Friends, This is it I would have you observe in all things and at all times,
that that Spirit that professes Truth and talks of Truth, and seems for it,
and yet is against it, is not of God, though it seems so; for here first
sprang, and is continued that monstrous, Antichristian Brood, that has filled
the Earth with Darkness, Blood and Cruelty, and with these shall those be
judged, that in this our Day have given and taken Offenses, to lay Stumblings
in the Way of the Simple; But Glorified be the Power that has broke forth,
before which they must all fly; yet here and there a few crawle up to use their
Strength against the Increase of his Power, the Word of whose Mouth shall
destroy them, and the Brightness of his Coming shall utterly consume them: for
they are such of whom the Apostle complained, had done him much Wrong; for they
hindered as much as in them lay the Purpose of the Lord in the Earth. And this
has been the Work of many in this our Day of God's Appearance, from the
beginning thereof, and by such as came to see the Glory of Truth, and heard
gladly for a Season, as they that receive the Seed in the high way, where it
was either lost, or carried away by the Fowls of the Air: and these could never
fell All for the Kingdom, nor take up the daily Cross, so mist the Life, and
came to be carried about with Winds, and missing of the Righteousness of God,
have gone about to establish their own, and blindly Zealous, have watched
others Vineyards, and neglected their own; so Withering and Fruitlesness has
come upon them, until they are twice dead. These were and are known by their
Murmurings and Complainings, yet listed up in their Minds, by their own
Righteousness, which as sure as God's Righteousness lays low, and makes to
grow in Love; so Man's begets Envy and watches for Evil, and feeds upon it,
and is filled with it: So as they living in Love can think no Evil; so they out
of it can imagine no good of them, from whom by Pride and Envy they are
divided, and so exercising their Minds in the Evil. Never did hungry Beasts
more earnestly seek their Prey to devour it, then these Back-sliders have and
do watch, to catch the Miscarriages of any such as do profess the Faith; and if
they can find a little, they make it a great deal by Whisperings and
Back-bitings, and large Intimations, more by much then the Substance, and in
all pretending to be in an Hatred of Evil and to cry to others, Stand farther
off, for we are Holyer then these: So after a doing some years Threatenings to
make the Lord's People Odious in what they would publish and bring forth; and
having done what they can to the utmost that way, and that not accomplishing
their End, now they lay their Stress on the severe Government of the Quakers,
which some of these Revolters once knew was set up in the Wisdom of God, to
hinder such Evils as they were used to speak against, and to reform, and gather
nearer unto the Truth of God; but this Order being like to smite some of them,
they strike hard at those that are exercised therein, their End being in all to
present the People of the Lord, and their Way, Worthless and Bad, that so they
themselves might not be so manifest in the Forsaking and Withstanding the Good
Way of the Lord, and that they might shut up that Kingdom to others, into which
they themselves would not enter. And tha^ to all they may be manifest, their
Works declare them; for every Lie is of the Devil: and how many they have
published in their late Books of Darkness, to which they have been ashamed to
join a Name, can I tell, nor am I covetous to know; for, who in the Faith
stands wars not with Flesh and Blood, but with Spiritual Wickedness in High
Places; and I have had, and have as sensible a Feeling of that Spirit from
whence it comes, and whither it must go, that brought forth that called, the
Spirit of the Hat, and that called, Tyranny and Hypocrisy Detected, or an
Answer to Alexander the Copper-Smith; and it is the same that the Prophet Micha
had a Sight of, that Lying Spirit, which went into the Mouths of the Seduced
Prophets: and though I never read the last of these Pamphlets, in that my time
not being like to be long on Earth, I was not willing to Mis-spend so much of
it; but one reading the Title to me, a Renewed Strength I found against that
Spirit that brought it forth, and that it did with Re-doubled Strength strike
at W. P. as one whose Pen had hit them; and had he never writ a Word, he
judges them in Denying the Glory of this World, the Vain Hope of which has
bewitched some of them to draw back: And another read to me that Lie made of me
in the last of these two Books, which I must speak something to that little
part that was read to me of my Son J. O. and I. I need not say much of my Son
J. O. for he through Grace, is made able to display and resist them; only this
I would have all the Simple take notice of their Scornful Taunts, and
Willingness to render him and I, as Speakers Falsely, or being like unto them;
and indeed, in this they much resemble God's Enemies in former Ages, as in
other things, and to his Judgment are they left, I having not a Purpose at this
time so much to answer them, for whom my Hope is near worn out, as to hold out
my Hand, with many Brethren, that the Honest-hearted might be delivered from
those Perdicious Ways they walk in, and are alluring to, by their Subtility
and False Speeches.

And by Question they ask, How could this accute Man say, The Meeting would not
hinder his Marriage? To this, as a Witness, I answer, I heard, with many more,
J. B. whom they most accused to hinder, say, That they had nothing against his
Marriage; and this some of their Confederates know.

And for what they say of me, as being a Great Mother and Governess among these
People, is but to set me on high, that the Dirt they fling, may the more come
upon me; for some of them, that are so Miserable, as to contribute to this Work
of Darkness, in Fighting against Truth, know, that I have Gladly and Long been
a Servant to this People of the Lord, and no more Government have I coveted or
gained, but by Love, and in Love possess. And for the Charge writ against me,
it is utterly false in Matter and Words, as these Accusers have stated it; for
those words, they say, I cried out, no Man nor Woman, that was present in that
great Congregation, will witness it, if they fear to Lie, and there are may
many Witnesses of what I said; and though I was permitted to speak a few words
at that time, that one or more of their Informers heard me say, I had
condemned, as not expedient, to have been spoken there; but they being in the
Dark, have altogether mist it, and placed a Lie of their own making in the
stead of what I spoak: But I unfeignedly desire, that they may find a place of
Repentance for this; and all other their Evils. But it is followed with another
Falsity; for say they, By her Authority, and J. O 's Interest, they proceeded
te Marry without's License. As to License from any Man or Woman to Marry, I
have often publicly (as called to it) born my Witness against, and with the
rest of the Lord's People declared, We make no Marriages, nor break no
Marriages, nor Marry any, but every True Man and Wife should known their being
joined of the Lord, and so were these Couple; yet did not, nor durst not go
brutishly together, as some pretending more Holiness, then others have done;
but this prudent Couple, according to the Example of Holy Men and Women, had
many Witnesses of the People of the Lord, and in an Orderly, Solemn Assembly
took each other, and the Presence and Power of the Lord sealed to it; and she
was a Blessing to him to whom the Lord gave her all her days: And I was so far
from the Exercise of Authority in that Matter, that I know not that I Invited
one to the Marriage, much less Commanded; and J. O. used no Interest in that
Matter, that I know, then what he gained by Love; and had these Accusers come
to, and kept in this Love, they had been kept out of that Spirit of the
Accuser, that now from time to time acts them to seek Occasion against the
Brethren, and the Truth; and then, whether False or True, as those that Rejoice
in Iniquity, they publish it, that they may Murder in the Way.

And if any Righteous Soul, grieved and burdened with their Bringings forth in
Mischief, Write or Answer them sharply, they imagine they get Strength by it,
and show it to Adversaries of Truth, as if the People of the Lord did Amiss in
Clearing the Truth, and throwing back the Dirt on them, from whence it comes
(but let all take notice, that the Prophet Elijah was Justified in his
Reproaching of Baal's Priests in their Blind Worships and Mad Fury; for the
True God appeared to him for his Justification, as be does unto us, that abide
in his Power unto this day) But for the Taunts and Mockings of Samballat and
Tobiah, they are recorded for their Infamy forever: For, what is the Chaff to
the Wheat, says the Lord?

And I did not, nor do not intend to Controvert, or Answer the Writings of
these Enemies of Truth, having not so much as read them through; only a few
Lines, which being False, Truth required to come over, and upon the Head of the
False Worker is it set: and I did not then cry out (as they say) in my own
Concern, nor do I now write to serve my self, but the Truth; and the End has
and shall declare the Ground of all Actions. And as the Fighters against God
have and do scatter from him and gather into the World, with the Vain Customs
thereof; so those that have and do contend, earnestly for the Truth, have no
other End or Aim, but to preserve in, and gather to the Grace of God, which
Teaches to Deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts; and many Thousands they are
that to this day are preserved thereby out of the Net that these Subtle and
Deceitful Ones have laid, and are laying: But Sufficient is the Grace in which
we have believed, and thereby we receive Power over all Spirits which are gone
out, and hatch Mischief, and bring forth Lies. But Praises be to the Power,
that has brought many into the One Mind, that above and before all they seek
the Increase and Enlargement of Truth; and these have the Mind of God, and know
he is on their side, and laughs to Scorn all his Enemies: And our Communion and
Fellowship is Holy, and within the Holy Place, where the Unclean and Inventers
of Evil could never come; for the Unfeigned Brotherly Love gives an Entrance
thereunto; but they out of it, not seeking after this, grow in Envy, by lusting
thereto, and offering Despite to the Spirit of Grace in themselves, they bring
forth the same against all us, that are guided thereby. And I am bold in that
Spirit that cannot Lie, to say to all in this Gainsaying Spirit (as I did many
Years since to some in the same Spirit; and some of these Evil-Workers did hear
it, and are Witnesses it is fulfilled on them of whom it was then testified, J.
P. and C. B. and others) if they return not, they are and shall assuredly be
swallowed up of the Earth, and link into it, cast again into the Sea, from
whence they were taken, as bad Fish indeed out of the Net. But Holy is the
Lord, and his Name shall be Magnified of all the Upright Ones; for their
Redemption is sure; and these are daily coming forth with Songs of
Thanksgiving, and the High Praises of the Lord are in their Hearts and Mouths
forever and for evermore, Amen.

Friends, that are plain-hearted, and love Righteousness, and though but turned
Sion-ward; and you, that for the Truth have sold All, you are all very dear
unto me, as I know I am, and must be to you: for, as we are all of one
Begetting, and are come to the one Hope, and are nourished at the one Breast,
where the Milk of the Word causes to grow, into the Oneness of that Spirit,
which sets free from Sin and Death, here we have Unity, and bear one another's
Burdens, and in the Life of the Head are affected with the Suffering of every
Member, that has Life therein, and with his Comp^ssions come to be filled, and
having Fellowship in his Suffering, are grieved and oppressed with the Works of
the Adversaries every where, and at all times, that ever since the Entrance of
the Night of Apostasy to this time are as truly Persecuting Christ Jesus in his
Members, and Slaying him in the Streets of the great City, spiritually called,
Sodom and Egypt, as Paul persecuted ^^m when he got Letters from the high
Priests to take Men or Women that were of that Way, and bring them bound to
Jerusalem: And as sure as the Apostle John saw his Crucifying in the Spirit of
Prophecy, so certainly with all the Contenders, and Gainsayers, and Resisters
of the Testimony of Jesus (which Testimony is the Spirit of Prophecy) be found
Fighters against God, who mischievously have taken up all Miscarriages and
Mistakes, and with their Misunderstandings and own dark Imaginations, adding
Lies of their own making; whereby some have been weakened, and others turned
out of the Way and the Truth, come to be questioned by the Ignorant, whereby
the End of these Revolters is made manifest: And though I have not so much as
said in my Heart, I would they were cut off from the Lord; yet sure I am, they
have gone about as much as in them lies to pervert the good Way of the Lord, by
making the People believe, the Quakers allow Vcleanness or Unrighteousness, in
that some professing it, have gone out as they, and practiced those things that
the Light testifies against (and yet when in good Order, by Men loving
Holiness, there is a Meeting to reform or divide such far from us, in the
outward) this offends them also) So, may not all see the Restlesness of this
Spirit, that would throw the Guilt of those that have offended, on those
Innocent ones that are traveling for the Removal of all Evils: But there are
many Thousands, to the Praise of the Power of God be it spoken, that are kept
not only out of Uncleanness and all Unrighteousnes, but are in the true
Religion which keeps from the Spots of the World, and their Communion stands
where the Blind could never see.

Another Stumbling Block that these that are making the Offenses, lay in the
Way of the Simple, is, as if we honor and set up Man in the Place of God, or
we were Worshippers of Angels, which is indeed Idolatry; To which I am called
to say something, as being presented with others, whom I am bold to say,
believe all Obedience, Honor and Thanksgiving belongs unto him that sits
upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore, and are not guilty of what this
malicious Spirit would present them to be: But being acted by the same Spirit
that they were that said, this Man says, he is the Son of God and therefore
ought to dye; So they not being in the Spirit that reveals the Son of God,
thinks we worship Man for him; but he that knew Christ revealed in him, bids
follow him, as he followed Christ, and that if I forgave any, I forgave it
(says he) in the Person of Christ. This I speak to the Simple and
Upright-hearted that they may be delivered out ot the Snare of the Cunning
Hunter that seeks the precious Life, and to such it will be given to know, what
is hid from the Serpent, that is still blind, and on Dust feeds; and the
Children's Bread, I nor any in the Faith, dare give unto them. But that every
honest Heart may see what Spirit acts in these Purposers of Evil, I take notice
of another Passage where this Libeller names my Name, and indeed, I knew not of
it when I writ the former Part, but an honest young Man in the Street told me
of it, and then I looked on that which they accuse me with; some times before
that and after it, I read, and being by the Power of the Lord, whom I serve in
my Spirit, made as willing to remove any Offenses, as these, by whom the
Offenses come (and on whom the Woe must come) are, to lay Stumblings, and I
shall freely confess to that which is true in their Charge, and deny the
Falsehood in this, as the former; and I shall begin with that in the 19th. Line,
page 44.

It Is not unusual (say they) with the Quakers to give as much Credit to one
another, as is the setting their Names to things they know not.

Answ. Friends, take notice how Ignorant the Carnal Man is of the things of
God, and not knowing that Nearness and Strength of Love, that is among the
Disciples of Christ, he brings it among the rest of the Rabble of his
Accusations, that, the Quakers credit one another in such matters, as indeed no
Money-Lover nor Unbeliever could never do; for every Deceiver is afraid to be
deceived; but who out of the Deceit is brought into the Faith and Love that is
unfeigned, cannot fear that a Brother will deceive or hurt him, and had rather
bear the harm of a False Brother (if it should so be suffered to be) then
mistrust or think Evil of him that is the Faith: But the Accuser of the
Brethren, with all his Adherents are out of this Faith, and are Strangers to
this Love by which it works. And though I never knew such a Practice among the
Quakers (not in one President) ever offered to me or any, to put their Hands to
what they know not, but this here rehearsed, and is this only by what he
himself and my Maid said, some of which I know to be true and some false; but I
had Joy that all should know in this Pack of Falsehoods, this Truth, That the
Quakers have, and do still credit one another. But whether it was so or no that
G. F. sent to our House to have J. P. and my Husband put their Hands to such a
Paper as they knew not; all I know of it I may speak of: My Maidservant then
living with me, many Years since told me in a Morning when I came down, that
there was a Man with a Paper to have some Friends put their Hands to, and that
J. P. was a wise Man because he refused it, and this I upon some Occasion, told
J. P. of, for I do not believe he ever heard my Maid say so to him; but he
being affected with his own Commendations, has repeated it before me more then
once, that my Maid should say he was a Wise Man: What was said, was said to me,
and from me he had it, and to my Knowledge, I never heard my Maid to say: Nor
did I ever tell him, or hear him speak those words, That she believed her
Master would have done it, until now I see it in Print, so I cannot but take
notice of their adding that which is False, to make their Matters hold
together: nor do I remember that Time, or Day or Week, that I said any thing of
George Fox, these words, that he repeats, as though I spoak them at the same
time; but that I did at some time speak those words to J. Pennyman, and it may
be to some others, I deny not; for in the Love of the Lord I traveled for him,
and some others of them, that were in Danger by their Imaginations to fall into
the Pit of Perdition; and so, as one that lived in the Love of God, I according
to the best of my Understanding, endeavored their Return and Safety, by
imparting to them what I had found to be my Profit and Safety, and bowed to him
and several of them, in telling them, that in the Light none errs; yet that I
was such a Child, as for many years I might not know my Right Hand from my
left: and if there were a Motion, or Revelation did arise in me, that I might
think was true (and we that are in Unity in the Spirit of God, may and do speak
our Motions one to another; for the Spirit of the Prophets is subject to the
Prophets; and the Order of the Church was, that they might Prophecy one by
one, and the rest might Judge) yet if G. F. should deny it to be of the Lord, I
should be subject to his Judgment therein, as one in Christ before me: This, or
to this purpose I spoke, and deny it not. But that this Despiser, of Dignities
may attain his own End, to pervert the Good Way of God, by giving them to know
what I was, he said, A Great Prophetess: Now if he did believe what he says
(though it was then a young time with me, being nigh Ten Years ago) he should
have followed my Example, and have brought his Motions to some in Christ before
him, to have tried his Motion, and so by Counsel have been delivered from those
Wanderings and Runnings, and Mad Actions, that he ran into, when he brought
that Truly-Valued Book, called the Bible (that I and many are come to the
Comfort of, and know, that it has been the Mighty Power of God that has
preserved it from the Hands of those that would have utterly Extinguished or
Destroyed it) to be burned: But Praises be to the Lord, that has preserved i^
unto this Day, to give Testimony to the Light and Spirit which gave it forth;
though J. P. may be reckoned among the Intenders, that would Destroy the Bible,
who brought it to the Exchange, with other serviceable Books in their Places,
and setting some on Fire in order to burn them, was prevented in this his Work
of Darkness; and being by me and others dealt with for this and other Mad
Actions, entreating him to come to Repentance, and no more follow the
Imaginations of his own Brain; but he being too high for Counsel or Entreaty,
returns us Hatred for Love, and goes on in Impenitency and Malicious Practices
unto this time, as all the High-minded and Despisers of Counsel ever did; and
therefore no marvel that he presents me, as one doing Amiss, in saying, I
should subject to one in Christ before me in any Case: So all the Honest and
Plain-hearted will come to see their End and Spirit, and beware thereof. And I
have Justification with God in giving Honor to whom Honor is due, and have no
Man's Person in Admiration, and know G. F. did never seek for Honor, nor has
been trusted in or bowed to, as a Man; but who sees him that is sent of God,
must hear and obey him; and if any have or do exalt, or worship any but the
Seed, Christ, to whom all Honor, Worship and Obedience is due, they have
another God, and practice another Doctrine then G. F. has been the Messenger
of; for unto him, the only Begotten of the Father, he came to gather, and as he
has received, has given unto us, that in the one Everlasting Covenant,
testified of by him, and all sent of God, we may know the Father and the Son,
whom he has sent: And many through believing can say, He is ascended. and
lives for evermore; But such as are out of the Faith, Reprobate from God, could
never see the Descendings not the Ascendings of the Son of God, who is to be
Honored as the Father: And they that are without Guile may see the Heavens
open, and the Angels ascending and descending on the Son of Man; But all out of
the Spirit of Truth are Wonderers and Despisers, thinking and speaking Evil of
those things they know not.

We read of one that came to Christ in the outward, and said unto him, Good
Master, What may I do to have Eternal Life? Christ answered him with a
Question, Why call thou me Good? None (says he) is Good but God. This was a
Parable to me, when out of the Faith, but in the Faith it is given to know the
Deep Things of God: And I only mention this Scripture to throw back the many
Accusations, that these Carping Spirits do cast on us, as if we Idolize Man, or
Men, when all in the Faith know, all Power, all Good is of God, manifest and
revealed in the Son by that Eternal Light and Spirit in which we worship; And,
none ever come unto the Father, but by the Son, nor, none ever come unto the
Son, but whom the Father draws: And all those that are in the Dark, profane
that Name whereby we are saved; but our Peace they cannot Break, nor the
Purpose of our God Hinder; for it must be accomplished: The full Time is come
and coming, in which all things shall be put under his Feet in whom we believe.

And so I shall Conclude, with minding J. Pennyman; and that though I have
Cause to believe, He Tauntingly calls me, A Great Prophetess, yet I would
have him call to Mind what I writ to him when he was a Prisoner at
Bishops-Gate: and as it has in part been fulfilled, the full Truth thereof
shall come upon him, and be made manifest to many; and if not, the Lord has
not spoken by me

Rebecca Traverse.
Ellis Hooks's Testimony.
OF late there have been two Scurrilous Books published against the People of
God, called Quakers; one entitled, The Spirit of the Hat; and the other
called, Tyranny and Hypocrisy Detected, or a further Discovery of the
Tyrannical Government, Popish Principles, and the Vile Practices of the now
Leading Quakers, Which Books are full of Taunts, Jeers, Lies, Scoffs and
Scorns, which indeed are scarce worth answering; for God and all sober Men know
us to be otherwise, and our Neighbors, that are not prejudiced: But some thing
has been answered, and is answered for the sake of the Moderate and Simple,
that they may not feed with them upon Lies, Scoffs and Jeers, and their
Condemned Stuff; and such that have been amongst them, and have seen their
Errors, and have Condemned and been heartily Sorry of, and for those things,
while they were amongst them, that is Meat now for the Vagabond Quakers, like
the Vagabond Jews, which they publish to the World, to help them that deny the
Principle of Truth it self, and have made them a Feast with Lies, and
nevertheless they boast of the Parts of the Hat-Men (as in page 71.) and those
that Consent with them, of the Abilities and Endowments, and then Scoff and
Jeer at the People of God, and call them Foxonians. Will this be taking, think
you, with People that love Peace and Quietness? But truly their Endowments, and
your Abilities, are manifest to all the Peaceable People, and Sober-minded. The
Hat-Men have been Raking and Watching these many years for Evil and Failings,
and give it you to publish, which manifests your two Parties opposite one
against another; for one pretends to stand for the Principle of Truth, but the
other clearly denies it: But Pilate and Herod were agreed against Christ; and
so here is Pilate, Herod and Judas agreed against Christ's Members; and so
against him, the Head.

And these Vagabond Quakers (that have been Watching for Evil) Corrupt Members
these many years; and you, that Consented with them, say, The People of God,
called Quakers, are fallen in their Principles: But they are the Hat-Men that
are fallen; for the True Quakers ever stood against the Hat-Men, as they call
them, in the time of them, and the Ranters; and we say, They are fallen. And
you that take their Part, and Consent with them, should publish your Names, and
be ashamed of your Doings in the Dark: but bring forth your Names to the Light,
and not work in the Dark, nor challenge in the Dark without Name, and great
Boasts; for we can appear before the King, and the King of Heaven, concerning
our Actions.

And as for the Hypocrisy and Tyranny of the Hat Spirit, which would thrust it
self in among us, which never was of us from the beginning, we always judged
it by the Power of God to be of the Ranters, who would have thrust in amongst
us, before it was born.

And as for Popish Practices, we deny, and Tyrannical Government; but own the
Order of the Gospel, the Power of God. And there is none of all them, that are
mentioned in these Books, that has done any Uncivil thing, but has been dealt
withal, according to the Order of the Gospel; and what has been Amiss they have
acknowledged, and been heartily Sorry for, and have Turned from the Evil of
their Doings: but these Hat-Men, or the Spirit of the Hat, that have not
Repented, and Some did make Confessions, like Pharaoh, and in Words seemed to
Repent, are now turned against the True Israel, and are publishing the
condemned Stuff in their Garth, that the Gartbites might boast; for, mark the
words (in page 70.) of those that Consent with the Hat-Men: It seems that they
have got a Feast of that Condemned Stuff, of which some had done Wrong, and
were heartily Sorry, and Condemned, and these Vagabond Quakers, the Hat-Men,
have presented them a Dish of it, which they make Music of; but the sober
Reader may see, there is no Concord in it, but Mischief and Envy.

And as for Benj. Furley's Paper, which you Hat-Men and others feed upon, who
formerly were in that Practice amongst you, Has not he Condemned it? So, that
which he has Condemned is Meat for you Vagabond Quakers. And That which Isaac
Penington, when he was with you Hat-Men, favoring you, gave forth concerning
it, Has not he Condemned it, and his Motion therein? And That which G. F. gave
forth in his Book to the Jews, which you, Elimas-like, bring, to pervert the
Way of Truth, was it not given forth concerning the Hat to Magistrates, and not
concerning the Wearing the Hat in Prayer to God, for which he was fined Forty
Pound in Oliver's days? Nay, are not some of those Men Offended at it now,
that pervert G. F's words, which were only putting off the Hat to Magistrates,
and not concerning putting off it to God at Prayer, as before said, as the
Apostle c^mmands, who was in the True Light and the Holy Ghost, who said, That
Men should Pray Uncovered: therefore says this Hat-Spirit, and those that
Consent with them, That the Quakers are fallen from their Principles; No, they
are the Hat-Men that are fallen: And perhaps some of them are offended at our
Hats, for not giving them the Hat-Honour; for we know their Ambition in other
P^wers days: And we have suffered more in other Powers days about not putting
off our Hats to Magistrates, then we have in these Powers days; and it may be
some of them are ashamed of their Names, and dare not bring them forth to
Light, that have been of that old Persecuting Party: But William Penn has
answered sufficiently to the Rational concerning this. But it may be the
Workers in the Dark will murmur, and therefore they put their Work upon a
Baptist, a Stationer to Name it, and to get it Licensed, and in the mean time
they lurk in the Dark: But if we should gather up all the Failings of
particular Persons among the Baptists and Fifth Monarchy-Men, and others in
this City and Country, and beyond the Seas, we might make a Book big enough;
and we might make a Book of the Hat-Mens Failings, which they know well enough;
but all those things we leave to God and all Good Men to judge, as knowing
among us, the Members of Christ, who is the Head of our Body, that we do not
admit of any Uncleanness amongst our selves, nor that which comes public to
the World, but in the Power of Christ Jesus, and in his Light and Spirit, we do
judge such things amongst our selves, let them be private or public to clear
the Truth, and that no Scandals may lie upon it, and the Name of God and Christ
may not be Blasphemed; God and all good Men know this, and according to
Gospel Order, they are and have been dealt withal, which admits of no Impurity:
And it is much these Hat-Men and their Companions, and those that consented
with them, did not Clamor against Moses and the Law of God, because that so
many amongst the Israelites ran into Fornication; but these are of Core's
Spirit, and Dathan and Abiram's Spirit, that offered a Strange Fire, who will
be consumed with it that gainsayes: And it was much they did not Rail against
Peter and Paul, and tell that to the World, when Paul withstood Peter
concerning Circumcision, and yet he circumcised Timothy: And it is much that
these Clamourers did not clamor against Christ, concerning Peter, his Cursing
and Swearing. But these Confederates with the Hat-Men, that are those that
plead for Wearing the Hat in Prayer, Ranter-like, seem very much to Commend J.
Pennyman and his Wife, as though we did not know them; but they and their
Spirit is known, witness his Action at the Exchange, and their Voluptuous
Doings at Merchant-Tailers Hall, which we leave to the Law of God and all good
Men to judge.

And this Spirit of the Hat says, how did the Lord raise many to go forth to
preach the Everlasting Gospel in his Power, etc. page 10, 70, 71. and then
these Hat-Men with their Confederates are angry, because G. F. speaks of no
Liberty but in the Power, and pervert his Words, as though Conscience should
not have Liberty in the Power: and now its clearly manif^st to all People, what
Spirit these Hat-Men are of with their Confederates, that they would have a
Liberty out of the Power; for were not G. F's Words, that People's Liberty
should be in the Gospel, and Liberty in the Power of God: and because G. F
stands for the Power of God which was first received, and their Liberty
therein, and the ^iberty in Christ that made them free, which were his Words,
and these Hat-Men and their Confederates, who are out of the Power of God,
would have Liberty of their Consciences, out of Christ, the Power of God:
therefore you may see from what these Peoples Motions are, and in what their
Consciences have Liberty; for them that plead for Liberty of Conscience, and
plead for Sin as long as they live, and a Purgatory when they are dead; and
such, and these Hat-Men and them that consent to them, would have a Liberty out
of the Power of God, and yet go under the Name of Christians, And is not this a
plain Contradiction in these Hat-Men, and them that consent with them, who
confess, that we, the People of God, called Quakers, went forth in the Power of
God, in page 10. and in page the 12. he terms G. F. a Papist, because he says
There is no Liberty out of the Power of God: But you should have put it in your
Book, true Liberty in the Gospel and the Liberty in Christ Jesus, according to
G. F's. Words: But I must tell you, All your Liberty of Conscience, out of
Christ Jesus, the Power of God, is Bondage, both to the Soul, Body, Spirit and
Conscience. Where note, that by Liberty of Conscience, G. F. did not speak of
Outward Exercise in Worship, for with such Libertines we have no Unity; and all
your Liberty out of Truth, out of the Power of God, the Gospel, and out of
Christ Jesus, with all your Motions, is in the Power of Darkness: And your
Hat-Liberty, keeping on your Hats in time of Prayer, which you much speak of,
which was imposed upon us, as being Heathenish, Romish, and in the Curse, and
^ursed by J. P. as his printed Paper manifests, printed by one of your Company,
who would have thrust it among us as a higher Glory, as some Vagabond Quakers
stand for it to this Day, and not very many, which we, that have kept the Power
of God, and our Habitations in the Truth of Christ, did judge it and the
Ranters, that would have imposed the same thing upon us; so we have been kept,
as we were all along from the first: and because we could not own such, and J.
P. carrying his Books to burn them at the Exchange, because we co^ld not be
conformable to them, therefore come these Outrages, Nick Names, Jeers and
Mockeries against us, who have kept in the same Power of God, that we were
first convinced by, which they maliciously call Tyrannical: so they are gone
out from us, and it is manifest they were not of us; for if they had been of
us, they would have continued with us: But as it was it is; Deceitful Workers
and False Apostles there are, and the true Prophecy is come upon some of them,
The Dog is turned to his Vomit, and the Sow to the Wallowing in the Mire, that
they thus bite and cast their Vomit out against us, and who cannot tell how to
worry us themselves, but have others that consent, and Confederates with them,
and these are their Abilities and Endowments they boast of; but to all the
Godly and sober People, it savoureth that their Books are but as a Raging Wave
of the Sea, wherein they foam out their own Shame.

And as for the People of God, called Quakers, Conformity, It is to be made
conformable to the Son of God; and as for the Uniformity, it is in the Gospel,
the Power of God.

And whereas you say in page 12. the Papists say, They believe as the Church
believes, so likewise says G. F. but the Spirit of the Hat says Nay.

This is known to all the People of God, called Quakers, to be a Lie against G.
F. for G. F. his Words are and have been to believe in the Light, as Christ
commands, who is the Head of the Church; and as for the Hat-Man's Nay, we dare
not believe him who puts Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness: But these
Hat-Men are now turned into the Spirit of Wars, and Fightings against the
Believers in the Light; and our Uncovering our Heads when we pray to God, etc.
is by the same Spirit and Power as the Apostles did, who commanded Men to pray
Uncovered.

And whereas the Spirit of the Hat enviously says, The Spirit of Antichrist
in G. F. would wrest from me what I am not willing to part withal, to wit, my
Conscience.

What, is not that concerning Wearing thy Hat in time of Pra^er, which I said
before is contrary to the Apostles Order? And yet this is the Hat-Man's
Conscience, who going from the Apostles Order, and Excommunicates thy felf, and
casts out thy felf and your selves, for Our Fellowship is in the Power of God,
the Gospel, and we cast out none, for they cast out themselves when they go
from the Power of God, and our Work was and is, to seek to bring in again from
under the Power of Antichrist, by the Power and Spirit of Christ, as is
sufficiently made manifest; and not to wrest the Spirit of the Hats Conscience
from him, but that his Conscience and all others, might have Liberty in the
Gospel, the Power of God: and I leave it to the Lord, to Reward thee according
to thy Words, which will be thy Burden, for terming G. F. as a Pope, and as the
Spirit of Antichrist, with such like Malicious Words; for we nor he, own no
Head, but Christ Jesus, over our Church, who exercises his Office amongst us;
and the Law that G. F. and others, the People of God, called Quakers, own and
are bounded with, in which they have Liberty in the Order of the Gospel, is the
Law of the Spirit of Life, which is in Christ Jesus, in which we have been kept
from the beginning; though you have a Liberty to speak and write what you
please, and complain and murmur against such that cannot bow, and have
Fellowship with you, who will have a Liberty for your Conscience, but not in
the Power of God.

And the Hat Spirit says, He is informed of a Meeting, appointed by G. F. and
other Elders, to Judge and Condemn several Men and Women of Good Report, and to
Shelter and Cover the Wanton Practices of others, and to Discourage Persons
from Discovering the Wanton and Unclean Ministers.

Answ. This is another Forgery of the Hat-Spirit; for Uncleanness and
Wantonness, blessed be the Lord, they are strange things among us: but if any
Unseemly thing has at any time been done, such were dealt with according to
the Order of the Gospel, without Respect to Persons. And this we have further
to say, That none have been more Notorious then some of the Hat-Spirit; but we
shall not run into such Trash, nor have we any such Ministers.

And whereas the Spirit of the Hat speaks of giving Nicknames; and they put
themselves, We were called Quakers.

But do these of the Hat-Spirit now Tremble at the Word? Nay; if they did, they
durst not utter forth or speak forth such Nicknames against the People of God,
called Quakers, nor father such Envious, Malicious Language against the Power
of Christ and his Spirit in the Quakers, as they do.

And another Filthy, Lying Scandal, the Spirit of the Hat and his Company casts
upon G. F. and says, He was in such a Rage, that W. G. thought he would have
struck S. N. Which thing is false; there was no Appearance of any such thing,
as the Meeting can testify, and I am a Witness, who was at that Meeting: And
thus with your Lies and Slanders you think to feed the Airy Minds, and make
them a Feast. And as for W. G. he has been heartily Sorry for Unadvisedly
Speaking such words.

And G. F's Books to the Lawyers and Judges did not contradict what was then
acted or spoken in the Meeting; and therefore the 46th page of the Spirit of
the Hat's Tyranny and Hypocrisy is full of Lies. And also the same Slander and
Lie is mentioned in page 42. of the Spirit of the Hat, That some there present
thought that G. F. would have struck S. N. and thus you add Lie unto Lie to
stuff up your Paper, which, as is said before, there was no such thing; but the
Man that did report it is heartily Sorry for it. But it seems, you Hat-Spirits
torment your selves, and are vexed about G. F's Marriage; but why did not the
Hat-Spirit reprove J. P. for his Voluptuous Marriage, with his Venison Pasties,
which were pulled about, to the spoiling of the Creature, and making a Scramble
for the Multitude? Oh Shameful Doings!

In page 19, 20. of the Spirit of the Hat's Tyranny and Hypecrisie, and in page
32. in all those pages is mentioned John Whitehead's Paper, and G. F. is
charged with opening J. Whitehead's Letter, which was writ by him, which is a
Lie, and a Forgery; for G. F. did not open the Letter, but it was sent Open,
only Enclosed to another, and left to G. F. and other Friends to dispose of, as
J. W's Testimony under his own Hand (before going) does testify: And therefore
here you may see what sort of Men these are, that forge such Lies upon G. F.
And that which he left to G. F. and others to alter, was the Matter concerning
Wearing the Hat in Prayer; for that was the Matter then in Controversy (and
not Other things) which he wrote to you; For the Spirit of the Prophets is to
be subject to the Prophets.

And as for George Bishop's Paper, mentioned in your Tyranny and Hypocrisy,
about the time that you would have thrust your Spirit of the Hat in amongst us,
he did give it a sufficient Blow in Bristol, which you might have done well to
have printed with his Paper: but it is like that made against you, who feed
upon Condemned Stuff, Actions which many have been sorry for, running into in
the time of their Ignorance, wherein they beguiled the Simplicity, but now
returned to Christ, their Shepherd, and feed amongst the Flocks of his Pasture;
but God's Words are true. The Serpent must feed on Dust, who is out of Truth,
Dust is the Serpent's Meat; Your Sting, Venum and Poison is felt and savoured.

And as for John Bolton's Reproving the Slit in the Woman's Coat, which you
stuff up your Book with, and G. F's Paper against Fashion and Images, etc.

You may feed on such Stuff, who live in the Vain Fashions which therein are
declared against, and which shall stand over you and your Images,

And as for all your Aggravations and Nick- Names, which proceed from your
bitter Gaul and Envy, Simon Magus like, we shall leave to God to judge of; for
there are few sober People, but see your Books are a piece of Envy, Malice,
Hatred and Spite, and to be a Spirit that seeks Blood, and you would not have
been so served your selves.

And you make a great Clamor against our Law, Government or Order.

I say, as before, Our Order is the Gospel Order, and our Law is the Spirit of
Life, which we received, which is in Christ Jesus, the Heavenly Man, by which
the Old Adam's Actions are judged.

And further, The Spirit of the Hat says, That G. F. and some others; the
Elders, had a Meeting to Judge and Condemn several Men and Women of Good Report.

Answ. Why might not William Mucklow have said, That he was one of them, that
had reported that Slander to a Lass, upon a Woman that was Innocent, who was
judged for it?

And this is another Lie, in your saying, That G. F. and others endeavor to
subvert the Royal Law of Liberty, page 38. For had you owned it, and kept in
it, you would not have done that unto us, as you have done; Neither did God or
Christ ever teach you to utter forth those Scoffing Expressions against G. F.
and the People of God, as may be seen in the 40th Page of the Hat-Spirit; and
it is the Hat-Spirit indeed, for it is not the Spirit of God.

And in page 3, and 4. of your Tyranny and Hypocrisy, there it is said, Our
Principles are far different from what we profess openly, and that we act upon
the same Principles as the Court of Rome.

Oh Lies, and Malicious Men! All these are your invented Lies; for you and the
Court of Rome we deny, your Spirit and Power, who are of the same Spirit that
would murder us, as the Papists did formerly; your Spirit is favored: How we
invite People to Christ, both in public and private, the Lord knows, to whom
we leave you, for him to deal with you according to your Works.

And in the 7th page of your Hypocrisy and Tyranny, it is said, For if every
Man upon pain of Sin, walk according to the Light in his own particular, then
he cannot without Sin walk according to the Light in G. F. or others, when that
is diverse or contrary from his own.

As for your Light, as Christ said, It is Darkness, your Works and Words do
manifest it, who are condemned with the Light, which G. F. and we, and others
walk in, which is the Light of Christ Jesus, which makes you to Rage; and then
we know that you cannot bear our Judgment, nor G. F's: and therefore such as
pretend the Light of Christ, and are Haters and Persecutors with your Tongues
of them that walk in the Light, we have no Unity with you, as before. But you
often with Aggravations and Malice quote G. F. and scoffingly say, your Elders,
throwing Dirt at them, to make them Odious amongst such as your selves, putting
your Bear-Skins upon them, that you may set the Dogs upon them,

And we and G. F. do know the things of God, by the Spirit of God; and the
Scripture does not reveal the Scripture, but the Spirit of God is it that leads
into all Truth, and it is the same that is revealing the Father to us.

And whereas you make a great Complaint (in the 16th page) of the Quakers, not
letting some of you Bury in their Burying-Ground.

Indeed, when some of you Hat-Men have come with Railing and Abusive Terms
against us, with Abusive Language, and called us worse then the Priests; and
when his Child has dyed, then the Father of such a Child has come to us to have
a Grave, not out of any Conscience, but to save his Money, we have bid him then
go to the Priest, whom he counted better then we, with whom he had Fellowship.
And such Loose Persons, that live not in the Truth, We cannot be Witnesses of
their Marriages; for we Marry none, but are Witnesses: and well might J. B.
deny William Mucklow, who, Ranter-like, kept on his Hat in Prayer; we have no
Unity with such Uncomely Practices. And J. Osgood and others may praise God
that they see your Folly, and have given a Sufficient Testimony concerning your
Spirit.

It seems you are tormented because G. F. sent for two Kings and the Emperor,
which came to hear him in America, and were tender: you wanted something to
stuff up your Book withal; had they been Malicious, it would have pleased you.

And whereas you Scoff at our Order of Marriage, page 21, 22. and call it G.
F's Order: We must tell you, It is the Order and Practice of the Holy Men of
God, mentioned in Scriptures, who took one another before Witnesses.

And whereas you Wickedly say, We Contradict one another in the Light and
Spirit. This is all like the rest; for such as you we can savor, You Hat-Men,
who have pretended to lean upon the Lord, but have, and some have had a Bitter
Cup for it.

And G. F's words were true in time of J. P's Wearing his Hat in Prayer; if all
be left to the Free Spirit of God, there had been no such Reasoning about the
Hat in Prayer, which you should have printed the rest of G. F's words, how that
we denied the Wearing the Hat in Prayer in the Ranters, in the time of J. N.
and also in the time of J. P. and did also deny the Practice and Principle, and
directed People to keep in the Power and Spirit that the Apostle was in, who
said, Men should Pray Uncovered, as they did in the Apostles days.

And whereas you liken us to the Church of Rome, page 25. scoffingly. It is no
matter to us, if the Pope profess God and Christ, and put off his Hat when he
prays; we shall not deny God nor Christ, nor keep on our Hats when we pray
because of that.

And in page 29. you make a great Outcry, because we said in our Declaration,
We always paid our Taxes; and then you say, An Honest-hearted Woman paid none.
We know she was a Whimsical Woman, and whither her Whimsies carried her, viz.
Mary Boreman, now called, Mary Pennyman.

And whereas you say, they are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, G. F. and
his Adherents, and such as exalt themselves.

This is Spite and Malice, and much such Stuff is in the 30 th. page not worth
taking notice of: for Dignity is the Power of God, which G. F. and we own; and
they are the Body of Christ that are in it. You cannot exalt your selves above
it, nor the Doctrine of Truth that is in Ancient Friends (which the Devil is
out of) who are made God's Free Men and Women by it; and God has given us Power
and Spirit to judge such Envious Spirits as this Book comes from: and so, we
have no Unity with such that be out of the Truth, neither can we have any hand
in publishing their Books, and we have a care of them that are printed on the
Truth's Account.

And whereas you say, that none may be permitted to public Business but these
that seek the Good of all, that is, submit to the Body of G. F. and his Party.

Here is Envy and Lies again: Where were there ever such Words spoken, to
submit to the Body of George Fox and his Party? may not the least feel the
Devilish Spirit in these Words? for we would have all to submit to the Body,
which Christ is the head of, and such, in Christ's Power and Spirit, are fit to
do Business in the Church, that seek the Good of all; and we limit not the
Lord, but would have all obey him in his true Light, in which there is
Fellowship.

And whereas you say, some of our Hearers have been weary of our long Preaching.

Answ. It is like they were such as John Pennyman and oath Apostatet, who come
crying against us in a public Meeting like the World.

And as for John Perrot (who is gone) we do very well know what he was, and
what Imaginations he went into, though he and you, lay it falsely upon the Lord:
and we contradicting him and his Practice, in Wearing his Hat and Covering his
Head in Prayer, was not only from G. F. but the Apostles; and if J. Perrot and
his Party, did speak against G. F. and us, because we could not own your
keeping on your Hats when you prayed, upon his or your pretended Motion, but
then and now make these Outcries against us who have kept our Habitation, and
you are found in another Spirit then the Apostles were in, who said, Men should
be Uncovered. etc.

And you scoffingly say, if J. Perrot he condemned, Fox cannot stand.

Why? because Perrot pretended a Revelation to do that which the Apostle
forbids: but, poor People! you have manifested your selves,and thus you are
angry because G. F. and others cannot change like you, to your Hat-Spirit.

And whereas thou speaks to a Declaration and Scurrilous Paper, page 37. thou
should have printed the whole Declaration, that People might have seen what
it was; which Declaration was against Wickedness and Uncleanness, and
Scandalous Books, and Papers against us.

And for John Pennyman, I never heard any one say otherwise of him, but that it
was a mad and wicked Action, to which the Devil lead him, when he followed his
Motions, to the Exchange, to burn his Books: and what did he carry the Bible
and the Book of Martyrs there for? think you.

And whereas you make a great Business of Tho. Ibbit of Huntingtonshire;
Friends were tender to him, and though he had a true Prophecy, and a Sight of
the Fire, yet he afterward confessed the exceeded, and saw himself: And why do
you mention G. F. who was above 100. Miles off at that time? this does show the
Venom of your Tongues. And you say, you have seen the Forgery of G. F. in the
Name of the Lord, contradicted the Elders, but this is like the rest.

And though J. Pennyman and his Company have been scraping up this many Years,
these things which they have published in Print; where did they ever go to
admonish any one, or to speak by one, or two, or three to them, according to
Christ's Doctine? but this are the Doings of False Brethren and as for John
Swinton, he saw his Errors when he leaned toward you, which his condemned
Stuff is Meat for such Envious Spirits as you are. And in their 43. page they
jeer and scoff, and call a Meeting at Bull and Mouth G. F's Court, or
Murderously call it King Fox's Court, when G. F. never had been at Bull and
Mouth Meeting since it was burned down; and many Scoffing Words are in the said
43. page, scarce worth mentioning.

And in page 44. you say that J. Pennyman complains and tells the World in his
refusing, to sign a Certificate of Wm. Sparrorow's, he received a Check from G.
F. and for advising that others should not subscribe to that which they were
ignorant of: We never put any to subscribe that which they were not willing to,
for that was but a civil thing concerning Wm. Sparrow's Certificate; and this
is many Years since, that J. Pennyman has kept this in store in his malicious
Heart. And in Page 46. the Paper which R. D. sent up of R. W^i^'s to advise
Friends upon his Deathbed, was not contrary to G. F's Doctrine and Practice,
he was not advised to any thing beyond his Freedom, and therefore G. F. is
clear of that Aspersion: For the Man was advised by me, and nothing was imposed
upon him; but the matter was declared unto him, and left to his Freedom to do
as he would, and he was well satisfied till Mary Boreman, and such as she, put
Doubts and Fears into his Mind, and made him question that he had done, and
Judge himself to have done wrong, which indeed it was not so.

And whereas you say in your Tyranny and Hypocrisy, He will not count himself
Obliged to keep off his Hat by Virtue of G.F. his Law.

Answ. Here is more of your Wickedness, for we do it from an Inward Principle
of Truth, and from the Power and Spirit of God, as the Apostle laid down in
Reverence to God, and thou may call it the Apostles Law: yet some of the
Hat-Men have pretended Motion, and some in Opposition, in their Wills; and
there are many Lies in that page, which are not worth mentioning.

And as for Vicious Ministers or Strumpets, or Wantonness: We deny, the Lord
knows our Hearts; and have ever searched and seekt out, and admonished, and
reproved by the Power of Christ, who has given us Power amongst our selves, not
to suffer such Actors and Actions amongst us, and therefore not to trouble the
Major, nor the Aldermen, nor Common Council; they see enough of that among your
Church every day: and let the Baptist and Hat-Men bring out their own of their
own Fellowship, with the rest of their Confederates, as many we might
particularize, and let their Six, or their Dozen of the Aldermen or
Common Council judge them, if they cannot judge, themselves.

And as for J. G. D. B. W. W. T. T. and T. M. all these have been dealt withal
according to Gospel Order years ago; but it seems these Adversaries and
Back-sliders are pleased to bring them up, to speak Evil of the Right Way. And
if W. C. was accused long ago in London, and has condemned his Evil, and
cleared God's Truth, this clears us, and condemns your Wickedness. And as for
T. M's committing Uncleanness when employed by G. F. to judge Persons and
Meetings, this is utterly false; for G. F. did not employ him: but when any
thing was manifest of him, that was Uncivil, he was dealt withal according to
Gospel Order. But as for your Charging him in Commiting Uncleanness, we leave
him to deal with you for it; who, it may be, you may find like one of your
selves, that will soon go with you to an Alderman or Major, who formerly charged
the Mistres, but now you say, it is your Mistake, it is the Maid; and thus your
Tongue is your own, who matter not what you say; but I leave T. M. to deal with
you.

And whereas you say, A Minister that is guilty, is Judged and Disowned
privately when Evidence appears.

So our Adeversary would have us to Judge or Disown without Testimony; this is
like his Law, page 50.

And as for your saying, Scandalous Familiarity of the Prophets and
Prophetesses, or Mistresses before Marriage, must go for nothing; for I and many
more are Witnesses that these things are False.

And whereas John Boulton is accused that he should say, He had the L^sses
Papers by him.

John Boulton says, he never said that they confessed to those Charges charged
against them: For, if those things had been true, it had been a Shame for
Modesty to speak of them; but upon their being Examined, they did deny that
they were guilty of such things, but in some things they were Childish, which
they were sorry for; which Confession of theirs, and Answer to the Dirty
Papers, which you feed upon, J. B. has by him: But all these gross things,
which they charged them with in their Paper, were as False, they said, as God
was True; and their Brother, who is one of the World and Relations, said, He
would not see his Sisters so defamed, as may be seen in the Girls Answers, but
they would Revenge their Cause, which they sent up to London about four years
since; which Answer John Boulton has to this day; which, if many were but in
Shame and Modesty, they would be ashamed to mention such things, which are
abhorred by us, and all are judged that are guilty of such things.

And whereas you say, William Mucklow offered to be at the hearing of J. W.
upon Information of Wantonness committed by him, concerning which W. Mucklow
could say something.

We do believe W. Mucklow was such a prying Man about other Men's Matters, as he
was about Hannah Salier's Business; but J. W. was examined concerning the
Matter, and the Party that accused him, and we have Power so to do by the Power
and Spirit of God, and it was not found to be as was represented by those Evil
Spirits, but clear of what they accused him.

You say, John Harwood, formerly of their Ministers, and while such, found
guilty of No^orious Uncleanness; and the said J. H. accused G. F. but could
have no hearing, and published his Charge in Print.

G. F. answered those Lies of J. H. long ago, which now may be food for such as
you, he answered them in Print. As for J. H. being one of our Ministers, and
whilst such, found guilty of notorious Uncleanness, these are Notorious Lies;
for he was one of you Hat-Men then, and preached it up like you; and therefore
for Shame stop your Mouths, and lay not the Unclean Actions of your
Hat-Ministers upon us, though we did deal with him, as we did deal with you,
while he would hear, according to Gospel Order.

And whereas W. Mucklow says, He accused G. F. to be a Respecter of Persons in
Judgment.

But this is false, like the rest; and some pronounced Woes upon him, etc. it
was thy Portion.

And at a Meeting after the Plague, E. Barnes, as the Ministers were exalting
themselves, cried out while R. F. was preaching; You have Whored from the Lord:
R. F. said, Thou art Whored, or the Whore: This (says Miles Stancliffe) was an
Unsavory, Word in R. Farnsworth, but not an Unsavory Word in E. Barnes: But
these Men cannot speak without Envy and Lies; they were exalting Lies. But was
not this E. B. one of your Hat-mens Spirit? and did not she manifest her self
to be in the Whorish Spirit in Hampshire, and Rose Atkins, and the Man they
kept Company with? what is become of them? which is beyond the Bounds of Modesty
or Christianity, as it is known to the World in Hampshire: Why do not you write
down their Carriages? M. S. and the rest should have declared it.

And many Jeering Words there are in your Tyranny and Hypocrisy, who would
Tyrannize over the Innocent with your Spirit of the Hat, who tell jeeringly of
G. F's Kingdom, and a Peer of it, and Foxoniant over and over, and King of the
Quakers; and thus your Devilish Gainsaying Spirit, Core-like, and Judas like,
seek^ the Life of the Innocent.

And why do you not answer Solomon in his Challenge, seeing you have taken part
of his words out of his Challenge to Muggleton?

And you make a great Matter about G. F. Ruling in his Kingdom, and Governing
in his own Kingdom: Must not every True Christian, that is born again in the
Power, Rule in his Kingdom, that is begotten again to a lively Hope? And does
not Christ say, The Kingdom of Heaven is Within you? And are not all the true
Saints Heirs of the Kingdom that stands in Power, and Righteousness, and Joy in
the Holy Ghost? It seems to this Kingdom within you are Strangers, like
Pharisees and Jews, in your Lo here, and Lo there, and Observations, who
crucified Christ; and so now you would crucify his Members, to whom his Father
has given a Kingdom, that stands in Power and Joy in the Holy Ghost: and is not
the Power and the Holy Ghost Everlasting? Oh you Mockers and Scoffers! Take
heed, lest you be such as God will make your Bonds strong: And is not this
Kingdom within, that is in Power and Joy in the Holy Ghost? Is not it
established in Peace in the Heart? and are not the Saints Heirs of the Kingdom
and of the Life that has no End? and is not the Power of God Spiritual and
Divine.

And because it is said, G. F. has reached through his Children afar off to the
begetting of many to a lively Hope. And what then? does not the Apostle say,
many Members, yet one Body? they were baptized by one Spirit into one Body; and
though they were absent in the Body, yet present in the Spirit, and that it did
reach one unto another (mark reach) which was the Spirit and Power of Christ,
in which was their Fellowship and Union: Do you not manifest your dark
Hat-Spirit here? And the Life of Christ that has begotten G. F. the same it is
that does reach and beget others to God, and that Spirit is blessed (which begets
and brings out of the Curse) he was blessed (and is blessed) in all Generations;
and who are of Faith, are of Abraham, who was the Father of many Nations. And a
great deal of malicious Stuff is in your Book, which all that are sober, can
savor it from what a Blood-thirsty Spirit it is come, who would fain stir up
the People against us, and the Powers; but your Envy is seen. And if any have
gone out into any Uncleanness or Looseness, it has been a Grief to our Souls,
and a Wounding to our Spirits, to see Go^, his Truth, and his People
dishonored, and they have not been received amongst us again, but by
Repentance, which is according to the Mind of the Lord, and Practice of Christ
and his Apostles. And why are these Apostates so mad that G. F. should inherit
the Kingdom of God that is Everlasting? Are not Christ's Words, Seek the
Kingdom of God first, and all things shall follow? and because he and thousands
more have found the Kingdom of God, this torments you that are in the Kingdom
of Darkness: and whosoever will receive the Kingdom, must receive it as a
little Child; but you are too big for it, and you that trust your own Riches
Inward and Outward, cannot enter the Kingdom, Luke 18. and was not the Kingdom
of God to be preached? but you do not love to hear talk of it; but you that
once set your Hand to the Plough and look back, are not fit for the Kingdom of
God. And is it not said, the Kingdom of God is come to you, Luke 10. and was it
not said to the Backsliding Pharisees, like you, that the Kingdom was taken
from them? Is not this your Condition? has not the little Flock a Kingdom? but
you shall weep and gnash your Teeth, when you see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in
the Kingdom, and your selves shut out; for the Kingdom stands not in Word, but
in Power: and are not the good Seed the Children of the Kingdom? and will not
God establish his Seed for ever?

And now John Pennyman and William Mucklow, I have a few words to you, who,
like Brethren in Iniquity, have joined together to betray the Innocent; It had
been better for you, that A Millstone had been hanged about your Necks, and you
cast into the Sea, then that you should have done what you have done. And as
for thee, J. Pennyman, Thou have long been full of Envy; and though Friends
sought to preserve thee, if it might be, and to keep thee out of the Evil, yet
I feared this would come upon thee, knowing that there was a Murderous Spirit
in thee, and now thou have fully manifested it against G. F. and others of the
Saints; but Woe and Misery will be thy Portion, if thou do not Repent, for
thou have set thy self against the Truth, and art joined with the Enemies of
Christ, to Persecute his Followers: And thou have been a long time a Persecutor
of me, as thou know, and now thou vents thy Malice against my Brethren; but
I can say, God forgive thee, if it be his Will; but I fear thou are wholely
shut up in Darkness, and so for Destruction. And this was upon my Heart to
write unto thee, who am, and always desire to be a Servant to the Truth, which
thou despisest, called

Ellis Hooks.
THus Reader, have thou the Testimonies of several Persons named in that Libel;
some of whom are more obscure, others more known: their Truth and Honesty shall
speak for them, I will not; But most of them are too Noted for Worth and
Integrity to be doubted upon a Libel, stuffed with that Rage, Treachery,
Slander and Scoff. We might also produce the Condemnations of three Persons
against themselves, the first Letters of whose Names are unworthily mentioned
by the Libeller; but the Truth is sufficiently cleared, and their Addition
would give the Book too great a Bulk; we rather wish It had been many Sheets
less, knowing that great Books are seldom read in this Careless and Impatient
Age: only Reader be pleased to Consider the Deceit of this Adversary, and how
ready he is to stretch any thing to slander and defame both Particulars and a
Society. The Spirit of the Hat charged our Ministry with Whoredoms and
Strumpets in the present tense: This Apologizer tells the World, our Answer was
Evasion, because we took it so; for says he, the Book meant it of time past:
that the Book meant no such thing, unless a thing means quite otherwise then it
says, read the Passage. Next, what is that to us if a Judas or Demas that
received part of the Ministry, fall into the Evil of this World again; can we
do any more then Condemn it, and we did nothing less? Is that to prove our
Ministry Vicious to tell a Story, perhaps seven or ten Years since, of any one
or two that have at times opened their Mouth in our Assemblies? Oh! God, the
Righteous and Terrible Judge, will reckon with this Ungodly Libeller, and those
Base, Murdering Judasses that have furnished him with this dirty Trash: God will
clear our Innocence, and detect their Envy and Hypocrisy more convincingly to
all the World: and that dreadful, black and Stormy Day that hastens to try and
win now the Nations, will scatter them and their Mischievous Designs, when God
will preserve us in his Fear and Counsel, by his Power, to his Eternal Praise,
and our Consolation, World without End.

W. P.
A Postscript To the READER, Concerning the Unity of our Adversaries against
us, amidst the great Discord they are at amongst themselves.
HOw hearty these Men are in their Envy against us, and Hatred to the Way we
profess, is very discernable from their close Confederacy and strict Union, who
are as remote, and differing from, and absolutely contradictory to one another
in their Faith, Worship and Discipline, as to the Quakers themselves, against
whom they have combined. They are made up of some Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists, Socinians and Apostates from us. A strange Medley of Adversaries,
and stranger, that there should be such Union to Mischief! But let us view some
of their Principles.

1st, The Presb. Indep. And Anab. believe that the Father, the Son, and the
Spirit (though three Names, denoting three Personalities or Subsistences) are
One, Infinite, Eternal and Omnip^^^t God, At which the modern Socinian cries,
Blasphemy and Idolatry; For, says he, Christ is but purely a Man, and the
Spirit but a Creature. Now come in these Apostates against the Presb. Indep.
Anabapt. We deny your Personalities and Subsistences; And to the Socinians, We
own Christ and the Spirit to be of one Nature and Being with God the Father;
And it is Blasphemy to say, that Christ and the Spirit are Creatures. Here Is
the first Discord or Jumble between our Adversaries.

Secondly, The Presbyter. Indep. Anab. and these Apostates, assert God to be a
Spirit, At which these Socinianiz'd Followers of John Bidle say, There Is no
such thing; but, with J. Reeve and L. Muggleton, That he has a Body like to a
Man, and inhabits a certain Place.

Thirdly, The Presb. Indep. and Anab. concerned chiefly against us, hold, That
God from all Eternity elected a certain Number to Salvation, and reprobated the
residue to eternal Damnation, without respect to any Condition of Obedience or
Disobedience, thereby to illustrate his own Soveraignity and Glory; which
Principle these Apostates have so much Understanding yet left, as to repute
pernicious and damnable. The like do some of these Socinians we have to do
with; others of them having wheeled off a few years since to the Geneva
Predestinarian side.

Fourthly, The Presb. Indep. and Anab. believe, That by Christ's Life and
Sufferings wholely without, God's Justice was Satisfied for Sins, and
Justification completely wrought for the Elect, not only by Forgiving Sins
past, but reputing them really Just and Righteous whilst actually Sinful; which
kind of Doctrine these Apostates deny, as also does the Socinian, affirming,
That God needed no such rigid Satisfaction; that this is not to make him
Righteous, but Revengeful; and that Christ cannot so properly be said to be the
Cause as the Effect of the Father's Love; For God so loved the World, that he
gave his only begotten Son, etc. And though such are forgiven who truly Repent,
and that Remission was sealed by Christ's Blood, as a Sacrifice; yet Men are
not made really Righteous within, by any Imputation from another's
Righteousness without, while they are really Unrighteous within. This is the
4th. Contradiction.

Fifthly, Presb. Indep. and Anab. believe Christ to have now in Heaven an Human
Body, or one of Flesh, Blood and Bones. The Socinian and these Apostates say,
he has no such Body, but that which he has is more Spiritual and glorified.

6ly, The Presb. Indep. Anabapt. and these Apostates affirm the Immortality of
the Soul. The Socinians deny it.

7thly, The Presb. Indep. Anab. and Socinian deny the Light that shines within,
to be Christ in his Spiritual Appearance. These Apostates, though erred from
it, yet affirm it to be such.

8thly, The Presb. Indep. Anab. deny that it can lead Men that obey it unto
Salvation. The Socinian with these Apostates, affirm, that it is able to lead
such as follow it to Eternal Life.

9ly, The Presb. Indep. Anab. and Socinian deny the Spirit to be poured out in
these, as former Ages; or that Men ought to wait for the Motions of it to
Preach, Pray, or Praise God, These Apostates in words confess to maintain the
contrary.

10ly, The Presb. Indep. Anab. and Socinian affirm, That the Scriptures are the
only standing Rule, to measure and try Doctrines, and Spirits by under the
Gospel; These Apostates believe no such thing.

11ly, The Presb. Indep. Anab. and Socinians disown the Practice of Keeping on
the Hat in time of public Prayer; These Apostates call the Pulling of it off,
a Tradition of Men, a Romish Tradition, etc.

Yet, Reader, for our seasonable and due, proceeding against them, as
Innovators upon the Church of Christ, and Disturbers of our Peace, by this new,
unprofitable, and irreverent Practice, denying them in their persistence and
rejecting their Motions, as not coming from the Spirit of God, are we furiously
fallen upon by some of each of those forementioned Parties; who (as Men
forgetting their own Essential Differences, and that Persecution they have
followed one another with for years) like the ancient Scribes, Sadducees and
Pharisees, unanimously endeavor our Disgrace and Overthrow in the World; as if
they were all of one Faith in Doctrine, who scarcely in any two most weighty
Points hit: which shows, that Men under diverse fundamental Differences, may be
acted by one and the same Spirit of Envy and Bitterness against the Truth, and
them that live therein. What else can I call that which has given these
Apostates that place in their Hearts (that while Faithful, hated them, as they
still do us) who Judas-like have run away from us, to inform our Enemies which
way they may take us at an Advantage?

These Men they hug, commend and vindicate at so high a rate, as if they were
the only great Pilgrims on Earth for Righteousness (as much as they differ) and
we, a Crew of Tyrants and Hypocrites. Their Innovation must be called
Gospel-Liberty; but our Religious-Government, Tyranny: They justify the
Motions of these Apostates, and, condemn Us for refusing them, whom themselves,
both deny Motions, and the Way to know them. They put me in mind of the Jews,
of old, who were seldom wanting, in the Promotion of the Christians Sufferings
by the Heathen; nay, they were glad, and improved the least Occasion to set the
Infidels upon their backs always the Jew and Heathen said Amen to the
Destruction of the Christians; yea, that very thing for which the Jew in his
time suffered from the Heathen, to wit, That they worshipped an Ass's Head, was
after abusively made the Reproach of Christians, both by Jew and Heathen. What
others have we received from the Separatists of this Age? who make us to
inherit that sort of Suffering which they once thought Ungodly in their
Adversaries, How welcome was a Renegado Christian to the Heathen, or a
Backslider to the Jew? How cheery were they of such an one's Intelligence? and
how apt to aggravate it to the Wrong of Christianity? But if that was
nevertheless True, because of the Unfaithfulness and Treachery of its
Professors; neither is our Way to be concluded False, nor our Society Criminal,
because a few straggling Renegadoes have in their Discontents, furnished some
common Enemies with a broken and imperfect Account of our Church-Proceedings:
But as this will turn little to their Credit with Wise and Just Men, so have we
Confidence in God, that having brought us through many Difficulties, he will
continue to preserve us through the Peril of False Brethren, and all other
Tribulations, which do, and will but work a far more exceeding Weight of Glory,
yea of that Glory which was with the Father before the World began; and in the
Possession of which, the now despised Flock of God shall rest with him in that
World which never had Beginning, and is without End.

William Penn.
THE END.
ERRATA.
READER, THou art still desired to continue thy Kindness in Correcting such
Faults as have through Speed of Work escaped the Press; whether they be Words,
Letters, Points or Parenthesis: some of the most Considerable are here
collected.

Page, Line, Error -- Corrected. 4 17 that blot out 9 15 shown shown 19 time
blot out 28 time blot out 33 head hear 18 24 those these 21 15 entitle
entitling 25 20 a and 26 12 the Hat the Spirit of the Hat 33 8 Introductoction
Introduction 37 Godliness Godliness undeservedly 34 37 an on 35 1 the these 36
21 of in 38 6 and Indep. Independents 9 God given God has given 37 had has 49
21 ever never 54 14 were was 29 that both that the Intent of both 57 36
Cowardness Cowardice 59 26 upon upon it. 62 17 as blot out 71 3 a Paper part of
a Paper


