A Declaration or TEST To Distinguish PROTESTANT DISSENTERS, FROM PAPISTS, and
POPISH RECUSANTS.
I A. B. Do solemnly in the Presence of God, and in my Conscience, Profess,
Testify and Declare, that I do not believe that the Church of ROME, or PAPAL
CHURCH, is the True Church, out of which, there is no Salvation; Or that the
POPE, or Chief Bishop of ROME, is Christ's Vicar or Vicegerent on Earth. Or that
He, or the Sea of ROME jointly or severally, is Head of, or has any Supremacy
over the True CATHOLIC CHURCH in General, or my self in Particular. Or is sole
or chief Judge in Spiritual Matters, or of the Sense of the Holy Scriptures. Or
that the POPE or his Priests have power to Pardon Sins, past, present, or to
come.

And I do believe, That at, or after the Priests pronouncing his words of
Consecration upon the Elements of BREAD and WINE, commonly called the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, or Sacrament of the Altar, there is not any
Transubstantiation, nor any part of the Substance of the Bread or Wine changed
into Flesh or Blood of CHRIST. And that the Sacrifice of the MASS, and the Use
of, Adoring and Bowing to Crucifixes, Pictures and Images in Worship; As also,
that the Invocation and Adoration of the Virgin MARY, or any other Saint or
Angel, and Prayers to and for the Dead, are Practices Erroneous, Superstitious
and Idolatrous, and contrary to the Truth of the Holy Scriptures. I Believe
there is no Mediator between GOD and MAN, but CHRIST JESUS only the Lord of
Life and Glory.

And I do further Believe, That neither the POPE, nor any other, by or under
his Authority, has any Power to Depose PRINCES, or to Absolve their Subjects
of their Allegiance on any account whatsoever. Or has Power to Authorize, or
give Leave to Me, or any other Subject of this Realm whatsoever, to PLOT or
Conspire the Hurt of the KINGS Person, His State, Government, or People.

And I do Truly and Sincerely Profess, and in good Conscience Declare, That I
Believe KING CHARLES the II. is the Lawful and Rightful KING of this Realm, and
of all other His Dominions and Countries. And I do Promise to be True and
Faithful to Him, and His Lawful Successors; And to live a Sober and Peaceable
Life under His and Their Government, as becomes a True Christian, and
Protestant Subject.

And I do solemnly in the Presence of GOD, Testify and Declare, that I make
this Declaration, and every part thereof, in the plain and Ordinary Sense of
the Words read unto Me, as they are commonly Understood by English Protestants,
without any Evasion, Equivocation, or Mental Reservation whatsoever, etc.


