A LETTER of LOVE TO THE Young-Convinced
OF That Blessed Everlasting Way of Truth and Righteousness, now testified unto
by the People of the Lord (called Quakers) of what Sex, Age and Rank soever,
in the Nations of England, Ireland and Scotland, with the Isles abroad; but
more particularly those of that great City of LONDON; Spiritual Refreshments,
Holy Courage and Perfect Victory from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, Amen.
My dearly beloved Friends and Brethren;
WHo have been called by the Eternal Spirit, unto an Holy Calling, out of all
the Pleasures, Vanities, Customs, Profits and Cares of this perishing polluted
World, unto the pure Knowledge of the invisible God, and Jesus in you the Hope
of Glory, which, to as many as Believe and Obey, is Life Eternal; and who for
that little Beginning of your Heavenly Journey, have met with Reproach, Loss,
Suffering and bitter Trials; as one among you, and a Traveller with you, and
therefore deeply sensible of your heavy Exercise, and boweddown Spirits; I am
constrained by the Eternal Unction, which we have received from on High, to
visit you in tender Bowels of Love unfeigned, beseeching you all in God's most
Holy Fear and Counsel to stand fast, and make your Calling and Election sure,
which is not (my dearest Friends) to those External and Shadowy Services, that
could never perfect as concerning the Conscience, in which the Worship of the
Jews formerly, and the Nations now mostly do consist (Carnal and Beggarly
Elements indeed), but to that Law in the Heart, and Spirit manifested in the
Inward Parts, which is the Substance of all.

Here God is the Teacher of his People, and daily does replenish his with the
Immediate Virtue of his own Life; For God Eternal is broken forth, and by the
Mighty Power of his Spiritual Appearance is come, to stain the Beauty of all
the Inventions of Superstitious Men, and thereby to summon all Nations,
Kindreds, Tongues and People to Judgment, for their Unrighteousness, that he
alone may Reign King in the Heart, where the Devil has hitherto had Dominion,
that true Religion may consist in fearing him and working Righteousness, by the
powerful Operation of the Spirit of Jesus in them, which my dearly beloved
Friends, with all Singleness of Heart let us wait to be sensible of, that
through the glorious Rising of the pure Power of the Everlasting God, which is
felt by all the Children of the Light, we may be enabled to work out our great
Salvation with Fear and Trembling: For great and weighty is the Work of the
Almighty in this his Day of Appearance, even to adopt us Sons and Daughters of
the Most High, by a Participation of his Divine Nature, that as we have born
the Image of the Earthly, in Pride, Vanity, Wantonness, Avarice, and all manner
of Impieties; and that whilst some of us were under great Professions, and the
continual Feasting on Visible and Elementary Things; so that now we may daily
Experience, through Obedience to that Pure Light and Truth in the Inward Parts,
which leads to all Meekness, Patience and Purity, the Quickening of the New
Man, and sensibly witness a bearing of the Heavenly Image, that so we may come
to feel the Peace that passes the world's Understanding, and our poor, tossed,
tried and troubled Spirits in good measure fixed and anchored, in the
Immovable and Holy State, over all the Glories and Pollutions of the World,
that so nothing may ever prevail upon us, to return into our former ways and
Lusts, committed in our Ignorance: For, the overflowing Scourge of the
Almighty will be upon the Back of the Backslider, and his swift wrath will
overtake the Heart that faints by the way; yea, better were it that such had
never been visited with the Glorious Dayspring from on High, nor been
convinced by the Powerful Persuasions of the Holy Spirit concerning the Pure
Eternal WAY of TRUTH, then afterward to turn from it, and so trample the Blood
of that most Excellent Covenant under foot: Yea, it will be the most Dreadful
of all Aggravations to their Eternal Woe and Misery.

And therefore, My dear Friends, let us not be discomforted under all our sharp
and heavy Exercises, whether from within or without; for this I am fully
persuaded of, That the same pure Principle of Light and Truth, that has
appeared to give a certain Discerning of our States and Conditions, and wrought
a Convincement upon our Understandings, is able to give us that Succor and
Support, if our Minds be but seriously stayed thereon, as shall Sanctify us
throughout in Body, Soul and Spirit; and so preserve us clean, to God over all.

And My Dear Brethren, Let us not enter into any Murmurings against the Lord,
but be singly given up to know his Will and Work done in us, that we Perish
not, as those of old: And in the Tender Love of Jesus Christ I earnestly
entreat you, let us no more look back upon our ancient Pastimes and Delights
but with holy Resolution press on, press on); for they will steal away our
precious Souls, beget new Desire, raise the old Life, and finally, ensnare and
pollute our Minds again; and what will be the End of such Rebellion, but Woes
and Tribulations from the Hand of the Just God, World without end? Neither let
us enter into many Reasonings with Opposers; For that is the Life God's Power is
revealed to slay with the Two-edged Sword; for it is the Still, the Quiet and
the Righteous Life, which must be exalted over all. And this I say in a sound
Understanding, through the Mercies of the LORD, that Deadness, Darkness and
Anguish of Spirit, will be the End of such Disputing and Pragmatical
Christians, whose Religion consists much more in Words then Works, Confessing
then Forsakings, and in their own Will-performances and External O! servations,
then in the Reformation and Conversion of their Souls to God: And finally, we
our selves, who have Known something more of the Lord, may also reduce our good
Conditions to an utter Loss, by seeking to comprehend Dubious Matters in our
Understandings, and Disputing about them with every Opposer the Devil in a way
of Temptation shall present to us; which does no way Advance our Growth and
Increase in the Noble Principle of Truth.

And I beseech you, My Dear Friends, Let not the Fear of any External Thing
overcome the Holy Resolutions we have made to follow the Lamb, Christ Jesus,
through all the Tribulations, Trials and Temptations, he and his Followers ever
met withal; O! let us be Valiant in God's Cause on Earth, who have but a short
time and a few days to live.

And let the Constancy of the World to the Momentary Fashions, Pleasures and
Pollutions of it, the more ardently stir us up to express ours, for the Honor
of our God against them all, who will Reward us for whatsoever we bear, suffer
or part withal on his Account.

And therefore, I beseech you, Let neither Father nor Mother, Sister nor
Brother, Wife nor Child, House nor Land, Liberties nor Life it self, deter us
from our Holy Constancy; but as the faithful Ancients did of old, through
Deserts, Wildernesses and solitary Places, in Goats-Skins and Sheepskins,
endure all Torments and bitter Mockings in this Earthly Pilgrimage, for the
Inheritance which is Everlasting.

So, My Dear Friends, Let us do as we have them for our Example; however, let
us be very careful to show all due Respect to our Relations, not to be Exalted,
nor any ways Unruly, lest there be just Cause taken against us, and the
blessed Truth should suffer; but in the still, retired, holy and patient Life,
this pure eternal Principle of Light and Truth (as seriously and diligently
waited on) certainly brings into, let us all dwell and abide, so shall we feel
the Powerful Operations of God's Holy Spirit, to the more complete redeeming of
our exercised Souls from under the Dominion of Sin, and to the giving all of us
a clearer Understanding and sounder Judgment of those things that are to be
parted from (as, the Pleasures, Cares and Customs of the World, that stand in
the fallen Nature, and only nourish the same, but crucify the Self-denying Lord
of Glory), and of the Things of God, and his spiritual Kingdom, which are to be
adhered to, that in his pure Wisdom, which is from above, we may all be kept
and preserved, over all the Snares and Temptations of the Adversary, both on
the Right Hand and on the Left.

And as one that is a Travailer in this Way, I even Beseech, Caution and
Admonish you all in the Holy Awe of God, That you never forbear Meeting and
Assembling of your selves with the Holy Remnant, amongst whom we first received
our Blessed Convincement. O! forever let us Honor the Lord's Truth, and those
who do sincerely profess the same, but more especially, such as were in Christ
before us; for this is well-pleasing unto the Lord.

And let us beware of Lightness, Jesting or a Careless Mind, which grieves the
Holy Spirit, that stands ready to seal us unto the Day of our perfect
Redemption; but let us be Grave, Weighty and Temperate, keeping low in Body, as
well as Mind, that in all things we may be Examples, and a Sweet Savor for the
God who has loved and called us.

And My Dear Friends, Let us keep in the Simplicity of the Cross of Jesus, even
in Plainness of Speech, and out of the World's flattering and deceitful
Respects; for we are as well to be a Cross in our Garbes, Gates, Dealings and
Salutations, as Religion and Worship, to this Vain, Adulterated and Apostatized
Generation. So, in the pure Measure of Truth, that has been manifested to
every Particular, and has convinced us of the Unrighteousness of the World, and
the Vanity and Emptiness of all its Professions of God, Christ and Religion, O
let us stand and abide! that we may feel it to be our Refuge and strong Tower,
when the Enemy shall approach, either by Inward Exercise, or Outward Bonds and
Sufferings, which in all likelihood will suddenly overtake us, for the Trial of
our most precious Faith; so shall we sensibly experience that heavenly Blood of
cleansing to stream therefrom, which only can give Remission, cleanse from all
Sin, and finally, purge the Conscience from Dead Works, to serve the Living,
Everlasting, Holy God, Almighty, Lord of Hosts, King of Nations, and King of
Saints. And whatsoever things are True, whatsoever things are Honest,
whatsoever things are Just, whatsoever things are Pure, whatsoever things are
Lovely, and whatsoever things are of Good Report, if there be any Virtue, if
there be any Praise O let us mind these things! and the God of Peace, that has
by his Eternal Quickening Power raised Jesus in Thousands from the Dead, Bless,
Accompany and Preserve us over all Trials and Tribulations, unto his Eternal
Habitations of Rest and Glory.

Carberry, in the Country of Cork, the 19th of the 12th Month, 1669. Your
Brother and Fellow-Travailer in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus our Lord; W.
P.

THE END.

