A LETTER From a Gentleman in the COUNTRY, To his Friends in LONDON, Upon the
Subject of the Penal Laws and Tests.
Quod tibi non vis fieri, alteri non feceris.
Gentlemen,
I Wonder mightily at the News you send me, that so many of the Town are averse
to the Repeal of the Penal Statutes; surely you mean the Clergy of the present
Church, and those that are Zealous for their Dignity and Power: For what part
of the Kingdom has felt the Smart of them more, and at all times, and on all
occasions represented their mischief to the Trade, Peace, Plenty and Wealth of
the Kingdom, so freely as the Town has always done? But you unfold the Riddle
to me, when you tell me it is for fear of Popery, though I own to you, I cannot
comprehend it any more than you do Transubstantiation: For that we should be
afraid of Popery for the sake of Liberty, and then afraid of it because of
Persecution, seems to me absurd, as it is, that Liberty should be thought the
high way to Persecution. But because they are upon their fears, pray let me
tell you mine, and take them among the rest in good part.

If the Romanists seek ease by Law, it is an Argument to me they desire to turn
good Countrymen, and take the Law for their Security, with the rest of their
Neighbors; and a greater Complement they cannot put upon our English
Constitution, nor give a better pledge of their desires to be at Peace with us.
But if we are so Tenacious as we will keep on foot the greatest blemish of our
Reformation, Viz. our Hanging, Quartering, Plunder, Banishing Laws; Is it not
turning them out of this quiet Course, and telling them if they will have ease
they must get it as they can^or we will never conceed it? And pray tell me if
this be not thrusting them upon the methods we fear they will take at the same
time that we give that; for the reason why we do so?

If Law can secure us, which is the Plea that is made, we may doubtless find an
expedient in that which may repeal these, if the danger be not of Liberty it
self, but of our loosing it by them at last; for there is no mischief the wit
of Man can invent, that the wit of Man cannot avoid. But that which (I confess)
makes me melancholy, is, That methinks we never made more haste to be cousened,
no, not in the business of the Declaration of Indulgence, when in the name of
Property that was actually damned, which at least reprieved it; and the price
of the Church of England gave for it, Viz. her promise of a Legal Ease actually
failed us: For instead of saving our selves from Popery, we are by these
partialities provoking it every day, and methinks foolishly for our own safety;
because there can be no other end in doing so, than securing that Party which
calls it self the Church of England, that is in her Constitution, none of the
best Friends to Property; for Men's Liberties and Estates are by her Laws made
forfeitable for Nonconformity to her: And I challenge the Records of all time
since Popery got the Chair in England, to produce an eighth part of the Laws to
ruin Men for Conscience, that have been made since the other has been the
national Religion, which is (I say,) a scandal to the Reformation.

She says, she is afraid of Popery, because of its Violence, and yet uses Force
to compel it; Is not this resisting Popery with Popery? which we call loving
the Treason but hating the Traitor: She would have power to Force or Destroy
others, but they should not have power to Force or Destroy her, no not to save
themselves: Shift the hand never so often this Weapon is still the same. 'Twere
happy therefore that all Parties were disarmed of this Sword, and that it were
put where it ought only to be in the civil Magistrates hand, to terrify Evil
Doers, and cherish those that do well, remembering St. Peter's saying (in
Cornelius's case) for an Example, I perceive now of a truth that God is no
respecter of Persons, but those that fear him and work Righteousness in all
Nations, shall be accepted: Else what security does the Church of England give
to the great Body of her Dissenters, that she will not do what she fears from
Popery, when she has a Prince of her own Religion upon the Throne, that has
made so fair a Progress these last Six and twenty Years in ruining Families for
Nonconformity, under Princes of another Persuasion. Come, Interest will not
lie, she fears Liberty as much as Popery: Since those that want, and Plead for
the one, are an hundred times more in number than the Friends of the other, and
all of her side, that Popery should not mount the Chair: So that she would get
more than she would lose by the Repeal, if an equal desire to subject both
Popish and Protestant Dissenters to her Power and Government, be not the
Principle she walks by in her present Aversion.

And to show you that this is the case, and that her Aversion to Popery is a
sham to the Liberty desired, the Dissenters are of no use to her, while the
Penal Laws are on foot; for by them they are put in the power of a Prince of
the Religion of the Church she fears; but the moment they are Repealed, so far
as concerns the preventing Popery to be National, the Dissenters are equally
interested with the Church of England against it. But then here is the
mischief, This Liberty takes the Rod out of her hand, she can no more whip
People into her Churches, and she perhaps may modestly suspect her own Virtue
and Ability to preach them thither.

In short, if she were in earnest against Popery, more than in love with her
own Power and Grandeur; that is, if the World were not in the way, she would
rejoice to deliver Men of her own Religion, that are so much more numerous than
the Papists, that they migh balance against her fears of their prevailing: But
to cry she is for Liberty to Protestant Dissenters, and make the demonstration
of it, her keeping up the Laws that ruin them, and then say it is for fear of
the Religion the Prince owns, and yet force them into his hands by doing so,
is, I must confess, something incomprehensible.

Besides properly and naturally speaking, the Church of England is the People
of England, and when it is applied to a Party, it is a Faction to the whole; and
that Title has no more truth in it, then it is sense to say the Roman Catholic
Church, which in English is a particular Universal Church: And pray is there no
room left to consider this hard case of the Kingdom? I hope the Civil
Magistrate will, who is the Supreme Pastor of this Civil Church on Earth. Is
she then no more than a Party? no certainly. And how great a one, a true
Liberty of Conscience would best tell us, and that is the true reason, and not
Popery, that she is tender in the Point.

I conclude then, that whilst those of that Religion only desire to be upon the
Level with others; I mean upon Native Rights, the Great Charter, what we all of
us call our Birthright, let us not refuse it, lest God suffer them to prevail
to curb our partiality. There are Laws enough to punish Offenders against the
State, if these were repealed, and not condemn people by Anticipation. That Law
which catches a Protestant, will catch a Papish Traitor, Riotor, or Seditious
Person. Again, let us reflect, that we have a Prince of Age, and more Honor;
the prospect of three excellent Princes of the Protestant Religion, the paucity
of the Papists, the number of the Enemies of their Communion, their unity in
that Aversion: What greater security can we have in the World? Policy, Honor,
Religion, Number, Unity, ay, Necessity too, conspire to make us safe: For all
these are concerned in the means of our preservation; unless our fears and our
follies should prevail, which I confess I apprehend most: For they will be
deserted of God, that forsake him and themselves too; Who dare to a certain
evil that a supposed good may come of it, contradict their own Principles, deny
what they expect, sow what they would not reap, do to others what they would
not that others should do to them: But there is a God in Heaven, and he is
just: He will meet to us what we measure to one another, and his Judgment is
inevitable. I therefore advise the Church of England to be as ready in her
Christian compliances as is possible. First, Because it is impious to keep up
destroying Laws for Religion, when her Savior tells her upon this very
Question, That he came not to destroy Men's lives but to save them. Secondly,
Because by this she will wipe off the Reproach she throws, by continuing them
upon her own Apologies for Liberty of Conscience, when under the wheel of
Power. Thirdly, Because Liberty to the Papists by Law, is bringing them into
the legal interest of the Kingdom, and will prevent the force they may else be
driven too, by being made and left desperate: For it is not to be thought they
will willingly pay the reckoning in another Reign, if by any means they can
prevent it; and keeping up the Penal Laws can be no security to t^^ Church of
England from such attempts, though they may provoke them upon he^ Fourthly, She
hereby saves her Dissenters; and if it be really her inclination to do so, she
has no other way, and this unites them to her in Affection and Interest, if not
in Worship. But if (on the contrary) she persists obstinately to refuse this
national paciffick; the Dissenters I hope, will consider their honest Interest,
Conscience and Property, and embrace those opportunities to secure them, that
God in his all-wise Providence is pleased to yield them in this conjuncture.
Thus Gentlemen, you have my Thoughts upon your News; pray communicate them to
our Acquaintance, and believe that I am,

Yours, etc.
POSTSCRIPT.
FOr the Tests that are so much discoursed of, I shall only say, that it is
another Mystery of the Times to me, how the Church of England that was against
the Exclusion, can be for them that were designed for a Preamble to it; since
in so doing, she is for that which was contrived to introduce the Exclusion she
was so Zealously against. I confess, I never understood her very well, and she
grows more and more unintelligible; but this I know, that she must either be
sorry for what she has done, or she did not know what she did. The first
reflects upon her Loyalty, the last upon her Understanding; and because I think
that the least and likeliest evil, I conclude she is no Infallible Guide upon
the Question.

Another thing you tell me that gives great offense, is, His Majesty's turning
out Protestants, and putting in People of his Religon. This I conceive a fault
that the Church of England is only answerable for. Other Princes have been so
unhappy as to suffer Tests and Marks of distinction that have broken and
disordered their Kingdoms, by depriving those of their Temporal comforts that
would not receive them; and this People esteemed a mighty Grievance; and were
frequent and elegant in their Complaints about it. We have a King now that
would remove these Marks of distinction, and secure all Men upon their native
Right and Bottom, that all Parties might sit safely under their own Vine, and
under their own Fig Tree; so that now, who is for Liberty? becomes the Test.
Are they then fit to be trusted that are out of his Interest, and against the
Liberty he is for, and the Nation wants and craves? Or is it good sense, that
he (who is mortal as well as other Men) should leave the Power in those hands,
that to his Face show their aversion to the Friends of his Communion though he
offers to maintain her still? She had the offer to keep them, upon that
Principle that must heal and save the Kingdom, Liberty of Conscience; which
shows the King was willing to be served by her Sons to choose, if upon the same
general Principle with himself: Wherefore it is the Gentlemen of the Church of
England that turn themselves out of Power, rather than endure Liberty of
Conscience to others; and shall this Vice be their Virtue. They must be
heartily in love with Persecution that can Sacrifie their places to the
upholding of Penal Laws for Religion, because they would not let others, not
only, not come in, but not live at their own Charges: A fine thing to suffer
for. Their Ancestors were Martyrs by Penal Laws, but these for them. The cause
is changed whatever they think, and I am afraid they are changed too for want
of thinking. I profess I pity them with all my Heart, and wish them more wit,
and better Consciences against next time, if ever they have it; for these (if
they will believe me) will hardly ever make so good a Bargain for them, as they
have lost by them. More of this, if you like it, next time, and till then Adieu.



FINIS.
Printed in the Year 1687.


