THE INVALIDITY OF John Faldo's Vindication Of his Book, called, Quakerism No
Christianity. BEING A REJOINDER In Defense of the Answer, entitled, Quakerism
a New Nickname for Old Christianity. Wherein many Weighty Gospel Truths are
handled, and the Disingenuous Carriage of our Adversary is observed, for the
better Information of all Moderate Inquirers. In II Parts.

By W. P.

Who loves not Controversy for Controversy sake.

Every day they wrest my Words, all their Thoughts are against me for Evil,

Psa. 56. 5. -- But he that does a Wrong shall receive for the Wrong which he
has done,

Col. 3. 23. Printed in the Year, 1673.

To all that Seriously Profess RELIGION, Among those called, Episcopalians,
Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Socinians and Latitudinarians.
THe Duty I ow to Almighty God, and the Respect I bear to his Truth, with that
great Concern which lives in my Mind for your better Information about us (a
poor People, traduced by some, despised by others) and our Principles
(mis-given here, perverted there) are the only Inducements I have to pursue
this tedious and unpleasant Controversy.

And that you might be undeceived of those false Apprehensions, vulgar Stories
or the Insinuations of more prevalent Agents have impressed you with, I could
(God knows) be contented, that even Sufferings were added to my Labors. What
would I not cheerfully undergo to win you into a serious View and impartial
Consideration of our Case! Truly, I have that Belief of many of you, that were
the Prejudice of Education and common Vogue of the World set aside, you would
do us some Justice. And I beseech you, weigh how much it becomes you, you, the
serious Professors of Religion, to give us a fair Hearing for our Principles
and Reputations, before you finally determine any thing against us. To Try all
things was an Apostolical Exhortation: Nor can you escape the Censure of
Dis-regarding it, if you decline a fair Inquiery after us? Let not Education be
dearer to you then Truth; and see if more be not to be known by you then yet
you know. Objected Novelty ought to have no Force with a Christian, since had
that prevailed, he had never been one: Nor should the Offense, Formality, or
Worldly Learning takes at us stave you off from a serious Search, much less the
Crucify, Crucify, of the Vulgar, because the God of Truth, when manifested in
the Flesh, was not exempted from more of that then ever yet attended us; Indeed
it should rather be an Argument for us.

Believe us, we entreat you, when we tell you, that Religion, Pure and
Undefiled Religion, we greatly love; It Is that we desire as well to Live as
Defend: God knows, we have long made it the Bent of our Hearts, and the whole
Aim of our Lives; without it we were the Miserablest of Men: Yet how are we
Defamed, Undervalued, Contemned and set at Naught, for a Company of Seducers,
Blasphemers, Idolaters, and what not? But why? because we are not understood,
and as cunningly (by some) hindered from being so. But therefore is this
Discourse more particularly Dedicated to you, that you may be both acquainted
with the Foulest Charges one of our greatest Enemies has exhibited against us,
his kind of Witnesses produced to confirm them, and his Management of the whole
Debate; with our Plain and Honest Vindication. If we shall be found guilty,
then let us be Condemned for such as he has represented us to be; but if
innocent, suffer us not any longer to Groan under the Heavy Pressure of such
Infamous Accusations; for in omitting to Right us for these Grievous Wrongs,
you will make your selves Accessories to an Injustice that must needs be
detested of all Virtuous and Good Men. I leave this Rejoinder with you,
containing the True Meanings of our Wrested Principles, and those confirmed by
express Scriptures, many R^^sons, and a Cloud of Testimonies: And shall
conclude with a Passage out of advers. Err. Johan. Hierosoly mitani.
Jerome, well-becoming all Honest Writers, and fit to be observed of every
impartial Reader. Quaeso, Lector, ut memor Tribunalis Domini, and de judicio
tuo te intelligens judicandum, nec mihi, nec Adversario meo faveas, neve
Personas Loquentium, sed causam consideres. I beseech thee, Reader, that
remembering the Judgment Seat of the Lord, and understanding that as thou do
judge, so thou shall be judged, thou favourest neither me, nor mine Adversary
that writes against me, and that thou regardest not the Persons, but the Cause
only.

I am a real Valuer of whatsoever is Worthy in any of you, and an Hearty Wisher
of your Improvement in the Knowledge of those things that lead to Eternal
Peace, which are only to be found in the Light and Life of Righteousness.
William Penn.

THE CONTENTS.
Part I.
CHAP. I. OF Christianity, in General, page 12. CHAP. II. Of Quakerism, as this
Independent Priest scoffingly calls our Holy Religion, page 25. CHAP. III. Of
the Scriptures, page 31. CHAP. IV. His Pre^ence of our Equalling our own
Writings and Sayings with the Scriptures, page 41. CHAP. V. Of the Scriptures
being the Rule of Faith and Life, and Judge of Controversy, p. 68. CHAP. VI.
Of our Dehorting People from Reading the Scriptures, etc. as charged by this
Adversary, page 94. CHAP. VII. Of Scripture-Commands; what are binding, and
what not. Our Adversary's Disingenuity observed, page 103. CHAP. VIII. That we
do not Deny the Scriptures to be any Means whereby to resist Temptation, in
Opposition to, and Denial of our Adversary's Charge, page 121. CHAP. IX. Not
we, but our Adversary opposes the Teachings of the Spirit to the Doctrines of
the Scriptures. The Testimonies brought by him, cleared and delivered from his
Application. Our Doctrine proved from Scripture and several Testimonies. His
frequent and gross Perversions of our Words and Writings discovered and justly
rebuked. page 141.
PART II.
CHAP. I. Of Gospel Ordinances in general; such truly embraced. page 187. CHAP.
II. Of true and false Ministry. p. 203. CHAP. III. That we own a Gospel Church.
contrary to our Adversary's Charge. page 217. CHAP. IV. His Charge of our
Denying to hear the Word of God examined: True Preaching acknowledged. page
237. CHAP. V. Of True and False Prayer. p. 240. CHAP. VI. Of Positive
Ordinances, as our Adversary calls them, to wit, Baptism and the Supper. Of
Baptism in particular. page 249. CHAP. VII. Of the Bread and Wine which Christ
gave to his Disciples after Supper, commonly called the Lord's Supper. page
264. CHAP. VIII. Of the Doctrine of Justification. page 273. CHAP. IX. Of the
True Christ. We own, and our Adversary proved to deny him. page 296. CHAP. X.
Three Scriptures rescued from the false Glosses of our Adversary, Joh. 1. 9.
Romans 10. 8. 2 Pet. 1. 19. page 317. CHAP. XI. That we are not guilty of
Idolatry, as charged by our Adversary. True Worshippers. The Charge inverted.
page 343. CHAP. XII. Of the Resurrection of Dead Bodies, and Eternal
Recompense. Our Doctrine maintained by Scripture, Reason and Authorities. page
362. CHAP. XIII. My Adversary declines meddling with my Appendix. His
Disingenuity great. His Perversions and Wrestings about his Key, pretending to
open our Words, Detected. page 389. CHAP. XIV. Of Reflections on Persons and
Things. page 397. CHAP. XV. His several gross Miscarriages summed and further
observed. p. 420.
Authors and Testimonies, Occasionally cited in Defense of this DISCOURSE.
R. Allen, page 16. Ambrose, p. 371. D. Amesius, p. 98. Arnobius, p. 21.
Augustine. p. 15, 130, 285, 360, 361. D. Barnes, p. 129, 234, 292. H. Barrow, p.
176. M. Barker, p. 247. T. Beza, p. 96, 97, 333. J. Bradford, p. 48, 227. T.
Brooks, p. 247, 383. Brownists, p. 176. H. Bullinger, p. 115, 143, 245, 292,
360. J. Calvin, p. 46, 92, 93, 96, 245. J. Camero, p. 358. J. Cann, p. 153,
176. J. Caryl, p. 129, 172, 247. S. Castalio, p. 36, 172. D. Cave, p. 22. J.
Chrysostom, p. 46, 118. M. T. Cicero, p. 92, 93. J. Clarius, p. 36, 43, 172,
357, 372. Clemens Alex. p. 22, 173, 292, 329. P. Codurcus, p. 172, 358, 376. T.
Collier, p. 73, 114, 120, 154, 202, 215, 236, 316, 341, 377.) Council Laod. p.
36, 37. G. Cradock, p. 43, 246. D. Cradock, p. 277. J. Dallaeus, p. 78. W.
Dell, p. 45, 46, 75, 120, 153, 215, 230, 246. Annot. cert. Divines, p. 368,
372. Doctor and Student, p. 91, 93. B. Downham, p. 293. J. Drusius, p. 43, 172,
357, 358, 376. Epictetus, p. 93. Erasmus, p. 36, 43, 96, 97, 325, 333, 358.
Ethiopick Version, p 331. D. Everard, p. 200, 239, 247, 285. Eusebius Pamph. p.
21, 22, P. Fagius, p. 326, 360. Farellus, p. 378. D. Featly, p. 118. Mart.
Finch, p. 342. C. Goad, p 128, 200, 214, 226, 235, 315, 341. W. Greenham, p.
217. H. Grotius, p. 36, 295. B. Hall, p. 383. D. Hammond, p 295, 378. C. J.
Hobert, p. 91. P. D. Huetius, p. 378. E. Hutter, p. 329. Jerome, p. 379. B.
Jewel, p. 113, 314. Irenaeus, p. 291. Ignatius, p. 340. Justin. Mart. p. 340,
359. Lactantius, p. 92. H. Latimer, p. 46, 50, 51. M. Luther, p. 46, 47, 98,
120. Lutherans, p. 43. P. Martyr, p. 98, 107, 118, 360. D. H. Moore, p. 358,
374. S. Munsterus, p. 172, 357. Origin, p. 292, 379. D. Owen, p. 172 W. Parker,
p. 54. D. Patrick, p. 277. W. Perkins, p. 246. Philo, p. 172. J. Philpot, p.
47, 50. Plato, p. 329. Plotin, p. 172. Plutarch, p. 93. P. S. Polano, p. 37. J.
Robinson, p. 176. A. Sadeel, p. 285. Samaritan Copy, p. 326. B. Sanderson, p.
16, 92, 93, C. C. Sandius, p. 78. Scapula, p. 329. Seneca, p. 93. W. Sherlock,
p. 277. Spanish Translation, p. 322. J. Sprig, p. 127, 201, 202, 293, 315, 342.
D. Stillingfleet, p. 89, 277. Synesius, p. 378. Syriack Translation, p. 331.
Theophil. Antiochenus, p. 21, 371. Tertullian, p. 21, 118, 360. D. Tillotson,
p. 89, 277. W. Tindall, p. 46, 113, 115, 120, 226, 234. L. Valla, p. 36. F.
Vatablus, p. 36, 43, 172, 357, 358. Vossius, p. 378. B. Usher, p. 16.
Waldenses, p. 76. J. de Wessalia, p. 418. J. Wickliff, p. 46. D. Wilkins, p.
33, 226. R. Woodman, p. 341. N. Zegerus, p. 36, 358. V. Zwinglius, p. 46, 47.
THE INVALIDITY OF John Faldo's Vindication Of his Book called, Quakerism No
Christianity.
The Introduction.
THis Controversy, not of Choice, but absolute Necessity, thus continued (and
which has swelled this Rejoinder beyond both my Desire and Expectation,
through such great Provocations and multiplied Wrongs, as are utterly
inconsistent with the Honor of Truth to put up, and which require our serious
Notice in its Defense) was begun by J. Faldo, a Nonconforming Minister at
Barnet, in a large Discourse, entitled, QUAKERISM NO CHRISTIANITY (disgusted,
as I have heard, at the coming over of some of his Hearers to the Way we
profess) in which he not only accused us of the Blackest Errors, but pretended
to prove every Charge out of our own Writings; an Essay none had ever yet
fallen on besides himself. At what Rate soever he proved them, certain it is,
he charged us home, and managed it with Equal Disingenuity. This, it was my Lot
to answer, which I did in a Book, called QUAKERISM a New Nickname for Old
CHRISTIANITY, etc. Chiefly intending by it to discover, how grossly he had
mistaken our Principles, and unworthily perverted those Words we had employed
to maintain them; and finally, to confirm our true Sense with the Authority of
holy Scriptures: Unto which he has ventured to give us a Reply, doubtless that
he might not be thought to have nothing to say, so little has he said to the
Purpose, which is already become the Discourse of the Moderate, and Regret of
his Party; But what he wants of Solidity, he fills up with Air, and places his
Reflections to the Account of Arguments; and when he comes to a Pinch, he gives
us Confidence for Evidence, attended most commonly with a Rout of hard Names,
to drive it more forcibly home. And truly herein he has deceived me; for I must
needs say, I did not take him to be one that would withstand such manifest
Conviction, and that with no other then Froth, Rant, and very Obstinacy: I
hoped that when I had given him a Serious Answer to his Book, he would either
have ingenuously acknowledged his Mistake of our Writings, with this
Satisfaction, that he found us not so Heterodox as he apprehended us to be; or
else have bestowed upon us such a sober and convincing Reply, as might have
sufficiently proved our Error, and justified his own Undertaking: But instead
thereof, behold a Pamphlet stuffed with Rage and scornful Abuse! by him
entitled, A Vindication; but is indeed his Condemnation with God and all Good
Men.

He seems to have deserted the Matter, as giving that for gone; and under
pretense of answering my Book, fully pays himself of my Person. Of that he has
no Mercy; I am all that a Man swelled with Passion, Prejudice and Revenge can
character me to be.

He complains much, yet himself is the Injurer; Forgery he lays at my Door,
and it is his own beloved Crime; He says I boast of Victory, yet John Faldo is
the great Crack; Where I rebuke his Froth, he returns me Railing; and if I
improve his own Similes against him, then Disingenuous W. P. Devotion he fleers
at, as if it were an old-fashioned thing; My Reprehension of his Ill-Language,
he counts intolerable; Is this your Meek Christian, says he? making it a
greater Sin in me to Defend my self, then in him to Accuse me; Personal and
Princip^^ Reflections run fluently through his first Book; My Reproof of that
unprovoakt Asperity, he storms at, and will needs have it to be Reviling; and
instead of Repenting of his ill beginning with us, he has greatly increased
his score, by a more Scurrilous Reply; as if the Man's Business were not to
make us Better, but prove and justify his own being Worse. He would make us in
Love with our Errors, if such we held, that uses so ill a Way to reclaim us.
Does he think we are to be Jeered or Railed out of our Religion? No, No. In his
first, he went too far; In his second he has done little else. What shall we
say of those, whose Pride has brought them to such a pitch of Passion, that
Rage must follow Reproof, and Revenge a Confutation? Without out breaking one
part of the Law of Modesty, I may say (for I know) he is irrecoverably gone in
my Answer. Not one Charge can he prove, nor one Friend of ours can he make to
speak to his Purpose. He was for having us to assassinate our selves; our
Friends he would fain have to turn Executioners to their own Principles. This
Fool's Paradise pleased him; but the Discreet know and think better: Some were
startled at the Pretenses of the first, wherein nothing less then our own Books
w^^e to bear Witness against us, who are now great Abominators of his Injustice
and Railing. Blessed be God for that Good Success; we hope the like of our
following Endeavors. I have for the sake of such as expect an Answer, sent
forth this Rejoinder; wherein several weighty Points are as clearly handled, as
Time, Place, and other Occasions would permit. It greatly concerns all to be
fully satisfied therein: And I hope, there is enough said for all Impartial
Readers to reap that Benefit. I seek no Revenge, I aim not at Reputation, God
is Record: neither has he done enough to raise up the One, or question the
Other; yet he has done doubtless what he could, and I must take the Will for
the Deed. I shall not show my self so Personally concerned in this Rejoinder,
as his Personal Reflections would make me; it is below the Spirit of a Christian
Man to be disturbed by such Barks of Malice; Curs, yelping at the Moon, neither
questions nor ecclipses her Light: It Is a sort of Suffering I must expect to
undergo; and the best is, I find little Difficulty in it. And though I shall
not cite all his Injustice toward me, for that were well nigh to transcribe
his Book; yet that which may be requisite to give a further Relish of this
pretended Christian, may be done in its proper place. In the mean time I shall
betake my self to the Consideration of such Passages in his Reply, as may be
thought to call for my Rejoinder, and that without those insolent Checks,
frequent Abuses, and very vain and gingling Taunts* he has cramb'd his Pamphlet
with: For I can suffer that my self, I cannot let the Truth suffer. Nor can I
think my Silence to his Revilings the worst Answer, especially when my Religion
will not allow of a like Return in Vindication: For though Scoffs and Abusive
Reflections may discredit an Adversary with the Weak or Prejudiced, yet with a
Serious Reader, such rather pollute, then defend a Cause. I will leave the
whole Honor of that Way of Confutation to my Adversary, not being in such
Necessity for Conquest, as to take that Dishonorable and Dishonest Way of
procuring it. If I can make my Rejoinder a little more intelligible, then he
has done his Reply, defend the Truth I own and honor, so as to answer my
Reader's Conscience, I shall have obtained my whole End; and maugre the
Impetuous and blustering Humor of a few Enraged Adversaries, my Mind will
sweetly rest in Peace with God, in whom I have believed, and for whose Cause
only I am thus warmly concerned in the World.

CHAP. I.
Of Christianity in General.

JOhn Faldo, in his Book, entitled, Quakerism No Christianity, begins with his
Account of Christianity, What it is? as I honestly observed in my Answer,
called, Quakerism a New Nickname for Old Christianity. Qua. no Chr. page 2.
What he laid down was this, By Christianity we are not to understand all those
Matters of Faith and Practice which Christianity does obliege us unto; for
Christianity is a large and noble thing, and takes in all that is worthy in
those Religions which it has out-stript: To which I gave this Answer, (though
disingenuously mangled and transposed by my Adversary) A strange Definition of
true Christianity: My Answ. page 2, 3.
For, if to Believe, and Do all Christianity requires, be not Christianity;
then there is something beyond all that Christianity requires to be believed
and done that is Christianity; else I understand nothing. This is all he brings
of my Answer to ground his Reply upon, omitting that part of his Definition,
and my Return to it, which in Honesty stood him most upon to consider. But
first let us hear his Reply to what he has quoted (for Reply and Rejoinder
distinguish our matter)

Reply, You may as well affirm a Finger to be a Man, when separated from the
rest of the Man, as common Justice, Truth, etc. to be Christianity.


Rejoinder, Though the Finger be not the Man, yet it is Part of the Man,
therefore common Justice, Truth, etc. by his own Instance, are a Part of
Christianity; but if no Part of Christianity, then may Christianity be without
Justice or Truth. My Drift was in my Answer, and is in my Rejoinder, That
something of what was at Anti^ch called Christianity, was in the World before
Chrst's Visible Appearance at Jerusalem. And that his Coming was but to bring
the World to a more improved Knowledge and large Enjoyment of that Divine
Power, Wisdom Life and Righteousness, which former Ages had comparatively but
an obscure Sight, and imperfect Sense of; and this was my Reason, because the
contrary Opinion excludes all antecedent times from any Share in Christianity;
and plainly shuts them out of all Hope of Eternal Salvation, which my Adversary
takes a little notice of in these words.


Rep. If the Scripture had any where said, that none but Christians shall be
saved, his Consequence had been grounded. page 5.
But he might have found asserted in my Book, THAT SALVATION DEPENDS ON A RIGHT
BELIEF AND ACCEPTANCE OF THE COVENANT OF GRACE.


Rejoyn. The Scripture says (as I instanced for Proof of that little Part of
my Answer by him considered) For there is no other Name under Heaven given
among Men, Acts 4. 12.
whereby we must be Saved, neither is there Salvation in any other. Now how to
distinguish betwixt a Man being saved by Christ, and his being a true
Christian, I must declare my Ignorance: Nay, John Faldo, though in
Contradiction to himself, tells us, That Salvation depends on a right Belief
and Acceptance of the Covenant of Grace. Let him either show how a Man may
rightly believe and accept of the Covenant of Grace, and yet be no Christian,
or else he does nothing to his own purpose, whatever he does for ours. Christ
is called, God's Covenant; The New Covenant stands in him. How a Man may
believe in the Covenant, and not in Christ; How in Christ, and not be a
Christian, concerns John Faldo to reconcile; only, Reader, let me tell thee,
that of about Six Pages concerning Christianity, this Man has not undertaken
Eight Lines to reply to, neither are those the Strength of my Discourse.

To conclude, I dare not repute Enoch to be no Christian, who walked with God;
Abraham no Christian, who saw Christ's Day, and rejoiced; David no Christian,
who was a Man after God's own Heart: Neither can I believe with him, that the
Apostle's Exhortation, Phil. 4. Whatsoever things are True, Honest, Just, Pure,
Lovely, of Good Report, if there be any Praise, think on these things, is no
Part of Christianity; or, that a Man may be a Saint and not a Christian; or,
that a Child of God is not a Good Christian; or, that James was mistaken, who
said, That the Pure and Undefiled Religion was to keep our selves unspotted of
the World; which strange kind of Consequences unavoidably follow from J.
Faldo's Assertion and Definition. For our Parts, As we think it no Wrong to
Christianity, so no Discredit to our Cause, that it should be reported that we
believe the Word nigh in the Heart (the Apostle Paul calls the Word of Faith
and Reconciliation) to have been preached by Moses, that Chist, the Promised
Seed, bruised the Serpent's Head, 1 John 1. 7.
as well before, as at, and since his Visible Appearance; That Enoch when he
walked with God, walked in the Light, in which he felt the Blood of Christ
cleansing from all Sin; That the Spirit of God strove with Men as well before
Christ's Coming as since; and that some were led by it before as well as since;
and therefore Children of God; Romans 8. 14, 17.
and if Children, then Heirs; Heirs of God, and Joynt-Heirs with Christ. Not
that we deny a Pre-eminence to Christ's Visible Coming, and the greater
Benefits that came into the World thereby; we would not be thought so to mean,
at no hand: only this, that something of that Divine Life, Power, Wisdom and
Righteousness, that then so super-excellently appeared and broak forth, was
revealed in all former Ages, as Mankind was in a Capacity to receive it;
wherefore the Difference lay in the Manifestations of the One Thing necessary,
and not in several things: So that the Law is, as it were, the Gospel begun,
and the Gospel the Law finished; or as Augustine expresses it, Lex est
Evangelium absconditum, et Evangelium est lex revelata. The Law is the Gospel
obscured, the Gospel the Law revealed; That is, suited to the Capacity of Ages.

But J. Faldo is Angry, that in my Recital of these words out of his former
Discourse, Qua. no Chr. page 13.
But the Thing Christianity might well be before the Name Christian, that I
left out these following words, so short a space. Saying, I am a Man of a
seared Conscience, and that it is pity any Reader should be so tame to be thus
imposed on.


Rejoyn. I know not what he means by these* last words, unless he would have
every Man that reads me, beat me. I have always thought it becoming a Minister
of the Gospel to make People Tame and not Wild; Sufferers, not Hectors; but
such Expressions very well suit with John Faldo's Religion: For my Conscience,
it is not so seared, but I can feel and resent John Faldo's Injustice. God
knows I left out no words designedly; nor could the Insertion of them have
disappointed me: For if the Thing Christianity may be before the Name a Day,
then a Year, and so an Age, till we shall come to the first Man that ever God
saved. All Men must be saved by either Law or Gospel; Now the Law strictly
considered, could never save, it gives Life to none: So imports the Scripture,
and so asserts B. Usher, B. Sanderson, Allen, and others; then it must have
been by the Gospel, which is by the Apostle called the Power of God unto
Salvation: and if all Men that were ever saved, were saved by the Gospel, then
True Christians; unless Men may believe the Gospel, be saved by the Life and
Power of it, and yet be no Christians, that is, not the Men, the term
Christians (given first at Antioch) does fignifie. I shall offer this short
Argument to the Reader's consideration. If He that is born again, be a
Christian, and such, as enter into the Kingdom of God, be born again, then
because Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Samuel, David, etc. entered into God's Kingdom,
it follows, that they were born again, and consequently Christians. How
pernicious is that Principle, which denies the New Birth to be so much as any
part of Christianity, when, indeed, the greatest, as Christ's own Saying proves.

The Truth of the Matter is, The very Life, Power and Spirit of the Gospel, or
Christianity, which to other exterior Performances, is as the Soul to the
Body, John Faldo would fain exclude from any Share in Christianity; and for our
preferring and pressing That, as the most important Matter, he over-runs us
with all the Vilifying, Scornful Epithetes a Lucian could bestow upon a
Christian: Indeed, his Frothiness is such, that were it not for their sakes,
who may yet be ensnared by his Adventrous and Imperious Assertions and
Reflections, I should not think his Vindication worth one Minute of my Time.
But he proceeds.


Rep. I undertook to prove Quakerism No Christianity from the confessed Newness
of it by their own Party. page 8.
Penn tells us, p. 21. the first Letters of the Names of some, the bare Names
of others, whose words I quoted, but dare not transscribe their words, being so
fair to my Purpose: only a part of Penington's, who says of the Quakers
Dispensation, that it swallowed up that of Christ and the Apostles: which Penn
would take off by telling me, I have no Candor in so Construing the words; as
if Penington, who was a Scholar, could not express his Mind congruously, but
must have Penn to be his Interpreter.


Rejoyn. Now what any can make of this Cloudy Paragraph, that has not read our
former Books (indeed of the greatest part of his Vindication) if then, I know
not: but sure I am, he ignorantly or willingly puts the Lie upon himself, and
greatly berayes his own Weakness. Is this your Combatant, you, that blow him
with Pride and Rage, that he may only have Wind to Crack out against the
Quakers? What Reply is this wretched, disingenuous Section to my Answer? If I
quoted not E. Burroughs's and J. Whitehead's words at length, and but a few
they were, I quoted that for which the rest left out were quoted. He would fix
the beginning of Quakerism about the Year 1651. this was the Drift, of his
Quotations, from whence he concluded Quakerism No Christianity. Hear my Answer,
and by that it will appear how suitable or sufficient his Reply is. Well, But
when came this Quakerism into the World? He tells us, page 21, 22.
about the year 1651. quoting E. B's Epistle before G. F's Great Mystery, also
a small Treatise writ by John Whitehead and Isaac Penington; from whence he
infers, that Quakerism is a late Dispensation, therefore not that of
Christianity. But certainly, this Man has taken a very Quick Course to
Unchristian himself, and all the Presbyterians, Independents and Anabaptists in
the World, as well as the Quakers: For I would ask him, if there was not a Time
since the Primitive Age, wherein Darkness has overspread the Earth, the Beast
did Reign, and the pure Religion was wholely Wilderness'd? If so, consequently
the Resurrection of Truth is no more a New Dispensation, or not that of
Christianity, then a Man that is exiled his Country, is not essentially the
same Man, when he returns, that he was before -- But since we are of another
Religion by his Account, then the Christian, because we cannot say that we were
always successively from the Apostles time, I will argue, that the
Presbyterians, Independents and Anabaptists are not Christians, nor is what
they profess to be esteemed Christianity, because they cannot prove a regular
Succession from the Apostles Times, their date also being of later years. What
will they say then? The Church was fled into the Wilderness; Truth exiled; God
as a Stranger in the Earth; yet Truth still the same in it self: Very well, so
say we. God was pleased to renew the Right Christian- Dispensation to us, and
by us, according to John's Vision, that the Everlasting Gospel was preached
again, intimating, that there had been a Time wherein it was not preached. If
this be not a New Gospel, because anew or again preached; neither is that which
J. Faldo calls Quakerism a New Dispensation, because it is preaching anew the
Everlasting Gospel to the Sons of Men; which is God's Power inwardly manifested
for the Conviction, Conversion, Redemption and Salvation of the Souls of such
as believe in it.

In which, First, I take in that part of the Quotation which was material to
the proving of Quakerism No Christianity, at least in my Adversary's
Apprehension. Secondly, I have Answered that Objection, both by showing that
the Presbyterians, Independents and Anabaptists, whom he owns to be Christians,
were novil; and that the Everlasting Gospel was to be preached again; which
employed, that a Time there was in which it was not preached; consequently, that
his Objection could not be therefore of any Force, as levelled at us: To all
which he says nothing, only asks a Question concerning my Reproof for his want
of Candor in explaining I. Penington's words, viz. As if Penington, who was a
Scholar, could not express his Mind Congruously, but must have Penn to be his
Interpreter. Let us see if this be any solid Confutation of what I said. Reader
hear me.

And though he particularly seems to Triumph over Isaac Penington's
distinguishing between the Dispensation of Moses, Christ and his Apostles, and
THIS of our Day, as if they had been three several Dispensations, and
consequently, if Christ was not that of Moses, because it swallowed it up;
neither this the Dispensation of Christ, which Isaac Penington says, it
swallows up: yet to me it seems a pitiful Catch; and shows, he knows not how
to take things with that Candor they are writ (...) J. P. means not a Distinct
Administration in Kind, but Dispensation of one and the same Light, Life and
Power by Nature, at several Times, and sundry Manners to the World: Christ was
before the Law, under the Law, with the Prophets, but never so revealed as in
that Holy Manhood; will it therefore follow, he was not Antecedent to that
Appearance? or He, that appeared then more Gloriously, had never shown himself
before? Or because of a Difference in Manifestation, therefore not the same H E
(through all those several Manifestations) in himself? Certainly, this Man is
very Unjust to J. P. especially, when the Words above quoted, that speak of a
Dispensation he experienced a little before God broke forth by us, called
Quakers, could have informed him, that he meant the Diverse Breakings forth of
God's Light and Truth, in order to the full Discovery and Recovery of Lost
Primitive Christianity: So that this present Appearance swallowing up all going
before it (had he so termed it, as he does not, and therefore wronged) is no
more then God's Retriving to us the Ancient Gospel, with Additional Blessings
and Assistances, giving us the same Life and Foundation they had, and what else
he pleased by way of Improvement; which alters not the Nature, no more then a
Child in Christ is not that Numerical Creature, but another Distinct Being,
when a Man.

Now can any Understanding Man account my Adversary's Idle Shifting Question a
Pertinent Reply? What if I. P. was a Scholar, might he not therefore be
Abused, or Misunderstood? Is Schollarship a Protection against Wresting? Must
I. P. intend what J. F. will have him, and not what really he did? But that it
should be so Offensive to him, for W. P. to Clear and Defend the Passage, is
delighting rather to have us Wrong then Right. But the Quakers must be
Heterodox, though it be but to save J. F. from the Disrepute of Lying. It Is
clear that I. P. intended no New Administration, but the Restoration of Pure
and Uncorrupted Religion; that he never so worded it, as by J. F. cited, that I
charge him with, but he thought it best to give it the slip, or else I must
impute it to his Carelessness.

Any Unbyast Reader may perceive, my Adversary has enough of the Controversy,
or he would never write so mean a Reply to such an Answer.

To wind up this, which more particularly concerns Christianity, I say, That
there never was but one True Foundation from Adam's day to this, upon which the
Holy Ancients built, and that was Christ Jesus, the Lord from Heaven, called,
the Second Adam, and Quickening Spirit: To deny this were to overturn the Chief
Cornerstone of the Christian-Religion; and how Men could build on this
Foundation and not be Christians, I know not.

The Christians of the first Three Hundred Years after Christ, were then by the
Jews and Heathens, as we are by certain Professors and Profane in this Age,
accused of Affecting and Following Novelties, as we learn out of Eusebius*
Pamphili Paeparat. Evang. lib. 1. and Theophilus Antiochenus, lib. 3. page 119.
Arnobius, lib. 2. page 40. Tertull. ad nation. lib. 1. cap. 10. with several
other Writers. The Account some of them give us, of what the Christians said in
their Defense was this, D. Cave.
That the Christian Religion was for Substance the same with that of the
Ancient Jews, Primitive Christianity.
whose Religion claimed the Precedence of all others in the World.

That the Religion was in Substance the same is expressly asserted and proved by
Eusebius. The Ancient Patriarchs were the Christians of the Old World, who had
the same Faith, Religion and Worship common with us, nay the same Name too;
Touch not mine Anointed, (...), my Christ's, or Christians: Thus D. Cave in his
Primitive Christianity out of Eusebius Praepar. Evang. l. 1. c. 5. p. 9.
Clemens Alexandrin. admonit. ad Gent. p. 57. about this old Objection, queries
thus, (...), etc. Why do we not use our Mother's Milk for Food, to which we
were accustomed when we came first into the World. And why do we increase our
Estate our Fathers left us, etc. intimating that the Difference between what we
call Law and Gospel, or that Religion which the holy Ancients professed before
Christ's Coming in the Flesh, and that which Christ Jesus and his Apostles
taught, was not in kind, but in degre^ only, the Ceremonial part excepted;
which the same Clemens calls childish and Trifling, and the Apostle Paul
Beggarly Elements, serving only the Nonage of the World in Religion, and
therefore to be laid aside upon a more improved Knowledge and full Enjoyment of
it. And this Christ's own Sermon upon the Mount clearly evinceth, who runs the
Sin of Adultery as far beyond the Act, as the first lustful Desire conceived in
the mind: And from true Swearing, to yea, yea, and nay, nay; and from loving
our Friends to loving our Enemiese; and from self-saving to suffering. I say,
unless we should with the Uncertain and Irreverent J. Faldo, exclude the Life,
Doctrine and Miracles of Christ from any share in Christianity, because, says
he, its dated with more reason, from Christ's Resurrection (and consequently
Christ Jesus before but an extraordinary kind of Jew) we must needs conclude
that as the tendency of Christ's Life and Miracles was to preach, live and
confirm his divine Doctrine; so the very bent of that Doctrine was the
Improvement and Perfection of that Righteousness, which in former Ages was but
begun, and more imperfectly manifested: so that to be under Grace is not to
live in the Breach of God's Law Uncondemned through Christ's personal Obedience
wrought wholely without us, but to be led to deny all that Ungodliness and
those Worldly Lusts, for which the Law takes hold upon the World, according to
the Apostle to the Romans, Romans 8. 1, 2, 3, 4.
There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the Flesh but after the Spirit (implying, that who walked after the Flesh were
so long not under Grace, but under Condemnation; Again,) For the Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death
(that is, not only from Death, the Wages, but from Sin, the Work that leads to
it; yet further) For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the
Flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin
condemned Sin in the Flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit. So that to
be under Grace is to be under the Government and Leadings of it, and to enjoy
that divine Power, which fulfills the Law, and redeems from those Corruptions,
which prove men rather to be alive without Law, then under Grace that fulfils
it. Upon the whole; since some in all Ages have been taught to deny
Ungodliness; Tit. 2. 12.
and to live godly, and that they could not so have done without the Grace that
brings Salvation; And since the Seed of the Serpent has been bruised in them,
and that it could not be without Christ, the promised Seed; and since such were
then turned from Darkness unto Light, and from Satan's Power unto God; and that
all this is purely Gospel and Christian; something of Christianity was in the
World before that visible Appearance of Christ, from whose Name the true
Religion was so called: For though there have been Diversities of Gifts, yet
the same Spirit; though Difference of Administration, yet the same Lord.

And though God, Heb. 1. 1.
who at sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in times past to the Fathers
by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, yet he was
the same God, who spoak by the Prophets, that spoak by the Son, though it is
always confessed, not in so plain, express and excellent a manner: the Difference
therefore lay in the Manifestation rather then in the Thing manifested. For
through all Generations, there has been but one Seed, Truth, Grace, Word, Life,
Power or Spirit, by which any of the Sons and Daughters of Men were ever saved;
and consequently J. Faldo has greatly wronged the true Christian-Religion, as
well as contradicted the Ancient Writers, and abused us in dating Christianity
from the time of Christ's Bodily Resurrection, and so bitterly reflecting upon
them that conform not to his narrow and false Apprehensions.


CHAP. II.
Of Quakerism, as this Independent Priest scoffingly calls our holy Religion.

IN my Defense of the Truth we profess, showing not only the Consistency of it
with Christianity, but proving it to be Christianity, there are Four Passages
he takes an abrupt notice of. His words concerning the first run thus.

Rep. To purge away the Character I give of a Quaker, he tells you, p. 9. We
never said, that the Light within every Man was the only Lord and Savior, and
very God; let him show us any such Passage, of any one acknowledged Quaker, and
he will say something.

Now Reader observe his Reply. The Man cannot see Wood for Trees. I quoted him
Forty Places in my Book, that will prove it. For instance, All Power in Heaven
and Earth is in it, Smith's Primmer, p. 14. Again, I will make you know, that I
the Light, which lights every man that eomes into the World -- am the true
eternal God, G. Fox junior, etc. These I quoted in my Book, yet could Penn say,
I thought to be believed hand over head.


Rejoyn. That this Adversary is base with a Witness, remember Reader, that
there is not One Testimony, much less Forty, in that place I quoted, and unto
which my Answer was made. Next, observe how he suggests my smothering of those
Testimonies he brings, whereas I have particularly answered the latter, which
includes the force or tendency of the former, and five more of his falsely
pretended forty. But to the Point. That I cannot see Wood for Trees, is a very
mean and wooden Reply; what I have said in my former Book stands unanswered,
and indeed is Unanswerable. See my Answ. p. 193.
I shall contract it thus, No man that believes Scripture will dare to deny
that God is Light; That every Man is enlightened by Him; and that by Him who is
called Light, all things are upheld: And that He alone is Savior; A Doctrine
J. Faldo teaches, page 84, 85, 89. That we never did assert, that the God that
made Heaven and Earth was comprehendible within the Soul of Man; yet that he
gave Light to the Soul of Man. To which with much more he returns us not one
word of Answer, but would make People believe, it has been the course I have
taken with him. To conclude, He must either deny Christ to have all Power in
Heaven and Earth, to be the True Eternal God; or that He who has that Power,
and is that God, is not that True Light that enlighteneth every Man that comes
into the World; or his Labor is but very Vanity, whose Wages will be Vexation
of Spirit. But thus far we are well assured, that J. Faldo, for all his Shows
of Reverence to the Scripture, overturns the most evident Testimonies therein
contained, by withstanding and defaming this one Assertion, that God, who is
Light, shines not in the Heart of any Man on the Earth, nor ever did; For what
else can be the Consequence of his decrying our Principle, that asserts Christ
to be the universal Light, enlightening every Man that comes into the World; or
that the Light wherewith every Man is enlightened is not Christ or God? I
affirm, that which quarrels this Principle would not in the very ground have
Christ to be God, indeed not God to be God; seeing it is an utter Denial of his
Omni-presence, since God is not manifested but by his own Light, and he being
every where, his Light cannot be limited, because it cannot be distinguished
from himself. But what our Adversary would be at by this kind of Reasoning, he
helps us in his next particular to understand.


Rep. He attempts to excuse Burroughs's Phrase from Blasphemy; viz. Your
imagined God beyond the Stars. But how? they were expressed of People's
imagining him to be in the Likeness of Man, and so denying his Omnipresence,
that he should not be below, as well as above. To which he replies thus, A rare
Excuse that denies Christ's Manhood, and making the Manhood of Christ, in whom
the Fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, to be a Popish Vbiquitary.


Rejoyn. Must this pass for my Confutation, A rare Excuse indeed. But for what.
Not W. Penn's Denial of Christ's Manhood; But J. Faldo's base Perversion of E.
B's words. The Question was not about Christ's Manhood, but of God himself, who
prepared it in time; A pitiful shift to infer from God, who is a Spirit, to
Christ's Body: We know, that is not every where; But the Word, that was with God
and was God, is not confinable. Though if the Truth were Known, J. Faldo's Zeal
for Christ's not being a Popish Ubiquitary centers in his Belief of mere
Anthropomorphism, I mean that God is confined to a Body, and that Body to a
certain place; else why should he oppose to my asserting of God's universal
Presence Christ's Manhood, the Fullness of the Godhead dwelling bodily in that
Manhood, and Christ's being resident in some particular place? But it is after
this lame, crabbed and insignificant way of Writing, that he vindicates his
first piece of Forgery, and wicked mis-giving of our poor Friends meanings. But
to proceed.


Rep. He tells you of the Companions I rendered Quakerism to be attended into
the World with, page 7.
and adds what else J. Faldo's Devil pleases; yet instead of denying what I
said (except the Epithetes) he thus excuses it. Finally did not the Devils
howl and roar, and tremble, who seeing they should be dislodged by one stronger
then themselves -- And was there no Terror in all this? yes verily. And
morcover, whereas People have taken the Quakers to be possessed of the Devil
when so behaving themselves, Mr. Penn has here confessed they were not
mistaken: And more then that too, that they themselves were Devils, for it was
them that roared.


Rejoyn. If this be to be a fair Adversary, there is no such thing in the
World. I will transscribe for thy sake Reader, what I excepted against in his
first Book, and how I answered it.

But once more; Christianity entered the World with Ravishing Songs, and
Hallelujahs of the Angels, p. 15, 16.
Healing all Diseases, Casting out Devils, Preashing Peace: But Quakerism
entered the World, as if Hell had broke loose, and Possession by Satan had made
way and fit Souls for the Quakers Spirit -- O the hell dark Expressions of the
Quakers Spirit, frightful and amazing Words, bitter Curses, Howlings and
Roarings; And what else J. Faldo's Devil pleases by which to render the
Quakers Odious. Well! but to answer him.

It was a time of Joy, and a time of Sorrow; the Spirits of the Just rejoiced
that he was born forth into the World, and that Sun of Righteousness risen,
whose Discovering Light, and Refreshing Beams would renew the World, that had
in great measure been bewildered, since its first Innocent State: But therefore
was it not a time of Woe, Sorrow, Terror, and grievous Distress to all the
Workers of Iniquity? Did not Christ come to bring War as well as Peace, a
Sword, a Fire upon Earth? Did not his Forerunner come in an astonishing
Manner, in differing Attire, of another Diet, and from a desolate Place to
preach Repentance, and to warn them, with an O Generation of Vipers to flee the
Wrath to come? Did he not say, that an Ax (a sharp and terrible Instrument)
should be laid to every unfruitful Tree? And did not the Apostles preach to the
Pricking of the Hearts of Thousands, and Paul by name, that Faelix himself
trembled, and All, as knowing the Terrors of the Lord themselves, they warned
others; wherefore Judgment is said to have begun at the House of God. Finally,
did not the Devils Howl, Roar and Tremble, foreseeing they should be dislodged
by one stronger then themselves, Christ the Son of the Living God? And was
there no Terror, Dread and Amazement in all this? I perceive it may be a Virtue
in the primitive Christians, but a Vice in the Quakers, at least in J. Faldo's
account.

But this know, O Impartial People! the Quakers were over-taken by the mighty
Hand of God, and great were their Travels, and Pangs of Sorrow, under the
Righteous Terrors of the Lord, whose Hour of Just Judgments was come; and being
thereby made Witnesses of his heavenly Work, and redeemed through Judgment,
they became Ministers of Judgment unto others; and the Terror of it struck
Thousands, the Devils trembled, etc. And art thou given up, John Faldo, to call
Light, Darkness, and Darkness, Light? the Terrors of God the Possessions of
Satan, and the Remorse of Conscience Hell broke loose? O Unhappy Man!

Reader, this was my Answer; how much of it he concerned himself with, I have
already observed. What Use he made of that little cited is very obvious, viz.
to conclude us Devils. What a False and Frothy Reflection is that, for one that
would be accounted a Divine? To call this a Reply is to abuse Controversy.
It Is manifest that Quakerism was not attended with more amazing Sighs and
Symptoms, then what our Adversary must needs confess to have been the
Companions of Christianity: And as they agree in the manner of their
Appearance, so do J. Faldo and the Pharisees in their Judgment of both. Does
John Faldo conclude us little better then Devils? The Pharisees called our Lord
and Master Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. Th^s has Truth been ever accounted
Heresy by the Priests and Rabbis of that Age in which it has appeared; we do
the less wonder that John Faldo should understand of what Spirit we are, who is
yet ignorant of his own, and scoffs at the Revelation of that eternal Spirit,
which can alone give him to relish either. For the Epithetes he bestows upon
Quakerism, they stink too much to be meddled with: If they be Christian there
is nothing Antichristian in the World. To rebuke his Reviling he counts
Railing; and it is come to that pass with his scoulding Adherents, that for the
Quakers not to pass by his unworthiest Reflections, however unprovoked, without
any Reproof, is to merit their sharpest Retorts in the most vilifying Terms; I
know not what to infer from such an humorsome Carriage, but that it is expected
from the Quakers Religion it should bear that, which J. Faldo's Vindication
tells us, his cannot; a great Credit to our Cause against his Will.

Thus far of Christianity and Quakerism, as they are contra-distinguished by
our Adversary.


CHAP. III.
Of the Scriptures.

MY Adversary begun his first Chapter in his former Discourse upon this general
Charge, The Quakers deny the Scriptures. The Proof he offered was this, The
Quakers deny the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be the Word of God,
and therefore they deny the Scriptures. Upon this account I thus delivered my
self, He entitules his Chapter. That the Quakers deny the Scriptures. See my
Answ. page 24
I was almost astonished at it, because he pretended to prove all out of our
own Books, and none such had ever come to my Hand; but upon Perusal I found
this to be the Upshot, That the Quakers deny the Scriptures to be the Word of
God. My Adversary's Reply is.

Rep. This is not the first Cordial you have made of a wilful Untruth, page 13.
nor yet the last by a great many. And you who summed up nine Arguments of mine
more, which were the Contents of the nine Chapters next following, should have
been ashamed of calling this one, which was the first of ten the Vpshot, and
then insult. But I shall try how you break this single Cord, this one of ten.


Rejoyn. I will not say he has Wilfully wronged me, but Wronged me he has. I
did not say, that it was the Upshot of his whole Discourse concerning the
Scriptures, but of that single Chapter; For had I reputed his nine following
Arguments undeserving of any notice, I might have called this single one the
Upshot; but having singlely refuted his subsequent Arguments, I could not in
good sense call the First the Vpshot. 'Twas not therefore the Vpshot of the
Whole, but of that Chapter in which the Word is used* I had good Reason so to
term it, since the Proof was too particular for the Charge; It was not my
wilful Untruth, but his Mistake. His suggesting, as if I only encountered that
single Cord is very Disingenuous; for I thoroughly considered Nine following
Chapters. Hear him further.


Rep. That you deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God you grant: But you
say, page 25. I declare to the World, that we own them to be a Declaration of
the Mind and Will of God, with many other things which I have showed to be
short of the main Ends of the Scriptures.


Rejoyn. Whether those other things left out, are short of the main Ends of the
Scripture, or no, will best be seen by considering what those Things are.

I do declare to the whole World, that we believe the Scriptures to contain a
declaration of the Mind and Will of God in and to those Ages in which they were
written, being given forth by the holy Ghost moving in the Hearts of holy Men
of God: That they ought also to be Read, Believed and Fulfilled in our Day,
being Useful for Reproof and Instruction, that the Man of God may be perfect.
Now if this belongs not to the main Ends of Scriptures, either there are none,
or they are unknown. However, it was (...) much the End, as name of Scripture,
that was then controverted. Again, he goes on thus.


Rep. I shall easily grant, that one Word may stand representative of many. An
odd Phrase that represents him not able to express himself congruously. page 25.
I have heard of Persons as Parliament Men, but never of a representative Word
before.


Rejoyn. He might have pardoned me an Incongruous Phrase, if such it had been;
for I have twenty times over been so kind to him: But I must tell him, it is
not less proper, though less used in Words then in Persons. He shows Ignorance
in that Philosophy he pretends to be a Master of, where there are many single
words or Terms, that are significative of entire Sentences; but (argumentum ad
hominem) granting to the Scriptures, that they are the Word of God, does not
our Adversary repute that Title Representative as well as Expressive of those
many thousand Words contained therein, See it in Dr. Wilkins Real char.
if so, then there is a Representative Word; If not, it can never be called so
in our Adversary's sense Again, he brings me in thus, I think it is as good
sense to call a King's Letters King, as the Scriptures the Word of God.


Rep. But by your favor Mr. Penn, It is neither nonsense nor bad sense to
call a King's Letter the Word of a King. page 14.



Rejoyn. This is nothing to the purpose; the Stress lies here, The Word of God
being a Title given to Christ, as the Title King is to a supreme Magistrate,
whether it be Reverent or Significant to call the Declaration Christ, the Word
of God, any more then to call the Declaration of a King by the Title of King?
For we therefore decline to give that Title to any thing below Christ himself,
to whom the Scriptures most emphatically ascribe it.

Because I said that it might be the Word of Advice, Reproof, Instruction, page
28.
which Christ the Great Word of God livingly sows in the Hearts of Men and
Women, that Christ spoke of, when he said, The Cares of the World choke the
Word, and it becomes Unfruitful. He replies.

Rep. page 15.
Here you have yielded the Cause to save Christ from being the choked and
unfruitful Word.


Rejoyn. I need not have done so for any such Reason, since Christ may in a
sense as well be Choked, as by Sin afresh Crucified, and the Spirit Quenched.
Nor could unfruitful obliege me to give away the Cause, since the Word is
always Unfruitful, where rebelled against. But is there no Difference J. Faldo
between a Word of Advice spiritually, livingly and powerfully, sown in the
Heart, by Christ the great Word of God, and that Advice, Reproof or Instruction
declared by Writing?

This brings to the Point, Whether the Scriptures or Christ may most deservedly
be styled the Word of God?

Christ is God's living Oracle, and rightly called the Word of God, because
that which livingly speaks forth the Will of God to the Souls of Men; The
Scriptures are but that Revelation declared and recorded; consequently they can
have no right to that Title which is so suitably ascribed to the Author of that
Revelation. To be sure J Faldo acknowledges that they are not the Living,
Powerful Self-sufficient Word of God; Nor does he pretend to dispute for them
to be such a Word of God as the Quakers deny them to be. Though it seems very
strange to me, that there should be Two Words of God; the one quite differing
from the other; or that any Word of God, if two there were, should be of it
self Impotent or Insufficient, as he seems to allow in his first Book, page 20,
27. Vind. page 14, 16.

That the Word of God cannot grow old, decay, be lost, page 30.
misrendred, corrupted, transcribed, reprinted. But hear what he says to me.


Rep. Did we hold as you, that it is to be understood of no other but Christ,
page 16.
it would be an Absurdity, but upon our Principles, none at all. Would you say,
that the Scripture is absurd; For we are not as many that corrupt the Word of
God, 2 Cor. 2. 17. Many did so, and many do so still, of who you are a
Ringleader.


Rejoyn. Truly if I am, I would be glad to know it, that I might be sorry for
it. I would not willingly deceive my self and others, both of the Joys of this
Life, and that to come. But I would desire J. Faldo to consider, if his Greek
Testament will allow his Translation, and least of all, his Argument, which is
this, If Christ cannot be corrupted, so^mewhat else besides Christ is in
Scripture called the Word of God. I am not so lean with my Learning but I will
spare him a little. I find Valla, Erasmus Vetablus, Castalio, Clarius, Zegerus,
and Grotius say, the Greek word there (...) signifies not adulterantes, but
cauponantes, vel abutentes re quapiam ad quaestum, that is, We are not as many
who Merchandise with the Word of God, or use it to self Ends, making a Trade of
it, or as several of our Old English Translations have it, chop and change,
which more sorely reflects upon my Adversaries Profession, then mine: For
though I am a Corrupter of Scripture in his sense, I am sure he is a Trader
with it, in its own sense. I might instance to my Defense, in several other
Languages, particularly the Italian, Spanish, and ancient French Translations,
but I will be brief. Now unless it be absurd to assert, that some Men have and
may make worldly Advantage to themselves from that place the Living, Eternal
Word of God has ministerially given them in the Hearts of People, and false to
affirm, that the Scriptures of the New Testament were not then all written, nor
gathered or compiled, as now they are, or made canonical and public till the
Council of La^dicea, about the time of Julian the Apostate, Anno 364^ I cannot
see how any may justly blame me, for denying the Scriptures to be the Word of
God, from the Passage cited by my Adversary; that men may make so ill an use of
the Living Word of God none dare deny. Now that the Scriptures were at that
time Imperfect and scattered is clear. They were Imperfect, in as much as but
five of twenty one Epistles were then writ, besides John's History of the
Gospel, and his Revelation, and Luke's Acts of the Apostles. J. F. may hence
see what a lame imperfect kind of Word of God he disputes for. Act. 12. 24.
But I would query, Was there not a Word of God before them? What was that Word
of God that grew and multiplied before any New Testament Writings were in
being? Did not the Apostles preach it? Therefore I rather take it to be such a
Word of God as attended the Prophets before them in an inferior Ministration,
namely, the Living, Powerful, Quickening Word, who from its various Operations
is said to be as a Fire, an Ax, an Hammer, a Sword, a Word of Reconciliation,
of Patience, of inward Washing, of Faith that overcomes the World in true
Believers, that was with God in the beginning, and was God, which at sundry
times and in diverse manners spoak (...), in and by the Prophets and Apostles,
which was the Author of the Scriptures, and therefore before them. So that the
Scriptures are no more then the Mind of the Living Word of God declared by
Writing upon several occasions; consequently to call them an Holy Declaration
of the Word of God, is a more Evangelical and suitable Title then the Word of
God, whose Declaration they are.

That they were scattered, and several Centuries or Ages uncollected, History
tells us; particularly we find it in the Council of Trent, Pietr.
which is given us by the Learned and Juditious Pietro Soane Polano: Soan.
They could not run their Canon higher then the Council of Laodicea, Polan.
which, as we said before, p. 152
was about 364. years after Christ; at what time, says a great Author,
Ambition prevailed with the Doctors of the Church, and they began to think de
pijs fraudibus of holy Cheats, and would have their Doctrines pass pro legibus,
non pro consilio, for Laws, not Counsel. I could prove as much and more out of
several Independent Authors, who seem to give all for gone before the end of
the third Century, though if some of them should now stand to the purest
Tradition, they must needs give their present Practice for gone.

I cannot but observe after what a suspected rate the Scriptures have been both
first collected and then conveyed through the several succeeding Ages; ^twas
well said of my former Author, Dubium igitur non est, quin Testamenta, vetus et
novum, monum^nta vera sint earum rerum, quae dictae et factae sint a Prophetis
et Apostolis. Where though he calls them not the Word of God, yet allows them
to be Monuments of those things which were said and done by the Prophets and
Apostles. But as he, and others, so I may well object, Are we sure that the
Judgment of those who collected them was sufficient to determine what was
right, and what not? For that which gives Scripture its Canon is not Plurality
of Voices, but that Word of God which gave it forth; If that Divine Counselor
presided not, what Assurance have our Anti-revelation Adversaries of their
Doctors C^oce? And granting that they have not rejected any Writing given forth
by the holy Ghost (which is a great question) and that what they have given us
was in the main writ by Inspiration (which I believe) yet how we shall be
assured, that in above three hundred y^a^s, so many hundred Copies as were
doubtless taken, should be pure and uncorrupted? Considering the private
Dissensions, the Readiness of each Party to bend things to their own Belief,
with the growing and succeeding Faults of leaving out, adding, transposing,
etc. which Transscribers might be guilty of, perhaps more through Carelessness
then Design, is beyond J. Faldo's Skill upon his Principles to inform us. From
hence we may observe the Uncertainty of J. Faldo' s Word of God, who by
Authorities can never prove the Scriptures to be given forth by Inspiration,
nor that they are truly collected; neither could those Persons, who first made
them Canonical be assured of the Exactness of those Copies they then found
extant, nor was the Collecter's Judgment Infallible; and to come nearer to our
times, Learned Men tell us of little less then Three Thousand several Readings
in the Scriptures of the New Testament in Greek.

Far be it from me to write this in any the least Undervalue of that holy
Record: Its only to show the weak Foundation my Adversary's Faith stands upon;
I believe great and good things of them, and that from no less Evidence then
the Eternal Word that gave them forth, which has oftentimes given my Soul a
deep Savor of those blessed Truths it declares of; only we cannot allow them
to be The Word, though the Words of God; and the rather, forasmuch as we see
the great and general Neglect that People are guilty of toward that Living,
Powerful, Regenerating Word of Life, by whom alone all right Knowledge and
lasting Peace is derived to the Soul of Man, through this Apprehension, that in
having the Writings they have the Word of God, and therefore look no farther,
the very State of the professing Jews of old, who thought better of the
Scriptures then of Christ, believing to have Life in them, at what time they
crucified the Lord of Life and Glory. From whose Proceedings we learn thus
much, That the worst Enemies to the invisible Word of Life may carry the
greatest seeming Respect to, and bestow the highest Titles upon the Scriptures
that were given forth from it.

In short, It was when Men turned from the Power of Godliness to the Form only,
that they did Canonize and lay so vast a Stress upon them. In the first and
second hundred years after Christ they were so scattered, that very few had all
of them; and it is not unreasonable for us to believe, that many had none of
them, especially those of the New Testament: Were they therefore without the
Word of God, and a sufficient Rule for Faith and Practice? Surely not; It was
an Administration of Life and Power of writing the Law in the Heart, and
putting the Spirit in the inward Parts. From whence came that Christian Answer
to the Heathen concerning Swearing, Fighting, and such contra-Evangelical
Practices, They could not do so because of God in their Consciences. At that
time of Day the Ano^nting led them into all Truth. But in process of time, when
Christians grew Careless and Worldly, whereby they lost the Power of Godliness,
then they began to set up an outward pompous Religion, ascribing that to the
Letter and Form, which was only due to the Spirit and Power; And as thus
entered the Apostasy into the World, so where Men are not turned and conformed
to that eternal Spirit, and divine immortal Power, the Apostasy still remains.
And our End in pressing People unto the Eternal Word of Life is, that they may
be brought out of Death and Darkness, which the Scriptures can never do. They
are a Declaration and Testimony of Heavenly Things, but not the Heavenly Things
themselves; and as such, we carry an high Respect unto them: We accept them as
the Words of God himself; and by the Assistance of his Spirit, they are read
with great Instruction and Comfort. I esteem them the best of Writings, and
desire nothing more frequently, then that I may lead the Life they exhort to;
and whatever slight Apprehensions my disingenuous Adversary is pleased to have
of these kind of Acknowledgments, I write the naked Truth of my Heart, knowing
I must give an Account to God.


CHAP. IV.
His Pretense of our Equalling our own Writings and Sayings with the Scriptures.

Without any flourishing Reflections, most commonly the Head and Tail, and
sometimes Middle too of my Adversary's Reply, I shall lay down his words.

Rep. The Means I used for confirming the first part of this Charge were two.
First, Their pretending them to be from Immediate Inspiration: This he is so
far from denying that he pleads for it; but after such a rude impertinent
manner, that I should but injure you, and show my self Idle to transscribe and
animadvert upon it.


Rejoyn. How rude and impertinent a manner I pleaded for it, the Reader may
best judge by perusing something of the Passage.

For Inspiration the Scriptures are not more express in any one thing. p. 36,
37.
No man can know the things of God by the bare Spirit of a Man.

The Scriptures are a sealed Book to all but those who know them by the same
Hand that originally gave them; so that however common they may be in the
World, they are Strangers to them that understand them not: And though Old,
respecting the Time, when they were revealed to the Saints, yet New to every
Age. So that we assert not a Revelation of New Things, but a renewed Revelation
of those Things God made former Ages Witnesses of: otherwise men are no more
benefitted by them; And to be benefitted, they must be made ours by the Spirit,
which made them the Holy Ancients.

In short, No Man can understand Spiritnal Things but the spiritually
Discerning, nor can he so be without the Inspiration of the Almighty; This is
Scripture.

Now the Author of those Queries, and J. Faldo also denying Inspiration, they
consequently deny themselves to be spiritually Discerning; And for Men not
spiritual to judge of spiritual Matters, much (...) to write of them, and bid
their Writings go, and throwdown Self-will, and exalt the Truth, is Vain and
Idolatrous: For, the Scriptures themselves, considered merely as such, are
unable; much less Writings founded on Self-Will; For its the alone Privilege
of God's Power and Spirit, and no writing whatever, distinct from it, can
perform that Great and Mighty Work in Man.

Now as Rude and Impertinent as this Answer may be in John Faldo's Eyes, his
Reply has not afforded me Light enough to see it. He would prove us guilty of
holding Inspiration, as if to do so were a Crime; From a Passage of John
Story's, who rejected certain Queries, exhibited against the Quakers, because
merely grounded upon the Author's Imagination, of certain Passages in
Scripture, and not any certain Knowledge or Experience received from the
Revelation of the Spirit. It must be left to the Reader to judge how
pertinently I returned upon my Adversary. Sure I am, that Self-willed Queries
can never throw down Self-will: And to urge Scripture not experienced, is to
steal the words of Truth from our Neighbor. Inspiration was in request after
Scriptures were in the World; And indeed are unintelligible without it. The New
Birth is never the more known for Christ's Saying to Necodemus, though thereby
we are taught, that without it no man shall enter into the Kingdom of God: It
is the Spirit alone that reveals the Mysteries of Regeneration; therefore to
deny Inspiration or Revelation is to overthrow the only and Evangelical Way to
divine Knowledge. Erasmus himself could tell us, What Men set forth by Man's
Device may be perceived by Man's Wit; Erasm. on 2 Pet. 1. 19.
But the thing that is set forth by the Inspiration of the holy Ghost requires
an Interpreter inspired with the like Spirit; Ibid in 1 Cor. cap. 2.
And without the Inspiration of it, Polano. Hist. Coun. Tr. p. 150.
the Secrets of God cannot be known; which is also the substance of the fourth
Article exhibited against the Lutherans in the Council of Trent, as an
erroneous Doctrine they held, That to understand the Scripture neither Gloss
nor Comment is necessary, but only to have the Spirit of a Sheep of Christ's
Pasture. Vetablus on this Passage in Job, But there is a Spirit in Man, and the
Inspiration of the Almighty gives him Understanding, There is no man, says
he, that does not partake of the Spirit, and from Almighty God and his Spirit
Understanding and Wisdom is to be sought. Adds Clarius, there is no
Understanding in men, nisi ab altissimo afflentur, unless they be inspired from
the Most High. Drusius is yet clearer, Our Eternal Help is from God, who
illuminates our Minds, without whom we are unable to understand any thing in
Divine Matters, and that inspires men with that Understanding, which neither
Age, nor Industry, nor Doctrine of any man can possibly give. Cradock, a famous
Independent-Preacher, Crad. Divine Drops. p. 171, 172, 210, 215, 221, 217.
tells us, That if men had all the Sermons that ever they heard recorded in
their Memory, though some may think them very knowing, yet truly they might be
miserable, confused and blind. For that it is the Spirit of God alone in the
Heart, clears, orders, assures, and settles things; yea, that the Scripture is
a dead and speechless thing without the Spirit of God. This, says he, is the
exceeding Greatness of the Power of the Spirit of God; And it is a wonderful
thing to see how quickly the Spirit of God will make a Scholar ripe. In short,
as to him, he greatly extolls the Dispensation of the Spirit; and page 210.
ventures at a kind of Prophecy, That in these latter times God will exalt his
Spirit, and throw down every thing that exalts it self against the Spirit, and
stands in his Light. He affirms the Spirit to be within, that the Children of
God are taught by it; for, says he, If thou be a Saint, thou have the Spirit
of God as truly dwelling in thee as in the Lord Jesus Christ (now Blasphemy)
and that the Way to know this Spirit to be in us, is from its own Evidence, and
that it is the Way to know it in others too; from whence he draws such kind of
Conclusions, That the Lord Jesus is anointed, and so are they; we have the same
Unction with Christ; we have the same Offices with Christ; we have the same
Love of God, the same Spirit, and the same Kingdom with Christ. The Church is
the Fullness of Jesus Christ. It is said of the Oil that was poured on Aaron,
This gives the Lie to J. Faldo.
It ran upon the Skirts of his Garments: so Christ being anointed that Oil runs
on us. Nay, the least Saint is as real a Prophet, Priest and King, as the Lord
Jesus was (for he dwells in him) only in all things he must have the
Pre-eminence.

William Dell, no small man in the Account of many who profess not themselves
to be Quakers, positively says in Answer to this Objection, That men now are
not to receive the Spirit in that immediate way to understand the Scriptures,
in which it was given to them who wrote the Scriptures (^he very Point
depending between J. Faldo and me) Surely Mr. Simpson will not deny that the
Spirit is given to that whole Church which is the Body of Christ; seeing Paul
says, If any man have not Christ's Spirit he is none of his, he is no Member
of his. Now the Spirit is always given, to whomsoever it is given by the
Father and the Son, as Christ taught his Disciples, promising them that the
Father would send the Spirit to them in his Name; And also that he himself
would send it to them from the Father; and was this Promise only made to them,
and not to all the Faithful also? Does not Paul say, Romans 12. 13. of the whole
Church, that by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, and are all made
to drink into one Spirit; because ye are Sons, God has sent the Spirit of his
Son into your Hearts, crying Abba Father? Gal. cap. 4. And do they not receive
it alike immediatetly from God? Who can give the Spirit of God to Man, but God
himself? When God promised to pour out his Spirit in the last days upon all
Flesh, did he name any Difference in the pouring of it out, saying, some shall
receive it immediately, and some mediately? No; But all who receive it, receive
it alike immediately from him. And by this Spirit (says W. Dell) did Holy Men
speak the Scripture, and by this only do Holy Men of God understand the
Scripture.

To this Objection, that Men now are to get Knowledge, to wit of the Scripture,
by Studies and humane Learning, and not by Inspiration (still the very matter
betwixt us) he boldly, briefly and smartly answers, This Doctrine carries the
visible Mark of Antichrist upon it. Will. Dell. confut. of Simps. page 114, 115,
116, 117.
For it is only the Inspiration of God, that enables a man to know the things
of God, and not a man's Study or humane Learning. It is not in this case in him
that wills and runs, but in God that shows Mercy. Wherefore Christ has said,
No man knows the Son but the Father, and he to whomsoever the Father will
reveal him. Wherefore Paul prays for the Ephesians, that God would give them
the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the Knowledge of Christ, without which
Spirit of Revelation Christ and the Father can never be known. Wherefore to
deny the Inspiration of God's Spirit now, is the most gross and palpable
Doctrine of Antichrist and his Prophets. To confirm what he writes, He brings
several Testimonies out of Chrisostom, Wickliff, Tindall, (...), Luther,
Latimer and Calvin. I will transscribe but two of them. Of the Knowledge of the
Gospel Zwinglius speaks thus, We must needs be taught of God, not of Men; for
this is the Saying of the eternal Truth, which knows not how to Lie, John 6.
Luther gives us his Mind thus, Tom. 3. fol. 169.
The Scriptures are not to be understood, but by that very Spirit by which they
were writ. No man sees one jot or tittle in the Scriptures but he that has the
Spirit of God; For all men have a darkened Heart in such sort, that if they
could speak and know how to bring forth all things of the Scripture, yet have
they not any true Sense or right Knowledge of them. For (says Luther) The
Spirit is required to the Understanding of the whole Scripture, and of every
part thereof. To this I am willing to add the Testimony of a Famous, English,
Godly and Learned Martyr John Philpot, in a Conference with Bishop Bonner, in
his eleaventh Examination before him and several other Bishops. B. Bonner
asking, Mart. vol. 3. p. 572, 573.
what meanest thou by writing in the beginning of thy Bible, Spiritus est
vicarius Christi in terris, The Spirit is Christ's Vicar on Earth? Philpot gave
him Answer after this manner, That Christ since his Ascension works all
things in us by his Spirit, and by his Spirit does dwell in us. Again, in
Answer to one Morgan, who mockingly queried, Have you alone the Spirit of God,
and not we? he thus answered, I say, not that I alone had the Spirit of God;
But as many as abide in the true Faith of Christ have the Spirit of God as well
as I. Again, by way of Defense of his severe Rebuke of this insolent and
scoffing Adversary (like mine) when he told him, that he Raged, he thus
replied. Thy foolish Blasphemies have compelled the Spirit of God that is in me
to speak that which I have said to thee, thou Enemy of all Righteousness. I
tell thee plainly, thou art not able to answer that Spirit of Truth which
speaks in me for the Defense of Christ's true Religion.

Of this Judgment were the most eminent Martyrs. I shall conclude with John
Bradford's plain Assertion to the Archbishop of York. 3 vol. of the Book of
Martyrs, p. 298.
We do believe and know the Scriptures as Christ's Sheep, not because the
Church says, they are the Scriptures, but because they be so, being thereof
assured by the same Spirit which wrote and spoke them.

How all these Testimonies can be True, and yet Inspiration Untrue, I shall
leave with the sober Reader to judge. And if my Arguments are still Irrational,
and my Testimonies Insufficient or Erroneous in his Account, it will become his
Pretenses to Divinity, not with Squibs and Railing, but Reason, Scripture and
better Authorities to discover it.

The second way he took to prove our Equalling our Writings to, and preferring
them before the Scriptures, is our Pretense to Infallibility. Hear what he
says.


Rep. Infallibility W. P. does not deny to be their Pretense, page 17.
but would make it very necessary, and casts the contrary Opinion again, and
again, and again too as Dirt in my Face. This is your Fallible, Errable,
Uncertain J. Faldo.


Rejoyn. It is ill done of my Adversary to call my Answer Dirt, which is so
serious, and to which he has replied little else but Dirt

I perceive all along, notwithstanding the vast Difference he represents us to
be at, as to a Worldly Condition, this Priest is ten times more enraged, at the
Just Consequences I draw from his own fallible Doctrines, then he thinks a
Quaker ought to be displeased with him, for his numerous and scurrilous
Provocations. But if it be Dirt, it sticks fast still, for I find none of it
wiped off. And how dirty it is the Reader may judge by perusing it.

He that does not Infallibly know, what he pretends to know of God or Religion,
knows nothing certainly which concerns either. My Answ. page 36.
Now if men cannot attain to any such Certainty, farewell all Religion: For,
that a man should affirm, and not know whereof; That he should profess God and
Religion, yet be uncertain of both; But that J. Faldo should preach up, and
profess himself Errable in all such Doctrine. Who ought to believe him? Why
spends he his Breath at a venture? What Reason have any to believe him against
us, who is Uncertain of what he says against us by his own Principle. This is
your Independent, Errable, Fallible, Uncertain J. Faldo.

Reader, this is by much the greatest part of that Dirt, he says, I cast in
his Face. But I must tell him, that greater Ignominy no Man can well bring upon
the Gospel, then that those who are converted by it are both Uncertain of the
Truth of it, and their own Conversion; he either seems to have forgot, or never
to have understood the Meaning of those words delivered by the Apostle Paul,
That their Hearts might be comforted, Col. 2. 2.
and being knit together in Love, and unto all Riches of the full Assurance of
Vnderstandding to the Acknowledgment of the Mystery of God. Again, Hebr. 6. 11.
And we desire that every one of you do show the same Diligence to the full
Assurance of Hope unto the End, Chap. 10. 22.
Let us draw near with a true Heart in full Assurance of Faith. And the Apostle
John tells us, He that believes on the Son of God, has the Witness in
himself. That they knew that they were of God, and the whole World lay in
Wickedness. And that the Son of God was come, and had given them an
Understanding, that they knew him that was True, and were in him that is True,
even in his Son Jesus Christ. And this is the Record that God has given to us
Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son. He that has the Son has Life, 1
John 5. 10, 11, 12, 19, 20.

If these prove not Certainty in Faith, Hope and eternal Life, there is no
Truth proved in Scripture; for that People should have full Assurance, Christ
in them their Hope, and Life, and Witness of these things in themselves,
knowing him that is true, and being in him that is true, and yet be Uncertain of
their Faith, Hope and Life; and doubtfu^l of their Inward VVitness, and the
Evidence and Knowledge that is given by him, cannot be less contradictory, then
to affirm men Ignorant of what they know, or guilty of what they are Innocent.
To be infallibly assured of what we believe, is no Error in the Opinion of John
Philpot and Bishop Latimer, whatever use is made of it now to discriminate a
Quaker. The first to the Bishop of Chiehester, who reflected upon him, ^ Book
Martyr. p. 577.
as conceiting himself better learned them the Bishop and the rest of his
Brethren (a Flout my lordly Adversary has more then once bestowed on me)
answered, I take upon me the Name of no Learning; I boast of no Knowledge, This
J. Faldo kicks at; he is one with the Papists.
but of Faith and of Christ, and that I am bound undoubtedly (or infallibly) to
know as I am sure I do. The Bishop replies, These Heretics take upon them to
be sure of all things they stand in; you should say rather, with Humility, I
trust I know Christ, then that I be sure thereof; which is so like J. Faldo,
that he seems to be the Bishop revived, proudly catechizing and reproving the
poor Quakers. But hear John Philpot's bold and smart Answer; Let him doubt of
his Faith that lists, says he, God give me always to believe that I am sure
of true Faith and Favor in Christ. Bishop Latimen in his second Letter
directed to Sr. Edward Bainton, 3 Book of Martyr. p. 475.
a Favourer of him that little time he lived in Queen Mary's Reign, who through
his desire to preserve him, was willing to allay the honest Man's Zeal for the
Truth from the great Uncertainty that is in the World about Truth; says he,
First ye mislike, that I say I am sure that I preach the Truth, saying, in
Reproof the same, that God knows certain Truth; Indeed God alone knows all
certain Truth, and God alone knows it as of himself, and none knows certain
Truth but God, and those that be taught of God, as says St. Paul, For God has
showed it unto them; And Christ himself, They shall be all taught of God. And
your Friends deny not but that certain Truth is communicated to us, according
to Capacity. But as to my Presumption and Arrogance, either I am Certain or
Uncertain that it is Truth that I preach; If it be Truth, why may not I say so?
If I be Uncertain, why dare I be so bold to preach it? And if your Friends be
Preachers themselves, after their Sermon, I pray you ask them, whether they be
certain and sure they preach you the Truth or no, and send me word what they
say, that I may learn to speak after them. If they say, they be Sure, ye know
what follows: If they say, they be Unsure, when shall ye be sure that have so
doubtful and unsure Teachers? Thus much of Infallibility; when he has answered
this we may give him some more; mean time we shall proceed.


Rep. But further, says W. P. Cannot one Man be another Man's Brother, and not
the Eldest Brother? p. 18, 19.
This has done your Work, or all Hope is lost. It seems the Scriptures and
your Writings may without Offience call one another Brother, yet not be thought
to aspire to Equallity. But why? Because for sooth you do not say, they are the
Scriptures Elder Brother. I thought till now that Brethren had been a term of
Equallity. And though in Humane Births there is a Natural Right to the
Firstborn above the Rest, yet not in the Productions of Scripture; for the new
Excels the old Testament in Glory.


Rejoyn. In Similes there is some Allowance with honest Men, but none to be
hoped for from J. Faldo. But if it be so hard for him to bear I cannot help it.
Several Writings may be given forth from the same Spirit without coming upon
the Vy. If we must needs equa^ some of our Writings to the Scriptures, because
given forth by the same Spirit, then must every the least True Christian be
equal to the greatest Apostle, because endued with the same Spirit.

The Pouring forth of the Spirit, which was the Promise of the Father, we have
proved the very Substance of the Gospel, and Inspiration as necessary as divine
Knowledge, because the only Way to it. Whatever therefore has been writ from
Adam's day to this, or shall yet be to the End of the World, from the Motion of
God's Spirit in the Hearts of any of his Children, stands as nearly related to
the Scriptures, as his several Manifestations of his Spirit in his Servants
Writing. The Ancient Christians were Brethren, having one Father; Were they
therefore equally dignified in Degree of Fellowship? And that was the Meaning
of my former Simile, disingenuously taken by my Adversary: For as there is a
Degree in natural, so in spiritual Births; The Dignity of the first lies in
Priority of Time, the Dignity of the last in a more full Discovery of
Immortality and eternal Life. Thus the Scriptures of the New exceed those of
the Old Testament. Where there is the first and most ample Declaration, there
must be the Pre-eminence. Now alas, what can we boast of, that was not formerly
testified unto; we exalt no singular Spirit, neither walk we in an untroden
Path; it is the Everlasting Gospel we bear witness unto, and to the Revival and
Breakings forth of that ancient Life, Truth, Spirit and Power, which according
unto diverse Dispensations, has made People true Children of God. What do you
esteem your own Meanings and Interpretations? Do you not entitle them to a very
near relation, the Text interpreted? We never intended to bring our Writings
upon the Vye, and dispute with it, the Scriptures, for the Pre-eminence: But
our Writings further declaring of the same Truth from the same Spirit, are
related to them. If to testify and exhort to the same Truth, the Scriptures
declare of, and that in the same Spirit of Christ by which they were given
forth, be offensively to equal or prefer such Testimonies, we are indeed guilty
of great Presumption. But if it be Scripturally True, That as many as are led
by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God; and that such as so led, may by that
Spirit further be drawn forth to fresh Testimonies to any ancient Truth or
Truths declared of in the holy Scriptures (whether by way of Prophecy,
Information, Exhortation, Reproof or Comfort to Believer or Unbeliever (as must
not be denied, since God cannot be limited) it cannot be Presumptuous or
Arrogant, to affirm any Kindred or Relation between any such Writing or
Wrirings of the Scriptures of Truth.

In short, Either there are never to be more Inspiration after the Apostles
Decease, and consequently no more Testimonies nor Prophecies to be then what
the remaining Scriptures give us, or the Pouring out of the holy Ghost, belongs
as well to after Ages as to that (as has been abundantly proved) and therefore
fresh Testimonies and Prophesies by way of further opening or pressing the
ancient Truth, recorded in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, may in
after Ages be given forth, unless God and his Spirit should be limited, and
many parts of the Scripture remain unfulfilled.

If any shall object, It Is Adding, according to Revel* 22. 18. I would have
them know, that the Addition intended was not of other Writings, but other
Doctrines. I will conclude this with a very notable Passage, delivered in a
Book entitled, An Examen of the late Assembly of Divines Confession of Faith
presented to the Parliament, Anno 165^. page 8, 10. It is evident that the Lord
will have Prophets in all Ages, and especially when he is about to bring
extraordinary Judgments upon the World in general, and upon the Church is
special; and that the Last Times shall abound most of all with the Prophetical
Spirit. So that these extraordinary Ways of God's revealing himself, neither
are ceased, nor shall determine in the militant Church.

Thirdly, whereas you say in the sixth Section, that nothing at any time is to
be added to the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, whether by new
Revelations of the Spirit, or Traditions of Men; We desire to know what Warrant
you have thus to determine. If you say that in Revelat. 22. 18. it is written,
That if any Man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the Plagues
that are written in this Book. We answer, That so much in effect was forbidden
long before, as Prove. 30. 6. Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee,
and thou be found a Liar: yet many Books of the Holy Prophets and Apostles have
been added since the written Word of those times. Yea, the same Inhibition was
given by Moses, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32. Ye shall not add to the Word which I
command you, neither shall you diminish ought from it: Therefore this Addition
thus probibited must necessarily be understood of any new Doctrine in substance
differing from the Old, but even that of Moses; But that there should be a
Vindication of the same when mis-understood, or a more full and free
Publication of the same, by the Prophets of the Old Testament, or Inspired Men
of the New.


Rep. My Adversary tells me a Blind Story, a preferring our Writings above the
Scriptures, as being from God essentially in us; page 19.
But this, says he, P. has not one word to.


Rejoyn. I had little Reason for it. He confesses, page 43. of his former
Discourse, that he expected not to find any such word as Essentially in our
Authors. Does he think I was to play the Fool in answering of him, as he begs
Excuse for in Replying to me? We affirm with the Scripture, that God
tabernacles in his Children, that Christ dwells in (...) People, and that the
holy Spirit Temples in his Saints. He was full of all Grace and Truth, and of
his Fullness have we received a measure of Grace and Truth; and he that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are all of one; After this Way that
he calls Heresy, know we, worship we, and enjoy we the God of our Fathers. But
what was the second Argument by which he endeavors to prove we prefer our
Writings and Sayings above the Scriptures.


Rep. My second is their Characters they give of them, concerning the
Scriptures; Feeding Death with Death, page 19, 20.
the Letter which kills. Of their own Sayings, The Voice of the Son of God
was uttered forth by him, etc.


Rejoyn. I told him before, That Death is a State without the living
experimental Knowledge of God, page, 39.
and his Work in the Heart. And that State, I said, will talk of the Fame of ^
Wisdom, as says the Scripture. At this he Scoffs, and makes as Merry with it,
as would some profane Stager. And in the midst of his Desires to be thought
Meek, to this little piece of a large and sober Answer, basely cropped, he gives
the hard Names of Nonsense, Folly and Impious. The Scripture justifies me in
what I said. For Men dead in Trespasses and Sins talk of God, and that perhaps
according to the Letter of Scripture too; An ellegant way of speaking, and
Scriptural.
why may it not be then said, That Death talks of Wisdom, as well as Dead Men.
But this he calls arriving at as perfect Nonsense as G. Fox himself. He would
have done better not only to have answered, but considered my following words,
Death or dead men's talking or feeding upon the Words of Scripture, being
ignorant of the true Sense of the Scripture; But it had been vain to have
expected this Candor from him.

In short, The Scripture without the Spirit is Dead, say some Independents as
well as Quakers. Men Unregenerate are dead in Sins, say all. What can such
men's Feeding upon the Scriptures be, but one dead thing feeding upon another.
Remember it was Christ that said, It was the Spirit alone that quickens.

But that this Man may show himself almost irrecoverably gone in Dishonesty,
because I said, page 40.
There is no Comparison betwixt what God requires, and an immediate hearing of
his Voice, and being sensible of his living Touches upon the Soul: Writings are
but holy things at second hand. He implies and replies thus.


Rep. Their Writings and Sayings they pretend to be perfectly immediate from
the Spirit of God.

But the Scriptures handed through many Ages; page 21.
And therefore there is no Comparison, because he affirms theirs to be more
immediate.


Rejoyn. Reader, Right me in this Matter: Was the Comparison betwixt our
Writings and Sayings with the Scriptures, or any Writings or Sayings, and the
Immediate Voice and Living Touches upon the Soul? Do not I expressly say,
Writings are but holy things at second hand? If so, how do I make our Wrings
holy things at the first hand? Do not I prefer the Voice of God to the Soul,
and his Immediate Touches upon it, as well before our own Writings and Sayings,
as the holy Scriptures of Truth? And who dare deny that heavenly Enjoyment of
God, to be the blessed End of Writings and Sayings too?

It is after a manner not less Perverting, though much more Scoffing, that he
deals with my Answer about Our Friends Denying Light to be in Scripture, That
is, said I, There is not Living, Spiritual, Essential Light in the Scriptures.
Now hear him.


Rep. Did he not intend his Writings for the View of those only who understand
no more, Right Reason then a Horse does Hebrew. He could not expect any success
in such pitiful Attempts. Whatsoever makes manifest is Light, says the
Scripture. But if there be no Light, but according to the Character he gives,
Candles, Stars, Moon, Sun, Reason, W. P's Writings also are gross and perfect
Darkness.


Rejoyn. This Man would pass both for Just and Rational; Just he is not, who
has left out those very words which remove all Pretense to Scruple, viz. That
the Scriptures carried a Descriptive and Declarative Light with them, Answ. p.
42.
that is, a Declaration from and of the divine Light. Dares he affirm more? or
does this deny all other Lights besides the Living, Spiritual and Essential
Light? Unjust Man! to leave out that which only could wrong his Adversary, and
answer his infamous Ends.

Besides, he abuses Scripture; the Light mentioned in that Passage is the
Living, Spiritual Light of God in the Conscience, Ephesians. ^. 13.
as the Verse at length proves, viz. That all things that are Reproved are made
manifest by the Light; for whatsoever makes manifest is Light. Again, Hear what
he says to the same Matter.


Rep. And yet W. P. tells you of the Author of the Quakers Book, page 22,
he writ to give notice, of the Dayspring of God's Eternal Light of Life to
the World, i. e. the Light within, that needs the Light of Farnsworth's Book
to be seen by: What cannot such a Reconciler do?


Rejoyn. But what cannot such a Scoffer do, who dare Affront God, and be Injust
to Men in the View of the World? which is manifested thus; First, as I denied a
Living, Spiritual and Essential Light to be in the Scriptures, or any other
VVritings; so did I acknowledge a Descriptive and Declarative Light to be in
them, and measurably in other VVritings, as well as the Scriptures, which he
hides from the Reader, and then triumphs over a false Consequence. Secondly, If
the Light within needs Rich. Farnsworth's Book as a Light without, to be seen
by, because it is by it testified to; the same upon his Argument may be said of
God himself, who is Light, that he needed the Light of the Scriptures to be
seen by. But what shall I say? The man is desperate in his Ventures.

From my concluding upon his Accusation, and my own Answer, so that our
Adversary's Argument amounts to thus much. We therefore prefer our own Writings
before the Scriptures, Which concerns him, if he would have what he writes to
be according to Scripture.
because in all our Writings we earnestly endeavor, by numerous Quotations, to
prove what we write to be according to Scripture; For this he flies out into
this following Reply.


Rep. I leave it to my Reader (says J. Faldo) to give a Name to this Passage,
page 22.
the like to which for a daring Untruth the World has scarcely been ever
acquainted with; yet the man pretends besides all other Graces to
Infallibility. In many a large Libel I could produce where there is not one
Quotation of Scripture: W. Smith, often quoted in Quakerism no Christianity in
his Directory for Religious Principles, consisting of above Two Hundred Pages,
has not one Scripture quoted, not one Exhortation to read the Scriptures; But
as his main Scope, denies and throws Dirt upon them.


Rejoyn. Reader right a poor People once; Never I think did man so slander
Persons and Principles: Dwell ^ while here, then give thy Judgment of both. My
Answer unencountered by him lay thus.

Let it suffice to all impartial People, that we only desire to make a
Difference, betwixt the Writings, My Answ. page 42.
and the Thing written of; And to the eternal Overthrow of our Adversaries (not
wholely without their own Help) since they think the Titles we gave our Books
(very glorious in themselves) most unworthy of them, but proper to the
Scriptures, whom they say we slight: Let it be considered, that not one of
those Books is destitute of Scripture; but is either generally in a Scripture
style (this Distinction I fear my Adversary wilfully omitted) or particularly
defended by plenty of express Scriptures cited. Therefore of necessity they,
the Scriptures, must also partake with them in common of those famous Titles.
And thus far have they the Preference, that they are quoted on purpose to give
the Truth we write of greater Credit. What is that Greater Credit, but to be
exactly agreeable with them.


Now Reader, first consider; I did not say, that no^ one Book is not without
plenty of express Scripture cited, as my answer clears; but that every one of
them is in a Scripture style, or particularly defended by express Scripture
cited.

W. Smith's Catechism belongs to the first; and if he would have fastened the
Lie deservedly upon me, he should have made appear, that he treated not on the
Truth declared of in Scripture, scripturally, which is as much the contrary, as
any thing can be; For his Catechism contains nothing else; neither is it
managed any other way.

Secondly, If he can produce one Book, endeavoring to defend, or prove our
Principle to be true, without such Quotation (for to such Books the Passage by
him cited relates) I will confess his Ranting Abuse to be a Just Rebuke: But I
make this Challenge to him, To give me one Book out of a Scripture Style, that
is not controversal; or any Controversal Book without express Scripture cited?
if he cannot, his vain Insults fall thick upon his own Head: But let us see if
the Design of W. Smith's Catechism be to deny and throw Dirt upon the
Scriptures: In the thirteenth page of William Smith's Catechism, printed 67. we
have this Question and Answer concerning the Scriptures.

Q. Of what Service are the Scriptures, as they are given forth and recorded
without?

A. MVCH EVERY WAY, unto those that have received the same Spirit from which
they were given forth; for unto such they are Profitable, and make Wise unto
Salvation, and are unto them of Service for Instruction, Edification and
Comfort: The same Spirit in them receiving the Testimony of the Spirit, as it
is declared in the Scripture; And there is an Agreement and Union in the Spirit
within, AND ALSO IN THE WORDS without; And so there is Instruction, Edification
and Comfort by the Scriptures unto all that are in the same Spirit that gave
them forth.

Now, in my Adversary's words, I leave it to my Reader to give a Name to his
Passage, both against me, our Books. and particularly William Smith: The like
to which, for a daring Untruth, is not commonly told.

For if to confess to the Scriptures, to believe, to read, and to fulfill them,
as what by the right Spirit makes Wise through Faith to Salvation, being full
of Instruction, Edification and Comfort; If this, I say, he to deny and throw
Dirt upon them, William Smith is deeply guilty; but I leave it with God, and my
Reader's Conscience, whether J. Faldo has not denied all Honesty in throwing
so much Dirt undeservedly upon W. Smith: But let us see what Reply he makes to
my Answer in his Inferences, and indeed there is need of Patience in having to
do with so much unworthy Shifting, and ill Language; His first Inference was
this, If the Light within was always sufficient, the Scriptures and other
Means were ever superfluous. Quak. no Chr. p. 59.
His second, By the same Ground the Writings of the Gentiles, yea, the bitter
Scoffs of Lucian and Julian the Apostate are of equal Authority with the
Scriptures; for they resulted from their Light within.

To all which (as my full Answer) only thus much I will say, That though all
Ability was and is in him the Light, whom we declare to be the Light of all
Mankind to reveal the whole Mind of God. (Here he leaves off, and takes the
rest from the beginning of another Paragraph, about a page off, to clap to it)
Yet that he so (...) mistakes Reason, and abuses his Reader, as to infer from
the ability of the Light (whether obeyed or disobeyed) the Uselesness of the
Scripture. Now hear his Reply.

Rep. Obeyed or Disobeyed were no Words of mine. But how can we know any thing
the better for VV. P's hard Names he puts upon it, page 23.
seeing there is nothing that pinches him, but he has presently (...) hard
Name for it. And so impertinently and slovenly imposed, that a man might learn
far more gentile Railing under a Hedge; As base Comparison, p. 43. Black as
Hell in Malice, p. 46. The Impudence of his Wickedness, p. 49.


Rejoyn. Whatever pincht me before, I hope the Reader will bear witness for
him, he has been more merciful in this Reply. He first brings little or nothing
out of my Answer, and says just nothing to what he brought. He did not say
obeyed or disobeyed; The more the Shame; As my Answer to the Inference will
sufficiently manifest, the substance of which was this, That if the Light had
been obeyed, and God's Spirit not rebelled against, there had not been so much
need of Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept. Therefore was the Light or
Spirit in it self insufficient? or Line upon Line superfluous? Is the Ability
of a Master questioned by the Use of Books? or the Use of Books superfluous,
because of his Ability? Insufficiency belongs not to the Light, but to the
Creature that cannot receive it as it is in it self. A Condiscension to such
VVayes and Means as suits the great Weakness and Distance of degenerated Man
from God, can no more conclude the Light insufficient, then God, Christ and the
holy Spirit. To which let me add, that as the Law, so very much of Scripture,
was added, because of Transgression; that makes it not superfluous, no more
then the succesless Strivings of the Spirit to bring out of Transgression
(because of Man's obstinate Rebellion) renders the Spirit not sufficient.

To the second Inference he drew, I gave a large Answer, which I shall
contract; That the Light of the Jews and Gentiles was one in it self; That as
either writ by that Degree of Light they had, they might both be said to write
by the same Light, and yet the VVritings be no more equal then the Degrees of
manifestation: That the VVritings of the Jews greatly transcended those of the
Gentiles, from that greater Discovery God vouchsafed to them. That his bringing
Lucian and the best Gentiles upon an Equallity, was wicked. That nothing lies
heavier against the Light within in that Blasphemous Saying, then against the
Spirit in the Prophets, Apostles, and every good Christian, who by his
infatuated way of Arguing would make us believe that Lucian and Julian acted
from the Light within, because they acted from something within, and that there
is no Distinction to be made between their Writings and the Scriptures
themselves, upon our Principle, because they writ according to the Light that
was in them; as he says. What is this but to deny all Testimony within, or at
least allows but of such a one, as gives equal Evidence to Apostates and
Christians, Men acted by the Power of Darkness, and the Principle of Light? It
shall now rest with my Reader to point where the Pinch was, For the Ill
Language he says I gave him, to wit, a Line and a half made up out of six
pages, given on distinct Provocations; Let us examine [ Base Comparison, page
43.] This fell out upon his comparing us with the Papists (which we shall anon
consider) How slovenly I was in doing so, I will not be mine own Judge [ Black
as Hell it self in Malice, page 46.] fell from me on this Occasion; says J.
Faldo, I know not hardly any worse Lucian and Julian said of Jesus of Nazareth,
the Scripture and Christianity, THEN THE QUAKERS HAVE DONE UNDER OTHER NAMES.
Now Reader, if thus to Unchristian, Unscripture, in fine, Unreligion, Profane,
yea, Atheize a whole Body of People, bringing them into parallel with loose and
heathenish Scoffers and Persecuters of the Christian Religion, who all this
while reverently believe in Christ Jesus the Savior of the World, in his
Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Doctrine and Miracles I say, If thus to
use us, is not as black as H^ll in Malice against us, there can be nothing
Black, Hellish or Malicious. For the last piece of Rai^ing (as he calls it) [
The Impudence of his W^ckedness, p. 4 9.] What could it be else, to charge the
Impiety of Julian and Lucian upon the Light within, and telling the World,
That upon the Quakers Principle, they may conclude their Writings as Canonical
as the Scriptures of Truth. But this man studied Personal Reflection more then
the Cause, or he would not have given but five Lines of nine Pages of my
Answer, and never have considered that, as he ought. I could be glad to read
one page of his Vindication, without unnecessary Reflection, who for a Line and
a half of pertinent Rebuke, by him out of six Pages of my Answer hardly picked
(and by me fully defended) cries out of my impertinent slovenly hard Names, and
that gentiler Railing may be learned under a Hedge, where I leave him to be
better taught.

But he is very angry I contract his Comparison of us with the Papists in the
Matter of Infallibility and Inspiration thus, He tells the World, the Papists
own Revelation, and the Quakers hold Revelation also; therefore the Quakers are
Papists, or very near them. Hear his Reply.


Rep. How can I guide W. P's Pen, to write Truth in Matter of Fact? page 24.
If he find such an Argument in my Book, I will be content to be his
Bond-slave. Can you believe that a man can be blessed with Apostolical immediate
Revelations, for every thing in Religion, that is not so honest, as to use the
very Eyes in his Head?


Rejoyn. By this we may perceive, it is high Tide with J. Faldo. First Reader,
I deliver not the words in a different Character from my own, because I did not
pretend to quote him: But that it was the drift of the Comparison, and so no
wrong to his Intention, the thing it self abundantly proves. The Papists hold
Revelation, and the Quakers own Revelation; what is the meaning of these two
Propositions, unless it be the Conclusion I drew? But lest the Man should be
believed, hear what he says himself in his first Book, page 63.
It is no little Absurdity in the Quakers to make Outcry against Popery, while
they plant and hug the Root in their own Bosoms. Again, in the same page, It
were no hard matter to prove an Agreement in a multitude of Particulars between
the Papists and Quakers. Besides all this, he brings in a Story page 55. of a
certain Romanist, who coming into England and being asked, which of the
multitude of Sects came nearest unto the Roman Church? replied, The Quakers.
And this J. Faldo says, he remembers. How then he should forget, to that
degree of Abuse, that there is any Argument in his Book to prove the Quakers
very near to the Papists, who in his Story uses that very Word to make People
believe it, I cannot tell, unless his great Desire to bedirt William Penn
transported him beyond all remembrance of what he had writ. I might now demand
his Promise, of being my Bond-Slave: But alas Proud Man and Insolent, he is too
high for that Office, if such I could accept of: Though I know not how he can
come off, unless with this Passage, p. 57. The Quakers out-go the Papists FAR;
therefore the Quakers are not Papists, nor NEAR them. He thought I made him
abuse us beyond his Intention, and he both intended and abused us beyond what I
represented. If in that I wronged him, he has more Reason to Forgive, then
Revile me.

But how comes it to pass, that he says nothing of my argumentum ad hominem;
The Papists own a God, a Trinity of Persons, etc. And J. Faldo owns a God and a
Trinity of Person, therefore J. Faldo is a Papist, or near a kin to one. Would
this be just? If not, neither is his Conclusion of force against us. J. Faldo
holds something in common with Jews, Turks, Heathens and Papists; he would not
take it kindly, if we should therefore conclude him, to be all or any of them?
But he gave this the go-by, which shows, he seeks not the Promotion of Truth,
but Disgrace of his Adversary, indeed his very good Friend, though his own
Indeserts will not let him believe it.


CHAP. V.
Of the Scriptures being the Rule of Faith and Life, and Judge of Controversy.

THe first thing in this Chapter he charge me with, is Forgery; Let us see
how he proves it.

Rep. The Charge in my fifth Chapter is, That the Quakers deny the Scriptures
to be a Rule of Faith and Life, p. 25, 26.
or a Judge and Determiner of Religious Controversies; but P. as if he had
sworn not to repeat my words faithfully, trans-scribes them, That we deny the
Scriptures to be a Rule of Faith, and Judge of Controversies.


Rejoyn. Reader, observe the Forgery lies here, that I left out Life, after
Faith; and Determiner, after Judge; and Religious before Controversies: But
because that which is the Rule of Faith, is the Rule of Life; and that Judge
and Determiner are all one; and that the Controversies intended, were not about
Questions in Mathematics, Philosophy, Trade, or Law, common or civil, but
purely about Religion, I thought it no Forgery to leave out words not
necessary, or what from the Nature of the Rule and Controversy on foot were
manifestly employed; especially when I made no Advantage to my self by it. But
every such little thing must be called by a hard Name, or John Faldo would have
little to write, and but a few to believe his Books.

But to the Point, (avoiding many Occasions for severe Reflection) Perhaps he
grants us what we can desire. For upon my asserting, that what was and is more
general then the Scriptures, is most properly the General Rule, he replies,


Rep. I never affirmed them to be a general Rule, nor is it that, Ibid. p. 26.
I charge the Quakers for denying; but I charge them with denying them to be
any Rule at all of Faith and Life; he mistakes the Question, and yields my
Charge to be their Principle, and pleads for it, p. 54.


Rejoyn. If that be not the Question, how have I granted the Question? Do I
plead for his Charge because I plead against the Scriptures being the General
Rule, p. 54. which he says is no part of the Charge, and what himself
undertakes not to contradict? But sure I am, if the Scriptures be not the
General Rule (as he implies (and thereby cuts his own Throat, and grants to the
Quakers the Question, as largely as needs to be) They are not The Rule by way
of Excellency, or the Rule by which God's People in all Ages have walked; for
that was and is General: So that the Scripture, upon his own Concession, is but
a particular Rule, and therefore must be subservient to the Spirit (who is the
great Evangelical Rule) as are many other Instruments, that have been made use
of upon several Occasions.

He might have learned thus much in p. 53. of my Answer, where I say that we
acknowledge the Scriptures to contain many Holy Rules for Godliness. I would
know of him how that could be, and yet deny them to be a Rule in any sense. But
we have good Reason to deny them to be the Rule of Faith and Judge of
Controversies, who can neither give nor govern Faith, nor Judge of
Controversies, as the many different Persuasions in the World fully prove; for
then all that have the Scriptures would be of one Persuasion, as it is most
certain, those are, who have and walk by the One Spirit.

Wherefore since the Scriptures themselves testify to the Spirit, as the
great Judge, Rule and Leader, especially under the New Covenant, where the Law
is not written on Tables of Stone (much less Paper) but of Flesh, to wit, the
Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of Men, the Spirit, and not the Scripture must
be the Rule of Faith and Judge of Controversy.

In short, The Scripture cannot try a present Motion or Prophecy. Bad Spirits
are wholely hid from it. For Instance, Paul reproved not the Spirit that cried,
These are the Servants of the Most High God, that show unto us the Way of
Eternal Life, from the Scriptures; neither did Peter, Deceitful Ananias, but
from the heavenly Instinct and Savor, Relish or Discerning they received from
the Spirit of God within them 'Twas in a Case of such Difficulty, that some in
these late Times have writ, That the Scripture gave no general standing Rule
(for all particular Cases) in fleeing or standing in Times of Persecution, but
that it was the Frame of the Spirits of the People of God to retire at that
season; which whether it be true or false, that the Spirit of God did so
influence them, two things are undeniable; first, That it was the Frame of
their Spirits, witness their Practice; secondly, That the Scripture was not
sufficient for them to square themselves by on that Occasion; And what else do
Professors mean, when they advise People to seek the Lord in this or the other
Case? why do they not go seek the Scriptures rather? Does not such a Practice
manifestly detect the Scriptures of Insufficiency, and evidently prove their
Acknowledgment both of Revelation, and their Recourse to a more Living,
Spiritual, Immediate and Sufficient Rule? Why else do they seek God's Mind
(say they) by Prayers not formal but by the Spirit? But this is become despised
Heresy with J. Faldo. For Faith in his Sense rises no higher, then so many
Articles, laid down (suppose truly) according to the bare Letter of the
Scriptures, which the Devil can believe as well as he: This Faith I call merely
Verbal and Historical, of which the Scripture may be a Rule, but not of Saving
Faith: for of that Faith only the Spirit can be the Rule; and why? because the
Spirit of God alone reveals him to the Soul, who is the Object of Faith, and
works Faith in the Soul upon that Object; and as this only begets Faith, so it
increases, enlivens, rules, governs and strengthens Faith unto Dominion. This
alone unfolds those Mysteries spoak of in the Scriptures, Acts 8. 30, 31.
Wherefore answered the Eunuch unto Philip, when he queried, Understandest thou
what thou read? How should I unless (...) I had a guide, as says our old
English Translation, which implies, That the things declared of by the
Scriptures are not to be understood from the Scriptures, but a more Living,
Spiritual and Certain Guide, Wherefore we affirm, That Repentance, Faith,
Sanctification, Justification, Redemption, Regeneration, etc. are all a Mystery
never to be disclosed, but by the Revelation and Operation of the Spirit of God
in Man; the Scripture can only testfie to such things, that they are; but it is
the Spirit alone that works them, and illuminates, guides, governs and rules
the Soul in and about such things. It Is true, all the Spirit leads to is
according to the Scriptures; it overturns them not; for they declare of most of
these Operations; yet because we believe, know and witness them from the
Conviction and Operation of the Spirit, before we can possibly understand them
in Scripture; therefore the Scripture is but a Declaration, and not the Rule of
Faith, etc. And the only best way to determine any Controversy on foot about
Repentance, Faith, Sanctification, Justification, etc. is the Judgment of that
Spirit which works them; For how can the Scripture, that has so many Meanings
put upon it, determine which of those meanings is the true? Let them show me
that Scripture that plainly and uninterpretatedly tells me, such a Proposition
is True, and such a one is False, that consists only of their additional
Meanings; such a new Nicknamed People right, and such wrong, and they do their
Business; if they cannot, as it is impossible they should, they must have
recourse to something else to rule and determine; and what can that be besides
that Eternal Spirit, which worked the true Faith, and ruled the holy Life of
those Ancients, who gave forth this Declaration of Faith and Life?

Can any Man t^ll another's Mind better then himself? or resolve any Doubt, or
clear up any Misunderstanding concerning what is delivered, better then he
that spoak it? To understand those holy Men's Mind, and disprove them that
mistake it, there is an unavoidable necessity of coming to that Spirit which
made it theirs. It Is granted, that all True Doctrine is according to Scripture;
but the Question is, What is true Doctrine? Scripture is a strong Testimony;
but what enlightens the Mind, resolves Doubts, and works Faith, and informs,
guides and helps the Soul through the whole Work of Conversion, and without
which the Testimony of Scripture it self is truly an unintelligible and an
incredible thing? This must be nothing less then the Spirit it self.

In short, The Scripture is not the Rule, but Declaration of Faith and
Knowledge; That only must be the Rule of Faith, which gave and ruled the Faith
of those that gave forth Scripture. And because none can give or work Faith
now, but what did give and work Faith then; it is not the Scripture, but that
which was before the Scripture, even the Spirit of Truth, which was the Author,
Rule and Finisher of their Faith. And if our Faith in this Age be the same with
the holy Men's of old that gave forth the Scriptures; they are no more our Rule
now then they were theirs then, who had a Rule and a Faith before them: But as
it was a Declaration of what they believed, knew and witnessed; so it is a
Declaration of what we now believe and desire to know and witness. John's
Epistle was not writ to be the Saints Rule; for he directed them to the
Anointing; yet their Faith and Life of which the Anointing was the Rule, was
according to John's Epistle. Again, The Declaration in time was after the Faith
declared of; but where there was Faith, there was a Rule, consequently that
Declaration which was after that Faith and Rule, was not that Rule; so that the
most that can be said against us is this, The Scriptures cannot be a
Declaration of your Faith, till you come to such a Belief of the Truth's
thereby expressed, as they had who writ them; and a great Truth it is. But then
say we, The Spirit must work that Faith, before the Scriptures can be accounted
a Declaration of our Faith, or we interested in them, And because that Faith
has a Rule so soon as it has a being, it must needs follow, that the
Declaration of that Faith cannot be either the Author or Rule of it. Here lies
the Mistake of my Adversary and many more, that because what a Man does is
according or agreeable to a thing, therefore that is the Rule of the thing
done. To proceed.

For this reason it is, a Constraint lies upon us from God, to direct and
exhort all People diligently to mind that Measure of the Holy Spirit, which God
has given them to profit with, as that alone by which Man comes to a certain
Knowledge of his Mind and Will, and to do the good and acceptable Thing in his
Sight, and that by which his poor laboring Mind is brought out of the
Incertainties, numerous Interpretations and vain Janglings Men have pester^d
the World withal; who have darkened Counsel, and bewildered many in their
Conscientious Enquieries after God, drawing out their Minds from the seasoning
Principle of Life, instead of bringing them nearer to the Lord; for which great
and heavy Plagues hang over the Head of this Generation, who make War against
the Spirit, with the Letter, instead of confirming its Appearance from the
Letter; and under Pretense of calling the Scriptures the Word of God, and Rule
of Faith and Life, divert People from Waiting for the Word nigh unto
themselves, which is the Word of Faith, and gives Life to all that believe and
obey it; decrying us as Seducers, and deriding us as Euthusiastick Canters,
because we prefer and turn all to the Spirit of Life within; an Outside,
Carnal, Envious and Hypocrical Generation, as it is.

I will conclude this Head with a Passage out of some certain Authors, that
were never professed nor reputed Quakers.

Wherefore they who are true Believers (says the first) and have received
Christ's Spirit, Dell Trial of Spirits, p. 10.
their Judgment is to be preferred in the Trial of Spirits before a whole
Council of Clergymen. And they only who can try Spirits by the Spirit of God,
and Doctrines by the Word of God written in their Hearts, by the Spirit can in
measure discern all Spirits in the World. And the Spirit of Christ, which
dwells in all true Christians, cannot deceive, nor be deceived in the Trial of
Spirits. With abundance more to the same purpose.

The other brings in Two Objections frequently made against us, and by him
pertinently answered for us.

Object. 1. It is said Isa. 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony, Collier
Genesis Epist. page 249. c. 10. page 258. c. 12.
if any Man speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no Light
in him.

Answ. Truth; there is the Law and Testimony in the Spirit as well as in the
Letter; The Law of God is in the Heart, there it is written, and there it
testifies the Truth of God; and if any Man speak not according to this Rule, it
is because there is no Light or Morning risen in him. The Spiritual Man judges
all things, yet he himself is judged of no Man.

Object. 2. It is said, Gal. 6. 16. That whosoever walks according to this Rule,
Peace upon him.

Answ. True; but that is not the Rule of the Letter, but of the Spirit, even
the Rule of the New Man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true
Holiness. Read the Words before, and you shall see it: There is nothing of any
Value but the New Creature: And whosoever walks according to This Rule Peace
shall be upon him, etc. Those Famous, Poor, Suffering Christians, the
Waldenses, in their purer times, besides many other weithty Points, wherein
they symbolized, with us in this very Matter, are not foreign, who in a
Confession, about Five Hundred and Fifty Years old, said this down as a piece
of their Creed, That the Discoveries and Testimonies of the Holy Spirit in them
were the most Convincing Evidence, and Infallible Proof of the Divine Authority
of the Scriptures. Consequently the Spirit must have been their Judge and Rule
concerning their Understanding the Truths testified by them, as ^. P. Porrin
their Historian, in so many words assures us concerning them in the beginning
of his notable History of their Rise, Doctrine, Sufferings and Progress.
And truly, my Brethren, it is my earnest Desire, to see Souls to live more in
the Spirit, and less in the Letter, and then they will see that we judge of the
Letter by the Spirit, and not of the Spirit by the Letter, which occasions so
much Ignorance amongst us; and those who profess themselves to be our Teachers,
are chief in this Trespass: Observe this J. Faldo. Again, The Spirit of God,
who is God, is the ALONE RULE of a spiritual Christian, etc. Further declaring,
That some setting the Scriptures in the room of the Spirit, they make them an
Idol, Ibid. p. 248.

Let him either discard these Men from being Christians, that were reputed
great and refined Professors, before the Breaking forth of the People called
Quakers, or leave off censuring this part of our Doctrine, as no part of
Christianity.

Nor have we any Ground to believe, that they were intended for the Rule at
first, since they were not given forth all at one time) and yet every Age stood
in need of such a Rule) but on diverse Occasions, as Miscarriages in the
Churches, Threatening of Judgments, Prophecies, Histories, and Comfortings under
Afflictions, etc. required: Nor do they carry the least Method or Designment of
the great Rule with them; here they are Proper, there Figurative; in one thing
Literal, in another Allegorical; without all Definition of Terms, framing of
Articles, such Plainness and Coherence in Matter, and Intelligibleness of
Language to all Nations, which may render them such a Rule. Besides, it is more
then probable, that much of the Writings of the New Testament are lost, from
Luke' s Word's in the beginning of his History, where he tells us, that he was
but ONE OF THE MANY, who did set forth a Declaration of those things, which
were most surely believed amongst them, even, says he, as they delivered them
unto us, which from the beginning were Eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word.
For it must be considered, when Luke writ his Narrative, that John's History
was not in being; and some will have it, that Luke wrote before Mark: But
whether it be so or no, certain it is, that Mark and Matthew could not make up
those many, that took that Work in hand; neither can we think, he should call
Matthew and Mark (...), which signify with the Athenians a Multitude; for a
certain Learned Man will have it, That no better Greek was spoken, then that
wherein Luke wrote his History.

That those Narratives were not Apocriphal, but at least of equal Authority
with his dedicated to Theophilus, his own words tell us: For those that writ
were such as related what they received from Eyewitnesses, and the first
Ministers of the Word. Besides which, there were in the Apostles Age, and the
two following Centuries, several Writings (reputed genuine) which either dyed
out of the World through that Neglect brought upon them by the Advantage some
accounted Heretics might make of them in Defense of their Opinions; or stifled
by the subtilty of the Romish Church, being more expressly opposite to her
growing Superstition and Grandeur: And for such Writings as still remain among
us, methinks, it should not be unknown to a Man of J. Faldo's Pretenses to
Learning, how much the Authority of several of them has been questioned by
some, and exploded by others, though never by any of us; particularly the
Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of James, second and third of John, second
of Peter, Jude, the Revelations; and with some Matthew's History it self, has
not escaped the like Censure. Of which, Reader, thou have an Account at large
in that Notable Frenchman Dallaeus De usa Patrum, and a late Discourse mainly
directed against the Roman Church, page 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
entitled, Christoph. Christophori Sandy. Nucleas Historiae Ecclesiasticae. I
would not any from hence should repute me so Impious, as to endeavor to weaken
the Testimony of Scripture, or beget any the least Doubt of the Doctrine
thereby declared; only upon our Adversary's Principles, which so strongly
oppugn'd the Doctrine of Revelation or Inspiration, I must take leave to
conclude in his Name and upon his Principles, that the Word of God is
imperfect, and a great part of the Rule of Faith and Life, and Judge of
Controversy is lost, and that he has no more Reason to believe the Truth of
those great things related in that part of the Scriptures yet remaining, then
any Legend at Rome: For exclude Revelation, and what Ground has he for his
Faith besides Tradition? and what Evidence can he give us upon his Principles
of the Truth of the former and Falsehood of the latter? These Councils and
Synods who collected and canonized them he accepts for one part, and rejects
for the other. Again, he trusts their Judgment in picking and choosing, and yet
rejects their Interpretation; as if it were not so difficult to relish Genuine
from Spurious Scriptures, as (when rightly discerning them to be such) to
understand them; which is an absolute Contradiction; For how should they know
true from False, and not understand the True? That Council which made the
Writings of the New Testament Canonical, left out the Revelations as
Apocriphal; yet I hope J. Faldo accepts that as heartily and unquestionably as
the rest: Council Tom. 1. p. 481. can. 60. Anno 364. and p. 549. can. 27. Anno
417. after Christ.
And that Council which took in the Revelations, and made it first Canonical,
brought in with it the Books of Tobi, Judith, etc. which J. Faldo, I suppose,
with all his Brethren, rejects, as Apocriphal. Thus are mere Men, and the
Judgments of such Councils, as he otherwise rejects, his Rule for believing the
Scriptures that remain to be Canonical (if it be proper to say, the first is
the Rule of his Canon, which is too short; and the other which is superfluous,
as by his Account) My next Question is, What was his Rule for believing those
Councils? I am sure he must have been without all other, then a Willingness to
believe so, because they said so; which how like this is to his Papist, unto
whom he would resemble us, let all sober Protestants consider. I cannot see how
he is able to oppugn any thing they say upon Tradition, who mounts no higher
for his Assurance then Tradition, and such too, as rests mostly within their
Hands. But if it shall be granted us, that to know Scripture to have been given
forth upon I find John Faldo often Scorning Inspiration, and bringing it into
odium under the word Enthusiasm, used of late to signify Whimsical Pates, or
Heads troubled with a Religious kind of Frenzy; as if he had abandoned the
Plea, Enjoyment and Practice of the best Separatists, whose Names he emptily
honors, and resolved to set up for a Coffe-House Droll, or a Play-Prophanist.
To cool his Courage, and stop his Career, I commend Two or Three late
Discourses to his perusal, writ by Men of Undoubted Learning, and pretendedly
defended by J. F. in his Quakerism no Christianity against the People called
Quakers. The first is D. Patrick his Friendly Debates; 2d, Fowler his Design of
Christianity (never to be answered by that Angry Man that designed it) And W.
Sherlock his late Discourse of Jesus Christ, etc. If both Presbyterians and
Independents are not thoroughly and truly charged to be Enthusiasts, Men holding
what J. F. condemns us for owning, though less justifiably; and if more
ridiculous Interpretations are not to be found among them, then was ever yet
read in any Quakers Book, I am content to suffer J. F's Reproach as Just (who
does not do as he would be done by, his great Scab or Leprosy, and of some
other of his Fraternity too) for alas, it is at best but a piece of Heathenism
with him; and a Man may be a very good Christian forsooth by a New Art of
Imputation, found out and accommodated to the Ease of Hypocrites, without that
straight and legal Way of just and holy Living.
Inspiration, Men must have Recourse to Inspiration, then not so much Councils
and Synods, as the Inspiration of the Almighty, which gives certain
Understanding, is our Rule in the Case; as well says the Assembly of Divines
in their Confession of Faith, chap. 1.. 4. The Authority of the holy Scripture,
for which it oug^t to be believed and obeyed, depends not on the Testimony of
any man or Church, but only upon God (who is Truth it self) the Author thereof.
And since J. Faldo himself confesses the Spirit necessary to the Understanding
of the Scripture, which implies the Insufficiency of the Scripture to give that
Understanding of it self, the Spirit must be the Rule of our Understanding the
Scripture, as it was before the Rule of our Faith concerning the Divine
Authority of Scripture; For the Light of the Interpreter, and not the Thing
interpreted is the Rule both of Faith and Practice; which is undeniably evident
from the reconciling of seeming Contradictions: If the mere Letter of the
Scripture were to be followed, no Man could ever make them meet in the same
Truth; The many Different Persuasions at this Day about Religion prove this,
whose respective Authors and Abettors think it no mean Advantage to their
Cause, that they hold the Scriptures to be their Rule.

But such as come unto the Spirit of God, know and believe the Truth as it is
in Jesus; David' s Key, that opens and none shuts, is given unto them; and the
Secrets of their God remain with them. This reconciles those seeming
Contradictions, and leads through the Greatest and Deepest Truths mentioned in
Scripture, without the least Doubt or Stumble: This is the Super-excellent
Benefit of the New Covenant Administration, the Promise of the Father, the
Instructor, Leader and Comforter of all God's Children; And for a further
Account of which, I refer the Reader to my Book, entitled, The Spirit of Truth
Vindicated, from page 16. to page 47. and Reason against Railing, from page 24.
to page 46.

To prove his former Charge, he produces this Passage out of James Naylor, God
is at Liberty to speak to his People by the Scriptures, page 27.
if he please, and so he is at Liberty to speak by another created thing, as to
Balaam by his Ass; and because I returned in Answer, To all which (said I) he
says just nothing; he replies, As if (says he) I were to answer the Proofs of
my own Affirmation. But that was not all; for beside that, it was no Proof: He
should have proved it Erroneous or Contemptible, as he styles it, or else he
does nothing; To cite, and not prove the Citation apt to the End for which it
was cited, that is, the Doctrine it contained or abetted to be Erroneous is
impertinent. What? Is it false Doctrine to assert, That God is at Liberty to
speak by the Scriptures or without them? Or is it to contemn the Scriptures to
say as John Faldo cites J. N. that God does speak to People by those Scriptures
that were given forth by Inspiration? Or, is it no Proof, that God is at
Liberty to speak by any other created thing to instance the Case of Balaam's
Ass? But he will by all means have it, that according to J. N. to take an Ass
or Bible to be our Instructor, is of equal Prudence; adding, These Notions,
says he, being by the Quakers sucked in; I wonder not that they leave the
Teachings of God by the Scriptures to attend on the Ministry of Asses. But this
indirect Reflection and unsavory Abuse, both shows the Vanity and Envy of the
Man, and must needs beget an Abhorrence of his Proceedings against us in the
Heart of every solid Reader. It had much better become the Author of Poor
Robin's Almanac, or the Cobbler of Gloucester, then a Turn'd-out Nonconforming
Minister. J. N's words I fully vindicated in my Answer; his Drift was, to drive
off People from this pernicious Apprehension, that God's Voice was only to be
heard from the Scripture, thereby justling the Spirit out of Doors, and
confining the Almighty to a certain Instrument; and not that he intended to
repute every Ass of equal value with the Scriptures; though I do not doubt but
the Voice of Balaam's Ass was a more immediate and forcible Rebuke with him,
then any Scripture then written.

But let this character our Adversary with every Just knowing Reader, that he
brings J. N's words that allow such Scripture as God shall please to speak to
any by, to be so far a Rule, to those to whom its directed, in order to prove,
that the Quakers deny the Scripture to be in any case any Rule at all: But we
must not expect better Usage from a Man, who is more perplexed at our proving of
our selves consistent with Truth, because it contradicts his Apprehensions and
Charges exhibited against us in Print, then that we should be in the Wrong,
though for that Cause he pretends to write against us. Strange! that he should
rather desire we might be mistaken, then himself be thought to have mistaken us.

But he thinks I have greatly wronged St. Paul, and I know not why, page 28, 29.
unless it were in showing him to have been guilty of that Fault; for to prove
the Scriptures to be the Rule, he brought this Saying of his; And herein, that
is, says our Adversary, [ all things that are written in the Law and the
Prophets] do I exercise my self, to have a Conscience void of Offense toward
God and toward Men. My Answer then was, page 58, 59.
that he left out that which was more applicable to the words, as the place it
self evidently proves; [ But this I confess to thee, (that is, Faelix) that
after the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers,
believing all things that are written in the Law and the Prophets, and have
Hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall be a
Resurrection of the Dead, both of the Just and the Unjust; and herein, says
the Apostle, do I exercise my self, etc.] Where its evident, that believing all
things that are written in the Law and the Prophets, was not that wherein he
said (so properly) that he exercised himself, as in worshipping the God of his
Fathers; not after their way, and having Hope toward God of the Resurrection,
etc. there lay the Stress, as is evident from their calling that Worship
Heresy, and afflicting him for that Hope which they otherwise allowed of. Nay,
that very Passage he makes the whole place to bear upon, comes in rather in the
Nature of a Parenthesis, then a Principal Matter; His thus dealing with us and
the Scripture I called a Perversion, at which he very vainly taunts, as if it
could not be a Perversion, because I confess that it somewhat relates to the
Verses cited, crying out, This is his Mouse his Mountain traveled to bring
forth: But if to clip a Text be not a Perversion, or to stretch it to what it
can never reach, nor ever intended, be not to pervert and abuse Scripture,
certainly there is no such thing. That he clipped it, is proved; that he
misapplyed it, is not less evident: For to believe a thing, is not necessarily
to make it a Rule; besides, if the Law and the Prophets were a Rule, because he
was exercised in them, then must his Worship and Hope also be a Rule, because
he was exercised in them; but that were improper and untrue. He is angry I
said, the Apostle had out-stript the Law and the Prophets, therefore they could
not be his Rule, replying, If St. Paul had undertaken a Reply to this
Gentleman, he would have undoubtedly lasht him severely for this Wrong done to
him and the Truth. But I am not of that Mind; for if he did not outstrip the
Dispensation of the Law and Prophets, how could he arrive at that State which
witnessed the Fulfilling of the Law and the Prophets; To deny this, is to deny
the further Illumination and Enjoyment of that Day; and according to J. Faldo's
own unhappy way of Reasoning, the Apostle must not be a Christian; for in
denying the Prophets to be Christians, because they were before Christ's
visible Appearance, and preferring Christianity so much above other foregoing
Dispensations, as he does, in not allowing the Apostle to have out-stript them,
he makes the Apostle to be no Christian; For which, I will not say, he would
have Lasht, but Reproved this ignorant Priest, as one that knows not whereof he
affirms. But hear him yet further.


Rep. I said, the holy Scriptures determine according to their kind, as much as
a Writing can do. From whence W. P. infers, page 29.
that it is not so determinative of all Cases as something else may be, which
is a more living, immediate and infallible Judge then a Writing is or can be;
an inference worthy of a poor Scholar, and a conceited Pedant. Is he gone
beyond Belshazer, who trembled at such a rate at the Writing At whose
Handwriting?
on the Wall. Did ever any Man in his Wits affirm the Scriptures to supply the
room of Eyes Skill to read Understanding, Conscience and the Assistance of the
Spirit of God, are not these in my Book all made necessary to render the
Scriptures such a Rule and Determiner?


Rejoyn. But why such a trivial Rant for a Reply? and why such hard words from
a Man of his Circumstances? one on many Accounts so near what he represents me
to be. Is it not true, that if something be more firm then Writing, that which
is more firm, and not the Writing, is the Judge and Determiner? Suppose a
Scripture for every Case that ever did or may happen (which we know, there is
not, and therefore not THE RULE) yet if such Scripture need an Exposition, who
is most truly the Judge and Determiner, the obscure Text or the clear
Expositor? Certainly where the Stress lies, the Power of Determination must be,
and there the Judgeship rests, but that is always in the Interpretation, since
the Difficulty is not about believing the Text, but the Exposition given of it;
therefore the Expositor is both Judge and Rule, and not the Text exposited.

And since J. Faldo has granted to us the Assistance of the Spirit for knowing
the Scriptures, the Spirit, then, which gives us how to understand and believe,
and enables us to fulfill them, must needs be the Rule and Judge, and no Writing
whatever. I shall conclude this Point with my Rejoinder to this following
Passage in his Reply.


Rep. But W. P. has not done triffling yet, neither is the Law the Judge, page
61.
but there is a Judg^ who interprets and speaks from the fresh Discoveries of
his own Reason the Meaning and ^^^tendment of those written Laws. But Mr. Pen^
The Judge is the Mouth of the Law, and subject to the Law, and prescribed in
his Judgment to that sense (...) the Law which is expressed by the Letter of
it. If so^^ of the Judges had the handling of you, for imposing yo^ canting
fresh Discoveries of his Reason upon them, the would tell you, they give
Judgment from a Deep Stu^ and Weighty Consideration of the Letter of the L^^
and moreover give you some hard Names, or worse, for you^ canting Law added to
your canting Gospel, His Blasphemy against the Ligh^.
and yet the LIGHT IN THEIR CONSCIENCES NOT GIVE THEM THE LEAST REBUKE FOR SO
DOING.


Rejoyn. I perceive he measures the Judges Displeasure by his own; Indeed they
would be very Unfit Persons to sit for our Judges, that should be like him; Men
that would call hard Names, and do worse to any Man for allowing them to be
guided by a Living Reason, would greatly evidence they had little or none, and
therein indeed that we mischaractered them. But who most dishonours them? I
that suppose them to judge and explain Written Reason by the Living Principle
of Reason in themselves, or he that renders them so many Posts or Pillars that
are to be moved by incens't Letters, without relation to any Reason inherent to
themselves, and not otherwise. But hear my form Answer before I further rejoyn.

His Instance about the Law is same; Page 61.
For the good Laws of any Land are but Reason written, or rather declared by
Writing, which is oblieging against the I would desire the Reader to take
notice, that the first Reformers never intended by their great respect to the
Scriptures, to establish them their Rule exclusive of the Spirit, as most do
now, W. Kiffin for instance; only they did on all Occasions prefer them, as
God's Tradition, to the place of a Rule beyond Popish Doctors or Councils,
which they who know any thing in these Matters are well assured to be the Truth
of the case. So that they were but a Rule comparatively, as we also hold; but
by no means can we allow that they preferred the Scriptures to that great Office
exclusive of the Spirit; or that Men were not to have their Immediate
Dependence upon the Instruction, Discoveries, and Revelations toward Faith and
Good Life. So much at this time.
Corruption of a Judge, but not the Reason of the Judge; neither is the Law the
Judge; but there is a Judge who interprets and speaks from the fresh
Discoveries of his own Reason, the Meaning and Intendment of those written
Laws. If the Laws be sufficient without a Judge, why is there a Judge? If then
they are Dark, Obscure and Doubtful in many Cases, so as to need a Judge and
Interpreter, which I call living and immediate Reason, since the Scriptures are
Writings, in which are many things difficult to be understood, it follows that
there must be an Immediate Living Judge, which must be therefore the Spirit of
Truth that gave them forth, because none knows the things of God save the
Spirit of God. And that those who are the Makers of Laws, are the only Persons
who are fit to judge and determine in Case of Difficulty, by a Declaration of
their Mind and Inten^ion in any such obscure Passage. In short. Either the
Scriptures are not obscure (a thing we daily see) or if so, yet sufficient,
which is impossible, or they must have a Judge, which is most true and
necessary; and what Judge, but the Spirit of Truth, which leads into all Truth?
p. 61, 62.

Now one would have thought, that an Answer so sober and reasonable might have
deserved a Reply more civil and pertinent, then my Adversary gave me: But I do
the less wonder at it, since he makes it his Practice to give hard Words
instead of solid Answers. But to his Reply as it is.


Rejoyn. He tells me, the Judge is the Mouth of the Law, and Subject to the
Law. Note, I have not made any considerable Distinction between ^e Rule, and
the Judge, from thy Judgment of that little (if any) Difference that is between
them. And my Adversary to his own Confusion seems of the same Mind; for
notwithstanding he severely and tauntingly reflects on that Passage upon me in
my former Book, yet in making the Scripture both Rule and Judge, he shows to
us, that the Judge and the Rule are not at so great a Distance, as his little
Skill in Philosophy would have rendered it. And herein he thwarts D.
Stillingfleet, and D. Tillosson, who against the Papists assert not the
Scripture to be the Judge, but Right Reason; And to speak the Truth of it,
Nothing can be more absurd next to Transubstantiation, then that the Scripture
should be the Judge of a Man's Meaning of any part of it self, that is, if it
be applied as a Right Rule; since in such Cases of Difference no Scripture ever
yet spoak clearer then its first Text; and the Question lies not about that,
but the just Interpretation.
But I would have him consider two things; First, that the Scriptures of Truth
were never given forth after that formal regular course that the Laws of
England were; but to particular Persons or Churches on particular Cases, though
together with hearty respect I acknowledge and enjoy the Benefit of them.
Secondly, The Question is not about things obvious, but obscure; and herein the
Judge is not only the Mouth, but Interpreter of the hidden Meaning of the Law;
This our Adversary's own words import; For if the Law were so plain, as only to
need a Mouth, what need would there be of deep Study and Weighty Consideration,
which he makes necessary to a Judge? the bare reading of the Law would be
sufficient to determine all Cases; Nay, it would end all going to Law: But
inasmuch as the Laws are both numerous and intricate, as the Vexatious Cases
and Disputes of our Times fully prove, it is manifest, that some other Judge and
Determiner must be found out, one that understands, compares and rightly
applies Law, whose Judgment must decide and determine the Controversy. Now
though every such Judge may be said to determine according to the Mind of the
Law, yet his Interpretation and not the bare Letter is recorded for the
Determination of the Case depending, from whence come our Book-Cases; Nor
indeed is this only referrable to any certain Person, explaining the obscure
Passages of Law, but the Application of the Law to the Fact, in which not only
the whole living Reason of the Judge is deeply and circumspectly exercised, but
the Understanding and Conscience of the Jury, respecting the Nature of the Law,
the Evidence of the Witness, the Heinousness of the Fact, and Variety of
Circumstances, wherein the obnoxiousness to Error lies (according to the Gre^k
Proverb, (...), i. Error is about the Circumstances) all in order to a
definitive Sentence or Determination about the Point handled. Now for any Man
to call the written Law the Judge, and not Synteresis, or living sound Reason
and Conscience in the Judge and Jury, to me seems very absurd.

Besides, Let it be considered, First, that the Law is added because of
Transgression; Prove. 8.
and such as live to that noble Principle from whence all good Laws come have a
higher Judge and Rule, then any of those written Laws, or any Interpretations
of men upon them; so that if J. Faldo compares the Scripture to the written
Laws, they who are led by the Spirit have an higher Rule then the Scripture:
and as he that lives up according to written Laws, by the Rule of his
Synteresis, or Law of Laws, the just Principle in himself, does not destroy but
fulfill those written Laws: so they that live according to the Rule of the
Spirit, do not invalidate, but fulfill the Scriptures. There is no need of
Swearing for a Remedy against that Man's Falseness, who is come to the
Truth-speaking of Christ's Righteousness; he that is come up to the greater,
does not slight but answer the lesser. Secondly, I beseech the Reader to
observe, that these written Laws had once a beginning, and that those that made
them were not without a Rule and Judge in themselves, both before, and in the
making of those Laws (neither is that peculiar to them, the Lawmakers) I still
mean Synteresis, of which many Lawyers speak great things, particularly a good
old Law-Book, called, Doctor and Student, which is not lessened by those Laws,
Doct. Stud. c. 2. p. 4.
nor ought any Law to be made, or take hold on any Person further then he acts
contrary to that just Principle in himself; which is called, the Law of Laws,
the Immutable Law, by Chief Justice Hobart, in his Reports, page 87. So that
both the Law was made according to this Synteresis, and is to be understood and
judged according to this Synteresis, which Synteresis or Law of Righteousness,
has not left us with a mere Declaration of its Mind, subject to many
Casuallities and Difficulties, but remains in the Heart of Man to inform his
Understanding and correct his Life; consequently the Judge of Controversy,
respecting the written Law (about which, and the Application of it, many times
arises the Controversy) must not be the written, but this Immutable Law in
Judge and Jury, from whence all good Laws proceed. It is a very depraved State
indeed that knows no further Obligation then a Written Law, whereas a great
part of Mankind is free from those Enormities the Law forbids and punishes, who
yet know not the Letter of the Law; like unto the Gentiles of old, Romans 2. 14,
15.
who having not the Law, became a Law unto themselves, showing the Work of the
Law written in their Hearts; which Law Cicero, in his Books of the
Commonwealth, cited by Lactant. 6. Institut. 8. calls Right Reason, agreeable
to Nature, given to all, constant and eternal, which calls to Duty by
commanding, and by Disswasion deters from Deceit -- No other Law may be put
instead of this; neither is it lawful to derogate any thing from it; neither
can it be wholely abrogated; neither can we be loosed from this Law by Senate
or People; There is no other Explainer or Interpreter of it to be sought;
neither will there be one Law at Rome, another at Athens; one now, another
hereafter; but being one Law Everlasting and Immortal shall hold all Nations at
every time: And there will be one, as it were, Master and Commander of all, God
that Inventor, Disputer, and Maker of this Law, to whom he that will not be
obedient, must fly himself, and even in this thing, must suffer very great
Penalty, though he should escape other Punishments. An excellent Place, which
clearly explains the Nature and Virtue of this innate Light, says Rob.
Sanderson, late Bishop of Lincoln, in his Oxford Lectures, concerning the
adaequate Rule of Conscience, prol. 4. San. page 138, 139, 140, 141.
where he also calls it from Calvin, A Spark of the Light of God, that he might
have Preachers of his Will in our very Bosoms; and that all other Laws are but
subservient to this in the Synteresis, the very thing that we assert concerning
the Scriptures being a Rule. Thirdly, I would entreat the Reader to consider,
that cessante ratione legis, cessat lex, i. the Reason of the Law ceasing, the
Law ceases, is an old Law-Maxim. Now who shall be Judge of that, the written
Law? By no means. Yet that preposterous Answer only can suit our Adversary's
Principle. W^ say, Living Reason must be the Judge. In like manner did the
Spirit of God give his Servants an Understanding in past Ages, how to behave
themselves with respect to those Laws, which were but Temporary, for whose
Abrogation there was no express Scripture, which the Scribes and Pharisees ^y
neglecting and grieving that Spiritual Leader, and sticking in the Letter of
the Scripture, only continued and maintained against Christ himself, who
fulfilled them.

To conclude, That which makes Law; That which explains Law; That, contrary
unto which no Law ought to be made or obeyed; That which gives to know what is
contrary or according to just Laws; That which gives to apply and execute Law
rightly, must be the Judge and Superior Rule; But that is this Synteresis, Law
of Laws, says Chief Justice Hobart; Right Reason, says M. T. Cicero; Innate
Light, says B. Sanderson; The Law of God writ in the Heart, says Doct. and
Stud. Spark of God's Light, says Calvin; A Living Rule and Everlasting
Foundation of Virtue, Plut. Dron. Prus. Dis. lib. 1. c. 14. Senec. Epist. 73.
planted in all Reasonable Souls, says Plutarch; God within, says Seneca and
Epictetus: Consequently, not any mere written Law can be the Judge and
Determiner of Controversies in Law. This Reader, holds almost all along the
same with the Scriptures. That the Law is not Judge of the Doubts that arise
about it self, but another, is already proved; and that the Scriptures can no
more determine Cases of Difficulty within themselves, is as evident by the same
Argument; and that Judge must either be some Man endued with the Spirit of God,
as in Law Cases some Judge with Right Reason, or else the Eternal Spirit, as he
is universally manifested in Men. The first I suppose our Adversary will think
too fair a Pretense for Popery to be allowed, and the last he can never avoid,
unless Man without the Spirit of God be able to determine of the things of God;
which were to deny the Scriptures of Truth, the Faith of the Ancients, the
Doctrine of the Reformers, and Right Reason.

Thus, Reader, I conclude this Point, and could have been willing to have done
so long before, had not the great Necessity of People's better Information,
drawn me into a more free and large Discourse then my Adversary's very empty
Replies could have deserved at my hands.


CHAP. VI.
Of our dehorting People from Reading the Scriptures, etc. as charged by this
Adversary.

THough I have said enough to persuade all sober Persons of our reverend Esteem
of the Scriptures, yet am I willing to remove any the least Ground of Scruple
by a brief Consideration of his Four following Chapters, in which he would fain
maintain his former False and Unadvised Charges of our holding in great
Contempt those Holy Writings. He begins thus.

Rep. My Charge in my Sixth Chapter was, That the Quakers take Men off from
reading the Scriptures for Instruction and Comfort. Penn objects against my
first Proof, as not bet having any such Consequence, page 63. And this is the
meaning of our Doctrine, to bring People to the Everlasting Word of God in
themselves, Smith. Cat. page 95. bestowing on me within Eight Lines,
Deeply-^gnorant, Malicious, Ungodly, Possessed by an Evil Spirit, page 30, 31.
Wretched, Impious, Grosly-blind, Malignity, Frothiness, Envy, Impious,
Injustice.


Rejoyn. If ever Man had to do with an Unjust Adversary, it is my Lot; And let
this very Passage be the Measure. First, What are those Words cited out of
William Smith, that prove, we take Men off from Reading the Scriptures? What
Reason has he urged, or Argument attempted, that were by me employed, in
Defense of the Passage, and Illustration of our Innocence? Shall this pass for
my Confutation? Must my Book be no better answered? and yet led captive by J.
Faldo's mere Pretenses, to wit, Reason, Religion and Learning. Its a Shame to
Professors of Religion to Countenance his Attempts, that maintains his
Controversy with so much Weakness and silly Evasion. He tells you of my
Rebukes, but is as true in that, as just in the rest; For neither has he given
all those ^ords, which abate that Harshness they seem now to carry with them,
nor do they lie within the compass of Eight Lines, as he would have you
believe: But be they as they are, what Man, not possessed with a Malicious
Spirit, would charge Untruths upon a Body of People, and then lay sound
Expressions upon the Rack, if possible to extort a Confession of them? Who but
one deeply ignorant would repute it an Undervalue of Scripture, to bring People
to the Everlasting Word of God that gave them forth, that only gives to
understand rightly and esteem them? And can he be less then Impious and Frothy,
that sports himself with our serious Belief, as well as very Unjust, that draws
Conclusions our Premises will not bear, and then call them, Charges proved out
of the Quakers own Writings.

To give the greater Authority to what I said I urged the Testimonies of
Calvin, Erasmus and Beza, concerning which hear him.


Rep. But page 64. he fathers his Error on Calvin, Eras. Beza. He directs
precisely only to Erasmus and Beza; in Nov. Test. 2 Pet. 1. 19. Beza' s words
on the place which I have examined are these, So it may be taken for the
Doctrine of the Prophets; which was to those to whom Peter wrote more without
Exception, to whom he may be said to have a respect in this Passage. Thus this
Man can abuse Scripture, Reason, Reformers all at once.


Rejoyn. If it be an Error, Calvin, Beza and Erasmus held it, as I will briefly
prove. But why must Beza's words be cited, and Calvin not denied so to have
writ, neither Erasmus by him considered, who of the rest I most precisely
cited? But it made not for his turn. He seems to adventure at my Dishonesty,
provided it may bring Disgrace or Weakness to the Quakers Cause. But to make
good my Quotations.

J. Calvin expressly tells us, Idem spriritus qui per os Prophetarum loquntus
est in corda nostra penetret necesse est, ut persuadeat fideliter protulisse
quod divinitus erat mandatum, Calv. Institut. lib. 1. cap. 8. That is, It is
necessary, the same Spirit that spoke by the Mouth of the Prophets, should
pierce into our Hearts to persuade us, that they faithfully delivered that
which was committed to them of God. What says J. Faldo to this.

Now let us to Beza. Our Adversary seems resolved to mistake me, that he may
render me mistaken. I cited him to one part of the Chapter and Verse, and he to
another; For my Purpose was, to prove, that Beza held it to be the Right Way of
understanding the Scriptures, to have recourse to the Everlasting Word; and he
takes a piece of the Nineteenth Verse, which related to the Comparison, (...),
or more sure Word of Prophecy (which is sufficiently cleared in my Answer to
his first Book) But to pass by this part of his Dis-ingenuity, I will set down
Beza's words on the 19th Verse it self thus, Imo quid si (...) vocavit solemn
ipsum, i. christum ipsum exhibitum, qui simul et ipsa lux est, et veram lucem
mundo intulit? That is, Yea, What if he called the Day Star the Sun himself,
that is, Christ himself exhibited, which both is the Light it self, and brought
the True Light into the World. Then He was to arise in the Heart, if He was the
Day Star in the Heart. And on the 20th verse of the same Chapter, thus. Vt
prophetiarum intelligendarum et ad verum scopum referendarum rationem sciant ab
ipso spiritu petendam qui prophetis ipsis illas dictavit: That is, (It was
required) that they might know the Way of understanding Prophesies, and
referring them to the right Scope, must be SOUGHT or FETCHED FROM the SAME
SPIRIT, which dictated them to the Prophets themselves, and more to that
purpose.

Now let us come to Erasmus, by him willingly passed over, who on that place
says thus in his Paraphrase, The Thing that is set forth by Man's Device may
be perceived by Man's Wit; but the Thing that is set forth by the Inspiration
of the Holy Ghost) requires an Interpreter inspired with the like Spirit.
Further rendering the Scripture so mystical and allegorical, as not to be
understood without it.

Nor shall this serve me; I will yet add Two or Three Testimonies more, and
begin with Luther, Scriptura non nisi eo spiritu intelligendae sunt quo
scriptae sunt: i. Luth. Tom. 2. Pol. 309. 2.
The Scriptures are not to be understood but by that Spirit by which they were
written,

Peter Martyr, that famous Italian Protestant teaches thus, The Spirit is the
Arbiter, Pet. Mart. com. loc. part. 1. cap. 6.
by whom we must assure our selves for understanding of the Scriptures, that
thereby we must discern between Christ's Word, and a Stranger's quoting
Christ's Words; My Sheep know my Voice, and follow not a Stranger's: and among
many other Scriptures he cites these, The Spirit searches out the deep things
of God. -- The Comforter shall declare all things that I have said unto you. --
The Spiritual Unction shall show you all things. -- Again, Part 2. Cap. 18.
The Spirit of God reveals the Truth in the Holy Scriptures. Lastly, I find him
expressing himself, in his Oration to the University of Strasborough, thus,
concerning the Scriptures, The School of this Philosophy is Heaven; Moreover,
says he, We must remember, that the Teacher hereof is the Holy Ghost.

And Doct^r Ames, Lib. 1. c. 5. These. 32.
a great Father of the Independents, and both a Learned and Good Man (his Day
considered) in his Disputations against Bellarmine, takes this Advantage upon
Bellarmine's Acknowledgment, that the Unction 1 John 2 taught, though not all
things, yet all those Doctrines which they had already received of the
Apostles, We require no more, says Dr. Ames; the Anointing of the Holy Spirit
does teach the Faithful to understand those things which they received of the
Apostles, therefore to understand the Scriptures in those things which are
necessary to Salvation; for those things those Believers had received of the
Apostles: With much to the same Purpose in that Chapter.

I could produce many more Testimonies from Great and Famous modern Writers,
besides the Pathetical Expressions of a multitude of Martyrs, both English and
Foreign, as well famous for their Learning, as great Fidelity, that express
themselves fully in Defense of our Assertion, That to bring Men and Women to
the Obedience of the Everlasting Word nigh, in the Heart, is so far from being
repugnant to, or undervaluing of the holy Scriptures, as without their
Acquaintance with it, and Conformity to it, they can never be read by any with
Instruction and Comfort, But if God please, there may be a time, for our more
full Disquisition of this Point.

But be thinks to supply his Wilful Omission and Disingenuous Carriage about my
Answer to the ill use he made of my other Proof, by reflecting upon my Honesty,
in transscribing his Second, taken out of our Friend, James Parn^ll, his Book,
entitled, The Shield of the Truth, page 10. because I added not these words,
Seeking the Living among the Dead, at the end of this Sentence, By the same
Light do we discern him to be in Darkness, who puts the Letter for the
Light, and so draw People's Minds from the Light within them to the Light
without them. And as if he had fully obtained his Will upon us, by making us
speak what he untruly says we own and practice, he goes on, This needs no
Comment to render its Proof valid; and is out of the Reach of the utmost
stretch of Penn' s Wit and Confidence, to put any Appearance of another
Construction upon it* But methinks this Sound renders him very Empty. It must
be a very plain Case, if not so much as the Appearance of another Construction
can be made upon it, then what he would have it to import; but I am wholely of
another mind, and that there is no Difficulty in making a very free and
sufficient Defense for the Passage; I ought to take it for granted, that the
whole of his Objection lies against the Words I omitted, inasmuch as he
pretends not to reply to my Vindication of the former part of the Sentence,
which was to this purpose, That by turning People to the Light of Christ we did
not teach them to undervalue, but how they should most truly understand and
value the Scriptures; that the Spirit was more excellent then the Letter, the
Power then the Form of Godliness, yet both Letter and Form to be respected in
their place, and that we only took our Aim against such as put the Letter in
the Place of the Spirit, thereby keeping People from the Holy Spirit, by which
alone the Scriptures are read and understood unto Ed^fication and Comfort. My
Adversary, I say, taking no notice of this, I must think, he had nothing to
say, saving his Charge of the forementioned Omission. To which thus much; It
was not designed; I took and defended the Substance of the Passage: For I would
fai^ know, what Life is to be had in the Letter, without the A^^^stance of the
Light or Spirit of Christ: If then the Letter is Dead without the Spirit, which
is Old Protestant Doctrine; Can it be any thing else then seeking the Living
among the Dead, to draw People from the Light and Spirit of Christ within to
seek for Life in the mere Letter without; ^or so the Question ran. This was the
State of the Jewish Church in her Apostasy, and is the Condition of Thousands
at this very day, who under Pretense of Honoring the Scriptures, despise,
grieve, and in a sense quench the Spirit that gave them forth, for which God is
wroth with the false Christian, and his Religion and Worship is an Abomination
in his Sight: and great and sudden will be their Distress; for his Indignation
is kindled, and his Fury ready to be revealed; and in that day shall such lofty
Boasters as my Adversary be brought ^^ow, their Spirits faint, and Hearts fall
within them; ^at what time the Light, Spirit and Life of Jesus shall be unto
all that trust therein, a Rock of Everlasting Strength, an immovable
Foundation and Sanctuary full of Comfort, Peace and Joy forever. And indeed*
this thing ^oth so deeply affect my Soul, that I cannot refrain from ^rying,
Woe, Woe, Woe against all such Watchmen of the Night, who rack their Wits for
Tales and Stories, to care well-meaning and devout People from the Enjoy^ent of
the Life, Virtue and Substance of the Scrip^ures, Nick-naming that only Way by
which so great and heavenly Benefit can ever be procured (I mean the
^nspiration of the Almighty) with such hateful Terms, ^s Enthusiasm, Quakerism,
Familism, a more refined ^rt of Ranterism, etc. and what else may keep them ^
their Snare, stop their Enquiery, and render the ^iving Eternal Truth of God
odious in their Sight; ^etter were it for such that they had never been born,
then under Pretense of being Ministers of the Gospel, to ^urder the Life and
Spirit of it, estranging the minds of People from that unchangeable Covenant,
instead of in^teresting them in it, thereby manifestly depriving their Souls of
blessed and Eternal Privileges. They are like Troops of Robbers indeed, Hos.
6. 9.
as the Prophet anciently said, they murder by Consent, most of them combining
against the in-dwelling Life of Jesus, and immediate Springings and Flowings
forth of his Spirit in the Hearts of his Children: Let it never be forgotten,
that the first Murderer was a Sacrificer, and the deadliest Persecutor a
Pharisee. Nor has there been a more Venomous, Enraged, Blood-thirsty Generation
of Men, then the Formal Literal Professor, who ever called God Father, and
Christ Beelzebub, who crucified his Son, and persecuted the Apostles, reputing
them Mad Men, that is, Phanaticks, or Enthusiasts, Seditious Fellows,
Sect-Masters, Introducers of New Doctrines, Innovators upon the Church, Turners
of the World up-side down, in fine, Despisers of the VVritings of the Law and
the Prophets, while they themselves thought to have Eternal Life therein, being
of the Circumcision, Sons of Abraham, and Children of the Promise: Oh! that
these of our Day might Repent, which those of that Day did not, lest neglecting
God's present Visitation (neither entering themselves, nor suffering others to
enter into the blessed Rest) the miserable Doom of that Hard-hearted Generation
overtake them, and that speedily.


CHAP. V.
Of Scripture-Commands, what are binding, and what not* Our Adversary's
Disingenuity observed.

BUt however, he has failed in his last Chapter, doubtless he thinks he has
done my Business in this; page 34
he begins like himself.

Rep. My Charge and Argument in this Chapter is, The Quakers affirm the
Doctrines, Commands, Promises, holy Examples expressed in Scripture, as such,
not to be at all binding to us; such an Argument, and so proved by me (mark
Reader) as a Thousand Penns can never invalid it.


Rejoyn. What can there be more conceited then this? He must live very lonely
and far from Neighbors, that proclaims so much Praise to himself, and have
wonderful Confidence to bid Defiance so vainly to others.

Reader, I beseech thee, for the Truth's sake, on whose side soever thou shall
find it to be, to examine with all impartiallity his Charge, our Answer; his
Reply, and our Rejoinder: If his Honesty, Reason and Justice hold any
proportion to his great Confidence, we yield; But if upon an impartial
Consideration he shall be found to clip and pervert our Matter, and to shuffle
with us in his own, once do a poor People Right, in giving Judgment against his
horrible injustice.

The Charge thou have heard; the Proof was this, That is no Command of God to
me, Ed. Bur.
what he Commanded to another: Did any of the Saints which we read of, act by
that Command which was to another, not having the Command to themselves, etc?

Now before I give my Answer, as it was set down in my Book, I shall insert his
Quotation of my Answer.


Rep. To this says P. I answer briefly and plainly, and he is as good as his
word. page 34, 35.
No Commands, says he, in the Scripture, are any further oblieging upon any
Man, then as he finds a Conviction upon his Conscience, otherwise Men should be
e^gaged without, if not against Conviction; a thing Unreasonable in a Man.


Rejoyn. He has a notable Way of Contracting his Adversary's Answers; I will
set down what I writ, faithfully, plainly and briefly.

Edward Burroughs's Expression may be taken two ways, pa. 71, 72, 73.
and both safe enough to the Honor and Credit of the Scripture, though not to
the Charity or Honesty of J. Faldo. Now follows that part he cited. No Command
in the Scripture is any further oblieging upon any Man, then as he finds a
Conviction upon his Conscience, otherwise men should be engaged without, if not
against Conviction, a thing Unreasonable in a Man; Therefore the Apostle, when
he wrote to the Churches, exhorted them, not to do those things whereof they
were ashamed, to shun what was manifested to be Evil; and affirms, that
whatever might be known of God was manifested within, for God had shown it unto
them. So that Conviction can only obliege to Obedience: and since what works
that Conviction is the manifesting Light, universal Grace, or quickening Spirit
in the Heart of Mankind, it follows, that the principal Ground for our Faith in
the Scriptures, and Reason of our Obedience to the Holy Precepts therein
contained, is the Manifestation, Conviction, and secret Drawings of the Light
or Spirit of God in the Conscience. And thus E. B's words are sound and
scriptural. Again, Such Commands either relate to Ordinary or Extraordinary
Cases. By Ordinary Cases I mean, such as chiefly concern Faith and holy Life,
which are general, permanent and indispensible; and then I deny his
Consequence. By Extraordinary Cases I understand Moses's going to Pharaoh, the
Prophets several manners of Appearance to the Kings, Priests and People of
Israel, with other Temporary Commands relating to outward Services, etc. And so
we say, that what is commanded One Man, is not binding, as such, upon another:
But when the Lord shall say, If thou sinnest thou shall dye; If thou keep my
Commands thou shall live; Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am holy; -- For
your selves KNOW YE NOT how ye ought to follow us, etc. I say, these Precepts
and Examples are oblieging upon all; why? because they more or less meet with a
Conviction in the Consciences of all: For I am persuaded, none that has a
reasonable Soul, who has not outlived his Day, but would readily say, These
are true and weighty Sayings; For Faith in God, and a holy self-denying Life,
are necessary both to Temporal and Eternal Happiness.

It was, Reader, to this sober Answer he flung out his foregoing Rant, and
makes this following Comment and Reply, Viz. says J. Faldo.


Rep. They are no Commands unless we think so. It Is no Sin to break all the
Commands in the Bible, if our Consciences can be so blind, dead or hardened as
not to tell us, it is a Sin. They who thought they did God good Service in
killing his Servants did not sin in the least, because they were not convinced
of a Command to the contrary. To vindicate my whole Chapter concerning the
Scriptures. It Is a Principle that has all Iniquity in the Womb of it. Who can
find Names for such Impious Principles? Penn has opposed, scorned the Truth,
vilified its Teachers and Defenders, so as scarce never Man did; vented the
most pernicious Errors, told abundance of those things that are known to
himself to be false.


Rejoyn. Reader, This is all the Justice and Reason I can have from this
pretended meek and suffering Nonconforming Parson. What would such Men do, had
they as much Power as Anger? But I shall leave him with his Pride and Passion.
Is there any thing more clear then that he extends the words of E. Buroughs to
Ordinary Cases, which were wholely writ about Extraordinary; and that he takes
no more notice of my Distinction, then if there had been none made? As if it
had been formerly an equal Sin for any not to be Circumcised, and to Murder his
Father or Prince; or that there was the same Conviction universally upon the
Consciences of all Men, Levit. 19. 18, 19.
not to wear Linsey-Wolsey, as to do by others as they would have others do to
them.

That what we say was E. Burroughs's Meaning, his own words undeniably prove.
One, says he, was sent to baptize, and another to preach the Gospel: which
were particular and extraordinary Commands. He clearly shuffles and evades the
dint of my Answer, and would run us within the Borders of Rantism. The Question
is not, Are God's Commands no Commands, unless we think so, and therefore no
Sin to break all the Commands in the Bible (which is the Comment he bestows
upon us) but whether this or that especial Injunction to any Particular Person
or Persons, to this or that parculiar End, be warrantably imitable, without
sufficient Conviction and Commission: Must J. F. Baptize because John Baptized?
or turn Preacher because Peter was one. E. B. only denied Imitation of Ancient
Times in Temporary and Shadowy Services, and all those Preachings, Prayers,
Ordinances and Churches, that have not (as Peter Martyr well expresses it) the
holy Spirit for their Root. So that instead of his holding a Principle that
has all Iniquity in the Womb of it, John Faldo first perverts his words, and
then to confute them both implies a Denial of the holy Spirit to be the only
right Leader to the Performance of Gospel-Prayer, Preaching and Ordinances, and
of gathering of Evangelical Churches, and does as good as tell us, that God's
Commandments are such to him, not because of any Conviction in himself of the
Justness of them, but from the Testimony of the Scriptures, which for all his
high Boasts of Christianity, is a State far beneath those noble Gentiles, who
not having an outward Law, were a Law unto themselves, having the Effect of it
written in their Hearts, their Conscience, bearing witness, etc.

And this we may boldly say, That such as ever acted from that inward Sense,
never thought they did God Good Service in Killing his Servants, whilst great
Admirers of the Letter of the Scriptures, and who, as concerning this
Commandment, Thou shall not Murder, thought themselves most unblamable,
believed, They did God Good Service in killing his Servants.

Nor can I think it so great a Disgrace to our Cause, that we ingenuously
profess the Reason why we desire to fear God, and keep his Commandments, doing
unto others, as we would have them do unto us, not so much to be from the
Letter of the Scripture as the Convictions of the Eternal Light and Spirit of
God in our Consciences; As it ought to be unto John Faldo and his Adherents,
who ground their Obedience upon the Letter of the Scripture, and not upon such
internal Convictions. What is it but to say, They could Lie, Swear, Steal,
Kill, etc. without any Remorse, did they not find such Injunctions and
Prohibitions upon record? A Consequence so detestable, yet so natural to their
Principles, that if this render them not able Guides to the very Confines of
Rantism and Atheism, I shall gladly ask an Excuse for my Ignorance, But that I
may leave nothing undone that may complete the Satisfaction of every moderate
Inquirer, I shall further weigh and rejoyn to these words of his.

They who thought they did God good Service in Killing his Servants, did not
sin in the least, because they were not convinced of a Command to the contrary;
nor the Idolaters in the Case of Baal, because they thought Baal to be a God
indeed.

Now Reader, observe the Evasion: This Passage relates not to Men's practicing
what God Commands, or our Tenderness in imitating other Saints without
Commission, for fear we should offer strange Fire, which is our Question; but
their doing that which God never commanded, yea, which Mankind in all Ages has
adjudged impious, and which to be sure, his Holy Spirit, that E. B. said, All
Men should wait to be convinced, assisted and led by in fulfilling God's
Commandments, never moved any to. He unworthily draws a general Conclusion
against us from mere particular Premises. It seems Men are to act without, if
not against Conviction, upon his Principle; and that it is the same thing with
him, to commit moral Enormities from an Hardened Heart, and to be tender of
taking up any external Practice, or performing some Religious Duty, without the
Convictions and Leadings of the Holy Spirit. The Apostle said to such as had
not as yet so full clearness as others, Phil. 3. 15.
That if any were otherwise-minded, God would reveal it. He did not enjoin them
during that Scruple to believe or practice the thing doubted; but therefore did
Persecutors act inexcusably in their fiery Zeal, because their blind
Consciences checked them not. Again, If Blindness came from Education, it is
(though Blindness still (and therefore it was basely done of J. Faldo to say in
our Name, that it is not Sin in the least, etc.) more excusable: for in the
days of such Ignorance God winks: But if it be a Blindness proceeding from
long Disobedience and Rebellion against the Convictions and Strivings of the
Good Spirit of God, as his Word Hardened implies, then, I say, it is not only
very heinous in God's Sight; but those Persons can never be excused neither
from great Guilt, nor the Sense of it in themselves, let them or J. F. talk
never so much of Conscience.

Besides, the most Essential, and Universally Necessary Commands of God were
through all Ages confessed to; both before there was any of those Writings, we
rightly call the Scriptures of Truth, from the Law of Nature, as many style it,
or rather, the Law God placed in Man's Nature, and since, where they have never
been; Therefore, whatever particular hardened and seared Consciences may say, we
have the Consent of Mankind, and their own Rebellion and Lewdness against them.
But the Words of J. Faldo in plain terms import, as if, 1 st, Men were not
generally convinced of the Righteousness of the Moral Commands of God; but that
Men keep them because they are in the Bible only; which runs against the
Testimony of Scripture, the Consent of Ages, and the Writings and Judgment of
the most Honest and Learned Protestants. 2ly, As if it were a like Evil,
Conscientiously to forbear Running, Willing and Striving in Matters of Worship
without the Spirit's Conduct, and searedly to plead for the Commission of
Murder and Idolatry, because Men of such Consciences bogle not at it (though
that is more then J. F. can prove, I mean, that they have no Stroke or Remorse)
3 ly, As if we could worship, preach, gather Churches, and administer
Gospel Ordinances aright without the Spirit. 4 ly, That he is not convinced by
any other Testimony then the Scripture without, of any Transgression against
God's Law. 5 ly, It supposes that if Men stayed till the Spirit moved, they
should stay long enough (who vainly prate of Praying by the Spirit
notwithstanding) never considering that the Spirit stands ready to Reveal it
self to their Assistance and Assurance who wait for it; and that all the
Children of God are led by the Spirit of God, which being our Position, had it
but been weighed by this Adversary, he could not (methinks) be so Unjust in his
Aggravations.

It Is true, should we believe as he does, the Spirit is not to be waited for
now adays to lead us, or that it is not ready to our Information, when we wait
for its Discoveries and Leadings, our Assertion would look very absurd and
loose; for it were to let fall all Worship, but not upon our own Principle, as
I said before; for first, all Worship to God ought to be performed by the
Assistance of his holy Spirit; for of our selves we can do nothing that is
Good: And secondly, God's Spirit is ready to assist, instruct and comfort those
that wait diligently and patiently for it; yea, God has given it to the
Rebellious, that it may judge them, if it don't lead them. It is such
Protestant Doctrine, that I wonder Men should not know their Admired Ancestors
Faith when they met it: Oh great Degeneration into Hardness and Ignorance!
Lastly, There is the same to be said against him that pretends to ground all
upon the Scripture, that he objects against us, who plead for the Conviction of
Conscience, which the Instance of the Jews Murder of our Lord Jesus Christ
unanswerably proves. There was a Law, that Blasphemers, should be put to Death;
By this Law they apprehended Jesus, adjudged, and got him to be executed: These
Men above any Age exalted the Scriptures as the Only Rule. Where lies the
Mistake? Not in the Scripture, but in their blind and envious Application of
it. Now I ask, if the only Way for them to have come to the true Sense and
Knowledge of him, and escaped that Wicked Murder, and the Deplorable
Consequences of it, had not been to have waited upon God for the Convictions,
Discoveries and Guidance of his Holy Spirit; since Flesh and Blood, and the
utmost Wit of Man, with the Exactness of the mere Letter of the Scriptures
could never give the certain Discerning, Knowledge and Savor of him unto that
Generation, whose very Words themselves were Spirit and Life? It was by a
Divine Touch, Sense and Knowledge given from above, that he was truly
di^cern'd, owned and followed of those that believed in him, and cleav'd to
him; therefore said Christ, No man comes to me but whom my Father draws:
Where was that Drawing but within. Again, Simon Peter, Flesh and Blood has not
revealed (what? who I am) but my Father that is in Heaven. So that at last, Men
must come to this Spiritual Sense in themselves, to understand and apply the
very Commands of Scripture; otherwise, not Justice, but detestable Murder may
under the Name of it be confidently perpetrated; Wherefore we Exhort all, To
have Recourse unto God's Spirit, that illuminates certainly, and gives to act
unblamably, by which the Scriptures are only understood as they should be, and
People brought into the Possession of that Life of Righteousness, they
plentifully declare of. Had it not been for this inward Discerning, there had
been no Ground for the Abolishment of the whole Jewish Service, which followed
some years after Christ's Ascension. And it is the same Eternal Spirit that is
the great Rule and Judge now, which God promised more particularly to shed
abroad in the latter Days; and is the great inseparable Privilege from the
New and Everlasting Covenant.

But to conclude, Why should it seem so Heter^dox in J. Faldo's Judgment, since
if Men believe the Scripture upon the Testimony of the Spirit, they practice it
by the Knowledge and Power of the same; How else could Paul have decry'd Jewish
Ceremonies; or we know, what to take, and what to leave? Or why do we omit any
Command therein mentioned? They Cicumcised, therefore must I Circumcise? They
Baptized, must I therefore Baptize? with forty more particular Cases, wherein
nothing can secure any from the Imitation of them, set Conviction or Spiritual
Dis^erning aside. I will offer two or three Testimonies from approved Men in
our Defense.

William Tindal, that ancient faithful Protestant Martyr, whom J. Fox, W.
Tindal's Works, page 319. p. 80.
that writ the Books of Martyrs, calls, the English Apostle, speaks thus, That
it is impossible to understand in the Scripture more then a Turk, for whosoever
(or any that) has not the Law of God writ in his Heart to fulfill it. Again,
Without the Spirit it is impossible to understand them.

John Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury, in his excellent Book against the Papists,
writ above One Hundred Years ago, B. Jew. contr. Hard. p. 532, 534.
says thus to our purpose, The Spirit of God is bound neither to Sharpness of
Wit, nor to abundance of Learning: Oftentimes the Unlearned see that thing,
that the Learned cannot see. Christ says, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the Wise and the
Politic, and have revealed them unto the Little Ones. Therefore Epiphanius
says, Only to the Children of the Holy Ghost all the Holy Scriptures are plain
and clear. Again, Flesh and Blood is not able to understand the Holy Will of
God without SPECIAL Revelation. Therefore Christ gave Thanks unto his Father,
and likewise opened the Hearts of his Disciples, that they might understand the
Scriptures. Without this special Help and PROMPTING of God's Holy Spirit, the
Word of God is unto the Reader, be he never so wise or well learned, as the
Vision of a Sealed Book.

Now unless Men are bound to do what they do not understand how to do, then
only are they to do them where they are Revealed or Discovered to them, which
being by the Spirit only, according to their Doctrine, the Testimony and
Discoveries of the Spirit are requisite to our understanding of the Scriptures,
which implies and comprehends a Discriminating Knowledge or Certain Discerning
of what we should practice from what is not oblieging upon us to practice, and
consequently, that we ought not to run headlong without such knowledge.

T. Collier, an Ancient and Eminent Man among the Western-Separatists of our
Nation, T. Coll. Works, p. 247.
writes thus: For me to speak of God, because another speaks of him; and to be
able to talk much of God as I read of him in Scripture, NOT BEING MADE ONE IN
THE SAME TRUTH, I see and speak BUT WHAT ANOTHER HAS SPOKEN; and so may speak
truly sometimes of God, but it is by Hearsay, ANOTHER MAN's TRUTH, BUT NOT
MINE; So, I doubt, many a Soul BOASTS IN ANOTHER MAN's LIGHT. -- Again, I see
that external Actings according to a Rule without, is nothing, if not flowing
from a Principle of Life and Love within. Which is more then E. B. said, of
whom J. Faldo (with unworthy Reflection and base Wrestings) has said so much.

Thus much of sober Rejoinder, and much more then my Adversary's scurrilous
Reply deserves; but the ConCernment I have for the Information of others, drew
this from me. I shall pass by his Ranting Strain against us at the top of his
36th page, desiring to keep close to the Business; and where I may without
breaking his Matter, avoid troubling the World with a Transcript of them, I am
very careful to do it: But this next particular (as many more) being little
else; and since he suggests thereby, an Untruth with great Confidence against
me, I should wrong both the Truth and my self in omitting it.

He charged us with Denying the Scriptures to be any Means to know God, Christ,
or our selves; for which he quoted W. Smith's Primmer, page 2. because he there
tells the Questioner, that Christ is the Only Way; to which J. Faldo answered,
That though Christ said, No Man can come to the Father but by me, yet he did
not say, that there is no coming to the Knowledge of God but by Christ; thereby
making, as I observed in my Return to him, a Difference between coming to the
Father by the Son, and to God by Christ, though no other Name be given under
Heaven then the Name of Je^us Christ, etc. That we never denied the Scriptures
to be a Means in God's Hand to convince, instruct, or confirm; nor could this
be W. Smith's Meaning, since he would thereby have cut off all Benefit from
accruing to People by his Books, and also that Ministry he had received of God.
In short, From our Denying that there is any other Way to the Father but
Christ, he concludes, that we exclude the Scriptures, and consequently our own
Books and Ministry with them, from being any way Instrumental of Good: however,
if I erred, it was in good Company, and that J. F. must acknowledge; for worthy
W. Tindal, p. 80. of his Works, and H. Bullenger, a learned and famous Reformer
in Switzerland, in his 4 Decad. and 8th Sermon, dedicated to King Edward the
Sixth, accord with me in the Matter. The former thus; Without the Spirit it is
impossible to understand them; Then say I, They are not a Mean to know God
savingly without the Spirit. The other says plainly, Men fetch the
understanding of Heavenly Things and Knowledge of the Holy Ghost FROM NO WHERE
ELSE THEN FROM THE SAME SPIRIT. This hits the Mark; But to proceed. Of all
this, and two whole pages more, he cites but two Lines and an half, included in
what I re-cited, on which he bestows this notable Reply.


Rep. This might look like an Argument for his Meaning, if it concerned almost
any but the Quakers, page 36.
who assert nothing almost but with a Contradiction. I should think it as hard
a Task to reconcile the Quakers to themselves, as to make the Poles to meet, or
to dig through the Earth with a Spade to the Antipodes.


Rejoyn. Yes, J. Faldo, it concerns W. Tindal and H. Bullenger, thou see^t, as
well as the Quakers. But did ever any Man not miserably baffled, put off such
serious Matter with such vain Reflections and Pedantick Similes? Will nothing
serve the Man's Fancy besides Poles and Antipodes? Must the Quakers needs
contradict to save him from the Discredit of foully belying them? They are
there, it seems, to oppose one another, where they will not harmonize to his
End. Certainly this Reflection can never be consistent with J. Faldo's own
Practice, who in a Book of nigh Thirty Sheets, writ wholely against the
Quakers, pretends to confirm his many infamous Charges by scores of
Testimonies, cold out of many of their own Books, which must be unanimous, or
they prove not his Charges, as he calls it; nay, he has again and again bragged
of their Harmony to his Purpose. Thus are we in highest Concord, when he thinks
it makes for his Designs; and when against them, as opposite as the Poles. But
blessed be the Lord, We have received that One, Eternal Spirit by which we have
been Baptized into One Living Body, and are of One Heart, One Mind and One
Sense concerning the Mysteries of God's Everlasting Kingdom: But as our
Adversary has said nothing sober or rational to what I answered in Defense of
W. Smith's words; so would he make the World believe I dared not to encounter
with one of his Testimonies. Hear him.


Rep. I produced many Testimonies to prove my Charge, which Penn dares not deal
with, nor bring to Light; take two of them: Matthew, Mark, Lukeand John are not
the Gospel, but the Letter. The next, Hebrew, Greek and Latin is nothing worth
as pertaining to the Knowledge of God, J. Hig. Warning, page 7.


Rejoyn. That he so suggests, as I said, his own Words prove; yet that I did
examine some of his Testimonies is undeniable; and to let him see I dare handle
these without fearing they should bite me, I say, and that not without very
good Seconds, They are not the Gospel: I mean, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, or
their Histories; for, the Gospel of Christ is the Power of God to Salvation, so
are not the Scriptures. The Gospel is Everlasting, so are not the Scriptures.
John saw the Angel flying in the midst of Heaven, having the Everlasting Gospel
to preach, which could not be the Scriptures. The Gospel was preached before
the Scriptures were written; therefore the Scriptures cannot be the Gospel. The
Gospel is but One; but after this Man's Reckoning there should be Four;
therefore they cannot be the Gospel: Which is further proved from the
Signification of the Word Gospel, to w^t, Glad-Tidings, which are to be
understood of the Coming of him that was the Savior of the World, of whose
Blessed Appearance and Wonderful Transactions these Scriptures are but the
Narratives. Besides, one of their Authors ( Luke) expressly calls them a
Declaration, consequently not the Gospel thereby declared of; which Definition
Peter Martyr, that Superintendent Reformer in England, chooses of all other,
Part 1. Chap. 6. of his Common-Places. Tertullian calls the Scriptures,
Instrumenta doctrinae, De praescr. Haeretic. adoer.
i. e. Instruments of Doctrine. And the New Testament Writings, Evangelicum
instrumentum, i. e. An Evangelical Instrument. Marcion. lib. 4.
And Matthew he calls, De carne Christi.
A Faithful Commentator of the Gospel. Chrysostom being required to Swear upon
the Gospel, both denied those Histories to be the Gospel, and to Swear at all.
And D. Featly Against the Anabapt^sts, p. 1.
will not acknowledge the English Bible to be the Authentic Word of God,
because of Corruption, consequently not Authentic Gospel, therefore not the
Gospel, for that is Authentic. I hope then I may without Offense, in Defense
of the Tr^th and that Honest Man (now at Peace, yet) so severely reflected
upon, conclude, that Matthew, Mark, Luke and John are not the Gospel, but the
Letter, or Declaration of the Gospel.

For his second Proof, viz. That Hebrew, Greek, and Latin is nothing worth as
pertaining to the Knowledge of God; I see no Error nor Blasphemy in so Innocent
an Assertion. This is so like the catching at Twigs by drowned Men for Safety,
that no Man not as Destitute of Succor would boast of the Evidence of so
Speechless a Witness. There is not one Word it can speak on the behalf of his
Charge. He is fled from the Scriptures to mere Language, and makes that a
Letter indeed, which one would think he took just now for all Spirit, perhaps
with this Distinction though, that the Scriptures may be the Gospel in Hebrew,
Greek and Latin, but by no means in the English: What becomes of the Vulgar
then? But what can there be more Sottish, then for a Protestant at this time of
day to talk of knowing God by Hebrew, Greek, and Latin; but above all, it is
unpardonable in an Independent Priest to write at this rate, whose Folk for
these Threescore Years have totidem verbis, in express terms, denied the
Knowledge of all or either of those Tongues to be necessary to the Knowledge of
God

Alas! who once pretended more to the Spirit, and was more derided for doing
so, then some of the Predecessors of these very Independents and Anabaptists,
now so hot against us? What less were the Invectives cast abroad against
Ancient Separatists, as the Alchimist Assembly-Man, Heudebrass, with abundance
of more serious Declamations against them, under the Names of Tub-Preachers,
Gifted-Brethren, etc.

But if Language learn Men to know God, which Christ himself said, was Life
Eternal, how comes it that Scholars are such Ill Christians, and Jews, the
natural Hebrews, were such Persecutors in Christ's time, and that they remain
Infidels to this very day? Methinks at this rate the Greeks, when God
condescended to speak forth the Gospel in their Language, should not have
counted it Foolishness, nor have mocked at his Ambassador, when he came on no
less Errand then that of Salvation; and least of all, since they believed,
should they have Degenerated into so much Superstition. But why the Latin must
be brought in I cannot conceive, unless it be the better to enable People to
understand the Romish Translation; for we never yet heard of so much as any
part of the Scripture that was Originally writ in that Tongue. It Is strange to
me he should so much despise the People whose Language he so much extols; and
count the one serviceable to the Knowledge of God, whilst with more Reason he
reputes the other such gross Idolaters.

Luther jerks the Papists for their laying that Stress J. F. does upon Humane
Learning. W. Tindal rejects it. W. D^ll and T. Collier write expressly and
unanswerably against the Necessity of it, or that it can give Man the Knowledge
of God.

In short; Common Experience, and the Christian-Spirit and Conversation of
Thousands that understand nor one Sentence of Hebrew, Greek, or Latin make
good the Assertion of our Honest Friend, and is a sufficient Rebuke to this
vapouring Adversary, whose Defiance to me to encounter his Proofs return
Weakness with Shame upon his Head; For though he thought to fling me to the
Dogs, or give me a Prey to Fierce and Lyonly Seconds, behold they are my
Friends, and unananimously turn with me against himself, who had designed them
upon such ill Service; a Recompense may he ever find, at what time he shall
endeavor to abuse our Friends, and pervert their Writings.

And so I shall end this Chapter; wishing for his sake as well as mine own,
that I may meet, if not with more Reason, yet with more Moderation in the
remainder of his Discourse.


CHAP. VIII.
That we do not deny the Scriptures to be any Means whereby to resist
Temptation, in Opposition to and Denial of our Adversary's Charge.

THe Charge by him endeavored to be defended in his Eighth Chapter is this,
That the Quakers affirm the Scriptures to be no Means whereby to resist
Temptation; I will set down his words.

Rep. He passes over no less then Six Testimonies without a word to invalidate
them; among the rest, this, page 37.
If you use any other VVeapon then [the Light within] in-this Spiritual War,
you cannot prevail against him, that is, the Devil, So I more then proved my
Assertion.


Rejoyn. I therefore avoided considering every Testimony he brought, first,
because many of them were so foreign that there could be no Pretense for
bringing them. And next, that I might not be prolix, I thought it sufficient to
examine three in six, and with good Conscie^e I can assure my Reader, I took,
as I thought, those he built most upon: if he doubted of any he should not have
brought them, I have answered the Law in the case.

For this now recited, it is as weak as Water to his Purpose, though a strong
Truth in it self; For the Intent of the words could be no other then this, that
the Armor of Light the Apostle exhorted the Church at Rome to put on, was
sufficient to Encounter the Power of Darkness; and that such as would overcome,
should not neglect or exchange that Armor for other Weapons; thereby not in
the least excluding other such Instruments as this spiritual Light might arm,
or give Strength and Invigourate to our Help. And I am so far from doubting,
that I firmly believe, that God's Spirit, not only in times past, has made
this use of the holy Scriptures, to Instruction and Comfort; but does even yet
to them who read them in his holy Fear and Wisdom.

Reader, I am truly weary; not because I find my way difficult from the great
Perspicuity and Reason that are on the Side of my Adversary; no, nothing less
in this World. But I know not which way to turn my self, but I meet, either
with Schoolboy Jeers, Insolent Language, Equivocations, or horrible
Perversions: God is Record between J. Faldo and I, who of us two has behaved
himself with most Ingenuity in encountering the strongest and fullest
Arguments, and shown most Reason and Moderation in Confuting them; Two or Three
Instances of his Failure in both respects, this Chapter presents thee with.


Rep. The first thing VV. P. deals with, is a Passage of James Naylor' s; For
those only are the Children of God, page 37
who are lead by the Spirit of God, to whom they who were led by the Letter
were ever Enemies. From whence says Penn, He concludes, that we account it a
very dangerous thing to read the Scriptures. Now if this Passage has any
relation to his Charge or Conclusion, no Man ever saw the like. He should have
added, that was always stark blind.


Rejoyn. Here he has given my Reflection upon his ill Application of the
Passage, omitting both my Exposition and Argument; An Injustice I do affirm
every Page of his Book to be guilty of.

What I said to explain the Sentence, was this; That there are Children of the
Fleshly, Literal and Historical Knowledge of the Scriptures and Religion, who
are Srrangers to, and therefore Persecutors of the Children born of the Spirit;
and that in all Ages there has been more or less of this among outward Jews
and Christians. And let J. Faldo deny this if he dare.

To all which and much more he says nothing; but to his blind Squib
beforementioned, he adds this Wrest^ing of the Passage, by me so clearly
exposited.


Rep. It is a Sign his Judgment is very feeble, that ^ould not, or would not
know, that it is dangerous to be ^od by the Letter, if they that were so led,
were ever E^emies to the Children of God.


Rejoyn. What is this but to make us Enemies to the very Scriptures, who
without any Distinction gives so Wretched a Meaning to words so far from
bearing it, whose true Sense was, as I observed already; to which I may add for
further Explanation, thus, That those who have Confidence in the Letter, Erring
from and Grieving the Holy Spirit, are not withstanding Enemies to the Children
of God, who are led by the Spirit, according to the true Meaning of Scripture,
which the mere Letter-Professor, as such, can never attain to: so that the
Danger lies here, to be led by the Letter, without the true Meaning of the
Letter, or rather by his own dark Apprehensions concerning the Mind of it, in
the stead of it; As the Jews when they crucified Christ by the Law of God
against Blasphemers. This is the genuine Sense of our Friend's words; For had
they been writ in the Sense in which John Faldo takes them, we had then as
greatly detested them, as he has now wronged them.

A second Passage is, in his first Book, page 109. his words these, Isaac
Penington, who speaking of Knowledge gained by the Letter of the Scriptures,
writes thus, Making him wise and able in his Head, to oppose Truth, and so
bringing him into a State of Condemnation, Wrath and Misery beyond the Heathen,
and making him harder to be wrought upon, by the Light and Power of Truth then
the very Heathen. Upon which J. Faldo bestows this Comment; If reading the
Scriptures, and getting Knowledge from them, puts us into a bad Condition
beyond the Heathen, I scarce know what is more dangerous then reading the
Scriptures.

Reader, it is worth our while to see, if I. Penington be as bad a Man as J.
Faldo represents him; in order to which I ask, First, May a Man, that reads and
pretends to value the Scriptures, from up an Understanding of them, and yet be
absolutely mistaken, for want of the True Interpreter, the Spirit of Truth? I
cannot think but J. Faldo himself will say, that such a thing may be; I am sure
I believe so: for it has often been so already, and J. Faldo's present
Writings are an Unanswerable Instance for the Point. The next Question I would
ask is this; Whether such Persons so mistaken, are not very apt in Defense of
their own Conceivings, to oppose the Truth it self? Methinks the whole Jewish
Church, at the time of Christ's Visible Appearance in the World, in disputing
against him, and decrying of his Religion, while they magnified the Scriptures,
as the only great Doctors of them, should without further Labor answer that
Question in the Affirmative. Next, Let me ask J. Faldo, If the high Conceit the
Jews had of their Knowledge in the Commands, Doctrines and Prophecies of
Scripture (however Erroneous for want of the True Interpreter) did not render
them more captious and obdurate then the Heathen themselves? If he can read the
Scriptures of the New Testament, he may answer this Question to our Mind, and
his own Shame. Lastly; Was not this State more dangerous, then that of the
Gentiles? God himself long since resolved this Question, when he brought such
heavy Judgments upon the Jews, and turned the Stream of his Love to the
Gentiles. It was not for naught those words were left upon record; He came to
his own, and his own received him not: That is, He came to the Nation and
People of all others God had selected for his Service, to whom he had been
propitious beyond measure, whom he redeemed by wonderful Miracles, and blessed
with Holy Leaders, Just Judges, a Righteous Law, True and Faithful Prophets;
whose were the Covenants, and Scriptures, who were the Seed of Abraham, and of
whom Christ came as concerning the Flesh; yet they received him not as God over
all, blessed forever, manifested in Flesh, in the Fullness of Time, for their
Deliverance; but vehemently rejected him, under the Title of Beelzebub, Prince
of Devils. By this time, I hope, Isaac Penington's Passage is vindicated from
the Malignity of our Adversary's Comment, whose Perversion must needs be open
and conspicuous to all that read him; First, in charging him, To have made this
Reflection upon the Knowledge gained by the Letter of the Scriptures; which are
none of I. P's words: Next, in concluding, that by I. P's Doctrine, nothing can
well be more Dangerous then Reading the Scriptures (who always was, and yet
is, a great Respecter and Reader of them) making the Stress of I. P's Saying to
lie in a Dislike and Contempt of the Scriptures absolutely, instead of their
dark Interpretations upon, and Carnal Deductions from the Scriptures, which he
only levelled his Discourse against.

Thus have we been served in every pretended Proof he has brought out of our
Friends Writings, to prop and enforce his feeble and incredible Charges; For
where we reprove Men's forming unto themselves Religion from the Letter of the
Scriptures, according to their own Conceptions of it, and give a Check to their
great Eagerness to comprehend the most weighty Mysteries therein expressed, and
their continual Questioning, Cavilling and Contending concerning them, whilst
they themselves are Ignorant of the very first Principles of Religion, being
yet Strangers to Unfeigned Repentance from Dead Works, and Fear toward the
Living God, with Loud Voices and Clamorous Tongues they thus exclaim against
us, after this Unruly as well as Unjust Manner, The Quakers Deny the
Scriptures; The Quakers say they are not binding upon them; The Quakers say, it
is Dangerous to read them; but I say in their Name, Blessed are they, who
reading, truly understand them, and live according to them. I might here break
off, but I entreat my Reader to peruse Two notable Testimonies given by
University-Men, and such as were reputed Famous Thirty Years ago.

The first is out of Joshua Sprigg's Book, entitled, A Testimony to an
Approaching Glory, page 96. Christ desires that his Disciples may be
sanctified, not by planting the Knowledge of the LITERAL Word in their Minds,
but by ingrafting the Nature of the DIVINE Word in their Hearts. Again, in page
107. Christ may offer himself long enough in the LETTER in the HISTORY of the
Gospel, but if he appear not in the SPIRIT, and sit in our Consciences to quiet
them, we shall never have any true Understanding of the Word aright. And in
page 79, and 80. We may see what is to be done by looking upon the HISTORY of
Christ; but till we find the same things done in us in some measure in the
MYSTERY, we can find little Comfort -- The whole HISTORY of Christ will profit
you nothing, nor all that you know, except you find EXPERIMENTALLY the same
things done in you by the Spirit.

The second is afforded us by Christopher Go^d, styled, Bachellor of Divinity
and Fellow of King's College in Cambridge, in his Book, entitled, Refreshing
Drops, etc. page 12. There is no Knowledge of Christ, nor of the Scripture, but
by REVELATION; it is that the Apostle prays for, That God would give unto us
the Spirit of Revel^tion. -- Again, in page 18. It is neither Moses, nor the
Scriptures, nor Christ's Works, can settle our Hearts, unless the Father be in
them, etc. Also in page 89. To go forth in Man's Power, in the Power of a
Letter of the Scripture only, is not safe. Yet again, page 87 upon Acts 17.
Here they hold Paul play in Reasoning and Disputing; Paul holds up Christ out
of the Scriptures, and the Jews do dispute against Christ by the Scriptures;
And this is that that all the Learning of Man does, all his Knowledge in the
Scripture does but serve him, to oppose the Spirit. The greater Knowledge in
the Scriptures, and the more Learning (if it be only of Man) the greater
Opposition unto Christ, and unto the Spirit. These Jews had LEARNING AND
KNOWLEDGE IN THE SCRIPTURES MERELY TO OPPOSE THE TRUTH, THE POWER AND LIFE OF
THE SCRIPTURES. And lastly, that we may not be too prolix, we shall content our
selves (in the over-looking many more) with this Passage, in his last
Testimony, page 71. upon Esa. 25. There are that have devoted themselves to the
Law, and the Letter of Scripture; There are others that have their Life in the
Creature; God will shortly draw all Life unto himself, and all they that run
after other Gods, shall starve and famish They and their Gods.

These Passages, Reader, speak for themselves; and which is more, so much for
us, that till J. Faldo and his Fellow-Separatists have publicly renounced
them, and their Authors, we have great Cause to say, that such as themselves
have hitherto reputed their Spiritual and Learned Ministers, do defend and
rather out-word us in Testimony to the Truth. But before J. F. proceeds to any
such Excommunication, let him remember that he cannot do it without Disturbance
to the Grave, and Injury to the Memory of Joseph Carl, that Famous and Ancient
Independent Pastor, who Licensed J. Sp^^gg's Book, Ann. 1647. and consequently
entitled himself to the Doctrine therein expressed.

And for Christopher Goad's, not only J. Sprigg performed the Friendly Office
of Publisher after his Decease, but himself was Pastor of a very eminent
Congregation of Independents in his Lifetime, Strange! that the Men of these
days should not know the Principles of their Admired Fathers and Teachers,
when they meet them; but that worthy Witness C. Goad, in his Conclusion of his
last Testimony, page 74, and 77. gives a good Reason for it; He that has Ears
to hear, let him hear; he that has not, it may be will cry, Whimsie, Fancy,
and turning the Scripture into an Allegory -- and whilst the Vail is over,
Error, Heresy, Blasphemy.

I had thoughts of adding no further Testimony, but a most remarkable Passage
of that Christian and Learned Martyr Dr. Barnes, Burnt for his Faith in King
Henry the Eighth's days (after having been his Ambassador, and in high repute)
pressed hard upon me; and I know not but his greater Distance from us then
those before cited may carry more Authority, and obtain greater Favor with our
Enemies, who will at least make show of Reverence to his Autiquity and
Martyrdom; his words are these.

That Man's Will, Reason, Wisdom, Heart, Soul, or whatsoever thing is in Man (
without the Spirit of God) is but the Wisdom of the Flesh; let him intend his
best, do all that lies in him, with all his Might, and all his Power, and yet
can it not please God; for it is but all Flesh. -- Again, It is the Spirit of
Christ that makes him Christ's, and the Spirit of God gives witness to our
Spirit, that we be the Children of God. Our Spirit gives no witness to
himself, the he is Christ's; for then were the Spirit of God frustrate;
wherefore, let our Spirit as well as he can study his best, to apply himself to
Goodness, or to the utterm^^ of his Power, and yet it is but WISDOM OF THE
FLESH, and HAS NO WITNESS OF GOD^ yea, it is but an ENEMY, and it must needs
b^ SIN, as St. Austin says, He that feeds without m^^ feeds against me.

Thus far D. Barnes, which is but a little of the great deal that he writes, to
the same purpose, against the Papists, about their Doctrine of Free Will. And
i^ deed he cleaves the Hair, and hits the Mark above mo^ Ancient Writers; for
as he unanswerably argues in the very Smart Discourse, that Man's cleaving to
his o^ Power brought him into transgression, and consequen^^ly could never
redeem him out of it. So does he e^^press the absolute Necessity of Man's
having Recourse^ the Spirit of God in himself for Counsel and Assistan^ in
order to understand and fulfill the Good Will of Go^ which implies, that all
those who call it, opposing (...) Spirit to the Scripture, and vilifying the
Knowledge Scripture, to press the understanding of it, and witnessing the
Truths therein declared of from the Revelation and Operation of the Eternal
Spirit only, are upon the rankest strain of Free Will, that was ever yet
broached among Men, and there we leave our bitter Enemy J. Faldo.

I am now come to a Passage more immediately concerning my self, which he
thinks, touches me to the Quick; but I know not why, unless he measures me by
himself, being a Man so quick to be touched, that at the soberest and solidst
Answer, which I could give him, he does so gaul and fret, that there is no
coming near him, without being kick't and abused. His Carriage toward me in
this Particular, amongst many Instances already past, and yet to come, proves
what I say.

In a Book of mine, called, The Spirit of Truth Vindicated, etc. in Answer to a
Socinian, who seemed to deride the Quakers asserting a Necessity of having a
Right Faith in God, and Knowledge of the Scriptures, from the Revelation and
Operation of the Eternal Spirit, I used these words, But I assure them, they
shall grope in the Dark, till they come into the daily Obedience of the Light,
and there rest contented to know only as they Experience. At this he scoffed;
What know God only as they experience? Can we experience his Omnipotency? That
W. P. of all others should talk at this rate is most ridiculous. To which he
brings me in thus answering, It Is Unchristian in John Faldo to assert the right
Knowledge of God, obtainable any other Way then by Experience. Here Is my
Reflection by way of Consequence, but where is my Argument? That he left behind,
as being better able to jeer it, then confute it; some short Account of it I
will give. That it is the Light or Spirit of God, that by its illuminatition
gives the right Knowledge of God, that such Knowledge never goes without
Experience. Again, The World without in its Make, Order, Perservation,
Providence, his Powerful Work of Redemption within prove what I writ: But of
this he takes no notice. Now his Dis-ingenuity thus far is twofold, First, his
stretching the word Experience to all Cases; when the Scope and End of my words
went no farther then every Man's particular Saving Knowledge of God, with
respect to his Repentance, Conversion and Eternal Salvation. 2 ly, He not only
has taken no notice of my Argument, but has abused the Consequence, viz. That
the Right or Saving Knowledge of God is not obtai^able but by Experience; after
this manner.


Rep. Reader, you have his Character of asserting, that Reason, page 38.
Faith, Scripture, yea, the Spirit of God too (all which are not one and the
same thing with Experience) are any Means by which to obtain the Right
Knowledge of God.


Rejoyn. How like a Disputant or an honest Man he deals with me may be seen,
First, In that no Man can have Experience without Reason, because Reason is
that part of a Man, which is eminently concerned in receiving that Experience,
therefore not the Giver of it, nor yet it without Reason. Secondly, The Work of
Faith is one great thing experienced. Thirdly, The Scripture is oftentimes an
Instrument to that Experience. Lastly, The Spirit of God is the efficient Cause
or Worker of the Experience in the reasonable Soul. For must not He be very
Blind or Malicious, that can suppose, I meant by the Knowledge of Experience,
such an one as God's Spirit brings not to, who have been all this while
pleading for that Knowledge and Experience which the Spirit of God can only
give, and abused with a Witness by J. Faldo for doing so; but that he should
suppose me to exclude Reason, from Men in their Experiences, which is to render
them Brutes, and because therefore unreasonable, to be sure most incapable of
Experience (unless Men may Experience without their Reasonable or Understanding
Part) is a Wrong that would have drawn a whole Chapter of Railing from him, had
he been so served by a Quaker. And for Faith, how can a Man have it, and not
know he has it; and which way may he possibly know it and not experience it?
As to the Scriptures, they may both be instrumental to Experience, and with
respect to what they declare of, be also experienced.

Two places more, and we leave this Chapter, in which it will appear, page 39.
that his Courage is as much upon the ebb, as his Envy was before upon the
flote. In his former Book he was so unhappy in his Cause, as to let fall this
Expression, That God above, and the Scripture without have taught us better
things. The use I made of it in my Answer he takes a little notice of, I mean
to recite, not confute it.

Now what is the Teaching of the God above, said I? If it be in the Scriptures,
My Answ. page 87.
it was impertinent to say any more, then that the Scriptures have taught them
better things. But if he meant that God taught by his immediate Discoveries
with and beside the Scriptures, then wherein do we differ?

To which I will faithfully set down his Reply, that if there be any Reason in
it I may lose none of it in Transscription.


Rep. W. P. thinks ( now) he has me upon the hip; this Phrase he calls
assisting to my own Confutation, page 39.
If joining the Teachings of God and the Scriptures always together be
Self-confutation, let me be ever so Confuted.


Rejoyn. This is both Evasion and False Doctrine. Evasion in putting always
together in the Reply, which was not in the first Passage; and very much alters
the Case, since to say, the God above and the Scriptures without have taught us
better things, and to say, if joining the Teachings of God, and the Scriptures
always together, etc. are vastly differing. For the first Saying or Passage is
general, and leaves God at Liberty to speak beside, with, or above the
Scriptures; but the Reply ties God always to the Scriptures; that he cannot
speak otherwise then by them, nor the Scriptures be without him, which makes up
the False Doctrine I charged upon him. But if he means that God speaks nothing
contrary to his Mind declared in Scripture, and the Scriptures nothing
contradictory to the Mind of God, I acquiesce; yet this Concession not only
brings him upon the Hip, but upon the bare Ground too; for it confutes him
without Control, inasmuch as he grants, that the Scriptures without are not
sufficient to teach without the God above, the very thing in Controversy
almost from the beginning betwixt us; so that I return his own words upon
himself, page 40. of his Reply. All this ado is to make the Scriptures nothing
without immediate Inspiration; implying that we hold them to be profitable as
God is pleased to discover unto us, and breath into our Hearts the true Meaning
and Virtue of them, for our Instruction and Comfort; and what short of this
does John Faldo's Expression import, that makes the Teachings of the God above
necessary to render the Scriptures truly profitable unto any: And what is this
but to say with us, that they are of no value (not in themselves, but) to us,
unless the God above unfold them, and brings our Souls into a sense of those
States and Truths they declare of. I leave my sober Reader to make his Judgment
of this, and so proceed to the next Particular, which will end this Chapter. I
will set down his words.


Rep. He quarrels with my Mannagement of Ephesians. 6. 16, 17. thus, page 40.
And a Shame it is that this Man should bring these places to prove that the
Scriptures are Means whereby to resist Temptation. The Words are, Wherefore
take unto you the whole Armor of God; And among the rest is reckoned the Sword
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. Why does he not say, it is a Shame I
produce any Scripture at all? which is like a Quaker thoroughly; but the Matter
is, it a Shame to call the Scriptures the Word of God, or a spiritual Sword.


Rejoyn. No such Matter. The Shame was, that J. Faldo perverted and mis-apply'd
Scripture; and the Shame still is, that he should so bungle and bogle in the
Business, as of Two Pages to take Two Lines, that concerned not either the
Exposition or the Argument, and when he has done, say nothing neither to it. Is
this Man like to acquit himself with Advantage against the vain Attempts of W.
P. as he is pleased to call them? Reader, I have often complained, and yet
shall have Cause enough of my Adversary's unfair Dealing, in not reporting the
fortieth part of what I urge, and that he is sure to take not what is most, but
least material to my Cause, and then bestows a Squib or two upon it, instead of
taking my Strength, or giving a sage Reply; and that I complain not without
Just Cause; be pleased to consider my former Answer with what he first writ to
occasion it; by which his Honesty in reciting, and Reason in replying may be
most impartially judged of. Thus he, page 113. Above all take the Shield of
Faith, which is able to quench, etc. and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God. Observe says J. Faldo, Faith in the 16th verse is preferred above
the Word of God in the 17th verse; therefore it is not Christ the Word, but the
Scriptures the Word; for Faith is not above Christ. Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 16. 17.
who had less need of Scripture then any of us all, resisted Satan' s
Temptation by Scripture, It is written, it is written, Mat. 4. To which I gave
this following Answer; But neither will this do his Business, and a Shame it is
that this Man should bring these places to prove that the Scriptures are Means
whereby to resist Temptation (which Rebuke was the whole he recited) that
concerned them not, especially this in Hand, unless he would have Faith to be
the Scriptures, or Word of God in his Sense, which as it is absurd, so it will
by him be denied, since he allows the Faith to be preferred before the Word of
God, therefore distinct from it, and consequently not the same with it. And
should we grant to him, that Christ is not understood by the Word of God, but
the Scriptures; yet observe the fatal Blow his Cause receives at his own Hand.
Every true Christian has Faith; that Faith is above the Scriptures, therefore
every true Christian has something in him above the Scriptures. Again, True
Faith overcomes the World, and quenches the fiery Darts of Satan, consequently
Temptations; therefore not so properly the Scriptures, as true Faith, which is
preferred above them, (by John Faldo himself) and which resists Temptation, and
overcomes the World, is, etc. Once more, the Just they live by Faith, but
Faith is above the Scripture, says J. F. Therefore the Just live by that which
is above the Scriptures, and consequently, the Scriptures are not the Rule of
Faith, for how can any thing be ruled by that which is inferior to it? Thus
much we get granting to him, that the Scriptures are the Word of God in the
Text. Now, Reader, tell me, of this Argumentation what has he taken, what has
he replied to? Yet this man is deemed worthy by the Professors of our Times, to
act the Tertullus against the poor Quakers.

For those words, The Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, I told him
then, We rejected his Gloss; for the spiritual Sword, as he says, Beza renders
it, must be of the Narure of the rest of the Armor mentioned in that Chapter,
that is, invisible and Spiritual, which the Bible or mere VVritings we know are
not. To which let me add; that I know no Reason why the Shield of Faith should
be preferred before the Sword of the spirit, unless it be because that is in the
Verse before this, if we consider them in an abstract Sense, or as they are in
themselves. For Above all, is not a preferring the Shield of Faith in Dignity
before the Sword of the Spirit, respecting their own Nature and Quality, but
with regard to the Creature. For, if Unbelief enters, how can the Loins be girt
with Truth, the Breast armed with Righteousness, the Feet shod with the
Preparation of the Gospel of Peace, the Head covered with the Helmtt of
Salvation, or the Enemy encountered with the Sword of the Spirit? So that
respecting Man, not respecting the Dignity of the several parts of the Armor,
Faith is above all, or first necessary; for though God, Christ, the Holy
Spirit, Eternal Salvation, be all, or either of them greater then Faith, as in
themselves, yet without Faith no interest can be had in them. Wherefore our
Adversary's Preference vanishes, and his Consequence about the Scriptures
being the Word of God falls to the Ground.

Concerning Christ's Answer to the Devil, It is written, it is written, I shall
desire the Reader to observe in my Adversary's Reply, what of my Answer he
transscribes, which I gave to the use he made of that Scripture; and what sort
of Treatment he affords me. These are his words.


Rep. Once more and I have done with this Chapter. But said Christ to the
Devil, It is written; What then? says W. P. Therefore must the Quakers needs
deny the Scriptures to be any means to resist Temptation? page 90. You may fear
the Man is crazed, or was almost asleep when he wrote this. I produced the
Example of Christ to prove that the Scripture is a Means for resisting
Temptation, he resisting so effectually with Its written, its written. But Penn
would make you believe I intended it to prove, that the Quakers deny the
Scriptures to be such a Means. Can you think such a Man to be sinlest, yea,
Infallible.


Rejoyn. His Froth and Reflection I am no otherwise concerned at, then that it
ill becomes a Pretender to Divinity. It is enough for me to show, that he has
willingly concealed my Answer, and has made a Reply as if he had taken in all
that was fit to be considered; my Answer lay thus, But said Christ to the
Devil, It is written; What then? Therefore must the Quakers needs deny the
Scriptures to be any Means to resist Temptation; (Here J. F. leaves me, but I
go on) or rather are they not such Means, which I am sure no right Quaker ever
denied. (Now Reader mark) Besides, it was reasonable that Christ should so
answer (set that Power aside, which filled up those words, and chained Satan)
because the Devil used Scripture to prevail upon him, as the place proves.
However we deny not, but confess that wherever God is pleased to speak by any
place of Scripture to a Tempted Soul, it may very well be acknowledged to be a
Means, by which God scatters such Doubts and Despondences, and gives Power over
Temptations, and that it may often so occur yet we would not have People fly to
them, as what of themselves may be sufficient: but rather have Recourse to that
Divine Faith, which the Scriptures testify is able to Quench the fiery Darts,
and which J. F. himself has largely confessed, is to be preferred above the
Scriptures themselves.

Now I desire the Reader to consider, First, That he gave not the 10th part of
my Answer in any respect. 2ly, That what of it would have prevented his
reflecting upon me, he wholly omitted. He seems di pleased that I made such a
Question upon his citing Christ's words to the Devil as this, therefore must
the Quakers needs deny the Scriptures to be any Means to resist Temptation?
telling Folks, They may fear I was crazed or a sleep when I wrote it; asking,
If they think such a Man to be sinlest or infallible? as thinking it improper
to his Quotation, and yet would take no notice of these words, that were
directed immediately to it, viz. it was (therefore) reasonable that Christ
should so answer, because the Devil used Scripture to prevail upon him; the
very Answer in his pretended Reply was wanting: With what Face then can our
Adversary, over and above his other ill words, charge me with designing to
render him impertinent, by making him endeavor to prove that the Quakers deny
the Scriptures to be such a Means, by the Question I asked, as if I had wronged
him, and that he never intended any such thing through the bent of the Chapter?
And what can be clearer, then that he on purpose avoided the shock, and took
notice only of that part of my Answer, which being torn from the rest, he
thought fittest for him to play upon. But I see no VVrong I did him in so
asking what I did; for I am sure it was one End for which the Scripture was
quoted by him; and the Jeers he bestows upon me and it, besides his wilful
Neglect of the rest of my honest Return, and yet complain for want of it when
he had done so, is a pitiful come off for a Man of his Pretense to
Controversy.


CHAP. IX.
Not we, but our Adversary opposes the Teachings of the Spirit to the
Doctrines of the Scriptures. The Testimonies brought by him, cleared and
delivered from his Application. Our Doctrine proved from Scripture and several
Testimonies. His frequent and gross Perversions of our Words and Writings
discovered and justly rebuked.

WE are now got to his last Chapter relating to the Scriptures, in which he
pretends to justify his Charge by further evidencing a Consistency between it
and William Smith's Doctrine, which I utterly denied to have been William
Smith's Words or Meaning. The Charge was, That the Quakers put the Spirit of
God and the Scriptures in Opposition to each other; His Proof of the Charge
lies in these words, Traditions of Men, Earthly Root, Darkness and Confusion,
Apostasy, the Whore's Cup, the Mark of the Beast, Bastards brought forth of
Flesh and Blood, etc. which says John Faldo, in his first Book, would amaze a
Christian to read, what is contained in the two pages quoted of vilifying
Reproach to the Scriptures: If this be not opposing the Spirit of God to the
Scriptures, the Devil himself must despair of inventing words to express it by.
Thus far John Faldo. And indeed I must confefs, If all or any of these things
were ever said or published by William Smith, there is great Cause for
Amazement, and Abhorrence too. But what said I to this? Truly enough; but that
J. F. was careful to conceal, he brings in a small Limb of my Answer, and then
scares it with hard words. Take notice of his Reply, to what he ventures to
trans-scribe of my Answer.

Rep. Penn says, VV. Smith reflected not in the least upon the Scriptures,
page 41.
nor those Doctrines which were truly received thence. No such words can be
produced by our Adversary. No Jesuit in the World did ever outdo VV. P. in
Equivocations and Subterfuges. His stress lies on the words TRULY received
thence.


Rejoyn. Suppose them to be my stress, what Subterfuge lies there? Are there
not Doctrines falsely deduced through Men's Ignorance of the true Intendment of
Scripture? And do not such, as confidently think them to be truly received from
Scripture, as if they really were so. But the Stress lies here with J. F. His
Religion cannot bear a Scruting; and is as well nigh as shy of a Search as
Mahometism it self. Though had John Faldo and the rest of his Gang continued
where they were, the poor Quakers might have had an Inquisition with a VVitness
at their Heels by this time. But he has a further Comment for us.


Rep. The Quakers allow no Doctrine to be truly received from the Scriptures,
but such as is received by immediate Inspiration, and not from the Authority of
the Written Word.


Rejoyn. Where Is the Opposition now? Does not he set the Authority of the
Scriptures against the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, at least exclude the holy
Inspiration from any share in that Authority, and so do what he can to shuffle
out the Spirit from being concerned in the Authority of the Scriptures; which
is, if not the only, yet the greatest Proof of their Authorities, since it is
chiefly by the Testimony of the Spirit in our selves that we know them to have
bin given forth by the Inspiration of the holy Ghost in others, as held both
the Primitive Christians, our Famous Martyrs, and most Considerable
Protestants. He speaks as if he affected Obscurity, and aimed only at jumbling
and intricating, instead of explaining the Matter. But had we put the Spirit in
Opposition to the Letter, it is no more then what the Scripture has done
before us, as H. Bullenger, that notable Reformer observes upon Romans 2. 29. The
Spirit, says he, is opposed to the Letter, as when Paul says, The
Circumcision of the Heart is the Circumcision that consists in Spirit, not in
the Letter; And again, The Lord has made us able Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter kills, but
the Spirit gives Life, 4 Dec. 8 Sermon. A notable Application to our Purpose;
but while we only so oppose them, as to give the Preference to the Holy Spirit,
J. F. falls foul of us for a Pack of Enthusiasts, shutting out the Spirit, at
least setting it aside to exalt the Letter. But what does he mean by these
Terms, Immediate Inspiration? for a Mediate Inspiration I never heard of. Sure
I am, that Inspiration is God's own Breathing into the Soul, by which it has
Understanding given it, whether it be of things written, or not written; and
how that can be done, and not immediately, I know not. If he will exchange his
impertinent Distinction of Mediate and Immediate for Ordinary and
Extraordinary, we shall allow him more then we can upon the other; for by
Ordinary Inspiration or Revelation I understand such daily and common Vision
and Discovery to the Soul, as concerns it in its general Station, respecting
God and Men* By Extraordinary, such as great Fore-Sights, or Divine Prospects,
which give to foretell or prophecy things to come, or decide some signal
Controversy, or very special Case of Difficulty: The first is what I speak of;
and do affirm, that neither can the Scriptures be understood, our Souls fed and
comforted, nor our Duties to God rightly performed without it: The last is a
Case so peculiar, that all along it is plain, I never intended it. But if by
Immediate Inspiration, respecting us, he understands, that from thence forwards
we cast off all Scripture, as an antiquated, or insignificant piece of Business
(which are yet Words too Modest for his Malice to father upon us, as I shall
anon make appear) then does he wrong us and our Doctrine to an high Degree. And
no matter what he thinks of me, or what Names he may please to call me (who is
too far gone in his present splenetick Disease, to think any better of such as
I am) I shall plainly set down what was my Meaning by the Words he cavils at,
viz. TRULY received thence, I hope, to their Satisfaction, who will be more
dis-interested in their Judgment.

By Doctrines TRULY owned and received from Scripture, we mean such holy
Truths, as God by his Spirit (inlightning our Understandings) has given us a
true Discerning of to be such, and those are they which we put in Opposition to
Men's Carnal Interpretations upon, and Imaginary Deductions from the
Scriptures, and not that we clash the Spirit's Inspiration against the
Scripture; for they harmonize, and bear reciprocal Testimonies to each other:
And this God, that knows all Hearts, both knows to be our true Sense in the
Matter controverted, and will one day abundantly prove to our Adversary's
Eternal conviction. This, I fear, J. Faldo will never swallow; and why? because
it would choke him: Perhaps I must be a Jesuit, an Equivocator, and what else
he pleases; but wherefore? because it strikes at his Honesty, indeed
Dishonesty; for he had rather we were, what he says, we are, then receive a
Contradiction by finding us otherwise, then he has so confidently represented
us to be. So much dearer is Humor, Pride and Worldly Credit to him, then our
being not so mistaken as he thought for. Is this Man like to make Converts,
that first maims my Answers, and then either pelts what he does take with Dirt;
or if one Sense worse then another may be had, that (ushered in with a Rant,
and wound up with a Quibble) must be given for an apt and irrefutable Reply:
This has hitherto been his Practice, and we now go upon both a Proof of it,
and yet more evidently to clear the Truth.

In that little piece of my Answer he cropped off from the rest, (for after his
wonted manner, he thought it not best for him to encounter it at large, but a
snap and away) I told him, that he could produce no such Words, as, Traditions
of Men, Earthly Root, Darkness, Confusion, Corruption, Deceitful, Whore's Cup,
etc. as said of the Scriptures, out of W. Smith's Book, which was one part of
my Stress, he was willing to shake off, but it will not so easily acquit him.
Observe his Reply.


Rep. And whereas W. P. says, No such Words can be produced; he intends no
other, but that Smith does not accuse himself in so many words of Blaspheming
the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, and the Doctrines from thence received.


Rejoyn. His first Words belie me; nor can any Man be so sottish, as to believe
I intended any such thing, as he would have his Reader believe; for that were
no Answer to the Objection, but an arrant, yet fond Cheat and Illusion. My
Meaning went with my Words, and my Words meant as I just now explained them,
the substance of which was in my Answer, though evaded by his Reply, and
perhaps my Rejoinder will meet with no better Usage.

For his Phrase of Blaspheming the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, I will tell
him, and that upon very good Authority, that he now plays the Canter with us,
and that shamefully, The Spirit of God IN the Scriptures! a Scripture for that,
I entreat him. You may see what a Doctor he is, you that believe in him, that
thinks, he can clasp up the Spirit with his Bible. It seems thus far John Faldo
and Simon Magus agree; for the one thought he could buy it of Peter, and the
other implies he may have it of his Bookseller. Indeed if I thought J. Faldo
could believe what he says, I should be the tenderer of him; for Ignorance is
to be pitied: But when he shall shut the Spirit of God out of Men, and shut
him up in the Scripture, though it call Men the Temples or Tabernacles of God
and his Spirit, whilst it never calls it self so, but Holy Writings, or a
Declaration of things certainly believed, he is to be censured for his improper
and ambiguous Terms, and the rather, because his Charity is so small to others
in Cases more excusable, and that no Man acts the Doctor of the Sentences to
others more snappishly and imperiously then himself; however, I shall be so
favorable as to take his Words in this Sense (else I know not which way he
will turn himself) viz. The Spirit of God speaking (when it pleases) by the
Scriptures, which brings him and his Cause unavoidably over to us.

But let us see if J. F. can honestly fasten any of those forecited Epithetes
upon W. Smith's Book; If he can, we will condemn the Book as heartily, as J. F.
traduceth us in his. But if he shall be found to have wronged W. S. God that
lives forever will avenge our Innocence upon him; which we desire may extend no
further then to work him into true Repentance, and effectually to vindicate us
in the Understandings of the Misinformed. His words are these.


Rep. But that all that Inventory of execrable Names W. Smith does intend of
the Scriptures, page 41, 42.
and the Holy Doctrines grounded on the Authority of the written Word, take
these Testimonies, John 1. 9. He [that is John] beheld him, and his Glory, and
felt his Power, and what his Power took away, then he declared him as he knew
him, and not from any Tradition or Writing before him; why then do teach for
Doctrines Men's Traditions? -- running into the Lines of what others have
written, Morn. Watch, page 6.


Rejoyn. The Passages from whence the particular Epithetes are taken shall be
considered anon.

This is one of those Testimonies he brings to prove he rightly cited and
applied his former Testimonies out of the same Author; which had he intended in
reallity, he should as well have inserted the one as the other; to help such as
had not seen his other Book, into a true Judgment of this; but then may he say,
I should not make the best of my Case, which to do him no Wrong he studies more
then the Truth, or any thing else, next to his making the worst of ours. And
now, Reader, that this Proof is as lame as his former, and wholely as silent to
his Wicked purposes, consider I entreat thee, the Drift of this Man, as his
Discourse at large manifests. Two things he had in his Eye, First, to beat
People off from the Doctrines and Traditions of Men, in the Sense Christ once
spoke those words, to wit, not the Scriptures, but Men's humane Interpretations
of them, with such Forms and Worships as they had invented in the Apostasy from
the true Spirit of Christianity, as these words, by J. F. purposely omitted,
notwithstanding they lay between the two first Sentences, which therefore make
an absolute Break, though he makes none, do undeniably evince, to wit, Weigh
this Truth all ye Priests and Professors, and ponder it in your Hearts; have
you beheld Christ, and seen his Glory? Have you felt his Power to take away
your sin? If yea, then why do ye teach for Doctrine Men's Traditions. Again,
page 16. For they being from the Life that gave forth Scriptures, their
Understandings are darkened, and they err, and know not the Scriptures nor the
Power of God. Lastly, in the 14th page he has these words, All the vain
Worships and Customs, which People at this day are in, who yet abide in Forms
and Traditions, are all come up since the days of the Apostles, and are after
Men's Traditions, and not after Christ. And the Conception of all has been in
Man's Imagination, and has been brought forth in his own Will and Wisdom.

By all which, Reader, it appears, that he distinguishes between Men's
Traditions and God's Tradition. For first, how can he mean the Scriptures in
the first Passage (the middle of which our Adversary so wilfully dropped) when he
implies, that from feeling the Power of Christ to take away Sin, Men would
leave off Teaching for Doctrine the Traditions of Men; making them thereby
sinful, and a Sin to teach them, when J. Faldo confesses, that upon the
Spirit's moving and giving us the understanding of Scripture we do allow the
Doctrines therein delivered, to be rightly preached. In the second Passage, he
undeniably distinguishes between the Scriptures rightly understood, and their
Mistake of them to whom he wrote; Not knowing, says he, the Scriptures, nor the
Power of God, being darkened; which imports, that truly to know and teach
according to the sense of Holy Scripture, is a quite differing thing from
Teaching for Doctrine the Traditions of Men. Nor is his third Passage less
clear in the Point, page 14. sin^^ he explains what he means by those offensive
Words to J. Faldo's Ear, by such Customs, Worships and Traditions as were not
of Christ, and that took their rise since the time of the Apostles, and
proceeded from the Imagination, Will and Wisdom of Man; therefore not the
Writings of either Prophets or Apostles, that were before such Apostasy, and
which were given forth as they were moved of the Holy Ghost.

The second thing greatly in the Author's Eye, and with which his Spirit seems
to be pressed through the whole Book, is this; Men ought to teach and preach to
others no further then they have a living Sense or Experience of what they so
teach or preach: that this was his Meaning, by those Words, Running into the
Lines of what others, have written; hear the following Words in his Defense.
How dare any of you, says he, make mention of his Name, or speak of his Glory,
or of his Power, seeing you have not beheld him yet made manifest in your
selves? Again thus, For John testified, that the giving forth of the Law was by
Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, John 1. 17. Mark, says he,
Grace and Truth were come unto John by Jesus Christ, and he had felt the Virtue
of it, by which Moses' s Admistration was fulfilled in him. I say, Reader, his
whole scope was to enforce the Necessity of coming into the Enjoyments of the
Holy Ancients, and an Experiencing of the Truth of those Doctrines they
declared, before Men are fit to teach them unto others. And as this is the
Tendency of his Words, so does holy Scripture strongly warrant the same;
Particularly Jeremiah, and the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians; in Jeremiah,
thus, He that has my Word, let him speak my Word faithfully; What is the Chaff
to the Wheat, says the Lord? Is not my Wordlike a FIRE, says the Lord, and
like a HAMMER, that breaks the Rock in pieces? Therefore I am against the
Prophets, says the Lord, that steal my Word every one from his Neighbor,
Chap. 23. Verse. 28, 29, 30. The Meaning of which notable place is plainly this,
Such as have God's Word to declare (which is known from all False Pretenders,
who steal the Word from their Neighbor, and then cry, he says, as the 31th
Verse expresses, by the Resemblance it bears to Fire, a thing easily to be
felt) let them faithfully speak it.

But those who steal and preach the Word or Testimony that came from the Lord
by and through another, as if the Lord spoke the same by them, unto whom the
Lord never spoak it; such Prophets the Lord is against, which strikes J. Faldo
dead, respecting his Pretense for Preaching, who abundantly proves it to be his
Belief, that such are as Good Ministers as any, yea, the only Orthodox, and the
other but a Pack of giddy-headed Enthusiasts.

The next place is in the Apostle's 2d Epist. to the Corinthians. Chap. 10.
Verse. 15, 16. Not boasting of things beyond our measure, that is, of other
Men's Labors, but having Hope, that when your Faith is increased, that we
shall be enlarged by you, according to our Rule abundantly, to preach the
Gospel in the Regions beyond you, and not to boast in another Man's Line of
things made ready to our Hands. Of this sort of Boasters is John Faldo, who
has nothing for his Religion but the m^er Bible, and but an usurpt Title to
that. Reader, take notice, that all along J. F. has made no Difference between
the Truths the Scriptures truly declare of, and Man's dark and unregenerated
Conceptions upon Scripture about Truth and Error. Thereby confounding that
which in it self is most clearly different, to the end he may bring all those
Blows we give at Men's Traditions and Doctrines (which they pretend to be
rightly deduced from Scripture, but in Reallity, are their own Imaginations) to
bear hard upon the Scriptures themselves, and those Doctrines and Traditions
that are truly delivered by them; which is a wretched begging of the Question,
that was not about the Scriptures, to which he would turn it, but his and their
way of understanding them, as if it were the same thing to decry the
Scriptures, as to disclaim against J. F.'s false Opinions concerning them.

But he thinks he has quite done our Business, and saved himself from the Black
Blemish of Forgery, by another Testimony produced to the same purpose, which is
this. And reading in the Scriptures, that there were some who met together, and
exhorted one another, they observe and do as near as they can what they read of
the Saints Practice, and so conceive a Birth in the same Womb, and bring it
forth in the same Strength that others do, and in the Ground it differs not, W.
S. page 22. But what of all this, J. Faldo? Can this Saying rise higher then a
Reproof of those who are but in the Form of Godliness, whom the Scriptutes
exhort us to turn away from: But why was he so disingenuous as to refuse us our
Friends words at large, thereby making People believe, that the Imitation
reproved by W. S. concerns the holy Life and Conversation of the Saints. For
its not two Lines before, that he tells us expressly what sort of Practice he
means, when he writes thus, And because they (Baptists) read of some that went
into the Water, and were baptized, they do the same. In short, The Zeal of his
Spirit runs against all Apish Religions, and those Persons, who take unto
themselves the Name and Form, they are Strangers to the Nature and Power of,
being not led by the Eternal Spirit to Worship God, but with an Unregenerate
Mind and Ambitious Will, eagerly rush into those things for which they have
neither Commission nor Quallification.

I could urge several Testimonies out of Authors that neither lived nor died in
Fellowship with the Quakers, as a further Vindication of their Sense in this
Particular; but Three shall suffice at this time.

The first is given us by Jo. Can, styled by Parson Ball, ( an Eminent and
Early Presbyter) The Leader of the English Brownists or Independents at
Amsterdam, more then 30 Years ago, viz. Labor to Experience the Power and
Leading of the Spirit: It is very dangerous to rest in any thing that comes
from the Creature, till you have the Witness of the Spirit, which is not
fleshly, heady or empty; but powerful, inward, and abides and settles the Soul.
In thy Light shall we see Light, and no where else, let them pretend never so
high Seize. A Knock to J. Faldo.

The second is a Passage in W. Dell's Trial of Spirits, writ, as I take it,
while he was Master of Cains College in Cambrige. They, says he, who want
Christ's Spirit, which is the Spirit of Prophecy, though they preach the EXACT
LETTER of the Word, yet are FALSE PROPHETS, and not to be heard by the Sheep.
And one Reason among many for this Assertion, was this, Under the New Testament
we are not to regard the Letter without the Spirit, but the Spirit as well as
the Letter, yea, the Spirit more then the Letter. And therefore Paul says,
That Christ shall destroy Antichrist with the Spirit of his Mouth, and the
Brightness of his Coming. He scarce (says this Author) takes any notice of the
Letter, but calls the true Preaching of the Gospel, the Spirit of Christ's
Mouth, or the Ministration of the Spirit. His next Reason is this, They that
preach only the outward Letter of the Word without the true Spirit, they make
all things outward in the Church, and so carry the People with whom they
prevail, only to outward things, to an outward Word, to outward Worship,
outward Ordinances, outward Church, outward Government, etc. whereas in the
true Kingdom of Christ, all things are inward and spiritual; and all the true
Religion of Christ is written in the Soul and Spirit of Man, and the Believer
is the only Book, in which God himself writes his new Testament, page 19, 20.

The third Testimony is out of T. Collier's Works, p. 249. How can they teach
others, who know not Truth themselves, as they say, but as they read it without
them? And so at the best, speak but other Men's Light. And if they
mis-understand what other Men have written, then they speak Falsehood instead of
Truth.

Thus much in Countenance of W. Smith's Expression, from Three Men of great
Note among our English Separatists.

But let us hear what Use J. Faldo makes of the Testimony he brought, and which
we have thus cleared and confirmed.


Rep. Then follows in this, and page 23. all that rabble of villifying
Expressions of both their Practices and Authority, page 42.
quoted by me in Quakerism No Christianity, p. 119.


Rejoyn. If this be true, W. Smith's Book shall yet be blamed, as much as J. F.
will otherwise have abused him. I will set down his words faithfully, They,
said he, hope to be saved after this Life is ended by Christ, though they be
Sinners, and so are set down in a Carnal Security, and rest at ease in the
Formality, and are Strangers to the Quickening Spirit, and the Faith that they
have made is not held in a pure Conscience, but is conceived in the Heart that
is Degenerated and Corrupted.

I Query of my Reader, if this was meant of the Scripture, upon whom J. F.
makes W. S. bestow the word Corrupted? Again, And what was by the Saints given
forth, and appears in VVritings without them, that their Life is in, and that
they contend about, and all strive to set up their own Conceivings, and teach
for Doctrines Men's Traditions. Mark that Reader. He speaks not against the
Scriptures, nor of them, but their Blindness in using them, and mind not the
Measure of God in themselves; that is, Reader, God's Measure, or the Grace of
God, which teaches to deny those sins he told them a little before they lived
in with Carnal Security. But, says he, stretched beyond it in the
Comprehension, and run into other Men's Lines and Labors. That is, They
outrun their own Experiences, and intrude themselves into those things, which
were beyond their own Growth, which W. S. rebukes them for, making it his
Business to turn them to that Grace, which obeyed, teaches them not to vilify
Scriptures, but brings them into the right Possession of them, and Title to
them: which he make appear to be more to their Advantage, then to dispute and
contend about them, whilst in Sinful Security, Formality, Estrangedness from
the Quickening Spirit, Humane Faith, Impure Conscience, and in a Degenerated
and Corrupted Heart; All which is in his 22th page, and give Light enough (to
any Man, that has not, like J. F. put out his Eyes of Reason and Candor) unto
these following words, which can no more relate to the Holy Scriptures, then
that Spirit from whom they came, to wit, They are all upon the Earthly Root,
and in Darkness and Confusion in their Practice and Worship. Now, Reader, What
does the Scripture practice, and whom, and how does the Scripture worship; if
the word ( they) relate to the Scriptures, and not those several ranks of
Professors to whom he expressly dedicated his Book? Yet further, That from the
Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Feet the Image (that is, the several
Sects) has no whole part in it, but is full of Putrefaction and Corruption,
and every Branch rotten and deceitful, and no good Fruit is found; for the
bringing forth of all is from the Heart that is deceitful and corrupted, which
lies fallen and degenerated from God. What Man, Reader, that ever thought to have
his Proofs examined, would have dared to apply in the Author's Name these terms
to the Scripture, that so particularly and plainly relate to Man in his fallen
State. But please to consider what better Authority he has for the rest, viz.
And are all found Wanderers in the Night of Apostasy, and in the Darkness have
taken the VVhore's Cup, and do drink it: And unto all those is the Cup of God's
Indignation poured out, because they are Bastards, and not Sons. Upon which I
query with J. F. who are the VVanderers? If the People; then the foregoing
word, They, of which the word Wanderers must be the Relative, concern
Professors; and then all those Terms beforementioned belongs not to the
Scripture, and consequently mis-apply'd by our Enemy. But if he says VV. S.
meant the Scriptures; how could they be said to wander, or drink the VVhore's
Cup? And if the Whore's Cup be the Scriptures (as J. F. makes W. S. to mean)
either the People drank up the Scriptures in the Apostasy, or the Scriptures
drank up themselves.

Next, Who are those Bastards, to whom the Cup of God's Indignation is poured
fourth? Certainly they are Disobedient Children, and not as J. Faldo would have
it, the Scriptures and holy Doctrines deduced thence.

Reader, Doubtless the Man is desperate, and to me he seems to have laid
Violent hands upon himself to the destroying of his Reputation among Men, and
his Soul in the Eye of God; since after all this Injury to our deceased Friend,
he dares yet appear in so impudent a Strain, as this following Passage makes
him guilty of. All this Penn KNEW to be true when he dared to make such
Hypocritical Appeals to Delude the World, Save the Quakers Credit, and Abuse me
as a Forger.

The Righteous God judge between us, whether I writ otherwise then I knew, or
he in affirming it, more then he knew. My Appeals were solemn, in the Grief of
my Spirit, to see a Man arrived at that pitch of Falsness, as to pervert and
forge about Sacred Things, even while himself would pass for a Minister of
them; and I can scarce think any Man so prejudiced against us, as not to
conclude with me, that his Aim in this untrue Passage (to say no more) was to
bear People down, as to the Honesty of his Quotation, by the mighty Vehemence
and Confidence of his positive Charge against me, to have known, what in
Reallity I never knew, and to have appealed hypocritically to God concerning
our Innocence, who did it in the Humility and Sincerity of my Soul, because the
Man had no other way left him, to secure himself from the deserved Imputation
of Forgery or wilful Perversion, scarce a remove from it. But that by which he
would clear himself from it, fastens it inevitably upon him, and renders him
one of the daringst and most hardened Perverters I have ever yet met with in
all my Life.

The next Testimony he brought to prove our Opposition of the Spirit to the
Scriptures, and which he pretends to justify against my Explanation, was this,
Of this sort are the False Prophets, who have their Preaching from Study, and
other Men's Mouths, charging me, that I treacherously left out, or from the
Letter, and not from the Mouth of the Lord. But as I used no Treachery, neither
omitted it in Design, nor thought it Prejudicial to his Cause, since my Answer,
as himself has trans-scrib'd it, shows, that I understood it to be the Letter
of the Scripture, that was meant, from whence they stole their Preaching, and
not that they received it from the Mouth of the Lord; so in the end it will
prove more my own Disadvantage to have omitted it, then any Bodies else. I
shall set down my Answer, as he has trans-scrib'd it, and his Reply, the
equall'st Way of Judging.

The natural Purport of the Words, said I, can be no more then this; That
though the Things declared of in the Scriptures were the Word of the Lord to
the holy Ancients and Jeremiah, as God's Mouth (not his Mouth therefore) to the
People Israel; yea, much of it (mark) the Mouth of the Lord to us also; yet for
Men to say any part of it by rote, especially if they add (mark) their own
Comments and Glosses, framed from study, OF any part of the Scripture, and say,
Thus says the Lord, or Hear the Word of the Lord, and not in the same living
Sense, nor upon the like Commission, every such one does rob his Neighbor, and
steal his words.

This is so much of my Answer as he trans-scribes, which seems thus far
ingenuous, that in three times a larger Answer he has not trans-scrib'd one
third of this; perhaps he thought it not so much for his turn. But before I set
down his Reply, I shall find two Faults with this recital; First, That he has
(I will not say treacherously, or that I knew he did design'dly mis-give my
words, as he is frequently pleased to charge me) falsely set down one part of my
Answer; for in my Book it is, If they add their own Comments and Glosses framed
from study, TO any part of the Scripture, and he trans-scribes it, Framed from
study O F any part of the Scripture; as if the studying O F the Scripture, and
adding Men's own Glosses TO the Scripture, were one and the same thing. All I
shall say of it is this, It Is a scurvy Mistake, and looks very suspitiously.
The second is, That he has left out the most material part of my Answer; The
Stress of which in brief lay here, Parrots imitate Men; But if such Creatures
are not therefore to be reputed Reasonable, though the Sentence be rational in
it self, because it proceeds from mere Imitation, and not a Principle of
Reason; neither is He a true Prophet, nor That the Word of the Lord, with
respect to that Prophet, who has not received what he delivers from the
immediate Word of God himself, but by Hearsay, or mere Imitation. But of all
this part he takes no notice. I now come to his Reply, which I will faithfully
set down, and I hope, as clearly enervate.


Rep. The Errors, Self-Contradictions and Absurdities of W. P. I shall express
briefly. First, page 43.
what he says they mean, I say they mean also, viz. The Scriptures are not the
Mouth of God.


Rejoyn. The Mouth of God is a most uncouth Expression, for which he has not
one Scripture, from Genesis to the Revelation; nor do I see how he should,
since it is unsound, if not Blasphemons; for, by calling them not A Mouth, but
THE Mouth, it renders them the most constant, necessary and excellent Mouth, by
which God, who is a Spirit, utters forth his Mind to his Children, thereby
excluding the Word of God nigh in the Heart, and his Spirit in their Inward
Parts. But to proceed;

What does he mean by Mouth, or how does he take it, Properly or
Metaphorically? If the first, I deny it: If the last, I thus far concede, That
the Scriptures, as other things may be in a sense so styled, when God pleases
livingly to speak by them, otherwise I choose to express my self, as in my
Answer, by him also omitted.

The Eternal Word of God is the Mouth of God, and the true Prophets and
Apostles in all Ages have been as the Mouth of the Word of God, declaring the
Mind of it, either by Word of Mouth or Writing to the People, and the
Scriptures are the Writings of those inspired Prophets and Apostles What more
would he have?

Nay, there is not only no such Negative, as he charges upon us in my Answer;
but I do expressly say, The Scriptures are not in a sense without a Mouth, and
that for God too, being a Declaration of much of his Will and Works, though I
cannot allow them to be the Mouth of God in the sense my Adversary throughout
his whole Book tugs hard to get; for by that means we should with him shut up
the Mouth of the Eternal Word, which is God's Living Oracle to the Souls of his
People. But he proceeds.


Rep. VV. P. says, the things spoken of were the Word of the Lord. Then the
Word of the Lord is or was more then one, a Contradiction to himself.


Rejoyn. Reader, take notice that there is no such thing as he pretends to
reply to, in this part of my Answer he brings into his Book; It seems he has
left it behind him, and I must go back to look for it. My words were these, The
Scriptures then are to us oblieging, as the Thing they declare of was the Word
of the Lord to several Ages, Temporary Commands excepted.

Which import no more then this, That the Word of the Lord declared the Mind
of the Lord by the holy Prophets; And the Mind of the Lord is not distinct from
the Word of the Lord, though the Declaration be different from the thing
declared of. I cannot see any Contradiction in what I writ. Sure I am, I meant
not by the thing they Declare of, the Declaration, either by Word of Mouth or
VVriting, but the Wisdom, Will, Glory and Power of the Eternal Word, as they
are Eternally One with and in the Word before so declared. He was a little too
nimble in the Business; but if I should let him make the worst Construction he
is able, it can rise no higher then this, I should mean by the Word of the
Lord, the living Command of the Lord in the Heart of his Prophets, afterward
declared by Word of Mouth, or VVriting; For Word sometimes signifies Command,
as thus, This is the Word of the Lord, or this is the Command or Mind of the
Lord, which are equivalent.


Rep. 3dly, That God has a Mouth in a proper Sense.


Rejoyn. This is untruly charged upon me. My Adversary's Reason for this
indirect Consequence was, my saying that Jeremiah was as God's Mouth (not his
Mouth therefore) which to me is a good Reason why he ought to have inferred the
quite contrary, since as his Mouth, signifying no more then something in lieu
of a Mouth, and not His Mouth therefore, was on purpose brought in by me, to
prevent that very Construction which my Adversary has not withstanding hit
upon.

But to the next part of his Reply, which is still by way of Consequence, as he
thinks from my Principles.


Rep. 4thly, What the Scriptures say, the Lord does not say, unless he that
utters them has the like Commission from God, as Jeremy.


Rejoyn. A mere Tale of J. Faldo's making. They are the Words of the Lord, let
who will speak them or say them over. But they are not the words of God by or
through that Person that is dead to them. And instead of hearing and receiving
them from such Intruders and False Pretenders, they ought to be flun^ back into
their Faces, and they reproved for False Prophets: What have thou to do to
take my Name into thy Mouth, says God, that hate to be reformed? And how is
he reformed that is not renewed into that Life, Power and Wisdom, that Man was
indu'd with, before he came to be through Transgression deformed. The Drift of
our Adversary is to prop and maintain a Company of dry, senseless and
unregenerate Talkers for VVorldly Maintenance. They are of their Race who
taught for Hire and divined for Money, the Chemarims, or Black-Coats of old
times. The plain English of all J. F's Jeers and Railings against us, is this,
We deny him to be a Minister of the Gospel, who preaches or teaches what he
has not experienced of God's Work in his own Heart, viz. who preaches of
David's Languishings, and never was in them; of the Terrors the Apostles knew,
and never felt them; In fine, the whole Exercise that attends the Soul of Man
from the beginning of his Repentance, to the Completing of his Salvation, and
never have experimentally trod that Path, and passed thorough those diverse
States. He is an ill Guide that never went the Way himself; and an unskilful
Physician, who is ignorant both of the Disease and Cure. His 5th Consequence is
this.


Rep. That all that call them by that Name, and tender them to others, are
Thieves and Robbers.


Rejoyn. This is a piece of Gibberish I do not understand. When did we call
any Thieves or Robbers, for a Name given to the Scriptures, if them he mean? On
what part of my Answer can he fasten these words? It Is true, I said then, and I
say again, They are all Thieves and Robbers, that steal other Men's
Experiences, and then preach them for Advantage; For they that stole of old
were such as spoke other Men's Words, without their Sinse. And as the False
Prophet stole the True Prophets Words, which was one of their Marks; so the
True Prophets did not speak in Immitation of one another; but as the Word of
the Lord came upon their Spirits, so they declared it, which is proved thus:
First, If it had been the Words or VVritings of the true Prophets themselves,
then it could not have been said, Let the Prophet that has a Dream, tell a
Dream, and he that has. My Word, speak My Word faithfully, since most, if
not every one of them had the Words, or VVritings of the true Prophets by
them. So that after J. F's. Conceit, every one of them might have spoken it,
and then too when it best pleased him; which being utterly inconsistent with
the very Words and Nature of the Text. I conclude, It was an Invisible,
Immediate and Spiritual Word the true Prophets spoak by, as they were moved of
it. 2dly, It was a Fire and Hammer, and that the Scriptures were not 3dly, It
came at certain times to them who had so much of the Scripture as was then
extant always by them; therefore not the Scripture, but an Immediate Word.
4thly, Otherwise there had been no more Scripture upon Inspiration, but a
continual discanting upon those they had; therefore still an Immediate Word,
and not the Words and VVritings of others. Lastly, If the Difference then
between a true and a fal^e Prophet, was the declaring faithfully the Word of
the Lord, when, and as they felt the Operation and Motion of it in themselves,
and a borrowing, or rather Stealing those words, and so without either the
Operation or Motion of the same Eternal Word, which was before the coming of
Christ; much more then ought the true Prophets in these Evangelical Times (to
whom were promised a more large Effusion of the Holy Spirit) to wait for the
Operation and Motion of God's Eternal Power, Word or Spirit of Life, in order
to instruct others. And more reason have we to repute them False Prophets, that
in these days of greater Light, should prop up themselves, as God's Ministers
with the old Cheat of Stealing their Neighbors Word. Certainly they are less
sufferable now, then at that time; And if that Dispensation renounce them, this
ought much more. But J. F. thinks he says something when he flings this
Consequence upon me as ridiculous.


Rep. That Jeremy and the Prophets are our Neighbors, though dead Two or Three
Thousand years since.


Rejoyn. I never said they were John Faldo's Neighbors, nor does he deserve so
good Company, though he needs it. But let it suffice, that J. F. steals as bad
as Jeremiah's Neighbors did; And thus far more boldly and notoriously, in that
they perhaps got the true Prophets Words so soon, that some might not know who
had them first; whereas J. F. runs back Two or Three Thousand Years a pilfering
for his Hackny-Sermons out of them, which are so well known to be other Men's
Lines and Labors. Methinks People should not suffer themselves to be so
miserably guld, nor lie at the Expense of maintaining a Priest to tell his
Tales, who may buy each of them a Bible containing the Writings of the Holy
Prophets and Apostles for Five Shillings, more to their Edification, since
their Ministers, or Masters rather, deny Inspiration, and consequently all
inward certaint^^ to their own Conceptions, and Glosses, hugging Fallibility as
a necessary Article, and flinging it more then once in our Teeth, as arrogant
Heresy to say, We are Certain of what we teach. Truly my Soul magnifies the
Lord, and I rejoice in God my Savior, that he has dis-vail'd this Mystery of
Iniquity, and dis-spoil'd that Painted Jezabel and splendid Whore of Babylon,
who has long fate upon the many Waters, and has discovered her Merchants, her
Wares, her Witchcrafts, whereby her Abominations are known, and her darkest
Stratagems and deepest Subtilties found out, Its not her saying, She Is a Bride,
a Church, nor her Merchants and People, that they are Ministers and Christians,
that will serve their turn; for their Conception is known, their Original,
their Number, their Power, their Devices and utmost Extent, and they are all
found to be out of the Redeeming Power, Life and Spirit of the Lamb. And for
this Cause am I engaged on Earth, and the Reproaches that attends me on that
Account are unutterably more grateful to me then the gaudiest Titles and
sweetest Entertainments this Temporal World can bestow. Its for God, against
the Devil; his Power and Spirit against Satan's; the Spiritual against the
Formal Man, and the real Life of Jesus, and Heavenly Experience of his
Salvation within, whereby the Doctrine of the Gospel is accomplished in Men,
against all Transformation into Likenesses, and but mere verbal Immitations and
Outsides of Religion; For every Plant that the Heavenly Father has not
planted, will he root up in this the Day of his Power, in which the Lord will
make his People a willing People, and that notby indulging, but rebuking, and
taking Men off from their own Willing and Running: For the Lord has decreed to
overthrow the Banks, which the False Prophets of the Nations have cast up, in
the Night of Darkness, whereby all Refreshment has been damm'd up from them,
and the Nations have been like a parched Heath and desolate Wilderness, that
his Life, Power, and Spirit may flow over every Kindred, Nation and People
under the whole Heaven; and they shall be all taught of God, and in
Righteousness will he establish them, and there shall be one Sheepfold and one
Shepherd; and the Idol Shepherds, who have no Vision, neither have any Bread of
Life wherewith to feed the Flock, God will utterly scatter and make an end of,
and his Name shall be Famous and Renowned through all Generations, Amen.

But Reader, my Adversary is not yet willing to leave me, he proceeds to tell
us, That the Quakers charge him, and such others with the Sin of Idolatry, to
believe and live according to the Iustructions and holy Examples expressed in
and by the Scriptures, except they have them by Immediate Inspiration; And
though the Substance of it has been already considered by me, yet I shall not
grudge my Pains, if the Reader will bestow his perusal, and perhaps he may find
something not unserviceable to the further Clearing of our Sense, and Detection
of our Adversary's Dis-ingenuity; He writes thus in his Reply.


Rep. I produced among others two Testimonies which W. P. tak^s notice of; My
first is out of Morn. Watch, page 45.
page 23. And this is Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, and the Abomination of
all Uncleanness.

Rej. I need say the less to this, because I have so clearly and lately
defended W. S. in that Book and Page from any such wretched Meanings and
Applications, which J. F. has employed his Wits to rack his Words to. Only
Reader, observe his Fallacy; that he sets not down what Examples and what
Instructions, but confounds Moral with Ceremonial Precepts, on purpose to make
us at one Blow cut off all Regard to Scripture indifferently. Next, But J. F.
Is not that Babylon, or the Antichristian Church, which has the Show and
Outside, but not the Life and Power of Godliness? May not Antichrist adorn
himself with the Literal Profession of the Gospel? Certainly all Protestants
have accorded to this I am sure. I. Sprig, C. Goad, W. Dell, I. Saltmarsh, T.
Collier, yea, J. Fox, B. Jewel, I. Renolds, D. Willet, R. Abbot, and a nameless
worthy Author about Qu. Elizabeth's time, in his Voice out of the Wilderness,
etc. allow of W. Smith's Doctrine, viz. That the merely Literal, Formal and
Fleshly-wise Church, not regenerated into the Image and Li^ of the Son of God
is Babylon; and some of them are most ^press in the Matter, which I omit for
haste.
mark his Antichristianism, in that he makes the Mind of God, and Doctrines
and Lives of the holy Ancients in Scriptures, capable of being understood and
followed without the Inspiration of God's holy Spirit, thereby giving the Lie
to the most express: Texts of holy Scripture, and the plainest Assertions of
the purest Fathers, most famous Reformers and constant Martyrs. I will say no
more to this, then that our Adversary himself, has in the same page cited so
much of W. S. as declares his Perversion of the other part of his Book, viz.
And are all out of the Life and Power of God; that is, Those that say, they
have God to their Father, speak high things of Holy Scripture, and bedeck
themselves with the Passages thereof, and notwithstanding are out of the Life
and Power of God, are not true Jews or Christians; but are of the Synagogue of
Satan, the Abomination of all Uncleanness, and which help to make up Babylon,
the Mother of Harlots.

For the other Proof he brought, which indeed was his first, though in his
Reply he tells us, it was his last; he was afraid to meddle with it, and there
was great Reason for it; For he knew not which way to handle it, but would bite
his Fingers. I will set it down with my Answer contracted, that I may help the
Reader to another Instance, by which he may take his just Measures of the Man
in hand, respecting his sort of Fair Dealing, or Strength of Argument.

W. Dewsbury he cites thus in his Discovery of Man's Return, page 21. All
People may search the Scriptures, and see how you have been deceived by your
Teachers, who have caused you to seek your lost God in Carnal and Dead
Observations, WHICH THEY HAVE NOT ANY SCRIPTURE FOR.

Now, Reader, was not this an extraordinary Passage to prove J. F^do's Charge,
viz. That it was Idolatry to act according to Scripture, etc. which is given by
our Friend as a Reason why People ought not to follow their Blind Teachers: But
be pleased to read my Defense, as I then writ it.

W. Dewsbury is so far from making it Idolatry to live up to the Scriptures,
that he condemns the seeking for the True God where he was not to be found,
which, says he, they have no Scripture for; As much as to say, that such seek
after God, not according to Scriptures: And therefore are both Deceivers and
Deceived. Unto which J. F. replied nothing, unless it be that he had nothing to
Reply, except an Acknowledgment, which he thought would not make for his
present sort of Credit.

He winds up this Chapter with a Justification of his Comparison of our
Doctrine about the Scriptures with that of Jesuits and Papists. I will set him
down at large.


Rep. Concerning my Parallel between the Jesuits and the Papists in the venomn
Spit against the Scriptures, page 47.
W. P. has thus little to say, It is Ridiculous, page 101.
and every way unworthy our notice, a mere begging of the Question; We can
never allow of the Comparison. But why all this Contempt?


Rejoyn. Contempt pinches his proud Stomach. But Courteous Reader, ask J. F. why
he left out the Words immediately proceeding, viz. He has been so Cunning or
Unjust rather, as to quote their Authors and not ours; and some Passages we
justly doubt. What base Juggling is this with his Reader, and Abuse of his
Adversary. It concerned him more to be just in this then to ask, Why all this
Contempt? And had he not had less Honesty then Stomach, we might have expected
that Justice, the want of which brings greater Contempt upon him, then my sober
Reflection upon such unfair Dealing.

But he proceeds to cite these words as the whole Reason, why we disallow the
Comparison, Sense the Papists place the Rule and Judgship in a Pope, and
General Council, and the Quakers in the Eternal, Unerrable, Holy Spirit of God.
To which he replies thus.


Rep. The first is as I said; the second is Blasphemously False; for the
Quakers call their Light within the Spirit of God, which I have sufficiently
proved to be a BLASPHEMER of the Spirit of God, a SORDID SINFVL, CORRVPT and
RIDICVLOVS THING.


Rejoyn. What he means by his first, I know not, unless that he said true of
the Papists. And if any of them have writ or spoak unworthily of the
Scriptures, we utterly detect their Actions. For his second, I confess, I am
greatly at a stand, I have traveled several Nations, conversed with Men of
most Ways of Religion, read a great many Books for my time; but never yet did I
meet with such an Insolent, Blasphemous and Scornful Expression, as this I now
transcribed word for word out of his Reply. It Is true, there was an Old Peevish
Priest in Ireland, who to get a little Money (as clearly appeared) writ an
Envious Book against us, T. Ienner, a Presbyter-Independent Priest of Ireland,
writ a Book against us for Gain; for he went from House to House of many
sufficient, and some great Men, to present them; some gave him a Crown, some
two Crowns, some a Piece: Among others, he had the Confidence and Avarice to
give one to the Lord Lt. of that Kingdom; His Secretary carried it to him, he
turning it over observed many black Charges, of foulest and most pernicious
Errors to Religion and Civil Government: The Parson still stayed; The Secr.
thought he had favored him sufficiently: but not understanding the Priests Aim,
that is, Lucre (the Old Priests Sin) was pressed to tell his Lord, that he waited
for his Excellencies Answer. The Secretary was so civil as to answer his
Desire; But when the Lord Lt. understood his Drif^, he returned the Book to the
Parson, with this Account, That be was sorry to bear that the Quakers held such
ill Principles; but the Tares and the Wheat must grow together till the Day of
ludgment. So the Parson was corrected for his Baseness, and disappointed of the
great Bone he crept thither for.
in which he called the Light within an Ignis Faetu^^s, a Dim Light, etc. who
lived long enough to vex himself to Death with our Answer, as we are credibly
informed, not long surviving its Arrival, and general Acceptance of most sorts
of People in those Parts; But never yet have I heard or read of such hard Names
from the worst of our Adversaries; For Tho Hicks himself in his Dialogues
against us, acknowledges that the Light within checketh for many Evils, and
excites to many good things, etc.

It were too large to go over the Praises given it by the best Jews, Gentiles
and Christians, Leg. alledg. l. 1.
Philo the Jew calls it an Immortal Precept. Plotin, a Gentile, says it is the
Root or Life of the Soul. That this Divine Principle in Man makes a true and
good Man. Clemens Alexandrinus a Christian-Father, speaks of it thus, The Light
will shine out of Darkness, Admon^. ad Gent. Strom. l. 5.
therefore it shines in the hidden part of Mankind in the Heart. Again, Man
cannot be void of Divine Knowledge, who naturally, or as he comes into the
World, partaketh of Divine Inspiration, etc. Thus Munster, Vetablus, Clarius,
Castellio, Drusius, and Codurcus upon this Passage in Job, And upon whom does
not his Light arise? acknowledge both its Vniversallity and Sufficiency too,
where obeyed.

I could produce a Multitude of approved Protestants, without being beholding
to one Papist (whatever J. F. says of us) in Commendation of the Universal
Light, within; but will conclude with J. Caryl, one of the most ancient and
eminent Pastors of the Independent Way, in his Exposition on Job, and J. Owen,
that great Doctor of Independency, in his Latin Exercitations, formerly writ
against the Quakers, under the Name of Phanaticks, a Term since bestowed and
improved, by he knows who, upon such as need no pointing at.

J. Caryl on Job. 32. 8. says, that Wisdom and Knowledge in the Things of God,
come from the Inspiration, or In-shining of the Light or Spirit from above. And
on Chap. 24. 13. That Light there mentioned, shined in Wicked Men's Hearts, as
well as Good, or to that purpose; And that it is not a Natural or Proper Light,
as the Sun in the Firmament, but such as reproved them for their Iniquity, and
comes from above, etc.

J. O. abundantly confesses to the Morallity and Vniversallity of the Light,
calling it also a Supernatural and Spiritual as well as Moral Light, as he
frequently phrases it. Good Use of which has been made by our Christian and
Learned Friend Samuel Fisher, in Answer to Him, Rich. Baxter, J. Tombs, and T.
Danson, unto which they have never attempted any the least Reply that we hear
of, though it greatly concerns their Cause and Credit to do something in it.
For my own part, I shall say no more to J. Faldo's Refutation then that he
calls the Light within us (by which it has pleased God to redeem us from our
Vain Conversation) against the Judgment of many Good and Learned Men in several
Ages, A BLASPHEMER OF THE SPIRIT OF GOD, A SORDID, SINFUL, CORRUPT AND
RIDICULOUS THING; for which God rebuke him.

But there yet remains a notable Testimony of our Friends to be considered,
which J. F. produces, to prove our great Affinity with the Papists.


Rep. If any pretend to be of us, and in Case of Controversy will not admit to
be tried by the Church of Christ Jesus, nor submit to the Judgment given by the
Spirit in the Elders and Members of the Church, but kick against it, such we
testify ought to be rejected as Heathens.


Rejoyn. Nothing but Rank Ranterism can call this Popery in such Disgrace, or
reject it as unsound, as I will make appear.

The Church of Christ, endued with his Spirit has a Judgment; This Christ
allows her, and that every Individual ought to rest satisfied in it, in Case of
Difference; therefore said Christ, Tell the Church, and if he refuse to hear
the Church, then let him be as an Heathen and Publican. The Saints shall judge
the World; and much more by their Judgment determine, or reconcile things among
themselves.

No Caution or Resolution could be more soundly and scripturally laid down;
First, It is the Church of Christ that judges. Secondly, It must be the
Judgment of the Church by the Holy Spirit, or rather the Holy Spirit in the
Church, not consisting of Elders only, but Elders and Members, which make the
whole Church. Lastly, The Persons rejected are such as first kick or spurn
against the Admonitions of the Church of Christ? What Man not bereaved of his
Senses, or as Irreligious as a Ranter, can so scornfully upbraid us with this
Serious, Christian and Necessary Discipline? Yes; J. Faldo (who pretends both
to his Wits and Religion) dares offer something against it.


Rep. Oh the Charity of the Quakers Leaders! All that will not submit to their
little Juncto, page 48.
are with them numbered with Heathens and Infidels. Here the poor Quakers may
see the Image of the Beast among themselves.


Rejoyn. It were well if J. Faldo would show more Charity in pretending to
rebuke us for the want of it; But will he allow of those Aggravations the
Episcopatians and Presbyterians made upon, See Dr. Bilsons and the Heads and
Doctors of Oxford against the Brownists -- Gifford against H. Barrow, R.
Bernard against Brownism, answered by I. Robinson; and -- Ball against I. Cann,
etc.
and against the first Brownists about Gathered Churches? Did not they draw as
large Conclusions? And had they not as much Ground for doing it, as our Passage
can give to J. F. since they denied in most harsh Terms The Church of England
to be the Church of Christ? The same did the People called Anabaptists both of
the Church of England, and National Presbytery. But why our little Juncto,
otherwise called the Spirit of G. Fox, and his Ministry, or Representative
Body? Is not this cast out on purpose to insinuate, as if G. F. with other
public Travelers in the Service of the Church, were Lordly or Domineering, as
J. Faldo a little further calls it, who rarely meddle with those things,
leaving every Meeting to their own Power? But what Occasion had he for this
Reflection of our Friends Paper, even as by himself given us? Does it not
mention the whole Church, and afterward explain who that Church is, by those
two Words, Elders and Members; for such is the Practice of J. F. in his
pretended Discovery of us.

Nor i^ there any Reason, why J. F. should so much stomach the Word Heathen,
since he thinks it a Privilege to be so to us, at least to call us so:
Besides, we own every such one to have a Saving Light, which he denis to us,
therefore less Charitable, nay Unjust to the Light; for he esteems us only fit
Company for the worst Sort of Heathens, such as Julian and Lucian^

It seems we must be viler then Heathens and Mahometans with J. F. witness his
first Book: But we ought not by any means to repute such as he is, that denies
us and our Principles with Abhorrence, as to us, either Heathen or Infidel;
What shall we call him then? But has the Man forgot that the drift of his Book
is to Unchristian us? That the Title of it is Quakerism no Christianity? and
that the Cry of his Associates for these 20. Years has been Heathenism,
Gentiles, Moral, but not Christian Men, and therefore have excommunicated,
beaten, imprisoned, and that to Death, and yet by no means must wedeny these
Folks to be true Christians, that have so long proved themselves to be none:
Though this might suffice, that such as that Paper concerned thought us
Christ's Church, therefore just to them whatever it may be to others for whom
it was not intended. A man may abuse the highest Truths, taking to himself the
Liberty he does, to pervert our Words and Sayings: His two Books in God's Day
will prove to his great shame and Condemnation this one Charge, that I have
often in other words upon occasion said concerning him, viz. J. Faldo's Charges
against the Quakers are not their Principles, but his own Consequences falsely
drawn from them.

To conclude, If such Inoffensive, nay Christian and necessary Resolves for the
right Disciplining the Church of Christ in the Ways of Peace and
Righteousness, cannot escape J. Faldo's Cruel Hands, instead of rendering us
Papists, I shall not wonder if from a Nonconforming Priest he turns a Spanish
Inquisitor, or any thing else that can be worse: but it is pity he should
leave us, and not see his face before he goes. I will acquaint him therefore
(if yet a stranger) with an Excommunication drawn up and pronounced by an
Independent of great note, being in the Parliament's time Master of Pembrook
Hall in Cambridge and Pastor of a Church in London.


Sydach Sympson's Excommunication of Capt. Robert Norwood.
I do in the Name of the Lord Jesus and his People declare Mr. Norwood one that
has lifted up his Tongue and Heart against the Lord Jesus Christ, Rob. Nor.
his Ans. to Syd. Sym. Excomm. page 8.
and God the Father, one that from hence forward we have no more to do withal
till he repent, but shall continually pray that his Nights may not be quiet for
the Thoughts of his Sin, but that his Bed may be filled with Tears. I charge
all you both of the Church, and all other that are Christians, that you should
look upon him as one that God would have thus severely used, until that he An
odd and unsound Phrase.
buckle under his Sin, and then our Souls shall rejoice. In the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ we deliver him unto Satan for the Destruction of the Flesh,
that his Soul may be saved.

To prove this Authority by Example, he produces this piece of Antiquity,
however ill it befits an Independent Churchman.

The Church of Pallemnis as Semetius reports, excommunicates Andronicus in
these Words: Let (...) Man account Andronicus a Christian, but look upon him as
one whom God execrates; have no Company with him, (...) but what is necessary.

This Reader is the Moderation and Charity of such as J. Faldo accounts both a
true Minister and a Christian Society; much of this have we found at the hands
of the same Sort of Separatists. But first observe (according as J. F. would
have us understand it by his Censure of us in a Case less obnoxious) the
absolute Authority, personally assumed, and how much S. S. acted the Pope (in
J. F's Language) or arbitrary Prelate in this matter, that had been an earnest
Decryer of the same Spirit in a more national Clergy. 2ly, It is worth our
Notice, that the matter First charged was, a (pretended) Untruth, relating to
civil Commerce, from which he cleared himself to his Adversaries public
Confusion: But this was but the Preface, the Business is behind; for he denied
the Locallity of Heaven and Hell, that is, void of outward Place, as looking
upon them, to have a more spiritual Signification, and that the other was too
carnal, indeed Mohammedan; and that he believed the Soul to have been breathed
from God, thereby assigning to it something more of Divinity than the usual
Opinion does. For this and no more (as the Pamphlet informs me, which recites
the Reasons of the Excommunication) do they excommunicate him; yet to color
the Business the better, like as J. F. does with us, S. S. expells him their
Society, for denying a Heaven and Hell at all, and as rendering the Soul God
himself; crying out, Satanical Devices, Atheism and Blasphemy There is one
Passage this Captain took notice of, not unfit to be observed by us, with
Respect to the Use J. F. makes of our Paper. S. S. in his Proem or Introduction
to his Excommunication used among other these Words, That though Men may
withdraw themselves from the People of God, they cannot from the O^dinances of
God, meaning, as I suppose, that his pastroal Power could or should reach
beyond Constantinople or a further Place, to excommunicate, Anathema, Meranatha
an Offender, etc. But to this the Person so dealt with, answers, and for ought
I know more justifiably then J. F. can pretend to do to us (for we allow no
such personal and pastoral Dignity and prerogative Power to any Man, nor do we
use any such Forms of Excommunication) siyes he, Have I therefore withdrawn my
self from the People of God, because I have withdrawn from you, ARE NONE THE
PEOPLE OF GOD BUT YOUR SELVES? What are all those you are withdrawn from, ALL
DAM NED?

This is such an Argumentum ad hominem, as I am of the Mind ought to trouble J.
F. if the least Grain of Modesty be in him, what he charge upon us is
outdone by themselves, and the Aggravations he would render us odious by, are
made the natural Consequences of the^r own Excommunications.

I will conclude this with telling my Reader, that for no other Cause then what
is expressed, namely Opinion (and that not very offensive) this Person once
accounted greatly of among them, being a Member of their high Court of Justice,
was first traduced, then excommunicated, after this, complained of to the
Powers, by them, therefore deprived of his civil Employ; and though they were
his Debtors, both for Money lent, and his Services done them (if we may credit
his printed Narrative) the Priesthood so prevailed, that the Lord Mayor Andrews
sent a Warrant for him, had him brought rudely and violently to the Sessions at
the Old Bailey, and there placed among Thieves and Murderers, in Order to his
Trial for Blasphemy.

These were the meek and hearty Pretenders to, and Fighters for Liberty of
Conscience, that when they had the Power in their Hand, proved abundantly they
intended it only for themselves; not unlike to their great Geneva Doctor, that
made Servetus keep Company with his Books, or rather had him burnt by them (as
if it had been to save Wood) for Exceeding their Presbyterian Reformation, and
instead of repenting, defended it in Writing, when he had done, at what time
the said Doctor and that whole City were persecuted themselves with the
Anathama's of Rome; and it is not to be doubted, but they thought them
unchristian. It would fill a Volumn to tell the Tragical Excommunications and
other notable Feats done by some of this Tribe of Men, for the Maintenance of
their Church, Power and Dignity, often times saving the civil Magistrate the
Trouble of abusing such poor Dissenters from them, as we are, by a licentious
Usurpation and Practice of his Power upon their Backs: we well know it; yet has
this man the Confidence to fall hard on us for censuring such as recede from
what they once owned, and because we can never allow them as such, to be of us,
he cries out, Oh the Charity of the Quakers, the Quakers may see the Image of
the Beast among themselves, etc. But on better Grounds may every ingenuous
Reader return this Exclamation, Oh the Incharity of J. F. and his Adherents,
whose very Mercies are Cruelties. Let him pack up his Pipes, and play us no
more of these Envious and Hypocritical Notes, and hold himself contented, that
whether we be the Image or no, to be sure he has made Sydach Sympson and his
Church the Beast in great Letters, cum multis aliis, not forgetting nor
excluding his own railing and excommunicating self.

The Conclusion of the First Part.
WE have now run through his Nine Chapters, Seven of which concerned the
Scriptures, doubtless writ to vindicate his former Discourse; but with what
Success, I leave with Thee, Courteous Reader, to judge. And before I sum up our
Sense, for a Farewell to this Part of his Pamphlet, I request thee, when thou
next falls into Company with J. F. or any of that Tribe of Men (the pretended
Admirers of Scripture;) and one would almost think, the devoutest Observers of
those Precepts, and precisest Imitators of those Examples expressed therein) to
ask in good Earnest, Whether it be the whole, and every part of Scripture they
call the Word of God, and Rule of Faith and Life, or No? If they say, All and
every part of it, then the Words of Wicked Kings, False Prophets, Persecutors,
etc. yea, the Devil himself therein at large declared, with the whole Jewish
History, and Ceremenial and Judiacal Law (containing the Government,
Sacrifices, Priesthood, and all other Jewish Rights) will necessarily make up a
great part of the Word of God, and their Rule of Faith and Life. But if they
shall answer Negatively, that they are not in the whole and every part of them
the Word of God, and Rule of Faith and Life; Then ask them, Which are those
Places, Precents and Examples, that particularly concern us under this
Administration? And if they answer this Enquiry and are not grown too hot and
angry by this time, entreat them to tell thee, By what they discern and
distinguish in this weighty Matter? For if they either set aside what they
should receive, or continue what should be laid aside, they Add or Dminish to
what themselves acknowledge to be the Word of God: If they say, the Harmony of
Scriptures, the same Question holds, How, and by What does it appear so
Harmonous? since there are very deep and obscure places, and sometimes seeming
Contradictions, and that in highest Points. If they say, by the Spirit and
Understanding of mere Man; the Apostle Paul directly opposes himself to every
such answer, 1. Cor. 2. But if (thus driven) they answer in the Words of J.
Owen, That the only Public, Authentic and Infallible Interpreter of the Holy
Scripture is HE, who is the AUTHOR of them, from the Breathing of whose Spirit
it derives all its Verity, Perspicuity and Authority, Exerc. 2, 7, 9. against
the Quakers: Entreat their Patience to stand one Question more, and thou have
done, viz. If the Verity, Perspicuity and Authority of the Scriptures depend
upon the Breathing of the Holy Spirit; or as he expresses it a little further,
the Infusing a Spiritual Light into our Hearts; Then, Whether People ought not
to have recourse unto the Holy Spirit and Light, as the only Interpreter, Judge
and Rule, what Scripture remain of Force to our Day; and how, and which way
such Scripture is to be understood? When thou have obtained such sober Answers
as thy Questions deserve at their hands, I should be very glad to have the
Perusal of them. In the mean time we own, and with our whole Acts 1.
Hearts confess, First, That the Scriptures ( given forth by Inspiration) are a
true and faithful Narrative or Declaration of the Mind of God toward the Sons
and Daughters of Men, and his various Dealings with them, respecting Precepts,
Prophecies, Threatenings, Promises, Providence, Rewards, Punishments,
Deliverances, Doctrines, Examples and Practices.

Seconly, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
That they are Profitable for Reproof, Instruction, Edification and Comfort.

Thirdly, That it is the Spirit of God, which only gives Men to read,
understand and use them to Advantage, Job 23. 8
as Thomas Collier has well expressed it, 1. Cor. 2.
about Twenty Five Years ago, Ephesians. 1
viz. And truly Brethren, it is my earnest Desire, T. C Works, page 249.
to see Souls to live more in the Spirit, and less in the Letter; and then they
will see, THAT WE JUDGE OF THE LETTER BY THE SPIRIT, AND NOT OF THE SPIRIT BY
THE LETTER, which occasions so much Ignorance amongst us; And they who profess
themselves to be our TEACHERS, ARE CHIEF IN THIS TRESPASS.

Four ^hly, That the Holy Spirit is the New Covenant, Rule, and Judge; it being
the Promise of the Father, and Ministry and Dispensation of the latter Days, as
there Scriptures abundantly prove, Neh. 9. 19, 20. Job 32. 8. Isa. 59. 21. Joel
2. 28, 29. Hag. 2. 25. Mat. 16. 17. Jo. 14. 17, 18, 19. Chap. 16. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Romans 8. 1, 9, 14. 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Gal. 5. 16, 18. Ephesians. 1. 17. I. Jo. 2. 20, 27. Yet we deny not but the Lord has
and yet may make the Holy Scripture a Mean to several in the Hand of his
Spirit, of Understanding and Comfort; and so far they may be a particular Rule:
Yea, I do believe they have been, and yet are next to a Living and Powerful
Ministry, a more ordinary Mean, then many, if not any other whatever. Howbeit,
we are not to center here, but press on forward to the Life, Power and Spirit
it self, of which they declare; for into That God has determined to bring, and
(as it were) wind up his People, by which they come to be fulfilled; whereas
those that stick in the Letter of them, and pass not through ^^d beyond it,
into the Life and Virtue they bear record of, know but as the Scribes and
Pharisees did, and cannot as such be true and faithful Witnesses for the true
and living God.

Fifthly, We have proved our Doctrine of the Scriptures and the Holy Spirit (as
by us distinguished and cleared from J. F.'s Perversions) by abundance of such
Authorities, as, I think he dares not gainsay. So that we cannot be longer
Heretics and those continue Orthodox; showing thereby, that we are but
pressing more entirely, plainly and effectually what the best Protestants and
Separatists have at times, not only let drop from their Mouths and Pens, but
insisted on, and prophesied also the increase and Enlargement of in the hearts
of Men, however forgot or denied by their Dry and Degenerated Posterity.

Lastly, That we do not therefore exhort People to hearken unto the Voice and
Leadings of the Holy Spirit, which strive with them (as that by which God, who
is a Spirit, comes truly to be known, and the Scriptures themselves only to be
read with a right Understanding, and true Benefit) with any the least Design,
to justle the Scriptures out of their place and Authority ( No, God knows it is
not our Purpose) but for this very End do we so write and speak, that People
may come to possess what they declare of, and witness them fulfilled in
themselves, instead of contending about what they do not understand, I. John 1
and which can never be revealed to that dead, dark and unregenerate State in
which they live; for the Lord is at work (as I said before) to gather People
more and more into the Spirit and Life of his Son, accomplishing his Glorious
Promises in these latter Days, and bringing People to the good Things
themselves, by which Outsides are daily wearing off more and more, and the
Testimonies of Holy Scripture witnessed and fulfilled in them that believe:
Which is not to Overthrow, but to answer the great End of their first
Publication and Preservation unto this very Day; Whereas the contrary is not
truly to esteem them, but under the very vain Pretense of it, to withstand, and
as much as in them lies, to bar out the Great Gospel-Ministration, which
stands in the Convictions, Instructions, Leadings and Orderings of the Holy
Spirit: And unto that must all come, who in this Life would witness a
Translation into Christ's Kingdom, that is not of this World, and know a being
made free of that Jerusalem which comes down from above, the Mother of the
Freeborn, which they only are that have been born again by the Regenerating
Word; to whom the Formal and Literal Professors are but as Hagar, and her
Offspring unto Sarah and the Seed of the Promise. And this is the Word of the
God of Heaven and Earth unto all those that are yet unacquainted with this
Convincing, Baptizing, Reconciling, Ingrafting and Regenerating Word, Power or
Spirit within. And so I am thus far clear of your Blood, and am at Peace with
the God of my Salvation.

THE INVALIDITY OF John Faldo's Vindication Of his Book, called, Quakerism No
Christianity.
PART II.
CHAP. I.
of Gospel Ordinances in general, such truly embraced.

THis second Part of my Rejoinder is a Consideration of his Defense of his
Charge, of our Denying Gospel Ordinances, the True Christ, with his
Transactions at Jerusalem; also, that we are guilty of Idolatry, and own not
the Resurrection of the Dead. The Work of this Chapter will be to see, how he
will make good our Denial of Gospel Ordinances in general. Be pleased to hear
how he handles both me and the Matter.

Reply, page 49, 50. The first Proof is out of Fox Mist. p. 2. He has
triumphed over the Ordinances, and blotted them out, and they are not to be
touched, and the Saints ^ Christ in them, who is the End of outward Forms. This
says W. P. page 103. is Scripture Language. But why so? because some
Scripture-words are in it, although the Text be mangled, Corrupted and abused
to the Contradiction of Scripture-Truth. Thus they apply sinfulyenough False
Prophets, Dogs, Serpents, Hypocrites, Devil, Liar, etc. But if I should call W.
P. Thou Child of the Devil, Thou Enemy of all Righteousness, he would not
therefore allow it to be all very true, though so applied, it looks much more
like Truth then G. Fox's scriptural Language, who has these Words about
Baptism and the Lord's Supper.


Rejoinder. For his Proof as he calls it, it is not in page 52. of G. F's Book,
which were Answer enough to so shuffling an Adversary. I confess in page 16. I
find it, but it is so far from being immediately directed to either Baptism or
Supper, that there is no such thing mentioned, much lest insisted on from the
Beginning of G. F's Answer to J. Timson's Book, to the very place wherein the
Words are found: Now, what to call this piece of Invention, is sest with every
Readers Discretion: But it is not less worth our notice, that of all my
Explanation of G. F's Words, he only reports these three, viz. is Scripture
Language, who further told him Christ did blot out the Handwriting of
Ordinances, Collos. 2. 14. That he was to the Saints then, and is to those now,
who rightly believe in him, the End of all Meats, Drinks, Washing, Days, or
any other Temporal Elementary or Figurative Worship according to, verse 16, 17.
By this it will appear, whether of us two have most honestly and most truly
applied Scripture; I in thus expositing and vindicating G. F's Passage, or J.
Faldo in calling me (by Implication) a Child of the Devil, and an Enemy of all
Righteousness. But again.


Reply p. 50. I also told Mr. Penn, That if the Saints having Christ in them,
were the Consideration, of which the Ordinances were not to be touched, then
not only we, but even all other Saints under the Mosaical Administration sinned
in their Practices of God's Ordinances also; for they had Christ in them in
those Days in the same Sense as the Saints in these.


Rejoinder. This Saying carries with it a large Concession to Christ's
Manifestation in the Hearts of his People, as well under the Mosaical
Administration, as that which we call, for Distinction, Evangelical; Indeed
larger, then true, if by the same Sense, he understands, that all that he was
to his Apostles, and the Churches by them planted, he was to the People of
Israel under the Conduct of Moses; for first, it is manifest they were not
capable of such Discoveries, being weak-Sighted, carnal and greatly addicted to
embrace the Fopperies of the Heathen; Secondly, There would have been no need
of showing forth a further Glory by Types and Figures, or to entertain minds so
enlighted and Heavenly with such low, and as the Apostle phraseth them beggarly
things, had they enjoyed Christ under the Administration of Moses, as in more
Gospel Times. But above all, that J. Faldo should plead for the Continuance of
Ordinances after Christ had blotted them out, and such Meats and Drinks, etc.
as Christ ended, (being the Substance of them) because Christ might be in some
measure known to the Saints of old, at what time such Ordinances were given
forth, and such Meats and Drinks observed, is Jewish, and as I said in my
Answer, to plead for a Legal Dispensation and Bondage to the Shadows of the
good Things to come, thereby making Christ's Coming of none Effect. But to
proceed.


Reply. p. 50. Yet though P. give me bad Words to strengthen his Argument, he
grants what I say to be true in his Anger, for (says he) Christ is to the
Saints now, who rightly believe in him, the End of all Meats, Drinks, Washings,
Days; Here Lord's Supper, Baptism, Christian Sab^oth or Day of Holy Rest, are
all denied in FOUR Words.


Rejoinder. If they be, it is his own Fault; for instead of my granting what he
says to be true I never mentioned them; and indeed he has so manifestly,
given away his Cause by this unadvised Expression, as we need no more against
him on this Occasion: For those four Words by which he makes me to deny the
Lord's Supper, Baptism and the Christian Sabbath are such as we must reject, or
we turn the Gospel-Ministration out of Doors; They are the Apostle's own Words
to the the Collossians, To call any Day of the Week a Christian-Sabbath, is not
Christian but Jewish; give us one Scripture for it; I will give two against it.
Gal. 4. 9, 10, 11, 12. where the Apostle makes their Observation, or Preference
of Days to be no less then a Token of their Turning from the Gospel. Also Col.
2. 16. An outward Sabbath or keeping of a Day to be but a Shadow; and that
Christians ought not to be judged for rejecting such Customs; for this very
Reason the Protestant-Churches beyond the Seas generally deny the Morality of
the First Day, counting all Days alike in themselves, only they have Respect
to the First Day, as an Apostolical Custom, and think it convenient to give one
Day of Rest from Labor to Man and Beast each Week Of this Mind several Learned
Protestants of our own Country have declared themselves to be; So that neither
our English Episcopalians nor French Presbyterians can escape. John Faldo's
Consequence any more then the Quakers; for if those that deny the Supper,
Baptism, and the first day of the Week to be the Christian- Sabbath, deny
Gospel Ordinances, then those who deny the First Day of the Week (J. F's
Christian-Sabbath) to be the Christian-Sabbath, must needs deny a
Gospel Ordinances, but that does many English Episcopalians, and most French
Presbyterians, therefore both several English Episcopalians, and the
generallity of the French Presbyter and are Denyers of a Gospel-Ordinance.
Consequently J. F. told an Untruth in his Preface, when he assured both
Episcopalian and Presbyterian, that they were no further concerned in his
Discourse then vindicated. In short, Though we assert but one
Christian-Sabbath, and believe that to be the Everlasting Day of Rest from all
our own Works, to Worship and Enjoy God in the Newness of the Spirit; yet it is
well known, that we both meet upon the First Day in the Week, and behave our
selves with as In-offensive a Conversation, as any of our Sabbatherian
Adversaries. The Honor is God's, by whom we are what we are; but this
Testimony I record for God, His Gopel and Right-begotten Children, that the
Meats, Drinks, Washings and Days, observing Christians are not come so far, as
those foolish Galatians, for whom the Apostle traveled again, until Christ
were formed in them, Gal. 4. 19. being yet Stranger to the Life Power, Spirit
and the Substance of the Gospel.
(Col. 2. 16, 17.) Let No Man therefore Judge you in Meat or in Drink, or in
respect of an Holy Day, or of the Sabbath Days, which are a Shadow of things
to come, but the Body is of Christ; and to the Hebrews, Chap. 9. verse. 10.
which stood only in Meats, Drinks, and diverse Washings, and Carnal Ordinances,
imposed on them until the Time of Reformation. I say, here the four Words are
denied to be Evangelical, viz. Meats, Drinks, Washings, Days; and since J. F.
will have the Supper to be considered under Meats and Drinks, Baptism under
Washings, and the Christian- Sabbath under Days, either He must with us, Deny
them, as Meats, Drinks, Washings and Days, that are abolish, and therefore not
fit to be continued under the Evangelical Administration, or maintain the
Continuance of Meats, Drinks, Washings and Days to keep up the Supper, Baptism
and Sabbath, and thereby espouse the Jews Quarrel against the Christians, and
defend the most Rank, Childish and Carnal Part of Judaism against Christianity
it self.

My Reader may by this perceive what a Gospel it is John Faldo would have, who
pleads for the use of those things under the Gospel which are repugnant to the
Nature of it; for in one place the Apostle calls them Shadows, and in another,
such Figures as cold not make such as used them perfect, as pertaining to the
Conscience, Hebr. 9. 9. which the Gospel does not continue, but make an utter
End of, by the bringing in a more excellent Covenant, Hope and Service.

His saying I was Angry, and gave him bad Words, is like the rest: What shall I
say to a Man that dares say any thing, be it never so far from Truth, provided
it may cast an Odium upon me, where he cannot confute me? The Hardest Words I
gave were, that he basely wrested our Words; of which let the Reader judge: And
for Anger, God knows I had none; I pity him. But he goes on.


Reply, page 50. W. P. to make a full End, adds, or any other Elementary,
Temporary or Figurative Worship. Now if he can show us any Gospel Worship,
considered entirely and formally, that is not Temporal Worship, he will do more
then ever Man yet did; but in the mean time he has confirmed my Charge.


Rejoinder. I have confirmed it by the Rule of Contraries, or by the same
Figure our Friends Writings use to maintain his Accusations: Certainly J. F.
can never mean as he writes, and be knowing and Honest too. If to confute his
Charge be to establish it, I hope my Reader will say, I have done it
effectually; I know not whether to impute it to his Vanity or Lazyness; for at
every turn we must prove his Charges, give Evidence against our selves, and dye
by our own hands, while it is to be remembered, that amidst all this Folly J.
Faldo must have the Liberty of Tempering with his Witnesses, that is, Resting,
Patching, Adding, Diminishing, Transposing, Mis-interpreting our Words and
Meanings, or else he would be wholely at a Loss. Many Instances I have given of
his Skill herein; and his pretty sort of Wresting the Word Temporal in this
very Sentence does make up another; for I mean by Temporal, as the Words
Elementary and Figurative immediately following do fully explain, no other then
such a Worship, as is instituted for a set time, till something more excellent
and durable comes in the room of it, as the Typical Worship of the Jews, that
served its Season, and then gave place to the Spiritual and Eternal Worship of
the New and Everlasting Covenant: And this Man takes me, as if I understood it
of a Worship performed within time in any Sense, thereby making me to deny the
Performing of Worship to Almighty God the time Men live in the World, because
it may be called from the Word Time, or Tempus, Temporal, restraining that to
the Nature of Worship, which only relates to the Act of Worship; As thus, The
Act or Performance of Worship may be to day, the Nature of that Worship,
Eternal; so that Worship may be performed within Time, and yet not be by
Nature Temporal; But the Worship of the Jews, respecting those Exterior and
Shadowy Things, was by Nature Temporal.


Reply, page 50. VV. P's next Fault he finds, is with my saying, That Penington
meant by the City of Abomination, visible Worship. If the Worship which he
acknowledges God to be found in, and which Professors about the years, 43. 44,
45, 46, used were visible Worship, or any part of it Visible Worship, then
Penington said it of Visible Worship.


Rejoinder. A Fault so palpable, is soon found; Who not stark blind with Envy
would make so ill a Construction of so found an Expression? I. P. said, The
Lord would not spare such as do not come out of the City of Abomination, that
is, says J. Faldo, Visible Worship, as if they were Synonimous, or Terms of
equal Signification; City of Abomination, that is, Visible Worship; back again,
Visible Worship, that is, City of Abomination. Is this Man fit to write of
Religion that adventures so boldly to pervert Men's VVritings? But he thinks
this will excuse him, that I. P. meant such Worship as God was found in, and
which Professors used about 4. 3, 44, etc. but this is too boldly obtruded;
for, what Man can think I. P. so brutish, as to call that Worship, in which
Himself confesses God to be found, the City of Abomination? I. P. spoak of the
Nature of, and not the Visibility of Worship; for there is not a word of it in
his Writings, so that he endeavors to maintain one Falsehood by another. But
that his Charge is yet true against the Quakers, he produces a Testimony out
of G. F's Mist. page 65. Paul brought the Saints off from the Things that are
seen, and Water is seen, and its Baptism; adding, Now unless W. P. will say,
That Things seen are not visible, G. F. has certainly failed W. P. But this
Shift will not serve J. Faldo's turn, since G. F. meant a visible changeable,
and not a visible permanent Worship; This Passage relates to Figurative and
Temporary Services, standing in those things, which were but Signs of the
Substance to come, and which are finished by it: So that the Apostle did indeed
labor to bring the Jews and other weak Christians off from their Visible,
Typical or Legal, to the more Spiritual Worship of the Gospel; not that they
should be debarred from expressing that Worship; for while Bodies See Judas
and the Jews comb. again. Chri.
and Souls are together, there is (as I writ at large in my Answer) a Necessity
of some Bodily Demonstration. I will yet give one Relish more of the Man's
Disingenuous Spirit, before I conclude this Chapter.


Reply, page 50. Before W. P. parts from this Argument be grows kind, and shows
the Power of Condescension to have place in him ( by these words) Yet thus far
we could go, That Visible Worship (as such) without a due Regard to what kind
of Worship it may be, and what is the Root from whence it came, cannot be
well-pleasing to God; A great Compliance indeed, which is thus much just, and
no more, a man's filling a Dung-Cart, or W. P's acting on the Stage, or the
Table in their Meeting Place, as like a Fencer as ever was seen, are not
Worship because seen, though they should by some be so called; for every thing
that is seen is not therefore Worship.


Rejoinder. His Acknowledgment of my Condescension is a small Artifice to
insinuate my yielding him the Cause. But what Reason he had to commend me would
be better seen by considering how aptly and honestly he has replied to that
little piece of my Answer he found in his Heart to give us. He thinks to fling
us off with his dirty and vain Similitudes; I writ of Visible Worship, as
Praying, Speaking, etc. on a Religious Account, he turns it to any visible
thing, as Filling a Dung-Cart, Acting on a Stage or Table as a Fencer (Similes
right-well suiting his Disposition) as if I denied that to be Worship, which
was seen, because seen, which was the farthest thing from my Thoughts, and is
not at all deduceable from my Words, Yet has this Man the Confidence to tell
his Reader, that they signify just thus much, and no more.

But in good Conscience, Courteous Reader, can this Man think to escape the
Hands of God that acts with so much willful Baseness against me, as to make no
Difference between my saying, That visible Worship, as such, unless proceeding
from a Right Root, cannot be well-pleasing to God; and saying, That visible
Worship is not Worship because Visible, though it should proceed from never so
true a Ground, which he makes my Answer to speak, at least he infers so from
it, though ^ direct Contradiction? Is it one and the same thing to say,
Visible, Worship is not therefore true Worship, because Visible, and
concluding filling a Dung-Cart is not true Worship because Visible? is it
honestly done to ^pply that to Acting upon Stages and Fencing, which ^lly me
was joined to Worship? If I had said Visible Fencing, as such, is not Worship,
because seen, his ^y Shift might have had something in it; but to make
Difference betwixt saying, that Visible Prayer is (...) true Worship because
seen, and Fencing or filling Dung-Cart is not true Worship because seen
(thereby turning what I said of Worship, to every Trivial or Common Action
among Men) is unworthy of an Ingenuous Disputant, much more an Humble
Christian, and least of all a Christian-Minister. In short, I spoak against
Visible Worship, not Rightly Grounded (a Position as true as Scripture it
self; for it is Scripture twenty times over) and he twisteth it, to my Denial
of Worship because visible, be it grounded as it will, as his last words in
the Chapter tell us, For every thing) says he, as the sense of my Answer) that
is seen is not therefore Worship; instead of this Every Worship that is seen
is not therefore true Worship. But his extending the Major Proposition to
every visible Thing, and not to visible Worship only, opens a Gap for his wild
and extravagant Similes. I will lay down our Propositions, that the whole
World may see his Unjust Way of Dealing with us.

My Proposition lay in form thus.

That Visible Worship, which arises not from a Right Ground, is not acceptable
with God.

But John Faldo's Visible Worship (say) arises not from a Right Ground.
Therefore,

John Faldo's Visible Worship is not Acceptable with God.

The Argument, as he gives it in my Name, formed, lies thus.

That which is seen is not Worship.

But a man's filling a Dung-Cart, etc. is seen. Therefore,

Filling a Dung-Cart, etc. is not Worship.

Which Argument makes nothing Worship that is seen, or visible, however truly
grounded, because Visible, instead of making such Visible Worship not true,
which does not proceed from a right Root.

Now be pleased, Friendly Reader, to observe whither this Evasion drives the
Matter.

If that which is seen be not therefore Worship ( as says J. F. in my Name)
then public Praying or Preaching, though of never so True a Kind, or arising
from never so Right a Ground, because seen, is not Worship, much less True
Worship.

By this it undeniably appears, that my Adversary has at best mistaken my
Answer, which abundantly confesses (as he himself has observed in his Reply,
page 50.) That there will be, there must be, and there ought to be a Visible
Worship; and that such Visible Worship only is rejected, which arises not from
a Right Ground in the Heart: But how can this be, if public Praying and
Preaching, springing from never so spiritual a Root, because seen, must be no
Worship (which J. F. tells the World in my Name) How can these so grand
Opposites meet? Or, how is it possible to reconcile things as contrary as this;
William Penn owns Visible Worship: William Penn denies Visible Worship? For it
is no less then to make me renoun^e Visible Worship for Visibility's sake, who
by my Principle and See Judas and the Jews comb. against Christ, etc.
Writings hold and maintain such Visible Worship as is of a true Nature, or
springs from a good and spiritual Ground: So that it is not the Visibility, but
the Ground or Nature (not being as it should be) that is the Reason of our
Exception.

Dr. Everad's Sermons. Beloved, I would have you ponder these things well: If
ye set up Ordinances, etc. so as to build and rest in them, ye do make Idols of
them, or at best, you play the Babes and the Children with them, by resting
always on such Crutches and Go-bies, and never come to be Youngmen, much less
as Fathers in Christ, page 562. And truly, with some men herein lies the Top or
Quintescence of their Religion, making such ado about Shadows and Figures and
Resemblances, and they let the Truth, the Substance, the thing pass, and regard
it not; forasmuch as they are so zealous and hot about Forms. But if they are
by any drawn up to speak of the Substance, they are as men lost, cold and
heartless; which is a plain Evidence to me that they prefer the Shadow before
the Substance, being merely exercised about Childish things, and are not
willing to come up to the Truth, to the Excellencies and Glories, of what
Baptism and other Ordinances signify, etc. p. 560.

C. Goad's Last Testimony, p. 76. Ordinances are Vails, Man's Ministry is a
Vail, if we see God in it, it is but darkly.

C. Goad's secret and safe Chamber, p. 72. The Carnal Jew looks for the
fulfilling of the Letter, the spiritual Jew looks for the Spirit: Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob sought a Country, not an Earthly one, but an Heavenly: We pitch
upon Figures and Vails, and enter not within the Vail. These outward things are
a Vail, a Table made a Snare; but when we are turned to the Lord the Vail shall
be taken away. All Man's Teaching, Wisdom, etc. makes the Vail the thicker:
Those that only feed upon the Vail, upon outward Things, in which God may
appear, their Life shall be destroyed, when others are fed and feasted.

Joshuah Sprig, page 142, 143, 144, 147, 148. The Design is to cupple the Lord
and Ordinances together; and we cannot endure to hear of the parting of them.
Swear by the Lord, and swear by Malcham, so we have but Ordinances we are well;
something from the fleshly Form and Appearance we do promise our selves, and so
like the Israelites hanker after the Fleshpots of Egypt, though they had as
good Meat in the Wilderness: So though God offer himself, and Christians tell
you, they cannot find God in such Forms, but find him abundantly good in the
Spirit; and though he be gone out of the Temple, yet they find him in their
Hearts, they press you to wait till God appear to you in the Spirit; O, say
you, I can never believe it, that God should do it without an Ordinance. This
is to say, that the Fleshly Form does add something to God, who being all in
all, is sufficient without it -- You are like a Man that is kept up with
Cordials, not to be compared with him that is in a Way of Recovery, when you
want the Physician it is as much as your Life is worth; and the Cordial if it
be long a fetching you begin to faint; you have not your Strength within you,
but in Cordials without you; So is the Case between you that live upon
Ordinances, and they that live upon Christ in the Spirit; Christ is never in a
Journey, or to fetch a great Way off.

T. Colliar's Works. p. 46. The Christians Privileges under the Gospel they
are all spiritual, and so are their Ordinances.

T. Colliar's Works, p. 241. God was in Christ reconciling men to himself; yet
this Dispensation of the Father was but a fleshly Dispensation, comparatively
with a more spiritual, this fleshly Righteousness answering a fleshly
Transgression. Thus likewise has he given Ordinances answerable to this
fleshly Dispensation, wherein when he pleases he appears in and through these
Ordinances; yet note, that God never appears in any fleshly Dispensation to
keep them in the Flesh, but that through these he might bring up Souls to
himself in the Spirit.

Sprig's Testimony to the approaching Glory, p. 55. Ordinances are but the
Shadow as it were of the Image, therefore take heed of idolizing Forms: Your
Interest lies in knowing the Father, not in knowing of the Form whatsoever;
and take heed of censuring and judging spiritual Discoveries.


CHAP. II
Of true and false Ministry.

OUr Adversary endeavors to strengthen his general Charge considered in the
former Chapter, by proving our Denial of each Ordinance in particular. He
begins in his other Book with the Ministry; His Proofs, as he calls them, were
these, And their Call to the Ministry we deny which is Mediate, J. Parn.
Shield, p. 16. Also G. Fox in his Gr. Mist. p. 45. But who can witness an
Immediate Call from God, and speak as they are moved from the Holy Ghost, and
such travel from place to place, having no certain Dewlling Place; This
Ministry we own and witness.

Now, without reporting one Word of my Answer, he concludes his first
Paragraph, concerning J. Parnels Words, thus: Having this Charge confessed
there needs no further Debate. O disingenuous Man! What! Only repeat the
Charge, and the pretended Proof out of J. P. without inserting any Thing of my
Defense or Explanation, and then cry, having this Charge confessed there needs
no further Debate. Poor Brag! yet nimble and notable Way of contracting
Controversy indeed: what is this but saying the same thing over again. But as
a Man that has forgot himself in his next Section, he thus recollects.

Reply, p. 51. To my Proof of a Call by men, W. P. says nothing; but that he
may not seem to have nothing to say, he tells us It is not, Go ye forth into
all the World and preach the Gospel, that belongs unto all Men, no more then
because Princes send Ambassadors to Princes with their Credentials, that
therefore every Man ought to do the like in Imitation, without considering
necessary Qualifications (thus far W. P.) Did you ever meet with so ignorant
and impertinent an Answer? Did ever any of us take those Words for our only
Call? Or pretend, we had a Call thereby, to preach to all Nations?


Rejoinder. Why so much Contempt? I have hitherto thought that Christ's
Commission to his Apostles had been pretended by you to be a Successive
Commission; if neither the Spirit of God within, nor the Scriptures without,
give not that Call? what does? It had much more concerned J. F to declare what
he meant by his mediate Call, and not to ask, if ever any met with so ignorant
and impertinent an Answer. But let this suffice that he denies that any of them
pretended a Call or Authority from Christ's Commission to his Disciples to
preach, etc. Next, That be can only mean by a mediate Call, that of the People,
since he had excluded a Call by the Spirit within and the Scriptures without:
But because the Call of a People is neither that which qualifieth, nor
authorizeth any Man in himself without the Commission of God's Spirit in a
Man's self, it is the Commission immediately received from God's Spirit, and
proper Qualifications that make the Minister, and not the Desire of the People,
that is an Invention hatched in Babylon, whereby as well blind Pharisees as true
Disciples; base Hirelings as Godly Shepherds may be made Ministers. There is
this further lazy End in it, that being once called by any People, they think
themselves only obliged to reside there, where they may take their Ease,
unless, a fatter Benefice present it self, at which they have been always wont
to catch with Greediness, still with this Design, that they might live with
more worldly Peace and Fatness. This was one of those Doors by which the
Apostasy crept in; for the whole World God's Field or Vineyard, and such as he
calls to Labor, neither will nor ought to be limited by men, but alone, by
the good Husbandman, who has called them into his Vineyard. But he proceeds.


Reply, p. 52. Did we ever say, it belonged to all men to ordain Ministers, and
without considering Qualifications.


Rejoinder. Did I ever say you did? What Trifling is this? But did not J. F.
charge my Answer just now with Impertinence and Ignorance for making them to
ground their Call upon the Apostles Commission only, and does he not now make
me to accuse them with holding, That all Men may ordain Ministers? What
Agreement can there be in this? Especially when there are no such Words in my
Answer? But it shows the poor Man is hardly put to it: For his inferring that
not only it belongs to all Men to ordain Ministers, but also without
considering Qualifications, is utterly false; for J. Faldo, to his apparent
Overthrow, page 9. as I have observed in my Answer, p. 106. grants us in so
many Words, that all true Ministers of Christ ought to have an immediate Call,
such as consists in Grace and Gifts; and such (...) have not this immediate
Call, we account unworthy of the Thing and Name. Thus has he given away his
Cause, yet still he swaggers like a Conqueror: But may I ever be thus overcome?
for if this immediate Call constitutes both the THING and NAME then a mediate
Call (let him understand what he will by it) neither worthily gives Thing or
Name, else what means his reputing such as have not this immediate Call
unworthy of the Thing and Name; It is to say, if I understand any Thing, and
that in so many Words, Mediate Ministry and Ministers are unworthy of being
called Ministries and Ministers, because the immediate Call only makes worthy
of both Thing and Name.


Reply, p. ead. But W. P's Comparison exceeds, because Princes send Ambassadors
to Princes, That is, Gods send Ministers to Gods, therefore every Man ought to
do the like; a rare Similitude-Maker.


Rejoinder. A rare Similitude-Taker! Reader, I would not have diverted thy Eye
from the Controversy, but that he forces me to show, how much more like a
Vain Whiffter then a grave Divine he governs himself; I have hitherto learnt,
that Similes run not always upon four Feet; should they, what havoc might we
make in holy Scripture? Similes ought to be taken where the Similitude lies;
It had been but leaving out two Words, that is, to Princes, and he had lost his
quibble; for all sober Readers will discern, that the Force lay, upon private
Persons imitating Princes in sending out Ambassadors; that is, because Christ
sent forth his Disciples, and Princes their Ambassadors, therefore every Man
must turn Disciple and Ambassador, which we call acting without a Commission,
and which J. F has sufficiently rated us for; and what is worse, forged in our
Names, that without an immediate Commission we deny Obedience to all the
Commands in the Bible; but that we have already considered in our Chapter of
Commands.


Reply, p. 53. In VV. P's Answer his Passion so blinded him, that he tells me,
I therefore pretend to refute G. Fox, and therefore was impertinent, and that
the Words were Scripture Words; whereas I quoted J. Parnel for those Words, not
G. Fox. But for VV. P. to call them Scripture-VVords, which are neither in that
Order, nor so much as relating to such a Subject, much less to the same End in
any Place of the Scripture, is such an impertinent Whi^sie, as becomes one, who
is resolved to say something, no matter what.


Rejoinder. If any Passion I had, he was unfit to see that Mote in my Eye, who
discovers so great a Beam in his own. The Mistake was inconsiderable, for it
was not in any Alteration about Words or Matter, but the Person that should
write them, which so long as he was one that J. F. calls a Quaker, was
altogether as much to his Purpose. But I have this further to say, he led me
into that Mistake by putting G. Fox. Mys^. p. 45. right against J. P's Passage,
and so connected them without any Mark of Distinction, that he rather deserves
to be blamed for Negligence, then I to be reflected upon for Passion or
Blindness. But be it J. Parnel's Saying and not G. F's sure I am J. Faldo has
very untruely cited it. Thus it begins; But who can witness an Immediate Call
from God (leaving what follows in a differing Character quite out) from the
Outward Callings and Countries, Lands, Livings and Possessions, into several
Countries to preach the free Gospel as they have rece^^ed it by the immediate
Inspiration of the Spirit (now comes in another Piece of J. Faldo's citing) and
speaks it forth as they are moved from the Holy Ghost (here he lets fall again)
And as the Spirit gives them Utterance, freely, as they have received it
freely; by which Ministry many are convinced; and as they abide in it are
converted, as Many in the Nation can witness to the Honor and Glory of God,
who are now new Creatures; and this Call we own and witness, and this Ministry
we own and witness, which is immediate and stands in the Will of God; And such
covet no man's Silver nor Gold, neither could be hired to a certain Place (now
comes in another Piece of J. Faldo Citation) but travel from Place to Place and
have no certain Dwelling Place (here he drops again) and such are the true
Ministers of Jesus Christ, who make the Gospel free and without Charge (now
comes the last Parcel of his Citation) and this (Ministry) we own and witness.

This Reader was J. Parnel's Doctrine, which, if it be contrary to a
Gospel Ministry, there is no Gospel Ministry can be proved by Scripture; read
these Scriptures, Isa. 35. 2 Mark. 16. 25. Amos. 3. 7, 8. Amos 7. 14, 15. Gal.
1. 11, 12, 1 Cor 1. 17, 18, 19. Chap. 2. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 29.
Acts 2. 4. Acts 20. 33. I These. 9. 6. J. F. should have proceeded, and have
given us four Lines more of this young Man's Discourse; but as he left out what
bore most closely and hardly upon HIRELINGS before, so would it not have been
for the Interest of himself and his Brethren to have brought in this little of
a great deal that immediately follows, viz.

[ And for the Testimony of this true Ministry, some of us are imprisoned, some
stoned, some stocked, whipped and shamefully entreated as Vagabonds, and
D^luders, and Wanderers, and Raisers of Sedition, and pestilent Fellows, and
esteemed not worthy to live in the Nation, both by Priests, People and Rulers.]

A Shame to Independents that then ruled, and which is worse, the Guilt of the
Blood of this Innocent Man lies at the Door but of too many of them, about
Coxel and Colchester in Essex, who by their cruel Imprisonment (scarce to be
paralelled by any Story) brought this godly young Man to an untimely Death. I
need not tell you why, he has done it to my Hand; because, says he, we
declare against all who come not in by the Door, but seek to clime up another
Way by their Study, Inventions, and Sepentine Wisdom and Knowledge, and so are
Thieves and Robbers -- Such Ministers and their Ministry we deny; for the Hand
of the Lord is against them, etc. Great and true Words; No Man can minister
that which he has not; no Man can have those things which qualify him a true
Minister, but by the Inspiration of the Almighty, and the effectual Operation
of his Power and Spirit: God's Messengers were ever led, taught and furnished by
God's Spirit, not by human Invention and Acquisition, which Paul counted Dross
and Dung in Comparison of the Exc^llency of the Knowledge of his Lord Christ
Jesus, through the Revelation of the Eternal Spirit. But that J. Faldo may be
the better understood about the Ministry he pleads for, take, Reader, a Passage
he cites out of G. F's Book, called Gr. Mist. which doubtless he reputes very
hetrodox or he would never bring it to prove a Charge containing such Matter as
he counts so. Thou [the Priest] art corrected by the Scripture, and the Apostle
corrects thee, who said, I have not received it of Man, nor by Man, and bid
others look at Jesus, the author of their Faith; Their Writings, says J.
Faldo, are abounding with Matter of this Nature; So much the better say I; for
it is old Scripture Doctrine, and J. Faldo gives us plainly to infer by his
Dislike of this Passage, that he maintains a Ministry received of man and by
man, and that People ought to look unto them, and not to Jesus the Author of
their Faith. If this be one of J. F's Christian Ordinances, as his Discourse
evidently makes it, I hope, my Reader will the less wonder at those hard Names
he gives us in it; for the plain English of his Charge against us is this, The
Quakers deny the Ministry that is of man, or by man, therefore they deny the
Gospel Ministry. Poor Man! what a pass has he brought his Affairs to? Indeed I
pity him, and fear the Consequence of his Disappointment, since a Man of his
Stomach to charge so high and make so little of it, may with the Loss of his
Honesty for ought I know hazard his Wits too.

To wind up this Chapter and prove to all the World I have not mistaken him,
hear him.


Reply, p. 55. W. P. produces one of my Testimonies out of J. Parnel, yet but
by halfs, And here is the Difference of the Ministers of the World and the
Ministers of Christ -- The one of the Letter, the other of the Spirit. To which
he replies, Strange Impudence to call this a Proof; But I cannot help it, if P.
will say the Sun is Darkness: Before I part with him here, I will furnish my
Reader with that part of the same Testimony he treacherously leaves out; for
they are mere Deceivers, and Witches, bewitch People from the Truth, holding
forth the Shadow for the Substance; and what is the Chaff to the Wheat? Add
this to the other (as it was in my Book) and I dare trust my Reader that is
willing to speak Truth to pass his Censure; It follows in the same Author
before quoted: And so the Devil takes Scripture to mantain his Kingdom, and
this he delivers by the Mouth of his Ministers, which he sends abroad to
deceive the Nations leading People in Blindness.


Rejoinder. Let the Reader observe, that what he here pretends to quote out of
J. P. follows as himfelf said, what we have just before transcribed. Three
things contain my Rejoinder.

First, He reports not my Answer which was to this Purpose. It is a Proof
indeed, but against him; for if a false or worldly Ministry under the Form of
Godliness may not be, farewell Scripture; But if such a Thing will be allowed
us, then since the Letter or Scriptures are not by such rejected, but in Show
most highly admired, and that they pretend to collect all they believe or know
from thence (though indeed they understand them not) we have great Reason to
say, That those who are Ministers only from the Letter, with what they
imaginarily comment upon it, they are not Christ's Ministers, p. 110. Of which
and much more he has not given us a Word; how can he reply honestly, and
intelligible, who neither gives nor takes notice of the Answer he should reply
to. J. Parnel's Words plainly relate to a Ministry not gifted nor qualified by
the holy Ghost; and J. Faldo tells us in so many Words, that without it none
are worthy of the Name or Thing; Yet does he make it as unreasonable for me to
say J. Parnel's Words prove not our Denial of a Gospel Ministry (which so
obviously own it) as for him to assert the Sun is Darkness.

Secondly, I did not leave out that which he charge me to have done
Treacherously, the best Word he can afford me on the like Occasions; he must be
quite bereaved of his Senses, that thinks I should fear defending J. P. in
calling such Dec^ivers and Witches (as bewitching the People from the Truth)
who are made Ministers by the Will of man, without the Inspiration of the
Spirit, Gift of the Holy Ghost, Will of God, and are Coveters of men's Silver
or Gold, Preachers of their own Inventions, Persecutors, Revilers, stirring up
of the Magistrates to stone, stock, whip, imprison etc. all which J. P. gives
as the Character of the Ministry he writ against; for if this be the
Gospel Ministry, the Devil is a Saint: The Truth is, John Faldo's Book is
generally to be read backward.

Lastly, There is no such Passage of the false Ministry much less of the true
in page 15, 16, or 17. of J. Parnel's Shield, etc. as J. F. suggests; however I
believe the Devil uses sometimes Scripture, and that he has had and has many
Ministers whom he sends abroad to deceive the Nations, leading and keeping
People in Blindness, under a Pretense of Christianity and Conformity to the
Doctrine of the Scriptures, in order to maintain his Antichristian Kingdom,
all true Protestants were of that Mind; but J. F. is none of that number.
Doubtless the poor Man is brought to a low Ebb, that brings this to prove we
deny Gospel Ministry, which the honest Martyrs, primitive Reformers, and what
is more to our Purpose, the Scriptures themselves say again and again; The
contrary will unavoidably prove, the Ministry of the Church of Rome to have
been not Anti-christ's but Christ's true Ministers, since they both use
Scripture, preach Scripture, and call themselves the Ministers of the Gospel by
Apostolical Institution and Succession, In this disarmed Condition we leave him
and the Chapter, confessing to all the World, that such a Ministry as has
effectually known the Operation of the Spirit of God in themselves, as to those
things which concern Redemption and Eternal Salvation; and that he draws sorth
by his holy Spirit, indues with his Heavenly Power, for the turning of Men from
Darkness to Light, from the Power of Satan unto God, we own, honor and love,
and only deny and reject that Ministry which is by the Will, Study or
Acquisition of Man in his unregenerated State, who not being acquainted with
the Effectual Operation of the Word of God in themfelves, are wholly dark as to
those things which relate to the true Ministry, not knowing what they deny nor
whereof they affirm; which does not edify, but hazard the immortal Souls of
Men: And as they want the Inspiration of the Almighty, to instruct them, so
(being Strangers to the Work of God in themselves, and not waiting to feel an
Enduement with Divine Power from on high) there proceeds no spiritual Life or
divine Virtue from them, to make their Ministry effectual, which is the Cause
of that Lamentable Decay of holy Living that is in the World, and great
Increase of all manner of Unsavory and Irreligious Conversation. I will
conclude with two or three Testimonies given by men once in request with
Separatists.

Christopher Goad's Invalidity of Church's Censures, page 64, 65. It is the
Spirit that makes Ministers, and those Ministers that remain by the Spirit do
minister the Spirit, and that is ministering of the Gospel, when we miuister the
Spirit.

I am a Minister of the new Testament so far as the Spirit speaks in me and by
me.

In whomsoever the Spirit stands up and speaks, that Person for the Time is a
Minister, a true Minister. The Spirit does not regard Sexes, the Spirit regards
not Age, Learned or unlearned: It Is not Age nor Sex, nor any major Part can
minister Spirit, but whom the Spirit pleases.

Christopher Goad. Right Spir. etc. p. 21, 22. The Ministry that is calling us
off from Man, from the Gloworm Light of this Creation, from Man's Parts an
Gifts into the Spirit, that is the Ministry we should look after.

The Truth is, there is no true Prophet, no true Testimony given of Christ, but
by those that see him, and the nearer to him the clearer Sight of him, the more
clear and powerful is the Testimony given of him: That Testimony that is given
to him by those that do not see him present and come, is not in deed a
Testimony to Christ, but to Antichrist; he is such a Prophet as Balaam was,
that had nothing but Notion.

All true Prophets that prophesied of Christ saw him, and he was in them.

Christopher Goad's Paraphrase upon Act. 17. p. 18. We know no other Guide but
the Spirit: There is not any Minister in the World that is our Guide, or any
Company of Ministers, ^ut the Spirit, if he speaks in them and by them; We
have but one Master, that is Christ.

T. Collier in his Works, p. 47, 48. and p. 430. Upon that Scripture, Mal. 27.
The Pri^st's Lips should preserve Knowledge, and they should seek the Law at
his mouth; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Host. Now this usually is
applied to the Ministers, who have given themselves the Title of Priest's, and
that the People should seek the Knowledge at their Mouths, and indeed they
themselves have done what in them lies, not only to bring People into this
Error and Ignorance, but to keep them in it, whereas Christ is indeed the alone
Pri^st, the Substance of the Jews Type, and the People are to seek the Law at
his Mouth; but he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts; he is called the
Messenger of the Covenant, Mal 3. 1. the alone Prophet and Teacher of his
People.

The Spirit being lost, Antichrist sets the Wisdom of the Flesh ( human
Industry, Tongues and Arts) in room of it, it is the Anointing of Antichrist;
for in all things Antichrist seeks to imitate Christ, as well in the Flesh as
in the Spirit.

Again, The Saints are made partakers of the same Spirit the Apostles were.

W. Dell's Sermons, page 16, 17, 18. There is a Necessity of this Power of the
Holy Spirit for Ministers. For first, If they have not this Power of the Holy
Spirit, they have no Power at all; for Christ sent them only as his Father sent
him. Without this Power they are insufficient for the Ministry; for no Man is
sufficient for the Work of the Ministry by any natural Parts and Abilities of
his own -- but only by this Power of the Spirit; and till he be endued with
this, notwithstanding all his other Accomplishments, he is altogether
insufficient -- but only by the Power of the holy Spirit coming upon them.

He cannot speak the Word of God but by the Power of God.

Christ himself without this Power of God could not have spoke one Word of God.

W. Dell. Stumble Stone, p. 8. The Ministry of the new Testament is a common
Ministry, belonging equaly and the like to all the Seed of Christ.

W. Dell. Trial of Spirits, p. 17, 18. The true Prophets speaking the Word of
God by and in the Spirit, as Paul says of himself, and other Believes who had
received the Spirit, We have the mind of Christ; But the false Prophets, though
they speak the Word of the Letter exactly, and that to the very Original and
Curiosity of Criticisms, yet speaking it without the Spirit, they are false
Prophets before God and his True Church; seeing all right Prophecy has
proceeded from the Spirit in all Ages of the World; but especially it must so
proceed in the Days of the New Testament, wherein God has promised, the
largest Effusion of his Spirit.

Greenham, Sermon. 1. p. 51. Without this Spirit of God, no Holy Exercise can
have its full Effect; for the word works not where the Spirit of God is wanting
-- when we have not the Spirit of God to teach us, speak of the Law or the
Gospel, etc. we are little affected therewith, unless God give us of his good
Spirit to profit by the same.


CHAP. III.
That we own a Gospel Church, contrary to our Adversary's Charge.

THe next thing our Adversary charged us with a Denial of, is a Gospel Church;
one of his Proofs, as he will have them called, was in J. N's Love to the Lost,
page 17. And the Chruch so gathered into God is the Pillar and Ground of Truth,
where the Spirit alone is Teacher. Upon which he argued thus, The Gospel Church
is a Church which had other Teachers, and not the Spirit alone; Therefore the
Quakers deny a Gospel Church, and they contradict themselves; for they have
more Teachers then all others: Thus his first Book, page 16. To which I
returned, That such as are not blinded with Prejudice, may discern that from
our speaking of the Universal Church of God, which (says the Apostle as well
as the Quakers) is in God; he in^ers, That we deny all Visible Religious
Societies, commonly called by the Ancients, Asia, Thessalonica, Ephesus,
Corinth, etc. Now observe his Reply.

Reply, page 59. Not one word of this in all my Book; My Charge was, That they
deny a Gospel Church, not Visible Religious Societies.


Rejoinder. Confidently said; but if all the Words be not there, does it follow
the Matter they import is not there? If he does not mean, That we deny a
Visible Religious Society to be a Church, what makes him to infer our Denial of
a Gospel Church, from our asserting it to be Invisible. Two things must follow
from this Reply: Either a Gospel Church is not visible, and then he breaks his
own Neck; or not a Religious Society, and so he is impious: If then a
Gospel Church is a Visible Religious Society, and we deny a Gospel Church, it
must follow, that we deny a Visible Religious Society, which in John Faldo's
Opinion makes up a Gospel Church. To conclude, a Gospel Church and a Visible
Religious Society he makes to be quite differing things: But perhaps, he will
come off thus; I did not say, ye denied the visible religious Societies, called
the Churches of Asia, etc. but that you deny them, or such as they are to be
Churches: But neither will this serve his turn; for we both own them to have
been Gospel-Churches, and are taught by J. F. to believe, That a Gospel Church
is not only not invisible but an other Thing then a visible religious Society
too; It is worth our while to, hear his Reason for it.


Reply, p. 59. Religious Societies may be as far from a Gospel Church, as half
a dozen Christian Friends associated together to eat a good Dinner, or carry on
a Trade; yet he dirts me with want of Honesty to grace his Forgery.


Rejoinder. He might as well have said to the Alehouse or Tavern, whether he
invited a Friend of ours after disputing with him, doubtless not out of Love to
our Friend, but the good Liquor, a Sort of Liberty once counted Scandalous by
many of his Pretensions, especially when just after so serious an Exercise; but
it is grown familiar with Men of his Coat, to fall from the Bible to the Pot,
and so back again. But, Friendly Reader, what say thou of this Man's Evasion?
Who will have me to mean by visible religious Societies, visible civil
Societies; for such I count good Men at an Ordinary, or a Committee of Trade;
Vain and Shallow Man! Did I not give Intimation enough what Religious Societies
I meant, when I instanced the Churches of Asia, Thessalonica, etc. to explain
what I meant thereby? Whether I did play the Forger, or my Adversary the
Dishonest Shifter, Let the Impartial Reader judge. Again,


Reply. W. P. proceeds, p. 113. in the same Evil, And from our asserting the
Spirit to be the only Gospel-Teacher, he concludes that we deny all Preaching
of men though by the Spirit; the four last Words though by the Spirit are added
by him, and merely forged.


Rejoinder. They may be added, but not forged; One would think it is only then,
when without the holy Ghost that we deny it by his Words, and that hurts us
not; but I take it the other way, and the Truth is, it is a Mistake he commits
against us, wherever the like Subjects fall in his Way; for this implies, as
if we denied Preaching by Inspiration, and that he all along had mantained it:
A Doctrine, he ever now and then flings in our Dish, scorns and derides: Thus
can this Man's Conscience sail by any Wind to gain the Shore; and after all
these Shuffles dares to conclude, That we in Terminis deny all Preachings of
men, because G. F. said, cease from man, when there is nothing more palpable,
then that G. F. meant man considered in his own mere Ability; that is, from
such as the Prophet forbid, not from true Prophets; but our Adversary the
Preachings of Men, though by the Spirit of God; for how can he make us to
contradict our selves in saying, man is the Spirits Instrument (which he
understands to be the Preaching of Men by the Spirit) if he does not make us
deny all Preaching though by the Spirit. In short, I hope my Reader will think
it no Forgery, whatever my Adversary may, (who ever and anon would hide his own
weakness by hard word flung upon me to amuse the credulous Reader) to say that
from our Asserting, The Spirit to be the only Gospel-Teacher of all who
believe, he concludes, That we deny all Preaching of Men, though by the Spirit;
else there would be no sense in his charging us with a Contradiction, because
we say, The Spirit is the only Teacher, and yet that the Spirit teaches by
Men, if he did not understand our Ceasing from Men, or Denying Man's Ministry,
to be our Denial of Man's Preaching by the holy Spirit. But he will not give
over yet: These words, The Spirit the only Teacher, he often flings up as words
indigestible by his foul and phlegmatic Stomach; for upon my saying, That such
as preach by the Holy Spirit are rather the Instrument then the Teacher, or Man
is that by which the Spirit conveyeth his Teaching unto others, he replies thus.


Reply, page 58. So that after W. P's own strict Account he allows their
Practices, viz. Preaching of Men, to give the Lie every Day to their Tenets.


Rejoinder. If Preachings of Men by the Spirit be the Preachings of Men, such
Preachings we shall always allow, and think it no Lie or Contradiction to our
Tenets; But if he that dictates a Letter of Intelligence be the Informer, and
not the Scribe, the Holy Spirit must be the Teacher, and Man but the
Instrument. True Teachings are not only Words, but Matter, and that accompanied
with Divine Power, which flow from the Eternal Spirit; Men give them but the
simple Covering of Expression, and that by the Spirit's appointment; therefore
not so properly the Teachings of Men by the Holy Spirit, as the Teachings of
the Holy Spirit by and through Men; consequently not Man's Teachings, but the
Spirit's.

Again, Because we charge him with bringing in ot her Teachers then the Holy
Spirit, contrary to express Scripture, the Promise of God, and the very End of
the Blessed Gospel, he replies.


Reply, page 58, 59. Can you think this Man worth Disputing with, who rambles
and talks he cares not how? If what P. said be true, the Exhortations to do the
Work of an Evangelist, feed the Flock over which the Holy Ghost had made them
Overseers, were not intended of Man's Teaching; but the Spirit of God only
exhorted the Spirit of God to these Actions, and Man had not, has not any
Agency in Teaching.


Rejoinder. But did we ever say, Man had no Share in being taught, whatever we
have said against the utmost of man's natural Ability, considered separately
from God's Spirit about his Teaching? We never yet said, That Man was not to be
taught: Is there no Difference betwixt Men's Teaching without God's Spirit, and
Men's being taught of God's Spirit? At whose Door then should we lay this
Absurdity, The Spirit of God exhorted the Spirit of God? What an Idle Non
sequitur is this?

Nor do we deny all Agency in Man, when managed by the Holy Ghost; A Man might
as well argue (following J. Faldo's Steps) against the Apostle Paul, when he
said, It is no more I that live, but Christ in me, that is, The Apostle had no
Life in him in any sense; Would this be good Doctrine? But more openly do the
Words of Christ lay to the Exception of such Cavillers, It Is not I that speak,
but the Father in me; Again, John 14. 10.
It is not you that speak, but the Holy Ghost in you; For, after J. Faldo's
Parapharase, Mat. 10. 20.
we must either deny that Christ or his Apostles spoak those words, or confess
that they contradicted themselves in saying, they did not speak when they did;
or lastly, He must acknowledge to us, That such Teachings and Speakings are not
the Teachings and Speakings of Men, but of God by and through Men. Let him
first see if he can reconcile himself to these Scripture-Passages so pertinent
to our Purpose, and leave off his silly Shifts, as easily confuted as
discovered.

Upon my saying, That we do believe, that there is One, and but One Universal
Church, the Ground and Pillar of Truth, and that is in God, and that the
Members of it are washed in the Blood of the Lamb, and grafted into the True
Vine, bringing forth Fruit unto Holiness, p. 113. he thus replies (and I
beseech my Reader to consider it.)


Reply, p. 59. If he own no other Church but this, which is the Character of
the invisible Church, he owns not a GospelChurch, whose Order and Frame is
according to the Doctrine of the Apostles and Practice of the Saints in the
New Testament.


Rejoinder. We are beholden to him for this; May we ever meet with such kind
Adversaries! It seems then my Definition has nothing to do with the
Gospel Church What is it but to say, that the Gospel-Chruch is not the Pillar
of Truth, The Gospel-Chruch is not washed in the Blood of the Lamb, The
Gospel-Chruch is not grafted into the true Vine; and that Men may be in the
Truth, washed in the Blood of the Lamb, grafted into the true Vine, and bring
forth Fruit unto Holiness, and yet no ways concered in the Gospel Church; in
short the Gospel Church is not the Universal Church, nor the invisible Church a
Gospel Church; and what is his Reason, if any there can be, for all this
pernicious and Antichristian Doctrine? Because a Gospel Church is one whose
Order and Frame is according to the Doctrine of the Apostle and Practice of the
Saints. Worse and worse it seems then in J. F's Sense, that the Order and Frame
the Doctrine of the Apostles brought the Church of Christ to, and the Practice
of the Saints in the New Testament, had nothing to do with the Pillar of Truth,
dwelling in God, being washed in the Blood of the Lamb, grafted in the true
Vine, and bringing forth Fruit unto Holiness. What Sort of impious Gibberish is
this? For according to his Notion of the Gospel Church, the most Satanical Crew
may as well be of that Church as the best of Christians; since the External
Order (at most but the Form of Godliness) was and is imitable and imitated by
arrant Hypocrites.

By this Argument Elias and the Seven Hundred, who had not bowed their Knees to
Baal (so invisible as Elias himself knew not of them) were Sch^s;maticks or
Infidels to the then Jewish Church, being without all Visible Church, Policy or
Order; and the Jews that had it, though Apostatized must have been God's Legal
Church. It will also follow, that for above 1200 Years together, since Christ's
time there has been no Gospel Church, yet Gospellers, as their Enemies have
called them, which were to grant to the Roman Catholics all they Desire. What
was that Church that fled into the Wilderness? It must either be the
Gospel Church, or not the Gospel Church; If not the Gospel Church, then not the
Christian, and consequently the Antichristian-Church; But that could not be,
because she fled from Antichrist: If the Gospel Church, then may a Church be
Gospel without punctuallity in visible Order; for it is notorious by all Story,
the Remnant of the Woman's Seed, who have born a faithful Testimony against the
Spirit of Antichrist in their Sackcloth and Wilderness Estate, have been
destitute of that Visible Order. Indeed I hitherto thought, that a
Gospel Church constituted necessary external Order, and not that mere external
Order constitutes the Church Gospel or Evangelical; But John Faldo says No,
who seems not to scruple at the Word Church, but to play upon the Word Gospel,
as if external Order and Gospel were synonimous, or of equal force; whereas the
Gospel is called in Scripture The Power of God to Salvation, from that
Spiritual Redemption it efficatiously works in them that receive it, from the
Bondage of Corruption, under which they have fruitlesly labored; which is the
Reason, and a good one too, why it signifies Glad-Tidings; since nothing can
be more Joyous to a weary and heavy-loaden Sinner, then to be eased of his
former Iniquities, by Remission, and purged from the Nature and Habits of it
out of the Soul, by the Operation of this Heavenly and Everlasting Gospel;
which worthy Christopher Goad (Right Spirit of Christ, page 17.) calls, the
forming or bringing forth of Christ in us. What is all our Adversary has said,
but to make Remedies against, or Condescension to the Weakness of the Church's
Infancy, as says honest W. Tindal in his Works, p. 9. 436, 438. the only great
Constitutes of a Gospel Church? By which he denies a Gospel Church to have been
antecedent to that External Order, and consequently that the Believers were not
a Gospel Church, when met together on the Day of Penticost, not long after:
since the Gospel had been many years preached, Multitudes converted, and many
baptized by the One Spirit into the One Body of true Gospel-Fellowship, before
ever those Epistles were written by the Apostle Paul either to the Church at
Corinth, or to Timothy, in which only External Order is mentioned: Nay, at this
rate, he has Unchurched every Party in England but one, if yet one may be
excepted; for if External Order only constitutes a Gospel Church, every Party
in England differing greatly in their External Order, it must follow, that none
but one, if any one, can have any just Pretense to a Complete Gospel Church,
consequently Mungrils. He still forgets what he promised, that None of them
were further concerned against the Quakers then Vindicated. Howbeit, herein
they may hold him excused, that he has equally unchurched Himself and these he
preaches to in Company, with all other Parties in England being out of that
Order.

But I entreat the Reader to consider, what a Monster he has made of Christ,
who describes him with two such Bodies to one Head, one Invisible, the other
Visible; one washed in the Blood of the Lamb, grafted into the true Vine,
bringing forth Fruit unto Holiness, Qualifications hid from the Eye of the
World, as worthy John Bradford told T. Weston, as in B. Martyr, p. 104, 312.
That the Church of Christ is Invisible to him that has not a Spiritual Eye;
The other constituted of People, no matter (how Unregenerated if) submitted to
an Eternal Structure of Order and Discipline; A Cover for all the Wolves,
Antichrist's and Hypocrites, that have been, are, or shall be to the End of the
World. In short, No Position can be more destructive to the Power of Godliness,
the Fellowship of the True Church that lives in God, and Pernicious to the
Souls of Men, by securing them in their Fancied Relation to a Gospel Church,
whilst in an Un-gospel Spirit, estranged from the Power of the true Gospel, and
unacquainted with the Congregation of the Faithful, who through Faith overcome
the World, and know a Washing in the Blood of the Lamb, and a being grafted
into the true Vine, and made to drink into the one Spirit, bringing forth
Fruits unto Holiness. To conclued, After this sort of Doctrine Men may be
Members of a Gospel Church, and not of the True Church; Members of a
Gospel Church, and not good Christians, no, nor good Men it self. Indeed such a
Pastor as our Adversary fuits such a Church, and such a Church exactly sits
such a Pastor; from whom God deliver me and all People, and them from
themselves, I mean the Power and Prevalency of that Pernicious Doctrine and
Spirit that now infects them. He proceeds, however with what success we shall
see.


Reply p. 59, 60. To this of their Invisible Church, I told W. P of their
Officers very suitable to a conceited nothing. Fox Mist. p. 2. The Holy Ghost
made the Officers of the Church Overseers; The Overseers to be Invisible, for
they saw with an Invisible Eye, and so were in the Spirit, which is Invisible,
and not in the Flesh. But W. Perm meddled not with this, which I dare say (as
much as he has of the Quakers Spirit) he cannot tell the Meaning of himself.


Rejoinder. I had no Reas^n to meddle with what I could not, no^ cannot yet
find; I entreat my Reader to consider the Unreasonableness of his Taunts; In
his first Book he (...) me to page 8. where no such thing was to be (...), yet
did I not place it to the Account of his Tr^^chery, the best Construction he
can make of any Innocent Omission on my part; In his Reply he sends me to page
2. and there I am as wise as I was before, no such Words or Matter appearing:
What shall I say of such an Adversary? Was I then to be blamed for not m^ddling
with what was not to be found? Or deserve I (...) better Terms at his Hands,
who made no hard use of it in my Answer? Or Lastly; Is he not worthy of double
Blame, that adds to his first Mistake a second, and then abuses me, as if on
purpose I had avoided the Di^^ of an Authentic Testimony, hitherto not
produced? But suppose G. F. has ever written any such (...) doubtless by
Invisible Overseers he only mean^, Spiritual, not Carnal-minded Men, who by
the (...), which the True God has opened, might watch over the Flock, as to
their inward and spiritual Conditions: This the following words make good, for
they saw with an invisible Eye, and so were in the Spirit, which is invisible,
and not in the Flesh. In short, They were not mere outward Officers, exercising
an Outward Rule and Dominion about outward Things, but Men qualified by the
Holy Ghost, with an inward Discerning to Over-see the Spiritual State of the
Church; not that their Persons were invisible, or their Actions toward the
Church, but that Heavenly Faculty given them of the Holy Spirit, which rendered
them Overseers, or Men able to see or discern the State and Condition of the
Church, was of an Invisible Nature.

He fell very foul upon us in his first Book, because of a Dutch-Woman's
speaking in one of our Meetings in her own Tongue; charging upon us, That we
did orderly, according to the Popish Mass, which was to Pray in an Unknown
Tongue. To which I made a large, and I hope, sufficient Answer, of which he
reports but these two or three Parcels, First, That I called it a Disinge^^ous
Reflection; Next, That we do not affect such Ob^curity; Lastly, The Divine
Light, Power or Spirit in^ardly manifested, is the one Tongue to the Children
of Light. This he calls Foolish, Antiscriptural, Ridicu^us; But if it be so, I
owe it to him alone, who has ^ade so Foolish and False a Citation of my Words;
^owbeit, he says nothing to what he has cited, his (...) Words set aside. His
Reflection was Disinge^ous, because such a Practice is not common or usual ^ith
us; Nay, that was accidental: Therefore to ^arge it upon us as conformable to
the Orderliness of the Popish Mass, as if it were a Principle with us to teach,
as with Romanists to pray in an Unknown Tongue, was more then Disingenuous; for
it was False and Malicious, being thrown out by him on purpose to infame and
disgrace us.

That we do not affect such Obscurity I affirmed, and our Practice evidenceth
it, being rather jeered for our too much Rusticity and Plainness, and our
frequent decrying of Dark, School-Phrases, and turning Rhetoric, by which
great Writers wrap up their Matter from the Understanding of the Vulgar. That
the Divine Light, Power or Spirit inwardly manifested are none of my words; I
will report my Answer, both more largly and truly, and leave it with the
Conscience of my Reader, thus.

The single Power of the Almighty may both strike Astonishment and give
Refreshment where the Words utterred are not always understood; since he
frequently does both without them: Understanding and Inward Sense are two
Things; for the Devil may speak the best Words in the Bible, and be an
Undiscovered Devil still, except by this Divine Light, Power and Spirit he be
inwardly manifested, consequently a right Sense may be had, where Words may not
be understood, which [Sense] is the one Tongue to the Children of Light; yet we
do not only decry all designed Obscurity, by Praying and Preaching in Unknown
Languages, but with the Apostle say, That we choose rather by far to speak in a
Known Tongue, as well as have the Sense of our Spirits: Nor did ever any Quaker
yet pretend to be moved to pray in an Unknown Language whilst he was Master of
that which was well known to the People. Since then we do not affect obscurity,
the Case of the Papists (who pray in Latin rather then in their Native or
Vulgar Tongue) he is very Disingenuous in that Reflection.

But in Reply to all this he only gives us thus much.


Reply, page 60. Sure I am, that the Spirit of God, by whom the Apostle Paul
was directed, is not the Quakers Spirit, nor its Doctrine the same with theirs
in the same Case: I shall be to him that speaks a Barbarian, and he that
speaks shall be a Barbarian to me, I Cor. 14. 11.


Rejoinder. I would fain know by what Means J. Faldo has that Discerning
between the Spirit of the Apostle, and the Spirit of the Quakers. Is it because
the Dutch-Woman spoak in an English Meeting: Do we Hold, Teach or Practice any
such Thing? Besides, the Apostle tells us, That though an Unknown Tongue might
render him as a Barbarian to him that understands him not, will it therefore
follow, that he was a Barbarian, or that he had not the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in him? By no means; for he might speak Mysteries in the Spirit, as
says the Apostle, verse. 2. Men may also pray in the Spirit in an Unknown
Tongue, verse. 14. A Man may Bless, Praise and give Thanks to God in an Unknown
Tongue, verse. 14, 15, 16, 17. Nay, the Apostle says of such a one, Verily thou
give Thanks well. Now, how all this can be, and yet that such a Person should
be acted by another Spirit then the Spirit of God and the Apostle, for my own
part I cannot see. In short, The Apostle tells us, That Tongues are for them
that believe not, verse 22. But our Friend spoak among them that believed; and
though they did not all know what her bare words imported, yet they might be
and were sensible of the Divine Power in which she spoak, which gave a general
Refreshment unto them of that Assembly, that were acquainted with it; otherwise
all Fellowship in Spirit must be renounced: But it is to be any thing J. F's
Froth will have it, because its unknown to his thick and carnal Understanding.
However, the want of a Known Tongue may render one less Profitable, but not
less a Christian; for a time should come, the same Apostle said, that Tongues
should cease, but never that Christianity, or having the Spirit of Christ
should cease; Therefore to re^ute all that cannot speak in a Known Tongue
Antichristian, or of another Spirit then the Spirit of God and his Apostle, is
unworthy of any Man that makes any the least Pretense to the
Christian-Religion, indeed to common Sense.

One Passage more then we conclude this Chapter.


Reply, p. 60. To my Reflection upon their affirming she spoke by the Spirit,
because they all found Re^reshings, viz. so have Children many a time of
Puppet-Plays, W. P. calls me all to naught, especially because I could not (as
he says) but think it meant by Refreshings, what came from God. But let not
Penn think we take our selves bound to reverence such Fooleries.


Rejoinder. That it was a Reflection he confesses; whether it were not an
Unseemly one I refer to every Man of Conscience. I did not intend to obliege J.
Faldo to believe what we say, but reprove his profane Scoffs at what we
believe. I would have so much regard to any People seriously professing
Religion, as not to explain what they mean by their Refreshment, by the
Pleasure some irreligious People take at the vain and frothy Sport of
Puppet-Play; And the worst Word I gave him and his Comparison, was Profaneness,
further adding, that it out-did Ben. Johnson's Alchimist (a Play made in Scorn
of Puritans) which all good Men detest, and himself dying abhorred.

But why may not People be refresht in their Souls from that divine Power,
which may attend a Person speaking in a Language unknown? Suppose a Godly
Assembly of English People and an English Preacher endued with God's holy
Spirit, and there happen into such a Congregation some serious Foreigners of
the same Judgment, is it absurd to say, That notwithstanding their Ignorance of
the Signification of the Words spoken, they may have an inward and spiritual
Sense of the Zeal, Power and Spirit that eminently attends the Preacher* if it
be, how much more ridiculous is it then for People to say, It glad^ed their
Hearts to see such a Godly Countenance, or to hear the Voice or Sound of this
or the other good Man, though they had no distinct Understanding of his Words?
I am in this Case a more allowable Witness then J. Faldo, who have seen Sinners
struck, the Weak strengthened, and the Strong confirmed at the hearing of the
Truth of God declared in a Language they could not understand; The divine Power
and Virtue went forth, and they were judged, comforted or confirmed in
themselves, and they no Fools (though J. Faldo calls such things Fooleries and
Pupppet-Playes) To deny this is to overthrow Spiritual Fellowship in the Ground
of it; and to center in this Atheistical Notion, That all our Knowledge of God
comes in by our carnal Eyes and Ears; that is, What others have written, and
what others have told me, that I believe, and therefore I believe, and not from
the Testimony of this Infallible Spirit of God in my self; which Credulity
renders him more like Rome in that, wherein she is condemnable, then any thing
he can truly suggest of us; but this gross Doctrine being so obviously taught
by our Adversary in his first Book, second Part, p. 91. we have the less Reason
to wonder that Fooleries and Puppet-Playes are the best Words he can bestow
upon the divine Consolation, Refreshment and Communion of the holy Spirit
within Men.

We will add these Testimonies, as the Conclusion of this Chapter.

W. Tindal in his Works, p. 250. Church, the Elect, in whose Hearts God has
written his Law with his Holy Spirit, and given them a feeling Faith of the
Mercy that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

D. Barns's Works, p. 244. The Holy Church of Christ is nothing else but that
Congregation that is sanctified in Spirit, redeemed with Christ's Blood, and
sticks fast and sure, alonely to the Promises that he made therein.

So that the Church is a Spiritual Thing, and no exterior Thing, but invisible
from Carnal Eyes (I say, not that they be invisible that be of the Church, but
that holy Church in her self is invisible) as Faith is; and her Pureness and
Cleanness is before Christ only, and not before the World; for the World has
no Judgment nor Knowledge of her, but all her Honor and Cleanness is before
Christ sure and fast.

Peter Martyr, fourth part of Common Places, cap. 1 page 1. The Name of a
Church is derived of the Greek verse (...), that is, to call; for none can be
Partakers thereof, which come not thereunto by the Calling of God. And to
define it, we say, that it is a Company of Believers and regenerate Persons,
whom God gathers together in Christ by the Word and the Holy Ghost -- It is
every where called the Body of Christ, because all the Members thereof have him
for their Head, of whom by the Joints and Sinnews they take their growing, and
attain unto Life by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

Christoph. Goad, p. 37. It Is a sad thing that there are Churches -- that think
it is enough there is a Form of Godliness, that we are in Church Fellowship,
and so lie down together and sleep; I have no Quarrel with Churches, or any
Form, but such as have not the Spirit in them; here are all asleep, asleep in
Death.

T. Collier's Works, p. 42. The Church of Christ under the Gospel are the
Spiritual Seed, the Seed according to the Promise.

T. Collier, p. 102. The Church, which is Christ's Kingdom, are a People (
Saints chosen) called out of the World; they are not of this World, as he is
not of this World.

W. Dell's Sermons, p. 152, 156, 186. The Church is a Spiritual Invisible
Fellowship, gathered together in the Unity of the Faith, Hope and Love.

Christ and the Spirit are the only Officers.


CHAP. IV.
His Charge of our Denying to Hear the Word of God, examined: True Preaching
acknowledged.

HE has maintained this Charge against our Answer with the same sort of Jeers
and Flourish (but manifest insuccess too) that he has done what went before.
His words are these.

Reply, page 61. Concerning denying the Ordinance of hearing the Word preached,
to my Proof from G. F. We must not hear Man, etc. W. P. says, That is so far
from making against us, that it makes for us at an high rate. Much like the
Madman of Athens, who called all the Ships that came into the Port his own,
while he was for all that, but a poor Threadbare Gentleman. I proved, that
they asserted the Light to be only preached, to be the only Preacher, and only
^eached to; yea, and the only Obeyer.


Rejoinder. If this be done, Erit hic mihi magnus Apollo; If to cease from Man
be not false Doctrine, then not to hear Man is no false Doctrine; for Man is
taken in the same sense in both places; For as God never intended by ceasing
from Man, that they should not regard his Prophets, who were Men, when they
came to declare his Will; so neither did G. F. intend that Man ought not to be
heard when he comes on God's Errant or Message in the Name of the Lord, but
mere Man, Man in his Natural Capacity and Ability without the Holy Spirit and
Power of God, which is but a carnal, humane and worldly Ministry.

To say we only preach the Light is no more then to report, The Quakers preach
Christ; for our Doctrine directs People to the Knocks of Christ, the true
Light, at the Door of the Soul, who is the Savior, Redeemer and Preserver of
them that believe in him, and keep his Commandments. But that we ever said,
That it was only preached to; yea, and the only Obeyer of such Preaching, is as
false as any Thing that can be said. He tells us he proved it; I will give the
strongest Passage he brought, J. Parn. Shield, etc. Epist. To the Light of God
in all your Consciences I speak: Very well; and what then? Is the Light
therefore preached to, taught or instructed, when he only appealed to the Light
in all their Consciences, concerning the Truth of what he said, as the Apostle
did? To the Light I speak, that is, To the Light I direct my self, To that I
make my Appeal, if what I write be not true? for what soever is reproveable is
made manifest by it, Ephesians. 5. 13. This Construction is Natural, Our
Adversary's forced; for nothing is more common with us in General, and that
Author in particular, then to turn People to the Light, pressing their
Conformity to the Reproofs and Instructions of it, always respecting it as
given us of God to be our true, certain and constant Teacher, and always have
we been reproacht by such as J. Faldo for doing so. But above all, that this
Passage should be brought to prove the Light is the Obeyer of such Doctrines
and Instructions, who is the Author of them, is an Absurdity that reflects
great Ignorance, or something worse upon our Adversary.

We have already declared our Faith so freely and plainly in this Matter,
besides the Testimony of our daily Practice, that we need say no more then
this: A true Living Gospel Ministry we own; and the Service and Benefit of such
a one we have enjoyed; and beautiful are their Feet who come in the Power and
Demonstration of the Spirit, that open the blind Eye, turn People from Darkness
to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, Act. 26. 18. that He may be
their Instructor according to that Promise, They shall be all taught of Me,
which is the chiefest End of all External Instrumental Ministry. To prove our
Sense of true Preaching, we may add these two following Testimonies out of that
renowned Independent Dr. Everad.

Dr. J. Everad's Sermon Militia Coelestis Truth it (...) many toss and tumble
the Letter -- and make you believe they expound it, and give you the Sense and
Virtue; yet how shallow, how literal, how humane, how low, how sensual and
carnal do they make the Worl^ to be? Even your Rabbis, your Doctors, your
great Scholars; which shows, if God himself, if the Lion of the Tribe of Juda,
if the Root of David do not open the Seals, it is not all the Learning, or all
the Universities in the World can help us to the Mystery, and the Mind of
Christ as the Apostle calls it, Shadows vanishing, etc. p. 326.

I dare not offer at any Method in the whole, nor at any Connection in the
Parts: For I find that all the curious Dichotomzers do but dream and play with
the Scriptures, feeding themselves with Fancies and not Truth; for, Sure I am,
the only Method that holy Men of old observed, was to speak as they were moved
by the Holy Spirit -- There be many Expositions on this Place, which I will not
trouble you withal, for Men speak according to Men; but the Scriptures were
written by God's Spirit, dictated by his own Finger: We must therefore labor
to find out what is God's Mind in the Scriptures, whatever Men say, page 369.
370.


CHAP. V.
Of True and False Prayer.

HE pretends in this Chapter which contains not a page, to refute several
pages in my Book, relaing to Gospel-Prayer, in which if I (...) not, he has
done me and the Truth I defend the greatest Service, that a reasonable Man
would desire at the Hands of his Adversary; for the Truth of the Matter is, the
Man has shrunk from his Post, and deserted his Colors, which we shall make
appear by comparing his first Book with his Reply.

Reply. VV. P. according to my Charge disowns man's Will and the Use of his
Conceptions to have any thing to do in Gospel-Prayer, page 122. and disowns all
Prayer that is not by and in the Light within, The Quakers Christ The Reasons
he gives are as Witless as his Assertion Truthless. Thus; Now, unless Men may
perform Gospel-VVorship without the Spirit and the Truth; or if in the Spirit
and the Truth, yet not by the Motion of either, a thing absurd, it must needs
be that Men ought only to preach and pray by the Motion of the Spirit and of
the Truth. How absurd is W. P' s Reasoning here? as if the Understanding,
Conceptions, Will of Man in Prayer must needs exclude the Motions of the
Spirit, or the Motions of the Spirit exclude them.


Rejoinder. The first Thing our Adversary charged upon us in his former Book
was our Denial of Gospel-Prayer, to prove which he cited W. Smith, who in his
Catech. p. 107. spoak against Prayers of Man's forming, in his own unclean
Wisdom to be performed at his own Time, and in his own Will; which I answered
thus.

It seems then, that what Prayer W. Smith's Passage reflects upon, is
Gospel-Prayer in J. Faldo's Account: Of this he takes no notice; he might think
it is his In^^st, but I am sure it was not his Honesty to omit it; for it was
to entitle Prayers hateful to God, Gospel, that he might have his Will of us,
in making the World believe that we deny Gospel-Prayer; he was far from the
Carriage of a worthy and generous Adversary in this, that knowing how apt many
are to receive any Charge against us, would have acted deliberately and
faithfully, as one concerned by the Constraint of Conscience, when he (alas)
sent his many Charges as false as black, to incense the Ignorant and Credulous
against us, Revenge for the Loss of some Hearers, and that which follows,
animating him to this Unchristian Essay.

But he proceeded thus; That we own no Prayer that is not by immediate
Inspiration and Motion of the Spirit, and without the Use of our Conception and
Direction of our Understanding. He brought two or three Testimonies to confirm
this Limb of his Charge; I avoided reporting them by confessing the Matter; my
Business was therefore to mantain our Assertion, in order to which I produced
John 4. 24. The Worship of God is in the Spirit and in the Truth, which he left
out, and from thence I gave the Argument by him repeated, which he is pleased
to call Witless and Truthless, as if says he, the Understanding Conceptions
and Will of man in Prayer must needs exclude the Motion of the Spirit, or the
Motions of the Spirit exclude them. But this Reader, we will easily scatter;
for if Man offer up his own Conceptions, he cannot be said to offer up what is
injected by the Holy Ghost, by whom alone God's Children cry, Abba Father; for
by Man's own Conceptions, I mean what simply proceeds from man, and where any
man prays such Conceptions, he must needs exclude the Injections and Motions
of the holy Spirit, and offer up an unclean Sacrifice; else there would be no
difference between the Prayers of the righteous and the wicked.

The Will of man in Prayer was not mentioned in the first Boook; But if by Will
he means, Man's Praying in his own Power, and how, and when he pleases, we
also deny that; for how can he be said to pray with the Spirit, and worship in
the Spirit, who acts without the Will, Guidance and Motions of the Spirit: And
if h^ means the Will of man subjected to the Will of God an^ R^le of the
Spirit, then we say, Such Prayer is not in t^^ Will of man properly, but in his
Will, to whom the Will^ man is subjected; That is properly done in the Will of
Man, which is done at Man's Disposal, or is in Man's Power to perform; but it
is not within the Compass of Man's Will to offer up a spiritual Prayer,
consequently, it belongs to the holy Spirit to furnish Man with that Capacity:
So that by the Will of man we do not understand the Will subjected, but the
Will absolute, and that we exclude. The Will of Man in that Case is swallowed
up in the Will of the Spirit, as the Apostle Paul's Life was swallowed up in
Christ; It is not I Paul that live, but Christ in me; It is not I, Paul, that
pray, but the Spirit that prays in me; that is, I Paul live by and through
the Life of Christ Jesus, and in Subjection to him; and I Paul pray by and
through the Spirit, and in Subjection to its holy Motions. I distinguish
between things being done contrary to the Will of Man, and not according to
the Will of man; for Paul might pray not according to his own Will, but the
Mind of the Holy Spirit, and yet not pray contrary to his own Will, because
resigning of his own Will unto the Power and Leadings of the Holy Spirit (To be
acted by that, whereby he receives a new Will, even the Will of the holy
Spirit) he does not resist or act contrary to the Will of the Spirit, though
not according to his own Will.

But for our Adversary to say we deny the Use of our Understanding in Prayer,
is a great Mistake, if not a Slander, That which I objected against was an
other Word by him carelefly or designedly omitted, to wit, the DIRECTION of
our Understanding; for there is as much Difference between the USE of our
Understanding and DIRECTION of our Understanding, as between a Master and a
Servant as to command and obey, Understanding is always made Use of by the
holy Spirit in Prayer; for without it there would be no Subject for the Spirit
to act or work upon. But the Direction of our Understanding in Prayer, is
perfectly exclusive of the Direction of the Holy Spirit, for there cannot be
two Directors; Besides, if the Direction in Prayer, be ascribed to the
Understanding, there is nothing left that may be attributed to the Spirit,
wherefore say we, The Understanding is not to direct, but to be directed in
Prayer to Almighty God by his own holy Spirit, according to that notable
Passage, Romans 8. 26, 27. The Spirit also helps our Infirmities, for we KNOW
NOT what we should pray for as we ought, but the SPIRIT IT SELF MAKES
INTERCESSION for us with Groanings which cannot be uttered, and he that
searches the Heart knows what is the Mind of the Spirit, because he makes
Intercession for the Saints according to the Will of God.

I offered Eight Arguments in Defense of this Doctrine, whereof he cited but
one, and said no more to it then I have reported; For that little he added, was
but an Aggravation of his Forementioned Consequence. See my Answ. page 133.
Seven then of my Arguments remain unmedled with; Romans 8. 13. 14.
I will hint at three to show not any Reason but my Adversaries Shuffle.

If the Children of God are led by the Spirit of God ( and not by their own
Wills, Conceptions and Directions) then no Access to God without it,
consequently, Prayer without the Leading of God's Spirit is not acceptable with
him.

Again; If no Prophecy or Preaching was to be of old but by the Revelation or
Motion of the Spirit, though but to mortal men, of far greater Reason should
not any Prayer be made to the Eternal only Wise God, without the Motion of the
Holy Spirit.

Lastly, Man of himself is Unable to think a good Thought, and as the
Professors say, from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot, altogether
Unclean; therefore he can not perform Gospel-Prayer by the Direct^on of his own
Understanding, Use of his own Conceptions, and Strength of his own Will.

To this Purpose was my fourth Argument, which, with those that went before,
and follow after it, my Adversary unmanfully declined. I will conclude this
Chapter with six Testimonies; the first out of a venerable Author (with almost
all Nonconformists) J. Calvin.

In one of his Sermons upon Job 32. 8. It is the Spirit of God who dwells in
Men, etc. Man (says he) cannot discern any whit of God's Secret until he be
enlightened; we can never by our Will reach so high as to know God, we must put
our Reason from us and renounce it utterly (what says J. Faldo to this
Doctrine of his Father Calvin) Again, If we will have our Lord to fill us with
his Wisdom, it behooves us to become Fools; that is to say, We must not bring
any thing of our own, for that were the shutting of the Door against God.

H. Bullenger's 4. Decad. Sermon. 5. p. 665. The Spirit of Man praying in this
World, being enlightened and kindled with the Spirit of God, groaneth and makes
Intercession for the Saints.

W. Perkins the English Calvin in the same men's Thoughts, p. 336. 21. writes
thus. All Exercises of Christian Religion are to be in the Spirit. The Inward
Motions of the Spirit, are of themselves the Worship of God, whereas our Words
and Deeds are not simply, but so far forth, as they are found in the renewed
Motions of the Heart.

Gualt. Cradok upon Ephesians. 3. p. 169. That you may see the greatness of his
Power, what a World of Prayers does the Spirit of God put into thy Heart that
thou art never able to utter with thy Mouth. All the Wisdom of the World cannot
make one spiritual Petition. We may make Forms of Prayer, but now the Spirit of
God that knows the Mind of God, THAT makes Prayers according to the Will of
God, and HE (Spirit) prays with Sighing and Groaning unutterably: I speak to
them that know the working of the Spirit. If the Lord should only hear the
Prayers thou make with thy Mouth, thou would be a Poor Man, but the Lord
respects the Prayer of thy Heart.

W. Dell. Sermon. Christ Spirit, etc. p. 35. When God has a Mind to give us the
Spirit, he puts us in Mind to ask it; yea, God gives us the Spirit that by it
we may ask the Spirit, seeing no Man can ask the Spirit but by the Spirit, Acts
1. 14.

Dr. J. Everad, the great Spiritual Separatist in King James and Charles the
firsts Time. Be assured whatever Prayers, whatever Sighs, whatever Groans thou
put up to him, he loathes all but what his SON MAKES; but all his Requests
are heard and granted, page 225; -- Be sure that your Prayers be such as become
God's Ear to hear; for all the Prayers of ALL FLESH through the whole World, is
displeasing to God, page 243. -- Not the best Duties you can perform will
please him, except they be salted and seasoned by his own Son, p. 9. -- Never
think that all your Prayers, your Tears, your Alms, etc. pleases him, but only
that which is his Son's own Action and Work in you, p. 355. But know, he (God)
regards none of these Prayers: But when his Son, in whom he is well pleased,
when he prays, he hears him always; but if any other Prays, he regards not,
p. 438. 442.

Again, It must be his Son's Work in us, else he loathes all, even the best of
the Sacrifices; if it be not Jesus Christ in us that does all, viz. that loves
God, and fears God, and obeyes God, and believes in God, etc. his Father
regards it not

But what thinks J. Faldo of all these Things? J. Calvin, W. Perkins, H.
Bullenger, Gu. Cradok are unquestionable, W. Dell Master of Cajus College in
late times; And for Dr. J. Everad his Works were licenced, December. 6. 1652, by
no less Man then J. Caril; and approved by Tho Brooks and Mat. Parker, all
three Independent Pastors; the first lately deceased, the other two not many
days ago living, who I hope are able to justify their Kindness to that
notable and doubtless very religious Man.

Perhaps the Truth may find better Quarter for these great Authors Sake,
therefore I bring them, though indeed it is truly lamentable, that the
Professors of our Age will not know the Doctrines of Men they hold in great
Admiration, when they meet with them in the poor Quakers Writings; but instead
of acknowledging miseraby brow-beat them with oppobrious Language, thereby
bringing the greatest Truths into Suspicion with the Vulgar. But, Oh Lord God
of Truth, This has been the Portion of thy People, and Lot of thy Children,
whom thou have gathered out of the World in all Ages, at the Hands of those,
who boast themselves in other Men's Labors, and have a Name to live, but are
dead to that Life in which they should live to thee: They seem to honor the
Prophets, and garnish the Sepulchers of thy Servants that are at rest; but
having erred from the Conduct of thy Spirit, and resisted the holy Motions of
it; they are become the greatest Persecutors. Resisters and Vilifiers of thy
holy, living, pure and spiritual Way. Oh Lord God arise for thy great Names
Sake, seize upon their Consciences by thy Invisible Word of Power; Lay Judgment
to the Line and Righteousness to the Plummet, Dash their fine carved Images in
Pieces, and let thy consuming Fire take hold on their Chaff and Stubble, and
bring them to thy righteous Balance, that they may see they and their Religion
to be lighter then Vanity; that they may witness thy mighty Work of Redemption
and Salvation, before they depart hence and are never seen more, through Jesus
Christ, the alone Advocate and Mediator, Intercessor, Redeemer and Savior of
all thy dear Children, who have believed in his Heavenly Appearance, by whom be
Everlasting Honor, Glory and Dominion, Amen.


CHAP. VI.
Of Positive Ordinances as our Adversary calls them, to wit, Baptism and the
Supper.

HE introduced his Discourse of Baptism and the Supper with an Account of the
Nature of these Ordinances, distinguishing them by Natural and Positive. He
excepts against my reporting of one part of his Doctrine, calling it by no
milder a Name then Forgery. I will give both our Quotations, that my Reader may
the better see what Ground he has for such severe Reflection; I cited him thus,

The Ordinances hitherto considered are called Morral from their Natural
Obligation, although respecting their Substance, they deserve a more
Evangelical Denomination, without which we cannot call them Christian
Ordinances. This he calls Forging, Corupting his Words, and that he that has
the Conscience to deal with such an Adversary, may make him say what he lists,
Reply p. 56.

I will now puncually transcribe his Words as himself has quoted them, and a
plain self-Defeat will lie at the bottom of all this Displeasure.

Reply, p. 66. My Words were these to a Letter, The Ordinances I have hitherto
considered are called Morral, from their Natural Obligation; although that
Substantial and Essential Part and Qualification of them, their Respect to a
Mediator will require a Denomination more Evangelical, and without which we
cannot call them Gospel or Christian Ordinances. Let VV. P. make the best
Advantage for his Causes these Words will afford him and spare not.


Rejoinder. Having his Leave, I hope he will not be angry if I take him at his
Word; but before I proceed, I cannot but declare my Amazement in calling this
circumstantial Omission by no milder term then Forgery, who God is record
between us, of 50 Testimonies, which he he has pretended to take out of our
Friends VVritings, has miscited or misreported one half of them, and imposed
false Glosses upon the other.

Now lets see wherein I have wronged him. I will observe every Variation; The
First lies between the Ordinances hitherto considered, and the Ordinances I
have hitherto consid^red; It seems I have was left out, but this is not one
Step to Forgery. The next lies betwixt these two Passages, although respecting
their Substance they deserve a more Evangelical Denomination, and his Saying,
although that Substantial and Essential Part and Qualification of them, and
their Respect to a Mediator will require a Denomination more Evangelical; the
Difference lies here; first, that I have put but the Word Substance in the
room of Substantial Essential Qualification, their Respect to a Mediator;
wherein I conceive I have not wronged his matter; for the substance of the
Morral Ordinances, and the Substantial or Essential Part or Qualification of
the Morral Ordinances are equivalent: The Difference only lies that I did not
rapeat his four Terms, when one would serve, but used the Word Substance, as
carrying in it the import of the rest; For the Moral Ordinances Respect to a
Mediator, I say, they either respect the Mediator from the Substance or
Circumstance of them, not the Circumstance to be sure, therefore the Substance,
and that Word I used in the Place of Substantial or Essential, as before. I
cannot yet see where the Forgery lies; but let us proceed; The next Variation
lies between will require and deserve. Now I know not any VVrong I did him in
saying, those morral Ordinances deserve, instead of those morral Ordinances
will require. The harsher Word of the two is in his own Quotation; There be yet
two Faults more that I have committed that help to the Forgery in my
Adversaries Opinion; The one is this, I cited it a more Evangelical
Denomination instead of a Denomination more Evangelical; The other was this,
instead of Gospel or Christian Ordinances, I did only set down Christian
Ordinances. All these things considered, I cannot believe these Omissions are
able to stain my Credit in the Judgment of any sober Reader, though J. Faldo
tells me, They are enough to stain any man which is not all black already.

This miserable Shift and causless Cry of Forgery, designed to amaze and divert
the Reader from calling upon him for a more serious Reply to the Use I made of
his own Doctrine against himself, cannot take me off from persuing my
Advantage; for I think those Omissions so little to his Prejudice, that the
inserting what I left out, would, if possible, have made more to my Purpose.
The Use I made of it was this: First, That a Ministry grounded internally upon
the (special) Grace and Gifts of God, externally upon the Scriptures of Truth.
2ly, That a Well-ordered Church consisting of Religious Members, preaching,
praying, and that scripturally too, are by him called Christian Ordinances, and
made natural to all Nations before Christ's visible Coming; and consequently,
there was the Thing Christianity before the Name of Chritianity, which pleads
our Cause against his first Chapter and his gross Contradiction to himself.
3ly, Those he calls Natural Ordinances, and that are of universal Obligation,
are far more substantial and necessary to Salvation then those two of
Water Baptism and the Lord's Supper, upon which he more peculiarly bestows
the Title of Christian; Since no Man can ever be saved without the one, I mean
those Natural Ordinances, as he calls them, grounded internally upon the Grace
and Gifts of God, and any Man may be certainly saved without the other that he
so peculiarly calls Christian Ordinances, viz. Water Baptism and the Supper.

I say, his Citation hinders me no more of this Advantage then mine he
excepteth against; for if the Substantial and Essential Part and Qualification
of them, and the Respect to a Mediator will require them to be Christian
Ordinances (that Part I left out, and for which he quarreld me) what Reason can
there be for his counting me a Forger, and telling the World, that I first cut
off his Matter, and then tell him of self-Contradiction, when the Words omitted
give a further Weight to my Consequences, and justify them beyond all
Opposition: For if these Ordinances be Morral, naturally obliging with all,
Gospel and Christian from their Substantial and Essential Qualification, and
the Respect to a Mediator, then there must needs have been Christian or
Gospel Ordinances from the beginning of the World. In short, Since he denis not
my Consequence upon that Citation I made; and that we have shown the Difference
to be little, and what there was to make for me, I think I may well conclude,
that my former Argumentation was found. Thus much for this Cavil. He goes on.


Reply, page 66. A Passage page 133. ( in W. P.) I cannot Persuade my self to
let pass; W. P. thus, It is no less then Blaspheming in our Adversary, and an
evident Contradiction to himself, to assert, That the Light he grants those
immutable Ordinances to result from, may be doubtful or decay, respecting it
self, since it were to say, that God -- were doubtful, and liable to decay.
(Thus far W. P.) The Light I spoak of was Natural Light, or the Light of Nature
in express Terms, which we dare not, nor the Quakers do not say is God, but a
humane Faculty.


Rejoinder. He might very well have persuaded himself to have let this Passage
pass, unless he had given it a better Reply: He is willing to bring us in for
Stars, but we reject his Kindness.

The Quakers say, That God is the great Sun of Righteousness, and Fountain of
all Light; That he enlightens all with a Measure of his own Divine Light, and
that from thence proceed these Moral, General and Obligatory Ordinances, which
J. F. himself confesses to be Gospel and Christian; and therefore it is both a
Contradiction, and little less then Blasphemy to call the Light a Sinful,
Sordid and Ridiculous Thing, as p. 47. of his Reply, and yet say so much in
Praise of these Natural and Universal Ordinances.

But above all, that he should say, the Quakers Deny the Light to be God, and
own it but for a Humane Faculty, who imployes many pages to prove the contrary,
and not above two pages off, expressly calls it the Quakers Christ, shows him
either to have been very careless, or not well himself, when he writ so
extravagantly.

We are now come to consider the Ordinances themselves, and first that of
Baptism.


Reply, page 67. Water Baptism W. P. disowns to be a Gospel-Ordinance, his
Reasons I shall answer briefly. Christ never was Administrator of
Water Baptism, p. 133. It is Christ's Command, and not his being immediate
Administrator that constitutes an Ordinance.


Rejoinder. He should have given my first Reason before he had pretended to
answer it. I further told him, That water-Batism was John's the Forerunner,
used figuratively and preparatively to the Visible Coming of the Messiah, which
being past, that preparatory Dispensation is gone with it; and lastly, that the
Forerunner is not to continue, but give way to him and his Administration that
was so fore-run, which were Christ and his Baptism. That John was to dicrease,
that is, Water Baptism; and Christ to increase, that is, his Evangelical and
Spiritual Administration. To all this J. Faldo says nothing: So that he spoak
Truth but by halfs; that is, what he said was no Answer, yet it was briefly
said. However, I do affirm, that Water Baptism is therefore Legal, because
Christ is not its Administrator; for the Legal Dispensation came by Moses, but
the Evangelical by Christ, not his Disciples; and this not coming by Christ, it
cannot be Evangelical, consequently no Gospel-Ordinance. Besides, I deny that
it is Evangelical because he is not administrator; for Christ is the alone
Administrator; of all things relating to his own Kingdom, the Temple-Worship
Altar, Circumcision, Baptism, etc. are invisible, answerabel to the Nature of
his Priesthood and Kingdom. Again.

It is said of John, That the least in the Kingdom of God is greater then ^he,
yet that a greater Prophet has not risen then John the Baptist, Mat. 11. 11.
Now this could never be understood of John's particular Condition, but of his
Water-Administration; therefore Water Baptism is not Evangelical. I might tell
him in short, That he has given away his Cause in this Particular, by rancking
Water Baptism among the diverse Washings page 50. The Apostle ( Hebr. 9.)
accounts Legal, and abrogated by bringing in of a better Covenant, the great
Evangelical Ordinance. Next, let him tell me, where it is that Christ commands
WaterBaptism: But this perhaps he thinks he has done in his Answer to my
second Reason, as by him reported.


Reply, page 67. Again, W. P. page 136. says, That Baptism mentioned Mat. 28.
was not the Baptism of John, but Baptism of the Holy Ghost, called the Promise
of the Father -- He distinguishes not between John's Water Baptism and his
own, but betwixt any Water Baptism at all, and his own Baptism of the Holy
Ghost. Baptism with the Holy Ghost was not in a proper, but analogical and
metaphorical Sense.


Rejoinder. John Faldo has done ill to drop my Answer, and render it so
obscure, if not impertinent; for by making that Gap in the middle, to whom can
we refer that Word HE? To John? That cannot be; how can the after Sentence
relate to the former, or be understood as it is? But thus has he dealt with me
from time to time, which I will not call Forgery, but Disingenuity I am sure it
is. I said, as he reports me, That Water was not understood in that Text: He
shifts it off with saying, That the Baptism of the Holy Ghost is not a Proper
but Metaphorical Baptism. But what is this to his proving, That the Baptism in
the Text was that of Water, and not that of the Holy Ghost, which was and is
the Question between us? I told him, That Christ in all likelihood
commissionated them to Baptize with that Baptism wherewith they were to be
Baptized themselves; my Reasons were three: First, Because his Baptism was That
of the Holy Ghost; and we are to suppose, that he commanded them to Baptize
with his own Baptism; therefore not with Water. Next, Because these Words, Go,
Teach, Baptizing, being some of the last words Matthew reports him to have
spoken while in the World; they must need have relation to that Saying which
Luke records in Acts 1. to have fallen from him immediate before his
Ascension, viz. And being assembled together with them, he commanded, that they
should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the Promise of the Father,
which, says he, ye have heard of me; For John truly baptized with Water, but
ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence. I say, the other
Passage in Matthew must needs have relation to these words, inasmuch as they
are by two Evangelists recorded to have been spoken immediately before his
Ascension, it being within four Verses of this Passage, that Luke tells us, He
was taken up out of their Sight. For in this part of Luke's Narrative the
Commission given us by Matthew is wholely omitted, which doubtless was spoken
at the same time; for we frequently find, That what one Evangelist omits the
other supplieth; Therefore I read the words thus, John indeed baptized with
Water, but ye shall be Baptized with the Holy Ghost; Then Go, teach all
Nations, baptizing them, etc. Unto all this he is so silent as if there had
been no such thing observed. My third Exception against Water Baptism,
respecting this Text, Matthew 28 That the Preposition (...), or into the Name,
etc. could not be said of Water, therefore no Water Baptism; which he takes a
little notice of, thus replying.


Reply, page 67. Baptism with Water was into the Name, etc. as a Sign; and
Baptism with the Holy Ghost, which is the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, might also
be where the Persons so gifted were not really ingrafted into Christ, or
sanct^fied.


Rejoinder. That Baptism with Water may be into the Name of the Father, is not
sober, unless it could baptize into the Nature of the Father; for nothing less
then Regeneration is wrapped up in the Text: Besides, that it is unworthy of the
Spirituallity of Christ's Ministration and Kingdom, that he should make
Water Baptism two thirds of his Commission, which Men may be baptized with, and
yet be as great Strangers, yea, Enemies to Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as the
most impious of Men. And admitting, that by the Holy Ghost is to be understood
the Gifts of the Holy Ghost; yet is it Heterodox with a Witness, to say, That a
Man may be baptized into them, and yet remain unsanctified, and ungrafled into
Christ; for what is it but to say, That to be baptized by the Holy Ghost, is
not to sanctify Men, nor graft them into Christ; for such has been his
Carelessness in this Expression, that he has not particularized what Gift Men
may have, and not be sanctified or grafted into Christ, but plainly denies in
general Terms, the Baptism of the Holy Ghost to be the same thing with
sanctifying and grafting Men into Christ: So many as were Baptized into Jesus
Christ were Baptized into his Death; was this done by Water? where is J. F's
Figure now he cast to abuse the Text, Mat. 28? Again, As many as have been
Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3. 27. I would fain know by what
Figure J. F. makes Water Baptism a putting on of Christ; such easy putting on
of Christ will fall hard one day upon such as he and the like Christians. But
why should I expect a better Account of these Divine Mysteries from a Man that
knows so little of them, and sets so slight by them? But let us hear him a
little further.


Reply, page 67. Many things are expressed by the Word Baptism, yet but one
Proper Baptism, which is Water.


Rejoinder. If he had said one shadowy Baptism, it had been better expressed,
for that he himself elsewhere acknowledges it to be; however, his one proper
Baptism is not the Apostle's One Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5. unless he will make the
Baptism of Water, and the Baptism of the Holy Ghost to be but one and the same
Baptism; if he can, he will perform an impossibility; if he cannot, there will
be two Baptisms, John's proper Baptism, Christ's improper Baptism, as J. F.
will have them contradistinguisht.

Now which of these two is the Evangelical and Durable Baptism; the one the
Figure, the other the Substance; the one the Forerunner, the other the Thing
Fore-runned? May we not ask of Water Baptism as Christ asked concerning John?
What went ye forth to see? one that said of his Dispensation, I must Decrease,
Christ Increase. I will not allow of J. Faldo's word proper at this time,
though allowable enough among Schoolmen, because the Philosophical Sense of it
is not known to the Vulgar; The word proper now bearing a different
Signification; and in the after common usage of the word, Christ's Baptism of
the Holy Ghost is the only proper Baptism, and that of Water but shadowy and
figurative. I will give him a like Case upon his use of the word proper, and
leave it with my Reader what to call this part of his Reply. There was but one
proper Pascal Lamb, and that was a Beast with four Legs: Also, there was but
one proper Circumcision, and that was the Circumcision of the Flesh; therefore
are they Evangelical, or to continue? But does not he know that they are
notwithstanding abrogated by that Lamb and Circumcision, which according to his
Language, are not proper but metaphorically so? Insomuch that after the
Apostle's Speech that is no more that Lamb, nor the Circumcision that is
outward, neither Baptism etc. but that which is not in the Letter, but in the
Spirit, Romans 28. 29.

I more then hinted p. 138, 139. of my Answer at this very thing upon his
making the Baptism the Sign and Thing signified but one Baptism, as a true
Exposition of that Passage of the Apostle to the Ephesians, One Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism; But he is afraid to meddle with that; for indeed never Man
more over-shot himself, opening such a Gap to Judaism, as I suppose no Man
pretending to be a Christian, ever ventured at.

But he faintly goes on in these words.


Reply, p. 67. W. P. tells me, p. 137. of the Apostle Paul's Pracitce. Practice
then we see (and all the reasonable World knows) is not Institution. This is
not a very sound Expression in it self. I do not say, that Practice is
Institution, but the Practice of the Apostles in pursuance of an Institution is
a Proof of its Continuance.


Rejoinder. The Expression is sounder then he is Ingenuous: He neither sets
down his own Passage nor my Answer; how then can he Honestly or Intelligibly
reply: However, he tells us, that he can beg the Question, that is, That the
Apostles practiced upon an Insittution; Thus he defends his Assertion, by
repeating his Assertion. We have great Reason to suppose him pincht, or else we
should not find him so tame; Here a Man may handle him without Knocks. But why
did he take no notice of the rest of my Answer, and say so little to this; and
which is worse, an Untruth too? For he positively lays down in the second Part
of his first Book, page 39. this Argument; Because Paul di^ ^^aptize some,
therefore it was an Ordinance. Now what can we call this but a Contradiction to
himself, who manifestly infers Institution from the Apostle's Practice, and yet
says, He does not say that Practice is an Institution; unless he will shroud
himself under the doubtful Signification of the word Practice, which may as
well be used about one thing as another; but as I meant it of an Apostolical
Religious Practice, so he ought to mean in his use of the word Practice, or
else he equivocates.

He also told us before, That the Reason why Water Baptism was not laid upon
the Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 1. was, because his Call was extraordinary, and out of
due time. To which I answered, That if he was inferior to no Apostle in his
Works, why should he be reputed so in his Co^^ission? That the Priests
generally allow them to have been all extraordinarily called (it has been their
Plea against our Call in these days) That no Man in our Days has a larger
Commission in the Point; and lastly, That since he was a
Gospel-Christian-Apostle, if Water Baptism had been then reputed a
Gospel-Christain-Ordinance, neither had God omitted that in his Commission, nor
had the Apostle spoak so slightly of it, as he does, when he thanks God, that
he baptized so few; for, says he, I was NOT SENT to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel, ICor. 1. 14, 17, Acts 26. 18.

But to all this, and abundance more, he was willing to be silent: Yet, that he
may not be thought to say nothing, although he gives not the Reader that part
of my Answer unto which he replies (I conceive lest his Wea^^ness should be too
nakedly exposed) he does at a venture, to bestow thus much at randum upon me.


Reply, page 68. If W. P. intended by the thing signified, saving Grace, then
it was come to many before Baptism at all was instituted, and Faith in Jesus
Christ was required in all before Baptism was offered; If of the Gifts of the
Holy Ghost, the Apostle Peter was so lfar from Arguing after his fashion, that
he makes it the Ground of Baptizing them. Can any Man forbid Water that these
should not be baptized, who have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? But if
W. Penn had been there, he would have reproved Peter of Ignorance and Sin.


Rejounder. No such Matter; But I may well reprove John Faldo, as guilty of
both, who is (...) ignorant as not yet to know the Thing signified; and so
firful, as to charge the Apostle Peter with that which his own words will not
bear; for here is no more of an Institution then there is in Paul's Words to
the Corinthians, As often as you do this, etc. Christ's Baptism is the inward
Washing by the Word of Regeneration, which makes perfect as pertaining to the
Conscience, of which ^ater-Baptism was but a Figure. I grant that the Sign
ended not so soon as the thing signified began, in Point of Practice; but I
affirm it did in Point of Institution. It is not bright Day as soon as it is
Daybreak; Shadows vanish gradually; and Customs (especially if grateful, as
were Signs and Ceremonies to Jewish-christians) are not easily left.
Water Baptism was the Prologue to Christ's Visible Appearance, and when he was
come, a kind of out ward Testimonial or Signification of their Belief in the
Visible Appearance of the then so much denied, so cruelly derided, and
crucisied Jesus: Wherefore I say, it was not Evangelical, but an Introductory
Ceremony, suited to the external State of things in that Day, which in some
competent Time so varied, that there could be no Pretense of Christian-Prudence
for Perpetuating the Practice of it, much less any Reason for its Institution;
for as the Christian Power and Spirit then brightned, and Christ came to be
more and more formed in the Hearts of his People, Water gave way to the Holy
Ghost and Fire; John to Christ; and their Carnal Historical Faith of Christ to
the Revelation of the Son of God in them, the one thing necessary, even the
Eternal Substance, that as He grew up, and put forth himself gradually, wore
off all Shadowy and Figurative Observations. Thus did God restore the Kingdom
to Israel, and bring back the Captivity of his People; having laid Help upon
one that is Mighty, the Son of his Love, who always was the Baptizer of all
them that believe in him, into his own pure Nature, which is that Regeneration,
without which, no Man shall ever enter into the Kingdom of God


CHAP, VII.
Of the Bread and Wine, which Christ gave to his Disciples after Supper,
commonly called the Lord's Supper.

OUR Adversary begins his Sixteenth Chapter thus.

Reply, page 69. W. P. having little to any purpose to say upon the Point of
the Lord's Supper, has recoruse to his old Shifts; First he charges the
Independents with the Death of J. Parnel, p. 141. But what is that to the
Question? and I believe as little to the Truth, as my hand in the Blood of
Kings and Princes.


Rejoinder. Then is John Faldo deeply guilty of the Blood of Kings and Princes;
for certain Persons of that Way apprehended, imprisoned, and hardly used him to
Death; Doubtless no Murderer, no Traitor was ever handled at that in humance
^ate by English Men, as was this poor Young Man by those pretended Saints. I
refer my Reader to the second Part of our Serious Apology, p. 185, 186, 187.
for further Satisfaction. Nor have I used any Shifts to avoid the Strength of
J. Faldo's Charges or Proofs. I am glad when he meddles with Matter; for I find
more Trouble, Chaff, Froth and Pedantry, then when I encounter any thing more
solid: But if this be not crying out -- first, there is no such thing, as I
will make appear in this very Chapter. I brought several Reasons to justify
our Discontinuance of the Supper, soberly discoursed in four or five pages: He
takes no more notice thereof, then if there had been no such thing, saving that
he tells us, He neglects them because they be speak the Emptiness of their
Author: Such a Way of Replying, that had I loved Shifts more then honest
Answers, and could put off my Conscience at that easy but unjust Rate, it
would have saved me the Trouble of having to do with John Faldo's essays
against the Quakers. He bestows his time in making good two Proofs he pretended
to bring out of our Frinds Writings; how well he acquits himself we will
examine.

J. Parnell it seems said [The Bread that People broak in that Observation, was
Outward, Natural and Carnal] This he counted most Heinous. I told him, That the
Bread and Wine being of an Outward Elementary Nature and Substance, may in
Comparison of what they signify, be very properly termed, Natural and Carnal.
Upon which he bestows this Reply, after his wonted Modesty.


Reply, page 69, 70. Very well becoming Penn's knowing Divinity and Philosophy;
Fire and Air are of an Elementary Nature; is Fire and Air therefore Carnal?


Rejoinder. We would not that any should think that we intend by Natural and
Carnal the worst Sense that may attend these words; for sometimes they import a
Wicked and Accursed State; but simply as they are opposed to things
Supernatuaral and spiritual, and in this Sense all parts of this visible World
may fall under their Signification.

Outward relates to the same thing, and so does Elementary, as vulgarly
understood, and by me appropriated. I was not making a Philosophistical
Lecture, but writing of plain and Evangelical Doctrine; I know that Words in
Philosophy do carry a quite other Sense then what they bear in common
Conversation. I opposed Natural to Supernatural; Carnal to Spiritual; Outward
to Inward; and Elementary, which relates to any of these Worlds Elements, to
the Nature of that Food which comes down from above; and I think Bish.
VVilkins's Real Character will vindicate me from the Crowing Charge of this
pretended Divine and Philosopher.

His next Testimony was out of VV. Smith's Primmer; They [Bread and Wine in
the Lord's Supper] are the Pope's Invention. This I utterly denied to have been
delivered by VV. Smith, and did require him in the view of the World to produce
any such Words out of the Books of W. Smith, or any other of our Friends. His
Reply is this.


Reply p. 70. What W. P insnuates I charged them with, viz. calling the Bread
and Wine Christ blessed, the Invention of the Pope; I am as little concerned to
make Proof of, as he is honest to make report of; for my Book lays no such
thing to their Charge.


Rejoinder. What a silly Evasion is this? Did he not charge us with calling the
Bread and Wine of the Lord's Supper the Pop^s Invention? And does he now tax my
Honesty in saying, That he makes us to call he Bread and Wine Christ blessed,
the Invention of the Pope? I would fain know what is the Difference between
these two Expressions; were not the Bread and Wine Christ blessed, the Lord's
Supper? If not, he knows what follows; and if they were the Lord's Supper, then
to call the Bread and Wine Christ blessed, or the Lord's Supper the Invention
of the Pope, is equivalent; therefore he ought to think himself greatly
concerned to make us Satisfaction for having cast so great a Scandal upon us
and our Doctrine. But he hopes to help one Shift by another. Hear him.


Reply, p. 70. But you are to take Notice that W. P's Words import that very
same Bread and Wine which Christ and his Disciples eat and drank together at
Jerusalem.


Rejoinder. Oh, J. Faldo, leave of these horrible Falsehoods: Has neither
Christianity, nor thy Profession, nor common Reputation Power enough to
influence thee into more Justice toward thy Adversary? What Man of Sense can
think I meant only that very same Bread and Wine which Christ and his Disciples
eat and drank together? There is no Foundation for this ill Comment; And I dare
appeal to my Readers Conscience in this Matter! And so meanly have thou managed
this Matter, that thy very next Words show the slightness of thy Reply.


Reply, p. 70. Whereas my Charge is of the Bread and Wine used in the
Ordinance of the Lord's Supper after his Death among God's People and his
Churches.


Rejoinder. What Difference was there in Point of Time between Christ's eating
the Supper with his Disciples just before his Death? and their breaking Bread
together soon after his Death? Not a Year; whereas the Pope showed not himself
till near six hundred Years after. I cannot see, Friendly Reader, how much more
criminal I made my Adversary by charging him with saying in our Name, The Bread
and Wine Christ blessed is the Invention of the Pope, then he has made
himself by his own Saying, That we call the Lords Supper eaten soon after his
Death, the Popes Invention; unless he should deny the Latter to be the same
Sort of Supper with the former. In short, We cannot but repute this an Injury
too apparent for John Faldo's utmost Invention to cover. But that he may not
suffer the Imputation of Forgery, at least a very gross Perversion, he thus
braveth me.


Reply, p. 70. If Pen dare deny it to be in W. Smith's Book which Iquoted three
or four times over in page 39. I shall prove him a Deceiver to all that will
but read it, W. S. answers to this Question, I would know Father how it is
concerning these things called Ordinances, as Baptism, Bread and Wine, which
are much used in their Worship? Answ. Why Child, as for those things they rose
from the Pope's Invention.


Rejoinder. This Citation as rankly and partially as he has put down, does not
prove that we account the Lord's Supper, either as it was eaten by Christ and
his Disciples before his Death, or by his Disciples after his Death, to be the
Pope's Invention. How can it, since we know the Pope's Date to have been so
many hundred Years after that Practice; His Citation must therefore be
understood of such a Baptism and such a Supper as the Apostate Church has
presumed to practice; and that I put not a fairer Gloss then his own Answer
will allow, observe these Words; and the whose Practice of those things AS THEY
use them had their Institution by the Pope, and were never SO ordained of
Christ: strongly implying, that what was of Christ's Ordination was not of the
Pope's Invention and Institution; consequently, That the Lord's Supper was
neither a popish Invention nor Institution; which is yet plainer from his
following Words; For he did not ordain sprinkling Water in a Child's Face, or
to make a Sign of the Cross in his Forehead, nor Godfathers and Godmothers to
undertake for it; Neither did he ordain Bread and Wine to be SO (or after that
Manner) used and received. So that nothing can be plainer then that his
Reflection lies against their Manner of practizing and using them, and not
against the Things themselves, as at any time practiced by Christ or his
Disciples and Followers: Therefore he is quite beside the Truth, in telling the
World that he does but apply these Words Pope's Invention to the Name, that
is, Lord's Supper, which the Quakers apply to the Thing; since we so clearly
distinguish between Baptism and the Lord's Supper (Name and Thing) and these
Practices and Usages of them, which have risen since the Apostasy; Now it rests
with thee, Friendly Reader, to pass Judgment, which of us two has acted the
Deceiver (to leave out a great many more of his hard Words) he that affirmed
VV. Smith called that Baptism and Lord's Supper, which was in Use some time as
well after Christ's Death and Ascension as before, the Pope's Inventions, or I
that affirmed, and from VV. Smith's own Book have expressly proved, that there
was no such thing said, as Primitively practiced, but only as they have been
since abused by the Apostate Church. For the Supper it self I refer the Reader
to the sixteenth Chapter of my Answer, and shall only say at this Time, that as
it was a Commemoration, or Remembrance of Christ to the Disciples, who were at
that Day so weak in Faith, as Luke 24. 11. Mary Magdalen's news about Christ's
Resurrection seemed to them as Idle Tales; yet that the Service and
consequently the Institution of it were of, as they came to witness him the
Evangelical Supper of Passover to their Souls, and that we therefore
discontinue it. First, Because the false Church has made Market with her
imitating that primitive Practice, drawn the Minds of People abroad from the
Heavenly Bread of Life, which is only to be received within, and has been
shedding so much Blood about it, rendering it and Water Baptism the Seal of
Christianity, thereby puffing up People to believe that of themselves which
they are not; Next, we have the Testimony of God's Spirit that he is withdrawn
from such Observations that have been so much insisted on and magnified in the
World; Lastly and eminently we discontinue it, because Christ is become unto
our Souls that very Thing, which it was most truly and properly the Sign of, to
wit, the Heavnely Bread and Passover, which nourishes the Soul unto Eternal
Life. Where by the Way it must not be forgotten how perversely he wrongs Christ
and Holy Scripture, who turns this Passage, Do this till I come, after this
strange Manner; The Lord's Supper is a Remembrance of Christ's Death past, NOT
TO COME, Rep. p. 71. wherein first, he makes as if there were a Death to come;
Next, Instead of exhorting People to look for his Coming, until which he bid
his Disciples practice it, he turns back their Eyes from that Expectation, and
makes the Sign wholly to have Reference to what was past, and not what was to
come, thereby seeking to perpetuate his Absence, and bar out his Appearance
(employed in these Words, till I come) which ends the Absence, during which the
Institution lasts; For the plain English of it framed into an Argument is
this: The Supper is to remember Christ's Death that is past, but that will be
always past, therefore it ought to be always so remembered. The like may be
said upon the Word Remembrance, for if it ought to be practiced because of
remembering Christ's Death, then forever, because his Death ought never to be
forgotten. Thus it perverts the Text, in that it makes not the outward Supper
to cease upon his Coming, as John 14. 23. Rev. 3. 20. (which is the Evangelical
Supper) till whose Coming Christ bid his Disciples do it: But to continue upon
the Score of remembering Christ's Death only (which as I said before, ought
never to be forgotten) is consequently to continue it upon Institution forever.

I shall only leave two things with my Reader, and so proceed to the next
Chapter; first, That from our discontinuing the Practice of these outward and
temporary Observances, J. Faldo concludes, our absolute and general Denial of
them. 2ly, Because some of our Friends have denied, rejected and termed Popish
the long Abuse of these Things, he makes no Difficulty of charging us in so
many Words with calling Water Baptism and the Lord's Supper, as laid down in
Scripture and primitively practiced, Popish Inventions, etc. God if he please
make this Man sensible of his notorious Injustice toward us.


CHAP. VIII.
Of the Doctrine of Justification.

HE introduces his Chapter of Justification in these Words.

Reply, p. 71. Upon the Point of Justification I cited 18 Proofs to my Charge,
To three of which W. P. answers by Way of Evasion and Railing, being silent to
the rest.


Rejoinder. Icited but three, and thought them as sufficient as threescore,
sure I am, they carried the Sense of the other fifteen, if not, he did ill to
produce them. I have answered the Law in the Point. And for Evasion and
Railing, if ever I used either, it was not in this Chapter, where I have
bestowed ten Pages of Sober and Christian Discourse; unto which he returns me
but three Pages in Defense of his former Application of our Friends Writings,
for Maintenance of his Charge; and what his Carriage in this particular is, I
will leave with my Reader.

His Charge was, that we denied the Transactions of Jesus Christ in the Flesh
to have any Influence into our Justification before God. Three of his Proofs I
considered, and rescued from his Tyranny. The first was this: All that are
called Presbyterians and Independents, with their feeding upon a Report of a
Thing done many hundred Years ago, E. Bur. Trump. p. 17. This J. Faldo called
Reproaching such as act Faith on Christ's Righteousness and Sufferings by him
wrought and suffered when he was in the World: An Answer that suits all
Hypocrites at what time their Historical Faith is struck at; but what said I?
why thus he brings me in. E. B. meant no more then their Excessive Admiration
of and Regard to what Christ did without; Thus far J. Faldo quotes me, and then
replyeth.


Reply, p. 72. Thus W. P. thinks to salve all with his Meanings which are well
nigh as corrupt as the Quakers Text; for the Admiration of what Christ then
did, will admit of no Excess.


Rejoinder. There is much more Reason that we should give our Meanings of our
own Writings then J. Faldo for us, since he is always sure to make them
against us; if he will not allow us to explain our own Minds, but make it the
Privilege of an Adversary, we are sure to be worsted, be it right or wrong,
nor can he escape by his own Practice: But why is my Meaning corrupt, or the
Text either? May not, nay, do not People rely upon those external Transactions
of Christ, (as recorded in Scripture Story) so as to neglect the whole Work of
Redemption and Sanctification by the Power o^ Christ within? Or is it false
Doctrine to affirm tha^ those who hold the whole Work of Man's Salvation to
have been thoroughly wrought by Christ's visible Transactions in the World
(thereby excluding the most necessary Opperation of his Power and Spirit for
the Redemption of such as have been imbondaged by Satan, are Excessive in their
Apprehensions of what Christ did for Mankind, when visibly in the World? If
it be, we must ingenuously confess, we are Holders and Mantainers of corrupt
Doctrine. But whilst Scripture is of any Value, that denies Heaven to wicked
Workers (though fair Professors) that says, without Holiness no Man shall see
the Lord; Math. 7. 27. 23.
and without being born again no Man Heb. 12. 14.
shall enter the Kingdom of God; John 3. 3. 5.
That Men shall reap what they sow; Gal. 6, 7, 8, 9.
and that Men are sanctified before they are completely justified; We need not
much fear to say, That such as attribute all unto Christ's visible
Transactions, when he was in the World, are Excessive in so doing. And if this
be true, how unfair was my Adversary in leaving out that Part of my Answer,
which would have further explained my Mind, and prevented his making so ill an
Use of that which he did report; but perhaps, this might be one Reason for his
Omission, which ought to have been a Reason against it; for to these Words E.
B. meant their Excessive Regard to what Christ did without; I added, whilst
they neglected, undervalued and decryed for Blasphemy and Enthusiasm the
Appearance, Work and Righteousness of Christ within, p. 148.

To be short, friendly Reader; J. Faldo, either designed to drop this Part of
my Answer, that he might the better rack the other to his own End and our
Disgrace (which if he did, it was unmanly, much more unchristianly done) or, he
intended his Reply for my whole Answer; and then his Doctrine will ly thus:
Whoever so regards Christ's Transactions without as to neglect, undervalue and
decry for Blasphemy and Enthusiasm, the A^pearance, Work and Righteousness of
Christ within, are not Excessive or out of the Way in their Apprehension of
Christ's Transactions; But J. Faldo has that Regard to the History of Christ's
Transactions, whilst he neglects, undervalues and decryes for Blasphemy and
Enthusiasm the Appearance, Work and Righteousness of Christ within; Therefore
J. Faldo's Regard to Christ's Transactions, whilst he so neglects, undervalues,
etc. is not Excessive or out of the Way. Thus it lies for him; Let us now see
how his Reply forms it for us.

Such as say, We ought not so entirely to regard, or rest upon Christ's visible
Transactions in the World, as to neglect, undervalue and decry for Blasphemy
and Enthusiasm the Appearance, Work and Righteousness of Christ within, hold
and mantain corrupt Doctrine; But so say E. Buroughs and W. Penn; Therefore E.
B. and W. P. mantain corrupt Doctrine.

These Arguments are the Natural Import of J. F's Reply; how sound and
consistent with Scripture and Reason, is left to the Judgment of Impartial Men.
Had E. Burrough's Words been more ingenuously weighed, he would have seen them
to have bin no witness for his turn; for may not Men feed upon a Report of good
Things, and for want of unfeigned Repentance, true Faith and humble Obedience,
never be benefitted by them? If J. F. denies it, he consequently excludes the
Inward Work of Faith and Repentance to be necessary (says he and all such
Professors) to apply Christ's Transactions beneficially; and if he confesses
Repentance and Faith to be requisite for the right and profitable Application
of Christ's Transactions, then is not feeding upon a Report of them sufficient
(for at that rate all the Hypocrites and Lord-Lord-Cryers in the World, however
impious, would be certainly saved) does E. B's Reproof of such who vainly hope
thereby to be justified and saved in the Sight of God deserve to be styled
corrupt Doctrine. I could here produce many solid Testimonies out of the
Writings of several ancient and worthy Protestants, but shall confine my self
within the Compass of a Passage given us by a present Writer, quoted by our
Adversary in his first Book, p. 58. and that is Dr. Stilling fleet in a
Discourse called his six Sermons, If they did believe Christ came into the
World to reform it, that the Wrath of God is now revealed from Heaven against
all Unrighteousness, that his Love which is shown to the World is to deliver
them from the Hand of their Enemies, that they might serve him in Righteousness
and Holiness all the Days of their Lives, they could never imagine that
Salvation is intailed by the Gospel on a mighty Confidence or vehement
Persuasion of what Christ has done for them, p. 160. Thus teaches D. Patrick,
D. Tillatson, D. Cradock, W. Shirlock and others called Episcopalians (to say
nothing of the general Independents and Baptists) how this will agree with J.
F. But above all, how Episcopalians are no further concerned in his Book then
vindicated, a Story he has the Confidence to tell in his Preface, whilst they
are so manifestly contradicted in the great Point of Justification, every
common Capacity will see without further pointing. And so we proceed to the
next Exception he makes against my Defense of a Saying charged by him upon R.
Farnsworth, as fit for his Turn.


Reply, p. 72. To the second Citation (viz. What Righteousness Christ performed
without me, was not my Justification, neither was I saved by it) W. P. seeks to
mend one Error by another, much akin to it, thus, (What gives daily Access and
Acceptance to and with the Lord, is that Preparation of Clean and Righteous
Adornment the Soul actually receives from Christ, etc. Take Justification in
this Sense, and not for Remission -- and let our Adversary do his worst. There
needs a Diver of Delos to make very good Sense of these words. I am so w^ll
acquainted with the Quakers Meanings, as well as their Sayings, that I dare
affirm he intends by all this no other Righteousness for Access and Acc^ptance
then what is subjected in Men, and is therefore their own Righteousness.


Rejoinder. The words he charged upon R. Farnsworth, I defended conditionally,
that is, That if ever he spoak or writ them, he did not intend any Benefit that
came by Christ's Offering of himself by the Eternal Spirit a Sacrifice for all,
for the Remission of Sins that are past through the forbearance of God, which
is the first part of Justification; But that the Justification and Salvation he
understood, were not from the Guilt of Sin past by Christ's Offering, etc. but
from the Root, Nature and Power of In-dw^lling Sin, through the Powerful
Operation of Christ's Spirit in the Inward Parts, in the Heart and Conscience.

But first, let is be remembered, that he cited no Book, a Fault I found with
him before, and desired him, just where he leaves off, that the next time he
would let us know what was the Book that afforded that Expression, which he
has not done; next, That he dares affirm we intended our own Righteousness to
be that which gives us Acceptance with God; whereas in so many words I said,
that the Clean and Righteous Adornment, which gives the Soul Admittance into
God's holy Courts, must actually be received from Christ, the Lord her
Righteousness, which four words, with a great many more, he disingenuously
skipt. For those words of his, subjected in Man, I know not what he means by
them, unless it be a Righteousness within the Power and Ability of Man to bring
forth; (for I know no other Righteousness that can be subjected in Men) and
that this was not my Meaning (notwithstanding his obtrusive Confidence) my own
words plainly evidence. He might as properly say, that a Child's being washed
clean by its Father, is its own Cleanness, or that it made it self clean; or,
because a poor Man in Rags entreats some better Raiment at the Charity of a
great Man, and that he would please to take him into the Capacity of a menial
Servant; therefore that Livery or Apparel bestowed upon him, by which he is
denoted, and has the Access proper to one of his Family, was of his own proper
Cost or Working; and not the Gift of his Lord and Master. If this be Absurd,
John Faldo's Consequence cannot be Rational.

In short, The Everlasting Righteousness which Christ brings into his People,
by which he fits them for his Father's Communion, Dan. 9. 24.
is not the less of him, nor the more of or from us, because in us.

But that I may not trouble my self to challenge him to prove this Pernicious
Meaning to be ours, he says he will prevent me with a Citation out of W.
Smith's Cat. p. 74. Quest What is the Righteousness that justifies in the Sight
of God? Answ. For we have Life before we have Motion to act or do any thing
that is pleasing to God, and in that Life we have Salvation, and so Life and
Salvation is freely given us from God.


Reply, page 72. This Citation Mr. Penn had to consider in this Chapter he
pretends to answer, but he forbears it among many other, which say more for my
Purpose then he dare transscribe.


Rejoinder. If there were others more to his purpose then this, he is to blame
to conceal them; but believe him that will, I cannot; And we have Cause to
think, that if he has misapplyed this, he would not have been very faithful in
the rest; I do seriously profess, I never met yet with his Peer for quoting.

First, there is no such Question either in page 74. or in several pages before
or after that, if in the whole Catechism.

Secondly, he has left out Five Words of the Answer, which stood us most upon
to be cited, and altogether the true Question, which was this.

Quest. But whether do you not depend upon the Things ye do for Life and
Salvation?

Answ. Nay, we do not so; for we have Life before we have Motion to act or do
any thing that is pleasing unto God.

What, Reader, can be clearer, first, then his Denial of our Dependence upon
Good Works for Life and Salvation? Next, What plainer, then that he excludes
Action, and consequently Works, as in the Creature, from so much as pleasing
God; unless God vouchsafe to breath the Breath of his own Life, and thereby
empower him to bring forth Fruits of Holiness? Lastly, That the Reason of Man's
Acceptance is not his own Works or Actions, but his being found acting and
working in the Living Faith, which is the Gift of God, by and through which
Access to, and holy Fellowship with God are enjoyed by his Children -- And thus
much W. Smith's following words tell us; and so Life and Salvation is freely
given us from God, and by his Grace we are saved through the Faith which we
have in him, and that puts us upon Motion and Action to do his Will in all
things, and yet not to depend upon what we do for Life -- But do all things
which he commands us from the Motion (or first setting on work, of his Life;
and this is Life before Action, which moves us to Action, and not Action before
Life, thereby to attain Life, Catechism, page 73, 74..

Now, Reader, this considered, give us thy Judgment of J. Faldo's daring Proof;
Does it not to a Tittle make good his Charge, That the Quakers are for
Justification by their own Works? What sort of Conscience must he have, that
dares look the World in the Face, and obtrude such arrant Untruths upon it?
Does this Scandalous Perversion become a Man who two pages off tells us of his
abhorring to Mis-eite, Mis-render or Mis-apply our Writings?

To conclude; He seems to write at all Adventures, supplying his Weakness with
Confidence, and drowning the Noise of his own Forgeries by his vehement
Clamours against such imaginary ones as he has provided for me, to go under my
Name, which is his greatest of all. I heartily pray to God, that he may be
stopped in this Unconscionable Course, and come to find true Repentance, that
Eternal Anguish do not irrecoverably over-take him, as the Just Recompense of
such Unjust Dealing with us.

His third Citation was out of I. Penington; Can outward Blood cleanse the
Conscience? Can outward Water wash the Soul clean? His Comment upon it is this,
A plain Denial of the Efficacy of the Blood of Christ shed on the Cross to
cleanse the Soul from the Guilt of Sin, by its Satisfaction to the Justice of
God. To which I answered, Does I. P. deny or any way meddle with the outward
Blood concerning the Guilt of Sin past, how far it had an Influence into
Justification, taking Justification in that Sense. But does not I. P. treat of
the outward Blood with respect to Purgation and Sanctification of the Soul from
the present (Nature) Acts and Habits of Sin that lodges therein? Is there no
Difference betwixt being pardoned Sin past, and the Ground of it, and being
renewed and regenerated in Mind and Spirit, and the Ground of that Conversion?
His Reply to this, though he gives not two Lines of what I now repeated out of
my Answer, lies thus.


Reply, page 74. And if we allow Penn's Construction, that he denied the Blood
of Christ, which he calls outward, to have an influence into Sanctification, he
commits a foul Error; for cleansing the Conscience by Sanctification is the
Effect of the Blood of Christ, as well as the other. The New Testament or
Convenant is by Christ said to be the Cup of the New Testament in my Blood,
wherein all the Promises and Mercies of the New Covenant are asserted, of
which, I think, Cleansing by Sanctification is none of the least.


Rejoinder. If by the Promise of Sanctification to be asserted in the Blood of
Christ, he understands that both the Promise of Sanctification, and all other
Promises relating to the Dispensation of the Gospel, were asserted, ratified
and sealed to them that believe, in and by the Blood of Christ, I shall
heartily and cheerfully submit; But if he mean that the Blood of Christ, shed
so many Hundred Years ago by the Hands of Ungodly Men, is the inherent real
Purger of the Conscience from Dead Works, I must deny what he says; for the
Scripture attributes Sanctification to the Eternal Spirit; It is one Article of
the common Creed of the called Christians, viz. the Lavour of Regeneration,
which is by the Spirit. But what is all this to J. Faldo's defending himself
from abusing I. Penington's Words? to wit, that by asking, Can Outward Blood
Cleanse? Can Outward Water wash the Soul? He would make him to deny Christ's
sacrificing of himself upon the Cross to have any Influence toward the
Remitting of the Guilt of Sin past, which is quite another thing? as this
Argument manifests, which naturally expresses J. Faldo's wresting of I. P's
words?

He that denies Outward Blood can cleanse the Conscience, denies that Outward
Blood may be a Sacrifice whereby to declare the Remission of the Guilt of Sin
past, which is so absolutely and obviously false, that it may be seen of every
mean Capacity; Yet hitherto J. Faldo's Reasoning runs. Once again before we
leave him, thus.

He that is pardoned the Guilt of Sin that is past by the Blood of Christ as a
Sacrifice declaring Remission to all that believe, is by the same Blood washed,
cleansed, renewed and regenerated in his inward Man from the very Nature, Power
and In-dwelling of Sin; which is as untrue as the other; yet both these
Arguments follow upon J. F' s mis-rendering of I. Penington' s words; But his
Credit in this Particular is not at all blemished by his Comment upon I. P' s
words, if we will believe him; for he thinks it may be justified by a Passage
out of W. Smith.


Reply. Catech. page 64. We believe that Christ in us does offer up himself a
Living Sacrifice to God for us, by which the Wrath of God is appeased to us.
This Passage I cited, which Penn among many others takes no notice of; And if
this can be the Blood of Christ shed at Jerusalem, on the Cross of Wood, it is
a most incredible Mystery.


Rejoinder. There is no Difficulty, Friendly Reader, in unfolding his pretended
Mystery, if the Question unto which the Answer was made be considered, which
was this, What is your Faith concerning Christ IN YOU as a Redeemer? which
relates not to the Blood of Christ shed on the Cross of Wood; wherefore to make
the Answer deny Remission of Sins to be declared by Christ's sacrificing of his
Body upon the Cross (which was no part of the Question to be answered) is like
all the rest of his Injustice toward us; If the Answer had rejected that
Sacrifice, we should have condemned it, as much as he has abused it; But
unless he denies that Christ offers himself in his Children in the Nature of a
Mediating Sacrifice, W. Smith's words are so far from Denying the Blood of
Christ shed upon the Cross of Wood, that he must allow them to be sound in
themselves; for Christ is a Mediator and an Attoner in the Consciences of his
People, at what time they shall fall under any Miscarriage, if they unfeignedly
Repent, according to 1 John 2. 1, 2. as allowably as that he prays in his
People, as their Head, A. Sadeel Oper. page 37.
which A. Sadeel says out of Augustine, and D. Everad, as anon. So that upon
the whole, this is as strong and clear a Proof, as others that he has hither
to brought; for as they, so this (in Question and Answer) wholely concerns what
Christ is to Man in Man (which was no part of the Question) and not what he was
to any in his Visible Appearance, which was the only Question.

Before I leave this Particular, I must again declare, That we are led by the
Light and Spirit of Christ with Holy Reverence to confess unto the Blood of
Christ shed at Jerusalem, as that by which a Propitiation was held forth to the
Remission of the Sins that were past through the Forbearance of God unto all
that believed: And we do embrace it as such; and do firmly believe, that
thereby God declared his great Love unto the World; for by it is the
Consciousness of Sin declared to be taken away, or Remission sealed to all that
have known true Repentance, and Faith in his Appearance. But because of the
Condition, I mean Faith and Repentance, therefore do we exhort all to turn
their Minds to the Light and Spirit of Christ within, that by seeing their
Conditions, and being by the same brought both into true Contrition and holy
Confidence in God's Mercy, they may come to receive the Benefit thereof; for
without that necessary Condition, it will be impossible to obtain Remission of
Sins, though it be so generally promulgated thereby.

To conclude; As in my Answer at large, so here, in short; I say; Justification
may be taken in a twofold Sense; Completely, and Incompleatly: or rather thus,
complete Justification has two parts; the first is, not imputing past Sins, or
accounting a true Penitant, as Righteous (or clear from the Guilt of past Sin)
as if he had never Sinned, through the Remission which God declared and sealed
up to all such in the Blood of his Son; and thus far Righteousness as imputed
goes, and is the first part or Justification begun. The complete or last part
of complete Justification, is the Cleansing of the Conscience, and Regenerating
the Mind from the Nature, Power and In-dwelling of Sin by the effectual working
of the Heavenly Power of Christ, and bringing into the Heart, and establishing
his Everlasting Righteousness in the room thereof.


Some Scriptures considered relating to this Doctrine.
To the first part belong such Scriptures as these; Isa. 53. 11. He shall bear
their Iniquities (...) septuagint (...), that is, He shall bear away their
Iniquities, as did the Escape Goat figuratively under the Law; or, That God
would declare his remitting or passing over the Sin that was past, Romans 3. 25.
and. that he would be in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.
19, 20.
not imputing their Trespasses unto them.

Also Romans 4. 5. But to him that works not, but believes on him that
justified the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness; that is, God
acquitted upon Repentance, and Faith in his Promise, such as have lived in a
Course of Ungodliness. For no present Work, how good soever, can justify any
Man from the Condemnation which is due for the Guilt of Sin that is past. So
that justifying the Ungodly in this place is pardoning the Ungodly; and being
so pardoned, upon Faith in the Promise of God, is accounted for Righteousness,
or as if the Person pardoned had never sinned: and this appears from the 7th
and 8th verses, Blessed are they whose Sins are forgiven, and whose Iniquities
are Covered.

Again, Chap. 5. 6. For when we were yet wit hout Strength, Christ in due time
dyed for the Ungodly; and verse 8. But God commended his Love toward us, in
that while we were yet Sinners Christ dyed for us. That is, Christ laid down
his Life to reclaim Sinners, and to declare the Righteousness of God for the
Forgiveness of the Sin that is past, to all Ungodly and Sinful Men, that turn
from the Evil of their Ways by unfeigned Repentance; it was done in and by
Christ for all Ungodly Men, but not to the Benefit of any without Repentance.
Not that people should go on in Sin, but by so recommending of his Love, and
sealing such Glad-Tidings with his own Blood, to allure and engage them from
their present Course of Sin, 1 John 4. 19.

He first loved us, men must not therefore continue in Sin, that Grace ( that
is Forgiveness) may abound; God forbid, Romans 6. 1.

The last considerable Place is in the second Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap.
5. 21. For he has made him Sin for us, who knew no Sin; That is, He was made a
Sacrifice for the remitting or passing over of the Sin that was past; for such
as repent and believe, that they might be made the Righteousness of God, or
rather accounted Righteous in the Sight of God, as if they had never committed
Sin by not imputing or forgiving the Sin that was past.

This Sense the two foregoing Verses confirm, to wit, that God was in Christ
reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them,
and has committed unto them the Word of of Reconciliation. Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseeeh you through us, We pray you
in Christ's Stead, that you would be reconciled to God, verse 19, 20. agreeing
with Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a Propit^ation through Faith in
his Blood to declare his Righteousness for the Remission ( or passing over) of
Sins that are past, through the Forbearance of God; which is neither a rigid
Satisfaction for, nor a Justification from Sins that are past, present and to
come, as a late shallow Writer in his Preface to the Hartford self-confuting
Pamphlet idly and falsely called the Quaker converted, would have us believe,
but an acquitting from or remitting of past Sin upon Faith and Amendment of
Life, which makes up that only imputative Righteousness, that the Scripture
holds forth, or we can allow of.

The Scriptures that belong to the second Part of this Doctrine, which makes up
complete Justification, are such as these: Keep thee far from a false Matter,
and the Innocent and Righteous slay thou not, for I will not justify the
wicked, Exodus 23. I. Lord who shall, ABIDE in thy TABERNACLE, who shall DWELL
in thy HOLY HILL? He that WALKS UPRIGHTLY and WORKS RIGHTEOUSNESS and
SPEAKS THE TRUTH IN HIS HEART, Psalm. 15. 1, 2. When a Righteous man turns
away from his Righteousness, for his Iniquity that he has done, shall he dye;
Again, when the wicked Man turns away from his Wickedness, and does that
which is Lawful or Right, he shall save his Soul, Ezekiel. 18. 26, 27. Not every
one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but
he that DOES the Will of my Father which is in Heaven, Math. 7. 21. Unless a
Man be born again he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3, 5. If ye
keep my Commandment, ye shall abide in my Love, John 15. 10. For not the
Hearers of the Law are justified, but the Doers of the Law shall be justified,
Romans 2. 13. If ye live after the Flesh ye shall dye; but if ye through the
Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the Body ye shall live, for as many as are led
by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God, Romans 18. 13, 14. That the Offering of
the Gentiles might be acceptable being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.
16. But this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification, 1 These. 43. Because
God has from the Beginning chosen you to Salvation through Sanctification of
the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth, 2 These. 2. 13. Was not Abraham our Father
JUSTIFIED by WORKS, when he offered Isaac his Son upon the Altar? Ye see then
how that by Works a Man is justified, and not by Faith only, Jam. 2. 22, 24.

In all these weighty Passages there is nothing more clear then that
Sanctification both ushers in, and compleats Justification. First, In that no
Man can have right to Remission of Sins, but upon Unfeigned Repentance and True
Faith begotten in the Heart, which is as well the Beginnings of Sanctification,
as Introduction to Justification. 2 dly, That (though we grant as before at
large, Remission of Sins, not to be the Effect or purchase of inward
Righteousness and Holiness, for its impossible; but the free Love and Mercy of
God yet) without the Holy Sanctifying or Regenerating Work of God in the Heart,
by the Operation of his Eternal Spirit, whereby to do the Will of God, as it is
in Heaven, Psalm. 16. 11.
it is impossible to have Access into God's Tabernable and Holy Hill, much less
to be justified by him. And indeed, as true Repentance, which is the beginning
of the Work of Sanctfication, opens the Way for the Remission of Sins that are
past, which I call the first part of Justification; so is Regeneration or
Sanctification throughout, in Body, Soul and Spirit, as well the completing of
Justification, as Sanctification, consequently it is that second Part of
Justification; because it is a making Man just by Nature, who was before Just
but by Imputation; that is, he that was accounted just by not having Sin
imputed through Repentance and Faith in the Love of God, declared in and by
Christ, is now inwardly made more just, because made Holy, as God is Holy,
Levit. 20. 7. Perfect, as his Heavenly Father is perfect, Mat. 5. 48.
Righteous, even as God is Righteous, 1 John 3. 7. through the effectual Working
of the Holy Ghost.

There are Two Scriptures which prove this.

The one is, 1 Cor. 1. 30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is
made unto us Wisdom and Righteousness, and Sanctification and Redemption; where
the word Justification is left out, and yet the Thing Justification doubtless
included and employed.

The other is, Romans 8. 30. Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also
called; and whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them
he also glorified; where Sanctification is left out, yet without Dispute the
word Justification includes it. Nor are we alone in this Judgment, since both
Ancient and Modern Writers avouch the same.

Irenaeus, adv. Here Is. lib. 4. cap. 30.

Irenaeus, Disciple to Polycarpus, who was Disciple to John the Divine Apostle,
says, Justiantem Patres virtute Decalogi conscriptam habentes in cordibus s^is
legem. The Patriarchs, says he, were justified by virtue of the Law written in
their Hearts.

Again, ( Lib. 3. cap. 4.) He speaks of many Nations of the Barbarians of whom
they that believe in Christ have Salvation written in their Hearts by the
Spirit, without Paper or Ink.

Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. lib. 7.

And says Clemens Alexandrinus, who lived in the same Century; Ye are made of
him to be Righteous, as he is Righteous, and leavened of the Holy Ghost.

Orig. Epist. ad Romans L. 4. c. 4.

And Origin also tells us, Therefore Christ Justified them only who have
betaken themselves to a New Life by the Example of his Resurrection, and have
cast away the Old Garments of Unrighteousness and Iniquity, as the Cause of
Death. Thus far of Fathers.

Of the Reformers from Popery.

H. Bullenger, Decad. 1. Sermon. 6. de Justif.

H. Bullenger thus; To justify signifies to remit Offenses (that is, as I
distinguished the first part; but hear what follows) to cleanse, to sanctify,
and to give utterance of Life Everlasting. Again, Justification is taken in
this present Treatise for the Absolution and Remission of Sins, for
Sanctification and Adoption into the Number of the Sons of God.

D. Barns's Works, p. 243, 244, 245.

To him I will add D. Barnes, Burnt in Henry the Eighth's Days, who in his
Discourse of the True Church against the Romish Bishops, asserts in full and
pathetical Expressions; That what gives her Acceptance in the Sight of God, is
her being presented to God by Christ her Head, without Spot, through the
Washing of Regeneration.

B. Downam. of Justif. chap. 1.

So Bishop Downam of Justification distinguishes and determines this Point
almost in the very same Terms.

I will conclude with some Passages out of J. Spirgg's Book, entitled, A
Testimony to an Approaching Glory.

J. Sprig. Test. p. 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 88, 89. We may be bold to say after
Christ, That Flesh profitteth nothing. If you only know Christ's Dying and
Rising without you, it will profit you nothing, except you have him Dying and
Rising within you. Error in this is the Root of the Dead Faith, whereof the
World is full -- Paul does not say, that the Hearing that Christ dyed for the
Sins of Men, does make them free; No, there was the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus -- Here is that which puts a Difference, when the Spirit of Jesus Christ
brings the Covenant to the Heart of a poor Creature, when the Spirit of
Adoption and Sonship revealing us God as our Father, revealing God in Union
with us, our Righteousness and our Strength, he does indeed seal us to the Day
of Redemption; He sets apart Christ's Sheep, this distinguishes them from the
other. So that if you lay your Salvation upon an What says J. F. to this? Is
it not beyond what E. B. said of a Report of Christ?
Historical Christ, ye will be deceived, If you will have that in which you may
confide, you must have Christ revealed in you in the Spirit.

This is the sum of all I desire to commend unto you, that we are not
justified, we are not sanctified by Christ's dying, by Christ's suffering in
the Flesh only, That is not the complete Ministration of our Salvation (There
indeed we see our Salvation as in a Glass, and it is transacted as in a Figure,
as in the History) but then are we actually sanctified, where as God does send
that same Spirit of Adoption into our Hearts, revealing unto us the Love of the
Father, and revealing unto us our Reconciliation, that Reconciliation that was
held forth to us on the Cross, but which is dispensed unto us, by our being
offered up upon the Cross, as Christ was.

All these Persons put great Value upon the Inward Work of God and Christ in
the Heart, and plainly determine Sanctification and Justification to be one and
the same thing; but if any one have the Preference, the Scripture it self gives
it to Sanctification, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Know ye not that the Unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God; Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with
Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God; and such were some of you, but
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified (...), ye are justified in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and the Spirit of our God. H. Grot. in Epist. 1 Cor.
H. Grotius expounds the word sanctified (...), accepistis spiritum sanctum, ye
have received the Holy Ghost, and the word Justified, majores quotidie in
justitia fecistis progressus, ye have made daily greater progress in
Righteousness. And D. Hammond, in his Annotations upon the fifth Chapter of the
second Epistle to the Corinthians, interprets (...) or Righteousness, a being
first sanctified, and then justified.

To end this Chapter, serious Reader, It is our Faith, that Christ to conform
us to his Heavenly Image, who have by wicked Works degenerated into the
Earthly, and thereby rendered our selves Aliens, yea, Rebels to his pure Law of
Life, first declares or holds forth Forgiveness of Sins past, upon true
Repentance, by the laying down of his Life; and then works out, by his Holy
Power and Spirit in our Consciences, the Sin that is inherent, and in the room
thereof brings in his own Everlasting Righteousness. So that our being
accounted Righteous, is as Christ was accounted a Sinner; That is, he was not a
Sinner by Commission or Guilt, neither were we as of our selves Righteous by
Innocence or Non-commission of Sin; for then there had been no need of
Remission to have been declared by his public offering up of himself: But he
was so reputed from bearing away the Sins that were past through the
Forbearance of God; and we are accounted as Righteous (upon Repentance and true
Faith) because of that Remission and perfect Acquittance of Sins that are past,
as if we had never committed them. Therefore woefully will they be mistaken,
that shut out the inward Work of God in the Heart, and stretch this to Sins
past, present and to come, without any regard thereto; when as the Benefit of
Christ's Suffering, can in no sense be known or enjoyed, without the true Faith
and unfeigned Repentance, which must precede Remission it self (and by whom, or
where is that wrought, if not by Christ within) much more must they go before
complete Justification, which comprizeth Sanctification and Redemption, we
cannot but pron ounce it a Dangerous Doctrine; since it flatters People with
that being completed, that is not; thereby deluding their poor Souls into a
Perishing Security.

CHAP. IX.
Of the True Christ. We own, and our Adversary proved to deny him.

THe sixteenth Chapter of his first Book charged us with the Denial of the
Christ of God; Among other Testimonies that he brought out of our Friends
Books, to maintain it, I did eflectually consider two; viz. This we certainly
know, and can never call the Bodily Garment Christ, but that which appeared and
dwelt in the Body. Again, For that which he took upon. him was but a Garment,
even the Flesh and Blood of our Nature, I. Peninington Quest. p. 20, 23, 32. To
introduce my Answer, I observed at the same time, and in the very same page, He
confost, That we don't deny there was such a Man as Jesus, the Son of Mary, and
that God, or rather Christ, was in him, which I then said makes up our Christ;
I meant, God manifested in the Flesh. He replyeth thus.

Reply, p. 76, 77. But this I told W. P. was no more then the Quakers profess
themselves; We witness ( says Fox) the same Christ that ever was, now
manifested in the Flesh.


Rejoinder. He should have given us the Book and Page, where G. F. has so
expressed himself; however, we deny not that Doctrine; for God does dwell and
walk in his Children, who are called his Temples and Tabernacles in Holy
Scripture, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Rev. 21. 3. But we must forever reject J. Faldo's
ignorant or worse Consequence; That because we own, that God dwells in his
Children, therefore he dwelt no more in that Body of Flesh he prepared to
manifest himself by then he does in his People; Or, that our asserting, that
God appeared and dwelt in that Holy Body eminently prepared by him, is to be
understood in no larger Sense, then that in which we understand him to dwell in
his Children. I might as well argue against the Scripture as J. Faldo does
against us; Christ was full of Grace and Truth; therefore when he fills his
Children with Grace and Truth, they have as much Grace and Truth in them as
their Lord and Master. Or thus, God was in Christ and God was in Paul;
therefore he was as much in Paul as he was in Christ. It is after this Rate,
Reader, our Adversary essays to confute us, as if we made no Distinction
between the Fullness and the Measure, the Treasury and the Gift; He was full of
Grace and Truth, and of his Fullness have we received and Grace for Grace, Joh.
1. 14, 16.

The next Thing I observed from what he gave as our Confession of the true
Christ, was this, That he whom we call Christ, is not John Faldo' s Christ; for
he was that Body only that dyed; here he cuts my Answer of short and bestows
this Reply upon it.


Reply, page 76. Here the Word, Only, W. P. forgeth; he makes my allowing
Christ's Body to be his Garment, to imply, it is not Christ himself.


Rejoinder. Why did he not give my Words; who knows by what he quoted of my
Answer that he had ever been so kind? the Man knew it pincht him, and seemed
resolved to conceal it. It was this: In the midst of his second Proof, he
inserts these two Words VERY RIGHT, as his Assent to that Part of it, which to
me seems as inconsistent with his Purpose as may be, to wit, that which Christ
took upon htm was our Garment, even the Flesh and Blood of our Nature;
therefore said I, John Faldo as well as we acknowledges, That the Garment is
not Christ, unless there be no Difference betwixt Christ and his Garment; Or,
that Christ was but the Garment of that divine Being that dwells therein; which
were unscriptural and very carnal; and I still say, That Christ's Garment can
never constitute him Christ. And that, as he darkly calls it the (entire)
Christ (as I shall make appear) so has he in this Concession contradicted
himself, and utterly given away the Cause. But he is of another Mind as his
Reply will inform us.


Reply, page 76. The Apostle Paul calls his and the Saints Bodies their
Clothing, 1 Cor. 5. yet they were never the less a part of themselves.


Rejoinder. A mere Rattle for Children. Did the Body God prepared for his Son
to do his Will in, help to constitute him Christ, as much as the Apostles Body
did help to constitute him Paul? If it did, why may we not as well say that
Paul was among the Fathers in the Wilderness so many hundred Years before he
was born, as the same Apostle does assert, Christ by Name to have been the
spiritual Rock of which the Fathers drank in the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10. 4. for
if the Body constitute him Christ, as says J. F. then he could no more be
Christ before he had that Body, then Paul could be Paul before he had his Body;
and consequently, There is no more Absurdity in affirming, That Paul was Paul
so many hundred Years before he was born, then that Christ was Christ so many
hundred Years before he was born.

Again, If Paul's Body were but a Clothing, how much more remote does J. F's
Comparison make Christ's Body to be from his Divinity? since Paul did not
preexist, Christ did; but he that took that Body, and that Body that was taken,
were not of equal Date; for the Body was taken in the Fullness of Time; but he
that took it, and manifested himself by it, was from Everlasting. In short,
Christ qualified that Body for his Service, but that Body did not constitute
Christ; He is invisible, and ever was so to the ungodly World; (that was not
his Body) as honest J. Bradford told Archdeacon Harpsfield. B. Mart. 3. Vol.
p. 293. and so much the Word (...) or anonted signifies, which was not outward
after the Jewish Ceremony, but by the Spirit and invisible Power of God.

Lastly, I will leave it with my Reader to consider what better terms then
Earthly and Perishing. J. F's Comparison implies to Christ's Body; for such
was the Apostles and the Bodies of those Saints he writ to. But he will by no
means have himself concerned with a great Part of my following Discourse, which
was, he thinks, in Opposition to no Body; because I argued that the mere Body
of Christ could not be the entire Christ (though he makes our Denial of it to
be a disowning of the true Christ) producing a Passage out his Book to my
Purpose in Contradiction to himself, viz. p. 72. The Flesh and Blood of Christ
we do not believe to be Christ, separated from his Man's Soul, or that to be
Christ separated from his Divne and Eternal Nature; bestowing upon me for so
ill employing of my time, these Terms, Vain Trifler -- Pedantick
Magesterialness, Forger, and that it is a greater Wickedness then being a
Thief; to make him assert the mere Body to be the entire Christ; adding, but
this is Penn' s highway and beaten Rode One would think after all this, that I
had wronged him with all imaginable Baseness, in fastening upon him any such
Conclusion; yet if I make it not appear by his Reply (which one would think, he
should have penned a little more cautiously after he had given such Occasion by
his former Discourse) and that to, in his very next page, let my Reader say, I
merit all th^se hard Words that J. Faldo flingeth so angrily upon me.

He produced several Scriptures to prove (as I understood him) the Manhood to
be the Christ of God (or else he did nothing; for without so believing and
arguing it was impossible for him to prove our Denial of the true Christ,
because. we asserted Christ to have been before that Body, consequently that it
was not the the entire Christ) which I explained and rescued. He omits giving
the Reader any account of it, only in general Terms, and that not without
Perversion; His Reply unto which will make good my Construction of his Words,
or I am greatly mistaken.


Reply, p. 77. Whereas I produced Abundance of Scriptures to prove that the Man
Jesus is the Christ, W. P. will by no means allow them to have that Sense; no,
not that in Luke 2. 26. And it was revealed to him (Simeon) by the Holy Ghost,
that he should not see Death before he had seen the Lord's Christ, neither that
the Child Jesus whom Simeon took up in his Arms, was the Christ; Certainly
(says W. P. p. 161.) This Allegation from Luke 2. 26. will never prove the
Body of Jesus, which the Father prepared before him, to be the whole entire
Christ, etc. Neither did I produce It to prove the Body to be such; what
Disputing can there be with a Man that keeps neither to my Words, nor to the
Question.


Rejoinder. But is this the great Enemy to Forgery, the express Quoter, one
that cites to a Tittle, and scorns, as to Ignore his own Concessions, so to
render his own Conclusions for his Enemies Assertions? who charges me with
denying this Passage among others, as any whit proving the Man Jesus to be the
Christ, whilst he quotes my own Conclusion upon it to have been no other then
the Body of Jesus, to have been the whole and entire Christ. Now he cant
compass his End, he produced not those Scriptures to prove any such Thing; but
what is clearer then that it is the same thing with J. Faldo, to deny the Body
of Jesus to be the entire Christ of God, and to deny the Christ of God;
consequently, that by the Christ of God he understands with L. Muggleton only
the Body that died? So that he did but evade, when he said that I argued
against no body, in affirming and proving that the Body taken in that time was
not the whole Christ of God; and that he produced those Scriptures to that very
End, notwithstanding what he says to the contrary; for what else can any
infer, when he so obviously makes no Difference between saying, The Man Jesus
is not Christ, and the visible Body of Jesus is not the whole entire Christ;
Thus, Reader, he Faulters at the Entrance. I will give a brief Account of near
two pages of Answer by him omitted.

It is and will be granted that Simeon saw the Lord's Christ; but I hope J. F.
will not deny unto that good man who waited for Israel's Consolation, that he
had as well a spiritual as natural, or inward as outward Sight of Christ; for
it were both to deny Christ's Divinity, and to conclude Simeon void of any
spiritual Sight or Intendment in these Words of the Lord's Christ, as a Light
enlightening the Gentiles, etc. though still be it understood, that we confess
that Child as seen and understood by Simeon, with Respect to that great End of
his Appearance to be the Lord's Christ; Let none then be so unjust as to infer
we deny the Lords Christ, because we rather choose to say the Body of Christ,
then Christ; for says J. Faldo as well as we elsewhere, Christ is God manifest
in Flesh; See my Answer, page 161.

Nothing can be clearer then that I only argued in Opposition to his carnal
Doctrine, against the mere Body's being the Christ of God. Now, since he makes
me hereby to deny the Man Christ Jesus, I must conclude, that by the Man Jesus
he understands no more then the mere Body of Jesus, otherwise, how do I deny
the Man Jesus to be the Christ of God, in only scrupeling to call the mere and
only Body of Jesus the christ of God. His next Animadversion was this.


Reply, p. 78. Let us observe how W. P. abuses that Scripture, Acts 5. 30, 31.
The words (says he) are thus to be understood, The God of our Fathers (who
raised up (the Body of) Jesus from the Dead, which ye slew, and hung upon a
Tree, him (whose Body you so cruelly used) has God exalted at his Right Hand,
etc. Beside this Construction, which renders it not to be Christ, but only his
Body that suffered, and so Christ never suffered nor dyed, nor rose, he (W. P.)
puts instead of whom he slew? which he slew, that it may intend only the Body,
and not the Person of Christ.


Rejoinder. I appeal to my Reader's Understanding and Conscience, if J. Faldo
does not in this Sentence make the mere Body of Christ to be the Christ of God;
for one Reason why he denies my Interpretation, is my making the mere Body only
to have dyed, which not being the entire Christ of God, it was not He, but his
Body only that dyed. So that either J. Faldo holds the mere Body to be the
Christ, or else, that something more dyed then the mere Body: But because he
acknowledges the Deity could not dye, nor that the Soul did dye, it must
follow that the Body only dyed; And since he will strictly have it, that the
Christ of God dyed, the mere Body must be the Christ of God.

His second Exception is very trivial, and what in it can be thought to deserve
an Answer, is included in what was said before; for whom might be attributed to
the Body, as it represented the whole or entire Christ, that is Metonymically
spoaken, the Thing containing, for the Thing contained, which is very frequent
in Scripture; for many times that is ascribed to the Body of Jesus, which
belongs to the whole Christ. This, with abundance more of pertinent Answer he
takes no more notice of, then if it had never been written. But a little to
give J. F. his Humor, and to see if the Upshot rises higher then which. What
does he understand by the Person slain? (according to J. F's own distinctions)
Was it the Godhead? That he denies, first Book, part 2. p. 73. Was it the Man's
Soul? No, Reply, p. 78. Must it not be the Body then? And if so? What
Corrupting of Scripture is it to say, which ye slew, instead of whom ye slew?
It Is at this slender trifling rate he has dealt with us throughout the
Controversy. Two Passages more before we conclude this Chapter.

Upon my recollecting the whole of this Argumentation and concluding thus,
Since the Divinity could not dye, and the Man's Soul was not Mortal, much less
could be hanged on a Tree, or put into a Sepulcher, it follows, That it was the
visible Body only that dyed, etc. and that it is therefore the entire Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, in J. F's as well as Blasphemous L. Muggleton's Sense, he
makes this Reply word for word.


Reply, p. 78. But if it follows upon my Sense, it follows upon the words and
scope of the Scripture, which says the same in so many words, and in sense a
Hundred Times. But there is no such ab^urdity follows upon either; The Soul
cannot dye, cannot therefore the Man dye? If not, there is no such thing, as
killing of Men, or mortal Men.


Rejoinder. Man cannot properly be said to dye whilst his Soul lives, but he
may be said to cease to be in this Visible World, or to depart out of it, and
to lay down his mortal Body; so that the Body dies, but not the Man; I know it
is a common Phrase, but synecdochically spoken, where that is ascribed to the
whole Man, which only belongs to the Mortal part of Man. This brings the
Business no nearer then it was before; for if I understand any thing, the
Comparison makes the Death of Christ to be the Death of his Body only, and that
it is called the Death of Christ, instead of the Death of the Body of Christ,
from that familiar usage in Speech, the Thing contained for the Thing
containing, that is, Christ, instead of the Body of Christ. In short, Because
such Murderers, who are said to kill Men, kill only the Bodies of Men, those
Jews who crucified Christ, properly crucified the Body of Christ only; though
in a more mysuical Sense, they may be also said in that very Action, to have
murdered the Prince of Life and Glory, 1 Cor. 2.

His other Passage contains a Reflection upon my saying, that Souls could not
be hanged on a Tree.


Reply, page 79. I had thought that the Soul being United with the Body till
Death, wherever the Body was disposed, the Soul was also; and therefore the
Body so long as it lives, hanging on a Tree, the Soul hangs there too; also
many a poor Wretch can tell him at the Torment of Execution, that his Doctrine
is False; for were but their Souls separated from their Bodies, they would feel
no Pain, nor cry out of their Torment.


Rejoinder. A very Shuffie, and nothing to the Purpose. The Soul is in the Body
so long as the Body is alive upon the Tree, and yet it self not strictly hanged
on the Tree; for if it were, then would it be as impossible for the Soul as
Body to free it self, whilst the Soul by his own Allowance is incomparable and
impossible, because immaterial; whereas Nales, Ropes, or any other Instruments
of Cruelty, can only fasten upon material things; for if the Soul could be
properly hanged, she could as well be burnt, and laid into a Sepulcher. A Man
might as well say, if J. Faldo were hanged on a Tree, his Watch in his Pocket
would be hanged; or if he were put in the Stocks, his Understanding would be in
the Stocks. Nor has any poor Wretch reason to complain of my Doctrine at their
Executions; for I never denied, that Pain was a Sign of the Soul's not being
separated, since it is an undeniable Reason, why it is not separated; however,
it is not the Soul, but the Body (through that sensibility the Soul, while
unseparated, continues in it) which feels that Pain.

But I could tell J. Faldo of many Blessed Martyrs, that in the midst of
Flames, were carried above the Sense of Pain; not because their Souls were not
in their Bodies at the Stake, but from the exceeding Joy of the Holy Spirit,
which by the way may as well be said to be tied to the Stake, as the Soul,
because in the Soul; for that is the Conclusion of J. F's Argument; The Soul is
in the Body, therefore the Soul is as well tied as the Body; the Holy Spirit
and his Comforts are in the Soul, therefore tied as well to the Stake as either
Body or Soul.

In short, Souls may be hanged upon Trees, as Souls in Scripture are said to
dye, or be slain, an Hebrew Phrase; not that Souls really did dye or were
slain, but that Man is called many times by his nobler Part.

I shall conclude this Chapter with a few Reasons for the Hope that is in us,
concerning the Subject Matter of this Chapter, and two or Three Testimonies in
Confirmation of them, which I offer with all Tenderness of Conscience unto my
serious Reader.

First, This Opinion of our Adversary's renders Christ not to have been the
Savior of the World from Abel's Day, contrary to Scripture, which teaches us
to believe, That there was never another Name or Power by which Men could be
saved, then the Name and Power of Jesus Christ, Acts 4. 12.

Secondly, It makes Christ's Words either an Equivocation or a Contradiction,
when he said unto the Jews, Before Abraham was I am; since it makes him that
was before Abraham, and him that said so, not the same Person or Being rather.

Thirdly, Because (...), or Anointed, has a Relation to his being King, Priest
and Prophet, which are both of a more Spiritual Nature and Dignity, then the
Flesh Christ took of the Seed of Abraham; for he was made the high Priest of
the second Covenant, was without beginning of Days or End of Life.

Fourthly, Because Christ himself magnifieth the Spirit above the Flesh; They
look not farther then his Body, or Flesh as it was visible to the World, and he
appointed them to look farther, yea, to his Flesh and Blood spiritually, which
is Meat indeed, and Drink indeed, being that Living Bread which came down from
Heaven, that who eats thereof shall live forever, Joh. 6. 48, to 58, and 63.
And those that see not through and beyond that visible Body of Flesh, which was
the Vail which the eternal Word took to trasact and represent as in a common
Person, that which every Child of God ought measurably to witness in his own
particular, unto the beholding and partaking of the divine Widom, Power and
Righteousness that dwelt therein which are Meat indeed and Drink indeed unto
every hungry and thirsty Soul, they are not yet come to the chief Cornerstone
that is Elect and Precious, but are carnal, not knowing the Scriptures nor the
Power of God, Mat. 22. 29.

Fifthly, Christ Jesus laid far more Weight upon the Coming of the Comforter,
or himself, in his second and spiritual Appearance in them, among whom he
bodily conversed, then upon the Continuance of his bodily Presence, Joh. 16. 7.
intimating that he intended a more spiritual Communion with them, they in him
and he in them, even as he was in his Father and his Father in him, chap. 17,
21, 23. a Fellowship beyond what they had already known, how could it otherwise
have been expedient as the Text expresses it, if the Change from his visible
to invisible Presence, had not been both more glorious and advantageous: His
Disciples believed him for the Words he spoak, Chap. 16. 30. But ver. 31. 32.
Jesus answered them, Do you now believe? Behold, the Hour comes, yea, is now
come, that ye shall be scattered every Man to his OWN; as much as if he had
said, You shall then know me and believe in me upon a more clear and certain
Ground, when you shall have received thus of my Fullness, and Grace for Grace,
Joh. 1. 16. and be scattered to it, which is hard to be done while I stay in
this Capacity among you; therefore it is expedient that I go away, as to my
bodily Presence, Joh. 16. 7. (on which you have such great Dependence) but I
(Christ) will not leave you comfortless, I will come a Comforter unto you,
Chap. 14. 3, 18, 19, 20. For lo I am with you always even to the End of the
World, Mat. 28. 20. this is the Christ of God.

Sixthly, Because the Apostle Paul desired not, thence forth to know Christ
after the Flesh, but spiritually as he was the Son of God revealed in himself,
2 Cor. 5. 16. Gal. 1. 15, 16. and as the Apostle counted all other Knowledge
Dross and Dung to that of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ revealed
in him; so was he not contented that the Galatians should rest in a fleshly
Knowledge of Jesus Christ, but traveled in Birth with them (like a faithful
Witness of the inward Work of God) a second time until Christ was formed in
them, Gal. 4. 19. who doubtless was the true Christ.

Seventhly, Because that Flesh of Christ is called a Vail, but he himself is
within the Vail, which is the Holy of Holiest, whereinto Christ Jesus our High
Priest has entered, Hebr. 10. 20, 21. And as he descended into, and past
through a suffering State in his fleshly Appearance, Phil. 2. 8.
and returned into that State of Immortality and Eternal Life and Glory from
whence he humbled himself, which was and is the Holy of Holiest (then obscured
or hid by his flesh or body the Vail) while in the World) so must all know a
Death to their Fleshly Ways and Religions, yea their Knowledge of Christ
himself after the Flesh, or they stick in the Vail, and never enter into the
Holy of Holiest, nor come to know him in any Spiritual Relation, as their High
and Holy Priest that abides therein.

Eighthly, Because that Christ lives and dwells in the Hearts of his Children,
Joh. 14. 23. chap. 15. 5. chap. 17. 21. Coloss. 1. 27. which cannot be said of
the Outward Body of Christ.

Therefore I cannot by any means believe that the mere visible Flesh and Body
constitutes Christ; though I shall confess, that respecting the Administration,
and the Service of that Holy Body (fitted and quallified of God as an
Instrument to usher, introduce and bring it forth into the World) it may very
well have attributed to it the Name Christ, being so nearly related; But rather
that Divine Nature, Wisdom, Power, Righteousness, Grace and Truth, of which he
is the Fullness (whose transcending Glory was veiled by that Body of Flesh he
wore, and was only let forth in that Day as any were capable of beholding and
receiving it) which dwelt therein. And those who at this Day do seed upon the
History of the Bodily Appearance (yet honorable in its place) and know not a
breaking through the Vail, by witnessing a Measure of the same Divine Wisdom,
Power, Righteousness, Grace and Truth revealed and born forth in themselves,
they are but carnal and fleshly Christians, being unacquainted with the
Formation of the Christ of God in themselves, which is the opening of the
Mystery of Christ, God manifested in the Flesh, and Christ abiding the Hope of
Glory in the Souls of his People.

This distinction, friendly Reader, of Christ and his Body, is very unpleasant
to me; but I am thrust into it by the loud Clamours of our Adversary against
us, and as too short he rests our words so as to rebuke his fond Absurdities, I
hope sufficiently detected, and which was more in my Eye, and indeed lay
hardest upon my Spirit, to oppose and defeat his Carnal Objections against the
Glorious Christ of God; for, by his vehement Outcries at us, as Persons
denying the Christ of God, because we rather choose to call that Body that was
prepared of God, the Body of Christ, then Christ himself, to beat People off at
once from hearkening after our Doctrine of the Spiritual Second Coming of
Christ into the Souls of Men; for if his Doctrine be true, Christ does not
really dwell in his Children; thereby depriving the Children of Men from the
most Heavenly Enjoyment and Privilege God has laid up for them that fear him:
For I am bold to affirm, and that in the Name of the only True and Wise God,
The True Church is become Christ's Body, and he (the Divine Wisdom, Power and
Righteousness) lives, reigns and puts forth himself in and by her; and that all
those who come not thus to experience the Christ of God to dwell in them, their
King Prophet and High Priest (who is without Beginning of Days and End of
Life) they are ignorant of God's Christ, do stick in the Vail, and know not any
Entrance into the Holy of Holies, where the Divine Unction from the High Priest
is received, and the Blessed, Holy, Spiritual Fellowship of the Gospel is
witnessed; for which Glorious Dispensation we contend through all Difficulties,
making it our Business to promote it in the World; and though it be now but as
a Cloud of a Span long, yet it shall spread and cover the Heavens, from whence
the Inhabitants of the Earth shall receive Refreshment, being bedewed and
covered with the Virtue and Righteousness thereof, for want of which the World
is as a Wilderness, being over run with all manner of Impiety under a specious
Show of Religion, making up that Whore of Babylon and Mother of Harlots, and
City filled with all sorts of Abomination, against which the Wrath of God is
now, and will yet be more and more revealed. Oh! Compassion to the Souls of
Men, our Brethren in the Flesh, opens our Mouths with frequent Cries, that
they would come out of her, lest they be Partakers of her Plagues; for, knowing
the Terrors of the Lord, we therefore persuade them to a diligent search after
the one Thing necessary, which shall never be taken from them, I mean, the
Testimony of Jesus in themselves, that they are his by the Washing of
Regeneration: For with great Sorrow I write it, God he knows; Unspeakable and
Irreparable is the Loss Multitudes have sustained by such Carnal Conceits, as
their Preachers through Blindness have begot a Belief in them of, and a Zeal
for, as sufficient to Salvation, to the suspecting and open decrying under the
hateful Names of Error, Heresy and Blasphemy, the very Soul or Substance of
True Christian Religion, which only brings to the Inheritance of it.

For us, our Appeal is to God, and that Impartial Generation he is now bringing
forth, who will have an Ear to hear, and a Palate to savor and taste the Truth
of this Ancient Mystery, Christ in them the Hope of Glory, at what time these
testimonies shall be of value, however dis-regarded by the false Jew and Carnal
Christian of the present Age.

I will end my part herein with our most solemn Confession in the Holy Fear of
God, That we believe in no other Lord Jesus Christ then he who appeared to the
Fathers of old at sundry Times and in diverse Manners, and in the Fullness of
Time took Flesh of the Seed of Abraham, and Stock of David, became Immanuel,
God manifest in Flesh, through which he conversed in the World, preached his
Everlasting Gospel, and by his Divine Power gathered faithful Witnesses; and
when his Hour was come, was taken of cruel Men, his Body wickedly slain, which
Life he gave to proclaim, upon Faith and Repentance, a general Ransom to the
World; the Third Day he rose again, and afterward appeared among his
Disciples, in whose view he was received up into Glory, but returned again,
fulfilling those Scriptures, He that is with you, shall be in you; I will not
leave you comfortless, I will come to you again, and receive you unto my self,
John 14. 3, 17, 18. and that he did come and abide at really in them, and does
now in his Children by Measure, as without Measure in that Body prepared to
perform the Will of God in; That He is their King, Prophet and High Priest, and
intercedes and mediates on their behalf, bringing in Everlasting Righteousness,
Peace and Assurance forever into all their Hearts and Consciences; to whom be
Everlasting Honor and Dominion, Amen.


A few Testimonies in Defense of our Sense.
B. Jewel. Sermon. upon Jos. 6. 1, 2, 3.

My first Testimony is out of that great English Author and worthy Man B.
Jewel, who speaking of what Christ was to the Jews in the Wilderness, says
thus; Christ had not yet taken upon him a Natural Body, yet they did eat his
Body; He had not yet shed his Blood, yet they drank his Blood. St. Paul says,
all did eat the same Spiritual Meat, that is, the Body of Christ: All did drink
of the same spiritual Drink, that is, the Blood of Christ; and that as VERILY
AND TRULY AS WE DO NOW; and whosoever then did so eat lived forever. I think a
pregnant and apt Testimony to Christ's being the Christ of God before his
Coming in the Flesh. But this being the Language of a Bishop, though more then
an Hundred years old: Perhaps his Stomach will not digest it, and therefore
let us hear what some considerable Separatists will tell us.

Joshua Sprig. Test. to an Approaching Glory, Page 80, 81, 86.

I beseech you therefore, be not offended whenas we say, That Christ according
to the History of him only, and according to his Ministration in the Flesh, is
but a Form, in which God does appear to us; and in which God does give us a Map
of Salvation; Thou know it not to be thy real Salvation, except it be
revealed within thee by the Spirit -- A map serves until a Man knows the
Country -- There is Christ in the Flesh, and Christ in the Spirit; Christ in
the Flesh is the Witness, the common Person in whom our Salvation is transacted
as in a Figure; Christ in the Spirit, is the real Truth and Principle of
Righteousness, and of Life; he is the real Salvation within us. Again in his
Preface he says, That in that Degree that the Spiritual Administration takes
place, the Fleshly Administration gives place; in that Measure that Christ's
Second Appearance draws on us, we are drawn from under his first Appearance.

Thus far Joshua Sprig, whose Book was licensed, as we have formerly said, by
Joseph Caril, a reverend Minister among the Independents.

C. Goad's Last Testimony, page 76, 77.

Destroy the Vail, and destroy Death; the taking away of the Vail is the taking
away of Death; Death upon a true Account is nothing but a Vail upon God who is
our Life, even Christ's Flesh was a Vail. Ordinances are Vailes. If God be our
Life, the less we are in these things, the more we are in Life.

T. Collier's Discovery of the New Creation, page 399.

We have had very narrow Apprehensions of Christ, and the Manifestation of the
Glory of Christ, limiting it to the one Man, when the Truth is, that Christ and
all the Saints make up but One Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. And God as Truly
manifests Himself in the Flesh of all his, as he did in Christ, although the
Measure of that Manifestation is different.

What says John Faldo to these things? Are not we Outdone in our Expressions
by professed Ministers, and those of the Independent and Baptist Way? shall we be
styled Blasphemers, that more modestly utter our Belief, whilst these Men
notwithstanding pass for Orthodox? I hope J. Faldo has more Reverence for J.
Caryl, then to question his Judgment in the License of the first; and not so
little Respect for the two last as to cry out, Heresy, Blasphemy, etc.

CHAP. X.
Three Scriptures rescured from the false Glosses of our Adversary; Joh. 1. 9.
Romans 10. 3. 2 Pet 1. 19.

OUr Adversary imployes his 19th Chapter in defense of his Exposition of 3
Passages in Scripture against what I offered in my Answer to be the true Scope
and Intendment of them; But what shall I say? so lamely does he cite me, so
constantly overlook me, that unless he had hoped to be believed, write what he
would, or that what he writ would pass for a Reply, whether it deserved to be
called so or no: I can see no Pretense for continuing the Controversy; for
either he grant^ what we say by contradicting himself; or says nothing to what
we deny, that may strictly merit our notice. But let him speak for himself.

Reply, p. 80. Upon my Exposition of Joh. 1. 9. That was the true Light, etc.
W. P. makes a huge Brag of the Advantage I give his Cause; and thus he argues
from my Words: If Christ made all things, then Christ was before his
Appearance, p. 168. and consequently, Christ was and is the Word, which was
with God, and is God, and the Light of Men, etc.


Rejoinder. If he says nothing, as nothing he says to what he cites, blame
not me, for I would have reported it: But whether I had any Advantage, or
having it, bragged of it, will be best seen by giving my Answer as it lay.

If Christ be that Light which is that Word which made all things, and
therefore God (as says J. Faldo) then Christ was before his bodily Appearance,
and consequently our former Chapter is justified on our Part against his
Notions of the Lord's Christ; but J. Faldo expressly says, p. 84, 85. as the
Word is the Light of Men, so or in that Manner is Christ the Light of Men; nay,
he calls it, Christ appearing in the Flesh, consequently, Christ was before he
took that Flesh, or appeared in that Body (not to constitute him or make him
Christ, but to transact, work, declare and bring to pass by and through it, as
a peculiar Vessel, and prepared holy Instrument) therefore Christ was and is
that Word which was with God and is God, and the Light of Men.

This was my Argument grounded upon his Concessions; What Advantage it is to
our Cause, let it answer for it self, what Bragg I made I know not, unless it
was my calling his Acknowledgments a Justification of our foregoing Chapter. I
leave the Meaning of his Silence to my Reader, and insert his Reply to another
part of my Answer, which was this: And least we should yet mistake him, he
calls it God manifested it in the Flesh; and that he might speak all for us in
a little, and give the Deaths Wound to his own Cause, he tells us in so many
Words, That the Salvation and Life Eternal of poor Sinners was wrapped up in
Christ as God. Mark his Reply.


Reply, p. 80. Yea, and as Man too; yet as this excludes not his Divinity as
necessary to our Salvation; neither does his Di^ity exclude his Humanity as
necessary.


Rejoinder. These Words, Yea, and Man too, are added; but with this woeful
Impertinency that they wholly contradict his Saying, Salvation of poor Sinners
was wrapped up in Christ as God; for they imply a Denial of Man's Salvation,
being wrapped up in Christ as Man; and that this was his Meaning, take his own
Words, as they ly in his own Book, part 2. p. 85.

And this I take to be the Import of the 4th verse (10. 1. In him was Life and
the Life was the Light of Men, That is, the Salvation and Life Eternal of poor
Sinners was wrapped up in Christ as GOD, who being SO QUALIFIED was capahle of
working it.

I say again and all reasonable Men must acknowledge I did not wrong his
Meaning, but gave his Sense and not mine: To be sure, there are no such Words
as these, yea and as Man too, which is just as if I should say, The
Understanding of a Man is wrapped up in him, as he is a reasonable Creature, and
being charged with a self-Contradiction, should absurdly add, yea, and as an
Animal too, There needs so pointing at so much palpable Weakness.

His other Words about the Divinity's not excluding the Manhood of Christ as
necessary to Salvation, is no part of the Question, but a mere go by Slip to
the Bu^^ness; for all was necessary that God thought necessary, that is,
instrumentally: But will it therefore follow that the Salvation and Life
eternal of poor Sinners was wrapped up in Instruments?

But let us see what he says at the Defense I made for my rendering of the Word
(...) enlightened in my Book entitled the Spirit of Truth vindicated. Hear him.


Reply, p. 81. I know not any Cause he has to think me stumbled at his
rendering (...) enlightened, unless for rebuking him for wastng so many pages in
quoting Authorities for that which would be granted easily.


Rejoinder. He and his Friend H. H. are the more to be blamed that they put me
to so much Expense, to make good it at least he intented to grant me; but his
easy granting is of those things that are too hard to be kept; however I
accept his Acknowledgment, as also of his Silence to what I writ in Defense of
our Understanding the following Words (so much Controverted by some) Every Man
coming into the World: However, there is one Passage that must not slip: It is
this.


Reply, p. 81. The last part of my Exposition, viz. That^ he THAT WAS the true
Light points at Christ's Appearance in the Flesh, I added, in his State of
Humiliation, This faith W. P. P. 178. stints Christ to that Appearance, denies
Christ now to be that true Light that enlightens all, and he might as well
infer, that because the Word was with God and was God, therefore he is not now
with God or God, But to blast all in a Breath says he, Is this your Tertullus?
I would have Mr. Penn more solid and pertinent, or leave his scribbling Humor,
which at this rate is fit to write to none but those that can find Refreshment
by a Dutch Woman's Babbling (though understanding not one Syllable) upon the
Conceit it comes all from the Spirit.


Rejoinder. Whether my Answer or his Reply be more solid and pertinent, I shall
leave with my Readers to judge. Oh how ready are Men to condemn in others what
they indulge in themselves? It is strange to me if my Adversary be not guilty
in censuring; but that hurts him more then me. I say again that his Drift was
to unconcern, That was the true Light in any other Time then Christ's Coming in
the Flesh; Christ was the Eternal Light before John testified of him. See Book
called, Annotations of certain learned. Divines in the Year 1645 on Ioh. 1.
verse 9.
to which I opposed about a page and a half of which he has reported not above
four Lines, and those not as they lay. Take it Reader, briefly thus: If the
Word that made all things, which was with God and was God, was that true Light,
as says J. Faldo himself, p. 84. then can it never be restrained to that
Appearance as the Beginning or End of it; nay the Evangelist is not yet come so
much as to mention any Thing of his Manifestation in Flesh; and if we will
believe J. Faldo the Verse concerns the Word Creator and not Redeemer, which he
stints to his Coming in the Flesh, see page 89. But by his Interpretation THAT
is not relative to his Appearance in the Flesh, but to the Word, which was with
God, and was God, as p. 84. and so the Spanish Translation has it, That WORD
was the true Light, etc. so that either the Word was not before that
Appearance; or if it were, being that true Light, that true Light was before
that Appearance. Therefore Mankind may very well be said, to have always been
enlightened by that Light, or that the Word should be before that Appearance,
and that true Light, which is the very Life of the Word, or Word it self,
should be stinted to that Appearance, is as absurd as any thing well can be.
Now Reader comes that part which he cited, but more regularly; That we should
take That was the true Light, etc. to deny Christ now to be true Light that
enlightens all, because he was so, is a strange Impertinency and gross Falsehood.

In Reply to all which next to what I have already transcribed, he says no
more then this.


Reply, p. 82. W. P. should have undertaken to prove that Christ was before
that time, and is now God manifest in Flesh, as he was then, and to those Ends.


Rejoinder. I did abundantly prove it in our Sense, and nothing solid has been
offered to invalidate what I alleged; but let it suffice that he has granted
my Charge. First, In denying Christ to have been either Christ or the true
Light before that Time, a manifest Contradiction to himself, p. 84, 85, 86, 87,
88, 89. of his first Book, second Part. Next, He therefore denies, that Christ
is now the true Light, because, he is not at this Day God manifested in Flesh
in the same Manner as he was then, and thus much further, that he was the true
Light before that Appearance ( Socinianism in the abstract) I do not say so in
Disgrace, but because he pretends to disown it. For his saying, I should have
undertaken to prove them is absurd, unless he had denied them. This with me, is
matter enough to impeach my Adversary of blackest Sacrilege. I need add no
more, nor no more will I add then this, The Question was not, whether we affirm
Christ to be that Light by his visible and bodily Appearance Life, Doctrine,
Miracles, Death Resurrection, etc. in this Day, which he was in that. But
whether these Words that was the true Light, did not relate to the Life of the
Word which was with God and was God (and consequently if he did not enlighten
Men) before he took Flesh, in the Flesh, and after his Resurrection and
Ascension by his Eternal Power and Godhead, as the great Sun of Righteousness
and spiritual Luminary of the Invisible and Intelligible World? Unto which his
Words bear no Relation, unless it be any to deny the Question.

In short, I told him, the very next Words to those he cited, That should we
grant the Evangelist to refer to that Appearance, Joh. 1. 9. yet it would
conclude no Denial of Christ's being the true Light that enlightens every Man
that comes into the World both before and since that Appearance, because it
was the most eminent breaking forth of the divine Light; which doubtless had
been enough to satisfy any moderate or modest Man, but not satisfying him, I
must infer as before, that his Displeasure is against our believing Christ to
have enlightened before and since that visible Coming, which if I understand any
thing, is in so many Words to deny his Divinity.

The next Scripture by him exposited and by me rescued was Romans 10. 3. The Word
is nigh thee, etc. he does but touch upon it, and gives so little of my Answer,
that there is scarce Head or Tail to be made of his Paragraph. I will contract
my Answer, and give his Reply.

He made the Word to be the written Laws, Statutes and Commandments given by
Moses, his first Book, p. 94. I answered; It could not be so understood, for
the Question was not about them, but about the Commandment of Commandments and
Word of Words; which he resolves thus: Let none say, who shall ascend, descend,
or go beyond the Seas to fetch the great Word and Conmandment, but the Word is
very nigh thee (...) of (...) signifies the innermost Parts of Men, whereinto
the outward Commandments could never come. Besides, without the Word nigh in
the Heart there could be no Conviction upon the Conscience, etc.


Reply, p. 82, 83. W. P. pu^s to fetch the great Word and Commandment, in the
Letter of the Text, as the very Words of Moses; A Crime to be abhorred, yet
frequent with him that pretends a sacred Esteem of the Scriptures. In few Words
to answer all; Moses said of this Word, verse 12. It is not in Heaven, which
may be said of the Book of the Law or written Word, but not of Christ the Word
-- also as I cold him before, it is such a Word as uses to be in the Mouth which
is the Organ and Instrument of speaking the Greek Word for the Word is (...),
which is never to be understood of Christ; not (...) which is sometimes
intended of Christ the Word.


Rejoinder. This looks more like a Reply then any thing we have had a great
while, yet that it only looks so, will ly on our Part to show. First, He
charges me with Forgery; Let Us see what it was. I said, to fetch the great
Word or Commandment, and the Scripture says, to bring the Word or
Commandment. Now I know no Difference betwixt fetching and bringing; it is true,
I added Great, which of God's Word or Commandment be not, I did amiss; If it
be, he is an idle Caviller, fitter to kill Flies all day with the foolish
Emperor then to write Books of Religious Controversy, It is called
Commandment, Deutr. 30. 11. and Word, ver. 14.

But it is not in Heaven, therefore it is not Christ, says our Adversary: I
believe J. Faldo knew in his own Conscience, that those Words were spoken on
purpose to prevent the Excuse of being without a Commandment, and that so nigh
as their own Hearts or innermost Parts, and not to exclude the Word Heaven;
but rather thus: The Word is not so in Heaven as that it is excluded your
Consciences, or that ye need to say, who shall go up to fetch it down, for it
is in your Hearts to instruct you that you may do it, and reprove you if you do
it not. God was never the less in Heaven for being nigh unto the Consciences of
the Athenians, which was Paul's Doctrine, Acts 17. 27, 28. for says he, in the
Name of their own Prophets, In him we live, move and have our Being; for we are
also of his Offspring.

Erasmus in Deuteronomy. says, non supra ^e sed intrate est Sermo valde, i. The Word
is not above thee, but very within thee.

The Samaritan Copy has it (not the Word, but) the Thing is in thee,
according to the Hebrew Word (...) which is often so translated.

Fagius upon the Place in Deuter. thus, In Cord dicit quia Legem cordibus
Judaeorum inscripserat Dominus priusquam in Tabulis illis lap^deis Decologum
insculpsisset i. e. In the Heart says he; because the Lord ha^^ written the
Law in the Hearts of the Jews, before he had graven the Decalogue in the Tables
of Stones.

For its being such a Word as uses to be in the Mouth, I must tell him, that
is such a Word as uses to be in the Heart too; which he takes no Notice of in
my Answer; and I am sure it is not so impossible for the Eternal Word to
express it self by the Mouth of a Man, and so may be said to be in the Mouth,
as it is for the Book of written Laws and Statutes to be in the Heart. Besides,
the Commandments are mentioned, verse 10. but this Commandment or Word, verse
11. 14. which cannot in good Sense be called the same, but rather that Law,
Word or Commandment mentioned by the Apostle, Romans 2. 14, 15. which he
acknowledgd, the good Gentiles both to have had written in their Hearts, and to
have lived up to in good Measure; unless we can suppose that God has been less
propitious to the Jews then to the Gentiles; I mean, that God gave the Gentiles
an inward and the Jews only an outward Law. But suppose, what our Adversary
says of the Word in Deuteronomy to be true, he has confounded himself in
this, That he makes the Word, Romans 10. 8. the same with the Word mentioned,
Deuteronomy. 13, 14. The one is (as says J. F.) the Word of Jewish Statutes, among
whom is the Hand wring of Ordinances, the ceremonial and judicial (as well as
morral) Law; The other is the Word of Faith which blots out the Handwriting of
Ordinances, and ends the Ceremonial and Judicial Law: But because these two
Laws or Words cannot be one and the same, and yet that the Apostle alludes to
the Words in Deuteronomy, it follows, that it cannot be the Book of written
Laws, but the Word that begets Love to, and Faith in God; for that was the Word
the Apostle preached: Nay, we may go further yet, and assert the Word,
mentioned in Deuteronomy to be Christ himself; for if that be one with the Word
of Faith the Apostle writes of to the Romans, then because the Word of Faith,
Romans 10. 8. is Christ, the Word mentioned in Deuteronomy, must also be Christ;
that are one and the same Word the Apostle's Allusion proves, and J. F.
confesses, and that the Word of Faith, Romans 10. 8. is Christ, let the two
foregoing Verses of the Text be consulted. But the Righteousness of Faith
speaks on this wise, Say not in thine Heart, who shall ascend into Heaven,
that is, to bring Christ down from above, or who shall, descend into the deep,
that is, to bring up Christ again from the Dead; but what says it, The Word is
nigh thee, even in thy Mouth and in thy Heart, that is, the Word of Faith which
we preach, verse 6, 7, 8. where nothing is more clear, then that the Word nigh
in the Heart, is Christ the Word; for the Question here is, how they shall get
Christ, as it was in Deuteronomy how they should get the Word. The Apostle
answers it, though not under the Name of Christ, yet under a Name attributed to
Christ; If our Adversary count Christ and the Word of Faith two differing
things, by the same Reason may we say, that the Word in Deuteronomy, concerning
which none needs to ask who shall go up in Heaven to bring it down, and the
Word nigh are two Words; but if that Question be needless, Who shall go up into
Heaven to fetch it down unto us, ver. 12. be answered in ver. 14. viz. but the
Word is very nigh unto thee, and consequently, that it is but one Word or
Commandment that is understood in the Question and the Answer, then may we with
good Reason conclude that Christ in the 6th. and 7th. Verses, and the Word of
Faith in the 8th. Verse are one and the same thing under two Names, else there
can be no Sense or Coherence in the Apostle's Words; for what Answer is this?
But what says it, The Word is nigh thee in thy Mouth and in thy Heart, that is
the Word of Faith which we preach, to this Question, Who shall ascend to bring
Christ down? Who shall descend to bring Christ up. If Christ and Word of Faith
are not Synonimous or equivalent Terms? The Question the Apostle makes the
Righteousness of Faith to forbid, is about Christ's Absence or Remoteness from
the Heart; Say not in thy Heart, and it is answered and resolved with the
Nearness of the Word in the Heart, which could be no answer or Solution in case
that Word was not Christ, or Christ that Word; for the Reason why the
Righteousness of Faith says on this wise, Say not in thy Heart, who shall
ascend to fetch Christ down, implies, that he is not shut up in some remote
place, but that he is nigh, and needs no fetching; and if nigh, then not
another from the Word nigh, which is the Answer to the Question.

To make it yet plainer and detect my Adversary, I will parrallel the Case,
Jacob being ancient, desired to see Jos^ph before he died; suppose him to have
asked, how shall I do to see Joseph? and that some body answered, Do not ask how
^hou shall see Joseph, for thou see Reuben; Tell me if this would be thought
a fit Answer to Jacob's Question; yet this must be the Cause of those who deny
Christ and the Word to be one in this Place: But if some body should have said
to him, Do not ask who shall show thee thy SON JOSEPH, Genesis 45. 8.
for the RVLER of all Egypt stands nigh thee: Would not every Body think the
Person meant Joseph that was so. This is so plain to our Pupose that every
common Understanding may discern the Reasonableness of our Interpreration.

For the Greek being (...), and not (...), it makes nothing against us, in that
(...) has the same Significaiton with (...), as Plat. Pol. 1.
Scapula informs us out of Plato.

Clemens Alexandrinus Admon. Isa. 2. 3.
ad Gent. on (...) calls it the Word of the Lord (...) i. Clem. Al. Admo. ad
Gent. p. 2.
the HEAVENLY WORD, the true Contender for Mastery, crowned in the Theater of
the whole World; and in his Strom l. 2. speaking of the same Place ( Romans 10.)
says, (...). Strom. l. 2.
The DIVINE WORD cries, calling all Men without Distinction, which must needs
be Christ the living Word of God.

Besides, there is but one word in the Hebrew (...) most commonly used to
signify a word; and though (...) and (...) are two words, yet they both are
under this one word in the Hebrew (...) as in E. Hutter's Translation, John 1.
1. Romans 10. 8. 2 Pet. 1. 19. But the Weakness of our Adversary in this
Particular must needs be obvious to all that consider how poorly he begs the
Question, in saying that (...) does not signify Christ the Word, which is the
Matter disputed; he appeals to the use of the Word, which helps him not; for
sometimes (...) signifies as well Christ as (...) and sometimes (...) does not
signify Christ as well as (...); his Reply confesses the latter, and the Text
and Context of this place, with J. F's Interpretation Romans 10. 8. makes good
the former; I do but herein make use of J. Faldo's own Rule, The Construction
of Words of various significations is to be made as most suits with the
Context, Rep. page 83. and so we leave him in this Particular.

The Third Scripture was, 2 Pet. 19. (...). This Scripture was effectually
rescued in my Answer from the ill use many have made thereof against us and the
Truth; He says little, if any thing, besides mere Cavil, leaving the most
considerable part of the Defense of our Translation of the Text behind him.
After four Pages escaped, he begins with me thus.


Reply, p. 83. W. P. tells me, That though our Translation has it (...) (
also) yet it is commonly understood by (...) ( but) it signifies a Comparison,
p. 186. If J. F. has but Greek and Honesty enough, he must needs acknowledge
that Positives, Comparatives and Superlatives are used promisucously in the
Greek. This I shall show it is little to purpose, except his Ostentation etc.
If Stephanus, Pastor, Schrevelius, Scapula and Leigh understand Greek, (...)
fignifies And, Also, For and If, Although, and many more, yea, and very often
But, and is an Adversative Particle, (...), John 8. 55. Yet or but ye have not
known him.


Rejoinder. Ostentation belongs (with Emptiness) to this Reply; first, I never
said (...) did signify but in no place, next, I only said, it was commonly by
our Adversaries understood so here, and consequently made an Adversative
Particle, contrary to the Nature of the Text, and all Translations that I have
ever seen or heard of: It had been to his purpose if he had brought Stephanus,
Pastor, Schrevelius, Scapula and Leigh to prove that (...) ought to be rendered
But in this Text in order to make good his Adversative Particle, thereby
quarrelling the Translation, and continuing a Comparison not well consistent
with the Text. Again.


Reply, page 83, 84. But that (...) should be rendered in that positive Degree,
not comparative, W. P. produces some Authorities. The Syriak and Ethiopick
Versions, which gave him little Countenance by we have over and above a sure
Word.


Rejoinder. I told our Adversary in my Answer, That if the Translation were
more sure Word of Prophecy, we must either understand it of the Eternal Word,
or conclude that the Writings of the Prophets were more sure to the Apostles,
then the Voice they heard from God himself in the Mount. I produced several
Authorities (as he well said) to exclude the Comparison of more sure; some he
has taken notice of, as the Syriak and Ethi^pick Versions; but that they give
little Countenance to my Attempt is vain and false, unless there be no
difference between saying, We have over and above a sure Word (which is but an
additional Testimony) and We have a MORE sure Word. The Case may be paralelled
thus; I have also another Witness, which I desire may be called and heard; and
I have also a more able Witness, which I desire may be called and heard: Is
there no Difference to be found here? Another sure Witness, another more sure
Witness; Is not all Preference shut out of the first, and brought in by the
last? J. F. must needs be guilty of great Ignorance or Immodesty in this
Particular.


Reply p. 94. VV. P. tells me, The French, German, Low Dutch, Sweedish, have it
in the positive (or sure Word) but I not having his Polyglott Bible cannot
easily examine them all, if he does not wrong them.


Rejoinder. But if this great Linguist had it, he would find none of those
Languages in it; I know not what he means by examining them easily in it,
without it; but he spoak more Truth then he is aware of; for if he will go to
E. Hutter, he may find them without the Polyglott, though perhaps not easily,
as he well says; for I scarcely think he masters Twelve Languages. To
conclude, This I will assure him, They all speak for me, and I am ready to
think they were translated by as able Men as himself, at least, let him and
them dispute that.


Reply, page 84. He adds Erasmus's Paraphrase, and Beza's, both of whom he
abuses. Erasmus renders it by firmiorem, Beza by firmissimum; the one a more
firm, the other most firm; in the old Latin it is most sure, in the new Latin
more sure. So D. Hammon, Arias, Montam and Piscator.


Rejoinder. This looks like something, so does Bubbles; but they easily vanish.
Erasmus I quoted in his Paraphrase, not in his Translation; but J. F. after his
old wont, observes not the Difference, but sets Erasmus against Erasmus; or
rather, to put the Trick upon me, would have Folks think, that Erasmus's
rendering it by firmiorem, was not in his Translation, but Paraphrase, which I
quoted; for he is so far from allowing firmiorem, or more sure to be the Word
of the Prophets, according to the common Acceptance, at least, that against
which we object, that he expressly says; If so be that the Prophets plain
Oracles be in great Estimation among you, which Prophecy by Figurative Dark
Shadows of Christ, of much more Gravity or Weight ought so evident a
Declaration by the Father himself of the Son be; which turns the Text upside
down, as to the Vulgar Sense of it. This I cited out of his Paraphrase upon his
Epistle, J. Faldo shuffles from the Paraphrase to his (...) Translation, which
he explains in his Note in Cri^cis Sacris thus; Verum Graecis mos est subinde
compa^^ivum positivo usurpari: That is, It is the Custom of the Greeks,
sometimes to use the Comparative for the Positive. And if he understands Latin
^e may know, that Senior is also used for Senex.

It Is true, Beza translates it firmissimum (most sure) (very sure) which also
excludes comparison, as Ipsissi^us (the very same he, not the most same he) If
J. Faldo denies this, it will show him ignorant in the Latin Tongue; for the
Superlative or firmissimum exceeds the positive or firmum by valde (very) as
well as by maxim (most) However, had we nothing of this to urge, yet his own
use of the Comparison, as his Concession to what I said in my Answer, and
Erasmus and Beza confirmed there at large, gives us all we desire; for he
acknowledges, That the Writings of the Prophets are not MORE true in themselves
then any other Revelation of the Mind of God; but more certain, with respect to
the Jews, who had a greater Esteem for, and Testimony of the Writings of the
Prophets to be of God, and not a Delusion, then of Peter's Revelation. So that
we see from J. F. himself the Scripture is not set above the Spirit, as the
more sure Word, the thing promoted of old by our Enemies, and which we only
oppose; for, I doubt not but the Scriptures were more sure to the Jews then
Christ himself, else they would never have thought to find Eternal Life in
them, whilst they neglected, yea, persecuted him, which whether it was their
Perfection or Imperfection so to do, I leave with the Judgment of my serious
Reader; yet does the poor Man vainly call this his defending these three
Passages from my Corruption and the Quakers Service. May my Adversaries always
defend themselves at this rate, and I shall never fear any loss to the Cause;
For what with his misrendering of our Writings, unfair Quotations, plain
Wrestings, pitiful Evasions and at best weak Replies, never di^ Cause receive
more Advantage at the hand of an Enemy, then ours has from J. Faldo.

I will give one Proof more before we leave this Chapter.


Reply, page 84. My Exposition of Coloss. 1. 25. Christ in you, etc. (though
the most opposite to the Quakers Christ within) W. P. has not one Word of
Answer to.


Rejoinder. I know not whether he means the Text or his Exposition to be most
opposite to our Christ within. The Text is Coloss. 1. 27. not 25. and lies
thus, To whom God would make known what is the Riches of the Glory of the
Mystery among the Gentiles, which is, Christ IN you the Hope of Glory: In which
I find not one word that opposes Christ's Dwelling in his People; One would
think our Adversary spoak Ironically or by Contraries, if he meant it of the
Text; for it seems an impossible thing to me, that a Text so plainly expressing
Christ to be in Men, should notwithstanding prove, Christ not to be in Men. If
he understood it of his Exposition, how can that truly exposite the Text, who
exposites it quite to another sense then it will bear? at least, he should call
this a begging of the Question. Let us hear what he offers.

First Book, Part 2. p. 100, 101. For Christ to be in the Gentiles (rightly
understood) would be no hard Matter for the Gentiles to believe, as to believe
such a Glory to be attained by Faith in and Obedience to the Laws of a Man who
dyed as a Malefactor, and that ^his Death of his should reconcile God to Man
with the Addition of such a Purchase.

This sort of Doctrine well becomes J. Faldo: I perceive I have not mistaken
him. What Carnalist in the World could have let drop a more pernicious Sentence
to the Doctrine and Kingdom of Christ, then to render it more difficult to
believe, and lay a greater Stress upon the External, then the Internal Work of
Christ. We must read the most weighty Scriptures backwards upon this Man's
Principles: He has helped us to a new Way of rendering the Text; not, this
Mystery among the Gentiles is Christ IN you the Hope of Glory; but this Mystery
among the Gentiles is a Man who dyed as a Malefactor, by his Death reconciled
to God, etc. Behold your Expositor! I dare warrant this Man's Comment will
never trouble the next Collection of Critics. At this rate the Lord-Lord-Cryer
is highly privileged, and the Galatians had passed the most difficult Birth,
before they had known Christ to be formed in them; Regeneration is a slight
thing in comparison of the Knowledge of Christ after the Flesh.

This Doctrine brings not Men to Christ in them the Hope of Glory, but inticeth
them into the Vain Hope of the Hypocrite, which perishes. The History is made
the greatest Mystery, and to believe the one matter of greater Difficulty then
to experience the other. Besides, why should his Dying as a Malefactor render
him unfit to be believed; since his Virtue was most Exemplary, his Miracles
stupendous, his Doctrine Spiritual and Powerful, his whole Deportment amongst
the Jews Innocent and Heavenly? Did not Tiberius himself move to the Roman
Senate his being taken into the Number of their Godds, upon the Report of his
mighty Works? It Is strange that should be reputed most Mysterious which was the
Introduction to the Mystery; and those Transactions counted most difficult,
that were by the Divine Wisdom of God ordained as so many facile
Representations of what was to be accomplished in Man. In short, It is to
lessen, if not totally to exclude the True Mystery of Godliness, which is
Christ manifested in his Children, their Hope of Glory. But he proceeds thus.

The Man Christ that was nailed on the Cross the Quakers do not believe to be
in them; for the Godhead if Christ, that is everywhere, and everywhere alike
-- he is in every thing at all times, and nothing can be void of his Presence.
So that if this be it you mean, the Saints have no more Privilege then any
other Creature whatsoever.

The second New and Living Man, who is the Lord from Heaven, the Quickening
Spirit, the Anointed Savior, whose Body was nailed to the Cross, we confess
before Men to be the Christ; and do by Virtue and Authority of Scripture assert
him to dwell in his Children; and we see nothing offered by J. Faldo that can
induce the weakest of us to desert this Faith, having with the Testimony of
Scripture, that of Christ in our selves: But let it be considered with what
Confidence this Man excludes Christ the Souls of his People, as well with
respect to his Godhead, as Manhood; but if in any Sense he may be said to be in
them as God, it is no more then he is in Cats and Dogs: Oh Irreverent, oh
profane Man! Are Beasts and Birds as properly the Temples of the Living God,
as sanctified Men? How can God be said to dwell and walk in his People, if so
remote from them as J. Faldo represents him to be? The Apostle is much to be
blamed, according to our Adversary's Doctrine, for letting fall this Passage, I
live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 20. The Upshot of this sort
of Doctrine is downright Atheism; for as they that know not God from the
manifestation of God within, are ignorant of him, if Romans 1. 19. says true. So
those who teach that God is no more in his Saints then in any other Creature,
endeavor to invalidate the most convincing Testimony Man can have of a Deity,
and to principle Men for the rankest Atheism that ever was: Yet such a sort of
a Doctor J. Faldo is become, and of all other Texts in the Bible, from which to
preach it, has chosen this Col. 1. 27. This Mystery among the Gentiles is
Christ in you the Hope of Glory, which indeed of all other does most oppose and
subvert it. Once more, and he has done with us upon this Passage, for this
time.

-- Christ is in his People by his Graces, wrought by his Spirit, which is his
Image and Likeness -- by the Manifestation of his Love and Glory, his Works and
Image in and on the Soul -- and do as effectually possess the Soul for Christ
his Use and Interest, as a Faithful Friend can do, according so that Text, That
Christ may dwell in your Hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17.

But I would fain know of J. Faldo, how Christ's Graces, Works and Image can be
there, and Christ the Workman excluded? If Christ be not actually there, they
can never Actually be wrought there; for none can work them but Christ by his
Spirit. In short, See Romans 8. 9, 10, 11. where the Spirit of Christ and Christ
are equiv^^ently taken.
either they may be wrought without Christ's Spirit, which J. Faldo disallows
or Christ's Spirit may work them, and yet not be where i^ works them; or if the
Spirit may be where it works them, yet Christ cannot be where it works them,
and consequently divided from his own Spirit, though indeed the Lord Christ is
that Quickening Spirit, which only makes alive again to God, who is the
Resurrection and the Life. Oh the Dreadful Darkness that yet over-spreads the
Hearts of (called) Christians! It may be as truly said of them as it was of the
Jews. The Vail is yet over them, and Christ Jesus the Anointed Savior is
unknown to them by that Redemption, which he effectually works in all those
that hearken to his Voice, and are conformed to his holy Government. They are
Witnesses of his Graces, Works and Image, through believing in his Appearance,
and giving up (like the Clay in the Hand of the Potter) to be ordered and
disposed by him. Nor does the Scripture he quotes, impugn the Real Presence of
Christ in his People; for, by Faith Christ dwells in the Hearts of his
Children; that is, by believing in Christ, he comes to live and dwell in us,
who through the Unbelief of Men is shut out from being Head and Ruler in them.
Our Adversary would make Faith and Christ's real Presence incomparable or
inconsistent, whereas the one cannot possibly be enjoyed without the other;
Faith being as the opening of the Door of the Heart to receive Christ in, to be
Lord and King; and if this be not J. Faldo's Faith, he is void of the Faith of
God's Elect, which purifieth the Heart, and gives to see God, according to Mat.
5. 8. Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall see God. This Doctrine is
the Overthrow of Christianity, a turning back of the whole Stream of the New
Covenant, a cutting off the Spiritual Union; for the Christian Dispensation is
IMMANUEL, God with us; the Word is not stinted to Christ as the Head, but
concerns the Body also; and God is manifested measurably in his People, as he
was in fullness, by and through that holy Body; nay, some eminent Professors
have gone so far as to say, They make up but one (...) or Anointed; for the Oil
runs from the Head to the lowermost part of the Garment, which takes in all. It
gives the Lie to Christ's own Words, who said, He would come and receive them to
himself, he would not leave them Orphants; which implies a real Presence.


Testimonies.
Good Old Apostolical Ignatius was not of J. Faldo's mind; who in his Epistles
produced, and endeavored to be proved genuine by Bish. Usher, Isaac Vossius,
and D. Pearson, says in that to the Ephesians, page 26. (...). i. e. Let us do
all things, he so dwelling in us, that we be HIS TEMPLES, and he our God IN us.
(...) The Corrupters of his House shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

Just. Mart. Expos. Tid. p. 375. (...) i. e. See, says he, how he (Paul) is
teaching the Edification that is in Christ, whence we are the Temple of Christ,
according to what is written, I will dwell in them,; and walk in them, and I
will be their God.

The Story of Richard Woodman in the Book of Ma^tyrs affords us thus much to
our Purpose in answer to the Bishop of Winchester: I believe verily that I have
the Spirit of God -- No Man can believe aright without the Spirit of God -- It
is impossible to believe in God, unless God DWELL IN US.

C. Goad defends our Faith in these words; The Gospel is nothing else but the
bringing forth of Christ IN us: It calls us from Conformity to the World, and
from walking as Men unto the Life of God, Right Spirit of Christ, p. 17.

T. Collier; God is a Mystery, Col. 22. and it is by the Appearance of God IN
US, we come to know God, who is a Mystery The Truth is, that we have had and
st^ll have low and carnal Thoughts of God, judging him to be a God AFAR OFF,
and not a God NIGH AT HAND. This is that ANTICHRIST WHICH DENIES CHRIST TO BE
COME IN THE FLESH. See his Works, p. 399. -- Again, God who is in himself, and
in the Son not only by Union, but also by a Dispensation of Grace to Men, is
likewise IN THE SAINTS, and that not as in the Creatures, or other Men, BUT HE
IS IN THE SAINTS AS HE WAS IN CHRIST. The Saints are TRULY made Partakers of
his Nature, hence called CHRISTIANS, they are CHRISTED; and indeed, Christ and
Christians MAKE BUT ONE CHRIST, ONE ANOINTED, ONE GOD FILLS THEM BOTH. See his
Works, p. 241, 242.

J. Sprig in his Preface says thus; Those that know Christ in them only
immediatione virtutis, not suppositi, know not so Full and Glorious a
Proportion in him to their End. It is and must be confessed, that God is, and
subsists otherwise in Himself then Men; but this hinders not the IMMEDIATENESS
OF HIS PRESENCE AND DWELLING IN MEN -- If you confine Christ's Dwelling to a
LOCAL HEAVEN, you are ignorant of that which is the greatest Joy that can be;
CHRIST DWELLS IN THE HEART, Sprig' s Testimony, p. 87.

Thus Martin Finch, who styles himself, Preacher of the Gospel, in his little
Treatise, entitled, Animadversions upon Sr. Henry Vain' s Book, page 81. The
Word of God abided and dwelt in them (1 John 2. 14.) If we take it for Christ,
they had him (Christ) ABIDING IN THEM; and surely, they that abide in Christ,
and have Christ abiding IN THEM, they are true Saints.

Thus, Reader, we take leave of this Chapter, and proceed to examine his next.

CHAP. XI.
That we are not guilty of Idolatry, as charged by our Adversary. True
Worshippers. The Charge inverted.

IN his former Book he charged us with the Sin of Idolatry; his Argument lay
thus, Those who own and profess that to be God which is not God, are gross
Idolaters; But the Quakers do so, in professing the Light within and the Soul
of every Man to be God; Therefore Idolaters. The Testimonies upon which he
insisted, I faithfully and fully considered, in above Seven Pages of Sober
Answer; he returns me about Three in Defense of his Charge, not giving above a
Dozen Lines of what I writ, and those made up of Scraps, rather contracting
what he said before, then making any substantial Reply to them; But however, I
will be just to him. Thus he begins.

Reply, p. 84, 85. To my Charge of Idolatry he answers as one that intended to
confirm, not confute it: His very Denyals implying a large Grant of the
Question, p. 192, 193. We do forever renounce any such Principle, as that the
Soul of Man, simply as such, is the very Essence and Being of God. Then it is
with him the very Essence or Being of God, though not because it is the Soul of
Man.


Rejoinder. No such Matter; But it is plain how much the Man is upon the
Ketches. His Argument led me to such an Answer* for he calls it, The Soul or
Spirit of a Man, which is a constitutive Part of a Man, page 114. I was
therefore led by him to write in that Abstract Sense, which thus far makes for
him (in case he can maintain his Charge) that the Idolatry would be the
grosser; Besides, God is the Soul, or Life of the Soul, therefore there was a
Necessity for such a Distinction.


Reply, p. 85. W. P. page 193. We never did, do, nor shall assert the God that
made Heaven or Earth to be comprehendible within the Soul of Man -- so that
when we say the Light is within any, we do not intend the whole Being of Light.
All that W. P. denies here, is but God's being so in the Soul of Man, as that
he is no where else or nothing else, yet allowing the Soul and Light within to
be God essential.


Rejoinder. It were heartily to be wished, we had nothing but Ignorance to
charge him with in this Passage; but methinks he would not have us to take him
for a Man of so little Understanding, as he has need to have, that writes so
much Falsehood, and does not know it.

First, He has dropped the most substantial part of my Answer in the middle.

Secondly, These Passages relate not to the Soul, but to the Light, upon
occasion of a place he cited out of G. Fox the younger, therefore not
applicable to the Soul, yet by him as well applied to the Soul as to the Light.

Thirdly, He says, All that I deny in those words, he quoted out of my Answer,
is only God's being so in the Soul of Man, as that he is no where or nothing
else, which if he had only said it of the Light, it would be no Contradiction
to my Principle or the Truth; for the Light is as well on the Earth as in the
Heavens, and in my Chamber as in the Firmament, without any Error in Physics,
and so may God, whom in my Answer I called the great Sun of Righteousness, that
caused his Spiritual Light to arise and shine into the Souls of Men be God as
well within as without the Soul; for wherever Divine Light is, God is; and
where God is, Divine Light is: Howbeit, we do not call the Manifestation of
Light, God, though the Manifestation of God.

Fourthly, His saying, That I yet allow the Soul and Light within to be God
essential, is a downright Falsehood, as with respect to the Soul; it is nigh
two pages before that I considered his Charge against us about the Soul; What
shall I call then his thrusting of it in here, which cannot be concerned in the
very Nature of the Answer? as thus appears, If the Soul be God, God is
comprehended within the Soul, and is no where, or nothing else but Soul, and
where the Soul is; An Absurdity, yea, a Blasphemy, never rightly to be inferred
from any thing I ever said or writ, thus scandalously flung upon my Answer by
J. Faldo, for want of a better Reply; I cannot think that ever man adventured
(under his Pretenses of Religion) so knowingly to pervert, wrest and misapply
Men's Words about Doctrines of the greatest Importance. This shows he values
Credit more then Conscience, who undertakes to fasten a Blasphemous Consequence
untruly on my words, lest he should be thought to have charged us beyond what
he could prove; but his Weakness bewrayes his Malice: For if the Soul may be
God, and yet I deny that God may be nothing else (his very Words in my Name)
then may the Soul be God, and God the Soul, and yet God something else, and
that something else God. When or where did I ever give Occasion for such
Biasphemish Gibberish? Yet this is the Result of what he dares tell the World
is my Meaning. I may say the same respecting Locallity or Place; for what Man
not stark Mad, would say the Soul is God, yet deny not but that God may be
elsewhere, which J. Faldo also makes (though an express Contradiction to his
wrests) a piece of my Meaning; for, unless God may be divided from God,
wherever he is, the Soul is, if the Soul be God; and so one Man is in
another, and every Man ^biquitary, or every where at the same time.

Friendly Reader, none of this Blasphemy and Nonsense belongs to me,
therefore I return it to the True Parent, to maintain it as he is able.

But he would have the World believe that of 23. Citations out of acknowledged
Quakers, I did but nibble a little at five of them. I think him not worth
proving a L -- that have already so many times done it upon unquestionable
Ground in this Discourse; besides, I should be necessitated to transcribe my
whole Answer; but I beseech this Kindness of the Reader, that he would not
think his Time lost in perusing the 20th. Chapter of my Answer, where he may
see himself if I have only nibled, perhaps he will have a better Opinion of my
Endeavors. I shall have Occasion here to touch upon some of them, and no more,
yet enough to show my Adversary's unfair Dealing.


Reply. To Fox Junior's, who calls the Light the Eternal God which created all
Things. In his continued Discourse (personating the Light) he calls it the
Light in you, me the Light in them; which P. would evade by saying, I granted
that in the first part within Man was not mentioned.


Rejoinder. Had I said no more then this it might have past for an Evasion; But
to pass over a page and a half of pertinent Answer to his Application of both
Passages out of G. F. and then say I evaded them by urging his Grant, that
within Man was not mentioned in the first Passage, is to act the Shifter with a
Witness; especially when the little Part he quotes was not said by me
concerning the last Passage, in which lay the Difficulty (to wit, me the Light
in them) but the first on which he very little insisted himself, viz. that the
Light is the Eternal God, etc. this transposing of my Answer and exchanging it,
was not ingenuous. This, Reader, in short, I offered as the Explanation of G.
F's Expression and the Conclusion of a great deal more too large to be recited,
viz. That he who is the Eternal Fountain of all Life and Sun of Light caused
his Light to visit the Hearts, and shine in the Consciences of all Mankind, as
well of such as rebel against it, and scorn it, to reprove them, as of those
who receive it, and gladly submit to it, to direct and justify them; wherefore
we utterly deny that the Manifestation in Man strictly considered, is the most
high God, but a Manifestation of God and from God, by the In-shining of his
blessed Light; and we cannot be said to worship the Manifestation, but that
Eternal God (who is Light) that is thereby manifested, p. 194.

The next Testimony brought by him and examined by us, was out of E.
Burroughs's True Faith, etc. for page he gave us none, neither then nor now;
but supposing true Citation, a Thing most unusual with him; I will set down his
Words as they lie.


Reply, p. 85. The next W. P. brings off as clearly: Every Man has that which
is one in Union with the Spirit of Christ, even as good as the Spirit of
Christ, according to his measure, E. Buroughs. Can any Man says W. P. be so
stupid as to think that. E. B. ever intended the Soul of Man that purely and
simply constitutes him such; for he is speaking of that universal Grace, Light,
Spirit, which God has given unto all, etc. His purely and simply constitutes,
is pure learned Nonsense. If what every Man has be as good in kind as the
Spirit of Christ, which E. B. confesses, it must be God and Christ.


Rejoinder. He should either have past the Manner of my Expression, or have
corrected it better; but I had rather be guilty of Nonsense then horrible
Perversion, J. F's Crime; for he applies that to the mere Soul of Man which E.
B. not only intended but expressed of the Light of Christ within Men. I will
set down some of his Words, that it may be an indeleable Brand upon J. F. a
notorious Abuser of our Writings.

E. Buroughs in his Answer to J. Bunnion and this Passage [Heathens, Turks,
Jews, Atheists have that that does convince of Sin, yet are so far from having
the Spirit of Christ in them, that they delight to serve their Lust.] Thus
expresses himself. Do they serve Sin or Lusts because Christ has not given
them Light to discover their Sin? or because they hate the Light that is given
them? Tell me, E. B.'s Works, p. 144.
Is not the Light or Spirit of Christ the only Thing that does convince of Sin,
Or does any Thing convince of Sin contrary, or besides, or without the Spirit
of Christ? If nay, then it must needs be that it is from, or by, or something
of the Nature of the Spirit of Christ which is in the Heathens, E. B. argues
and about five or six Lines lower thus concludes. Till thou provest the Light
of Christ, which thou confessest every Man has, to be contrary to the Spirit
of Christ, I shall say, Every Man has that which is one in union with and like
the Spirit of Christ, even as good as the Spirit of Christ, according to its
Measure. Now let J. Faldo blush if he can. Certainly, Reader, greater Injustice
could not well have been acted toward any Man's Writings, then he has acted
in this Particular; for what is clearer, then that the Soul is no further
concerned in E. B's Words, then that it onght to obey the Light and Spirit he
w^^^es of. I told him this before, as that Part of my Answer he has
transcribed into his Reply, shows, to wit, that E. B. was speaking of the
Universal Grace, Light or Spirit which God has given unto all, etc. of which
he takes no Notice, but thinks an Epitomy of his first Book of Accusation and
Wresting Reply enough to my Answer. But which is yet baser; he has the
Confidence for all this, to cry out against Shifting and Evasion. But to make
it yet plainer, I will set it down more distinctly.

E. B. Every Man has that which is as good and like the Spirit of Christ.

J. F. Then every Man's Soul is as good and like the Spirit of Christ, which is
God; therefore the Soul is God.

W. P. answers, E. B. understood it not of the Soul, but the Universal Grace,
Light or Spirit, therefore no Proof.

J. F. If what every Man has be as good in kind as the Spirit of God, which E.
B. confesses, it must be God and Christ.

W. P. That which E. B. confesses is of the Light or Spirit, and not the Soul,
therefore J. F's Charge is false.

Now Reader, what shall we call this but Petitio principii, a begging of the
Question, a repeating of his Perversion, It is so, because I will have it so,
as much as if he should say, I have charged them higher then any; more then
that, I pretend to bring their own Books for Evidences. If I yield to have
perverted them, my Credit is gone, my Books are despised, and which is worst of
all, my Gain is lost. But to the next.


Reply, p. 86. That of Fox he deals treacherously in leaving out the
Proposition to which the Answer is made, and thereby its Sense also. F. brings
in the Priest saying, It is an Expression of a dark Mind to say, that God is
not distinguished from his Saints. To which he reples, He is a Reprobate and
out of the Apostles Doctrine. What can be better proved? If God be not distinct
from them, not only their Souls, but the Composition of the Saints, Souls and
Bodies are God: But if this Passage do not prove P. a designed Deluder, none in
the World will.


Rejoinder. The Substance of my Answer took in the Priest's Assertion, but that
J. Faldo almost always takes Care to conceal. G. F. writ not like a
Philosopher, but an honest, plain, Christian Man; Nor is it any Disadvantage to
our Cause, that either willingly or through Unskilfulness he neglects them; for
he meant by not being distinct, that they were not at a Distance in point of
Place, by Reason of the dwelling of God and Christ in his People; It is
apparent G. F. intended no more by his Answer, which our Adversary in his first
Book gave in these Words. But God and Christ is in the Saints and dwells in
them, and he (the Priest) is a Reprobate, and out of the Apostles Doctrine. We
see by this that the Question was not, whether the Soul be God and Christ; but
whether God and Christ are at a distance from or dwell in the Saints, yea or
nay? I leave it with my Reader's Conscience, who has shown himself the
designed Deluder of us two.


Reply, W. P. tells me, p. 197. That Fisher did not mean the Spirit of Man that
is any Part of Man's Nature, whereas his very Words are, The Spirit of Man
which concurs to the constituting Man in his primitive Perfection. I told him
also that Fisher allowed no Man in his degenerate Estate to have any Spirit at
all as Constitutive of Man.


Rejoinder. It Is true, if he puts primitive Perfection to it; for nothing can
reduce Man to his primitive Perfection, but that Holy Spirit which he may be
said to have lost (that is any Interest in) by his Transgression; Homo
rationabilis factus, irrationabiliter vivens, amisit rationem; tradidit se
terra^o spiritui, Psalm. 48. 21. vide Irraeneus, P. 336. i. e. A Man who is
made reasonable, living unreasonably, has lost his Reason, having given
himself up to an Earthly Spirit.
but to say he told me that S. F. allowed no Man in his degenerate Estate to
have any Spirit at all, as constitutive of Man merely, is to tell his Reader an
impious Falsehood twice over, and not to essay the enervating of one of those
Reasons by me urged to prove it so: S. Fisher's Words were briefly these:

As to the Spirit of, Man, which concurs to the constituting of Man in his
primitive Perfection, it is the Breath of Life which God breathed into his Soul
-- whereby he became a Soul, that did partake something of God's own Life. This
is that living Principle of that Divine Nature, which Man did before his
Degeneration, and shall again after his Degeneration, partake of.

I told him that S. Fisher did never intend it of the Natural Soul of Man, but
rather of the divine Life of the Soul, without which the Soul is destitute of
the Knowledge of the true and living God, his own Words very plainly show; for
if S. Fisher intended that Spirit which is the divine principle that man did
partake of before his Degeneration; certain and clear it is, that since Man did
under that Degeneration partake of his own Soul, or else he could not have been
a Man. S. Fisher. never meant the mere Soul of Man, but the Life of that divine
Principle which regenerates and renews the Soul unto a Life of Purity and
Blessedness.

Unto which and much more he affords me no other Reply then what I have already
inserted, to wit, I told him that Fisher allowed no Man in his degenerate
Estate to have any Spirit at all as constitutive of Man; as if his mere tell
him were Convincement enough to his Reader, that S. Fisher held all sinful Men
to have no Souls, and he knows the Consequence; If no Souls, then no
Punishment; for to be constituted a perfect Man to God and a mere Man, is not
one and the same thing; neither can pertaking of the divine Life or Nature be
so understood, as that the Soul is that divine Life or Nature it self; or that
such as partake not of it, have no Souls. Such Doctrine better becomes J. F's
adventures Abuses then the Writings of that honest and Christian Man.

He tells us of some other Quotations which I meddled not with, particularly,
that G. Fox in his Book called the Great Mystery, etc. should say, The Soul was
Equal with God, that it was without beginning, infinite in it self and a Part
of God; for which he assigns us no Page in his Reply, in his first Book, the
16th; I have diligently perused it and find no such thing; however should he
have ever written these Words, I dare say for him, he understood no more by
Equality then Unity; for God is greater then all; by Infinite no more then
something that is not finite, or which comes to an End; and by the Soul's being
without Beginning and a Part of God, no other then that divine Breath of Life,
which is as the Soul or Life of the Soul, that came out from God, and therefore
is of God; that Cause is much to be suspected that props it self with such
shallow Cavils; he observes no Nicety of Expression in his Writings, and it is
therefore disingenuously done of any to make this ill Use of his plain and
vulgar Phrases.

But least all this should fail, and he had Reason to suspect it, he brings us
out a Piece of a Letter, formerly written by Josiah Coal (who lived and dyed a
faithful Servant of God, and is now at Rest with him) put into his Hands, I
suppose by his Gentleman, p. 94. as he received it at the Hand, I suppose of
some Vagabond-Quaker.

First, That he should call George Fox the Father of many Nations; but what is
this more then to say, that Men of several Nations have been begat unto Christ
through him, Thus Paul was a Father to the Romans, Corinthians, etc. 1 Cor. 4.
15. for though ye have ten thousand Instructers, yet ye have not many Fathers;
for in Christ have I begotten you.

Secondly, That his Life has reached through his Children to the Isles afar
off, to the begetting of many again unto a lively Hope. But what of all this?
The life of God is one in all; Paul lived by the Life of Christ, and so did
Peter; Paul was present in Spirit, though absent in Body, 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4.

Thirdly, That Generations to come should call him blessed: But is not the
Memory of the just blessed? Prove. 10. 7. and did not God by Isaiah promise
concerning Israel, I will make thee an Eternal Excellency, and the Joy of many
Generations, Isa. 60. 57. This belongs to G Fox, Josiah Coal, and every Child
of God; yea, and J. Faldo too, if he were so good as he should be.

4thly, That his Being and Habitation was in the Power of the Highest: And so
it should be; for that is the Habitation of every Child of God; for others
dwell in the Power of the World. In short, we are exhorted to stand fast in the
Power of Godliness; and we read that it was the End of the Evangelical Ministry
to turn People from the Power of Satan unto the Power of God, which is the
Power of the Highest.

5thly, That he ruled and governed in Righteousness: This is but what Paul
exorts Timothy to do in the Church of Christ, as both his Epistles inform us at
large; Every Elder, Overseer or Pastor in the Church of Christ is bound to do
so; If J. F. can prove he does otherwise, he may then charge him with uncomely
walking, but not J. Coal with Blasphemy for saying, that a good Man governs in
Righteousness.

Lastly, That his Kingdom is established in Peace, and the Increase thereof is
without End: So is the Kingdom of the Saints of God. That they have a Kingdom
and Dominion is clear from several Scriptures: It is the Fathers good Pleasure
to give you a KINGDOM, Luke 12. 23. Wherefore we have received a KINGDOM which
cannot be shaken, Heb. 12. 28. The Saints shall JUDGE the World, 1 Cor. 6. 3.
The Nature of this Kingdom is declared. Luke 17. 12. The Kingdom of God is
within. Joh. 18. 36. My Kingdom is not of this World. Romans 14. 17. For the
Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the
Holy Ghost. The Durableness of this Kingdom is laid down by Daniel, and the
Time came that the Saints possessed the Kingdom, whose Kingdom is an
Everlasting Kingdom, Dan. 7. 22. 27.

Yet upon these so innocent Expressions so scriptural, and therefore so easily
defensible, does this Adversary of ours call an Evidence of the blasphemous
unheard of Passages and Principles among our Ministry conceived, vented and
allowed, which did the World know, it would make their Ears tingle, and their
Hearts ache. But we will see if these Words belong not of more Right to a
Passage, that fell from the Mouth of a Court-Chaplain, in the Golden Age of
Independency, not in a private Letter, but a public Auditory, that we may help
him to a clearer Sight of his own Folks, and that his severe Exclamation better
suits them then us.

After the Death of O. C. that all due Acknowledgments might be paid to his
Memory for the noble Acts he did, of breaking all Oaths he made to God and Men,
to advance his own Family and Interest, though to the Scandal of Religion and
Loss of the Cause, a certain Chaplain of his broak forth with this Extatical
and Elegiack Assertion, that if that were the Word of God (meaning the Bible in
his Hand) then as certainly, that blessed Spirit (the Protector) was with
Christ at the right Hard of the Father; and if he be there, what may his Family
expect from him? for if he were so useful and helpful, and so much Good
influenced from him to them, when he was in a mortal State; how much more
Influence will they have from him, now he is in Heaven? THE FATHER, SON AND
SPIRIT THROUGH HIM BESTOWING GIFTS AND GRACFS UPON THEM.

I will omit naming the Party, he is dead, I give the Fact, and it speaks so
much Idolatry, that nothing ranker can be produced of the most Extravigant
Votaries of Rome.

God, if it pleases him of his great Mercy give this poor Man Repentance,
before that Hour overtake him in which it will be hid from his Eyes, which ends
my Return to these hard and evil Speeches.

I shall as my Manner has been produce the Testimonies of certain considerable
Men in defense of what we believe, concerning the Light within; and others
relating to the Soul of Man, for their Sakes, whom Tradition has abused, and
the frequent Clamours and Invectives of many against us blinded, so as to think
we are the Sink of Error and offscouring of all Heresy; to the End that they
may see our so much decryed Doctrine, clearly and abundantly approved by such
as are of general Reputation among them.


Of the Light shining in Man.
Vatablus and Drusius upon Job 24. 13. They are of those that rebelled against
the Light, say, that it is the Light, of God and that it is God himself. I
suppose, none will doubt that this Light shined in the Consciences of those
that rebelled against it, consequently, the light that shines in the Conscience
is the Light of God, as he is the great Sun of Light.

Munsterius and Clarius upon Job, Chapter 25. 3. Upon whom does not his Light
arise? ask, Who is there in whom the Light of the Divine Wisdom does not shine?

Codurcus is of the same Mind saying, he enlightneth all Men, referring us to
John's Testimony.

Drusius upon the same Place queries; Who receives not his Light, and is not
illuminated by his Light?

Erasmus and Vatablus on Joh. 1. 9. calls it the Fountain of Light, whence the
Light also flowed to John himself. Now if this Light be in Men, and of the
Fountain of Light, which say they is God, I hope none will deny the^^ the Light
that shines in Men, is divine Light, and consequently God, 1 John 1. 5.

Zegerus on Joh. 1. ver 4, 5. In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of
Men, etc, expresses himself thus; That Life by which all things were made,
that which is the Word, yea, which is God the Fountain of all Life, that
always was and is the Light of all Men -- and it shines in the Darkness of
our Souls, which the Prince of Darkness had darkened.

Cameron on the place says, It is to be understood especially of that Light
which is unto Salvation, and whereby it comes to pass that we are freed from
the Darkness of Sin and Death.

All which is to say, that the Light which shines in Man's Heart is Divine and
Saving, therefore God manifesting himself in Man.

Dr. H. Moor in his Philosophic Cabbal, page 27. says; The Light pursued
Adam, and upbraided unto him his Case after his Transgression, and that it was
the DIVINE Light; wherefore he was ashamed and hid himself at the Approach of
the DIVINE Light, manifesting himself to him to the Reprehension and Rebuke of
him -- And the DIVINE Light charged all this Misery and Confusion upon the
Eating of the forbidden Fruit, and Luscious Dictates of his own Will -- And the
DIVINE Light spoak IN Adam, concerning the Woman: What work has she made here?

Thus does he make the Light that reproves in the Conscience to be the Divine
Light, and consequently of the Nature of God, who is the great Fountain of
Divine Light; Nay, to put it out of doubt, he reads those words, which in
Genesis say, It was God himself that reproved Adam, after the manner before
expressed, to wit, the Divine Light in Adam reproved him; thereby making the
DIVINE LIGHT in Adam and GOD to be ONE and the same Being.

Of the Soul.
Justin Martyr brings Tryphon questioning thus concerning the Soul, and himself
allowing it.

(...), etc. That is, Is the Soul Divine and Immortal? Is it a Particle of that
Commander Himself, and as it sees God, so is it also permitted to contain
Divinity in our Mind, and thereby even now to be happy? Yea, altogether, said I.

Tertullian. de Anima, p. 297. asserts the Immortality and Divinity of the Soul.

P. Fagius in Genesis 2. 7. Rabbi Nehamanides has observed, That he that
breaths on any contributes something of his own to it; whence Christ our
Savior, when he would communicate the Holy Spirit to his Disciples, he did it
by breathing upon them, signifying that he contributed to them something of his
own that was Divine. The word (...) signifies something DIVINE and HEAVENLY;
some think (...), because the Immortal Soul of Man is a certain DIVINE THING
come from Heaven. And the Poets call the Soul of Man a PARTICLE OF DIVINE
BREATH (...), a breath or spiritus, DIVINE, HEAVENLY, Vital, Immortal, and
Enduring forever. The Soul of Man DIVINE and HEAVENLY, consists in a DIVINE and
HEAVENLY Spirit. The Author Hiskuni understands it to be an Inspiration from
the Holy Spirit of God.

Peter Martyr speaks of the Soul thus in Psalm. 94. We are taught not to
withdraw from the Divine Nature those things that are perfect and absolute in
us, page 12. and in page 122. They say ( says he) (...) does chiefly signify
that which is DIVINE and Reasonable that God does give unto us.

H. Bullenger says, The Soul is a Spiritual Substance poured of God into Man's
Body; in his 4 Decad. 10 Sermon.

Augustine says, It is felt in the Life -- it is unutterable, breathed into
Man's Body by God of his own Essence and Nature -- from the secret Power of God.

In short, Very various have been the Opinions of the Ancients concerning the
Soul: Plato divided it into Two parts; Zeno into Three; Panaetius into Five or
Six; Soranus into Seven; Chrysippus into Eight; Apollophanes into Nine; by some
of the Stoics into Ten; by Possidonius into Twelve, as Tertullian reports in
his Book de Anima, p. 273. and H. Bullenger tells us, That hardly two say one
and the same thing concerning it.

Seeing then that Men of such excellent Abilities, and nicest Disquisitions
both in Nature and Theology, rather prove their own Contradiction and
Confusion, then give us any certain Account of the Soul, what she is; and that
the Scripture mentions it so rarely and obscurely, and that J. Faldo denies all
immediate Inspiration (as he calls it) which is the only Way left us to
understand it, he has not shown himself a Charitable Divine, but an Impious
Wrangler in falling so heavily upon us with the opprobious Name of Idolaters
for assigning something more of Divinity unto the Soul in its primitive
Perfection, then his Opinion will allow us.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Resurrection of Dead Bodies, and Eternal Recompense. Our Doctrine
maintained by Scripture, Reason and Authorities.

IN his former Book he charged us with the Denial of the Resurrection of the
Dead, and Eternal Recompense. The Testimonies he brought for Proof were such as
rendered him very weak, or something worse, I hope they were sufficiently
dis-engaged from his Service, unto which, according to his old Custom, he has
not thought fit to reply: He only takes notice of two or three short Passages
out of six or seven pages of Answer, on which he bestows a few Squibs, and
concludes with that Contempt and Rudeness no Man pretending to Religion or
Humanity would have vented, especially against a Man that he provoked to answer
him, by beginning to abuse his Friends in general, and him in particular;
considering withal, that his Profession is to suffer, not to insult. Strange!
that my Religion and Conscience should subject me to so much Contempt, with a
Man that pretends to both. But W. P. I dare say, had not been thus treated by
J. F. could he threaten the Law, and Flant and Swagger at the rate J. F. does.
But it is like such Folk, to insult where he may do it safely.

One of his Testimonies was this, Christ is the Resurrection, to raise up that
which Adam lost, and to destroy him who deceived him; So Christ is the
Resurrection unto Life of Body, Soul and Spirit, and sorenews Man, Princ. pap.
call. Quak. p. 34. I will not trouble my self, nor spend my Reader's time in
transscribing what I said in Defense of this Passage, as to the End he designed
it; Nothing can be clearer, then that this concerns Regeneration, so says J.
F. himself, page 132. consequently the Resurrection of Dead Bodies is not
concerned in it.

His second Testimony fell from G. Whitehead in these words, if we may believe
him; I do not believe this Body shall rise again after it is Dead. I told him
of his Disingenuous Catching, and put him in mind of the Apostles own
Expression that justifies the Saying, if it was ever said -- Thou Fool -- Thou
SOWEST NOT that Body that shall be. But unto whatever I urged for the clearing
of our Friends Words and Writings from his ill Constructions, like an unfair,
if not a fearful Adversary, he makes no Return.

I will now set down what he thought fit to give us.

Reply, p. 88. Take W. P' s own words (acknowledging the Truth of my Charge)
Either the Resurrection of the Body must be without the Matter, or it must not;
If it must, then it is not the same numerical Body, and so their proper and
strict Resurrection they must let go; although this allows my Charge true, and
so enough to its Vindication; yet I shall Answer P's Arguments against the
Resurrection, wherein be opposes Philosophical Conclusions to the express
Doctrine of the Scriptures.


Rejoinder. If I have herein vindicated his Charge, it must follow that he
charged us with Denying the Resurrection of the Body without any Allowance of
Change as to that Matter and Corruptibility it was buried with; consequently,
That J. Faldo believes a Resurrection of the same Carnal Bodies that are
interred without any Alteration whatever; for that allowed, they cannot rise
properly and strictly the same Bodies. If our rejecting this Carnal Dream of
his, is that horrid Principle he charged us with Denying, we have no Reason to
be much concerned about the Success. But he proceeds.


Reply, page 88, 89. The latter part of W. P's Dilemma is the Horn with which
he pushes at the Resurrection (viz.) If it must not be without that same gross
matter it dyed with, then I affirm it cannot be incorruptible, because it will
carry with it that which will render it corruptible ad infinitum.

The Body must necessarily be the same Matter is allowed, but W. P. calls it in
his assumption of the 2d part of his Dilemma, the same gross Matter, which
makes his Argument Falacious in the Form of it. But to let that pass, it shall
be the same Matter and numerical, though not of the same Grosness; and shall
have the same Substance and Essential Form, though not the same Accidents.


Rejoinder. Is this the Scripture-Doctrine, he says I oppose with Philosophical
Conclusions? Would he would give us but one Scripture that looks but favorably
toward this Reply; I never read one yet of a Body's having the same Matter,
and not the same Grosness, the same substance and Essence, and not the same
Accidents. For shame; must our Denial of Physical Nicities, or rather J.
Faldo's Absurdities be branded for horrid Doctrine. It Is true in Philosophy,
that a Substance may loose its Accidents, and yet remain the same Substance.
Things may be discolored, yet the same Beings they were before: But that
Matter should be such, and not gross, is incongruous with Scripture and
Philosophy. Matter and Grosness or Corruption are Synonimous in Philosophy and
common Speech: But that Grosness, or the Substantial Part of any Man's Body
should be but an Accident, that the Accidence teaches all Boys in a
Noun-Substantive, deserves a Lash at least. Are Flesh, Blood and Bones
Accidents, or that of them which is gross and corruptible an Accident? I wonder
what a fearful sort of a Noun-Substantive J. F. would be in case he were
condensed and rarefied of such gross and corruptible Accidents, Indeed one
would think his Head, if not all the rest, had been near akin to them, when he
writ this piece of new Philosophy. But this abundantly proves upon what Foot
his Resurrection stands, if it may be said to have any, or to stand at all.

Faellacious is but one of his hard words; for if the Body rifeth with the same
Matter it carried to the Grave, it rises with gross Matter, unless it carried
no gross Matter thither. Let him choose of the two which to deny. But is this to
answer my Argument, to tell us with so much unwarranted Confidence, that the
Body shall be the same Matter, Substance and Essence, etc. the very Question?
What is this but to say, It shall be so, because it shall be so? If he would
have done any thing, he should have demonstrated how Matter can be without
Grosness, and the most gross and Material part of the Body to be but the
Accidents. But he thinks he has said something to the Point.


Reply, page 89. To talk that it (the Body) cannot be incorruptible because
beyond the Nature of Matter it self, is to talk like an Atheist, making Nature
to be God, and not acknowledging the God of Nature.


Rejoinder. Did I dare sport in Religion, scarce ever Man gave a fairer
Occasion in his Compass; But he practices it, and I abhor it. This is such a
riddle me, riddle me, as I never heard of before.

W. P. says, The Nature of Matter admits not of Incorruptibility, ergo, W. P.
is an Atheist, ergo, he makes Nature to be God, and ergo, he acknowledges not
the God of Nature.

This is the very Man, that not a page off reflects Ignorance upon my
Philosophy: Doubtless a Peerless Disputant, one way or other. May he evermore
thus confute me? which is all I will say to such subtle Reasoning and losty
Argumentation in this place. Yet he has not done.


Reply p. 89. If God be omnipotent (which he is, or he is not God) he is able
(as the Apostle speaks) to subdue all things to himself, with which words he
answers all Cavils from Impossibility in Nature.


Rejoinder. The Question was not about God's Power; nor was it so much as any
Part of the Question; But whether Matter is not by Nature corruptible, and how
that which is corruptible by Nature, may be by Nature incorruptible. This
Scripture he urges to prove his carnal Resurrection, will as well prove the
Popish Transubstantiation, or any the most unreasonable Conceit in the World;
for it is but saying, All things are possible with God, and God is able to
subdue all things unto himself; and the Business is done at J. Faldo's rate of
arguing. But the Question is not about what God can do, but what he has done
and has declared he will do.

I know there are Impossibilities in Nature, which God's Omnipotency makes
possible; but if J. Faldo does not know that there is a Difference between
Impossibility in Nature, and Contrariety to Nature, I now tell him there is
one, and that so wide, as though Almighty God frequently supplies Nature's Want
of Power, yet he rarely, if ever, acts contrary to and inconsistent with the
Nature of his own Creatures; What is spiritual remains spiritual, what is
material material, and what is corruptible corruptible. But let us see how much
better he acquits himself of another Passage, which he ventures to cite, and in
my Opinion does no more.


Reply, p. 89. W. P. proceeds farther in this vain Reasoning and wicked too, p.
202. I say, we cannot see how that which is of the Dust should be eternal,
whilst that from whence it came, is by Nature but temporal; and that which is
yet most of all irreconcilable with Scripture and right Reason is, that the
Loss and Change of Nature from corruptible to incorruptible, natural to
spiritual should not make it another Body. That it is according to Scripture I
have given large Proof in my Book, to no one of which he replyeth, as also how
unreasonable it is to call that a Resurrection, which is not of the same
numerical Body.


Rejoinder. We may guess how well he proved it in his first Book by the
Strength he has employed to maintain it in his second. But let all sober Men
judge if this Reply be pertinent to this Part of my Answer; yet he promised he
would answer my Arguments. For the Scripture, it is clear, That Corruption
shall not inherit Incorruption; neither can Flesh and Blood inherit the Kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50. Thus Anota. cert. Divin. anno 1645. upon the Place; and
if he will know the true Resurection, set him learn to understand this weighty
Passage: For we know, that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, Eternal in
the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. And I cannot but wonder, my Adversaries Understanding
should be so benighted, as that contrary to express Scripture he should assert
a Resurrection of the same Body that is buried, properly and strictly so; the
Apostle teaches us to believe that it is not that same Body that is sown that
shall be; for though we shall be changed from Mortality to Immortality,
Corruption to Incorruption; 2 Cor. 5. 1. and 1 Cor. 15. 37, 50. yet (men's
Bodies of) Flesh and Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: For the Word
Resurrection, (...) does hot strictly imply a taking up of the same Numerical
Body, as he would have us believe from his new found Relative IT (first Book,
2. Part, p. 138.) for which Beza shall give him a Release both from the Latin
and original (Greek) there being no Word in either for (his Relative) IT on
which he and his factious Brother Hicks have so relatively insisted; Indeed as
their last and best Refuge. The Text lies thus:

(...). Seritur corpus animale, resuscitatur corpus spirituale. i. e. Anatural
Body is sown, a spiritual Body is raised; that is, They lay down a natural, and
take up a spiritual Body, or in lieuof a Natural receive a spiritual Body; not
that the Natural Body shall be transubstantiated into a Spiritual Body, or that
admitting of such an Exchange, that the Spiritual is the same Numerical Body,
that was the Natural; for so the Natural and Spiritual Body would be one and
the same; but suppose J. Faldo' s Relative IT to hold, I do utterly deny that
this Text is concerned in the Resurrection of Man's Carnal Body at all. I will
recite it with the five following Verses as they ly in our English Translation.

It is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a spiritual Body; There is a Natural
Body, and there is a Spiritual Body; and so its written, The first Man Adam was
made a Living Soul, the last Adam was made a Quickening Spirit; howbeit that was
not first which is spiritual, but that which is Natural, and afterward, that
which is Spiritual; The first Man is of the Earth Earthy, the second Adam is
the Lord from Heaven; As is the Earthy, so are they that are Earthy; and as is
the Heavenly, so are they also which are Heavenly; and as we have born the
Image of the Earthy, we shall also bear the Image of the Heavenly, v. 44, 45,
46, 47, 48, 49. I say this does not concern the Resurrection of carnal Bodies,
but the two States of Men under the first and second Adam, Men are sown into
the World natural, and so they are the Sons of the first Adam; but they are
raised spiritually, through him who is the Resurrection and the Life, and so
they are the Sons of the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, the quickening
Spirit. The very Words of the Apostle undeniably prove this to be the Scope;
how else could the first Adam's being made a living Soul, and the second Adam a
Quickening Spirit, be a pertinent Instance to prove Natural and spiritual
Bodies; upon which follows, that the Natural was first, that is, the first
Adam, and then that which is spiritual, which is the second Adam, the quickening
Spirit, the Lord from Heaven, who came to raise up the Sons of the first Adam,
from their Dead to his Living, their Natural to his Spiritual Estate.

But perhaps it will be objected that the 47th Verse, The first Man is of the
Earth Earthy, and part, of the 9th. Verse, We shall also bear the Image of the
Heavenly, seem to imply a bodily Resurrection; But let the whole. Verses be
considered, and we shall find no such thing. The first Man is of the Earth,
Earthy, The second Man is the Lord from Heaven; who sees not that this is
rather spoken of the Earthy-Mindedness, then the Earthy Body of Adam? It was
mentioned to show the great Disparity, that is between the Nature and
Qualification of the first and second Adam; the following Verse puts this
Interpretaion out of Doubt, as is the Earthy, such are they that are Earthy;
and as is the Heavenly, such are they also that are Heavenly.

For those Words, We shall also bear the Image of the Heavenly. I cannot see
how they should relate to the Resurrection of the Carnal Bodies of Men; for the
Image of the Heavenly, is a renewed State to God, through the Operation of the
Spirit and Power of Christ, the first Part of the Verse clears it; and as we
have born the Image of the Earthy, we shall (or rather, let us bear) the Image
of the Heavenly) as Ambrose and Theophilact read it, and six or seven Copies
besides have it) which is as much as to say, That as we having born the Image
of the God of this World, by becoming his Children; so may we bear the Image of
the True and Living God, by being redeemed from a vain Conversation, having our
Consciences sprinkled from dead Works, and being born again of the
incorruptible Seed by the Word of God which lives and abides forever. Had this
concerned the Resurrection in our Adversary's Sense, If it be objected, that
Adam is not mentioned as degenerated, but as created, and therefore this
Interpretation will not do. I answer; it is true he is said to be made a living
Soul; but first, this makes not for the Resurrection of dead Bodies, and so far
our Adversary gets no Strength. 2ly, Though the Apostle beings with the first
Adam's Creation, yet he orderly comes to the Earthly Image, that the living
Soul put on by Disobedience, which introduces the Necessity of the coming of
the second Adam, and his Quickening Spirit to create a new, bring into the Image
of God. So there is Adam as sown and his Posterity representatively in him, and
his and their Laps, and then the Restoration by him that is the Resurrection
and the Life, the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven however
the Image would be changed wholly (Accidents would not serve his Turn)
therefore not the same Image, unless the Earthy could be the Heavenly Image,
which were Impossible; for we should loose our Earthly Bodies, at what time we
become the Image of the Heavenly, in this World, if this conceit had any Truth
in it, and if of the other, they to be sure must never enter; for another takes
Place: But as it was never understood so by any that I know of, but evermore of
that Earthly Image which came by transgression, and the Heavenly Image that
comes in obeying the Truth by the Spirit, according to what the Apostle says,
Col. 3. 8 9, 10. But now you also put off all these, Anger, Wrath, Blasphemy,
filthy Fornication out of your mouths, lie not one to another; seeing that you
have put off the old Man with his Deeds, and have put on the new Man, which is
renewed in Knowledge after the Image of him that created him: So till the
natural Man that is sown, comes to dye to his own Image, Will and Affections,
he can never be quickened into this Glorious Image of the second Adam, the
quickening Spirit, who is the Lord from Heaven.

But suppose, it were to be understood rather of Bodies then Souls, Annot.
cert. Divin. anno 1645.
the Text may be as well translated a Living as a Natural Body is sown; yea
rather so, for the Word is not (...) but (...), or Animale, that imports as
much as a Soul^-Body, and such an one, I dare say, J. Faldo would not be
willing to sow, except he had a Mind to be buried alive: So Clarius both
translates it, and interprets it, Corpus animale accipiendum est, cui anima
vitam prestat ne intereat. i. e. A Souly or Living Body is that, to whom the
Soul gives Life that it does not dye.

But to go farther; suppose the Apostle treated of a natural Change, and not
only of the spiritual State of the Soul in this Life, yet can it be extended no
farther then this; when good Men lay down this Earthly House or Tabernacle of
Clay, the Image that came to us from Adam's Loins, we shall be clothed upon of
Immortality, received into the Building that is Eternal in the Heavens, and be
made like unto his glorious Body, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Philip. 3. 21. We sow a natural,
we reap a spiritual, and we sow not that Body which shall be; but God gives a
Body as pleases him, 1 Cor. 15. 37, 38.

I also parralelled my Adversary's Change yet Sameness of Bodies with the
Popish Transubstantiation, showing, that the Absurdity Protestants Charge upon
this, is equally chargeable upon that; only with this Distinction, that the
Papists deny it to continue a Wafer after Consecration; but J. Faldo asserts,
the spiritual Body to be the same carnal Body after Mutation, which is a Kind
of Consubstantiation, and far more ridiculous: But of this he took no notice,
and his Silence is prudent: Things unanswerable are better unmedled with, then
cited and not confuted; He knows who pas^ for wise Men by holding their
Tongues; I wish that were his greatest Fault.

I will conclude this Head with a few Testimonies in Defense of what we have
said against J. Faldo's Carnal Resurrection, referring my Reader to my Chapters
of the Resurrection both against him in my Answer, and my Book against T.
Hicks, entitled, Reason against Railing; and particularly the second Part of a
Discourse (that we hope will suddenly be published) called, The
Christian-Quaker, for his fuller Satisfaction of our Scriptural Judgment, and
our Adversary's fleshly Apprehension concerning the Resurrection.

H. More, Mist. God. p. 221, 224, 225.

Dr. H. More, the Cantabridgian Philosopher, begins his Discourse of the
Resurrection with this Censure of J. Faldo's. We come now to the second
particular propounded, the Resurrection of the Dead, which I dare say the
Atheist will listen to, with more then ordinary Attention, and greedily suck in
the Doctrine, provided it be stated with the most curious Circumstances that
the RIDGIDEST OF THEOLOGERS will describe it by, that we shall have the same
NUMERICAL Bodies, in which we lived here on Earth, and that those very Bodies
(the Molds being turned aside) shall start out of the Grave. This Doctrine the
Atheist very dearly hugs as a Pledge in his bold Conceit of the Falsness and
Vanity of all the other Articles of Religion; wherefore he fancying the upshot
of Christianity to be so groundless and incredible, he fairly quits himself of
the Trouble of all, and yields himself up wholely to the Pleasures of this
present World.

To the Objection of Atheists, who play hard upon J. Faldo's Carnal
Resurrection.

First, In that Canables proper Bodies are made up the Flesh of other Men, so
as if every one had his own, he would have never a Body in the Resurrection.
Secondly, That it implies that all Men are buried, when as Myriads are drowned
in the Sea, and eaten by Fishes. Thirdly, That Men's Bodies are passing like
Rivers, consequently no more the same Numerical Bodies, then the Water that
runs away is the same River; and upon this score the Body of an Old Man must
pay for the Sine of a Young Man, whose youthful Body felt the Pleasure, and is
gone.

He thus answers out of the best sort of Philosophers, That the Soul of every
Man is his individial Person, and that she alone it is that sees, hears,
enjoyes Pleasures and undergoes Pain, and that the Body is not sensible of any
thing, no more then a Man's Dublet when he is well Bastinado'd; and this Answer
(says he) takes away all the first and last Cavil (he goes on) and why do Men
plead for the Consociation of the Soul's numerical Body in Reward or
Punishment, but that they fancy the Body capable of Pleasure and Pain; but they
err, not knowing the Nature of things; the Body being utterly incapable of all
Sense and Cogitation, as not only the best Platonists, but also that excellent
Philosopher Descartes has determined, and is abundantly demonstrated in my
Treatise of the Immortallity of the Soul. See Book 2. Chap. 2, 4, 5, 6. To the
second Cavil I answer, That the Universal Expression of Men's rising out of the
Grave, is but a Prophetical Scheme of Speech, the more strongly to strike our
Senses, as I have already intimated in my Exposition on the 1 Cor. 15. against
the Psichopannachites, see Book 1. c. 6.. 3. This Succor, says he, we have
against the Atheists out of Philosophy; but I answer further as concerning the
Scripture it self, That I dare challenge him to produce any place of Scripture,
out of which he can make it appear, that the Mystery of the Resurrection
implies the Recessitation (or raising up) of the same Numerical Body; The most
Pregnant of all is, Note, Reader, that our Translation is erroneous, Job 19.
32. whom mine Eyes shall behold. In the Hebrew thus, (...), i. e. mine Eyes
have seen; the Septuagint (...), vidit, does see, as Drusius and Cadurcus
observe.
Job 19. which late Interpreters are now so wise, as not to understand at all
of the Resurrection: And for 1 Cor. 15. that Chapter is so far from asserting
this Curiosity, that it plainly says, it is not the same Body. But the Atheist
will still hang on and object further, That the very Term Resurrectio implies,
that the same Body shall rise again; for that only that falls can be said
properly to rise again; (Where let the Reader take notice, that D. More calls
J. Faldo Atheist, for it his Objection against me, Rep. p. 89.) But says D.
More* The Answer will be easy, the Objection being grounded merely upon a
Mistake of the sense of the word, which is to be interpreted out of those
higher Origiginals, the Greek and Hebrew, and not out of the Latin, though the
word in Latin does not always imply an Individual Restitution of what is gone
or fallen; as in that Verse in Ovid, Victa tamen vinces subversaque Troja
resurges But this, faith he, is not so near to our Purpose ( yet it excludes
the same numerical Troja) Let us rather consider the Greek word (...), which
resurrectio supplies in Latin, and therefore must be made to be of as large a
sense as it. Now (...) is so far from signifying (in some places) the
Reproduction, or Recovery of the same thing that was before, that it ^ears no
sense at all of Reiteration in it, as Mat. 22. 24. (...); and shall raise up
Seed unto his Brother. Also Genesis 7. 4. there (...) signifies merely a living
Substance, and therefore (...) in an active signification, according to this
sense will be nothing else but a giving or continuing Life and Substance to a
thing. The word in the Hebrew that answers to (...) is (...), which Translators
translate a living Substance; whence (...) according to this Analogy may very
well bear the same latitude of sense that (...), they being both words that are
rendered Resurrectio, but simply of themselves only Vevification, or Erection
unto Life.



Thus far D. H. More against John Faldo's Carnal Resurrection, of whose
Philosophy, Scripture-Challenge and Criticisms let him clear himself if he can
I shall also produce a Testimony out of T. Collier.

T. Coll. Works, page 169. This Doctrine of the Resurrection of this Body is by
some denied, and by others too Carnally looked upon; some thinking that our
Bodies of Flesh shall be raised in the same Form in which it dyed; others, that
it shall be spiritual, yet question, whether it shall be of the same Substance;
therefore it will be necessary to consider two Particulars for the clearing of
it: First, By what Power we shall be raised; Secondly, With what Bodies.

1. By what Power.

Answ. 1 st, By the same Power by which Jesus Christ was raised, which was by
the Power and Spirit of God, 2dly, By the same Power and Spirit that the Saints
are raised from the Spiritual Death of Sin and Self, Phil.. 3. 10. Romans 8. 11.
This being a Truth, that they shall be raised by the same Power, it may
somewhat direct us to the Form in which they shall be raised, which is the
second Particular, that is, in a spiritual Form, not in a Fleshly; for as the
Spirit of Christ raises us up in the Spirit, while we are here, so shall it
raise up our Spirit in the last Day: It is sown a Natural Body, it is raised a
Spiritual Body: Our vile Bodies shall be changed and made like his Glorious
Body.

D. H. Hammon also denies a proper and strict Resurrection of Bodies, and
consequently is guilty of that horrid Principle, as J. Faldo calls it, which
may be seen at large in his Comment 1 Cor. 15. Among other things, he tells us
of one Synesius out of Vossius, who was made Bishop, not withstanding he
refused to subscribe the Article of the Resurrection of the Body, which shows
how much greater Charity they had for Dissenters, then our rigid Adversary,
whilst a Dissenter; for indeed it was very diversely, thought on, and very
obscurely laid down in the beginning of the third Century, says P. D. Huetius
in Origenianis, p. 132.

Farrellus, Calvin's Predecessor at Geneva, and one to whom that eminent
Reformer writ many Loving and Respectful Epistles, usually beginning with
Clarissime, Charissime, and such like, did both deny the Resurrection of the
same numerical Body, but defended his Opinion and disputed strenuously against
the vulgar Notion, which plainly opposes John Faldo's, But more especially Oh
the Angry Countenances the Wicked will have on that Day! -- Oh the Angry
Speeches! -- It may be, from Words they fall to Blows, and tear one another
Hair, and spurn at one another Bellies, bite one another Flesh, and even claw
out one another Eyes.
The Vincent's gross Notion of The Resurrection, who has taken upon him in a
large Discourse, called, Christ's Certain and Sudden Appearance to Judgment, p.
48. 49. to write the History of it, wherein he is so punctual, that he does not
only tell. them what Bodies they shall have, but what Encounters and Dialogues
are like to pass, even to Scolding, Railing, Scratching, and I know not what
besides; so vain and ridiculous is that Author.

I will wrap up these Testimonies with two Passages out of Origin in Jerome,
Non easdom Carnes nee in (...) formis restinent quae fuerunt Sermina: i. e. The
Seed shall not restore the same Flesh, nor in the same Form -- Again, Non
oculis videbimus, etc. We shall not see with Eyes, hear with Ears, act with
Hands, walk with Feet in that Spiritual and Ethereal Body that is promised,
that is not subject to be touched or seen with Eyes, nor to be weyl'd, etc. This
and much more is urged by Jerome against John of Jerusalem, Epist, cap. 8.

These Testimonies I have produced, to show the Arrogance and Uncharitableness
of J. F. in counting it an horrid Thing to reject his Carnal Notion of the
Resurrection of the Dead, and that to such a Degree destroys (if you will
believe him) all Hope of Immortallity; most absurdly placing Eternal Felicity
therein.

The Resurrection we own, and for the Manner of it, we are not inquisitive; and
as I told him before, so again, because these things run men into unprofitable
Questions, and a Philosophical Way of Discoursing, no ways tending to God's
Honor nor the Soul's Profit and Comfort, I shall decline any further or nicer
Disquisition, and content our selves with this, that if we live holily, we
shall dye happily; and if we walk in his Fear, we shall depart in his Favor;
and at being unclothed of Mortallity, we shall be clothed on with Immortallity
and Eternal Life: For God will raise all such into Immortal Life and Glory, who
truly dye in the Lord; But we cannot but take notice of the Subtilty of God's
Enemy, who by casting curious intrical and unprofitable Questions, about what
Bodies the Dead shall rise with, and bringing us under vulgar Reflections by
not consenting thereto, endeavors to divert the Minds of People from our most
frequent and fervent pressing a part in the first Resurrection, that only saves
from the Power of the second Eternal Death; of which let my Reader receive this
friendly Warning; for besides that it is a Satanical Decoy, Thou Fool belongs
to none more, then him, who acquiesses not with all humble and contented
Submission in the Good Will of God, whose Will be done in Earth as it is in
Heaven.

To the Second Part of his Chapter, which concerns our Denial of Eternal
Rewards; although it deserves not our notice, for the Folly and Falsehood it
contains; yet that he may not make my Silence to yield his Charge, and to show
that in every Point he behaves himself dishonestly toward us, I shall consider
that little he says.


Reply, p. 89. Concerning a Reward in the World to come, which I affirm they
did not profess, W. P. opposes rather because he would not be thought to
subscribe to me, then that he believes not what I say to be true.


Rejoinder. This Man pretends to judge Hearts not only without Words, but also
contrary to Words. I did most expressly tell him, that though we own the
Beginning of Heaven and Hell to be in this World (who charged us with the
Denial of them any where else) yet that they were but Earnests of that Complete
Joy or Torment that Men should receive as their Eternal Reward or Recompense
hereafter; But this passes for Hypocrisy with John Faldo's present sort of
Conscience. And He proceeds.


Reply, p. 89. W. P. tells me, p. 203. None ever read so; J. F. quotes no such
thing; nay, he says he has searched, but to no purpose, My Charge was, not
that they deny a Reward in another World, but that they profess no such thing;
yet being silent to it, has a full Consequence that it is none of their Belief.


Rejoinder. How could his Charge imply no such thing, who makes our Silence
(upon which he grounded it) to have this full Consequence, that a future Heaven
and Hell are none of their Belief, and if not believed, denied However, it
makes not a little for us, that he not only never read so, quotes no such
thing, and says, he hat^ searched to no purpose, but that he has made no Reply
to these words, he recites out of my Answer, which has this full Consequence,
that for J. Faldo to charge what he has never read, what he has searched for
and could not find(p. 141, 142.) and therefore could not quote upon us to our
Scandal) is unworthy of any Man pretending to Common Honesty.

But what does he mean by our not professing Eternal Rewards? Our not daring to
enter into the secret of the Almighty? What, how and by whom they are to be
distributed? What other End have our Meetings, Writings and Sufferings? Must I
always deny Eternal Recompense, where I do not expressly declare I own it? How
many Times in Religious Discourses will J. Faldo come under the like
Imputation? he cannot show me one Book that was ever wrought by any of us, in
which it is not abundantly implied, if not most plainly expressed: Were there
no such thing, it would belong to us, above all other People, to use the
Apostles Words, We are of all Men most miserable; but God has fixed that Hope
of Immortality and Eternal Life in our Souls, which all J. Faldo's Clamours
will be too weak to shake. But were we darker in this Point (then whom none are
clearer) we and our Books have Moses, the Prophets and their Writings to keep
us company, who mention it but obscurely, and not so frequently and
unquestionably as we do. J. Faldo loves to hear talk of Heaven, but despises
and shuns the Way which leads to it; and because our greatest Pains are
employed in bringing People into that straight and narrow Way that leads
thither, rather then by delicious Fables to preach them into an Hope of Heaven,
whilst in a State of Disobedience to God's Holy Spirit, therefore is it that he
concludes us not to believe Eternal Rewards, that is, to deny them. Never did
Man catch at such broken Reeds to save himself from the just Abhorrence of all
sober People. We deny his Carnal Refurrection, therefore we must needs deny
Eternal Rewards. Again, We do not believe Eternal Rewards (if he may be
credited) yet he never read so, much less found it so by his own Confession;
and therefore could never quote it so. If we speak of Salvation, unless we put
future or eternal to it, he confines it to this World; he deals so with Heaven
and Hell; boldly concluding, from what we say, Men feel and know of those
things here, our Dis-Belief of any such thing hereafter. I told him of B. Hall
and T. Brooks, their Books entitled, Heaven upon Earth, but he says nothing
to that. In short, he seems to have made it his Business to render us but as
odious, as his Wits and worse would let him, but let him go with this
Character, no Man having charged so home, proved so weakly, and abused so
grossly, as this Adversary has done.

Because I concluded my Answer to the two first Parts of his former Book,
though contrarily to what he did, yet in the same Method, he is pleased thus to
treat me.


Reply, p. 90, 91. Set how good W. P. is at APING MY Logic If Quakerism (so
called) says he, be not another Dispensation then that of Christ preached and
settled by the Apostles; If it deny not the Scriptures; if it deny not all nor
any of the Ordinances of the Gospel, etc. And so he goes on with his Negatives;
by the same good Logic. I will prove Geometry, Logic or Philosophy to be
Christianity. If Geometry, etc. deny none of these Things, Geometry is
Christianity; but it does not, therefore Christianity; yea, if we will pass to
the Concrete, you may prove a HORSE or a GOOSE a Christian by the same
Argument; for they deny none of these things.


Rejoinder. Take away his idle Carps and Cavils and he would have nothing to
say, and he rarely says any Thing, but something is against himself. Who any
whit intelligent or candid, considering that I refumed the Argument in opposite
Terms, could think I intended it not to opposite Ends? That is, when J. Faldo
tells us, that we deny the Scriptures and all the Ordinances of the Gospel, and
we answer, that we do not deny the Scriptures or any Ordinance of the Gospel,
that we thereby do not mean; or these Words do not imply an Acknowledging of
the Scriptures and every Ordinance of the Gospel; for Instance: Suppose any Man
charges J. Faldo with a Denial of the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and
Baptism and the Supper to be Ordinances of the Gospel, and he shall answer, I
do not deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, nor Baptism nor the Supper to
be Ordinances of the Gospel: Are we to conclude, that J. Faldo acknowledged the
Scriptures to be the Word of God, and those Ordinances to be Gospel, no more
then an Horse or Goose? I will form it into an Argument for his Sake.

He that denies the Scriptures and Ordinances of the Gospel, is no true
Christian; But W. P. (says J. Faldo) denies the Scriptures and Gospel
Ordinances; Therefore W. P. is no true Christian.

I deny the Minor, or second Proposition; I query then, if I ought not to be
understood, to own the Scriptures and Gospel Ordinances? If not, there is no
Disputation: If I ought to be so understood, was it ingenuous or just in him so
to cavil? But that his Honesty and Logic may yet more clearly appear, I will
give his Reply in this plain Argument, wherein I wrong him not one Tittle.
Whosoever denies not the Scriptures and Gospel Ordinances is a true Christian:
But an Horse or a Goose does not deny the Scriptures and Gospel Ordinances;
Therefore a Horse or a Goose, according to J. Faldo, is a true Christian. I
know he would fling this Absurdity upon me; but he right well deserves it
himself, who would extend the Major Proposition beyond its Bounds; for it was
not Who or Whatsoever did not deny Christianity, thereby including all Sorts of
Beings and Things (which made a Gap for his Horse and his Goose) but if Quakers
or Quakerism so called (of whom was the Controversy, and must either deny or
own) do not deny the Scriptures, etc. it follows, they own the Scriptures, etc.
for by the same Rule that his owning the Scriptures includes no Denial of the
Scriptures, it holds e contra that our not denying of the Scriptures, includes
an ^owning of the Scriptures, or else his Argument proves nothing; for if it
stands not upon the Rule of Contraries, it will follow, that we may deny them,
and yet own them, for not denying them (though there be no Medium) is with him
no owning them. But what Part is not that Man fitted to act, who can argue
against his Adversary at such a Rate as this.

W. P. denies not the Scriptures, yet for all that, he owns them no more then
an Horse or a Goose, and why? because they do not deny them.

Next to this Injustice, his Logic in these Attempts excells. But above all
the rest, that the first, Piece of my Argument, as formal as any thing can be,
should not e^cape this Man's Abuse, viz. If Quakerism (so called) be not
another Dispensation then that of Christ preached and settled by the Apostles,
then the same, said I, though not another, yet not the same, says he; Let the
Reader judge in this Case: My Adversary in his first Book, 2d Part, p. 144.
begins thus, If Quakerism be an other Dispensation then that of Christ settled
and preached by the Apostles: Now what is plainer, then that this is a
Negative, as well as mine; for another Dispensation is not the same. Next, does
it not imply, that Quakerism (so called) is not Christianity, if another
Dispensation? And why may it not follow, if it be not another Dispensation,
that it is the same with that of Christianity? Is not this employed as strongly
and clearly as his Consequence in the contrary Proposition? Why should his
Negative pass, and mine be stopped; or his Consequence hold, and not mine? He
will have, That if Quakerism be another Dispensation, then not the same; but I
must not be allowed to infer, If Quakerism (so called) be not another
Dispensation, it is the same; as if it were not alike to say, If Quakerism (so
called) be not another Dispensation then the same: Or thus; If Quakerism (so
called) be the same Dispensation, then not another. Our Controversy lay upon
absolute Contraries, not upon things only indifferent, as Geometry, etc. for
they are neither for, nor against Christianity, neither do they own or deny
them. But if J. Faldo will be understood of his Saying; The Quakers deny the
Scriptures, that the Quakers do not own the Scriptures; Why should not we be
understoo^ when we say, we do not deny the Scriptures, to mean that we do own
the Scriptures. His Objection is, we run upon Negatives, whose first
Proposition of nine Parts has eight Negatives in it; unless, If the Quakers
deny Scriptures, Ordinances, Christ, etc and affect not a future Blessedness,
etc. are no Negatives; or that we must not thereby understand, They do not own
them; for if he sets it not in Contradiction, but at the Distance of Geometry
only, how can he conclude, The Quakers deny the Scriptures; yet so he concludes
per fas per nefas: What can be said to a Man of this hardy Stamp? whom neither
Logic, Reason nor Modesty can bound, yet a pretended Master of them all. Had I
used him at this toyish, gibing and illogical Rate, I had been an airy
Sophister, of no more serious Conscience or Religion then Punchenello; but
being his Adversary I must be a Dunce, an Ignoramus, and something else (he was
so wise as to hide from us) which are the Epithetes he is pleased out of his
great Storehouse of Ill Language to bestow upon me at parting. But which is
stranger, if any thing be strange that he does; after all the Perversion,
Addition, Diminution, Wresting, Misquotation, Evasion, and Schoolboy Puns and
Gibes, he has the Confidence thus to end this Chapter, and his Defense of the
first and second Part of his first Book:

Thus I have honestly and clearly vindicated every Charge in that Part of my
Book which intends the Proof of Quakerism to be no Christianity.

How honestly and how clearly he has vindicated his Charges belongs not to
either of us to judge, whatever we think; but is le^^ with every impartial
Reader to determine; though, if it be as he says, I am yet to learn what an
Honest and Clear Vindication means; for according to that Sense, I have had
of him through this whole Controversy, and the most upright Observation I
could make of his Management, it seems to me a moral Impossibility that he
should not be conscious to himself, of exhibiting. Charges he has not proved;
of abusing our Writings to endeavor it; of declining the Strength of our
Answers, and Vilifying of our Persons for writing them. To the Righteous God I
recommend the whole, and according to our Truth and Honesty in this Matter, may
we receive the Sentence of Well or Ill done, etc. I hope my Conscience will
abide the Search; for God that knows all Hearts, is Witness, I have not the
least Guilt upon me for my Concern and Carriage in this Affair, having done to
him, as I would all Men should do unto me, and therein fulfilled the Royal Law.


CHAP. XIII.
My Adversary declines meddling with my Appendix. His Dising enuity great. His
Perversions and Wrestings about his Key, pretending to open our Words, Detected.

WE are now come to his Two and Twentieth and last Chapter, which for his
Truth, Reason, Language and Carriage toward me, is an exact Representation of
his entire Reply, which will not be hard for any serious Reader to observe, and
make that use of it which may forever discard J. Faldo in his Opinion from any
future Pretense to honesty in Writing, till he has publicly recanted this;
but because I always desire he should speak for himself, be pleased to hear him
this.

Reply, p. 91. In W P's Answer to the third Part of my Book, he says nothing
to the Chapter of the Characters of Apostolical Persons and Inspirations,
wherein (it consisting of Twenty four Pages) I agitated at large these Points,
to the Overthrow of their pretended Apostolical Ministry, and Inspirations of
the same kind with theirs, common to all Believers, on which Quakerism is
founded.


Rejoinder. This Complaint might have been very allowable in case I had not
already sufficiently considered and answered whatsoever was of moment in those
Twenty Four Pages under the Head of Inspiration; and that himself had not been
so shamefully injust, as after having attackt the first Part of my Book,
entitled, The Spirit of Truth Vindicated, with Thirty Four Pages, and I
replied in an entire Appendix of Thirty Pages, he had not wilfully neglected to
give ^s one word of Rejoinder: I beseech my Reader to take notice of this one
great Piece of Disingenuity; for if I must be chid, because I did not
unnecessarily repeat Controversy, having already defended our Doctrine in this
Point, under the Head of Inspiration and Gospel Ministry, What shall be said to
him, that unprovokedly fell foul of my fore named Book, and after I had replied
in its Defense takes no more notice, then if he were wholly unconcerned in any
such Attempts? He must either think what he writ irrefutable or indefensible;
If the first, then he need not have replied at all, since I am persuaded he
believes one part of what he writ to be as irrefutable as the other: If because
indefensible, he is to be excused, yet deservedly to be blamed for finding that
Fault: with others which he is much more guilty of himself. To say nothing of
his Pretense of Answering Two Hundred Fifty Four Pages within the Compass of
Ninety Six, and that Skip he makes over my whole Key, consisting of about half
a score Pages, added for the Opening our true Meaning from that perverted
sense, ignorant and malicious Persons have put upon our Principles: And lastly,
his Vindication of his Key in not a page and an half against Six or Seven Pages
of my Answer, wherein, I hope, it was proved abundantly defective. But let us
hear what he says to remedy those defects I therein charged upon it.


Reply, p. 92. In my Key of Two Hundred and Fifty Particulars, he excepts
against Ten; Five of which he further explains, the other Five he opposes.


Rejoinder. This looks unfair on my part, till my Reader be informed, that not
one of these Two Hundred and Fifty Particulars had so much as the Name of Man
or Book, consequently no Page, how to find and read any of those things he
affirms to be our Sense or Meaning, which is enough to discredit an Honester
Writer then J. Faldo; so that what I did, was more then could be justly
expected, much less challenged from me: however, I took Ten of the most
suspicious. If he be disproved in those, there is great Reason to suspect him
about the Rest, till he has produced more unquestionable Evidence. Of these he
tells us, I explain one Five and oppose the other, Let us hear how he gives my
Opposition, and what is his Replication.


Reply. The first of these is in page 247. THE WILL OF THE FLESH. i. e. All
that is chosen by Man, though he be thereto disposed by the Will of God
revealed in the Scriptures. This W. P. calls False, and an Abominable and
Notorious Untruth. I have proved at large their calling all things of a
Religious Nature by that Name which are not by Immediate Inspiration: although
the Scriptures have Precepts! and Examples, commanding and prescribing them.


Rejoinder. If this be not to beg the Question, no Man ever did since the World
was. He says, he has proved it at large: and I say, I have refuted it at
large; and what says he to that? no more then this, I have proved it at large,
etc. Does this Man look like an able Disputant? That he is not an honest one,
take my Answer, by him omitted, with his own words faithfully cited.

J. F. page 69. THE WILL OF THE FLESH, i. e. All that is chosen by Man, though
he be thereto disposed by the Will of God revealed in the Scripture.

W. P. This is False; Many things may be and are daily chosen by Man, that is
not in the Will of the Flesh, nor by his own Will, much less when any should be
disposed thereto by the Will of God revealed in the Scripture: An Abominable
Untruth, and so Notorious, that I need say no more; only Challenge him to
produce any of us (that is, any of our Sayings or VVritings) in Proof of his
Exposition, if he can; otherwise be has Slandered Us and Our Principles: For
the W^ll of the Flesh, is that which is quite Contrary to God, and inconsistent
with the Good of the Creature.

How well he has acquitted himself in point of Honesty, as well as Ability,
first, in so maiming my Answer; and next, in saying nothing to it, is still
referred to my Reader's Judgment, and so we proceed.


Reply, page 92. The second is, page 249. CHRIST THE OFFERING, i. e. the Light
within. W. P. calls this no Quakers Expression; that it is, take this Proof. We
believe that Christ in us does offer himself up a Living Sacrifice to God for
us, Smith. Cat. page 64.


Rejoinder. I still say, it is no Quaker's Expression; Though the Light that
shines in our Hearts be Christ the true Light; But that which I most insisted
on, he has (as he uses to do) quite left out; viz. for he would by this
insinuate, that we deny Christ to be an Offering as in the Flesh, and that Body
then offered up to be concerned in our Belief of the Offering; but I do declare
it to have been an Holy Offering, and such an one too, as was to be once for
all; therefore let none receive his Abuse of us for our Faith.

He that has half an Eye may see, how poorly and meanly he has shifted off
the Weight of my Answer. Again,


Reply, p. 92. The third, MEN-PLEASERS. Sense. They who comply with Men though
in things not only Lawful, but also to Edification. This W. P. calls an arrant
Lie; but the ground is, provided J. F. means by Lawful unto Edification, what
we do. I am not so silly to put such Bonds on the Truth.


Rejoinder. Indeed I never took him to be so Silly as Mischievous in the
Matter, not to use his own Phrase more -- then Ignoramus; for instead of
putting, Bonds on the Truth, he has broken all Bonds of Truth; he pretends to
give our Sense of Men-Pleasers, and substitutes his own in the room of it; and
when we tell him, that if he means by Lawful and to Edification, what we do, he
belies us; he confidently replies, I am not so silly to put such Bonds on the
Truth; as if in rendering our Sense of words, he were not bound to keep to our
Sense of them; how is it our Sense, if it be his, and not ours; and how truly
ours, if it be putting Bonds on the Truth to render ours truly? But the Man's
present Hardiness is beyond wondering at. To the next.


Reply, p. 92. TRADITIONS OF MEN, i. e. The Scripture or written Word, p. 250.
To this W. P. adds; But to say, they are the Traditions of Men, in the sense
Christ forbid the Pharisaical Religion, God forbid: I had rather my Tongue were
cut out of my Head. Oh base Man, to abuse an Innocent People thus grossly. I
have already proved the Phrase to be the Quakers, viz. Smith' s and Nailor' s.


Rejoinder. This answers it self: if he had taken off the Force of my Words, I
might have bestowed a Rejoinder upon him; in the mean time, I have disproved
his pretended Proof, where I met with it; and what I find here, is but a mere
begging of the Question. The fifth and last Particular he thus endeavors to
vindicate, is this.


Reply, p. 93. THE VAIL IS OVER THEM, p. 251. Their Sense I give of this, he
presents the greater half of ( which explains the other) by an etc. to blind
the Reader, and make the Quakers believe, I deserve the Imputations of Malice
and wicked Man, which it seems he is resolved before hand to bestow on me.


Rejoinder The Man is weary of his Work, as we may see, by the great haste he
makes over every particular. No Man living that has not read both our Books
can make any Sense of this Hodge-Podge Section; that ever any Man should touch
with Religious Controversy, that is so visibly defective in it! My Answer
shall be my Rejoinder; for, sure I am, he has overlookt it, and therefore yet
to be replied to.

J. F. p. 89. THE VAIL IS OVER THEM, that is, says J. Faldo, the Belief of the
Man Christ Jesus, which was of our Nature to be p. 251, 252. the Christ, etc.

W. P. Let this be the last (though several more might be observed) which at
this time shall be considered, in which we shall see that J. Faldo has done
like himself, and the Man we have all along taken him to be. The Vail is over
them, it is a Scripture Phrase, 2 Cor. 3. 15. used by the Apostle to express
the Darkness and Ignorance that to that time remained over the Understanding of
the Jews in reading the Law; and this Vail he makes us to interpret after this
gross and absurd manner; namely, that the Vail is the Man Christ. Wicked Man!
Did ever Quaker so irreverently express himself? Give us his Name, or tell us
in what Book we may find it. What greater Malice could thou have shown, then
thus injustly to pervert the Scripture in our Name? abusing both: As if,
because Christ's Flesh is called a Vail, and the Ignorance of the Jews a Vail,
that therefore the Quakers must of Necessity mean by Vail in the first Sense,
Vail in the second Sense; as if the Way to have the Vail rent, were to deny the
Man Christ Jesus.

All this my Adversary thought fit to conceal, left his transcribing it into
his Reply, would have made that Discovery of his Baseness, which he should
never have been able by all his Shifts to palliate. I think I did not nickname
this Chapter, when I called it a Representation of his whole Reply: He ends as
he begun, with Squibs, Puns, Evasions and Ill Language; for unless the Goodness
of a Book be to be measured by the Paint of a Title Page, or bare Writing
reputed Replying, he might with more Sense and Reason have called it Froth,
Folly and Fiction, then a Religious Vindication, etc. No Man I ever read of
has exceeded the Bounds of Truth by obtruding Falsehoods, and wandered from the
D^corum of a fair Adversary, by unfair Citations and obvious Wrestings, betaken
himself for Sanctuary to such silly Shifts, and Schoolboy Jeers, at the rate
this Adversary has done: And I have no Reason to Doubt of others being of the
same Mind, since the World is not so destitute of Understanding, as to be
cheated with his hocus-pocus Tricks, to take Tin for Silver, or Copper for
Gold, or Froth for Substance, or Inventions for Texts, or Wrestings for
Meanings, or Gibes and Taunts for pertinent Replies. I have hitherto abundantly
satisfied my self concerning him, and I hope all that read me, both of him and
his Essays against the People called Quakers; If not, it ought not to be
charged upon me as wanting good Will to do it: I was never more sedulous, and I
think never more faithful in any such Affair. And to the End my frequent
Complaint of his unfair Dealing may be further justified and confirmed, and his
Deportment in the whole of this Controversy more exactly related, I entreat my
Reader to consider what I have now to tell him.


CHAP. XIV.
Of Reflections on Persons and Things.

IF we will believe John Faldo in his own behalf, he abhors that sordid Way of
Writing, which some Practice, of Reflecting, Nick-Naming, giving Ill-Language,
etc. either to his Adversary or his Doctrine. But as it fares with most Men,
they condemn in others what they indulge in themselves; so truly, No Adversary
in the midst of all his severe Censures of that unchristian Way of proceed,
has made more bold with his Reader, nor fallen more foully upon his Adversary,
yea, Persons unconcerned, then J. Faldo has done.

We were as quiet, as Men that had scarcely known there was such a Person in
the World, when our Peace was disturbed by a great Book entitled with no more
Modesty nor Mercy, then in plain Terms, QVAKERISM NO CHRISTIANITY. In this he
charge us at once with whatever all our Adversaries put together had from
time to time insisted upon to render us Odious; almost every Charge as
scandalous and impious as rankest Blasphemy; and both rendered and called so
(for ought I know) more then Twenty Times in that Discourse. This Book I
thought I answered with more Moderation then either it deserved, or the Law of
Retaliation would have granted: At the latter-end of it, I ran up a few of his
many unworthy Reflections, Jeers and Scoffs together, that I might the better
help my Reader to a true Relish of our Adversary's Spirit. He says nothing to
them, which makes me conclude, I have not injured him, nor in one word done him
wrong; for had I, without doubt he had not past over my Collection with so deep
Silence. I think it fit to transcribe them, that my Reader may see what
Provocations I met with to draw Rebukes from me.

Horrid Imposture; Ditch of Grossest Delusion; Subverting Christianity; Their
Feigned Christ; Folly, Madness; It began in Blasphemies against Christ;
Gratifying Pride, Idleness, Giddiness; In Professors Profane; Vanity; Folly;
Nonsense; Error: Whether it smell more of the Fox or the Goose; Imposture;
Babble; Blockish Person; QUAKERISM ENTERED THE WORLD AS IF SATAN BROKE LOOSE,
and POSSESSIONS BY SATAN WERE TO MAKE WAY AND FIT SOULS FOR THE QVAKERS
SPIRITS; O the Hell Dark Expressions of the Quakers Teachers! What bitter
Curses and Execrations! Dismal Howling; Horrible Roaring; Blasphemy; Wretch;
Vain Fictions; Quakers Glowworm; Deck their Idol; Real Nonsense; But it is
Pity not to lash a little; Idiots; Stark Blind; Steel Hard; Your Crooked,
Unholy Principles; Their Light grows Wiser and Wiser; Opium of Quakerism; The
Quakers Divine Spirit Dumb; Refreshments at Quakers Meetings, so there is at
Puppet-Playes; Impudent Foreheads; Non-such Ignorance; Proud, Dreaming,
Intolerable Notions; Ignorance and Delusion; Outstrip all in the Crooked Way;
Blasphemers of the Lord of Life and Glory; Surely God has given them up for
their Pride, Giddiness, or Idle Ignorance, and that in Justice; And the Devil
has blinded their Minds with a Witness; Horrible Abomination; Gross and Dark
Conceits; The Rankness of Quakerism.

And though I have carefully avoided his ill Example, yet such is my
Unhappiness, that my Reproofs are styled Railing; and Religious Censures, given
forth from a grieved Spirit, counted Ill-Language. But what seems yet most
insufferable, this very Man, that calls every sober Reprehension by an Hard
Name, is most profuse in his black Epithetes upon us; as if notwithstanding the
Circumstances he mostly confesses he is under in the World, as his complaints
tell us (which is no Fault laid to his Charge) he thinks it more intolerable
that we should censure his Domineering, Scoffing Strain against an entire
People, be they what they will in Reputation, Merit, Honesty or Acceptance
among Men, then that he should use it. What Blindness has seized him, that he
should not see this a Fault in himself? Is he fit to reprove, who out-does the
Reproved in that for which the Reproof is given?

But before I reflect his Miscarriages of this Nature upon him, he has
something to say to me. It seems I have not behaved my self toward him with
that Subjection to his unprovoked Abuses, which he thought became me to a Man
of his Quality. Let us hear what has stumbled him, and how patiently this
pretended Enemy to Personal Reflections takes it. The first is this.

I happened to let fall in my Answer, not material to the Point, this, but as a
passant Expression, and so intended: I find him more in Words then Matter, and
I suppose more are of that Mind; or else what means his Pains to be made Waste
Paper of already; QUAKERISM NO CHRISTIANITY has exchanged the Booksellers
Stall for the Tobacco-Shops.

This so harmeless and true Saying has given him great Offense, at least he
has taken it; what had become of me, had I bin either as petulant or
vainglorious? I will give his words, that my Reader may judge if the Man have
any Vanity. After his Debate of serious Matter; Now, Reader (says he) I am
come to a Passage which makes me conclude its Author desperate.

As if all the Error and Blasphemy he laid at my Door in his fore going five
Chapters had been Toys and Trifles, but dark Conjectures and mere Guesses to
this great Discrimen of my desperate Condition. Oh monstrous Vanity of
Vanities! But he goes on.

A Passage ( says he) that renders W. P. careless, how justly odious he
becomes with Thousands, so he may but lessen the Reputation of my Book.

Better and better, or worse and worse, which my Reader will. Does my
Reputation depend upon the Good-liking of J. Faldo's Ungodly Charges, propt
with fal^e Citations, Perversions, etc? I am miserable then. No Head, not
empty, would make so great a Sound. It seems his Books have Thousands of
Votaries: Hundreds are a Number too diminutive to vow Maintenance to his
Labors. These words show the great Vanity of the Author, or the Debility of
the Cause that must have whole Regiments of Auxiliaries to his Protection,
choose him whether. But that he may leave no part of his Picture undrawn by his
own hand; for who can (or will) do it so well? hear him yet further.

The Acceptance my Book has had in the World becomes not me to express.

A cleaver Way to tell us both his Book's Acceptance, and his own Modesty: Yet
he so loves the Theme he cannot give over.

The second Impression of above 1250. may be abroad ere this come to thy hand.

And how should they choose, since the New Cabal, contrived to overthrow the
Quakers, have taken a way of packing such Books into the Country as a new sort
of Manufacture, where long before the second Impression came out, in several
parts of England, they lay so heavy upon hand by the peaceable Disposition of
both Preachers and Hearers, that (as I have been credibly informed) some better
affected to such Work then ordinary, have gone from House to House, offering,
yea, pressing them upon the People, as if it had been an Alms to buy them. Yet
he goes on still.

I cannot yet find by enquiring that any of W. P's Answers to my Book have come
to the Preferment to adventure that Passage.

It seems he has enquired; Strange Vanity! But what then? Therefore unworthy?
So was W. Tindal's then in Henry the Eight's days; H. Barrow in Q.
Elizabeth's; from whom descended those that are undeservedly called his
Followers; I mean, such Independents as J. Faldo is become. Had it been a good
Argument against Luther's Books, that they were not sold at Rome? Or what
Preferment had it been to despised Truth to lie upon the same Stall by Error
and Imposture? It Is well our Books escape Burning amidst such Ill-Neighbours as
J. F. and our selves too. Convenience to dispose of our Defenses we like, and
sometimes want. His Attempt is a License to lie upon any Stall without fearing
a Search: But he should not insult over that low Condition God is pleased to
exercise us in: Though we think it no Preferment to our Books to keep Company
with J. Faldo's at any time; nor should we desire it, but to disprove their
black Charges.

But as if I had committed the most enormious of all Crimes, in saying, That
his Book had exchanged the Book Seller's Stall for the Tobacco-Shops, he
cautions me, not to pass yet a while by the Booksellers Shops, for fear they
should point at me, and do something else for a Non-such

I know not what, unlefs he had some private Intelligence, that they intended
to break my Head with some of his Books, to prove to me by the Experience of
Battery* that they had not left the Books Seller's Stall.

But this is not all, he tells me on this only Occasion, I have not the Fear of
God before mine Eyes; The Words of my Mouth are Iniquity and Deceit; That I
left off to be wise and to do good; that I set my self in a Way that is not
good, and abhor not Evil, Psalm. 36. 2, 3, 4.

Upon this Text he preaches my Infamy and Disgrace, but with an Abuse to the
Text as well as to me, and all for that only Passage. Nay, the Booksellers, J.
Robinson at the Sign of the Golden Lion in Pauls-Yard, and R. Boul^er at the
Sign of the Turk's-Head in Cornhill, are brought forth with a Fearful WHEREAS
against W. P. upon no other score then to buoy up the Book's Sale and the
Author's Credit; And by this pair of Booksellers, whom I know not (and I
scarcely think ever heard of, especially the latter) much less had I ever
harmed them, am I called all to naught, unless Notorious, False, Dishonest,
Impudent, Brazen-faced Detractor are no such thing; and this in one page, and
that in a Certificate too, as if they had not been giving mere Testimony but
Sentence, and that after a municipal Proceed of a Billingsgate Judicature. But
I forgive them; besides, the Words call neither of them Author.

Two things I shall observe: First, That his Book has had general Acceptance by
Learned Divines, both of Conformists and Non-Conformists. Secondly, That we
have endeavored to prevent the Sale of J. F.'s Book.

To the first I answer, their Learned Divines I know not; and how should I,
their Names are concealed? But granting what these Men say, it proves nothing:
I could produce the Letters of Men, of known Honor, Learning and Quality, not
only in England, but abroad in the World, to balance the Scale, who condemned
his Enterprise of Weakness, Incharitableness and Wickedness heartily embracing
the Answer as a Check but due to his Exorbitances. But let it be as it will in
the Esteem of Men; we the poor traduced Quakers have a further Appeal and
expect an higher Judgment: In the mean time, we rest in God's Providence, and
desire to pursue our Christian Duty.

In the second Passage I do aver, they have wronged us; for we never
endeavored any such thing as to prevent the Sale of our Adversaries Book,
therefore in so many Words they have certified an absolute Untruth; which ill
becomes Men pretending to Conscience, as the latter of them does, going under
the Name (as I take it) of an Anabaptist, but I suppose some what BECALMED.

This I thought to have prefixed in Form of a Certificate under several Hands,
after their Example; but I had more Regard to the Weight and Gravity of my
Discourse, then to seem so concerned for my Reputation about a very Trifle,
wherein, had they what they desire, J. F's Book would appear never the less
impious, nor my Answer one Jot less formidable; and so I end with him upon this
Score.

His next Disturbance at me, is in p. 43, 44, 45. of his Reply; on this
Occasion: He would needs turn Hangman to us in his former Book, saying, That
now he was come to the highest Round of the Ladder, I presume, in order to
execute us: But I was so Modest, as to use no Word so gross to him, only
inverted the Allusion, and turned his Simile back upon him, thus: I will not
say for what an Army Chaplain might deserve to be so highly exalted; but since
his eager Pursuit after an innocent People, has brought him actually thither,
and it falls to my Share to be his Executioner, I shall take all the Care I can,
to acquit my self well of my Employment. At this he rages beyond-measure,
though he be only entangled in a Rope of his own providing. He must needs be
meddling with Laddes, and trussing up the poor Quakers and their Principles,
without all Civility, Mercy or Justice; and because I improved his own
Similitude to the Dispatch of his Cause, that he had designed to illustrate the
Execution of us and ours by; He, as one beside himself, calls me Hangman,
Bungler, infallible Stager, and in plain Terms Fool. But this is little to what
is behind; for it seems, I am not enough for him to wreak his Displeasure upon,
and therefore of all others my deceased Father, whose Grave with Heathens had
been a Guard from all Reflections (especially, when as unconcerned as what was
never born, in the Controsie) must be fetched up to answer for his Sons
Micarriage (if such it had been) his Words are these.

But why an Army-Chaplain deserves that Preferment more then a military
Sea-Captain, his Father's Character.

Insolence and Pride! for Shame, John Faldo, shall the most Barbarous Nations
make it a standing Axiom, De Mortuis nil nisi bonum; And does J. Faldo, a
Nonconforming Minister, that should be more humble from his Profession and
Meaness, break that laudable Saying by De mortuis nil nisi malum. Strange! But
why my Father of all others? Did he ever wrong him? But had he; where is J.
Faldo's Christianity in the Point? Is this the Way to prove Quakerism, none?
One would have thought I had been enough to satiate the revenge^ul Stomach of
this Canabal, without haling him out ^f his Grave, whom Death has freed from
the Con^rns of the Living, and the Earth intombed out of their Sight.

What kind of Sea-Captain he was becomes not me (...) tell, nor need I; the
World knows it: Neither shall I stomach his Comparison or diminutive Epithetes.
His Question I therefore refuse to answer, because every observing Person may
easily satisfy himself, as to the vast Disparity that is between the Station
and Service of every such one and an Army-Chaplain; for it is but to
distinguish between the Preservation of a Man's Country from the Rapes and
Spoils of Foreigners, and the ruining it by turning Incendiary, kindling
Animosities and blowing them into Domestic Wars, and the Question is fully
answered. However, I would have J. F. be more careful how he medles with the
Men of that Element; for if they should know of his base Reflections and
Comparisons, they would, I assure him, do more then point at him, as he said of
his Booksellers to me.

The next Passages in my Answer which trouble him not a little, are these two,
that I should say to these Words, poor Non-Conformists; but why poor
Non-conformists after all their preached up Battles, Spoils, Plunders,
Sacriledges, Decimations, etc. as Rich and Covetous as ever. Again, upon the
Description of the True Ministry, I said, No, they are true Gospel Ministers,
and their Feet truly beautiful, whose Gospel is Peace on Earth, and Good Will
toward Men; and not Garments roled in the Blood of Kings and Princes Rulers
and People. No Worldly Armies, Battles, Spoils, Sequestrations, Decimations,
etc. in which J. Faldo and his poor Nonconforming Ministers have had their
Hands, etc. p. 52, 53, 62.

This may perhaps sound harsh; but I shall easily take that off by declaring
the Occasion. My Adversary mus^ needs reflect upon me, and some other of my
Friend^ for our Estates, Houses and plentiful Subsistances; and having first
abused us by making it necessary to a True Minister after our Principle, to
have no House, jeers at our Poverty and envies our Prosperity; bidding such as
had no dwelling Places, to repair to William Penn and such other Quakers for an
Answer, who have large Possessions and brave Habitations, such as few
Ministers, especially the poor Non-Conformists enjoy. Upon this I depainted
what some of their Ministry had been, and what it is; not varying one Tittle
from the true Character of them, so far as I know it. What had he to do with
our Livings? What with our Ministry? Shall he rant uncontroleably? Has he a
Privilege to make us Fools and Knaves at Pleasure without Contradiction? Is
there no Supersedeas to such Unchristian Proceed? We must be abused if Poor,
and jeered or envied if Rich; and that by a Man, who is one of that Tribe which
has given the signallest Proof of a false Ministry, by the great Degeneracy of
the late Times, whereinto they were not only fallen; but have been the
Ringleaders unto others corrupted by it. But I beseech my Reader to consider
his Reply to what he thus drew upon his own Head.

1. That my Accusations are false, which is sooner said then proved; twenty
Years have made them good.

2. That I have like an accursed Ham, discovered my Father's Nakedness. No such
Matter J Faldo, That Fig-Leaf will not cover thine. My Father was no domestic
Incendiary, much less an Army Chaplain or Parson; of such I spoak. He
complotted none of those Tragedies, nor was his Estate advanced by any of the
consequential Gains: His Family never saw two Pence of any Sequestration or
Decimation Money, nor possessed one Foot of King's, Queens or Church Lands,
though perhaps some honest Men did. Accuse that can, provided he will prove, or
else he had better hold his Tongue. I can say, and that with Sincerity to God
and Man, that after twenty five Years of public and very eminent Sea and Land
Employs ( requiring much Time, Prudence, Care, Faithfulness, Government) and
the many great Opportunities he had to swell his Estate to a very considerable
Bulk, and that as laudably as any public Officers raise themselves, he
departed this World with a most clear Conscience in all those Respects, leaving
not half that which many London Shopkeepers arrive at by their private
Acquisitions. Base then and unworthy with a Witness, to bring him or me into
your Society; We are unconcerned in those Enormities, for which I justly made
the Reflection.

3. But he says, that I spit Defiance against the Kings Gracious Laws, and Act
of Oblivion; that if I be displeased, I will call for Fire from Heaven to
devour the whole Stock and Kindred of one that offends me.

God forbid, and forgive him. I would rather dye my self then bring any such
Damage upon any of you: But you are to be put in Mind of old Times, to humble
you; Some of you perk up so high, as if none were fit Guides for Heaven but
your selves, and would sit Inquisitors upon other Men's Religion without
Contradiction, and yet have given such eminent Proofs of your Degeneracy, fresh
in our Memory. I have not said half so much as JOHN CANN, the old Independent
Pastor, left behind him in his little Treatise, called, The Time of finding,
which is an Entire Testimony aginst your Apostasy, for so the old Man calls it,
and the second since his day, preferring the worst of the former Bishops before
you. See his Epist. Dedicat. Most sharp are his Reprehensions of you in the
Discourse it self.

To talk of the Act of Oblivion, is not so pertinent, as to live that humble
Life your former Miscarriages should in very Prudence engage you to. This were
a better Use of the King's Clemency, then to trouble the World with such
unnecessary Contests, especially when they expose other more harmless
Dissenters to the Severity of the misinformed Magistrate, and rude Vulgar, and
prejudice the Minds of sober Inquirers against them: This is to be as bad out
of Power; as you were in it.

Neither would I be understood to have spoken of all Sorts of Non-conformists
(having always been one my self, and a true Lover of the Honest of them) which
J. Faldo takes great Pains to insinuate; No: Nor of all called Ministers,
neither. I aimed at such only who remain in their Partial, Narrow, Bitter,
Spirit, unfit for God and Men. It Is notorious to all inquisitive Minds, what
Misery these Nations have been reduced to, through the pernicious Councils,
horrid Flatteries and most partial and ambitious Practices of many of the
Nonconforming Clergy when time was; They always stood in the Way of whatever
tended to the true Freedom of this Mighty Nation from greatest Thraldom. I
could particularize in twenty great Instances, and bring the Complaint of many
considerable Persons against them, Many Pamphlets are extant that loudly speak
the same, especially two, called The first and second Narrative of the late
Parliament's Proceedings, etc. printed Anno 1658. and 1659. as I take it, in
which the greatest Hypocrisy, the most detestable Falseness to God and Men,
and a Sort of Flattery to their new Monarchy, exceeding all modern Idolatry,
yea, Blasphemy it self, are brought to Light, and laid at the Doors chiefly of
the Priesthood among all Persuasions in any Power at that time; Out of which
and several others I have extracted about one Sheet, which I intended for the
Press, but pure Tenderness to those that acted with Integrity and Conscience,
stopped its Publication: I was careful not to give any Occasion for them to be
born hard upon by such as knew not well how to distinguish between Persons and
Things that differ; though such as I meant, well deserve it from us, that when
in Power persecuted us, contrary to their own Engagements, and now out of Power
malign and abuse us by slanderous Reports and invective Libels: Nor is it
wholly laid aside, though pro tempore suspended: New Provocations may give
Occasion for their History to come abroad to the Nation more compendiously then
ever. A Work I take no Pleasure in, but am heartily sorry, that such as have
given that just Occasion for Rebuke, should (as not having their Fill of us
before) fall so severely on us now about Religion, who have so eminently proved
themselves false to God, Religion and the Kingdom; and thereby necessitated us
to rip them up and show how nauseous this Officiousness of theirs is; as if
they thought to expiate old Crimes and prove themselves Zealous for Religion,
by perverting, abusing and gainsaying ours. This is the present Plague that
infects the Families of but too many, through the secret Instigations of their
Ministers, yet too inward with them: And I know, that the most honorable left
among Dissenters, lament at this Day the Stingeness of their Clergy, whose
Fierceness is rather increased (then lessened) with their Loss of Power. But
such generous Persons, as have acted truly upon Conscience, according to the
best of their Understandings, and have ever continued immovable for General
and National Good, no Man holds them in greater Value then my self; I wish for
every such one the King and Kingdom had a Thousand. It is an Abuse therefore in
my Adversary to extend my Words to all Non-conformists, which only relate to
the Narrow-Spirited, Angry and Imperious aamong their Teachers. And if it be
for my Plain Dealing with them, he (like himself and his Cause) threatens me
with the Punishment of the Judge, Law, and I know not what beside, unless I
repent me of my Saying (at what time he pleads the King's Oblivion (showing
himself more below him in Mercy, then he is in Dignity) Let him begin when he
will, it will never lessen my Credit, nor greaten his, But that he should,
after so much Provocation, such scurrilous Replies, Hard Names and black
Characters, given by him, say, I am turned CAVALIER and PRELATE too, to
satisfy my Lust of Anger; adding, We see what a Change the Quakers Light can
make when it acts the Part of Fire, are Words very Indiscreet and Ungrateful,
as well as Scoffing and Profane; for they fling such scurvy Reflections upon
Cavaliers and Prelates, as become not one who got his Oblivion by the former,
and his present Liberty of Preaching and License for Printing by the latter:
For it is as much as to say, that both Cavaliers and Prelates are a Sort of
Revengeful, Angry and Fiery Persons (to be sure bad enough, or he would not
have rendered me either, when he went about to character me to Disgrace) So
unthankful is he for his Oblivion and all other Benefits that he now enjoyes at
the Hands, and by the Moderation of either Cavaliers, that is, Royalists; or
Prelates, that is, Episcopal Protestants; whom notwithstanding, he pretended to
be no further concerned in his Essays against us, then vindicated, as I have
frequently observed.

But lastly he accepts against my mention of one of his new Benefactors.

There is a Gentleman, Mr. T. F. against whom Mr. Penn has such a Slpeen, that
to my great Wonder I find him in all his Writings (I have read) attempting his
Disgrace, who never wrote against him; and if my Information fail me not, P.
has been engaged by him to another kind of Deportment.

How black am I with J. Faldo's Dirt? but none of it will stick. Spleen I never
had to the Man; but once a Friendship, that had never been broken by me; but as
it came, it went. At the time of our Disputation with T. D. T. V. T. D. and W.
M. at the Spitle, being engaged in the Negative concerning the common Doctrine
of distinct and separate Personallity, he and some others fell into great
Intimacy with us; Who but we in his and their Thoughts? at what time they were
not quite discovered by us: But pulling off their Masks, at last we found them
to have been the Followers of J. Biddle, in that which is commonly called the
Socinian-Way; and that their peculiar Regard to us came from an implicit
Vindication of one of their Principles, for which we came under the Scandal and
Odium of Socinians: Pulpits rang how the Quakers had unmaskt themselves on that
Occasion; and their warm Disputes in our Defense did not a little strengthen
the common Reports that went of us, and me in particular. When my Book
entitled, The Sandy Foundation Shaken, came out, it being a further Detection
of what we call Errors, and it happening that Socinians did the same, as I was
a rank Socinian (who had never read any one Socinian Book in all my Life, if
looked into one at that time) so these Men, at least T. F. was ready to believe
me nearer a kin to them, then, God he knows, I was; that is to say, in Denying
the Divinity of Christ. At this time, what would he not have done for me, if I
might have believed him, and in Reallity the Man was wonderfully taken; but
which was grievous, he was shamefully mistaken; and when he came to read my
Confession to Christ's Eternal Godhead in my little Book, entitled, Innocence
with her Open Face (though he had another, called, The Guide Mistaken, that p.
28. abundantly does the same, which was writ and read by him before the Sandy
Foundation was thought of) he deserted me, broak all Bonds of Friendship and
Rules of Civility, and his extreme shows of Kindness turned to continual
excessive Reflections; He would have it a Retraction, rather then be thought to
have been mistaken; He had built his Hopes too high for the Foundation, and
then became wrathful that they fell. And though I sought his friendly
Behavior, having no Thought in my Heart but Love and Friendship to him; yet so
invincible was his Displeasure, that there was no holding for me of his
Good Will, and believing Christ to be God; They were with him as inconsistent,
as Light and Darkness; I know no other Reason (if this be any) for his
Sharpness to me; And God knows, this is the very Truth. I leave it with my
Reader to satisfy his own Conscience concerning this Matter.

But he never wrote against me; Truly he needed not, who has another
Instrument so nimble, and so able a Scribe as J. F. for the Purpose. But if
calling me the basest Names, undervaluing, detracting and traducing me in
almost all Companies behind my back; and in a Garden at Hogfdon, where I went
to accompany some of my Relations, to affront me with opprobrious Names, as
many can witness, who demeaned my self with all Gentleness toward him; and to
act in the Quallity of an incessant Agent against us by Informations, Reports,
Books, etc. (WHO ONCE DID ALL THESE THINGS FOR US (and we are no worse Men then
we were) If these things be no just Provocations to mention two Letters, I am
to blame: Yet that I name him in almost all my Writings, or all that he has
read, is false; for in the Spirit of Alexander the Copper-Smith, etc. which J.
F. quotes, he is not named, and of above Twelve Books he was mentioned but in
Three, and that obscurely; this makes the Fourth against my Will. The Occasion,
besides what has been already touched upon, was this; H. H. one of his Friends,
writes a Book against us, or rather to us against G. F. J. Faldo's Mr. T. F.
was the Promoter and Scatterer of these Pamphlets, especially upon the
Exchange, where (and not in private Converse, as J. F. says, and makes to be
the only Reason of my taking notice of him, that he may render me base to his
Readers) before several, and those of diverse Persuasions, called G. Fox Knave,
Puppy, Logerhead, with such like unhandsome Terms, unworthy of a Man of T. F's
Consideration in the World.

This I would never have repeated, had not J. Faldo drawn, yea, compelled it
from me, by suggesting an Untruth, and substituting it in the room of the True
Reason.

Well, But if his Information fail him not, I have been engaged by T. F. to
another kind of Deportment. And suppose all this, has he not dis-engaged me
sufficiently? I owe no Man any thing beyond Truth, nor will be fettered from my
Testimony by any Obligations. But I never was engaged to him beyond what I have
faithfully related, except it was his lending me (as he thought) by one that
was my Servant at that time of my Tower-Imprisonment, about Forty Pounds (he
coming in my Name, counterfitting both Messages and Letters, as I made appear
to him afterward) which, though mine Eyes never saw one Penny of it, nor was
there a Penny employed in my Service, or to my use, I did, when God enabled me,
having then no Estate in my Hands, faithfully repay, as if I had really had,
every Penny; believing then, and still, that it was Kindness in him to me that
was abused by a Knavish Servant; and I would never let him suffer for it: If
herein I have wronged him, he may forgive me.

But because in my Answer to J. Faldo, and what he said in his behalf against
us, I told him, that some thought it a Shame, that so ill a Tongue should go
unrebuked of those whose Principles and Interest give them the Liberty of doing
it in a way that might be more effectual then all the Moderation and Reason
that can easily be shown to him; J. Faldo, exactly like himself, strains these
words, all the Moderation and Reason, which I intended, of our bearing his
Abuses, only showing their Unreasonableness by writing, to nothing below some
Unjust and Violent Course to rid him out of the way; which are but softer words
for downright Murder, and to Countenance this Comment of his. I was told, I
think, by one that had it at T. F's Mouth, that he was advised to take the Law
of me for his Security.

But to put all this out of doubt, those that thought it a Shame, he should so
frequently, violently and publicly revile honest Men, bringing their Common
Credit into Question by scurvy Names, meant by the way that might be taken,
only the Law, which was what some counseled him to use to secure himself
against me. These Men had need have good Consciences, that are thus afraid
before they are hurt.

Thus have I vindicated those Reflections J. Faldo laid such Foundation for;
and if T. F. be troubled at this, I must tell him, so am I, but I cannot help
it; Let him better advise his Scribe next time; for I have nothing but hearty
Love and good Wishes for him; nor have I said any thing harsh or disgraceful in
this Defense of my self, imputing much of what has happened more to his
Natural Haste, and sometimes ungo^^rn'd Speech, then a Premeditated Injustice:
He knows how often I have cautioned him in those respects, while we conversed
together; Nor has it been my only Observation and Admonition by a great many
others* and some of his own Friends too. Thus I leave T. F. ^n perfect
Good Will, to see what Leave it is that J. Faldo is taking of us.

His Epilogue degenerates not one jot from the Book it self; And as if he would
do me a great Deal of Mischief in a little Compass, and say whatever is rude
and unjust, once for all, he tells his Reader, That I have egregiously played
the Forger; that I am a Cheat; that all Men understanding Controversy will
judge me worthy to be made a Proverb of, and when they would express an
impudent Forger, to say no more then W. PENN, Rep. page 95.

And that he may add Profaneness to his Railing, he proceeds: A Great Poet of
their own has these words, worthy to begin all Mr. Penn's Books on that
Subject as it ends this of mine.

If a mere Scoff in Scripture Phrase be prophanening Scripture, then I have not
overcharged him in calling this Phrase, wherein he uses Paul's words to the
Athenians (but with Scorn and Levity) against us, Profaneness. But let us hear
these so much Derided Words.

And they that would be satisfied concerning us any way, they must find us and
know us in the Principle of Life, where we are, and not in their own Reason,
where we are not; and so let none REASON about us, for there they can never
know us, nor come unto us, W. Smith's Cat. p. 94.

But why so much Contempt upon this Passage, unless it be to show us, that he
can still Scoff at that Principle of Life, which is the Strength and Habitation
of God's Children, as he has done already throughout both his Books. Did the
Disciples or the Pharisees find out Christ's Meaning by their Reasoning about
it, John 6. or would not either have relisht the true Meaning of his Words, had
they dwelt in the Divine Principle of Life? Why did Christ say; I thank Thee, O
Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the Wise
and Prudent, and revealed them unto Babes, if they are discoverable by humane
Reasoning? for Babes are ignorant of that Art; yet out of the Mouth of Babes
and Sucklings, etc. The Apostle's Question 1 Cor. 1. 20. was very impertinent,
if J. Faldo may be of Authority, who said, Where is the Wise? Where is the
Scribe? Where is the Disputer? etc. for this implies an Exclusion of all those
Arts, Sciences and Natural Gifts from any Capacity to reveal the deep Things of
God, shut up in the Divine Principle of Life. Besides W. S's Words imply a
Clouded Understanding and degenerated, and therefore Incapable. J. F. must
either intend by his Derision that he thinks W. S. deserves to be hissed for
denying the Knowledge of Divine Things to be attainable, by the Degenerated
Understanding of Man, or sanctified: If the first, All may have Cause to abhor
his False Doctrine: If the latter, I would know which way that can be, without
the Divine Principle of Life? This abundantly manifests J. Faldo's unsavory
Spirit, Dr. Barnea, I. Brad. I. Calv. B. Jew. VV. Perk. VV. Green. I. Car D.
Owen, with a Hundred more of this Mind, admired by such as I. F. yet that
Doctrine derided by him in us; particularly I. de VVessalia, No Man can know
the Mind of Christ, which he holds forth in his words, but he alone, Paradox in
Fasc. Rer. p. 163.
and proves him to be ignorant of the Way, Method and Work of God in his
Children. When the Natural Man by his Reason can know Christ, he may know his
Sheep, the Scriptures, and the Power of God, and not before; but because it is
impossible in Reasoning or Arguing pro and con, by the utmost Strength and
Search of Natural Abilities, to know Christ, but by the Revelation of the
Spirit of God alone, as has been abundantly proved; therefore William Smith's
words are sound and weighty, and J. Faldo's carnal and profane; showing
himself to be a Mocker of the Privileges and Mysteries of the Gospel; but what
else may we expect from one that walks after the Lusts of his own vain Mind,
having not the Spirit, Jude 18, 19. Yet that we may manifest how inconsistent
he is with himself, as that he cannot write against us, but he must write for
us, take this Passage out of Quakerism No Christianity (which ought always to
begin his Books against us upon this subject, as it ends this Chapter of mine.)

Those Gospel-Illuminations are beyond the utmost reach of our Natural
Faculties of the Mind (though sanctified) and therefore it is said to be 2 Timothy
3. 16. Book 1. Part 3. page 50.
Divinely inspired; It is not produced in the Exercise of the Rational
Faculties; the Soul is purely passive or receptive therein; and is to those
Illuminations as the Wax is to the Seal.

CHAP. XV.
His several gross Miscarriages summed and further observed.

I. Of his Over-looking my Answer and Arguments.
OF Twenty Two Chapters in his Reply, there is not one of them, in which he
has not wilfully declined inserting my Answer and Arguments, and only flutters
about, pecks and scratches at some part that is of least moment to the Reason
of the Point; perhaps some Rebuke or Reflection upon the ill use he makes of
our Friends Writings; particularly page 9, 22, 23, 24, 30, 31, 35, 53, 56, 57,
71, 73, 82, 83, 85, 86, 90, 92, 93. How is it possible my Arguments should be
conquered, when they were never encountered? I was never yet so unjustly dealt
withal in this Particular by any Adversary of his Pretenses.

II. Of his drawing False Inferences.
Where he ventures at any time to insert any considerable part of my Answer, he
is sure to draw some Inference that may bring an Odium my words never deserved.
I could particularize at large page 6, 13, 17, 18, 31, 35, 41, 42, 47, 49, 71,
72, 73, 74, 75, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91. but take these following for the
rest.

1. From Edw. Buroughs Reflecting upon Peoples imagining God to be confined to
some place beyond the Stars, he implies, they deny Christ's Manhood, Vindic.
page 6.

2. From our not styling the Scriptures the Word (but Words) of God, he infers,
that we deny the Scriptures, First Book, p. 18, 19.

3. From our Asserting the Doctrine of Inspiration, and Certainty of what we
are inspired either to write or speak, he infers, not only our Equalling with,
but preferring what we speak and write before the Scriptures, First Book, page
40. Vind. p. 17.

4. From our Condemning the Imitation of any of the Holy Men of God of former
Ages in particular Cases, without they are thereunto required by the Spirit of
the Lord, he infers, that Commands of God in Scriptures are no Commands unless
we think so; and that it is no Sin to break all Commands in the Bible, if our
Consciences can but be so blinded as to tell us it is no Sin, Vind. p. 34, 35.

5. From our Asserting that there is no knowing of God but by the Spirit; and
that Men's Apprehensions of God, and his Work in the Souls of his People, are
but the Endeavors and Effects of the Wisdom of the Flesh, he infers, that we
oppose the Spirit and the Scriptures; nay, that we reject and scorn them, Vind.
page 41, 42, 47.

6. From our denying a Carnal, Worldly, Mercenary Ministry, Lifeless Prayers, a
mere formal Church, Preaching and not by the Spirit; and W. Smith's saying,
that the present Use of Bread and Wine, and Water, called Baptism and the
Supper (as they are used at this Day) are no other then Popish and Humane; he
infers, that the Quakers, deny the Gospel Ministry, Gospel-Prayer,
Gospel Church, Gospel-Preaching; and that we CALL Baptism and the Lord's
Supper, as PRACTICED IN THE FIRST AGE AFTER CHRIST, the Popes Inventions, etc.
Vind. from p. 49. to p. 71. Oh Injurious!

7. From our reproving People for feeding in an Unconverted State upon the mere
Report of what Christ has done without them and depending thereon; and from
our asserting that Justification (taken for Remission) goes not before
Repentance, which is an inward Work, much less, that Men can be completely
justified, or made inwardly just, but by the washing of the Word of
Regeneration and Sanctification of the Eternal Spirit, this Man dares to infer
Our Denial, yea our Undervalue, and that to the Degree of Blasphemous Contempt
of the Transactions of Christ at Jerusalem, Vind. p. 71, 72, 73, 74.

8. From J. Penning. asking, If outward Blood would cleanse the Conscience from
indwelling Sin, he infers, that we deny all Benefit by the Blood of Christ shed
upon the Cross, for the declaring of Remission of Sins, Romans 3. 25. First Book,
2. Part* p. 46, 47. Vind. 77.

9. From our choosing to call that Body God prepared in which to do his Will,
the Body of Christ, rather then the Christ of God; And from our asserting, God
to be that Light which enlightens every Man; and that the Soul of Man had
something of the Life of God in its primitive Perfection, he makes no more ado,
but concludes, First, That we deny the Christ of God; 2dly, That we make the
Measure of Light in every Man the Eternal God, thereby confining him to Man's
Soul: And lastly, That the Soul of Man is God himself, and so God saves God,
and God worships God. This my Reader may find in his Vind. from p. 75. to 87.
particularly this following of E. B. about the Soul.

10. From E. Buroughs affirming the Light of Christ in every Man to be one
with the Spirit, and as good as the Spirit of Christ (in order to prove it the
same) J. Faldo infers, he made the Soul of Man God; because that which is as
good as the Spirit of God is God, Book 1. Part 2. p. 122. Vind. p. 85, 86. As
if E. B. had spoken it of the Soul of Man, and not the Light of Christ shining
in the Soul of Man, as his Words express it.

11. Lastly from our Denial of his carnal Resurrection, as inconsistent with
Scripture and Reason, he takes Heart to tell all People, that W. P. and all the
through Quakers deny the Resurrection of the Dead; and are guilty of not
believing a future Reward in an other World, with a Train of Ill Language, too
long to bring in, Vind. p. 88, 89, 91.

This, Friendly Reader, has been the Entertainment we have received at J.
Faldo's Hands; but all things shall work together for good.

III. of his evading my Answer and Arguments.
It is very frequent with him, next to leaving out what I say, or fastening
false Consequences upon what he transcribes, to evade the Strength of mine
Answer, either by pretending to have said enough in his first Book, (as if that
had foreseen my Answer, and anticipated his Reply with a Refutation) or by some
one Word which will serve him to play at; or by being in haste; or else my
Answer deserves no Reply at all, etc. An Evidence of this Sort of Carriage my
Reader may find in his Reply, p. 5, 17, 18, 38, 51, 57, 58, 59, 69, 71, 76, 91,
93 One at large for all.

To my several Arguments in defense of Immediate Revelation, Inspiration (as he
terms it) he returns three or four Lines.

This W. P. is so far from denying, that he pleads for it, but after such a
Rude, Impertinent manner, that I should but injure you, and show my self idle
to animadvert upon it, p. 17. The cheapest Way that ever Man took to confute
his Adversary. Does this become any Man of his Pretense to either Schollarship
or Christianity?

IV. Of his Forgery or Perversion.
I am sorry I have such reiterated Occasion to charge him with Forging, that
is, foisting in Words into our Writings and Sayings, that are wholly
inconsistent with them, or perverting those he delivers, to the End he may make
them ponounce his Mind the more plainly. A few of many Places I have observed,
as in page 22, 25, 41, 42, 50, 51, 92, 93. Of which I shall give four Instances
more particularly.

1. ^. Pennington speaking of Knowledge according to the Flesh: By Flesh, says
he, The Quakers understand the Use of our Understandings (though) sanctified,
first Book, p. 41. Vind. p 24, 25.

2. His second is, making W. Smith to call the Scriptures Traditions of Men,
Earthly Root, Darkness, Confusion, Corruption, Rotten, Deceitful, the Whore's
Cup, the Mark of the Beast, all out of the Life and Power of God; and not that
the meant them of those who had degenerated from the Power of Godliness, and
had set up their own Imagination in the stead of God's Institutions, teaching
for Doctrines the Traditions of Men, first Book, p. 117. 119. Vind. 41, 45.

3. The Third is, his making I. Pennington to call visible Worship the City of
Abomination, Vind. p. 50.

4. Lastly, That he gives in our Name, this Interpretation, of the Vail is over
them; i. e. the Belief of the Man Christ Jesus, which was of our Nature to be
the Christ, etc. Vind. p. 93.

V. Of his grand Improbabilities and downright Untruths.
This Charge, I know, must needs be very unpleasant to a Man as Vain Glorious
as many Places of his Book declare him to be, but I cannot help it; It Is Truth,
if there be an^ Truth in the World, that he has writ a great many unlikely and
absolute untrue Things. Let my Reader take the Pains to look over these
following Pages of his Reply, and I am well assured, if impartial, he will not
think that I have in a Tittle wronged him, p. 6, 7, 19, 21, 33, 35, 38, 39, 42,
46, 47, 48, 49, 55, 56, 65, 70, 72, 73, 89, 93. Of which I will only instance
four.

1. First he affirms, that he quoted forty Places out of our Friends Books,
that would prove the Light within (as within us) to be the only Lord, and
Savior, and very God, p. 6. whereas he brought not any one that either proved
the Terms or the Matter.

2. Secondly, He confidently accused us, of charging the Miscarriage of Men's
Souls on the Knowledge the Letter of the Scriptures by God's Blessing does
convey, p. 21.

3. Thirdly, Whereas I said that W. Smith's Words reflected not in the least
upon the Scriptures, nor those Doctrines truly received thence; neither that
any such Words can be produced by our Adversaries, he boldly tells his Reader;
I intended no other but that Smith does not accuse himself in so many Words of
Blaspheming the Spirit of God in the Scriptures, and the Doctrines from thence
received; as much as to say; We both knew it to be Blasphemy, but W. Smith did
not call it so, p. 41. There is no ingenuous Man that will not abho^^ the
Falseness of this Passage.

4. Lastly, I opposing his Affirmation, that we did not profess or believe
Eternal Rewards, thus pretends to confute me: W. P. opposes me rather because
he would not be thought to subscribe to me, then that he believes not what I
say to be true, p 69. But if this be true sure I am, there is no Truth in the
World.

And indeed, there is no giving this Sort of Carriage at large, but by
transcribing far the greatest Part of his Book.

VI. Of his idle Jeers and frothy Expressions.
I have not met with any Man writing upon so serious a Subject as Religion is,
that gives himself the Liberty of so many vain Expressions, as if he had
intended his Discourse for vulgar Merriment, and not to Christian Information.
If my Reader please to trouble himself with the Perusal of these following
pages, he shall find enough to nauseate, p. 6, 22, 23, 26, 27, 29, 30, 34, 37,
40, 47, 50, 51, 53, 58, 60, 69, 71, 72, 95. Take two Instances: He cackles like
a Hen, when he had laid a WORSE THING then an Egg, p. 47.

Again, because we said, God spoak once by Balaam's Ass, thereby proving that
he did not always speak by the Scriptures, he thus reflects, I wonder not that
they leave the Teachings of God by the Scriptures, Balaam's Ass shall rise up
in Judgment against J. F.
to attend on the Ministry of Asses, thereby calling us Asses, p. 27. Which,
how Witty soever he thinks such sort of Sayings, to be sure, they are more
Frothy and Irreligious, then becomes a Man professing Religion, much less
writing of the Weightiest Points of it.

VII. Of his Vain Glory and Self-Praise.
At this he is excessive; So conceited is he of his own Abilities, and
impatient after Praise (the greatest Discovery of Pride and Weakness that any
Man can make) which my Reader may find, p. 28, 32, 33, 34, 50, 52, 61, 63, 65,
84. I will give one Proof for all.

My Charge and Argument in this Chapter ( says he) is such an Argument, and so
proved by me, as a THOUSAND PENNS can never invalidate it, p. 34.

The truth of which, as also the Vanity of it, may be seen both in my Answer
and Rejoinder; however he stops his Reader's Mouth, and counts him senseless
and desperate that is not of the same Mind, p. 36.

VIII. Of Railing and Ill Names.
No Man pretends to dislike, yet no Man practices these ill-bred, as well as
un-christian Courses more then J. Faldo, where he wants Reason he imposes an
hard Name; and if he be rebukt, he calls it Railing, reflecting that upon us
for reprehending it in him. If I call his Comparison base, that is so, and that
he manages it maliciously against us, he replies, that more gentile Railing may
be learned under a Hedge, and that those Words are slovenly imposed UPON HIM;
as if he were too great to be reproved, or licensed to rail without Control,
at least against the Quakers; for if I tell him, he is unmannerly, he counts
our own Practice a Dispensation; inferring from our Dislike of vain and
fruitless Complements, a Liberty to treat us with what unseemly Language
pleased him best; This my Reader may see at large, if it please him to look
into these Pages of our Adversary's Reply, p. 5, 8, 16, 20, 27, 29, 33, 35, 45,
49, 50, 52, 54, 58, 62, 63, 64, 69, 72, 73, 77, 82, 87, 91, 95.

But to omit whole Sentences, and yet to give some Instance more at large then
by bare Figures, my Adversary has liberally bestowed out of his great Store of
ill Language these following Epithetes, as well upon our Religion and Friends,
as my self for defending them.

That our Light is the second Antichrist, B. 1. P. 1. p. 107. p. 39, 80, 107.
p. 109. P. 2. p. 20.
the Quakers Idol, Pernicious Guide and Savior, Fancyful Teacher; in fine, a
sordid, sinful, corrupt and ridiculous Thing; and our Religion and Practice
Blasphemy and Idolatry, p. 47, 85, 87. Our Friends ( Quakers, so called)
benighted with palpable Knavery and Impudence; B. 1. P. 1. p. 8. P. 2. p. 21.
p. 22. p. 126. P. 3. p. 37.
Absurd and Blasphemous Idiots; Out of the Knowledge and Wits also;
Prodigiously wicked; Speak the amazing Delusions of Satan. And that I am a
presumptuous and blind Accuser, a Sophister, an Hamam, an accursed Ham, a
treacherous and wilful Deluder, a Madman, an Hangman, an infallible Stager, a
Fool, an Ape, a Dunce, an impudent Forger, and what not, that his Rage and
Folly can foam out, page 4, 53, 54, 59, 61, 63, 65, 90, 91, 95.

I desire my Reader would also take notice, that besides his excessive
ill-using of us, and ruputing our Rebukes for doing so, Railing (which shows
the Beam to be in his own Eye, and that his Nature is as proud to reject
Reproof, as it is foul and rough to occasion it) he gave us the Onset; Had he
not begun with us, we know not that ever we should have meddled with him; but
having begun, and withal so miserably abused us by foul Charges, false
Citations and vilifying Language, that it should be more unreasonable in us to
censure him, then in him to deserve it, no impartial Man can ever think* What
is John Faldo for a Man, of what Rank, what Quality, what eminent Office or
Dignity in the World, that we must be kicked by him up and down four or five
Hundred Pages, for whatever he pleases to count us, and not be told, he wrongs
us? Is the Quality of this diminutive Priest so much, and the whole Body of the
People, called Quakers, and that to stop him in his Career of Scoff, Jeer,
Taunt, foul Names and Reflection is to deserve them? But over and above, that
this shows his Disposition to be Imperious and Impatient, as well as Rude and
Frothy, and therefore very inconsistent with his Pretenses to Meekness and Good
Manners, but most of all with his Reprehension of others in Cases less
offensive; it will neither confute my Arguments nor damnifie my Person, which
makes me the less solicitous of making any other Rejoinder. I should here bring
in my Conclusion to this whole Discourse, but lest any may yet doubt of the
Truth of these things, as believing me to have made an ill Use and partial
Relation of them, I shall yet offer for further Confirmation of my Sense of the
Man, and his Undertaking against us, this undeniable Evidence, to wit, that he
has dealt imperfectly and falsely with the World in his Account of our
Writings, which he makes the Foundation on which every Charge is built, that he
exhibits and aggravates against us. I have here and there in my Book touched
already upon this great Failure; But I shall more particularly inform my Reader
of it in this place.

Of Imperfect and False Citations.
Forasmuch as J. Faldo would have all People believe, that he has charged the
People, called Quakers, with nothing that their own Books do not clearly and
plentifully prove (insomuch, as he counts those that think not so, senseless
and desperate) and that many who read him, may be ready to credit him, because
they see Books, Names and Passages frequently cited, especially those who have
not the Books by them, to examine how honestly he deals with us, I thought it
requisite to end this Book with this further Unanswerable Discovery of his
Defective Foundation, that in many places we find Names without Book; Books
without Parts, Chapters and Pages, yea, without Names; and Page without Number
or Figure; many falsely cited; some added to, others diminished from in the
beginning, middle or end of Sentences, thereby robbing them of their own
Explanation, that he might the better fit them for his purpose. Take these few
Instances.

I. Names without Books.
G. Fox, Book 1. Part 1. page 47. G. Fox, 48. J. Nailor, 90. C. A. Part 2. page
7. W. Dewsbury, 11. C. A. 45. R. Farnsworth, 46. G. Fox jun. 83, 119. R.
Farnsworth, 142. E. Buroughs, 143.
Thus far of Names without Book, which is not fair in any Adversary. Now of
Books without Pages, and Page without number.

II. Books Without Parts, Chapters Pages.
Morning Watch, Book 1. Part 1. page 37. Light out of Darkness, 37. Shield of
Truth, Book 1. Part 1. page 45. Love to the Lost, 45. Life of E. B. 45. Epistle
of W. Dewsbury, 47. Velata quaedam revelata, 53. Morning Watch, 92. Morning
Watch, Part 2. page 19. W. P. Spir. of Truth, 32. Love to the Lost, 39. True
Faith, 122. F. H. Testimony, 123. Great Mist. 124, 125. Velata quaedam
revelata, 133. Great Mist. 142. Some Principles of the Elect People, 142. Great
Mist. Vindic. page 86.
III. Books Falsely Cited.
G. F's. Great Mist. Book 1. Part 1. page 41. W. S's Primmer, 44. Great Mist.
52. Great Mist. 57. Love to the Lost, 118. G. Fox Great Mist. Part 2. page 10.
G. Fox Gr. Mist. 12 J. Parnell Shield of Truth, 22, 23. W. Smith's Cat. 27. W.
Smith's Prim. 37. Love to the Lost, 40. W. Smith's Prim. 42. W. Smith's Prim.
Part 3. page 94. W. Smith's Prim. Vindic. page 6, 70.
Thus much at present of False Citation, which* to say no more, makes any Book
incapable of being answered.

IV. Several Passages Clipped and Maimed.
J. St. Short Discovery, Book 1. Part 1. page 42. Short Discovery, 80. W.
Smith' s Prim. 88. J. N. Love to the Lost, 89. E. B. Answ. to Choice
Experience, 89. J. Story Short Discovery, 89. W. Smith' s Prim. 114. J. N. Love
to the Lost, 120. J. N. Love to the Lost, Part 2. page 6. I. Penington' s
Quest. 19, 23. W. Smith' s Cat. 26. W. Smith' s Prim. 37. G. Fox Gr. Mist. 40.
J. N. Love to the Lost, 43. W. Smith' s Cat. 69. Love to the Lost, 103.
Reader, These are but a very few of what we could offer; for indeed there is
scarcely one Passage that he has not mangled on purpose to make it speak the
better on his behalf, which given at length would have cleared it self.

V. Certain Places more particularly Perverted by Adding or Mis-applying.
I. Penington' s Question, Book 1. Part 1. page 41. E. B' s Answ. to Choice
Exper. 89. I. Peningt. Quest. 109. W. Smith' s Morning Watch, 119 W. Smith' s
Morning Watch, 126. Love to the Lost, Book 1. Part 2. page 25. J. N. Love to
the Lost, 27. W. Smith' s Prim. 42. I. Peningt. Quest. 46, 47. W. Smith' s
Morning Watch, 48, 49. I. Peningt. Quest. 70, 71. I. Peningt. Quest. 81. I.
Peningt. Quest. 126. I. P. Quest. 129.
These, Reader, are but some Hints I was willing to give thee of our
Adversary's Disingenuous Carriage toward us, either in letting drop that which
may be most material, at least might be more explanatory of our Friends
Intentions, foisting in words wholely inconsistent with the Scope of our
Passages, or mis-applying them in favor of his black Charges, all which may
clearly be seen by a Comparison of his Books with our Friends Writings, a great
part of which, I must confess, it will be difficult to procure, since to prove
his Miscarriage in Citations, I have not been able to compass above the one
half of the Books he names; but that carries this Woeful Reflection with it, if
his use of 15. Books in Thirty affords us so many gross Instances of his Unfair
Dealing with us, what might we have expected upon our Examination of the rest?
In the mean time we shall without leave suspect him, having so much Reason for
it.

To complete what I have done in this Particular, let me tell thee, Reader,
that in his Comparison of us with the Papists, he sets down Twenty several
Passages as our Doctrines and Opinions, not producing so much as one Person,
Book 1. Part 1. page 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.
Book or Page to avouch them; a piece of Justice he denies not to the Papists
themselves at what time he refuses it to us, though not they, but we were the
People against whom the Discourse was writ: which, though gross enough, yet
nothing compared with his Disingenuity at the end of his First Book, Part 3.
from p. 62. to 90.
where under the Pretense of furnishing his Reader with a Key to understand the
Quakers Meanings by, he sets down no less then about two Hundred and Fifty
Particulars in our Name, without so much as the bare mention of one Author,
Book or Page, to countenance his Attempt. Yet after all this he cannot bear to
be told of his unfair Carriage, and his Unjust Dealing toward us; His Quality,
or his Pride, is so great, it will not bear a Reprehension; I never met with a
Man of so much Falseness and Stomach together. He thinks it so great a
Punishment to be told of his Miscarriages, that if we will not let him pass for
a Faithful, Sober, Meek and Christian Author, however he has proved himself
the Contrary, we must expect all that his Scorn and Anger can cast upon us: But
such Vindications of his Essays will be Handwriting enough against
themselves, and their Author, who ought not to flatter himself after these
great Evils, with the Hopes of Impunity; for such as he has sown against us,
such shall he reap at the Hand of God, the Righteous Judge of all, who will
reward every Man according to his Works. But I desire with all my Soul that God
may show him Mercy, that Repentance may yet over-take him, and this Iniquity be
blotted out before he departs this World, and is no more seen I would beseech
him in the Love of God to fight no longer against the Truth, and for a Cause,
his Conscience (might it speak) would tell him, is not the only true God's, but
the Honor and Interest of the God of this World, whom the formal Christian is
lead and ordered by, that is so sharp against us. Let him not be afraid to take
Shame for that which is shameful, lest vain Credit here, brings Sorrow
hereafter. I cannot be otherwise persuaded, but that Reputation prevailed more
with him then Conscience in this Controversy; he tugs so hard to prop the one,
and there is so little savor of the other: God could never be in that Design,
nor amidst those Thoughts, that were laid with so great Mistake, and which have
been vented with so much Fury. I must needs say, There was neither Truth to
inform us, nor Charity to gain us: It stumbled the Weak, grieved the Tender and
offended the Peaceable among those Professions he pretended to vindicate,
gratifying only such as are of a Litigious and Contentious Nature, whose
unreasonable Heat it had been his Duty rather to abate by Sweet Persuasion and
a meek Example. I have this Comfort in my Conclusion of this Controversy, that
I most heartily forgive him all the Injustice and Unkindness he has shown, at
least so far as I am therein concerned, and that I think is more then any Man;
And with the same Love that God has loved me, I do with all my Soul fervently
wish his Solid and Unfeigned Repentance, that he may receive the Love and
Mercies of God in the Remission of his Sins, and Reconciliation of him by the
Power and Spirit of Jesus Christ our Lord, that he may kno^ the Excellency and
Glory of the Truth in the inward p^^ts, and what are those good things, no
Carnal Eye, Ear, or Heart has ever seen, heard or understood, that God has
laid up for them that truly fear him, and which he daily reveals unto all such
by his Eternal Spirit.

The Conclusion.
THus, Friendly Reader, are we come to the End of our Task, wherein, I hope,
the Doctrines of that despised People, in Derision called Quakers, their
Worship and Church-Practice, are evidently and firmly vindicated against vulgar
Mistakes and Reports, and more especially those many black Charges, so
confidently exhibited by J. Faldo, in his first and second Books, both by a
fair Rescue of our Words from his gross Perversions, and indirect and unnatural
Meanings, and the Confirmation of our real Sense, with plenty of plain
Scripture, many Reasons, and the unquestionable Testimonies of several Ancient
and Modern considerable Authors. My Design has not been Conquest, but
Information, that by these Religious Wars we may at last arrive at Peace; And
these Weapons be all beaten into Plow-shares, so as to learn War no more: That
to fear God and work Righteousness (the Life of Jesus Christ our Lord, who has
left us his most Holy Example, that we should follow his steps) may be the very
bent of our Hearts, the Resolution of our Minds, and constant Practice of our
Lives, which bring the Soul to the Inheritance of Substance, and establish the
Heart forever.

Oh, that all who read this Discourse, may with me wind up their Spirits, and
lodge their Souls, not in the Love of Controversy, but of that Divine Life,
which stills, resolves, and fixes all, and gives such Heavenly Waiters to feel
and enjoy Immortallity! To see and possess something that is beyond time, and
these painful Exercises that are within it. Oh, this makes Men Weighty,
Serious, Loving, Meek, Holy, Forbearing and Constant, the Image and Delight of
God! Such become Livers of Pure and Undefiled Religion, who have been thitherto
but so many vain and verbal Contenders for Religion; so shall this Scripture be
fulfilled to our unutterable Rejoicing, Psalm. 85* 9, 10.
Surely his Salvation is nigh them that fear him, that Glory may dwell in our
Land; Mercy and Truth are met together; Righteousness and Peace have kissed
each other.

The God of Everlasting Strength Bless and Prosper this Glorious Work in the
Earth, to the Praise of hi^ Holy and Blessed Name, Amen.

W. P.

THE END*
ERRATA.
THe Author's frequent Absence from the Press, with that continued Difficulty
which attends us in printing, has now, as at other times, made way for several
Escapes: The most offensive (though few very obstructive) to the Sense, are
here collected and corrected* The other, as Stops, Parenthesis, and some ^ew
Improprieties are left for the Ingenuity of the Reader to excuse and amend.

Page 9. line 20. read Principle. p. 10. l. 9. for were r. was. page 20. l. 3.
r. writ in. p. 21. l. 11. r. charged. p. 30. l. 27. r. should not. p. 32. l.
16. for no r. not. p. 33. l. 9. r. there are. l. 10, 11. r. as much. p. 35. l.
27. f. who r. whom. p. 38. l. 33. r. belief. p. 42. l. 22. r. much more. p. 50.
l. 22. r. doubtful. p. 53. l. 26. it dele. p. 54. l 2. r. as are so. l. 29. r.
1651. p. 55. l. 22. f. but even r. even. p. 56. l. 2. in dele. l 4. f. the r.
his. p. 59. l. 32. for this dele. p. 64. l. 7. f. no r. any. p. 78. l. 18. r.
(...) 7. l. 8. for dele. l. 20. r. lame p. 88. l. 32. f. me r. (...) l. 33. f.
thy r. my. p. 92. l. 23. r. praelect. p. 117. l. 2. r. culled. p. 129. l. 10.
r. Caryl. p. 136. l. 3. f. it r. them. p. 140. l. 15. r. reply pretended. p.
142. l. 3. r. scars. l. 19. r. scrutiny. p. 144. l. 22. r. gone, I fear. p.
147. l. 31. r. ye teach. p. 153. l. 16. r. Cajus. p. 161. l. 23. r. distinct.
p. 166. l 5. r. certainty. p. 169. l. 18. r. but it. p. 188. l. 3. f. of r.
have. l. 9. r. sinfully. p. 195. l. 28. r. foild. p. 197. l. 25. r. to
conclude. p. 204. l. 17. not dele. p. 209. l. 22. r. serp^ntine. p. 216. l. 24.
r. and a. l. 27. r. spoke. p. 225. l. 33. f. it out of the Soul r. Sin. p. 226.
l. 26. r. promised in his Discourse. p. 232. l. 16. r. repute. p. 235. l. 11.
r. verb. p. 239. l. 22. r. word. l. 31. r. Dichotomizers. p. 244. l. 25. f. any
r. my. p. 247. l. 29. r. Barker. p. 248. l. 27. f. they r. themselves. p. 249.
l. 21. f. with such an r. thus with his. l. 22. r. 65, 66. p. 253. l. 23. ^.
Sharers. p. 259. l. 30. after dele. p. 260. l. ^8. the Baptism dele. p. 262. l.
17. to dele. p. 263. l. 32. r. he wore. p. 265. l. 6. r. trouble in his. p.
266. l. 2. r. crowing. l. 15. r. philosophical. p. 269. l. 2. f. a r. of. p:
270. l. 18. r. were. l. 30. f. yet r. so. l. 31. r. wore off. p. 255. l. 5. r.
(...). p. 30^. l. 25. r. incompe^ible. p. 308. l. 16. r. he that. p. 310. l.
12, 8, 22. r. holys. p. 311. l. 24. f. too short r. to show. f. so as to r. so
to. p. 318. l. 26. it dele. p. 319. l. 25 r. needs no. l. 22. r. or slip. p.
320. l. 5. f. ^ r. what. p. 324. l. 14. r. (...). p. 325. l. 27. f. Prophe^s r.
Poets. p. 326. l. 7. r. had. p. 327. l. 14. r. that they. p. 329. l. 15. r.
(...). l. 17. r. (...). l. 20. r. (...). p. 330. l. 11. r. (...). p. 332. l. 1^
and 21. r. Polyglott. p 339. l. 7. r. of some. l. 23. r. (...). p. 346. l. 21.
r. ubiquitary. p. 348. l. 15. r. ^leverly. p. 352. l. 11. r. terreno. p. 353.
l. 19. r adventrdus. p. 358. l. 11. f. then r. that. p. 3^0. l. 8, 12, 22. r.
(...). p. 361. l. 21 r. imperious. p. 365. l. 18. f. in r. is (...). p. 369. l.
12 r. fictious. l. 15. r. (...). p. 372. l. 11. r. and bring. l. 21. however
dele. l. 29. r. Souly Body. p. 373. l. 24. r. pass. p. 374. l. 27. r. up of. p.
375 l. 15. r. numerical. p. 370. l. 2. r. resuscitation. l. 4. f. 32. r. 2. p.
379. l. 1. f. but r. and. l. 20. r. restituent, semina. l. 26. r. weighed. l.
31. r. as d^stroyes. p. 380. l. 17. r. intricate. p. 382. l. 19. r. wrot^. p.
383. l. 21. r. has. p. 408. l. 24. r. and would. p. 419. l. 4. f. as r. and.
p. 422. l. 24. r. of the Light. p. 423. l. 18. r. and Inspiration. l. (...). r.
Pretenses. p. 428. l. 9. r. Vind. page 47. l. 19. r. Vind. page 4. p. 429. l.
4. f. and r. greater then. l. 5. and dele. p. 430. l. 11, 31. f. Chapters and
Pages r. Chapters or Pages.


