Plain-Dealing With a Traducing ANABAPTIST: Or Three LETTERS Writ upon
occasion of some Slanderous Reflections, given and promoted against William
Penn by one John Morse.

Published for Common Benefit, that all Impartial People may be better
acquainted with the Invective Spirit of some so called, and their ungodly fly
way of Defaming such as dissent from them, especially in their Restless
Endeavors against the Poor QUAKERS.

By a Lover of Charity and Sincerity in all, W.P.

Printed in the Year, 1672.

Reader,
WIth what regret of spirit I behold the Controversies of our Time, and how
Unpleasant it is to me to be concerned therein, God he is Witness: And I think
it cannot reasonably be hard for any to believe me, when mere Reputation would
forbid a man to subject his Religion or Good Name to the Folly and Malice of
every inconsiderable Wrangler.

But so intolerable are many Separatists, and of them, some Anabaptists, in
their Lies, Slanders, Traducings, and what not, which may proceed from Wrath
and Envy; that, lest some of the Dirt they throw should stick, we are
necessitated to that Defense, we neither think the Truth (otherwise) wants, nor
our Adversaries could deserve at our hands, and least of all the man concerned
in these Letters.

But we have the less reason, I confess, to expect good Quarter from him, who
denies it to his Church-Sister, or doubt that he should slyly suggest Evil
against us, who basely goes to Law with her, and that before those who by his
own Principles he accounts Unblievers. Only we cannot but think it a strange
Use that these men make of Tolleration, to persecute by Revilings those that
have most suffered for want of it, as if they would walk Antipodes to the
Government: For whilst that persecuted, they seemed to pity us; but now that
tollerates, they appear to envy us. What? do they think it a Blemish to
Tolleration, That any should be quiet but themselves; and therefore will
continue that as justifiable in them, which they accounted condemnable in the
Powers? But this notably shows their spirit, who thus adventure to persecute
without Power: Let who will believe they would not do it if they had power; for
my own part, I declare my self none of that number; and think it the best way,
both to wish, and lawfully endeavor they may never have any to try.

Reader, I have nothing farther to say in this Epistle, but that the Person
herein concerned, unworthily reflecting upon me (for something in a Discourse I
lately published against the close, but faint Endeavors of a vizarded Socinian)
as that I was an Erroneous and Blasphemous Person (terms the most hateful to a
Christian Man) I writ him, as in Conscience oblieg'd, a kind of Challenge to
make it good, which he vainly endeavored by his Answer, as my Reply will
further manifest. Perhaps their Publication may be seasonable, if not to some
of their own way (for which I greatly hope) at least to others, and I am
confident to all who cordially love Truth, Righteousness and Peace, above
charging God with Hardness, and impeaching that People as Erroneous, which most
vigorously believe and assert the Universality of his Rectitude and Mercy.

W.P.

John Morse,
UNderstanding that thou have made use of my Name to so evil a purpose, as to
charge upon it Error if not Blasphemy, upon occasion of a Book lately writ by
me, in Defense of the Light and Divinity of Christ; and not being unwilling to
have such Reflections past unexamin'd; These are to let thee know, that I
expect thy Proof, if any thou have, that if it be true, I may take Shame to my
self in the ingenuous Acknowledgment of my Fault; or else, that thou do
confess, thou have unworthily traduced me.

Rickmansworth, the 25th of the 10th Month, 1672. Great is the Truth, and it
shall prevail; I am therein a Friend to thee and all men W.P.


In Answer to which he sent me the following Letter, so writ and phrais'd
verbatim.

William Penn,
IN Answer to a Letter thee sents me; I shall acquaint thee how I came to speak
of thee, and to have thy Book: A Friend of thine came to invite me to a Meeting
of yours; I asked her, What moved her to invite me? She said, the Light in her:
I asked her, What that Light was? She told me, It was Christ, and that the same
Light was in me, Reader, he is not ingenuous in his Account.
and in every Man and Woman; and if obeyed by me, was sufficient to save me: I
asked her, What was that that came into the Room, when the Disciples were met
together, the Doors being shut? She told me, It was a Spirit: I asked her, How
she knew it was a Spirit? she told me, The Light, Christ, in her told her so: I
asked her, Whether I should believe the Light, she said was Christ, or Christ's
own words, as thou may see in the 24th of Luke, verse the 38, 39. Christ
said, A Spirit has not Flesh and Bones, as yo see me have? I showed to her how
grossly the Light in her had erred, therefore it could not be Christ; for Christ
cannot err: I might be larger herein, but shall forbear. After this thy Friend
brought me thy Book to read, and when perused it, returned it again, and did
say, there was Error in it, and that thou Contradicts thy self in that Book;
see page 21. where thou say. That if God's Unerring Spirit only enables men
to walk in his Statues, Spirit of Truth Vindicated. page 21, 22.
and keep his Judgments to do them; then since all are required to walk
therein, none are exempted from a sufficient measure of that Unerring Spirit in
order to it. And page 22. or thus, If without having the Spirit, none can have
Prophecy and Vision, and both to be and to continue in Christ's Church
universally; then it will naturally follow, that she cannot be without that
Unerring Spirit; and that such as are, cannot in that state be Members of the
true Church, then consequently, thou say, Heretics. Page 25. thou say, The
World cannot receive the Spirit of Truth. Again, Page 34. Jude 19, 20. These be
they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. First thou say
no man is exempted from a sufficient measure of the Unerring Spirit; His Charge.
and after thou say, Heretics and Sensualists have it not, nor the World
cannot receive the Spirit, this judge is Error, and Contradicting of thy self.
See also page 71. where thou chargest God Foolishly; compare Romans 9. verse
the 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Nay, but, O Man, who art thou that replyest against
God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me
thus? has not the Potter power over the Clay of the same Lump to make one
Vessel unto Honor, and another unto Dishonor? I hope these few Lines,
although brokenly pend, may prevail with thee, whereby thou may ingeniously
acknowledge thy Error, and God shall have the Glory. Farewell,

Wattford, the 4th of the 11th Month, 1672. John Morse.


To which I make this Reply. Rickmansworth the 9th of the 11th Month, 1672.
John Morse,
MY Religion teaches me no Respect to Persons nor Abilities, and therefore I
shall willingly Reply to thy Answer that yesterday came to my hand; and if thou
knew'st my other Occasions, thou could not but esteem thy self indebted to my
Charity; for indeed, I have no other inducement to send these Lines. First
then, I take notice thou addressest thy self in the style of a Quaker, which
for a man so averse from him, as an Angry Anabaptist to do, with me relishes
either of Jeer, or Hypocrisy; unless thou had this Tenderness upon thee,
thou would not offend me; I hope the latter, though a Mistake; for I would
have every thing appear in its proper Colors: I love no Apes in Religion, and
desire that Foxes should appear in their own Skins, and Lambs in theirs.

Next, Thou give me an account of a Passage that fell betwixt thee and one of
Anne Stodard's Whom thou have deceitfully and obscurely endeavored to Ensnare.
Maids, from whence thou collectest, that great Error dwells in the Light. I
perceive how much more willing thou art the Light should be blamed, then the
Lass. But what if so be that an Anabaptist should wickedly kill a man, within
an Hour after he had been Dipped, would it be Reasonable, Charitable or Christian
to charge that upon his Renouncing the Church of England's Baptism (as they
call it) and receiving of another? Would it have been good Arguing, That
because some of the Children of Israel in the Wilderness Rebelled against Moses
injustly, yet as a Tyrant, pretending to a better way of Government, more easy
and just, therefore the Spirit God had given them was Erroneous, though it was
truly grieved thereat. If all the Quakers in England should utter the grossest
Errors, the Light wherewith Christ as the Word-God has, and does enlightened,
ought not to be charged with such Defects, but rather they, for not bringing
their Errors to the Light. And I affirm, There is no true knowing either of
Evil or Good, but in the Light, wherewith Christ has illuminated Mankind; and
if thou know any thing savingly, it is thereby; therefore kick not against
it, neither fling thy Cavils at it, I Warn thee from the Lord; for, if thou
seek to pervert the Right Way of the Lord, by thy Night-works against the
Light, it will certainly be one day thy very woeful Condemnation.

That which concerns me, is called, First, Error and Contradiction; and
Secondly, Foolishly charging of God.

My Error and Contradiction is this, That in one place, I make all men to have
a measure of the Spirit; and in another, I say, That such as have it not are
Heretics concerning the Faith; as also, that I quote these Passages, John
14.16, 17, 18, 20. again, 16.13. where Christ promises to send that Spirit
which the World cannot receive; also that of Jude, Sensual not having the
Spirit, which thou judge to be Error and Contradiction: Did I not know thy
Meaning, I should take it for granted, that what thou call the
Contradiction, was also the Error; namely, That all had not the Spirit: but
understanding by thy second Carp, the narrowness of thy Soul (for it is
Predestinarian) I will take it for granted, thou meanest quite contrary,
namely, That God's Universal Love to Mankind is the horrible Blasphemy thou in
Words (I heard) do charge me with, though thou art something more Modest in
thy Letter, by calling it a Foolish charging of God.

In short, I Answer to this first Cavil.

In Page 21. It is a Consequent drawn from the place, suited to my own
Assertion. In Page 22. That is, such as shut Believers from the Guidance of
God's Spirit.
it is a Consequent I make their Principle to speak that deny the Universality
of the Light and Spirit. In the one, I say, all are illuminated, or have a
measure of that Spirit, because all are commanded to keep God's Statutes, which
it is impossible to do without such Divine Assistance: In the other place I
make the consequent to be, that to be sure, the Spirit is the Rule to
Believers, the thing chiefly aimed at in the Question, because without it there
would be no Vision or Prophecy, which some Professors confess are to endure
till Christ's second Coming personally, there, by their own Principle, they
must be Heretics concerning the true Faith. But again, it is not said, that
such Heretics have not the Spirit at all, because they have it not as their
Rule; For [Having] has a twofold use in Scripture, the one as a Condemner, in
which sense none is at one time or an other without a Measure of the Divine
Light and Spirit to reprove them; and secondly, the so having it, as to enjoy
and possess it as a Rule, Guide and invisible Minister of Life, Comfort and
Refreshment, in which sense the World has it not, that is, received it not, as
says the Text; yet the very next Chapter says, That it should convince the
World of sin: A man may hear a Reproof and Instruction, yet not follow it; so
that such as receive not the Spirit, It is not theirs by the Adaption of
believing.
that strives with them, may be truly said to be sensual, not having the
Spirit, because they receive it not to the ends for which it was or is sent. I
hope then I shall not be longer charged with Error or Contradiction in this
particular.

The second Part of the Charge is, That I should foolishly Charge God (which
more hiddenly, I hear, has been styled Blasphemy) Let us hear my Book speak.

Spir. of Truth Vindicat. p. 71.
God Requires all Men strictly to serve and obey him, and to work out their
Salvation with Fear and Trembling, or else their End shall be Destruction: But
this the Almighty (with reverence I say it) could not justly do, unless the
Light, with which he enlightens Men, were Sufficient and Saving.

I own the Words expressly, and will abide their Defense before Men and Angels;
and before I have done, I hope, Blasphemy shall not lie at my Door, in the
sense of every Man that is not principled to make God an hard Master.

First, I say, That it is inconsistent with the Rectitude of God's Nature, to
esteem that naturally Just in himself to Man, which by his Law written in the
Hearts of all Men is adjudg'd most Unreasonable, Cruel and Unjust among Men;
for since whatever is Holy, Good and Upright is derived to us from God, and
that we are to be Perfect, as our Heavenly Father is Perfect, it is utterly
Impossible, that He should be Just in that which is most Unjust in Man: For
instance;

That it cannot be consistent with the Nature of God, that He should damn any
Man, for not improving a Talent He never gave him: Because a Man commanding his
Servant to go so many Miles within such a set time upon pain of Death on foot,
whilst he either fetters him in a dark Celler, or cuts of his Legs, is Cruel,
Injust and Impious.

Secondly, This Doctrine makes God Partial, which is Infirmity at best in a
Man; nay, it makes him the worst of Dissemblers, which my Soul loathes to
think, and my Hand almost trembles to write; For to what purpose does he
invite, Ezekiel. 18.
saying; He delights, not in the Damnation of Sinners, but rather that they
should Repent, and yet never gives them any ability whereby to do it. Nay, if
thy Principle may be credited, has taken Order by an Eternal provision of
Decree that they should not.

What an Affront, nay, downright Lie does this Doctrine, opposite to what I
asserted, give to the Scriptures which testify, God so loved the World, as to
give and send his Son, that such as believed might have Life, Joh. 3. verse. 16.
and yet from Eternity to provide by Decree that perhaps Nine parts of Ten in
the World should have no Light or Spirit to assist them, but whether they did
well of ill, should inevitably be damned: though God declares himself, to be a
Rewarder of Men according to their Faith and Works, not according to such
De(...)rees.

O Barbarous Cruelty, and most aggravated Injustice! What! tell Men, that if
they believe they shall be saved, and yet hinder them from believing, for if
the Reprobate should believe, God's Decree (as they call it) would be broak,
which is impossible. Again, Warn, Men of Damnation, professing no delight in
their Destruction, and for fear they should repent and be saved, determine by
an irrevocable Decree that they should be damned. O vile, hiddious and
Blasphemous Doctrine! It renders the most merciful and Just God most cruel and
unjust, and also turns the Reins upon the Necks of people, to commit what they
will; for indeed who would be bounded, that stands upon so good or bad terms as
an immutable Decree. This Doctrine may perhaps a little influence such
affectionate Minds as conceive themselves interested in that Electionated Love
of God: But do not the most of those who believe it, Buoy up themselves above
the daily Cross, and so live above the holy Chastisements of God for Sin,
because of this sure Bottom, as they vainly imagine it, whilst the generality
are so far from being reclaimed, who know themselves to be Prodigals, that
being discouraged through such a kind of Predestination, they quit all hope of
returning for Mercy, whose ends must needs be Destruction? O merciless Faith, O
injurious Assertion both to God and Men! Let my Soul forever beware of such
Impiety.

But because thou seemst to charge the Scripture with having lead thee into
this Foolish Charging of God, I shall observe thy Quotation of 17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 22. of the 9th Chapter to the Romans.

The Apostle begins this Chapter (or else they that divided his Epistle into
Chapters, Romans 9.
made it to begin) with his great sorrow for his Countrymen the Jews. He
enumerates their Privileges, and could wish himself accursed for their sake;
yet whilst he lamented, that they to whom were the Covenants, Glory, Adoption,
and whose were the Fathers, and of whom Christ himself came after the Flesh,
being of the Seed of Abraham, should thus bar themselves out of Christ's
Kingdom, and not be of the true Israel and Circumcision in Spirit, read verse.
6. So that the being of the Seed of Abraham after the Flesh, or Isaac, or any
other man never so righteous, rendered them not Children of Promise, albeit it
be said, in Isaac shall thy Seed be called, for then would all Isaac's Seed
have belonged to the Promise, which in Esau was not verified, as testifies this
very Scripture. Neither, because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they all
Children, but in Isaac shall they Seed be called. What is this [Isaac,] and
what is this [ Calling?] that is, says the Apostle, They which are Children of
the Flesh, these are not the Children of God; that is, They that are carnally
descended are not the Seed; Isaac is understood mystically, as showing forth
One conceived by the extraordinary Power of God, in whom all Nations should be
blessed with Freedom and Adoption, as they come to believe and obey; wherefore
adds the Apostle, The Children of the Promise are counted for the Seed; who are
they? the Jews Inward, and the Circumcision in Heart. So that here is only the
Election of the true Seed, [ mystical Isaac] or [Isaac in Spirit] such as
through Repentance, Faith and good Works come to be translated into the pure
Nature thereof, who have been refined in the Refiners Fire, purged and cleansed,
and so made chosen Vessels of Honor; which Word [Chosen] or [Choice] signifies
a thing more precious then ordinary, and therefore Elected.

So on the contrary hand, when men have sinned away their first Stock, God is
not bound to recruit them again, He may proceed to determinative Judgment if
he please. Here it is that he will have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and
whom he will he hardens. And though Pharaoh, that wicked King, was at last
hardened by the Lord, yet, if the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 th. Chapters of
Exodus be but read, it will appear, first that God did not harden Pharaoh
before Pharaoh had grievously imbondaged Israel, rejected his Counsel, despised
his Visitations, and so hardened his own Heart; and who with an audacious
Contempt asked Moses, Who is the Lord that I should obey his Voice, etc?
Secondly, That God's raising him up, Chap. 5.2.3.
was not from an innocent Child, to be a wicked King, as if God had infused a
Cruel and Wicked Quality into his Heart; O God forbid! But he suffered him not
to be quite wasted with the many Judgments that God brought upon him for his
Rebellion, who after every Judgment, still increased in his Wickedness, but
raised yet him up again, that he might renown his Name, Chap. 9.34.
and proclaim his Great Power, as well to punish obdurate Sinners, as ransom
his own People: Thus God endured this Vessel of Wrath, to make his Wonders
known. So, what if God did give over Jerusalem and her Children to Destruction,
who resisted the Heavenly Invitations of his Son, and rather chose the
Gentiles, Who could impeach him? had he not waited long? Which of the Prophets
had they not slain? and did they not cry of Jesus himself, Let his Blood be
upon our Heads, etc? Wherefore if God would harden them he might: since here he
might have Mercy on whom he pleased to have Mercy, and whom he would of such
Impenitents he might harden. In short, Alan was made a chosen Vessel, a right
Plant; but through Degeneration, he became a Vessel of Dishonor, and a Plant
of a strange Vine: Those therefore who are Regenerated by the One holy Seed,
which Seed is Christ, Elect and Precious, God makes his Vessels of Honor
forever; and they who have spent their Heavenly Portion, defiled themselves,
resisted the Heavenly Invitations, and are become one Spirit with the God of
the World, who rules in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience, such
Adulterated ones God separates from him, as Vessels of Dishonor and Wrath,
fitted for Destruction (but by themselves, not from the Lord.)

Thus much briefly at this time, as to the Doctrine of Predestination, as it is
destructively and extravagantly believed by too many Professors of Religion.
And to this 9th Chapter to the Romans, the Intendment whereof borders not in
the least upon that Ungodly Fancy of Personal Election. I shall sum up the
whole of both sides thus.

W. Penn's Faith.

1. I believe, God has given unto all men sufficient of his Light, Spirit or
Grace; which Obeyed, will lead to Blessedness: because God would otherwise
exhort men to what he should not have given them Power to do; which is unworthy
of his Righteousness. 2. I believe, That God hardens no man to Sin, till man
has first hardened himself against God by Sin; or that Sin goes before
Hardening.
J. Morse his Faith.

1. I believe, That God requires all men to hear and obey; or that all have the
Gospel tendered; yet deny, that all have Grace sufficient to embrace it, or to
live up to it, so as to be saved: for, God may bid Man believe, and be saved,
and not give him Power to do so. 2. I believe, That God raises up men and
hardens them on purpose, to Glorify himself in their Destruction; not
considering Sin as the main and provocative Cause to that Hardening and
Destruction.
Upon the whole, I leave it with God, and his Witness in every Conscience,
whether it be William Penn, or John Morse that has writ Error, Contradiction
and Blasphemy against God, Scripture and Sound Reason?

So truly desiring thy better Information in these weighty Matters, that
knowing the Truth, thou may obey it, and be saved; (for God would not that
any man should be damned, but that all should come to the Knowledge of the
Truth, and be saved) I remain,

Thy Well-Wisher, and all men's, W.P.


An Account of some Discourse betwixt one Sarah Lane Quaker, and John Morse
Anabaptist; for the clearing the Truth his Relation abuses with Forgery.
S.L. John Morse, we are to have a Meeting to day, and I had a desire thou
should know of it.


J.M. I have heard your Friends formerly; they deny the Scriptures to be the
Word of God.


S.L. We own them to be the words of God, given forth by the Spirit of God, and
a Declaration of the Mind and Will of God; but the Word it self is God. Read
the first of John, and there thou will find, That the Word was in the
Beginning, and all things were made by it; which cannot be said of the
Scriptures.


J.M. But you disown Baptism.


S.L. What Force is there in it?


J.M. There is little in it, only an outward Ordinance that we must do till
Christ come.


S.L. Do thou look for Christ to come again?


J.M. As for that we must leave it, and not presume too far.


S.L. I do witness him Spiritually come; and such as are come to the Substance
wants them not: But if there be little in the Ordinances, as thou say, what
great need is there of doing them? Christ came not to continue, but to put an
End to Types and Figures. And for Water Baptism, many of us have had it, and
been among you that use it, and we that did so, are come further, to see beyond
that, to the Inward Baptism, which is the Substance, that ends the outward.


J.M. The Scripture tells us, it is an Ordinance.


S.L. Do thou own two Baptisms to continue, contrary to Scripture? John said,
He should Decrease, that Baptized with Water; and that Christ should Increase,
who was to Baptize with the Holy Ghost and with Fire.


J.M. But you own the Light to be in every man and Woman?


S.L. I own and confess, that Christ has enlightened every Man and Woman.


J.M. What, Christ, the Fullness to be in every Man and Woman?


S.L. No, not Christ's Fullness; but a measure of his Light is given to Every
one.


J.M. Every one, what, has every man a measure?


S.L. Yes.


J.M. What then is the Reason that Drunkards and Lewd People live in their
Wickedness, if they have that Light?


S.L. The Reason is, because they do not obey it; there is something in them
that shows them their Sin, when they have done amiss, and reproves them; for
they will say, Lord forgive them, or the like: that must needs be good that
shows them when they have done what they ought not to do.


J.M. I confess, there is something that does show men Sin, but it is not
sufficient.


S.L. It is sufficient, if it be obeyed; but God said, His Spirit should not
always strive with man: yet every man has a Day, or a Time to be tried; if they
rebel, and will not obey, God then gives them over.

From this he fell to Curious and Unnecessary Questions; As the Devil did about
the Body of Moses, so did he about the Body of Christ: But this he insisted on
mostly the second time.


J.M. What was that which appeared to the Disciples, when the Windows and Doors
were shut, was it Flesh or Spirit?


S.L. Spirit.


J.M. Christ himself said, he had Flesh and Bones, when they doubted, thinking
he might be a Spirit. But tell me, what became of the Body of Christ?


S.L. I shall not meddle further with such Matters, nor run into things which I
have no certain Knowledge of; neither would I have given thee that Advantage by
my simple Answer, if I had been aware of thee. And if I have replied
unadvisedly, that is nothing to our Friends.


J.M. But, Light was that which lead you into this Mistake.


S.L. The Light never leads into any thing that is wrong.


Reader,
THis is the very Truth of the matter, which I the rather add, that what
Advantage he may think to have gained, and his Boast of it, may receive some
Allay by a plain and true Relation of the whole, so far as could be remembered.

Of what force then her mistake is against the Light, is to be Learned from her
own Ingenuous Confession; and if John Morse were Candid, he would have laid the
blame where it was proper, and not have charged it upon the Light within.

And indeed, if we Consider, first, that Christ's coming in, the Doors being
shut, is not mentioned in that Scripture, Luke 24.38, 39. as cited by him, but
in Joh. 20.19, 26. 2ly, That he was not there without his Spirit. 3ly, Were it
not unjust to say, the Light in the Disciples grossly erred, when they supposed
they had seen a Spirit? Luke 24.37. 4ly, That it was a Foolish and Unnecessary
Question on his part. 5ly, That he took base Advantage of it. 6ly, That the
Maid so particularly Cleared the Light from leading her into any, the least
Mistake. 7ly, That I could ask him ten Questions for his one he put to her, of
the like abstruse and obscure Matters, that I have cause to believe he is wholly
ignorant of, and the Knowledge of them not necessary to Salvation, I say,
considering these Particulars, and that all arose from her loving Invitation of
him to a Meeting, I cannot see but he is far more Condemnable then the Maid;
and I believe, the Light in every unprejudiced Conscience will say the same.

This was my Postscript to my Letter to him, which ends these present Letters.
IT comes into my Mind to express thus much farther concerning the Lass, that
the Simplicity of her Answer is to be excused far sooner then thy Unchristian
and Vn-Charitable Spirit, that lay in wait to betray, and if such watchings for
Evil be uncondemned of thy Religion, I pronounce it Antichristian and
Devilish, and that in the Name of the Lord; And as for our Light, thou shall
never be justified, whilst that condemns thee, and if it be insufficient as to
thee, it is because thou never yet did give up thy self to the Holy Conduct
thereof, but unworthily disparages that, which I can make appear thou live
not up to. Repent therefore, and be Baptized of Fire (which consumes the Thorns
and Briars with which you Water-Baptists scratch and rend at us) and know a
purging from dead Works in the Name of the Lord, or thou and they of thy Spirit
will be utterly lost in the day of the Lord.

THE END.

