THE SKIRMISHER DEFEATED AND TRUTH DEFENDED; Being an ANSWER to a Pamphlet,
ENTITLED, A Skirmish made upon Quakerism. By William Penn.

Jam. 3. 13, 14, 16. Who is a Wise Man, and endued with Knowledge amongst you?
let him show out of a good Conversation his Works with Meekness of Wisdom: But
if ye have bitter Envying and Strife in your Hearts, glory not, and Lie not
against the Truth: For, where Envying and Strife is, there is Confusion, and
every Evil Work. Printed in the Year, 1676.

THE Skirmisher Defeated AND Truth Defended* Being an Answer to a Pamphlet,
entitled, A Skirmish made upon Quakerism.
OF all the Evils that attend Controversy about Religion, there is none more
odious and provoking then that of Mistating Principles, and giving That under
men's Names to the World for their Doctrine and Judgment which they abhor to
believe, much more to assert and divulge to others. And this I hope I may
without Offense add, That to be Misrepresented has mostly been the Lot of
Truth in all Ages, and her peculiar Difficulty and Suffering from the World:
For, no sooner has Almighty God blessed Mankind with further Discoveries of his
heavenly Will and divine Helps to perform it, then some or other, and those not
a few, have i^mediately opposed themselves to that Work, and the Lovers and
Abetters of it; nor have those Adversaries been of the Rabble, Men of no
Letters, Education or Pretense to Religion, by no means; much the contrary, the
Learned Crew, the Clergy, that great Corporation of Religion; it has been
generally such, the Chemarims, men of the Black Robe, that from a Pretense to
greater Knowledge then others, an Education in the Studies of Divinity, a
peculiar Warrant and Mission, with the Countenance of Worldly Authority, have
used their Skill and employed their Abilities to traduce Truth, and stigmatize
her Followers, exposing both to the Fury or Mockery of the World: tell me when
this fell out otherwise, and allow me Scripture Story but to be true and sacred.

I pretend not now to write an History, no not to epitomize that which is
already writ, nor need I, for the Case is evident; but because Examples are so
ready, I will instance in him that said, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life:
One while the Scribes and Pharisees took hold of his Nonconformity to their
Customs, and then he was a Despiser of Moses, a Breaker of the Law, one that
made void the Traditions of the Fathers: Another while, he was a Mean Fellow,
but a Carpenter's Son; and what Man of Quality would follow him? or who would
make a Messiah of a Mechanic? or a Savior of so servil an Offspring? But
when this would not do, then he was a Samaritan, and had a Devil, and cast out
Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils; thereby rendering his Person hateful
to the Jews, that refused all Commerce with the Samaritans, and his Wonderful
Works suspected of a Diabolical Power, lest the People should believe in him:
But this Trick failing, and the People believing, lest any of Note should be
taken with him, they ^ling out, that he was a very Idiot, one that knew not
Letters; and that none followed him but those that are cursed, and know not the
Law, the Rabble, the Vulgar and Illiterate People: But when this Stratagem
succeeded not to lessen his Reputation, and question his Pretenses, they bruted
up and down, that for all his pretended Perfection, he was a Loose Person, a
Wine-bibber, a Companion of Publicans and Sinners, not fit to be the Leader of
a Strict Sect, nor qualified for so Glorious a Work as that of the Messiah's.
God still blasting their Designs, and the People flocking after him, admiring
his Doctrine, his Authority, his Wisdom and his Miracles, the Jewish Council of
Doctors and Rabbis roundly accuse him of Blasphemy, and have the Confidence
and Cruelty to seek his Life* telling Pilate, that They have a Law, and by
their Law he ought to Dye; but Pilate scrupling the Matter, and finding their
Proofs short, faints in their Business, which they perceiving, with one loud
Cry, as if it were a Dare to Pilate to deny them their Murderous Ends, tell
him, He is an Enemy to Caesar, hoping though Pilate would not concern himself
with their Laws and Customs, yet that being Caesar's Deputy and Officer, he
would not suffer any man to live that was a declared Enemy to Caesar's
Government; and they had their End.

Nor did his Disciples fair better, who were accounted Enemies to the Law and
Scriptures, Seducers, Deceivers of the People, Pestilent Fellows, Sowers of
Sedition, Turners of the World upside down, etc. But who were they that made
this lamentable Opposition? were they literally Heathens, or professedly
Infidels? no such matter; for that might have in some sense extenuated the
Crime, at least have spoiled our Parallel; but they were the Off^spring of
Abraham,, Great Scripturians, to whom pertain'd the Covenants, Promises,
Adoption, and if we will take their word for it, Children of God, in Bondage to
none; though its not to be doubted but that they were by Nature Heathens, and
for all their great Profession Infidels in spirit, and great Slaves to Sin, and
Children of the Evil One all this while. Now, this has been our Case, who are
in Reproach called Quakers.

In the first Place, we must honestly and plainly confess before almighty God
and all Men, that we have been of the common Mass of Mankind, and had our
Conversation in the times past, in the Vanities, Pleasures, Sports and Lusts of
this World, living in some respect without God and Christ in the World (though
under a Profession both of God and Christ, as the most Part of Christendom (so
called) do at this Day;) and in this dead Estate to the living Sense and
Enjoyment of God and Christ in our Souls, the Lord visited us, and by his own
convincing and reproving Light, Power and Spirit has he awakned us, and
brought us to behold him, whom we under all our Profession, of Religion, had
more or less grieved and pierced with our vain Thoughts, Idle Words, and unholy
Actions, and to Sorrow with true godly Sorrow, and be in unfeigned Bitterness,
as for our first born or our only Child, the Lord thus redeeming us through his
holy Rebukes and Judgments from an evil Conversation, and converting us to
himself by his own Righteous Law in our Hearts. And when it had pleased God
thus to rouse us out of our carnal Security, and fire our House of empty
Profession about our Ears, and open the Books of Conscience, and call us to
Judgment, kindling his holy Terrors in our Hearts, because of our past
Conversation, that had been in the vain and sinful Fashions and Customs of the
World, calling God our Father, and not born of him, and Christ Lord, and not by
his holy Spirit, neither had taken up his daily Cross, to the slaying of our
own Wills and carnal Affections, notwithstanding the great Profession that we
in Words made of him and the Christian Religion, we came to see that true
Christianity was another Thing then the World apprehended, and that as he was
no more a Jew that was one outward, so neither was he a Christian that was one
outward, but he was a true Jew and Christian that was one inward, whose Praise
is not of Men, but of God; in this Zeal that God had begotten in us for his own
living Way, the spiritual Circumcision, the right Christianity, namely, To be
Christ like, to do the Will of God in Earth as it is done in Heaven, to live
unspotted from the World, and no more we to live, rule and order, but Christ,
that lives in us, which is to have eternal Life abiding in us. In this godly
Zeal, I say, for this pure and living Way, we frequently testified to all
People what God had done for us, where he found us, what he discovered to us,
what he condemned us for, what he redeemed us from, and what he had brought us
to, earnestly recommending the Light of Christ within, that manifests the Mind
of Christ unto them, vehemently decrying the lifeless Profession they worship
God, the eternal Spirit in, and showing to them a more excellent Way, because a
more pure and spiritual Way; manifesting to them how that they called Christ
their Lord, and did not obey him, their Savior, and were not saved from Sin by
him; yea, how they magnified him in the History, and crucified him in the
Mystery, warning them of their carnal Faith, Hope and Security they lived in,
which cleansed not their Consciences from dead Works, nor overcome the vain and
wicked Spirit of the World, particularly exhorting them to turn away from
their hireling Teachers, that had caused them to err, who though they said,
Thus says the Lord, the Lord never spoke by them, and God said of old, such
should not profit the People, who fed and clothed themselves of the Flock, but
had no heavenly Bread, no green Pastures, no pure Fountain to feed and refresh
the Flock with; and that all should learn of the Lord, that teaches his people
himself by his own good Spirit in their inward Parts, according to the Tenure
of his second and everlasting Covenant, that they turn not again unto Folly.

For this Testimony sake has the Devil raged, and plotted our Ruin ever since
we have been a People, now like a Lion, then like a Lamb; one while in the
Appearance of a Serpent, another while in the Shape of a Dove; but the Lord God
Jehovah has kept us hitherto, none of his Weapons has yet prospered, and it is
our Faith none even shall; for our Confidence is in him whom the Winds and Seas
obey.

Sometimes they tell us of our Novelty, as the Jews did Christ; Abraham was
before thee, say the Jews; Before Abraham was I am, says Christ; the Christians
were counted Vpstarts both by Jews and Gentiles, yet their Way, D. Cave's prim.
Christ.
and so ours, the pure, plain, spiritual Religion and Worship was before Jew or
Gentiles were; anon we are Ignorant, Illiterate, Mechanical; by and by we are
Subtle Jesuits, Crafty Deceivers; then Familists, as quickly Papists; by some
counted Enemies to Caesar, by others Temporizers; our Visage is continually
marred in the Eyes of the Outside Christians, as was our blessed Lord and
Masters in the Eyes of the Outside Jews; for what can escape their Censure;
there is a Sort of Men nothing pleases; one says we are Socinians, owning
Christ to be but meerrly a Man; another, that we are Sabellians and
Valentinians, and deny the Manhood of Christ; starts up a third, and says, The
Quakers expect to be justified by their own Works; a fourth presently cries
out, They will do nothing unless the Spirit move them (how are the Works ours
then?) some imprison us because for Conscience sake we cannot take up Arms,
others for Fear we should: Again, our Plainness in Apparel is concluded
Singularity; our proper Speech, Rudeness; our Scripture-Dialect, Canting; if we
conscientiously refuse them our Hat, it is Pride; if out of pure Tenderness we
cannot swear, it is Contempt of Authority; and if we deny to pay the Parson
Tithes, it is reputed Robbery, though we have nothing for our Money of him: In
fine, our Silence goes for Sullenness, our Sobriety for Morosity, our Frugality
for Covetousness; and for our Doctrines, they are only Antipodes to Truth; for
we are made to deny God, Christ, Spirit, the Immortality of the Soul (yet that
we hold our Souls to be God, Christ and holy Spirit too) that we deny the
Scriptures, Ministry, Church-Ordinances, Justification and Salvation by Christ,
the Resurrection, Rewards and Punishments; and which is yet further observable,
as it fared with or dearest Master and his Followers then. The Scribes,
Pharisees, Saduces, Galileans, etc. ready just before to devour one another,
immediately united and combined to oppose, traduce, trap and ensnare them; so
has it fallen out with us; for the Hand of every party has been lifted up
against us; I scarcely know one that is under any considerable Notice in
Christendom (however violent and irreconcilable among themselves) that has
refused that common League and Confederacy, or that has not by some or other
of its principal Agents vigorously, if not scornfully and persecutingly decry'd
and opposed us, yet are we alive and a people, blessed be the Name of the Lord;
this leads me to ask the Question, why did they so use our blessed Lord and his
Disciples? the Answer is easy, Because they saw him not, they knew him not,
nor his Followers as they were; they had lost their Divine Savor, and
professed the Words and Sayings of Moses and the Prophets, not in their Life
and Spirit; and I can give no other Reason why we are so little known to the
World of Christians in our Age, then that they hold generally the Christian
profession out of the Christian Nature, Life and Spirit; for we are the most
mis-understood and mistaken of people, whence it follows, that our Antagonists
of every Party have charged us with Doctrines and Principles not of our owning,
but their own Mistaking, if not Inventing, which is worse; 'twere too tedious
to enumerate all their Attempts: there are not less, I believe, then One
Hundred Books extant, two thirds of the most of them are Imagination, Romance,
Fiction, and no Judgment or Doctrine of ours. This is Notorious by our Answers:
and I hope every man's word is to be taken about what his own Faith is, though
not in the Proof of his Faith, to be a True Faith.

Of later Times, two Persons have excelled in this Way of Opposing us, Thomas
Hicks and John Faldo; they are both Answered, according to their respective
Tracts; and their further Defense remains hitherto unattempted by any.

It Is with a Passage in my Answer to J. Faldo's first Book that this same I. C.
styled, A Minister of the Gospel, and a Skirmisher too, offers at an Encounter.
I question not his Courage so much as his Skill; he shows Will enough, but his
Abilities fail him: I am willing to persuade my self, that he is more Novice
then Soldier in this War, and that this is rather a Spurt of Heat, then a
Deliberate Action; for, Wise Men count their Cost, Fools only invade without
Force: I hope he will not be angry with me for this Opinion of him; I am sure
he ought not, if he be a Minister of the Gospel; I know not how he will take it
as a Skirmisher, an Employment of so different a Nature; but certain it is,
that Mistake is more pardonable then Malice, and Ignorance excusable then
Fiction: I would not willingly fall upon him with those severe Terms, and put
him upon that Difficulty I have been constrained to treat others with, and
reduce them to; I would choose rather to inform then chide him; only I must tell
him, that he is fallen into the Road of as great and arch a Perverter of our
Writings and Sayings, as any Enemy that ever appeared against us, and improved
his Mistake upon us, by as many Foul, Impious and Detestable Consequences (even
to a Tautology) as that of any other Adversary has done, which would make one
think, that there was more of Design then Accident, and Premeditation then
Inadvertency in the Business. Be it as it will, the Man pretends to be offended
at me, and endeavors to make others offended too, It Is highly fit as a
Christian-man, that I do my best to remove the Reason of it, and that I shall,
by the Help of Almighty God.

First then, I will set down that Passage of mine, which he makes the Reason of
writing his Pamphlet, and annex some of the Consequences he draws from my
words, by which he would render them and me Odious to his Reader, and then fall
to my Defense, which will not be difficult, and I hope not tedious to my
ingenuous and inquiring Reader.

No Command in the Scripture is any further obliging upon any man, then as he
finds a Conviction upon his Conscience -- It is Conviction that can only oblige
to Obedience -- When any man is convinced, that was commanded another, is
required of him, then, and not till then he is rightly authorized to perform it.

These Parcels has he culled out of a Book of mine, Quak New nick Name for Old
Christ. page 71, 72.
Quakerism a New Nick Name for Old Christianity, I writ in Answer to John
Faldo's Book entitled, Quakerism No Christianity.

Let Us now see the Use he makes of them, and what Language he makes them to
speak.

That this Position opens the Flood-gate to all Error, Atheism, Impiety and
Wickedness; and that it is the Overthrow of all Law and Government, p. 2 That
sins of Ignorance are no sins; for all Conviction is by Knowledge -- that this
justifies Paul 's Blasphemy and Persecution, and gross sins against the Gospel,
because he did it ignorantly, p. 3. It justifies all Erroneous Doctrines and
Practical Misapprehensions, and whatever Vices lie in the Understandings of men
-- Penn's Position does justify the Irish Rebellion, the French Massacre, the
Marian Persecution, the Ten Persecutions of the Primitive Churches, the
Gunpowder Treason, Judaism, Mahometanism, Paganism, Popery, and all Erroneous
Sects and Parties in the World, with all their False Principles and Practices.
Christ says, It is Life Eternal to know God and Christ Jesus, John 17. 3.
Penn's Position says, If you are ignorant and unconvinced, no Law can lay hold
on you, if you be deluded, and practice according to the Conviction of your
deluded Mind you are warranted by the Command of God, which do all center in
Conviction, p. 4. Again, If this Position be true, then Conscience and
Conviction is God; and whatever Conscience says, must be done, be it right or
wrong; and it lies in the power of Conscience to make void all the Laws of God,
and to do what it pleases -- It will also follow, that he is the most free
from Sin who has the most feared Conscience, and that the ready Way to
Obedience and Salvation, is to debauch and sear the Conscience -- If Conviction
be the Ground of Obedience and the Authority of Scripture depend upon the
Rectitude and Purity of Conscience, then all Rational Laws, Order and
Government, both divine and human, are overturned, and a stop is put to all
Religion and Piety toward God, to all Conscience, Honesty and Charity toward
Men -- So Princes and Rulers may command and make never so good Laws,
Conscience may come and say, I deny all these Laws, and the Maker of them;
Children may refuse to obey Parents; Servants, Masters, and Inferior
Superiors; if Conscience shall be unconvinced, and if it be deluded, Subjects,
may murder their Princes; Children, their Parents; Servants, their Masters; one
Man, another; there can be no Law, but Conscience, and whatsoever Conscience
says must stand, p. 5, 6 -- The Quakers Conscience says one Thing, the
Papists another, the Pagans, the Turks, the Jews, the Tyrants, the Traitors,
the Heretics, the Worldlings, the Hypocrites, the Proud, the Adulterers
Conscience, how many contrary Consciences are these? how many Gods shall we
have and contradictory Laws, if Conscience and Conviction be the only Thing
which obliges to Duty, p. 6, 7. These with Abundance more of the like Nature
are the Consequence he rather bestows upon, then draws from my Words, as
particularly he has laid them down; pray hear his Farewell after such a violent
and virulent Skirmish, I would be glad to make the best of your Position, but I
must profess my Conscience and Conviction, p. 13, I refer my self and what I
have here writ to Impartial Censure, warning and entreating all People, as they
love their Souls to take heed of Quakerism -- Keep your Poison to your self,
and none will perish by it but your self; but if you will needs vend it, and in
the View of the Nation, and such at least as know the English Tongue, set up a
Position subverting all Religion, Law and Government, and levelling all holy
and profitable Rules and Commands to Men's Lusts, leaving no Man in the World
under any Obligation, or any Duty to God or Man, further then he is convinced
in his Conscience; be it known to you, that Jesus Christ has his Servants
abroad, to bear Testimony for him against such GOD-BLASPHEMING AND SOUL-DAMNING
ERRORS; and if you repent not, this that I have written shall rise up in
Judgment against you, and shall be an Aggravation of your Misery in that Day.

Prepare to answer the righteous Judge, if your Conscience be blinded and
seared now, it will be open and awaken then.

This Reader concludes his two Sheets of Skirmish upon me: But by the way, it
ought to sound very strangely to my Reader, that a man should profess
Conscience and Conviction for this long Anathema against Conscience and
Conviction: But by that time he is as well acquainted with these sort of men as
I am, he will leave off wondering that such men contradict themselves; indeed
they live by it.

But what shall I do or say to this Goliath? Behold the Spoil of his Skirmish!
He has invaded my Body and Soul, Religion and Life; these he thinks he leads
away in Triumph after him; for I am (if he may be believed) by my Doctrine an
Heretic, a Blasphemer, an Atheist, a Traitor, a Regicide, a Paracide, a
Murderer of my Kindred and Neighbors, a Destroyer of all Government Divine and
human, and a common Enemy to Mankind, unfit for this World, and for Heaven in
the next, unless I repent, which ought to be very questionable to so dissolute
and impious a Wretch, as this pretended Minister of the Gospel in his Skirmish
has been pleased to render me; what remains, but that the Dogs or the Lions
devour me, the Rabble or Government sacrifice me? I am only fit for Prey, if
this be true; what now shall I do, Revile him? by no Means; revenge my self by
a bitter and invective Answer? no such Matter; but may not I be angry with him?
not a Jot; what then? Pity and Inform him, though a Parson; I think so too;
wherefore overlooking all such Provocations, I begin and proceed in this Method.

First, I cannot but take it very ill, in Case I were unsound in any one
Doctrine, not through Inadvertency, but knowingly and premeditately, that he
without any further Search or unquestionable Proof, should fault and impeach
the Way I profess, and upbraid an entire People with my Mistake; I ask if this
be the Way to persuade me that he is a true Minister of the Gospel, one that
is zealous to promote the Commandments of God, that in doing this has broke
That of loving his Neighbor as himself, and doing unto others as he would have
them do unto him; William Penn holds a gross Error, therefore the People called
Quakers and the Way they profess must be skirmish'd upon with the foul Names of
Murderers, Rebels, Traitors, Atheists, Heresy, Blasphemy, etc. What Part of
Logic or Philosophy is this? none I think, I am sure there is neither Law nor
Gospel for it; but it is too frequent with many to live in the Transgression of
those Commandments they verbally admire, even then when they are pleading for
them.

In the next Place, I must needs observe to him his Disingenuity in telling me,
He would be glad to make the best of my Position, after he had manifestly made
the worst he could, his two Sheets being stuffed with the most abominable
Consequences it had been possible for any Man to invent or aggravate against
me; this seems to be a Degree beyond Ignorance, and looks very scurvily for a
Man of his Function and Pretenses, Skirmishing laid aside.

But that which weighs the most with me to suspect my present Adversary of
unfair Dealing (to let such Words as Forgery slip for this Time) is his taking
my Matter to Pieces, clipping Sentences, and dropping that by the Way, which
read with the rest would in my Apprehension have defended the Passage from the
Possibility of any reasonable Exception. Shall four Lines and an half of a Book
of above 250 Pages, and those culled too out of three several Places, reprobate
the Book, the Author, his Religion, and the Body of People he relates to? I
hope he has so much Conscience and Conviction left upon second Thoughts (if for
my sake he is not out of Charity with both) as to condemn this Sort of
proceeding with us; but perhaps he will tell me, I make too much of it, and
that it was but a Skirmish; if so, then no Battle or solid Encounter of both
Armies, and if not, how come we and our Religion to be defeated, and taken in
his Apprehension; doubtless this must go but for a Vapor, and proves the
Parson more a Man of his Words then of his Deeds.

Nor is this all the Ground of my Jealousy, for unless he had met with my Book
by Accident, and had cast his Eye only on those three Places, not reading what
went before, came between, or followed after, (a thing scarcely possible) and
upon that transcient Notice had sallied forth, and skirmish'd upon me (a
Rashness no Man in his Wits would be guilty of) or that when he had fallen so
patly on those three places, he resolved to see no more for Fear of being
better informed, a Disingenuity greatly unbecoming a Man of his Pretensions, it
must and will follow, that he did knowingly and on Purpose omit both giving his
Reader the Reason of this Part of the Controversy between me and John Faldo,
and my Sense at large in Defense of our first Position; which done, would have
saved him the Trouble and Danger of a Skirmish, and me the present Pains of
giving him this Repulse. And here I entreat the Readers Patience for a little
Digression, if yet it be one.

John Faldo writes a Book called Quakerism No Christianity; in it he charges
the People called Quakers with several erroneous Principles, whereof one is in
general Terms, That we deny the Scriptures, upon this he bestows 9 Chapters.
One of them is taken up with this Title, That the Quakers affirm the Doctrines,
Commands, Promises and holy Examples expressed in Scriptures, as such, not to
be at all binding upon them. To this Book I returned my Answer, entitled,
Quakerism a New Nick Name for Old Christianity; I follow him Chapter by Chapter
in my Course, I undertake him upon this Head. To prove his Charge he produces a
Passage out of Edward Burrough's Writings, much at the same Rate that this
Adversary quotes me, and such Harmony they hold, that they fall both upon the
same Construction of us, as if they had compared Notes, or had abused us by
Instinct. This I complain of in my Answer to J. F. how comes J. C. to make the
same false Step, and yet have read that Answer; E. Burroughs's Words were
these, as cited by J. F. That is no Command of God to me, what he commanded to
another; did any of the Saints which we read of act by the Command which was to
another, not having the Command to themselves -- This J. F. improves at the
same Rate that J. C. does mine, to wit; That it opens a Way to all Lewdness and
Impiety, and has all Iniquity in the Womb of it, extending these Words to all
Laws, which (as I make appear in my Answer, however overlookt by this Man) were
limited by E. B. and me to Temporary and extraordinary Cases.

Had J. F. been quiet here, I could have hoped that he had both seen and
sorrowed for his Mistake; but he persists in his horrid Abuse of E. B. and
begins at the same Rate with me for defending him; This is in his Vindication
of his former Book, to which I Rejoyn at large in Defense of my Answer, resume
the Controversy entirely, distinguish of his Fallacies and Misrepresentations,
and assert and maintain our own Principles, confirming them with some Hundreds
of reputed Authorities, as well of former as more modern Ages. In this
Discourse (hitherto unattempted by any) I make a further Defense of E. B's and
my own Sense from J. F's Mis-construction, which it had become this pretended
Minister of the Gospel to have consulted, before he had engaged himself upon so
strange a Skirmish.

That this Injury done me may more distinctly appear, I shall here set down
once more (I hope without Offense to the Reader) the present Parson's Text, not
his Sermon, that is too tedious.

-- No Command in the Scripture is any further obliging upon any Man, then as
he finds a Conviction upon his Conscience -- It is Conviction that can only
oblige to Obedience -- When any Man is convinced that what was commanded
another is required of him, then, and not till then he is rightly authorized to
perform it.

I omit to mention his Comment; but every Thing that is vicious, profane and
diabolical he makes to follow upon those Premises.

That my Reader may the better see whether my Matter and Design at large merits
any such Constructions, I choose to insert, and that as the best and briefest
Way, the 5th Chapter of my Rejoinder to J. Faldo, which contains his Charge and
Proof, my Answer (thus pared and patched by J. C.) his Reply, and my Rejoinder,
as a more complete Defense of E. B's and my Assertion against the vile
Interpretations of J. Faldo, so dexterously followed by J. C. and therefore
equally fit for him.

Here follows the 5th Chapter of my Rejoinder to J. F. containing a Vindication
of my Doctrine from any such Evil Consequences as are by I. C. charged upon it,
with this further Advertisement, that the Reader observe, that those Lines of
Capital Letters are the Passages quoted by I. C. and all the rest of my Answer
in the Common Letter, with Comma's on the sides, herein recited, and much more,
is wilfully omitted by my Adversary: also the Reader is desired to consider of
the Marginal Notes, by which he will be helped to understand the Disingenuity
of I. C. against me, my Friends, and our holy Profession.

Of Scripture-Commands, what are binding, and what not. Our Adversary's
Disingenuity observed.
BUt however, page 34.
he has failed in his last Chapter, doubtless he thinks he has done my Business
in this; he begins like himself.

Rep. My Charge and Argument in this Chapter is, The Quakers affirm the
Doctrines, Commands, Promises, holy Examples expressed in Scripture, as such,
not to be at all binding to us; such an Argument, and so proved by me (mark
Reader) as a Thousand Penns can never invalid it.

Rejoyn. What can there be more conceited then this? He must live very lonely
and far from Neighbors, that proclaims so much Praise to himself, and have
wonderful Confidence to bid Defiance so vainly to others.

Reader, I beseech thee, for the Truth's sake, on whose side soever thou shall
find it to be, to examine with all Impartiallity his Charge, our Answer; his
Reply, and our Rejoinder: If his Honesty, Reason and Justice hold any
Proportion to his great Confidence, we yield; But if upon an impartial
Consideration he shall be found to clip and pervert our Matter, and to shuffle
with us in his own, once do a poor People Right, in giving Judgment against
this horrible Injustice.

The Charge thou have heard; the Proof was this, That is no Command of God to
me, Ed. Bur.
what he commanded to another: Did any of the Saints, which we read of, act by
that Command which was to another, not having the Command to themselve, etc.

Now, before I give my Answer, as it was set down in my Book, I shall insert
his Quotation of my Answer.

Rep, To this says P. I answer briefly and plainly, and he is as good as his
word. No Commands, says he, in the Scripture, pa. 34, 35.
are any further obliging upon any Man, then as he finds a Conviction upon his
Conscience, otherwise men should be engaged without, if not against Conviction;
a thing unreasonable in a Man.

Rejoyn. He has a notable way of Contracting his Adversary's Answers; I will
set down what I writ, faithfully, plainly and briefly.

Edward Burroughs's Expression may be taken two ways, and both safe enough to
the Honor and Credit of the Scripture, page 71, 72, 73.
though not to the Charity or Honesty of J. Faldo. Now follows that part he
cited. NO COMMAND IN THE SCRIPTURE IS ANY FURTHER OBLIGING UPON ANY MAN, THEN
AS HE FINDS A CONVICTION UPON HIS CONSCIENCE, Ought any man to obey what he
does not know? and is not Knowledge Conviction? I provoke him or any to give me
a Scripture for that. But more of this anon; observe what follows.
otherwise Men should be engaged without, if not against Conviction, a thing
Unreasonable in a Man; Therefore the Apostle, when he wrote to the Church
exhorted them, not to do those things whereof they were The Apostle here does
plainly exhort them to make their Conviction on their Rule; for there was
something in them that brought shame over them for their Evil Deeds, the true
Light and Spirit, that makes known what of God is to be known in man.
ashamed, to shun what was manifested to be Evil; and affirms, that whatever
might be known of God was manifested within, for God had shown is unto them.
True still; for Man cannot see without Eyes, nor act without Knowledge: But the
Question is, What Conviction this is; the words prove that it is by the Light
and Spirit of God; then the feared Conscience and debancht Mind are I. C.
speaks of plainly excluded; here I mention the Conviction, and that which
works it: What Countenance do either give I. C. tos heap those foul and Impiou
Consequences upon me?
SO THAT CONVICTION CAN ONLY OBLIGE TO OBEDIENCE: and since what works that
Conviction is the manifesting Light, universal Grace, or quickening Spirit in
the Heart of Mankind, it follows, that the principal Ground for our Faith in
the Scriptures, and Reason of our Obedience to the holy Precepts therein
contained, is the Manifestation, Conviction and secret drawing of the Light or
Spirit of God in the Conscience: And thus E B's words are sound and scriptural,
for the Scriptures are chiefly believed to be true upon Conviction, therefore
every Practice therein; AND WHEN ANY MAN IS CONVINCED, THAT WHAT WAS COMMANDED
ANOTHER, IS REQUIRED OF HIM THEN, AND NOT TILL THEN, HE IS RIGHTLY AUTHORIZED
TO PERFORM IT. Again, Such Commands either relate to Ordinary or Extraordinary
Cases; This plain Distinction I made is left out by him, that he might the
better have his Ends, and Conceal the Injustice of his Work.
By Ordinary Cases I mean, such as chiefly concern Faith and holy Life, which
are general, permanent and indispensible, and then I deny his Consequence. By
Extraordinary Cases I understand Moses 's going to Pharaoh, the Prophets
several manneres of Appearance to the Kings, Priests and People of Israel, with
other Temporary Commands, relating to outward services, etc. This is a direct
Contradiction to his Inference and Allegation, who would have me to hold, that
what is in any Case commanded one Man, is not binding upon another, when I
limit it to Extraordinary Cases, and just after say, that the Moral Commands of
God are obliging upon all, How is it then that I deny the Ten Commandments to
belong to all Men, or that I hold, men may Kill, Steal, etc. and not be
cullpable? O disingenuous man!
And so we say, that what is commanded One Man, is not binding, as such upon
another: But when the Lord shall say, If thou sinnest, thou shall dye; If thou
keep my Commands, thou shall ^ive; Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am
holy; -- For your selves KNOW YE NOT how ye ought to follow us, etc? I say,
these Precepts and Examples are obliging upon all; why? because they more or
less meet with a Conviction In the Consciences of all: For I am persuaded, none
that has a reasonable Soul, who has not This Out living their Day plainly
shows, that I excluded seared Consciences; how then do I make a seared
Conscience my Rule of Obedience, or the readiest Way to Salvation?
outlived his Day, but would readily say, These are true and weighty Sayings;
For Faith in God, and a holy self-denying Life, are necessary both to Temporal
and Eternal Happiness.

It was, Reader, to this sober Answer he slung out his foregoing Rant, and
makes this following Comment and Reply, Viz. says J. Faldo.

Rep. They are no Commands unless we think so. It Is no sin to break all the
Commands in the Bible, if our Consciences can be so blind, dead or hardened as
not to tell us, it is a sin. They who thought they did God good service in
killing his Servants did not sin in the least, because they were not convinced
of a Command to the contrary. To vindicate my whole Chapter concerning the
Scriptures. It Is a Principle that has all Is not this the Language of I. C?
are they not Brethren in Abuse?
Iniquity in the Womb of it. Who can find Names for such Impious Principles?
Pen^ has opposed, scorned the Truth, vilified its Teachers and Defenders, so
as scarce never Man did; vented the most pernicious Errors, told abundance of
those things that are known to himself to be False.

Rejoyn. Reader, This is all the Justice and Reason I can have from this
pretended meek and suffering Nonconforming Parson. What would such men do, had
they as much Power as Anger? But I shall leave him with his Pride and Passion
Is there any thing more clear then that he extends the words of E. Buroughs to
Ordinary Cases, which were wholely writ about Extraordinary; and that he takes
no more notice of my Distinction, then if there had been none made? As if it
had been formerly an equal Sin for any not to be Circumcised, and to Is not
this a plain Distinction? what could be plainer against any such Consequences
as I. C. draws, and to prove that I understood not what he renders me to have
intended?
Murder his Father or Prince; or that there was the same Conviction universally
upon the Consciences of all Men, not to wear ^insey. Wolsey, Levit. 19. 18, 19.
as to do by others as they would have others do to them.

That what we say was E. Burroughs's Meaning his own Words undeniably prove:
One, says he, was sent to How plentiful are the Evidences of our Innocence;
and how distinctly nay the Reader see that E. B. writ of Particular and
Extraordinary Commands?
baptize, and another to preach the Gospel: which were particular and
extraordinary Commands. He clearly shuffles and evades the dint of my Answer,
and would run us within the Borders of Rantism. The Let me pray the Reader, and
prevail with him to dwell a while upon this Passage, and do an Innocent Man,
yea, an Abused People Justice, Does this plead for Rantism, Atheism, Blasphemy,
Murder, etc as I. C. tells us?
Question is not, Are God's Commands no Commands, unless we think so, and
therefore no sin to break all the Commands in the Bible (which is the Comment
he bestows upon us) but whether this or that especial Injunction to any
Particular Person or Persons, to this or that peculiar End, be warrantably
immitable, without sufficient Conviction and Commission: Must J. F. Baptize
because John Baptized? or turn Preacher because Peter was one? E. B. only
denied Imitation of Ancient Times in Temporary and Shadowy Services, and all
those Preachings, Prayings, Ordinances and Churches, that have not (as Peter
Martyr well expresses it) the holy Spirit for their Root. So that instead of
his holding a Principle that has all Iniquity in the Womb of it, John Faldo
first perverts his words, and then to confute them both implies a Denial of the
holy Spirit to be the only right Leader to the Performance of Gospel prayer,
Preaching and Ordinances, and of gathering of Evangelical Churches, and does as
good as tell us, that Gods Commandments are such to him, not because of any
Conviction in himself of the Justness of them, but from the Testimony of the
Scriptures, which for all his high Boasts of Christianity, is a State far
beneath those noble Gentiles, who not having an outward Law, were a Law unto
themselves, having the Effect of it written in their Hearts, their Conscience
hearing witness, etc.

And this we may boldly say, That such as ever acted from that inward Sense,
never thought they did God good Service in Killing his Servants, whilst great
Admirers of the Letter of the Scriptures, and who, as concerning this
Commandment, Thou shall not Murder, thought themselves most unblameable,
believed, They did God good service in killing his Servants.

Nor can I think it so great a Disgrace to our Cause, that we ingenuously
profess the Reason why we desire to fear God, and keep his Commandments, doing
unto others as we would have them do unto us, not so much to be from the Letter
of the Scripture, as the Convictions of the Eternal Light and Spirit of God in
our Consciences; as it ought to be unto John Faldo and Adherents, who ground
their Obedience upon his the Letter of the Scripture, and not upon such
internal Convictions. What is it but to say, They could Lie, Swear, Steal,
Kill, etc. This is the Tendency of his Doctrine, who flies out upon Conscience
and Inward Conviction, as if they were the only great Enemies of his Salvation.
without any Remorse, did they not find such Injunctions and Prohibitions upon
record? A Consequence so detestable, yet so natural to their Principles, that
if this render them not able Guides to the very Confines of Rantism and
Atheism, I shall gladly ask an Excuse for my Ignorance. But that I may l^ave
nothing undone that may complete the Satisfaction of every moderate Inquirer, I
shall further weigh and rejoyn to these words of his.

They who thought they did God good Service in killing his Servants, did not
sin in the least, because they were not convinced of a Command to the contrary;
nor the Idolaters in the case of Baal, because they thought Baal to be a God
indeed.

Now, Reader, observe the Evasion: This notable Clause clears our Sense more
particularly, and gives a very plain Discovery of our Enemy's Disingenuity. We
speak of Positive, J. F. and I. C. conclude our Argument against all moral
Commands; these are Ministers of the Gospel all this while, if they may be
believed.
This Passage relates not to Men's practicing what God commands, or our
Tenderness in imitating other Saints without Commission, for fear we should
offer strange Fire, which is our Question; but their doing that which God never
commanded, yea, which Mankind in all Ages has adjudged impious, and which to
be sure, his Holy Spirit, that E. B. said: All men should wait to be convinced,
assisted and led by in fulfilling God's Commandments, never moved any to. He
unworthily draws a general Conclusion against us from mere particular Premises.
It seems men are to act without, if not against Conviction, upon his principle;
and that it is the same thing with him, to commit moral Enormities from an
Hardened Heart, and to be tender of taking up any external Practice, or
performing some Religious Duty* without the Convictions and Leadings of the
Holy Spirit. The Apostle said to such as had not as yet so full clearness as
others, Phil. 3. 15.
That if any were otherwise minded, God would reveal it. He did not enjoin
them, during that Scruple, to believe or practice the thing doubted; but
therefore did Persecutors act inexcusably in their fiery Zeal, because their
blind Consciences checked them not. Again, If Blindness came from Education it
is ^though Blindness still (and therefore it was basely done of I. Faldo to say
in our Names, that it is not Sin in the least, etc.) more excusable: for in the
Days of such Ignorance God winks: But if it be a What says my Reader to this
Passage and plain Provision, made by me against blinded, deluded and hardened
Minds and Consciences? Does this agree well with my present Adversary's
swaggering Consequences, especially that which makes me to deny sins of wilful
Ignorance? What Gospel can a Man so qualified be Minister of?
Blindness, proceeding from long Disobedience and Rebellion against the
Convictions and Strivings of the good Spirit of God, as his word Hardened
implies, then, I say, it is not only very heinous in Gods Sight, but those
Persons can never be excused neither from great Guilt, nor the Sense of it in
themselves, let them or I. F. talk never so much of Conscience.

Besides, the most Essential, and Universally Necessary Commands of God were
through all Ages confessed to; both before there was any of those Writings, we
rightly call the Scriptures of Truth, from the Law of Nature, as many style it,
or rather, the Law of God placed in Man's Nature, and since, where they have
never been; Therefore whatever particular hardened and seared Consciences may
say, we have the Consent of Mankind, and their own Rebellion and Lewdness
against them. But the Words of J. Faldo in plain terms import, as if, 1st, Men
were not generally convinced of the Righteousness of the Moral Commands of God;
but that Men keep them because they are in the Bible only; which runs against
the Testimony of Scripture, the Consent of Ages, and the Writings and Judgment
of the most Honest and Learned Protestants. 2ly, As if it were a like Evil,
Conscientiously to forbear Running, Willing and Striving in Matters of Worship
without the Spirit's Conduct, and scared^y to plead for the Commission of
Murder and Idolatry, because Men of such Consciences bogle not at it (though
that is more then J. F. can prove, I mean, that they have no Stroke or Remorse)
3ly, As if we could Worship, Preach, gather Churches, and administer
Gospel Ordinances aright without the Spirit. 4ly, That he is not convinced by
any other Testimony then the Scripture without, of any Transgression against
God's Law. 5ly, It supposes that if Men stayed till the Spirit moved, they
should stay long enough (who vainly prate of Praying by the Spirit
notwithstanding) never considering that the Spirit stands ready to Reveal it
self to their Assistance and Assurance who wait for it, and that all the
Children of God are led by the Spirit of God, which being our Position, had it
but been weighed by this Adversary, he could not (methinks) be so unjust in his
Aggravations.

It Is true, should we believe as he does, the Spirit is not to be waited for
now adays to lead us, or that it is not ready to our Information, when we wait
for its Discoveries and Leadings, our Assertion would look very absurd and
loose; for it were to let fall all Worship, but not upon our own Principle, as
I said before; for first, all Worship to God ought to be performed by the
Assistance of his holy Spirit; for of our selves we can do nothing that is
good: And secondly, God's Spirit is ready to assist, instruct and comfort those
that wait diligently and patiently for it; yea, God has given it to the
Rebellious, that it may judge them, if it do not lead them. It is such
Protestant Doctrine, that I wonder Men should not know their admited Ancestors
Faith when they meet it: Oh great Degeneration into Hardness and Ignorance!
Lastly, There is the same to be said against him that pretends to ground all
upon the Scripture, that he objects against us, who plead for the Conviction of
Conscience, which the Instance of the Jews Murder of our Lord Jesus Christ
unanswerably proves. There was a Law, that Blasphemers should be put to Death;
by this Law they apprehended Jesus, adjudged and got him to be executed: These
Men above any Age exalted the Scriptures as the Only Rule. Where lies the
Mistake? Not in the Scripture, but in their blind and envious Application of
it. Now I ask, if the only Way for them to have come to the true Sense and
Knowledge of him, and escaped that Wicked Murder and the deplorable
Consequences of it had not been to have waited upon God for the This further
proves what Conviction as well as what Commands I understood; and ought to
shame my Adversary, if he has any Ingenuity in him, for that ill Use he has
made of my words about Conscience and Conviction.
Conviction, Discoveries, and Guidance of his holy Spirit, since Flesh and
Blood and the utmost Wit of Man, with the Exactness of the mere Letter of the
Scriptures could never give the certain discerning, Knowledge and Savor of him
unto that Generation, whose very Words themselves were Spirit and Life? It was
by a Divine Touch, Sense and Knowledge given from above, that he was truly
discerned, owned and followed of those that believed in him, and clear ved to
him; What says I. C. to this? Is the Conscience and Conviction I make so
necessary, a blind, dark, scared Conscience? Do I leave it there? Is that the
Language of my Doctrine? Is it not a Conscience convinced and taught by God's
holy spirit? Let what follows and the Three Testimonies be weighed.
therefore said Christ, No man comes to me but whom my Father draws: Where
was that Drawing but within. Again, Simon Peter, Flesh and Blood has not
revealed (what? who I am) but my Father that is in Heaven. So that at last, Men
must come to this Spiritual Sense in themselves, to understand and apply the
very Commands of Scripture; otherwise, not Justice, but detestable Murder may
under the Name of it be confidently perpetrated; Wherefore we Exhort all, To
have Recourse unto God's Spirit, that illuminates certainly, and gives to act
unblameably, by which the Scriptures are only understood as they should be, and
People brought into the Possession of that Life of Righteousness, they
plentifully declare of. Had it not been for this inward Discerning, there had
been no Ground for the Abolishment of the whole Jewish Service, which followed
some Years after Christ's Ascension. And it is the same Eternal Spirit that is
the great Rule and Judge now, which God promised more particularly to shed
abroad in the latter Days; and is the great inseparable Privilege from the
New and Everlasting Covenant.

But to conclude, Why should it seem so Heterodox in J. Faldo's Judgment, since
if Men believe the Scripture upon the Testimony of the Spirit, they practice it
by the Knowledge and Power of the same; How else could Paul have decry'd Jewish
Ceremonies; or we know, what to take, and what to leave? Or why do we omit any
Command therein mentioned? They Circumcised, therefore must I Circumcise? They
Baptized, must I therefore Baptize? with forty more particular Cases, wherein
nothing can secure any from the Imitation of them, set Conviction or Spiritual
Discerning aside. I will offer two or three Testimonies from approved Men in
our Defense.

William Tindal, that ancient faithful Protestant Martyr, whom J. Fox, that
writ the Books of Martyrs, calls, W. Tindal's Works, page 319. p. 80.
the English Apostle, speaks thus, That it is impossible to understand in the
Scripture more then a Turk, for whosoever (or any that) has not the Law of God
writ in his Heart to fulfill it. Again, Without the Spirit it is impossible to
understand them.

John Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury, in his excellent Book against the Papists,
writ above One Hundred Years ago, B. Jew. contr. Hard. p. 53^, 534.
says thus to our purpose, The Spirit of God is bound neither to Sharpness of
Wit, nor to abundance of Learning: Oftentimes the Unlearned see that thing,
that the Learned cannot see. Christ says, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the Wise and the
Politic, and have revealed them unto the Little Ones.Therefore Epiphanius
says, Only to the Children of the Holy Ghost all the Holy Scriptures are plain
and clear.Again, Flesh and Blood is not able to understand the Holy Will of God
without SPECIAL Revelation. Therefore Christ gave Thanks unto his Father, and
likewise opened the Hearts of his Disciples, that they might understand the
Scriptures, Without this special Help and PROMTING of God's Holy Spirit, the
Word of God is unto the Reader, be he never so wise or well learned, as the
Vision of a sealed Book.

Now unless Men are bound to do what they do not understand how to do, then
only are they to do them where they are Revealed or Discovered to them, which
being by the Spirit only, according to their Doctrine, the Testimony and
Discoveries of the Spirit are requisite to our understanding of the Scriptures,
which implies and comprehends a Discriminating Knowledge or Certain Discerning
of what we should practice from what is not obliging upon us to practice, and
consequently, that we ought not to run head long without such knowledge.

T. Collier, an Ancient and Eminent Man among the Western-Separatists of our
Nation, writes thus: For me to speak of God, T. Coll. Works, p. 247.
because another speaks of him; and to be able to talk much of God as I read of
him in Scripture, NOT BEING MADE ONE IN THE SAME TRUTH, I see and speak BUT
WHAT ANOTHER HAS SPOKEN; and so may speak truly sometimes of God, but it is by
Hearsay, ANOTHER MAN's TRUTH, BUT NOT MINE; so, I doubt, many a Soul BOASTS IN
ANOTHER MAN's LIGHT. -- Again, I see that external Actings according to a Rule
without, is nothing, if not flowing from a Principle of Life and Love within.
Which is more then E. B. said, of whom J. Faldo (with unworthy Reflection and
base Wrestings) has said so much.

Thus far goes my Rejoinder, and I hope far enough to defeat our Skirmisher,
and rout all his false Consequences in the plain Field; I will not abound in my
own Sense, but shall leave every impartial Reader to determine, whether E.
Borough or W. Penn for him understood and intended those Passages to all the
Commandments of God, or those only that are of a pecu^iar and extraordinary
Nature, which are both by J. F. and J. C. so odiously relented and improved,
even to all Atheism and Impiety.

But for further Satisfaction to my Reader and to complete this Adversary's
Defeat, I will suppose him making this Acknowledgment and Objection, viz.

I grant that both J. F. and my self have unworthily wronged E. B 's Words and
Sense, and W. Penn 's too, as to the main scope of the Controversy, believing
they intended what they said, not of all the Commands of God, and I am willing
to let go the last of the three Passages I cite in my Pamphlet, viz. When any
Man is convinced that what was commanded another is required of him, then, and
(not till then, he is rightly authorized to perform it, believing this related
to extraordinary Cases; but I am yet dissatisfied with the other two Passages
still, viz. No Command in the Scripture is any further obliging upon any Man,
then as he finds a Conviction upon his Conscience -- It is Conviction that can
only oblige to Obedience. I still believe that all those horrid Consequences I
skirmisht him with, are due to that Doctrine: What more can J. C. say for
himself then this Objection imports? I shall now defend my Words, as he has
laid them down, from any such Inferences as he has given in their Name.

To make my Answer clear, it is to be considered; first, What is that
Conscience I mean; next, What the Conviction, and by whom given, which
understood, corrects his Folly (to say no worse) and ends the Debate with his
Defeat.

To say nothing here of the various Definitions that are of Conscience, nor is
it so proper, for the Question is about what Conscience, I shall keep to the
Distinction in Scripture; the Scripture mentions two Sorts of Conscience, a
Good and an evil Conscience; the Question will be, which I meant; if the last,
as says J. C. I am gone; if the former, he is routed; not the latter, say I,
for two Reasons, the one, because a wicked seared Conscience, as such, rejects
all Conviction, the other, because I have particularly declared against I. F.
that spoke not of any such Conscience; nay, I have excepted and made Provision
against any such Construction in my very Answer; so to take and render me then
is injurious. But if I meant it of a corrected, rightly qualified Conscience,
such as the Apostle speaks of, Romans 2. 14, 15. that bear Witness in the
Gentiles to the Work of the Law of God writ in their Hearts, then it will
follow, that this Skirmisher is beside the Saddle, and has shouldered himself
out of the Point.

But next, what is Conviction that obliegeth? is it Imagination only? or a
Diabolical Suggestion to kill, rob, lie, etc. as says I. C. no such Matter,
but a clear Understanding and sound Judgment, and upon right Conclusions, from
the Manifestation of the Light, Grace or Spirit of God, that attends all People
whose Day is not over for their Conviction and Conversion to God; this I do
verbally provide for in my Answer and Rejoinder to I. Faldo, yet has J. C. so
strangely rendered both me and my Assertions therein; certainly this Man is the
greatest of Novie^s in our Controversy and Religion, or incomparably base; for
either he supposes that we do not hold, That all Men are enlightened with a
measure of saving Light so as that Men cannot plead ignorance of what is fit
for them to do, which is our known Principle, and he confesses it, p. 13. or
that if he does so know, he must admit that this divine Light is idle and
insufficient to convince People; or lastly, believing neither, he does very ill
to tell the World in our Name, that we make debauched and seared Consciences
our Rules of Obedience to Salvation, and subject the Laws of God and Man to the
Acknowledgment of such depraved Consciences.

Again, where there is no Law, there is no Transgression, and where the Law is
not known, there is no Law; now I. C. would have us believe, p. 8. and 9. that
the very Ten Commandments, p. 8. and 9.
as well as the Sayings of Christ, and Writings of his Apostles are so
spiritual and mysterious, that carnal Men, as such, cannot know them, no not so
much as to understand what God man's when he says, Thou shall not kill: Now if
this Tale be true, what is become of J. C. for if the Scrpiture says Where
there is no Law, there is no Transgression, and Reason assures us, that where a
Law is not known, there is no Law, and that J. C. tells us, that no Man that is
not spiritual can know God's Law and Commands, even when they are published, and
that the Spirit of God only gives the spiritual Knowledge of them; will it not
unavoidably follow, That no Command obliges without Conviction, since no
Command ties without Knowledge, which is Conviction, says J. C. p. 3. yet
again the whole Bible J. C. receives for Truth, either by Authority or
Revelation, both which Ways require Conviction; for if he goes upon the Foot
of Authority, he must be satisfied in his Conscience that those who writ,
divulged, preserved and recommended it have not put any Trick or Abuse upon
him, which is Credit upon a Sort of Conviction; if he embraces the Bible upon
the Revelation and Testimony of the Spirit in himself (the old Protestant Plea)
that is not possible without Conviction, for Evidence is Knowledge, and
Knowledge Conviction; and if I must have the Conviction of God's Spirit for the
whole, I must have it for the Parts; and therefore no Command in Scripture is
any further obliging upon any Man then as he finds a Conviction upon his
Conscience; the contrary makes God a very hard Master; for it is to* say, that
he reaps where he has not sown, that his Laws are not binding where they are
not known, and that he requires an Obedience without giving Men the
Understanding of their Duty: again, they are Christ's own Words, I will send
the Comforter, Joh. 16. 7, 8.
or rather Advocate unto you, and when he is come, he will convince the World
of Sin. I demand if the Conviction of the Spirit is not here made the Rule of
Judgment and Practice. Chap. 15. 24.
Again, If I had not done among them the Works that none other man did, they
had not had Sin; here Conviction goes before Sin, and that makes Death follow
Sin: For the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of men, Romans 18. 19.
who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, because that which may be known of God
is MANIFEST IN THEM, for God has SHOWED it unto them. So the Prophet, Mic. 6.
8.
He has SHOWED unto thee O Man what is good. And upon whom does not his Light
arise? Joh. 1. 5. 9.
In him was Life, and the Life the Light of Men; that was the true Light which
LIGHTS EVERY Man that comes into the World. For it is a Shame to speak of
those Things which are done of them in secret; Ephe. 5. 12, 13.
but ALL THINGS THAT ARE REPROVED are made MANIFEST by the Light. For the Grace
of God that brings Salvation has APPEARED unto ALL Men, teaching us, that
denying Ungodliness and VVorldly Lusts we should live soberly, righteously and
godly in this present World. For if our HEART condemn us, God is greater, Joh.
3. 20, 21.
and knows all Things; Beloved, if our HEART condemn us not, then have we
Confidence toward God; which Passages prove an universal Principle, not
condemning without requiring, nor requiring without manifesting and convincing;
therefore it is no God-blaspheming nor Soul-damning Error (as says J. C. p.
14.) to affirm that there is no Obligation without Conviction, nor Duty without
Knowledge; what would this Skirmisher make Jews of us, Romans 10. 2.
to act upon Zeal without Knowledge? Acts 18. 22, 23.
or Athenians, to worship and dedicate Temples to an unknown God? and lay it
down for an Axiom of Divinity, That Men stand obliged, not only without, but
against Conviction; is he not like to give a rare account of his Onset, that
mannages it at this Rate? the poor Man has mist his Blow, and is fallen down
with striking at me; this appears by his manifest Mistakes and gross
Contradictions too, his Mistakes I have already shown; I shall now touch
briefly upon his Contradictions, wherein he is as kind as he was cruel, and
gives but all that he plundered from us, and so ends the Skirmish. His first
Contradiction is this.

I grant you that no man stands bound to obey any Command, which it is utterly
impossible for him to know and be convinced of; p. 11.
But does this assoyl and clear him from yielding the Cause? -- But where
nothing hinders a man from knowing his Duty, but his own Neglect and wilful
Carelessness, and where a man shall by Sin debauch and sear his Conscience, will
you excuse this Man -- If indeed the Case were so, that no Conviction could be,
or none that I could any Way compass, then I were in no Fault, but where it is
my Fault if I be unconvinced -- in such Case God may justly charge me with the
Omission of Duty, and the Commission of Evil -- and by granting this, I assoy^
and clear the Justice of God.

No doubt in the least, and a Seasonable Peccavi for what he has done, for, how
wide is this off what I have said, of which I. C. has said so very ill? I say,
No Command is obliging without Conviction; I. C. says, No Command is obliging
without Conviction, provided he does not hinder his own Convincement. As if I
stated it, that Let men shut their Eyes, stop their Ears, rebel, blaspheme,
give themselves up to all Superfluity of Naughtiness till Conscience is seared
as with an hot Iron, yet without the Conscience be convinced, or that God by
Force make it to see, hear, and be sensible whether it will or no, men are not
obliged by any of his Commands; for this is the very Way he states the Case for
me, though I do so particularly provide against any such dissolute and infamous
Pretenses. This is so plain, that when I say, that Conviction only obliges to
Obedience, I add, that what works the Conviction is the Manifesting Light.
Universal Grace or Quickening Spirit in the Heart of Mankind; so that let us now
see the real Difference betwixt this Skirmisher's Grant at the End of the Day,
and what he so furiously flew upon in the Beginning. Says he, I am bound to
obey no Command, but what I am convinced of, provided I do not neglect or
reject the means of my Convincement. p. 11. Say I, No Command is further
obliging upon me, then as I find a Conviction in my Conscience by the Light,
Grace or Spirit of God, unto which all men should have regard; for that follows
in my same Answer as an Explanation and Guard to that Assertion, most
unworthily neglected by my Adversary, only to make Room for this vain and
fruitless Skirmish. Now unless my Conviction by the Grace of God, be neglecting
the means of Conviction as most undoubtedly it is not it being the only Way of
true Conviction) what Iota of Difference is there between my Assertion, and his
Concession? For Instance, no man is bound to answer a Question he does not
hear, say I; no man is bound to answer a Question he does not hear, if he did
not stop his Ears, or refuse to hear, says he, as If I admitted, that men
might stop their Ears, and yet be excusable, which is to read my Assertion
thus, No man is bound to answer a Question that he will not hear; and no
Command is obliging upon a man that will not be convinced. The most
contradictory to my Assertion that can well be, especially when I neither lay
the Obligation upon every Conviction, but that only which comes from the Holy
Spirit of Truth; that is always present to convince all of their Duty, nor
subject that Conviction to the corrupt wills of Men.

I shall here sum up all my Authorities into one, and that is W. Perkins a
famous man in his time, whose Judgment may perhaps sway a little to correct the
Etravagancy of this young Skirmisher.

-- Such Persons as have not so much as heard of Christ, though they are apt
and sit to be bound in Conscience by the Gospel in as much as they are the
Creatures of God, W. Perk. Works of Consc. p. 512.
yet are they not indeed actually bound, till such time as the Gospel be
REVEALED, or at the least means of Revelation offered. Reason I. Whatsoever
Doctrine or Law does bind Conscience, must in some Part. BE KNOWN by Nature or
by Grace, or by both; the Understanding must FIRST OF ALL CONCEIVE or at the
least have means of conceiving fore Conscience can constrain, because it
BINDS BY VIRTUE OF KNOWN CONCLUSIONS in the Mind, therefore things that are
ALTOGETHER UNKNOWN AND VNCONCEIVED OF THE UNDERSTANDING DO NOT BIND IN
CONSCIENCE. Now that the Gospel is unknown of many I have already proved.
therefore it binds them not in Conscience. II. Paul says, Romans 2. 12. They
which sin without Law, shall be condemned without Law. To this he brings
Augustine, Tract. 89. on John 15. 22. saying, that the Gentiles may have an
Excuse for not believing in Christ. Bish. Sanderson is of the same Judgment in
his Oxford Lectures on Conscience.

Now for his next Contradiction, which is in ample manner thus.

God and CONSCIENCE will never smite for mere (p. 11.) and total
Impossibilities; what are they I. C.? to obey a Command which it is utterly
impossible to know or be convinced of: Very well, enough of this before; but
what is the Matter with Conscience? how comes this strange Advance of a sudden
from the Bar to the Bench? what, a Regicide, a Parricide, a Murderer, an
Adulterer, a Drunkard, a Thief, a Traitor, a Tyrant, a Blasphemer, an Atheist,
and now a Judge, and such a Judge too as takes Place next God himself in
Judgment; God and CONSCIENCE will never smite and condemn, etc. O Powerful
Conscience! and O Righteous Conscience too! what, a just Judge at last! both
able and equal? certainly then it can be no Error to follow thy Dictates, nor
make thy Convictions the Measures of our Obedience; but tell me O Conscience,
if Princes and Rulers make never so good Laws, with thou come and say, I deny
all these Laws and the Makers of them; Children may murder their Parents;
Subjects, their Princes; Servants, their Masters; one Man, another? p. 5, 6.

Do thou require men to do all these Impieties underpain of Damnation? if
not, go to I. C. for Satisfaction; for he has grievously abused thee.

In short, Reader, So perplexed is the Man in his Skirmish, that he seems to
have scared no Body so much as himself; he has frigtned himself with his own
Bulbeggar; and as it happens with young Hottspurs, Conceit carries them on, but
leaves them in the Fray, to get off as they can: so it has fallen out with I.
C. he is in, and he known not how to get out again.

One while he appeals to God and Conscience; If God and Conscience approve me,
p. 2. here he makes Conscience the Rule of his Writing as well as God; another
while, We may do the most horrid Crimes, and yet Conscience stood to them, and
not only not smite us, but approve us and praise us, p. 5. By and by, God and
CONSCIENCE will never smite and condemn for mere Impossibilities; here again it
is joined with God in Righteous Judgment. p. 11.

Again, If Conviction be the Ground of Obedience, and the Authority of
Scripture depend upon the Rectitude and Purity of Conscience, then all rational
Law, Order and Government divine and human is overturned, and a stop put to all
Religion and Piety toward God, to all Conscience, Honesty and Charity toward
Men. Let God command what he will, Conscience may come and say, I deny this
Command and him that commands it, p. 5.

I desire to know of this Man, by what Trope or Figure it is that he makes
adhering to Conscience the Way to overturn and stop Conscience: that is the
first Case of Conscience I have to ask of him.

The second is this, how Conscience can be coupled with Honesty and Charity,
nay, with God himself, and yet have the Impudence to tell God, I deny thy
Command and thee too; is not this strange Divinity? surely this Man is but a
Parson by the by; for he violates the common Rules of Theology, as their own
Schools teach.

But once more in Honor of Conscience, and to make her amends, as he began
with the leave of Conscience, he ends, if we will believe him, with the
Judgment of Conscience, hear him.

I would be glad to make the best I can of your Position, but I must protest my
Conscience and Conviction; thus does he make that his Guide his whole Pamphlet
reprobates.

The next Contradiction is this, that Conscience is made by him to be killed
with Sin, as if it were a just Principle; and by and by he renders it the
seared active Sinner, p. 5. One more,

Lastly, he tells us, that he grants that without the Light within we could not
at all come to the Knowledge of the Scriptures, p. 12. yet that the Light
within gives the Drunkard leave to be drunk.

Again, The Light within, which should be his GUIDE, like a negligent drunken
Coachman sleeps, and the Horses run wood, or he drives into Pits and Bogs; so
does the Light within take Part with the Flesh and Satan against you, p. 13.

These Contradictions speak for themselves, though against him; the Reader may
easily judge at what a Pass this Parson-skirmisher has reduced himself, that
writes at this Random Rate.

But what further of his elaborate Studies in Divinity? why this, If Scripture
go (says he) farewell God, and Christ, and Heaven, and all Law, and Rule, p. 13.

Now God forbid that the Scriptures should go; but since in telling a Fib of us
(as if we slighted them) he has adventured such an Axiom abroad in the World, I
think fit thus to animadvert: Does God, Christ, Heaven, all Law and Rule depend
upon Scripture? strange Change! the Creator depends upon the Creature; the
Savior upon his Message; Heaven upon the History of it? Ridiculous, as well as
blasphemous-Well, but this is the worst Sense; let us see if we can find the
best, and that is this, Farewell to our Knowledge and Enjoyment of God, Christ,
Heaven, etc. if the Scriptures were lost; but this is also Extravagant, since
God has not so tied up himself to Scripture; the Scripture it self tells us of
a Law writ in the Heart, and that this is not an Inferior State neither, Heb.
8.
but that of the New and everlasting Covenant. Again was there no God, Christ
or Heaven, Law or Rule before Scripture? the contrary is notorious, the World
had enjoyed many Ages before the Scriptures were in Being; Paradise needed them
not; and Abraham, Isaac and Jacob had them not; and can this Parson think there
was no Knowledge of God, Christ, Heaven, Law or Rule in those Ages? wonderful!
what cross Prospects does this Man take of Religion! But what becomes of his
spiritual Laws writ in Man's Nature? p. 8, 9. if all would be lost with the
Scriptures (which God preserve) how cross is this to the Apostle's Sentence in
this very Place, Romans 2. For the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by Nature
the Things contained in the Law, and are a Law unto themselves: it seems here
was God, Heaven, Law and Rule without Scripture.

Lastly, He would needs have it, That men may commit all sorts of Impiety upon
Conviction; see p. 4, 5, 10, 11. whereas all these Evils are committed against
Conviction, says every Orthodox Man, be they Sins of Wilfulness, Searedness or
Ignorance; for Wilfulness resists Conviction; Scaredness overlayes, smothers or
kills it, if it be possible; and Ignorance is Darkness or Blindness, which is
just opposite to Conviction.

Perhaps he thought any thing would do against the Quakers, especially if
Skirmish and Imprimatur began it; but can he in his Conscience think (for now
he tells us he has one, and he can appeal to it too) that the Light within
helps to the Understanding of Scripture, and ought to be our Guide; and yet
that it should be a lewd drunken, fleshly, satanical Principle, and a Rebel
against God that gave it for those excellent Ends of knowing Scripture, and
regulating our Conversation accordingly? shall I return him his own Saying?
Quit talia fando temperet a lachrymis? though we had all gone astray, I ever
thought our Guide had kept the Way, and that should be our Condemnation; but
this Man teaches other Doctrine, namely, that the Guide God has given us
leads to be drunk, and takes Part with the Flesh and Satan against God. What
follows, but that every Man is discharged from adhering to such a Guide,
especially since the People in the Coach are not to be blamed, if the Coachman
drive them into Pits or Bogs; but seriously Parson is there no Soul damning or
God blaspheming Error in this Doctrine, that charge him with making so ill
Provision for the Rule of Man's Life; would not thou take a better Coachman,
left thy Horses, with thy Wits should run wood? And has the Almighty so ill
helped us with a Guide, and yet denounces so many heavy and eternal
Punishments, in case I miss my Way? This false Step in Divinity drives me to
observe three or four more, and so conclude.

The next is this, That the Indians have no Knowledge of Good or Evil; p. 8, 9,
11.
which besides that contradicts the Testimony of Travailers, and the Judgment
of all Learned Men; and which is more, the Scripture too, that demanded of old,
Upon whom does not his Light arise? and tells us, That every Man has a Measure
of Light, and that the Grace of God appeared to all Men, the Par^on contradicts
himself; for he tells us of Laws of God writ in Man's Natures, which includes
Indians, if Indians be Men.

His next Error expressed or employed by several places of his Pamphlet is, That
all men are not convinced, reproved or condemned, p. 9, 10.
though they may have the Means of it. I affirm that all men are Convinced,
though they lay it not to heart; for men see their Sin, unless they have sinned
their Sight away, in case that can entirely be. God has showed unto thee O Man
what is good: Mic. 6. 8.
What Man is this? the Jew? yes, and the Gentile too: O Man! that is, Mankind;
and can man see the Good and not the Evil, or can he see either and not be
convinced? Monstrum Horrendum Ingens: Pray how is man left without Excuse, if
God shows him not Good and Evil? and can he see, and not be convinced? Sight is
Conviction.

But when all is done, granting the Man his black Opinion of Conscience and
Conviction; what can he say of a Quaker's Conscience I cannot say of a
Protestant's? Will he beray his own Nest, or mark his own Nose? What other
Argument used Luther, Melancthon, Zwinglius, Calvin and Beza etc. abroad; B.
Hooper, J. Bradford, I. Philpot, B. Jewel, etc. at home? for their Separation
from the Church of Rome. Does not this man know, that all those horried
Consequences he has heapt upon my Assertion, may be (and some of them have
been) urged against the men named and their Followers by the Popish Church,
yea, and by one another too? Is this Man a Protestant? Why not a Papist? Answ.
Because of Conscience and Conviction to the contrary; Hold there, says the
Papist, the Church is above a private Conscience; and what know I but your
Conscience will Lie, Steal, Rebel against the Government, and at last Cut
Throats. O by no means, I. C. may say, I am no such Man, my Conscience teaches
me better things: Never tell me of that, says the Papist, whilst you make
Conscience and Conviction the Rule of your Actions toward the Church, I have
Cause to fear that will one time or other pretend a Conviction to follow all
manner of Lusts, to overturn Law and Government, and to stop all Religion and
Piety toward God, all Conscience, Honesty and Charity toward Men, p. 15. But
God and Conscience approves me, says I. C. p. 2. I cannot believe more then I
can believe; nor do God and Conscience ever smite for mere Impossibilities, p.
11. and I must protest Conscience and Conviction for what I do, p. 13. And thus
I. C. comes off with his Papist. Would one think then that this Man should fall
so severely upon me for having any regard to Conscience and Conviction? one
would think he were beside himself, as well as the Truth: But I am not without
Hopes of his Information and Repentance; till then I would advise the
Imprimatur man, not to be so Licentious; and in the mean while, it can do him
no harm to meditate well upon this Passage of Scripture, And he causes all,
both great and small, rich and poor, bond and free to receive a MARK in their
Right Hands or in their For^heads; and that no man might BVY or SELL, save he
that had the MARK or the NAME of the BEAST, Rev. 13. 16, 17.

I shall conclude with the Judgment of B. Andrews, W. Perkins and B. Wilkins
upon Conscience, and that shall be my Contribution to the Parson's better
Proficiency in Divinity; for I hear he is but Lately and by Accident of the
Trade.

Lan^. Andrews Bp. of Winton, on the Commandments, chap. 6. says, In the WORST
of Men, when God puts the Bit in their Mouths, those Sparks (viz. that he has
placed in man) will fly out. N. 5. He calls Conscience, God's Deputy or
Vicegerent.

W. Perkins, Treatise of Conscience, in his Works Theological, 1 vol. page 517.
Land. 1636. impress. Conscience is a part of the Understanding in all
reasonable Creatures, determining of their particular Actions, either with them
or against them. -- Understanding has two parts, Theoretical and Practical;
under the latter is Conscience, because his property is to judge of the
Goodness or Badness of Things or Actions done -- Reason of the Name of
Conscience, p. 518.
scire to know, is of one Man alone by himself; and conscire is when two at the
least know some one secret thing, either of them knowing it together with the
other: Therefore the Name (...) or conscientia, Conscience, is that thing that
combines two together, and makes them Partners in the Knowledge of one and the
same secret. -- Man by a Gift given him of God knows, together with God, the
same things of himself: And this Gift is named Conscience. -- It is (as it
were) a little God, p. 519.
sitting in the middle of Men's Hearts, arreigning them in this Life, as they
shall be at the Tribunal of God in the last Judgment. -- Power in the Soul, the
Property whereof is to take the Principles and Conclusions of the Mind, and
apply them, and by applying, either to Accuse or Excuse -- I Conscience be
lost, it is only in respect of the use thereof, as Reason in a Drunkard, and
not otherwise -- Conscience is a Thing of a divine Nature, Note.
and is a thing placed of God in the midst, between him and Man, as an
Arbitrator, to give Sentence and to pronounce either with Man or against Man
unto God.

Bish. Wilkins's Real Character, Definition of Conscience, Its a Faculty
whereby we apply general Principles to particular Cases, being a practical
Judgment or Memory, relating to Matters of Duty. The Opposite to it,
Unconscionableness, Searedness, Profligateness, etc.

These Testimonies give great Honor to Conscience, as the generallity of
Professions give to the Men. By them it appears that Insensibility is not
Conscience or Conviction; and the Truth is, unconscionable implies that
conscionable is reasonable, just and good.

For our Parts, we believe that God has placed his Witness in every Soul, Heart
and Conscience; and that all Mankind shall be Accused or Excused by it; they
that rebel against it, to them shall it be a Never-Dying Worm; to them that
love and obey it, an Everlasting Comforter.

By this has God awakened and redeemed us from a vain Conversation: It Is his
ancient Light and Spirit that strove with the old World, and strive with this.
To no other Spirit is our Testimony, neither Conscience or Conviction, then
that which is according to the Nature of it. And as I can make my Appeal to the
Neighbors of I. C. and all other People elsewhere, if ever our Consciences or
Convictions have led us to any such detestable Enormities, as he charges upon
our Doctrines and Principle; and if we have not rather had our Conversation
among them in all Gentleness, Sobriety and Honesty; so do I warn all, to whom
this comes, that they judge us not with Unrighteous Judgment, nor readily
receive the Reports and Suggestions of prejudiced Men against us and our holy
Way. Its no easy thing to Flesh and Blood, for us to live uprightly in the
Profession of it: mere Outside, Historical Faith, Large Shows, much Talk for
Religion, will not do the Matter, if the Heart remains unsubjected, the
affections unmortified, and no Peace with God sealed to the Soul; Depart from
me, will be the last dismal Sentence.

Therefore my dear Countrymen, Grieve not God's Holy Spirit; incline your
Hearts to his pure Word; it is nigh you (as Romans 10.) that you should obey it
and do it; it will reform and regenerate you; it will create all things new,
from an Hard to a Broken Heart, from a Vain to a Contrite Spirit; new
Affections, new Desires, new Love, new Friendship, new Words, new Works, new
Customs and Fashions (not like the World's, that shall pass away, and Vexation
of Spirit only remain in lieu of them forever) Then shall the Peace of God slow
into your Souls as a River, and nothing shall ever harm or make you afraid.

Truly Friends, a Vain, Worldly, Unwatchful Conversation unrepented of, be your
Profession and Church what (...) will, will one Day harm and make you afraid;
for God (...) Reward all people according to their Works: at that (...) Day it
will not be Well Talked, or Well Professed, but WE^^ DONE, good and faithful
servants; Why? Because th^^ have kept his holy Sayings; Remember what Christ
Jesus said (by whom God will judge the Secrets of all Hearts in the Day of
Account) that for every Idle Word which Man speaks, shall he give an Account
in the Day of Judgment.

As one that knows the Terrors of the Lord, I would persuade all men to turn to
the living God; For if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the Ungodly
and Sinner appear? for the Kingdom of God stands in Righteousness, Peace and
Joy in the holy Ghost; and Sinners have nothing to do there: Neither think,
that you are saved by Christ from Wrath, and not saved from Sin; or that he has
saved you from the Guilt, though the Nature and Acts of Sin remain; no such can
walk with God here; for they must be translated, changed, renewed; muchless can
they enjoy the Lord hereafter. Wherefore cast about, and see how it is with
you; hearken while it is to day; your faithful Monitor is in your own Bosom,
and Waits and Knocks to be let into your most inward Affection, that he may be
your Delight, the prime Object of your Love; and blessed are they that are not
offended in him, but believe in him, and confess him before all men; the
Outside Jew despised him then, the Outside Christian sleights him now; but
blessed be God, this spiritual Appearance of Christ in the Soul, to the Jews
(the Professors) a Stumbling Block, to the Greeks (the Wise Men) Foolishness,
is unto us, who have believed therein, the mighty power of God to our
Salvation; and the worst desire I have for you is, That you also may sincerely
believe, and when Time with you shall be no more, receive, with all those that
in the Self-denying Life of holy Jesus walk, and saint not, to the End of their
Days, Glory, Honor and Eternal Life, Amen.

THE END

