A LOOKING-GLASS FOR THE QUAKERS: IN TWO COLVMNS; Wherein they may in part see
Themselves, and may be seen by Others.

Vide, Audi, Judica.

The first Column is, what they formerly published against the Papists; and the
other Column is, what they Published on their behalf, when Uppermost.

PHIL. ANGLVS.

Cleanse your Hands, ye Sinners, and Purify your Hearts, ye DOVBLE-MINDED.

Be afflicted, and Mourn, and Weep: let your laughter be turned into Mourning,
and your joy into heaviness.

Humble your selves in the sight of the LORD, that he may raise you up, Ja.
4.8, 9, 10.

LICENSED,

May 14. 1689.


LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXIX. and are to be Sold at several
Booksellers. Price Two Pence.

A Looking-Glass for the QUAKERS, in Two Columns. Wherein they may in part see
Themselves, and may be seen by Others.
This Column is what they formerly Writ and Published against the Papists.
See, the Trumpet of the Lord sounded, etc.
TO all you called Papists, to your whole Body and Head at Rome, the Word of
the Lord reaches. Thus assuredly says the Lord, My Controversy is against
you, and my Vengeance, and wrath, and Fury, shall for ever, World without end
be upon you, tho you pardon one another, yet will not I pardon any ONE of you:
-- Some of you are made a Curse already, and with Vengeance and Indignation
shall the rest be persued, till your Body be rooted from off the Earth. p. 13,
14.

See, their Answer to Semper Iidem, etc. P. 34. 35. 36.
COnsider the Nature, and Constitution, and Disposition of the Spirit of the
Church of Rome, how that it is not changed, but the same that ever it was, viz.
A Spirit of Murder, and Cruelty, that has Killed and Martyred such as have
differed from them, and contrary minded in Religious Matters, and it would work
and bring to pass the same still, if it had its Power, without limitation, in
England; the Papists, I say, would Burn, Kill and Torture such as they judge
Heretics, and all that cannot bow and bend, and conform to their Ways and
Injunctions, and Religion. This they would be or again in England, if it were
in their Power, as it was heretofore, I say, this ought to be considered, even
the Cruelty of that Spirit, and what danger there is in it, to give way to the
exaltation of that Spirit, and to embrace it in the Least, whereby to give it
occasion to get into the Power and Judgment Seat; for if it does, then Fire and
Faggot, and Killing and Burning about Religion, will openly appear again, and
this seems to be manifest by the Constitution of the Spirit of Semper Iidem,
which may give good and wholesome Cautions, that the Spirit of the Papists is
still a cruel Spirit, and would destroy all that differ from their Way, if they
had Power; and that that Spirit is not to be Hugged, and Embraced, nor set
HIGHEST, lest the effect of it prove woeful to England, by bringing forth again
what it once did, in renewing Fire and Faggot, for this is the disposition of
the Spirit of the Romish Church, as is apparent by Semper Iidem.

Consider, how Careful and Vigilant the People of England ought to be, to wait
and attend the motions of the Spirit of the Church of Rome, lest it insinuate
itself into AUTHORITY, and get its intended advantage, and purpose, against the
Protestants, and their Cause, and advance it self against them, and promote its
own Interest, and destroy and overturn theirs; for, without all controversy,
that same Spirit is now at work to agitate its desires, and, according to its
old course, it is hatching and contriving how to promote itself, and to destroy
all that is contrary; it is undermining, and secretly surmizing its Opponents
overthrow, that itself may be exalted; for that Spirit is diligent in its way,
to take the least occasion for its self-advantage. And therefore the People of
England ought also to be careful and diligent in their Cause, to preserve
themselves, and their Interest, from the defeat of the Church of Rome, and they
ought to watch against that Spirit, to keep it in SUBJECTION, under AUTHORITY
and Command, and not to exalt it into COMMAND over them, lest they be subjected
to the Idolatries, and Oppressions, and Persecutions of that Spirit to their
own destruction, both of Persons, Estates, and Religion; for that Spirit will
attempt always to Rule, and if it Rule, the^ will follow consequently an utter
overthrow of the Protestants Persons and Cause, that will be the effect of the
Authority of it, tho it may bear hand in hand in seeming lo^^ and good
agreement with the Protestants, till it has gained its desired end over them;
which is to promote itself, and to subdue, by Burnings and cruel Tortures, all
the which is contrary to it: Let the People of England consider this matter,
now when it is time, and be watchful over the motions of that Spirit, and not
put confidence i^ ^t too far, nor commit too much credit upon it, even as they
love their own Safety an Peace, which are concerned in this case.

It is worthy to be minded while it make mended, lest the time come it cannot
be prevented.

See, No Cross no Crown, etc. by W. Penn.
THese are the Men, Women, and Children, [the Waldenses] who, for above these
500 Years, have valiantly maintained a cruel War, at the expense of their most
innocent Blood, against the unheard of Tyrannies, and more than Paganish
Inhumanities, of Proud Blood-thirsty Popes, Cardinals, etc. But above all, of
the Monkish Inquisitors, whose most barbarous invented Cruelties are the ^^ly
demonstration of their Wit; with whom it is held to be a greater Sin, to conceal
an Heretic, than to be perjured; to obey an Heretical Prince, than to murder
him; to Marry a lawful Wise, than to keep a Whore; in short, to dissent, tho
never so conscienciously, than to Murder, Lie, Steal, and commit all the
enormities prohibited both in the 1st and 2d. Table -- Nay, let him be never so
virtuous, to say, that the Flesh, Blood and Bones, of Jesus, once nailed upon
the Cross, were not in a Wafer; (held by the nasty Fist of a Fornicating
Priest) Nay, God not in that Wafer -- were enough to Rack, Hang, or Burn,
without any farther Appeal, or Examination. 'Twas against the like Adversaries
these poor Waldenses sought, by suffering throughout the Nations, by Prisons,
Con^iscations, Banishments, wandering from Hill to Valley, from Den to Cave,
being Mocked, Whip't, Racked, thrown from Rocks and Towers, driven on
Mountains, and, in one Night, hundreds perishing by excessive Frosts, Snows,
and the like Colds; smothered in Caves, Starved, Imprisoned, Ripped, Hanged,
Dismembered, Riss'd, Plundered, Strangled, Burned, and whatsoever could be
invented to ruin Men, Women, and Children, page 92, 93.

See, Truth Exalted, etc. by William Penn.
COme answer me, you Papists: Whence came your Creeds, but from Factious and
Corrupted Councils, dyed in the Blood of those that refused Conformity? But,
above all, When, and Where, did they [the Scriptures] ever indulge your cruel
Persecuting, Whipping, Racking, Inquisition, Murdering, Spirit; whose Popes,
Faith, Church Government, and whole Religion, was founded, and are maintained
by Inhuman Bloodshed, as your own Histories plainly manifest? Who gave life to
these things, but the Devil, who was a Murderer from the beginning? Thus have
you, Papists, through many Generations, been always shedding the precious Blood
of those, whom God in every Age raised to testify against your Superstitions
and Will Worship. Therefore, Woes from God Almighty to that Romish Whore, who
has corrupted the Nations, and sits upon a Scarlet-colored Beast full of Names
of Blasphemy, drunk with the Blood of Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus; The hour of
her Desolation is nigh, and in the Cup which she has filled, shall it be
filled to her double; for strong is the Lord God of Hosts who judges her, page
56.

See, A Seasonable Caveat against Popery, etc. by W. Penn.
WE hope, it may not be too late to militate for Truth against the dark
Suggestions of Papal Superstition, to vindicate that of the REFORMATION from
the quaintest Stratagems, and most unwearied Endeavors of Romish Emissaries,
to put both it, and us, into their Inquisition. We know, they have so far
Mastered their Ancient Fierceness, and Masked their Sangum Looks with those
more modest and familiar, that though we need not more Reason than before, we
need more Skill and Caution, or else we may too fatally experience the force of
that Vulgar Proverb: Laugh in thy Face, and cut thy Throat.

They are grown so Complaisant, that none seem more exasperated at Persecution
than themselves, (whilst the very Fathers of it) decrying the fierceness of it
in some Countries, (whose Incendiaries they were and still are) and imputing
all the Blood of poor Protestants to some unwarrantable Civil Score, (thereby
abusing the Magistrate with their own Conspiracies;) Nay, for all their
venerable Esteem of the Popes Infallibility, they have not stuck to Censure his
Roaring Bulls, (though procured by their own means) and all that might express
their New Tenderness, that many, unacquainted with their Practices, are ready
to believe them, what they say themselves to be, whose Moral is to have two
Strings to their Bow, to be Ambo-dexters, and furnished with Meanings to suit
the Compass of ALL Occasions, page 3.

I stand amazed how any Man of Sense can be a Papist, when the only
Demonstration of his Religion must be his not understanding it, page 14.

In those frequent Bulls for Massacres, which can no more be denied than Light
at Noon day, by which People have been stirred up, upon the Promise of
Forgiveness of Sins, Redemption from Purgatory, and Eternal Salvation, or
dreadful Denunciation of Eternal Damnation, to Enterprise that Work of
Murdering many Hundred thousands of Men, Women, and Children, without any Legal
Presentment, Trial, or Conviction. But the Consideration of these things are
out of fashion in England, that many Embrace them upon their present Disguises,
and not in their true Sanguinary appearances, page 30, 31.

To conclude, If we would not receive a Thief till he has Repented, let the
Papist first Recant his Voluminous Errors; but, above all, let us have good
Testimony of his Hearty Sorrow for that Sea of Bloodshed in England, France,
Holland, Ireland, Spain, Italy, Savoy, Switzerland, and Germany, of many
Hundred thousands of Poor Protestants, that for pure Conscience could not
Conform to their most Exorbitant Practices, as well as new Doctrines, imposed
upon them; such Inhuman and Barbarous Inventions and Cruelties as no Age could
ever Parallel, and are the only Demonstration of their Wicked Wits that lived
in that Age; and that not only upon the Parties themselves, but their poor
Innocent Babes: For that English Protestants should so far neglect these
weighty Considerations, as to be Gulled and Cheated out of their Religion,
purchased them by their Martyred Ancestors, and be persuaded to embrace that
old Bloody Apostatized Church again, with all her Slavish, as well as
Ridiculous, Superstitions, is a Crime so offensive to God, and intolerable to
Men, as the time hastens, that the very Stones of the Streets will rise up in
Judgment against them, p. 35.

Thus have I undertook, tho with much brevity, an enervation of the Romans
Faith, at least a detection of their Craft, their horrid Cousenage, and present
way of Insinuation among the People. p. 36.

Qu. Whether, in case they could not be conformed unto, they would allow a
Toleration, were they powerful! Whether, in case they should say Yes, we ought
to believe them, since it is one of their most Sacred Maxims, not to keep Faith
with Heretics, as was seen in the Case of those of the Alpine Vallys, J. Hus,
etc. and in that they have, in all Ages, brought so great a Deluge of Blood
upon the European World, p. 37.

Qu. Whether, it be the Interest of the English Nation to subject her-self to a
Popish Yoke, considering the incomparable Bloody Massacres of that sort of Men
in several Reigns. p. 38.

See, England 's great Interest in the choice of Parliament Men, etc.
PRay, see that you choose sincere Protestants: Men that don't play the
Protestant in Design, and are indeed disguised Papists, ready to pull off their
Masks when time serves: You will know such by their Laughing at the Plot,
disgracing the Evidence, admiring the Traitors Constancy that were forced to
it, or their Religion and Party were gone beyond an Excuse, or an Equivocation.
The contrary are Men that Thank GOD for this Discovery, and in their
Conversation zealously direct themselves in an opposition to the Papal
Interest, which indeed is a Combination against good Sense, Reason and
Conscience, and to introduce a blind Obedience, without (if not, against)
Conviction; and that Principle which introduces implicit Faith, and blind
Obedience in Religion, will also introduce implicit Faith and blind Obedience
in Government; so that it is no more the Law in the one than in the other, but
the Will and Power of the Superior, that shall be the Rule and Bond of our
Subjection: This is that Fatal Mischief Popery brings with it to civil Society,
and for which, such Societies ought to be aware of it, and All those that are
Friends to it. p. 4.

See, Their project for the good of England, Dedicated to the Parliament, etc.
THe difference between Protestants and their Dissenters is purely Religious,
they [hold the one common Civil Head,] and mostly about Church Government, and
some Forms of Worship, etc.

But as to the Papists, under Correction, the case is altered, for tho it be
mostly managed on the side of Religion, the great Point is merely Civil, and
should never be otherwise admitted or understood. For want of this Caution,
Protestants suffer themselves to be drawn into tedious Controversies, about
Religion, and give occasion to the Professors and Favorers of that Way, to
exclaim against them as Persecutors for Religion, who had reprobated such
severities in the Papists to their Ancestors. -- When in reality, the
difference is not so much Religious as Civil, not but that there is a vast
contrariety in Doctrine and Worship too: But this barely should not be the
cause of our so great Distance, and that Provision our Laws make against them:
But rather that fundamental Inconsistency, they carry with them, to the
security of the English Government and Constitution unto which they do belong,
by acknowledging a Foreign Jurisdiction in these Kingdoms. So that drawing into
Question and Danger the Constitution and Government, to which Scripture and
Nature, and Civil Pact oblige their Fidelity, and Obedience; There seems a
discharge, upon the Civil Government, from any further Care of their
Protection, that make it a piece of Conscience, to seek its ruin, and which is
worse, a Principle not to be informed of better things, for even here, not
Reason or Law, but the Pope, must be Judge, p. 7.

Having brought the Matter to this, I shall first offer you a new TEST, next
the Ways of taking it, with most aggravation against the Party Rejecting or
Breaking it; and lastly, how you may secure your selves from Papists disguising
themselves amongst Protestant Dissenters, that so nothing may remain a Remora
in the Way, that shall not be removed to leave you a plain and even Path to
peace and safety.

The New TEST.
I A. B. Do solemnly and in good Conscience, in the sight of God, and Men,
Acknowledge and Declare, that King Charles the Second is Lawful King of this
Realm, and all the Dominions thereunto belonging, and that neither the Pope,
nor See of Rome, nor any else by their Authority, have Right in any case to
Depose the King, or dispose of his Kingdoms, or upon any score whatever to
absolve his Subjects from their Obedience, or to give leave to any of them to
Plot or Conspire the hurt of the Kings Person, his State or People; and that
all such Pretenses and Power are false, pernicious, and demnable. And I do
further sincerely profess, and in good Conscience Declare, That I do not
believe, that the Pope is Christ's Vicar, or Peter's Lawful Successor, or that
he, or the Sea of Rome severally or jointly, are the Rule of Faith, or Judge of
Controversy, or that they can absolve Sins, nor do I believe there is a
Purgatory after Death; or that Saints should be prayed to, or Images in any
sense be Worshipped. Nor do I believe, that there is any Transubstantiation, in
the Lords Supper, of the Elements of Bread and Wine, at, or after, the
Consecration thereof by any Person whatsoever. But I do firmly believe, that
the present Communion of the Roman Catholic Church is both Superstitious and
Idolatrous. And all this I do acknowledge, intend, profess, and declare,
without any Equivocation, or Reserve, or other sense than the plain and usual
signification of these Words according to the real intention of the Lawmakers,
and the common Acceptance of all true Protestants.

This is the Test I offer; large in Matter, because comprehensive of Oaths and
Test too, yet brief in Words.

The next thing is the Ways of Taking it, with most Aggravation upon the
Refusers or Violaters of it.

First, That in all Cities and great Towns, notice be given by the Magistrates
thereof to the Inhabitants of every Ward or Parish to appear on such a day, be
it New-years-day, or Ashwednesday rather, (when the Pope Curses all
Protestants) at their Public Hall, or other Places of Commerce, where the
Magistrates shall first openly Read, Subscribe, and Seal the TEST, then that it
be Read again by the proper Officer of the Place, to the People, and that those
that take it do audibly pronounce the Words after him that Reads it; and when
they have so done; that they Subscribe and Seal it, that such Subscriptions be
Registered. -- Lastly, Let this be done Annually, that is upon every
New-years-day or Ashwednesday, as a perpetual Testimony of the Peoples
Affection to the King and Government, and their Abhorrence of the Practice of
Rome.

The Abuse of this Discrimination should be very PENAL, for it is a great Lie
upon a Man's own Conscience, and a Cheat put upon the Government; Your Wisdoms
can best proportion the Punishment, but it can scarce be too Severe as our
Business stands, p. 9, 10.

Lastly, See their Remonstrance, etc. to the Parliament, etc. presently after
the Death of Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey.
IT is not a time now to Dispute but Act, and that vigorously too, or England's
lost. POPERY, that Enemy to GOD by setting up Idols; to CHRIST, by its
Newfound Mediators; to the HOLY GHOST, by putting a Pope in his place; to the
Scriptures, by its Legends and Corrupt Traditions; to Reason, by its imposed
Absurdities, to Common Sense, by its most foolish but most idolized
Transubstantiation; to all tender dissenting Consciences, by Fire and Faggot;
and to all Civil Government that refuse to be subject to it, by Plots,
Assassinations and horrid Massacres, its usual and notorious steps to Worldly
Advancement. This monstrous Popery, this common Enemy to Mankind, that has so
often contrived our Ruin, and several times been at the very point of effecting
it, has once more attempted us, and with that Violence and Design, that it
looks like the last time: Nay, the great Sticklers of it are got within our
Works, and promise themselves the Garrison, because, they say, they have Friends
in Disguise among us. It Is true, they have lost some Men in the Attempt, but
they are not much daunted at that; for the whole Papal World, they brag, have
Conspired their Success, and the Air Rings with the thousands of Masses that
are daily said for the Prosperity of the Design, as if their Intention were to
Convert the World, and not to Kill the King, Garble the Parliament, Shamble and
good and sober Protestants of every Party, Fire and Plunder Cities, and
finally, Change the Government and Religion of the Kingdom, which is the Plot.

Nor will the more impudent of them deny the thing in general, but much the
contrary, insulting to us with Tertullian's Implevimus omnia against the old
Pagans. We fill your Courts, your Armies, your Navies, it must take, you cannot
avoid it; it is a just Cause to extirpate Heretics, Root and Branch.

But one (and may be the worst) part of the Plot has failed them, they resolved
to surprise you, to make a Night Work of it, to let you and yours never see day
more, (for such Deeds become Darkness) as they did in France and Ireland in
those most Bloody Massacres of poor harmless Protestants. But God, the infinite
good and gracious God, that has always watched over this poor Island, (an
hundred times designed to destruction) and whose Eye pierces through the
Secrets of Men, has notwithstanding the Greatness, as well as multitude, of
our Sins, (not to be equalled by any thing but his Patience and Compassion)
discovered this impious Conspiracy, we hope too early for the Plotters Purpose;
he has beaten up our Quarters, and given us the Alarm, if we will take it;
methinks we should, when the Noise of Fire and Sword is in our Ears; when we
cannot walk the Streets without Danger of being stabbed, nor sleep in our
Houses for fear of being burned, witness the dreadful Fire at London, the Fire
of Southwark, and that the other day of Limehouse, where three poor Souls were
burned quick, to say nothing of forty Attempts they have made in other places.
To which let me add the Design in general of Massacring all the best People in
the Kingdom, begun and amply confirmed in the most barbarous Murder of that
Worthy Knight and Judicious Magistrate Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey, p. 1, 2, 3. --

Thus this poor Gentleman, but worthy and brave Patriot, ended his days by the
Assassinating Hands of Papists, whose Butchery made him the Common Martyr of
his Religion and Country, and his Death is to us the Earnest of their Cruelty;
in him they have Massacred us all, we must take it to our selves, and can no
more be unconcerned in his Death, than disinteressed in the Cause of it.

The Plot is opened, the Tragedy is begun, our Wives are frighted, our Children
cry; no Man is sure of his Life a day; the choice is only, what Death we shall
dye, whether be Stabbed, Strangled or Burned. This Consternation and Insecurity
must needs obstruct all Commerce, scare People from following their lawful
Occasions, deter all Officers of Justice from their Duty, and in fine, dissolve
Human Society, and reduce the World into its first Chaos.

For the Lord's sake let us consider our Condition, let us all turn to the Lord
with unfeigned Repentance, let us look and cry to him for Help, that he, who
has discovered, would confound, this Bloody Conspiracy, and show Mercy, and
bring us Deliverance, that we may yet see his Salvation, and serve him all the
days of our Lives; and in order to our Security, these things are earnestly
requested of you.

1. Take effectual Care to preserve the King; they say and we believe, he is
not for their turn; we would not have him for his sake and ours: In order to
this, pray find out the Ahithophels, the Dangerous Men about him; you know who
they are; Be free and bold, prize your time, the Conjuncture is great.

2. Vote an Address to the King, to Banish all Irish Papists; out of the Army,
Navy, and Kingdom, by such a Day; and all Papists out of the City of London,
whose gross Ignorance and base Desperateness renders them the fittest Men for
Assassinations. Besides, it is a shame that the Children and Kindred of Irish
Rebels, if not some of them the very Men themselves that were Actors in that
horrid Massacre in the year 1641, about thirty seven years since, in which
above Three hundred thousand Protestants were Murdered in the Kingdom of
Ireland, without regard to Age or Sex, should be employed either in the English
Army or Navy; but more scandalous is it, that St. James's should be their Head
Quarters, and the Park turned into an Irish Walk. What do so many Irish
Papists, Teigs and Rebels, do swarming there? No good, to be sure; their Parts,
Courage and Skill can invite no Man of any to entertain them; it must only be
their Ignorance and Cowardly Cruelty which make them Instruments of Mischief,
and fit to be used by those that love foul play. -- p. 6.

3. For God's sake, call for the Plot, look thoroughly and strictly, into it;
Fear nor Favor no Man; Fiat Justitia: But fear God, do what you do as in his
Presence, to whom you must tender an Account. It Is it he great Action of your
Life, discharge your Trust, and quit your selves now like Men. This has been
the perpetual Troubler of our Protestant Israel; as you would see God with
Comfort, and secure your Posterity from Civil and Spiritual Tyranny, slip not
this opportunity God has so wonderfully cast into your hands; be not found
Despisers of his Providence, neither be you careless or fearful of improving
it; Now or Never: Had they you on this Lock, and at this Advantage, you nor
yours should never see Day more. What once you could not have so well done,
they have now made easy and necessary for you to do; and what before you
scarcely might do; is now become your Duty. Be not cheated by a Sacrifice; let
not the Lives of two or three Plotters be the Ransom of the rest, or your
Satisfaction; it is not Blood but Security, prospect future Safety, an Eternal
Prevention of the like Miseries for the future; otherwise we shall only sit
down with the Peace and Joy of Pools, and fat our Selves Sacrifices with more
security against their next Slaughter. -- p. 7.

4. Let every Protestant Family be well Armed, and every Popish Family be
utterly disarmed; they have tried out usage of Arms with Ease, we theirs with
Cruelty enough.

5. Let there be an Act with a strict PENALTY, that, after such a Day, no
Gun-smith shall sell Guns or Pistols, Cutlers, Swords or Daggers; and
Dry-Salters, Gunpowder or Bullets, without License of the Aldermen of the Wards
in London, or some Chief Officer, if in any other Corporations; and that the
Person so buying them, shall, before the said Officer, subscribe a sufficient
Test against Popery; but more especially, that no Papist be suffered to make or
sell any such Implements of War.

6. That care be taken to prevent fraudulent Conveiances of Estates by Papists
to escape the Law, where they have done mischief: For this is to cheat the
Government, and invalidate the Law.

7. That it shall he Treason for any Papist to Entertain a Priest, Jesuit, or
Seminary in their House, because mortal Enemies by Principle and Practice to
the Civil Government. Consider of the Swedish. Law, or a better way to clear
the Land of all of them; let us buy them out to be safe.

8. That in all Schools, particularly in Universities, Care be taken to Educate
Youth in a just abhorrence of Romish Principles, especially the Jesuits immoral
Morals, showing the Inconsistency thereof with Human Nature, Reason and
Seciety, as well as pure and meek Christionity; of which there has been great
neglect.

9. That our Youth be not suffered to Travel abroad, but between Twelve and
Sixteen, and that under the Conduct of approved Protestants; for the present
way of Education is chiefly to Pleasure and Looseness, which makes way for
Atheism or Popery, no Religion, or false Religion. p. 8.

10. That speedy Care be taken to release all oppressed Protestants in this
Kingdom; and since the Papists mark all Protestants out for one Fate, and
esteem them one Body of Heretichs, that they may be as one Body of Protestancy
against that Common Enemy^ This is the Language of God's present Providence,
those that withstand it are such as love Rome better than London: Every
Protostant. Dissenter or not, has the same thing to say against Bopery. Agree
then so far, and let a general Negative Creed be concluded upon, and from
thence let some general positive Truths be considered of, in order to a better
understanding among them: For this purpole, let there be a Select Assembly of
some out of All Persuasions, in which, these two Proposals may be duly weighed,
That whosoever Believe and Own what shall be therein contained, shall be
Reputed and Protected as true Protestants. p. 9.

But we must never forget the horrid Murder of Henry III: and of Henry IV. of
France, our Kings renowned Grandfather. And would to God our King would
consider, that all his Humanity to them can never secure him from their Stroke;
they were both better Catholics, and yet both Assassinated: The first a bred
Papist, yet because he would not Murder all the Hugonots or Protestants of his
Kingdom, and his known best Subjects, they did as much for him: The last was
their Convert, all they seemed to desire of him, and all they can expect from
our King, yet how did they use him? they did twice assassinate him, and the
last time killed him. What security then can any Prince promise to himself from
Men that make not the profession of the same Religion, a Protection to them
that own it, but upon humors or suspicions of their own, or to introduce
another PERSON or Family, more immediately under their influence, and disposed
to their turn, will make no scruple of killing him? What Slaves are Kings with
such Men, and under such a Religion? Let not the mildness of our Prince be thus
abused; show your selves his great and best Council in this Conjuncture, and
deliver him from these Men of ingratitude. -- p. 11.

From this Religion, O Lord God, deliver us; O King and Parliament, protect us:
It Is your duty to God and your obligation to the people. We beseech you, excuse
us and take all in good part; our fears are great, we fear justly and our
desires reasonable: Remember our dreadful Fires, consider this horrid Plot, and
think upon poor, yet worthy, Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey; let not God's Providence
and his Blood rise up in judgment against you, God of his great Mercy animate
you by his power, and direct you by his Wisdom, that the Succession of his
Deliverances, from Queen Elizabeth's days, may not be forgotten, nor his
present Mercy slighted; Let us do our duty, and God will give us that Blessing,
which will yet make England a glorious Kingdom, the joy of her Friends, and
terror of her Enemies, which is the fervent and constant Prayer of yours, p. 12.

This Column is what they Published in behalf of the Papists, when uppermost.
A Defense of the D. of Buck. Book, 1685. in Reply to a Church of England-man,
who Answered the said Book.

NOw this Man would think it imprudent in me, and that it is none of my
business to vindicate the Persons charged [ i. e. the Papists, etc.] yet I have
so much Justice, I confess, as not to condemn Parties by particulars, and
Charity as to be satisfied with their Solemn disclaiming of such Practices. --
I must also tell him, I cannot admire his Wisdom, Manners or Justice in his
Reflections upon the Roman Catholics, after the assurance of so great an ONE
of that Communion, has given him and his Friends of their Security and
Protection. -- For the late occasion he takes, let him be just, and he will
find the Excluders almost every Sunday at their Parish Churches, and if three
quarters of them were to Pray for their Lives, it may be they could better read
their CLERGY, than say their prayers without the Public Liturgy. p. 25, 26.

A Reply to the Answer of the Man of at Name, to the Duke of Buck, etc p. 22.
23.

ONe thing I must say, the Roman Catholics have been Loyal in England and
Holland. -- and who knows not, that they [the Church of England Men] were such
as hardly knew how to Pray, but out of our Liturgy, that attempted to exclude
the Presumptive Heir to the Crown, upon the score of his Religion.

Animadversi^ns on the Apology of the cl^m^r^us Squire, etc.
BUt when he has done all he can, they were not Dissenters -- that in 80.
prosecuted the Roman Catholics, and resus'd them Liberty; but Church of
England-men, and such of them too, as would not allow it to some Protestant
Dissenters, for fear the Papists should hide themselves amongst them, and that
they therefore must swallow the most severe Cests that could be fra to show
themselves not Friends to that Communion, and to tell Truth, and I beseech the
Gentleman not to take it amiss, that I say, the Dissenters were invited to the
share they had in opposition to Popery by Churchmen; ay, they were for a
Comprehension, to make the Church stand broader, the better to receive the
Assaults of Rome without hazard. p. 3.

'Twas the Gentlemen of that Communion, that Impeached the Prerogative in the
Declaration of Indulgence, and set the Political Capacity of the King in
Opposition to his Natural; and to make the Business the more Popular, bestowed
that Comment upon it, of a Design in the Court, to let in Popery and Arbitrary
Government, p. 5.

A Persuasive to Moderation, submitted to the King, etc. 1686.
WE have not to do with an insensible Prince, but one that has been Touched with
our Infirmities: More than any body sit to Judge our Cause, by the share he
once had in it, (in Preface.)

Good Advice to the Church of England, etc. 1687.
IT happens now, that God and Caesar are both of a Mind, which perhaps does not
always fall out, at least about the Point in hand, p. 17.

Edw. VI. -- by Archbishop Cranmer was compelled to Sign a Warrant to burn poor
Joan of Kent, a famous Woman, but counted an Enthusiast. -- Thus even
Protestants began with Blood for mere Religion, and TAUGHT the Romanists in
succeeding times how to deal with Them, page 30.

If She hopes, by her aversion to a general Ease, to set up for a Bulwark
against Popery, one year will show the Trick, and mightily deceive her, and the
opportunity will be lost, and another Bargain driven, I dare assure her,
mightily to her disadvantage. Violence and Tyranny are no Natural Consequences
of Popery, for then they would follow every where, and in all Places and Times
alike, but we see in 20 Governments in Germany, there is none for Religion, nor
was not for an Age in France, and in Poland, the Popish Cantons of Switzerland,
Venice, Lucea, Colonia, etc. where that Religion is Dominant, People enjoy
their Ancient and Civil Rights a little more steadily than they have of late
time done in some Protestant Countries nearer home, almost ever since the
Reformation. p. 42. 43.

It is her Interest to Repeal those Laws -- She else breaks with a King
heartily inclined to preserve her by any way, that is not persecuting. p. 44.

Let us not uphold Penal Laws against any of our Religious Persuasions, nor
make Tests out of each others Faiths, to exclude one another our Civil Rights,
by the same reason, that denying Transubstantiation is made one, to exclude a
Papist; to own it, may be made to exclude a Church of Englandman, a
Presoyterian, an Independent, etc. p. 58.

Advice to Protestant Dissenters, showing, it is their Interest to Repeal the
Test, etc. 1688.

THe Test in the nature of it is unreasonable, because it puts a Man upon a
Temptation to deny that, which he believes, he cannot be Saved without
Believing p. 2.

The taking away the Test is the great debate, for, say the Church of England,
and those that give Ear to their Insinuation, If that is gone, there can be no
security to the Protestant Religion; now as to that, in a Roman Catholic
Reign, what Service is it? are they kept for all that, out of Places, and
Offices of Trust? No, but although we cannot prevent them of that, yet, the
keeping them out of the Legislative Power is our security: But let me ask them
one Question, Have they not often charged them with those Doctrines, viz. Not
keeping Faith with Heretics? Or, that they are not obliged, or do not account
that of any value or tie to them that they promise to us; And further, Whatever
they do to us, provided, it is to serve Holy Church, let the Act be ever so
immoral, it is meritorious; if we consider this, I cannot see that great
Bulwark in the Test, that many would have us believe; for if they may have
Indulgences for these Enormities, I cannot believe they will be so squeamish at
the Test, when they find the promotion of their Church so mightily depends upon
taking it --. If the Papists find, that the Dissenters break with them, upon
this Civil Union, will not they be obliged to betake themselves to the surest
way they can, for their own security, which I conceive will then consist in one
of these two Points, 1. To get a Dispensation to take the Test, or else, to
bring the Church of England into their Interest. As to the First, the Church of
England tells us as above, they can do things Tantamount, but if they have
abused them in their Tenants, and they should refuse that way, but should fall
in with them, what security can they give us, that they will not accept of them
into their Favor, since our Prince is of that Persuasion? Who knows, but their
Ancient pretense to Loyalty may spring again? If so, from whom must we expect
Kindness, for of theirs we have had woeful Experience; and for the Romanists,
it is better joining with them, when we can serve them, than to expect Favor
from them, when we have deserted them. p. 56.

Reasons for the Repeal of the Tests, etc. ^. 16, 87.
THey ought to be taken away, because they are unreasonable and unjust, etc. p.
3.

It Is highly necessary, that these Tests be abrogated; this appears, in that
the King desires it, the Papists crave it, and the Interest of the whole Nation
requires it: We are all then in Prudence to consent thereto. -- We have been
Taught to entertain very hard Thoughts of their Religion, and as we learnt to
speak, we stammer'd out, No Papist, No Popery, whence sprang this aversion?
mainly, I am sure, from our apprehension, that Blood and Cruelty attended it;
the Roman Catholics, tho sure of the King, are willing to concert and
accommodate Matters with us, and to deliver us from what we so dreaded, their
Persecution upon the most reasonable and equal terms, of being freed from the
danger of ours; I hope, our established Church will bethink her self, and
better consider things, than by her stubborn Adhesion to her Laws of Severity
and Force, to incline us to love Popery, when we find it gentle and casy to be
entreated. p. 3.

The King promised to maintain her, so he does, and will undoubtedly persevere
to do, if She runs not her Self into a Forfeiture of the Royal Grace, etc.

Let her cease to be angry, and rebuke her Sons very unmannerly Sitting in
Judgment upon, and censuring, the King's Proceedings; let her, I say, be Wise,
and know her Duty and Interest; the Advice is requisite, She being at this day
tampering to draw the Phanaticks into an Association, against the Kings most
Gracious purpose to them and all his People. It is Insinuated, that undue and
false Returns may be made [of Parliament-men] etc. but surely there lives not a
Man without the Pale of the Church, we are talking of, so wicked, as to think
the King does not detest the Thought of so base a Practice: He that whispers a
thing so greatly below the King, will, for ought I know, suggest, that to
Morrow His Majesty will Return us an House of Commons from Hounsloe-Heath:
Discourses of this kind may not be heard, but in Bedlam or Newgate, therefore
Adjourning them thither for Cure or Correction, etc. p. 6, 7, 8.

Here follow a few Words taken out of some of their Addresses to the late King.
Viz.
We pray God to Bless the King, His Royal Family, and People, with Grace and
Peace, and that after a long and prosperous Reign here, He may receive a better
Crown among the Blessed. Land. Ap. 1687. Which is the Prayer of, etc. We cannot
but with grateful Hearts both admire, and acknowledge, the Providence of God
that made the Kings retiring into our Country [i. e. Scotland, 1679.] give a
happy turn to his Affairs, to the defeating and disappointing the Designs of
his Enemies. -- We do justly conceive our selves obliged by a special tie, to
praise God for his Goodness; in carrying the King through, and over, all his
Troubles; since by the same Providence, and at the same time, by which the Lord
began in that more observable manner to evidence His Care of him, He made him
the happy Instrument to deliver us from our Troubles, so that the Prosperity of
his Affairs, and our peaceable fruition of the exercise of our Consciences,
bears the same Date, etc. June 1687. We pray God Save the King, and deliver
Him out of all His Enemies hands, both Spiritual Enemies and Temporal Enemies,
Amen. Aug. 1687. The foregoing are only their own Words without any
Observations or Remarks, that being left for themselves, or some others, to do
for them, and are but a part of what they have Writ against the Papists, when
under; and on their behalf, when uppermost.

FINIS.

