Mineralogia: OR, An Account of the Preparation, manifold Virtues and Uses of a
Mineral Salt, both in Physic and Chyrurgery; which is so safe, pleasant and
effectual in its Operation, that it may be taken by those of all Ages and
Constitutions with great Benefit, and without Danger of the least Prejudice.

To which is added, A short Discourse of the Nature and Uses of the Sulphurs of
Minerals and Metals, in curing the most Chronical and pertinacious Diseases.

By Chr. Pack, Philo-Chymico-Medicus.

LONDON: Printed and are to be sold by D. Newman, at the Kings-Arms in the
Poultry, 1693.

An Account of the Virtues and Use of Sal Solutivum, Prepared only by Chr.
Pack, at his Laboratory, next Door to the Gun in Little-Moor-Fields near
Moorgate.
AFTER many years Experience of the virtues and worth of this Medicine, in
helping and curing many Diseases, to which the Body of man is subject, which of
late I have also much improved and exalted in its Virtues; I have determined at
length for a public Benefit (and to excuse my self from writing many Letters)
to publish the following Account of it.

I. It is a Salt prepared of Mineral Subjects, by apt Mediums purified and
reconciled to the Archeus, or Aura vitalis of the Humane Body, (which is the
adequate object of Medicine) and thereby becomes a Salutiferous remedy enobled
with Virtues sufficient for the curing of many Diseases. This Definition
arises from its Subject, Object, and End.

II. It is neither an Acid nor an Alcaly, but a Salt of a middle Nature, being
able to pass the several Digestions unchanged, and in its passage to resolve
and absterge all Preternatural Coagulations, for which Reason I call it Sal
Solutivum.

III. It is endowed with those Four general Properties, viz. Cathartick,
Diuretic, Deobstruent, and allaying of all Preternatural heat and Acrimony:
Besides which, as I have now exalted and improved it with the noble Sulphur of
Venus, it is a general easer of Pain, and Extinguisher of Venereal Venoms, that
are not grown to a confirmed Pox, as is manifest by what it effects now in
alleviating the Pains of the Gout, Rhumatism, Toothach, Colic, Griping of the
Guts, Virulent Ghonnorhaea's, etc. beyond what it could have done heretofore.

Having thus briefly premised its Nature and Qualifications in general, for the
satisfaction of such Physicians as may desire to make use of it; I shall now
Address my self more particularly to show its Virtues and manner of using.

1. Sal Solutivum purges the gross Excrements, and most viscous Humors of the
first passages without Nauseating the Stomach, or the least griping Pains. 2.
It is singular in opening Obstructions of the Vessels and Vis^era. 3. It
purifies and invigorates the whole Mass of Blood, and restores it to i^ natural
State; for being an amicable Salt, it has admittance into the Blood, and
reaches, as Helmont says of fixed Alcalyes made Volatile, usque ad limen
quartae Digestionis. But this is denied to all ordinary purging Medicines,
which if through any inadvertency of the Archeus, they chance to slip into the
lacteal Veins, and so into the Blood; they cause griping Convulsive pains,
Stiches, Flux of Blood, Faintings, etc. till Nature has again discharged her
self of them; and so instead of purging the Blood, too often both corrupt and
exhaust it. And these two Properties are well worth the observing, being not to
be met with even in the mildest of the common Catharticks. For this cause it is
of great use in Fevers, neither disturbing the Juices, nor accending the Blood.
I have seen many Fevers proceeding from Surfeits, both in eating and drinking
quickly cured by it, and even Hectic Fevers themselves in a longer time, but
such as I judged to proceed from a Scorbutic or venereal Cause: As for those
which are wont to accompany a Pthisis, I have had no Experience of it in them,
yet I doubt not but even in those it would allay the Preternatural heat.

But that this Medicine may be given to the best advantage, it is necessary in
the Administering it, to have regard to two special Intentions, which Physicians
are wont to observe in the curing Diseases, viz. 1. The purging the first
passages, the Stomach and Intestines of gross Excrements and Filths. 2. To open
and dissolve all Stagnant and obstructing matter in the Viscera, as the
Pancreas, Mesentery, Liver, Spleen, Reins and Womb, and to correct and purify
the Blood, when it decllnes from its natural Crasis. The ordinary Dose of this
Salt to purge according to the first Intention (which only is purging according
to common Acceptance) is from half an Ounce to six Drams, dissolved in a Pint,
or a Pint and a half of warm Posset Drink, new Whey, or pure Water, and drank
in the Morning fasting. Those that cannot take such a quantity of Liquor, may
dissolve their Dose in half a Pint (which will presently dissolve it if it be
warmed) and drink another half Pint presently after it, and a third half an
hour after that, and fast till Dinnertime, except the Patient have a mind to
take a Porrenger of Water Gruel, or thin Broth; neither will a draught of Ale,
or a Dish of Tea at all hinder, but promote the working of it. Those who like
neither Posset Drink, Whey or Water, or want the Convenience of getting them,
may take it in Ale, and it will do well enough; although in some few Persons I
have known it cause a Drowsiness when taken in spirituous Liquors; the Reason
of which is its partaking of the Anodyne Narcotick Sulphurs of Mars and Venus,
which readily associate themselves with the vegetable Sulphurous Spirit, by
which they are quickly carried to the Brain: yet the use which may be made of
this in some Cases, is not inconsiderable as is well known to Physicians.

This Medicine does not only gently dissolve and expurge the Excrements of the
Stomach and Guts, but it also corrects the violence of all Preternatural
Purges, if you put but two Drams of it in their infusion, or drink the same
quantity in a draught of warm Posset Drink after Pills which gripe and operate
Churlishly; It has also a power of stopping the working of Vomits, some of
which greatly incommode the Stomach, by Vellicating its Membranes, and
impressing them with a Nauceating Character; to prevent which let two or three
Drams of the Sal Solutivum, be dissolved in half a Pint of cold water, and
drank about half an hour before the Vomit is taken. Or in case a Vomit be taken
which works too violently, or too long, that is when the Stomach is wholly
emptied, and yet the Patient continues to reach, let a Dram and a half, or two
Drams of the Salt be dissolved in a large Glass of warm Posset Drink, or rather
warm Water, (because Posset Drink may at that time be disgustful) and be drank
off. Do the same when a Vomit has done working, and yet the Patient finds a
swimming or Giddiness in the Head, or a Nauseousness, or disposition to Vomit,
for the Salt will free the Tunicles of the Stomach, and contract and
corroborate them, precipitating the offending Particles per inferior a; but I
add not this to encourage any Body to meddle with such Physic without due
Advice, but to show the safety and efficacy of the Medicine. N.B. This Salt
never leaves the Belly bound as the common Purges do, but always soluble, and
is the best Remedy that I know against a Costive Temper of Body.

The second Intention is to alter, and open Obstructions in the Liver, Spleen,
Pancreas, Mesentery, Reins, Bladder, and Womb; from which proceed many tedious
and stubborn Diseases, as the Scurvy, Dropsy, Jaundies, Hypocondriack
Melancholy, Vapors, Greensickness, Rhumatism, inveterate Headache,
Restlessness, Sleepiness, Vertigo, Phrenzy, Cramps, Convulsions, Internal
Inflammations, and Aposthumes, Piles, Exulcerations of the Kidneys and Bladder,
Gravel, stoppage of Urine, etc. together with many others arising from
Obstructions, and Acrimony of the Blood, and viral Juices.

In all which the chief end of this Medicine being to resolve and attenuate the
thick and stagnant Juices, or Excrements of the several Digestions which lie in
the smallest passages, to Contemper any excess of quality in the Bile, Lympha,
and Blood, by mingling it self with the Chyle and Blood, and insinuating it
self into the more inward recesses of the Body, this method is to be observed.

First purge the Body with half an Ounce, five or six Drams of the Salt
(according to the Patients are and strength) dissolved either in Posset Drink,
Whey, or Water, as you please, to carry off the gross Excrements of the first
passages, and to make way for the better Penetration and distribution of the
Remedy into all the parts of the Body. If the first Dose purge not to your
mind, take another the next day, that the aforesaid end may be answered. Then
dissolve the same quantity of the Salt you gave to purge in a Quart or three
Pints of pure water, and let the Patient take a third part of it the same
Night, after the purge three hours after Supper, another third part the next
Morning early before he rises, that he may sleep upon it, and the remaining
third part in the Daytime between Meals, and this to be continued for a Week,
Fortnight or three Weeks, etc. as occasion shall require. But because some
Patients cannot drink any considerable quantity of water, without nauseating or
other inconveniency to their Bodies, the Physician may accommodate the quantity
of water to his own liking, provided he order but enough to dissolve it well,
that it may not taste too strong.

This Salt answers all the ends of the Mineral-Waters, both purging and Chaly
beat; besides, and beyond which it has some Advantages, one of which is the
certainty of its Nature and Operations, the which cannot be affirmed of any of
the Mineral Springs; seeing that there may be a growth, or accidental Concourse
of various matter in the passages of the Earth, which may variously impregnate
the waters passing through them, and make some Alteration in their Properties.
Besides the Patient is obliged to drink a large quantity of the Mineral Waters,
or they will not work, which if they do not, they cause Gripings, Stiches,
Sleepiness, Feverish Dispositions, and other inconveniences, arising from the
Crudity of the Minerals, as well as from the quantity of the Water; especially
the Chalybeat, which also require purging besore, and after a Course of
drinking them, to prevent some hurts, which otherwise might arise by their use;
which every one is excused from in the use of this Salt, for where a large
quantity of water is not convenient for the Patient, a Quart, a Pint and a
half, yea even a Pint may serve, this being also its own purge: Besides it
being free from Mineral Crudity, and wholly pure and friendly to Nature, can
never do hurt, but always good, by being long retained in the Body. Nor is it
to be reckoned amongst the smallest Advantages to those who are confined to a
place by Business, or by the Narrowness of their Fortune, that they may take
this artificial Mineral-Water, at all times of the year, and in all places,
without loss of time, hinderance of business, or the charge of Coach-hire to
and from the Wells, or more chargeable maintaining themselves there.

If you would use it instead of the purging Waters, as Epsome, Dulwich,
Northall, etc. dissolve six Drams, or three quarters of an Ounce of the Salt,
in the same quantity of pure Spring Water, as would be fit for the Patient of
any of the purging Waters, viz. from three Pints to three Quarts, ordering him
to drink it by degrees in the Morning, in the space of an hour and a half, or
two hours, and to walk, or use some Exercise in the open Air (provided it be in
the Summer time) and to order himself as if he were drinking the Mineral
purging Waters.

But if you would have it answer the end of the Chalybeat waters; as the
German-Spaw, Tunbridge, Islington, etc. viz. to purge but little by Stool, but
to alter and open Obstructions, then use it as in the second general Direction
already given.

Now although this Salt be of great use and service in very many diseases, yet
I have by long Experience observed, that in some it is specifically potent; as
in the Scurvy, Jaundies, Dropsy, Hysterical Suffocations, Melancholy Vapors,
Green Sickness, stoppage of the Menses, Piles, Ghonnorrhaea, Colic,
Diarrhaea, Bloody Flux, Griping of the Guts, Worms of all sorts, old Head-achs,
Inflammations and Rhumes of the Eyes, Itch, and Choleric Eruptions of the
Skin, stoppage and heat of Urine. In all which Cases I may truly say, it has
signalized it self, and often exceeded my Expectations. And although from the
Directions already given, any one may easily collect the way of giving it in
those Diseases, yet for the public Good I shall be somewhat more particular.

In the Scurvy, I first purge the Patient with a Dose or two of Sal Solutivum,
as at the beginning of the second general Direction; then I dissolve an Ounce
of it in a Quart of pure water, by shaking them together in a Bottle till all
the Salt is dissolved, and then order the Patient to drink half a Pint of the
same at night going to Bed, and another half Pint early in the Morning, so that
half an Ounce of the Salt is taken in a day, and this I continue daily for a
Month or six Weeks, according to the age and strength of the Disease, ordering
the Patient besides to drink a pure and well rectified Volatile Spirit of Salt,
in all his drink as well at meats as at other times, ten or twelve Drops at a
time or more, so that he may drink the quantity of forty or fifty Drops in a
day, (which Spirit of Salt may be had at my House sealed up in Glasses with
printed Directions for its use. Price of each Glass a Shilling) for such as
have the Scurvy manifested in their Mouths, by Soreness of the Gums, and their
readiness to bleed upon every light occasion; I order an Ounce of the salt to
be dissolved in a Pint of warm water, and the Mouth to be well washed with some
of that water warm two or three times a day.

In the Jaundies, I give it in Summer in Water or Whey, in Winter in warm
Possetdrink, every other day five or six Drams, or two days together (according
as it works) then intermit a day and give it again, and on the intermitting
days half the Dose, continuing the use of it, till the Yellowness and Faintness
cease.

In the Dropsy, I give it in the same manner as in the Jaundies, only in a
less quantity of the Vehicle. I have cured both the Ascites and the Anasarca
with it, but thwether it will do ought in a Tympany, I know not; having never
given it that I remember in that Disease, for in that I am wont to use my
Arcanum Universale, Species Universalis, and Tinctura Regalis. But in an
Ascites, whether it proceed from an Obstruction of the Liver, Kidneys, or
Ureters, or from a Rupture of the Vasa Lymphatica, from their two great
Repletion; (from which last I persuade my self more Dropsies do arise than from
any other cause) this Medicine answers all the Intentions of cure, because it
not only opens all Obstructions, and pleasantly reduces the water, but also by
its strengthening and Balsamic Virtue, Conglutinates the breaches of those
Vessels, and Remedies the too great laxity of the Viscera, having all the
Virtues of a complete vulnerary Medicine, as I shall have occasion to show by
and by, when I come to speak of its external use.

In Hysterical Suffocations, commonly called Fits of the Mother, and Melancholy
Vapors, I give two or three Drams dissolved in a Pint and a half, or a Quart
of pure water upon the approach of the Fit, or if that cannot be, as soon as
the Fit is off, and in the time of the Fit (when greater quantities cannot be
got down) I order the Dissolution of the Salt in water to be given by
Spoonfulls. The next day I purge with the whole Dose dissolved in a Quart of
water. And for as much as those suffocating Fumes are caused by Obstructions,
and Fuliginous matter remaining in the small Vessels, where they ferment from
time to time, causing a puffing up, and Sense of fullness (especially sometime
after eating) it is necessary to take the Salt daily for sometime, to open and
carry off the Obstructions as in the second general Direction; by this means
their frequent Returns may be prevented, by extirpating the Evil which
frequently (in those dismal oppressions to the poor female Sex) is but only
palliated.

In the Green Sickness in Maids, it is necessary to dissolve an Ounce of the
Salt in a Quart of pure water, and to take half a Pint of the water at night
going to Bed, and the same quantity early the next Morning, continuing this
Course daily for three, four, or five Weeks if need be, not omitting to purge
the Patient first with a full Dose or two at the beginning, as in the second
general Direction, as also two or three days before the full of the Moon, that
Nature may be the more effectually helped in this way of operating. Where the
Menses are only stopped, it is to be taken as in the second general Direction for
Obstructions; besides which the Patient is to be purged once or twice with the
full Dose, two or three days before her monthly time of Expectancy. This
Medicine is also of singular use for those Women whose Months are about to
leave them, in preventing many disorders which are occasioned thereby; in which
case it is to be taken once or twice to the quantity of half an Ounce, or five
or six Drams for three or sour Months successively, about the time when they
ought to flow. I have known some Women of Fifty years of Age, who have by the
use of this Medicine seemed again in that respect to grow young. I have also
easily and effectually with this Salt delivered some Women of false Great
Bellies.

About two Months since, I gave three quarters of an Ounce of Sal Solutivum to
a Maid about twenty one years of Age, who had a very ill habit of Body, and a
pale sickly Complexion, having never had the Course of Nature in due order or
quantity, and for some Months past totally suppressed. She was now seized with
a grievous pain in her Right side, emulating an illegitimate Plurisie, which
(as she told me) had frequently assaulted her for some Months past, for the
removing which Pain I gave her the Salt, which gave her seven or eight Stools
before Noon without any Sickness or Griping, by which time her Pain was quite
gone out of her side: She eat some Dinner, and about two hours afterward
discharged her Stomach by Vomit of a great quantity of filthy green Matter,
after which she had two or three Stools more, with which her Menses came down
plentifully, which with her often going to the Vault occasioned her catching of
Cold, and a sore Throat. I ordered she should have somewhat warm and
comfortable, and go to Bed, and keep very warm the next day which she did; the
Night following (she still complaining of her Throat, and a Soreness all over
her Bones, (as she phras'd it) I ordered her ten Grains of my Pilula Balsamica
which sweat her very plentifully; during her sweating her natural Purgations
were but little, but as soon as that was over they returned again, continuing
for a due time, since which she has remained well.

It is a singular Remedy for the Worms of all sorts, killing them and resolving
them into Slime, and purging their putrid Matter out of the Body. To Children
from three years of Age to seven, I give from a Dram and a half to three Drams,
from seven to fourteen, half an Ounce, from fourteen to twenty, or more, from
half an Ounce, to three quarters of an Ounce, or six Drams dissolved in fair
Water, Whey or Posset Drink, and continued every day for a Week together. Where
it is difficult to get Children to take it, a little Sugar may be added to the
Dissolution to make it the pleasanter. My Volatile Spirit of Salt also
effects the same in a longer time in those Children which cannot be persuaded
to take the Salt, which they may take in all their drink, and not discern it.
The Salt and this Spirit used together are still more effectual.

In the Piles I give a quarter of an Ounce of the Salt dissolved in half a Pint
of water in Summer time, or warm Posset Drink in Winter, which just keeps the
Belly soluble, and by dulcifying the Acrimony of the protruded Blood takes away
the Pain and Inflammation; besides which, if the Piles be outward, I order them
to be often embrocated with my Aqua Phagadenica, and fine Rags to be laid upon
them wet in the same water: but if they be within the Anus, then I order the
same water to be warmed, and injected by a Syringe twice or thrice a day, and a
Rag three or sour times double well wetted in the same to be applied outwardly,
and by this Course the Piles by degrees dwindle and shrink up like dried
Grapes. This Course has never failed me, but has been effectual even when the
Piles have been inveterate and fistulated. To those who are subject to the
Piles, I advise the daily use of my Volatile Spirit of Salt in all their Drink,
to the quantity of thirty or forty Drops a day, it is far better in this
Disease than any Diet-drink.

In Virulent Ghennerheas or Claps, I give first six Drams of the Salt dissolved
in fair water in Summer, or in a Pint of warm Possetdrink in Winter, ordering
the Patient to drink another Pint within an hour after, then I give half an
Ounce so dissolved every Morning in a Pint of the Vehicle continuing it till
all the heat and sharpness is gone, and the Gleet fit to be stopped, which
sometimes will be in a Week, sometimes a Fortnight or three Weeks, according as
it is of shorter or longer standing, or the Diseasyfying-power milder or
stronger; for it pleasantly and effectually educeth the venereal Venom,
purifyeth the Seed, and strengthens the Spermatick Vessels. But when the
Issuing is fit to be stopped, I give my Balsamum ad Ghonnorhaeam every night at
going to Bed, from twenty to forty Drops mixed with a little Sugar, and half an
Ounce of the Salt every other Morning. But where a Ghonnorhaea has not been
taken in time, or has been unduly stopped, so that it be turned into an
incipient Pox, and I find by giving six or seven Doses of the Salt that it
cannot reach it, then I have recourse to purging and sweating, alternately with
my Manna Mercurii, and Aurum vitae Bezoardicum, which usually effects the Cure
to satisfaction But in a Chonnorhaea unduly stopped, (known for the most part at
the first by a painful Tumor in the Groyn) when it has not exceeded a Month,
three, four, or five Doses of this Salt will set it a running again, and
aftewards Cure it, being used as above with the Balsome, but in longer time. I
have known some who have fallen into the hands of Men either unskilful in this
matter, or worse, who have endeavored to discuss those Tumors, which
themselves have made by their unseasonable stopping of a Ghonnorhaea, and have
sometimes effected it so well, as when the Patient has thought himself cured
of a Clap, he has soon after been attacked by the Symptoms of the Pox, and so
the last Error of the Physician was worse than the first.

In the Chollick or Griping of the Guts, where there is great pain, I dissolve
six Drams or three quarters of an Ounce of the Salt in a Quart of hot spring
water, and order the Patient to drink three or four Glasses in the space of
half an hour, as hot as he can: But if there be Vomiting let it be drank more
leisurely, viz. A quarter of a Pint once in a quarter of an hour till the
Vomiting cease, then take notice how much of the Medicine has been vomited up,
and give so much again, that the Patient may have the full Dose. If in the
water you intend to dissolve the Salt in, you first boil the bruised Seeds of
Anise, sweet Fennel, Carraway and Coriander, a Dram or two Drams of each, to a
Quart of water, it will be the better, because those Seeds have a peculiar
Virtue of pacifying the Exorbitant fury of the Pylorus; you may put in the Salt
in the boiling, which will extract the Virtues of the Seeds, sooner and better
than water alone can do. But beware that you neither boil, infuse or warm any
Liquor in which the Salt is, in Brass or Copper Vessels, but in Silver, Tin or
Earth, lest it attract from the the Metal somewhat disagreeable to the Stomach.
It usually eases the pain in two or three hours time, sometimes sooner, but
where the Stomach will not retain it, or it does not overcome and expel the
obstructing matter, in a few hours time, I give a second Dose, and if that fail
(as I have some few times seen in the dry Gripes and Wind Chollick) then I have
recourse to my Arcanum Universale, which (Blessed be the Almighty) has not
that I remember ever failed me. Note that after the Pains are allayed, it is
necessary to purge the Body diverse times, with the Salt dissolved in the
aforementioned Decoction of Seeds, to carry off the remaining Excrements, which
otherwise, retaining a diseasy Ferment, may soon cause a fresh disorder. But in
a bilious Chollick, known by bitterness of the Mouth, Vomiting, Yellowness of
the Skin, etc. you may leave out the Seeds and give it in water only, the Seeds
being more precisely adapted to the help of the Wind Chollick, Gripes, Illiack
Passion, etc. yet they are endowed with a general Virtue of pacifying the
Pylorus.

In a Diarrhaea or common Looseness, boil some Bran in pure water, strain the
Decoction, and in a Pint of it dissolve three Drams of the Salt, and drink it
up at twice, at three or four hours distance: do this three or four times over
if need be. But in a Dysentery or Bloody Flux, I give the Salt dissolved in a
Decoction of red Rose leaves: half an Ounce a day as long as it is required,
after both which, the Patient must be purged with the whole Dose dissolved in a
Quart of the same Decoction, in which it was given before to sweeten the
Acrimony. In the Bloody Flux, I have given six Drams of it Clyster-wise in the
foresaid Decoction, besides giving it at the Mouth by two Drams at a time twice
a day, and that with great Success.

In Headachs, Inflammations and Rhumes in the Eyes, I give five or six Drams
every other day so long as there is need, many of which it has taken away at
three or four times taking. But as an Auxiliary Topic, in Inflammations and
Rhumes of the Eyes, I order a few drops of my Aqua Opthalmica, to be dropped into
the Eyes two or three times a day.

In the Itch, Botches, Boyls, and other Choleric Eruptions of the Skin, I give
half an Ounce or five Drams every day, dissolved in a Quart or three Pints of
water or New Whey in the Morning, as the Mineral-Waters for a Week, Fortnight,
Three weeks, or a Month together, as the greatness of the Disease requires: In
those Cases it cannot be enough commended. It has cured some that have been
adjudged Leprous. In those Diseases I order together with it my Volatile Spirit
of Salt to be taken inwardly, as in the Scurvy, and my Aqua Phagadenica to be
used outwardly, by washing with it twice a day.

In Heat or Gravel in the Kidneys, or stoppage or heat of Urine, first I purge
the Body with one whole Dose, then dissolve an Ounce in a Quart of water in
Summer, or warm Posset Drink in Winter, and let the Patient drink half a Pint
at night going to Bed, and also early in the Morning; besides which I order
thirty or forty drops a day of my Volatile Spirit of Salt, continuing the use
of those, till all the Preternatural heat be gone, the Obstructions opened, or
Gravel cease to come away.

Thus I have in as brief a manner as I could, set down my Experiences of the
internal use of this Medicine, wherein I am not Conscious to my self, that I
have in any thing commended it beyond its just merit. I shall in the next place
and somewhat concerning its external Virtues and Use; to which by way of
Conclusion and Confirmation, I shall subjoyn the Observations of some learned
and skilful Physicians concerning its Virtues, which they have been so kind to
Communicate to me for the public Good.

Of the External use of Sal Solutivum.
This Salt has its peculiar Excellencies in Chyrurgery, as well as in Physic;
it presently stops bleeding; cures an ordinary Wound, whether incised or
contused, at one single dressing, but if the Wound be large and lacerated
(provided it be timely and duly applied) at two or three dressings, as I my
self have diverse times seen. It takes away all Inflammation and pain from the
Wound in half an hours time, never suffering it to come to Suppuration, but
cures it by the first Intention. There are three ways of preparing it, to apply
it to Wounds.

The first is to take some of the Chrystalline Salt in the Summer time, and
spread it thin in a broad Glass dish, or Earthen one glazed, and expose it to
the Sun all day, stirring it now and then, and covering it with a clean Paper,
to keep any dust from falling into it, and in a few days you will have it come
to a Powder like fine Flower, when it is brought to this state, I believe it
will perform all things which are rightly ascribed to the Sympathetick powder;
but this I leave and recommend to the Trial of the ingenious; among which, if
any shall be so generous to Communicate to me any effects of this Salt, which
may be of further use to the public, they shall be thankfully received, and
again improved to that end. The Second way is to put some of the Salt into
double Papers, about half an Ounce or less in a paper, and wear it some time in
the Pocket, that the warmth of the Body may supply the place of the Suns heat,
and in like manner bring it to an impalpable powder, and this may be done in
the Wintertime without attendance or trouble. The third way is to dissolve
four Ounces of the Salt in a Quart of warm water, put into a Bottle and shaking
it till it is all dissolved, and keeping it close stopped for use. The first way
it is most powerful, the last, or the least Efficacy, but either way will well
serve.

For a small Wound or Hurt take a little of the powder of the first or second
Preparation, and lay it upon the Wound pretty thick, and bind it on close, so
that no Air may come in, and let it continue on till it is healed, which will
quickly be, but it is convenient to let it remain on for two or three days,
that it may be confirmed. If at any time when you take off the dressing, you
find in a Cut that it is not sufficiently consolidated, or in a Bruise, that
all the Soreness and Blackness is not gone, presently apply a little more of
the Medicine, and let it lie till the Hurt is quite well. But if you have not
the powder of the first or second Preparation, then take a pledget of Lint or
fine Tow, or a fine linen Rag three or four times double, which let be well
and thoroughly wetted with the water of the third Preparation, and apply that to
the Hurt as the other, which once in twelve hours or oftener, if need be, you
may moisten all over with some of the same water, without opening it if the
Wound be large. Where the Wound is large or lacerated, first let it be clean
washed with warm Urine, so that it may be freed from Dirt or other extraneous
Matter, then take such a quantity of the powder, as you think necessary well to
cover the Wound, and mix it with so much of the White of an Egg (first well
beat till it be thin) as will make it into the Consistency of a pretty thin
Liniment, which spread upon fine Tow, or fine Linen, and apply it to the Wound
with convenient Bandage, letting it remain two or three days before you open
it, except in that time you find any considerable pain, which if you do, it is
a Sign that the Air has access to the Wound, and then open it and presently
apply a fresh dressing, as close as possibly you can. Note, that if there be in
the Wound such torn ragged Flesh, that has taken Air, and you judge incapable
of Conglutination, take it off with your Scissers before you apply the
dressing. If you have not the powder, then use the water as above directed. The
powder will answer all the Intentions of cure in an Amputation, being duly
applied with good Bandage.

It cures Ruptures in Children, if the Rupture be first put up, and then the
powder mixed with the White of an Egg (as for a Wound) and applied to the
Scrotum or Navel (as the Rupture is) with convenient Bandage, and renewed every
fourth day, and the Salt daily taken inwardly dissolved in a Decoction of
Comfry-Roots, so much as may just keep the Belly loose, but not purge; for the
straining of the Abdominal Muscles in going to Stool is a great hinderance to
the Agglutinating of Ruptures. Suppose the Child be two or three years of Age,
dissolve half an Ounce of the Salt in a pint of the Decoction, and give the
Child three Spoonfuls of it Night and Morning, renewing the Decoction and Salt
against that is done, and continue the Course for six weeks, and by Gods
blessing the Cure will be effected. If the Child be younger two Spoonfuls may
be enough, if elder, you must give it more according to the Rules before given,
varied with Discretion.

It also effects the same in Fractures of Bones, being used in the same manner,
both inwardly and outwardly, for it powerfully assisteth Nature, in forming the
Callous, and also preventeth Fevers, which not seldom happen upon those
Accidents.

Half a Grain or a Grain at a time, of the Powder may be blown up into the
Nostrils daily Night and Morning, to serve as an Errbine or sneezing Medicine,
for it pleasantly and copiously evacuateth superfluous Moisture, by which it
cures Catarrhs, it being also taken inwardly every other day for some time, in
such a quantity as may give three or four Stools, which is ordinarily done with
half an Ounce. It gives present ease in the Toothach, about a Dram of the
powder being tied up in a fine Rag, and applied to the pained Tooth; but this
is to be understood when the Toothach proceeds from a sharp Humor, irritating
the Nerves which are inserted into their Roots, but not of the pain of a hollow
or rotten Tooth, excepting that in those it may give some short ease: but it is
necessary besides to purge two or three times with the full Dose of the Salt,
to dulcifie and carry off the sharpness which causes the Pain.

I could here set down many more Uses of this benign Salt; but because they are
not precisely useful to a Physician or Surgeon, I shall leave them to some
other opportunity, till I see what Reception the things I have already
published concerning it, will meet with, and subjoyn the following Accounts
which I have received of it from others.

Sir,
I Have only this day received your Letter, and if you writ a former one to me,
I assure you, that it never came to my hands, and therefore must have
miscarried, neither have I had any notice of your Intentions, in making of your
Sal Solutivum more public; only your old Acquaintance, and my worthy Friend
Mr. T. did lately acquaint me, that you designed to afford it at a lower Rate
than hitherto you have done.

I could have wished, that you had always Sold it at a more easy Price, for
then it had been no small advantage to the meaner Sort of people, amongst whom
the happy Effects of it, might have been more largely experienced, than their
mean Purses could admit of; it being one of the most General, Safe and useful
Medicines that ever I have prescribed; not only in those Cases wherein you so
much recommend it, but likewise in diverse others, in which it may be, you have
not hitherto made any Trial of it.

In Cholicks and the Griping of the Guts, where few purging Medicines take
place, it is s^arce credible, with how much ease it carries off those peccant
fermenting Humors out of the Bowels, removes Pains, and indeed instar
incantamanti, affords more sure relief then Gallens Cupping-Glass ever did.

It is of Excellent use in the Strangury, Gravel, and Nephritick Pains, if
continued for some time, and given in a proper Bochet for the usual Drink.

Against Worms, in all persons, and of any age, it is a Medicine of singular
Efficacy, and no less powerful than pleasing to Children, when sweetened with a
proper Syrup to promote its quicker Operation.

It is the very best Medium to prepare Chaly beat Medicines by, that I yet
could ever find, and when intimately joined with Mars, which by a proper (...)
is easily and readly performed, it affords the best, and most effectual
Remedies, in Cachexia, affectione Hypocondriaca, Mensium suppressione, chlorosi
sive palore Virgineo etiam in ipso scorbuto (...).

In excessive Costiveness, where the Bowels are parched up, and inflamed, their
motion inverted, and thence those miserable Pains of the Iliack Passion; and
where other Glisters though often repeated have no effect, a sufficient quantity
of this Salt, dissolved in decocto communi pro clystere, will certainly and
happily effect the Cure.

Externally in all Wounds and Ulcers, it is the most gentle and best Mundifying
and cleansing Medicament that I think is extant; and all Men of Learning or
Experience, will assent, that that is the great, if not the only Intention
required in these Maladies, and that he who can happily answer that one
Indication, without Corrosives or doloriferous Medicines, will easily keep off
all evil Attendants, and then Nature its self will prove the surest and
swiftest Digestive, Sarcotick and Epuletick Medicus.

There is one Distemper, which it seems was very rare in Gallen's days, and
which he relates only twice to have seen, though then arrived at a very great
Age, viz. a Dyabetes; but the Debaucheries of our Times has rendered it more
common amongst us. I having been sufficiently puzzled in two of my Patients
afflicted with it, notwithstanding my utmost Care, in prescribing the best of
Medicines, and exactly following the Methods of the most learned Physicians,
though wholly without Success, till at last I began to consider of Sal Solutivum,
and its constituating Parts; and then by a very different Method, from the
usual way of exhibiting it, it had in both Cases that happy effect, which gives
me some hopes, that if rightly and duly ordered, it may prove almost as
effectual in that deplorable Distemper, as the Cortex in intermitting Fevers.

I shall only give you this one more of my Observations about it, and it is in
a Disease, which Catharticks instead of relieving generally render more
violent, and though administered even in the intervals of Fits, and after a long
time of Cessation, yet usually does with greater violence cause their Returns;
I mean Hystericks, vulgarly called Fits of the Mother: in which I have scarce
ever known this Salt to fail, being given in a large Proportion of a very
easy, though most proper Vehicle; it is then strangely grateful, and even in the
taking, as well as in the Operation, does with mighty ease, yield an incredible
relief in that troublesome and vexatious Distemper, both to the Patient and
Physician.

Thus Sir I have, though very concisely, answered your Request, and amongst my
Observata passim rariora, tum Medica tum Chyrurgica, (which as my time will
permit, I am preparing for the Press.) I shall say much more concerning this
Salt, both as to its Doses, proper Vehiculi, ways of Exhibiting, times of
Administering, and rightly applying it to diversity of Constitutions, for
without a due Consideration of all these, the greatest Physicians would scarce
differ from Empericks, and must only Act like Old women. I am,

Warwick March 11th. 1692. Sir, Your humble Servant, W. Johnston.

An Abstract of a Letter touching Sal Solutivum.
I Have much to say in the Commendation of Sal Solutivum in general, but
especially on its transcendent Effects (by the Blessing of the Almighty) on two
late Patients of mine; the one in a putrid Fever, occasioned by a Surfeit; the
other of an Athletick habit of Body, being Asthmatick, and afflicted with a
painful Tumor in Ano.

The first of these Patients had been under the hands of two other Physicians,
for seven or eight days, who after they had skinn'd him alive left him to
combat with Death, as impossible to be cured. The method they took was this,
first they prescribed him a Sudorifick, ordering the Sweat to be promoted for
several hours, the same Evening they gave him a Clyster, the second day another
Clyster, the third day another, after which they opened a Vein in his Arm, not
omitting Cordials, Night draughts, etc. After his second Clyster he fell into
gripings of the Bowels, then they followed him with more appropriate Clysters,
and other Medicines inwardly adhibited for that purpose. After bleeding he fell
delirious, even to a full Distraction, to remedy which they blistered him in
diverse places, but all in vain, which they seeing, put him under the Sentence
of Death and so left him. In this condition he had remained several days when I
was sent for to him. When I came, I greatly blamed the Physicians to their
Faces, for that they judging his Disease to arise from a Surfeit, had not in
the first place discharged the Viscera of Concoction, and not to have drawn the
Crudities by Clysters into the Guts, and then for their impertinent and ill
timed Sweating of him, but above all for their bleeding him, which soon sucked
in the Defilements of a corrupted Chyle into the Veins, and put the whole Mass
of Blood into a Ferment. They made little opposition to the Charge, and the
sole care of the Patient was put upon me. He was still in a distracted
Condition, and his Eyesight quite taken away, yet finding by his pulse that he
had strength enough to bear the Sal-Solutivum, I gave him a Dose, which in an
hour gave him a motion to Stool, and within four hours gave him six Stools to
my great satisfaction; about the end of which time the Patient fell into a
sound and quiet Sleep, I then again feelling his pulse, told his Relations he
would have no more raving Fits, which (praised be the Almighty) accordingly
happened, nor did I besides this Administer any thing, but a little Cordial
impregnated with your Elixir Proprietatis volatile to his full Recovery.

Being just now sent for to visit a Patient, I have not time to write more,
concerning those two Cures above said, but the Persons are now both in good
Health.

Aug. 4th, 1692. Yours F. B.

An Abstract of another Letter from the same Physician.
AS touching the Virtue of Sal Solutivum, if I could say no more in its
Commendation, than what I have already written you touching the Case of the
young man in a Fever with Distraction; even that alone were worthy to be
published for the general Service it might do in such Cases. Yet whether it
might always have the same good effect is to be doubted, if he that Administers
it be ignorant of Natures Indications, and the true timeing of Medicines. For
when I came first to the Patient, my design was to have administered a Dose of
your Arcanum Universale, by reason of his great complaint of his Head, but
finding him very weak, and that his Eyesight was almost lost, by reason of the
vio^ence of his Fits, and hearing a croaking noise in the Intestines, I
presently changed my Intention, and instead of the Arcanum, ^ave a Dose of Sal
Solutivum, which had the ^lessed effect before written. Note that this was done
on the 11th day of his Disease.

The Salt had the like Success in the Di^emper of a young Woman, occasioned
from (...) fright by a Fall from her Horse: In the ^^st place, she was seized
with Convulsions and Hysteric Passions, which returned three ^r four times
every day for several days together; with a continual pain about the Region on
of her Spleen, but during the time of her Fits only a great pain in her Head. A
Neighboring Physicians advice was taken, who endeavored with pearl Cordials,
Anti-Convulsive and Hysteric Remedies to appease the fury of the Spirits, but
without Success; for on the contrary the Fits came on with greater violence,
and she also in the interspace grew gradually so Melancholy, till at last she
became as dumb to almost all Discourse. I being sent for, after Enquiry into
the Nature of her Disease, and the Remedies which had been Administered; I found
that she had a Suppression of her Menses for some Months before; she also being
of a Sanguine Complexion: But soon after I came, perceiving one of her Fits a
coming, I gave her thirty drops of your Elixir Epilepticum, which no sooner was
warm in her Stomach, but the Fit gradually remitted, and thereupon her Fits of
both sorts wholly ceased; but the pain of her Spleen, obstruction of the Womb,
and the abounding of Melancholy remained, neither had she the benefit of Stools
as usual. I considering it was near the prime of the Moon, advised a Clyster
for that Evening, and the next Morning six Drams of Sal Solutivum. And whereas
she was before confined to her Bed, lying with a Melancholy Eye fixed upon the
Wall, I ordered her to rise, and to be employed in some Household business, or
to walk with a Companion in the Fields, which she accordingly did. The third
day after, coming again to see her, and enquiring of the Operation of her
Physic, I was informed, that the Salt had given her two or three Vomits,
(which way of working is unusual with it) with several Stools, and yesterday
(said her Mother) her Terms came down in abundance, more than ever she had at
once in her life, and still flow; and the continual pain in her Side is abated.
Notwithstanding things promised so well, I advised her to take two or three
Doses more of the Salt, (as knowing it an Efficacious Medicine both for the
Spleen and Womb, and also in Melancholy Cases) and also proscribed her a small
Cordial of Cephalic, Splenetick and Cardiack waters, with an Addition of one
Dram of your Elixir Proprietatis Volatile. I ordered a Dose of the Salt every
other Morning, and the Cordial four or five times a day on the intermitting
days. And so by the blessing of God by the use of these only, she was in a
short time restored to perfect Health. The Convulsive and Hysteric Passions
being occasioned by an Idea of Fear, were the more excited from the defect of
the Womb, which only being restored to its right Office by the Salt, and the
pain of the Spleen removed, the Idea gradually vanished, for which reasons I do
attribute the Cure chiefly thereunto, believing since, that Sal Solutivum would
have performed the Cure alone, if the drops had not been used. But for Diseases
of the Womb, I have observed it to be extraordinary Successful, when given
about the Change or Full of the Moon, whose influence upon that part is very
remarkable.

I have by me near forty Observations more of Cures (wherein Sal Solutivum has
been used) in different Constitutions, Ferments and Diseases, as well
complicate as Simple, but because other Medicines have been used, together with
the Salt, I shall forbear to add any of them except you desire it. But as to
particulars let this following Account serve for all; it being a Cure performed
by it upon my own Body, and for the greatness of it deserves to be put as a
Frontispiece before the rest: Take it thus. At first I had a small pain for
some hours, with a gentle Inflammation, which increasing after one day broke
forth into Pimples, and some Pustles near the Spina Dorsi on the right side,
with a gradual and daily boring as with an Augur inwardly from that part, until
by the third day it had reached in a strait line, the right side of the
Umbilicus: The Superficies of each pained part, I could have covered with a
Crown piece. I concluded these to be the Symptoms of an Imposthumous or
Ulcerous ferment, to me almost equally dangerous; for considering that my
Stomach frequently abounded with a Scorbutic Acidity, I was apprehensive of
Danger, in promoting Maturation if A posthumous, and that the Acidities of the
Stomach would be as vexatious to an Ulcer, if not in the first place altered.
Under this thoughtfulness, I called to mind the Nature of Sal Solutivum, the
which although I had often administered to others, yet had not taken four Doses
thereof my Self for diverse years: However, because of its gentle Solutive
quality, and the rather for that I knew by Experience, that in a Saline
Scorbutic habit it has abated the saltness and sharpness of the Lympha.
Therefore (God me so directing) I resolved forthwith, to rely upon the sole use
of Sal Solutivum (at which time my Distemper had not exceeded four days) and
presently dissolved a Dose thereof in warm Posset Drink being early in the
Morning, which wrought very little, nor was my pains lessened, but rather
increased for that day. -- At Evening therefore I swallowed four Pills of
Species Universalis, and the pain for that Night (the Pills having no Action)
became almost intolerable. The next Morning I took a larger Dose of the Salt,
and felt in its Operation some ease before Noon: The same day at Evening I took
another Dose, which after two or three Motions gave me far greater ease than
the former, so that I rested pretty well that Night. The next Morning I found
more of Soreness and Tenderness than pain. Thus I continued to take the Salt
every Morning and Night (except the first Night that I took the Pills) till my
whole stock was spent, which was but five Doses, which I made up six by
borrowing a Dose of one of my Patients, to whom I had before prescribed some
Doses of this Medicine, by which time all my pain was happily and totally
removed. First the pain near the Navil, gradually remitted inwardly as it
increased, and afterward that near my Back. For the first three days my
Excrements continued Foetid, Crude and Slimy, the fourth day the ordure became
laudable enough, nor have I had ever since the least Symtom of pain in those
parts.

One thing worthy of Observation happened in the curing of this Distemper by
the Salt, which is, that it also met with another at that time altogether
unthought of, which I hope it has eradicated, I having been free from it ever
since: It was a Tetanus or Cramp, an old and frequent Concomitant of the
Scurvy; I either had it in my Fingers when writing, in my Throat when yawning,
in my Thighs when stretching them down in the Bed; once in almost all the
Musculous parts of my Body, occasioned by the taking of a Vomit many years
since. When on Horseback by turning my self about, it would presently seize
either my Neck, Shoulders or Side, so frequent and troublesome was it to me;
although by things inwardly taken, and outwardly applied, it would perhaps
remit its rigor for a week or more at a time sometimes, nevertheless it would
at other times within that Compass give me fresh Onsets to my exceeding great
trouble and pain: But now (blessed be the thrice glorious Name of God) I am
freed from it with a Restoration and renewing of my Health.

One thing more worthy to be observed, which I had almost forgot, is this, I
had long had a Carnous Tumur, occasioned at the first as I suppose by a wrench
or strain of my Back, this continued sometime after the beginning very painful,
after that a small Tubercle like a Wen arising from the Spine, near the upper
Vertebrae of the Loins on the left Side. Some Months after this, a stretching
pain with a Tumor, from that part reached straightway the length of the
Spleen, which gradually Tumify'd to the Magnitude of a Child's Arm, in a
Pyramidal or Conical figure, whose lesser end began from that Tubercle in the
Back, and the greater part stretching over the Spleen, ended in the Hypoconder
of that side. This Tumor was some years since mitigated by the use of
Aperitives and Emplastrum Nigrum; Nevertheless it still continued painful when
I lay on that side, besides which it would increase and decrease with the Moon:
But since my taking the six Doses of Sal Solutivum, no Symptom of that Nature
hitherto appears, nor any thing like a Tumor remains. The Cure of this, as
also of the Cramp, was indeed unthought on by me then, whose trouble and pain
were inconsiderable to that other concontain'd in the first part of this
Account, but (by the blessing of the Almighty) all things wrought together for
the benefit of,

Wivlescomb. December. 17th. 1693. Your Loving Friend to use Fra. Brain.

Dr. Pack,
I Have very often been prevented in my design of answering yours; as to the
Solutive Salt, I have found it effectual in heat of Urine more than once, I
have given it to several Persons, and to Children in a Tertain Fever, and the
second Dose has put by the Fit; I seldom gave less than half an Ounce unless to
Children under ten years; I cured a young Woman of Quality, in dolor and fluxu
Haemorrhoidum, or bleeding Piles, when all Remedies proved ineffectual, with
six Doses of it, half an Ounce to each Dose without any return; the same I did
for a Gentleman of Quality of this Country, it being an old, and obstinate
Disease; I give it to Children for the Worms, and to Persons in continual
Fevers before any Signs of Concoction, if they be restringed, or there be any
occasion for a Solutive; because it does not disorder the Humors, yet I have
known it purge some Persons very much, who have Lax Bowels and are of a weak
habit of Body; a young Maid who had a Tumor broak in the intercostal Muscles
of her Breast, which I perceived by her complaint, and by the pus that she
Cough't up, I cured, by giving her three Doses of these Chrystals; they
cleans'd, and healed the Ulcer, as I do believe; for want of Appetite, I have
given it to very many, and it always procured an Appetite to all, in two or
three Doses taking; one remarkable Experiment of the Sal Solutivum I had almost
forgot, it is this: A Gentleman in Hantshire had a Son about four years of Age,
whose Face soon after his Birth was wholly encrusted over with a Scab, which
continued notwithstandng all the Physicians endeavors, and old Women's
Medicines in the Country, till it was by me totally cleansed by Sal Solutivum.
I dissolved half an Ounce of the Salt in four Ounces of Spring Water, and
ordered the Child's Face to be washed therewith three times a day; and at the
same time the Child took the Salt in his Milk from one Dram (by degrees) to two
Drams every Morning for three Weeks together, by which means the Scab vanished,
and the Child's face became perfectly smooth, which I look upon to be an
extraordinary effect. I cannot at present think of more, because I am in have,
but I should be glad to hear what Improvement you, and some other Practitioners
have made of it; I have some of it by me, when I want, you shall hear from, Sir,

Chichester, November. 19th, 1692. Your affectionate Friend, and Servant F. House.

Sir,
YOU having acquainted me with a design you had to advance the Reputation of
wholesome and Salutiferous Medicines, that they might be brought into more
common use, in the stead of those Crude and ill prepared ones too much in
Vogue, not only with the meaner sort, upon whom Custom has prevailed; but also
those of a higher form, whose profession obliges them to do better, the health
and lives of their Patients depending upon it. I must needs acknowledge, there
is great reason for all Physicians who design the good of their Neighbors more
than their own private Interest, to study the best Remedies they are capable,
and the best methods for the Administration thereof: because, next to that of
the Cure of Souls, that of a Physician, is the most careful and worthy
Employment under Heaven: And there is as much reason to endeavor a sincere
Reformation therein, as in any thing we can set about. Now although this
present undertaking of yours cannot be supposed to effect so great a good, yet
seeing all prudent Men know that the greatest things in this World, are not
attained otherwise than Gradatim, I am not without some hopes that the public
knowledge of the use and virtues of your Sal Solutivum, may do some Service
that way, for when by repeated Experiments it shall be found, that this is one
of the best and safest of purging Medicines hitherto made use of; It may not
only serve to stop the Mouths of those who abuse the World, by telling them
that Chemical Remedies are dangerous; but may excite the more ingenious to
bring into use, those more excellent and Salutiferous Preparations your self
and others, who are Philosophers by Fire can supply them with, for the good of
their Patients. I shall therefore give in Evidence some few of those many
Testimonies I have to offer in its just defense.

About Seven years since I had a Patient whose Legs were much swelled and
pitted, with other Symptoms which commonly attend that sort of Dropsy called
Anasarca. I ordered him to take half an Ounce of your Salt, which purged him
very kindly; after that six Drams of the same, with the like Operation; and
after that he took a whole Ounce, and by those three Doses he was perfectly
cured, and so continued, without any other Medicine.

A Gentlewoman about fifty years old, being troubled with a general
indisposition of Body, a great oppression at her Stomach, with want of
Appetite, after other Medicines had proved ineffectual, I ordered her to take
of* Sal Solutivum every Morning in a draught of water, which accordingly she
did, and was cured in a bout ten days.

I have reason also to commend its use, in those who are troubled with heat and
sharpness of Urine; it commonly giving them relief as soon as most Remedies that
are used, if it be timely and prudently administered.

For the Yellow Jaundise, I believe there are few better Remedies; as will
appear by the Trial I made of it upon my self. Last Summer I was sorely
afflicted with a deep Melancholy, and after some time fell into the Yellow
Jaundise: I used those Remedies with which I cured others, but to me they
proved ineffectual: But at length I took three Doses of your Sal Solutivum, by
which (through the Blessing of God) I was perfectly cured. And perhaps it may
not be ungrateful to the Sons of Art, to give a brief Account of the Modus
operandi. The first Dose did Vomit and purge from Morning, till about 4 or 5 in
the Afternoon, which indeed was an unusual and extraordinary way of Operation,
I having never known it do so before, either in my self or others: But when I
saw that the matter ejected by Vomit was as yellow as Saffron, I was well
pleased with its Operation. I opened a Vein about six that Evening, and the
Serum Sanguinis was as yellow as the matter of the Vomit. I adventured
notwithstanding in two days time to take the same Dose as before; It did not
vomit me at all, but only gave me about four or five Stools: The last I took
gave me about three or four Stools: without that usual griping and sickness,
which commonly attends ordinary Catharticks, and so I was freed from that
afflicting Disease: as also that Melancholy which attended me: The Dose I took
was about half an Ounce at a time. I thought good to add this, as an
Encouragement to those, who understand true Medicine, that they may not think
otherwise of it than they ought; for by this it is manifest that your Salt has
variety of ways to exert its Virtue, where it meets with variety of Matter. And
although I have for some considerable time, been in the pursuit of some
Arcana's in which I have not been wholly frustrate in my Intention; and
therefore cannot be supposed fond of any single Remedy, so as to take up with
it: Yet I must confess (where purging is necessary) I would, for its safeness
and utility, recommend your Salt before any thing I yet know; because it does
good, and no hurt, to whomsoever it has been Administered, as by reiterated
Experiments has been found,

From my House in Barbican, Febr. 17th. 1692/3. By your Friend and Servant, W.
Russel.

Worthy Sir,
I Here present you with what I have remarked (and can bring to Memory)
touching your Sal Solutivum in General.

It has always been highly approved for that excellent Property beyond all
other Purgatives that it leaves the Body Laxative; and when taken in a
sufficient quantity works certainly, and copiously without Sickness, Gripings
or any Discomposure, leaving the Stomach sensibly stronger, etc. not liable to
taking of Colds, or any necessity of Confinement as is usual with other
Purgatives.

I have found it of excellent Service in the Iliack Passion, making way
through, or rather dissolving the most indurated or stubborn Obstructions of
the Intestines, being given in a large Dose, etc.

For the Itch I have never known any internal means to equal it, being taken
daily for a Fortnight together.

For Uterine Obstructions, I have proved it of very great Service, and sometime
speedy to a wonder, effecting the work the very first Dose.

I have also known it to resolve very large Tumors of the Neck (supposed to
arise from Cold, but I am well assured, that in one it was Scrophulous) by
taking one or two large Doses in the Morning in their Water Gruel, in which it
always works best.

And as a Crown to all other its excellent Virtues, I have proved it of very
great use and advantage in Melancholy Madness, viz. where Nature was stubbornly
propence, to a solitary Retirement, and Constringency, and would not hearken to
the Gifts of any other Remedies, especially Resolutives -- all Specificks, as
well as Universals, were unavailable; yet by the constant use of this Medicine
for eighteen or twenty days, Nature became effectually reclaimed from that
Error, and Inordinacy, and brought to a proper and due Freedom (or Enlargement)
of Action, which was soon obvious in more sound and regular Issues of the
sensitive Faculties, etc. This is all that I can at present recollect of it
remarkable, which I entreat you to accept of, with the hearty Respects of,

Feb. 17th. 1692. Your much obliged, and Faithful Servant, George Deane.

A short Discourse of Mineral Sulphurs.
IN my Catalogue of Medicines Printed in the Year 1684. I made mention of some
Sulphurs of Minerals and Metals, prepared by me, which were adapted to the
curing of radicated and stubborn Diseases; and such as are too Ideal or
spiritual to submit, or hearken to Sal Solutivum, which are Medicines so small
in Dose, so easy to take, and so effectual in their Operations, that I cannot
but wonder no more use has been made of them. Perhaps one reason may be, that
I have not described their Virtues and Uses particularly; but having there said
somewhat of their Preparation, Virtues and Doses in general, I had well hoped
that it might have met with diverse Physicians in this Nation, who so well
understood such Medicines, as to have been glad to know where they might have
them for their use; or at least such as upon the Credit of the higher Forms of
Chemical Medicines, would have given them a fair Trial. I am sure if they had
taken the Advice of the noble Helmont, these neat and efficacious Preparations
had not been so long neglected, and the more especially because never any in
England (that I know of) besides my self ever pretended to make and publish
such Mineral and Metallic Sulphurs.

Helmont's words are these: In his Treatise or Chapter Entitled, In Verbis,
Herbis, and Lapidibus Magna est Virtus: Ipsum Morbum totum, ejusque remedia
Considero in Archeo alterato vel pacato, adeoque minimo attactu, vibratione,
jaculatione, imo radiatione sive illuminatione perfici ac compleri sanationes,
non habito causarum occasionalium respectu; idque potentius aspicio in
Mineralium remediis Sulphureis, puta in Sulphur veneris, stibii, ac potissimum
in Sulphur Glaurae Augurelli, quae Nympha a^^e nomine proprio caret hactenus,
etc. Horter itaque Tyrones, addiscant Sulphura spoliare vi peregrina ac
virulenta, sub cujus nimirum Cu^^odiacirc; abditur ignis vitalis, Archeum in
scopos desideratos placidissime deducens: junt Videlicet sulphura quadam,
quibus Corre^^is atque perfectis tota Morborum Cohors auscul^a^, utp^^e
pluralitas in unitatem Archei tanquam pugnanteni pugnum contrahitur. Hoc paci^
in ipsa animae sede Combinat^que Duumvicatu, Amentie, Appoplexiae, Caduci,
Paralyses, Vertigines* Asthmata, Hydropes, Atrophiae, iminanesque des^tus
annihilari vidimus, stupente scilicet ipsa natura. i. e.

I consider the whole Disease it self, and its Remedies to be placed in the
Archers altered or appeased, so that Cares are completely performed by the
least touching, Vibration or Jaculation, yea only by Irradiation or
Illumination, without any regard to their P^ocatartick, or occasional causes;
the which I see more especially effected by the Sulphurous Remedies of
Minerals, viz. the Sulphurs of Venus, and Antimony, but most powerfully by the
Sulphur Glaur of Augu^ellus, which Nymph has not hitherto been called by a
proper Name* etc. Therefore I exhort young Artists, that they learn to spoil
Mineral Sulphurs of their strange and poisonous Faculty, under the Custody of
which is hidden a vital Fire, which pleasantly brings the Archeus unto the
desired Ends: yea, there are some Sulphurs, to which (when they are corrected
and advanced to their perfection) the whole band of Diseases gives way, because
their Plurality is contracted into the Unity of the Archeus, like a Fist
clutched to fight. By this means we have seen Madnesses, Apoplexies,
Falling Sickness, Palsies, Vertigoes, Asthmas, Dropsies, Atrophy's, and other
very cruel defects to be annihilated in the very Seat of the Soul, and combined
Duumvirate, even to the Amazement of Nature her self.

By which excellent Discourse, that noble Philosopher sets forth two things:
First, that the Sulphurs of Metals and Minerals being corrected by the Artist,
and brought to the highest perfection, viz. Fixation do then universally cure
all Diseases. Secondly, that they exert this wonderful Virtue after the manner
of a shining light, which enlighteneth all dark places and corners, that even
so the Mineral Sulphurs, purified corrected and fixed, by their Splendor and
Light (which the Almighty has endowed them with) do irradiate and enlighten
the Archeus, which is darkened and obumbrated by Diseases, injecting new Powers
of light into it, and raising it as it were to a new Life. For the Nature of
all Metallic and Mineral Sulphurs is like unto that of the Stars; for as the
Stars are fire and light, so likewise the Sulphurs, as those do warm and
enlighten, so these; as the Nature of those is to vivifie and quicken, because
they are altogether light and life, a Spring of quickening Virtue, so likewise
the Sulphurs, when freed from their Impediments, can do no other, but warm
enlighten and vivifie. But that the subject of my Discourse may be the better
understood, I think it necessary here briefly to declare what I intend by
Mineral Sulphurs: know then that I understand a soft Fat, or Oleaginous
inflamable Matter created of one Substance, to wit, of the grosser, thick or
earthy, or lower Fire, which remained in the Severation of the Chaos, which I
take to be the Mother and first Rise of all the Mineral Sulphurs; which are
totally of one Nature, Descent and Original, and of one Substance; even as the
Stars are created of one and the same Substance, viz. of the more subtle and
celestial Fire, which in the moving of the Fiat upon the Chaos mounted upwards;
so that the Stars and the Sulphurs agree in the two Properties of warming and
enlightening. This Sulphurous substance being by Virtue of the central Fire
always upon motion in the Bowels of the Earth, meets with the Metalline or
Mineral Juices, generating in their proper Matrixes, adheres to them,
coagulates them, and continually abides with them, until they have attained to
perfection; or else being taken immature out of their Mines, is in part forced
from them by the Fire of melting, which together with their mineral Earth,
turns into an Opake Glassy Cinder; the other part abiding still with the
refined Metal or Mineral, which is that which I call a Metalline or Mineral
Sulphur, Denominating it in particular, according to the Metal or Mineral, to
which it is joined, as the Sulphur of Venus, Sulphur of Antimony, etc. This
Sulphur I take to be the Agent or Fire of Nature* by which Metals are in their
Mines first coagulated, then gradually and continually cocted and maturated,
till by length of time they acquire a Metallic hardness, and Malleability, or
else obtain the ultimate perfection of Metals, which is purity and fixity, and
then having no further need of this Sulphurous Agnet it is Spontaneously
separated from them, as is manifest in the Oars of Gold and Silver (Gold
especially) those Metals being sometimes found in pure Bodies, their Agent
being totally separated.

That this Sulphurous Agent in part remains closely combined with the inferior
Metals after their smelting from their Oars, appears in the hard Metals as Mars
and Venus by their being scorify'd in their Ignition, or by the S^al^s that
sail from them, when heat red hot and hammered upon an Anvil; the same thing
may be observed in the Flux of the sol: Metals; for if you melt Tin or Lead
with such a Fire as will keep it red hot, and when the Metal flows keep it
continually stirring* in a short time all the Metal will be reduced to a Calx
or Ashes. Now if any one shall think, that this Incineration of the Metal is to
be attributed only to the power of the Fire, and not to its Sulphur, let him
try if he can by any degree of Fire thus reduce Gold and Silver to a Calx,
which want this external Sulphur, having laid it aside as a useless Garment. If
he shall reply, that as the Bodies of Gold and Silver being perfect, are not
altered by the Fire, so neither are they hurt by Sulphur (especially Gold which
is not at all diminished by suffering a Cementation with Sulphur) and therefore
it is not Sulphur in the inferior Metals, that reduces them into Scoria or
Ashes, but the Action of the Fire which transposeth the parts, or alters the
Texture of those Metals, which are unfixt and imperfect, and therefore want a
stability to resist the Power of the Fire. I answer, it is true, the perfect
Metals are not destroyed by Sulphur, but are again set free from it upon the
Test by Saturn, to which it presently adheres, turning it into Scoria, and
leaving the Gold or Silver unaltered. But notwithstanding this, there is no
Goldsmith but will tell you to his trouble, how eager or brittle Sulphur will
make Silver and Gold: And indeed so brittle, that if upon Silver or Gold in
Flux, Sulphur be multiplied, the Metal may be beaten to Powder in a Mortar,
which is enough for my purpose, viz. to prove the Existence of a Sulphur in the
inferior Metals, by its Power of scorifying or incinerating their Bodies.
Another way by which these Sulphurs are manifest is by their Flame, when the
Metals are in a strong Fire; Copper emits a green Flame, Tin a purple colored
one, etc.

Some of the ancient Philosophers have called this universal Sulphurous Agent,
Daemogorgon, or the God of the Earth, and attributed to it Health, Wealth,
Honor, etc. and without doubt they wanted not their Reasons for so doing: but
my present purpose being only to show that this Terrestrial Fire, as it adheres
to Metals and Minerals affords an excellent Medicine against Diseases, I shall
not enquire into its further Qualifications.

And although those Sulphurs be necessary to the Metals, as a digesting,
maturating or ripening Agent, yet I think them not to be of the Essence of the
Metal, to which they so closely adhere, but to be highly endowed with Virtues
for curing Diseases; having besides their common Power of warming and
enlightening, received special Gifts and Dignities from the Astrums of those
Metals with which they are con-coagulated: for if the external Sulphurs were
Essential to the Metallic form as the Internal are, then they could not be
separated from the Metal nor any part of them, but the Metal would be
destroyed, but I have diverse times seen the contrary, whence I conclude, that
they are not Essential to the Metal. For I have sometimes by Calcination with
Niter, sometimes by other Salts separated much of the Sulphur from Tin;
afterward I have reduced the Tin again to a Body (although it be somewhat
difficult, by reason of the Action of the burning Sulphur) and have found it so
far from being destroyed, that it has been much mended both in the Color,
Hardness, and Sound; in which it has in some degree emulated Silver. I have
also by the help of a certain Menstruum known to me, separated the Sulphur from
Copper, but the form of the Copper was not destroyed but meliorated, the Metal
being more Ductile and of a greater Splendor than it was before, and if the
Menstruum be diverse times repeated upon the Calx, till all the external Sulphur
be separated, and the Calx then again reduced to a Metal, that Metal will be
white, hard, and ductile like Silver, but yet formally distinct from Silver as
wanting a due Fixity: Neither can those Sulphurs when thus separated, by any
Art be reduced per se into a Metal: Hence I conclude, that they have other Ends
and Appointments from the great Creator, than what are limited to the Metals;
to wit, to cure the Diseases of humane Bodies. This opinion of mine is
confirmed by the excellent Helmont, de Lithiasi, Cap. 8. 8. speaking of the
Sulphur of Venus, where he has these Words: Cum Sulphur istud externum, quale
e Cupro trahitur, non ^^t Necess^^^um Metallo perfecto; Cupro au^^^ ^^lu^
Sulphur, sit a Deo inditum, ergo ne^^ss^ est ^^^ud Sulphur haber^ suos fines ad
Necessitates ^^minis ingrati conducentes, pro inf^rmit^^^^s scil^^et humanis,
supra omnem Metallic^e pers^cti^^^s dignitatem.

Seeing that the external Sulphur (such as is drawn from Copper* is not
necessary to a perfect Metal; but is joined to the Copper by God, therefore
that Sulphur must necessarily have its own Ends, conducing to the necessities
of ungrateful Man, to wit, for his Diseases and Infirmities, above all Dignity
of the Metallic perfection.

And this is not only true of the Sulphur of Venus, and the other inferior
Metals, that God has appointed them for Medicine, but of Minerals also, even
from common Sulphur, to the Sulphur of the Electrum Minerale immaturum or Lili
of Paracelsus, which are the highest and lowest Boundaries of the Dignity of
mineral Sulphurs, notwithstanding which those Sulphurs differ greatly among
themselves in their Dignity and Power: for the Sulphur of Antimony exceeds the
Common Sulphur in light and virtue, as far as Nature in their first Generation
has more highly stated, and nobilitated the former than the latter; the
difference being the same as between a raw and a roasted piece of meat for the
nourishing of our Bodies. For although the Sulphur of Antimony, be as well
Volatile and Combustible as the Common Sulphur, and so no difference between
them as to their fixity and maturity; yet such a difference there is in their
Virtue, that the Sulphur of Antimony as soon as it is separated from its
mercurial Body, being given to the Patient without any further Preparation is
of much quicker and powerfuller Operation than the Common Sulphur, although
often sublimed; which proceeds from no other, but its inbred Excellency
wherewith it has been endowed by Nature: so also the Sulphur of Venus has a
greater Virtue than that of Antimony, and that of the Electrum Minerale
immaturum has a Power and Virtue more eminent than any of the rest. For as the
Almighty God in the beginning, created all the Stars of one Matter and
Substance, i. e. of a subtle Fiery light, and yet made one more glorious,
powerful and splendid than another; even so has he done with the Metallic and
mineral Sulphurs, which he has also created of one Substance, viz. of a gross
and earthy thick Fiery light, but yet withal has framed the one more glorious
and more virtuous than the other, attributing to each its particular Glory,
which it cannot exceed though prepared and perfected as much as is possible by
Art; insomuch that no Sulphur can take more Virtue than the Creator has
endowed it with in its first Formation: and as you see that one Star exceeds
another in Beauty and Splendor, so likewise one Sulphur surpasses another in
its Virtue and Energy of healing.

Now as you see that among the Stars the most glorious is the Sun, which
greatly surpasses all the rest in Light Virtue, and Splendor, being the Root,
Source and heart of the Stars, whence they all did flow, and is as their Father
in regard of their Original, and their King in respect of its great
Pre-eminence in Splendor: even so the Metals and Minerals also have their King
and Father, which surpasses them all, and therefore is by Paracelsus, and
Helmont, called Electrum Minerale immaturum, Metallus Primus, Metallus
Masculus, which signifies the first, or the Father of the Metals; and so of
right may be called the King of the mineral Kingdom, in regard that this
proceeds from it: even as a Tree springs from its Root; for which reason
Helmont sets down this heavenly Tincture, in the Front of his Catalogue of the
Arcanums of Paracelsus, calling it Essentia Membrorum, because that nothing
does so completely strengthen all the Members as this Royal Tincture, when
brought unto its perfection.

From what has been said, we may Collect, 1. That Mineral Sulphurs are
Subjects endowed by the Almighty, with great Virtue in the curing of Diseases.
2. That this Virtue is environed, and kept from us by a Malignant virulency, so
that none of them can be of Medicinal use to us without a due Preparation,
their inward Light and Virtue, being guarded by a virulent Poison, like the
paradisical Tree of Life by a flaming Sword. 3. That this Exotic virulency
being removed, and the Sulphurs perfected, they cure Disseases ad Modum Radii,
without being diminished either in Substance or Weight, but pass through the
several Digestions of the Body unaltered in their quantity, and unchanged in
their Celestial Power and Virtue. 4. That those great Powers and Virtues have
their Rise from the invisible heavenly Substance of the Sulphurs, having their
Root nearer to the interior heavenly World, than all other visible, tangible
and corruptible things, and therefore nearer to the Divine Goodness, as those
words of Helmont intimate. Adeoque testantur ejusmodi Arcana, se infinitae
bonitati propinqua, etc.

Now as those prepared Sulphurs act efficiently, ad Modum Luminis in Archeum,
striking at the very Ideas of Diseases, so they induce and enable the Archeus,
or Vital Spirit to perform its own Acts, and do Instrumentally warm, digest,
concoct, resolve, transpire, dulcifie, etc. whence the material cause of
Diseases, or diseasy Matter, in which the Idea acts, is gradually altered and
separated, by the daily taking of these Sulphurs for a due time; whence the
Palsy, Epilepsy, Convulsion, Consumption, Asthma, Dropsy, Leprosy, Gout, and
other grievous Diseases may be eradicated. And to this purpose any of the
mineral or metalline Sulphurs may be used, provided they are duly prepared, for
we are not obliged to seek such a Sulphur in Gold, nor is there a necessity of
using that of the other hard Metals, (although they well recompense the Labor
and Charge of extracting and preparing) but our merciful Creator has been very
bountiful in giving us great Variety of Subjects, from which this Sulphur may
be gotten besides the Metals, as Common Sulphur, Vitriol, Lapis H^matitis,
Lapis Calaminaris, Antimony, ^^nk, Native Cinabar, Magnesia, etc. But with this
difference, that the one excells the other in its degree of Virtue as I have
showed above; as also that some of them are Speci^^^dly potent in some
Diseases, as the Sulphur of Furiol in Epilepsies, that of Antimony in Diseas^s
of the Paps and Womb, as Imposthumations, Ulcers Cancers, etc. in those parts;
the Sulphur of Mars in the Dropsy and Green sickness, the Sulphur of Jupiter
in the Asthma, and Consumption, that of Venus in the Scrophula and Diabetes,
etc.

Now these Mineral Sulphurs, show forth their Virtues in healing more or less
eminently, according to the degree of their Preparation, by which they more or
less approach their ultimate perfection: these Degrees of Preparation, I
consider under three several Ranks or Classes. The first of these contains the
Sulphurs separated from their Bodies, opened and unlocked, Volatile and
Inflamable, digested, corrected, and spoiled of their mineral Malignancy, and
made safe and effectual Remedies for the curing of Diseases; whose Dose is
small, being for those of ripe years, but from two to four Grains, or six as
the highest, and pleasant in Operation, working for the most part by gentle
breathing Sweats, or insensible Transpiration, never by Vomit, unless where
Nature is predisposed to that Evacuation by some indigested or offensive Matter
in the Ventricle; but when Nature has once made her intended Separation, they
then cause Vomiting no more. In acute Diseases, as Fevers, Fluxes, Plurisies,
Imposthumations, etc. they are to be taken a Grain or two every three or four
hours in a spoonful of a suitable Vehicle, so long till the Disease is
overcome, and signs of Recovery appear, and then once or twice a day till
perfect Restoration. In Chronick Distempers two Grains in the Morning fasting,
and three or four Grains at Night going to Bed, in a Glass of Canary or Sherry;
but that which is elicited from the Common Sulphur, being less active than the
rest, may be taken from six to twelve Grains.

This appearance of the Sulphurs is in the form of a subtle tinging Powder,
and thus prepared; I constantly keep by me the Sulphur of Venus, Mars, and
Antimony, and purpose to do the like by those of Vitriol, Zink and native
Cinabar, having at diverse times heretofore prepared them all by the help of the
same Alcahestick Menstruum: I call the Menstruum Alcahestick, because in many
things it agrees with the Alcahest of Paracelsus and Helmont, but not in all
the Properties which are attributed to that, wherefore I do not believe it to
be the same; but in separating the Sulphurs from Minerals and Metals, and
correcting their virulency it is equal to that, and to me much better, who am a
Possessor of this, but pretend not to that. This I thought necessary to mention
in this place, to save my self and others the trouble of curious Questions.

The second Rank or Order of these Sulphurs, is the Preparation of the first
Order, Philosophically dissolved and brought over the Helm, in the form of an
highly tinged red Oil or Tincture, which is dissolvable in Wine and other
Liquors, but may be most commodiously taken upon the point of a Knife mixed
with a little fine Sugar. The Dose is from 10 to 20 Drops. In this form it is
more penetrant, and its light much more diffusive than in the former, and
therefore much more prevalent in the Cure of Chronick and fixed Diseases, as the
Epilepsy, Palsy, Asthma, Ptisick, Dropsy, Gout, Rhumatism, and other
pertinacious Diseases of the Genus-Nervosum, and Viscera. N. B. That when the
Sulphurs are brought to this form, Basilius calls them Animae Metallorum, and
Helmont, their Elementum Ignis. And thus far my Experience has reached in the
Preparation of these Sulphurs; and in this form also I intend (God willing) to
prepare them and keep them by me, for the Assistance of such Physicians as are
minded to use them. And here I cannot pass by somewhat worthy of Note, which I
have lately observed of the red Oil, or Anima of Venus, which is, that a little
of it mixed with some other convenient matter, and rubbed upon Rhumatick and
other pains has given present ease, and in two or three days has quite
removed them: and I am in great hopes that it will give ease in the dolorous
Gout, to such a Degree that the Patient may constantly persist in the use of
such inward Remedies as may remove the cause, of which sort are the Sulphurs of
which I am Discoursing. But of this I have not yet had an opportunity to be
made certain by Trial.

The third Order or Degree is, when the red Oil or Anima of the second Degree,
is brought to a State of Incombustibility and Fixity, and then it is, and not
till then, that they have attained those Superlative Virtues in healing, which
Helmont attributes to them; yet the lowest of those Orders is not without its
eminent Virtues (compared with ordinary Medicines) in curing Diseases. But the
bringing the Sulphurs, or any of them, to this fixed and permanent State, which
is their ultimate perfection, I do not pretend to have done, for it requires
more time, and perhaps more Art than I am furnished with to handle them,
neither do I profess to prepare the Sulphur, Electri Mineralis immaturi sive
Metalli Masculi, concerning which Subject, Men that have ventured to name it, I
find have greatly differed. But among my Preparations of mineral Sulphurs, I
content my self by way of Eminency or Preference, with my Astrum Minerale,
whose Dose is from three to six Grains in the first form abovementioned, and
from ten to twenty Drops in the second form. But as that is the most eminent in
Virtue of the Sulphurs which I prepare, so it also is the dearest, being to be
made but in small quantities with much labor and time: but my Species
Universalis, having all the Properties of the mineral Sulphurs, may serve
Instar omnium, where they cannot be had; the difference being only in the Dose,
which is much larger than that of the Sulphurs, and the Virtue somewhat less
potent as being more extended. Also my Tinctura Metallica, being a Solution of
the more subtle parts of Metallic Sulphurs in Spirit of Wine, may be used in
Diseases of the Nerves, and all others arising from Congelation, instead of the
Animae Metallorum of the second form, and is a very pleasant and efficacious
Medicine; the Virtues and Uses of which, together with the Species Universalis
are described at large, in the Appendix to my Catalogue of Medicines, Printed
Anno 1684, to which I refer the Reader; which Directions may also indifferently
serve for the use of the mineral Sulphurs, either in the form of Powder or
Drops, by observing their Doses above set down, and varying them in proportion
with the Species and Tincture. But if it shall please God to grant me Life, and
prosper my Labors and Studies; I hope I may hereafter be able to give such an
Account of some of the higher Arcana in Medicine, as may be profitable to the
Miseries of the Sick, and afford some satisfaction to well-minded Physicians.

I think it here convenient to advertise that in Chronick Diseases, where the
mineral Sulphurs are to be used, if the first passages of the Body be well
cleansed by the Sal Solutivum, and the Obstructions of the Viscera and Vessels
opened, the Sulphurs will much more readily display their Virtues, and the time
of the Cure will be shortened.

I have spent many years in the search of a safe, pleasant, and effectual
Preparation of the vulgar Mercury, that might like the Arcanum Corallinum, or
Mercurius Diaphoretcus, of Paracelsus and Helmont, cure the Pox, Cancer, Noli
me tangere, etc. and although among the many Trials I have made, I have
obtained somewhat which has done things notable, yet it has not completely
answered the End of my Enquiries. But I have at length found out a mercurial
Medicine, which I hope will fully answer my longing Expectation: It is sweet in
Taste, and fixed, although not with a complete Fixity so as to abide a very
strong Fire, for I have sometime pleased my self with such a fixed Mercury, as
would abide the Fire of a Coppel in form of a Powder, but I could observe but
little effect it had in Physic. This of which I am now speaking operates very
gently, sometimes by Stools, and sometimes by Sweats, and according to the
Trials I have yet had of it, does neither Vomit nor Salivate; as to its
particular Virtues, Dose, and manner of administering, if it shall after
reiterated Experiments complete my Desires, I shall publish an Account thereof,
together with my Balsamum Veneris Anodynum abovementioned, which is also now
under Probation. And in order to this, I make it my request to such ingenious
Physicians, as love the Propagation and Improvement of Medicine, that they
would give those two Medicines a fair Trial, and make such report thereof to
me, as they shall be found to merit; by which means I shall be able to furnish
the said Account much sooner and better than my own single Observations will
enable me to do. But I shall here say no more of them, lest I fall under the
same repfoof with him who Sold the Bears skin before he had killed the Bear.

My Arcanum Universale, Pillula Balsamica, Manna Mercurit, etc. being sometimes
mentioned in this Book, they who desire to be further informed of the Virtues
and Uses of those, and other of my Medicines, may have recourse to a small
Physical Treatise, published by me some years since, called Praxis Catholica,
where they may find satisfaction; which Book is to be sold by Mr. J. Lawrence
at the Angel in the Poultry.

The price of Sal Solutivum is one Shilling the Ounce; of the Sulphurs, in form
of Powder, Five Shillings a Dram, in form of Tincture, Ten Shillings an Ounce.
The Species Universalis Six Shillings an Ounce. The Tinctura Metallica Five
Shillings the Ounce; with an Allowance to Physicians, who use them in
quantities.

I am sorry I had not time to enlarge somewhat more concerning Mineral
Sulphurs, but my daily Avocations being many, and the Press now staying, I must
here make

THE END.
From my House next Door to Gun Ally in Little-Moore Fields, 4th. May. 1693.
Advertisement.
ALL Glaubers Works in a large Folio, [containing Variety of Secrets in Physic
and Chemistry; sundry ways of trying Metallic Oars, working in Mines,
separating Metals, making Saltpeter, enriching barren Land, and improving the
Fruits of the Earth] translated out of Latin and High Dutch, by the Author of
this Book; are to be Sold by the said Author, and by D. Newman at the Kings
Arms in the Poultry.


