An ABSTRACT of the Book, entitled, The Quakers Challenge at two several
Weapons, to the Baptists, Presbyters, Papists, and other professors.
The Original of which being brought me since my Answer to it (which for some
Years I had not seen) I was willing to have this reprinted, partly for the sake
of such who have not seen the same, and in abhorrence and detestation of that
proud, exalted, Antichristian Spirit that writ it; whose Works of Wickedness,
and Deeds of Darkness must not always go undetected and unpunished.

But who shall live when God does this? Published on the behalf of CHRIST JESUS
the Son of the Living GOD, who is not only become my alone Savior, Sanctifier,
and Redeemer, but also my great LORD and Master, to teach and instruct me in
His Word, Work, Worship, and Service this day: for which I cannot but praise
and magnify His Name, who is GOD over all, blessed for ever and for evermore,
Amen, says His Servant; who is a true Lover of his Country, and a Well-wisher
to the weal and good of all Mankind.

J. P.

AFter S. E. had exclaimed against several of the Baptists Teachers, saying it
was their work to belie the Innocent, and fill the Peoples Ears with false
Reports; that they were Enemies to the Lord, his Truth and People, etc. he
proceeds to his Challenge in these words:

I do challenge any of the Teachers amongst the Baptists, or Independents, or
Presbyters, or Papists, or Jesuits, high Priests and low Priests; for these are
all blind Guides, and their Profession is rotten, their Church is Babylon,
their Faith is unsound, and their Doctrine is false for ever. And I will
maintain it by these two Weapons, viz. To fast seven days and seven nights, and
not to eat nor to drink. And the next Weapon is, To wake seven days and seven
nights, and not to sleep till they be faithfully performed before the Lord: and
the God that answers by Fire, shall be the true God; and he that the Lord
shall carry through this fiery trial, shall be accounted a Worshipper of the
true God, and shall give Him the Glory and Honor, and acknowledge His Power,
who alone is worthy, who is over all, God blessed for ever. But he that tires
by the way, shall be accounted a Member of a false Church, and an Heretic;
whose God is his Belly, whose Glory is his Shame, whose End is Destruction.

Come Papists, etc. will you maintain that your Church is a true Church (which
is established by Blood) answer the Quaker. -- Come Protestants, who are called
by the names of Presbyters, Independents, and Baptists, Fifth-monarchy,
Seventh-day Sabbath-men, and Family of Love, the Quaker denies you ALL, and is
come to try you; not by the Tongue, which is your Glory, but by the Belly, for
that is your chief God: For of a truth you all are Shut out of the Saints
Society,
And your Book of the Practice of Piety.


Come Papists and Protestants, Gog and Magog, will you be daunted by a Quaker?
Stand up Presbyters with your hypocritical Fastings, who fast for Strife and
Debate; who for matter of Persecution there is none exceeds you; you had need be
ranked next the Papists, for who so cruel as you against the Truth? Come, go
with me these fourteen days journey; and after this two times seven is over, we
will have three times seven more. I never knew the Quakers conquered yet by all
your cruel weapons; therefore if ever you conquer the Quakers, it must be by
Fasting and Watching.

Come Thomas Vincent, I have a mind to challenge thee: but if thou do not
answer, if either Papists or Protestants, Jesuits or Priests, are willing to
answer this DUEL: let them name their day and time; and for what God, and for
what People, and I will answer you, or whom you can produce in the behalf of
the People called Quakers, who are in the Truth, [and None but THEY.]

Come Jeremiah Ives, John Lucas, Robert Porter, and John Brown; I challenge
you, as Elias did the false Prophets: and thou Jo. Brown, Baptist Teacher --
you Blasphemers come and answer this Duel. Stand up you sleepy Professors and
maintain your Assertions. Come Jeremy, I must not pass thee by, for I testify
thy Faith is false, and so is thy Doctrine, and thy Profession is rotten, and
thy God is thy Belly; and thy Faith the Faith of Devils, that purifieth not the
Heart, etc.

Stand up, old Thomas Lamb; come old Thomas and young Thomas, and help your
Brethren, Jer. Ives, Matthew Caffin and William Burnet; for the Quaker denies
your Church, and is come to the true Church, the ground and pillar of Truth,
etc.

Come forth you Jesuits and Papists, Monks and Friars, Star-gazers,
Monthly-Prognosticators, and Astrologers, and all the Devils Conjurers; will
you not find a Man to answer the Quakers? If you find a Man, let him be known
who he is, and for what God, and for what People; and let him send one to me to
see me perform my Challenge, and I shall send one to him to see him perform his
Answer; or we will be shut up together in one Room.

Stand up Muggleton the Sorcerer, whose mouth is full of Curses, Lies, and
Blasphemies; who call thy last Book, A Looking-Glass for George Fox, whose
name thou art not worthy to take into thy mouth; who is a Prophet indeed, and
has been faithful in the Lord's business from the beginning: It was said of
Christ, that He was in the World, and the World was made by Him, and the World
knew Him not: So it may be said of this true Prophet, whom John said he was
not; but thou shall feel this Prophet one day as heavy as a Millstone upon thee:
and although the World knows him not, yet he is known.

Come forth Robert Porter, thou should answer this Duel, for thou have opened
the mouth of God's Enemies against the Truth and his People: But is not thy God
thy Belly, as the rest of thy lying Brethrens? Come forth; it is but fourteen
days: and if I fall by the way, thou may then say, the Lord never sent me.

Stand up all the Armies of the Beast, Papists, Jesuits, Presbyters, Baptists,
and all the false Prophets of the Nation.

Come Gloucester Professors, to whom I writ a Challenge once, but none would
answer me; come William Shepherd the Lawyer, and Thomas Martin; come William
Jordan the Presbyter, who said thou would fast with me thirty nine days, and
I could never get thee to fast one.

Never did any thrive that spoke against the Quakers.

Solomon Eccles.

The aforesaid Challenge is not only published by S. E. but is also owned, or
at least countenanced by the chiefest Leaders of that People: for the said
Challenge is again renewed in their Book, [Judas and the Jews] in these words,
viz. L. Muggleton and the Baptists have agreed with John Pennyman, to get
something against S. E. to save their Bellies; and John Pennyman, as a Captain
of Cowards, endeavors to strengthen the Enemies of God against me behind my
back: but he should first have answered my Challenge, etc. (he speaking of
Watching and Fasting, which he calls his two Weapons) page 72. This Book is put
forth by Tho. Briggs, John Whitehead, John Crook, Solomon Eccles, James
Claypool, William Gosnel, Henry Stout, Rebecka Travers, Ellis Hooks, etc. and
is owned by George Fox, George Whitehead, and several others.

Here follows one of George Fox his Challenges (relating to Fasting only)
taken out of the Title Page of his Book, entitled, An Answer to a Paper from
the Papists, etc.

If any Papist, etc. will go forth three or four weeks with a Quaker with Bread
and Water, and have no more of that than the Quaker has, --. So if you dare
try this matter, then some of your side shall watch the Quaker, and some of the
Quakers side shall watch you, and so we shall try if your Bellies be not your
God.

G. F.

Woe to the Crown of Pride! Woe to the Shepherds of Israel! I will magnify the
Law, and make it honorable. But this is a People robbed and spoiled: for their
Glory is turned into Shame, and their Honor into perpetual Reproach and
Contempt.
LONDON, Printed the 19th day of the Month called February, 1680/1.


