The P. of Orange's Engagement For Maintaining and Securing the Protestant
Religion, and Liberties of the People of England, According to His Late
Gracious Declaration.
Humbly Reminded To be Performed by Their Most Sacred Majesty's K. WILLIAM and
Q. MARY, in Their Royal Assent in PARLIAMENT, to the Perpetual Establishment of
Liberty of Conscience.
Moved in Ten Reasons for a Religious Freedom. With Allowance.

REASON I.
IT is not the Will of the Great and Wise God, to appoint any Forcible Ways or
Courses to bring Men and Women to conform to his Worship: But Christ was
pleased to Commissionate his Apostles (to whom he committed the Keys of his
Church) to Preach and Declare the Christian Doctrine: And they that succeed them
in their Office, are not by Might or by Power, but by gentle Invitation, and
the Influence of his kind Spirit, to inform the Judgment, convince the
Conscience, and so to persuade the Children of Men to be Reconciled unto God.
And who is Man, that he should take another course, and will not rest in God's
wisdom? Now we are Ambass^dors for Christ, as though God did beseech you
through us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

REASON II.
THe using outward Compulsion in matters of Conscience, does only serve to make
Men Hypocrites, but works no saving Conversion. If Men conform to any Worship
or way thereof, with an unwilling mind, they cannot serve God aright, though
the Worship be right, because the Heart of the Worshipper is not right. God
calls for the Heart, My Son, give me thy Heart. If it were not for compulsion,
the Man would be in some other Practice or Profession; and when he Conforms
only to save his Person or his Purse, he is the Servant of Man, and not the
Servant of God, and this is not to save his Soul. Not by constraint, but
willingly; not for filthy lucre, but a ready mind.

REASON III.
ALL sorts of Persons are for Liberty of Conscience for themselves, even those
that are most imposing upon others. They would account it hard measure to be
constrained to perform, or forbear such and such things which concern their
Religion, or to suffer unproportionable penalties. And why should not the
Church-Protestants make the Presbyterians, the Independants, the Papists case
their own in this point, seeing they are all Fellow Christians. Therefore,
whatsoever things ye would that men should do unto you, do ye so unto them, for
this is the Law and the Prophets.

REASON IV.
THe good Rules of Humanity, and common Civility, which is carefully observed
in smaller matters, are openly violated, by using of force in the matters of
Conscience. Men abhor to thrust that Meat and Drink down their Neighbor's
Throat, which will not agree with their Stomachs. They say commonly, Pray take
that which best likes you: and why are they not as civil in the matter of
Religion? Have compassion on one another, love as Brethren, be pitiful, be
courteous.

REASON V.
THe Church Protestants in England were sore distressed by hot doings
heretofore in the Reign of Q. Mary, when they were accounted Criminals, for not
conforming to that Worship which was then the Established Worship of the
Kingdom; and whoever take up the same Spirit of Persecution against others, for
Nonconformity to the present Worship now Established, does not only justify the
violent proceedings under Queen Mary from their own principles and practices,
but also, upon mounting that part of the Wheel at top again, (as lately
endangered us, though now down) will leave themselves no Excuse nor Cause of
Complaint, if God bring the same severity to fall upon them. For with the same
measure men me^e withal, it shall be meted to them again.

REASON VI.
THe Conforming and Nonconforming Protestants, and the Protestants and Papists
all do agree as to the substance of Christianity, in the same Articles of
Faith, and the same Rule of Manners, in the Apostles Creed, and the Ten
Commandments. There is one Body, one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.
As a variety of Flowers may grow on the same Bank, so may Protestants of all
sorts, Churchmen, Presbyterians, Independants, Anabaptists, Quakers, and
Papists live in England. Union in Affection is not inconsistent with
disagreement of Opinion. There is much more Reason to love one another for the
many things wherein we agree, than to fall out for those wherein we differ; and
though we cannot have communion in the same external worship, we can and have
communion in the same internal Adoration of the same Blessed Trinity, and in
the one hope of our calling unto Life Eternal, through Jesus Christ. We cannot
come together in the same Church, but may live together in the same Land; and
as we are under the same Gracious King and Queen, they may protect both, and
suffer no Party to persecute one another. The Woolf shall lie down with the
Lamb, the Leopard with the Kid; they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
mountain.

REASON VII.
THe French Protestants, who are the Dissenters from the Established Worship of
that Kingdom, have been kindly received and succored by England, even under
both our late Kings: And when the French King is highly blamed by English
Protestants, and perhaps too by most English Catholics, for persecuting his
peaceable Subjects, should we go to do the same things in our Kingdom which we
condemn in another? God forbid. Therefore art thou inexcusable, O man,
whosoever thou art, for thou that Judge another, do the same things.

REASON. VIII.
THe prosecuting Dissenters and Recusants for matters of Conscience is of great
disadvantage to the Trade of the Kingdom, the Dissenters being a chief part of
the Trading People of the Nation, considered as Merchants, Shopkeepers,
Clothiers, Farmers, etc. by which many thousands of the Kings poor Subjects are
maintained, and consequently Liberty of Conscience must be a most effectual
means for the restoring of it.

I will mention a story or two, which may be easily attested, if they be called
into Question. One Thomas Peard about 19 Years since of West Dean near
Barnstable, who kept many poor People at work in the Clothing Trade, was
prosecuted upon the Act for Twenty Pound a Month, so many Months for not coming
to Church, that he was forced to quit his Habitation and Employment. Upon this
the poor People of many Parishes go a Begging, and the numbers presently were
so great, that the Justices were sain to meet, and consulting together,
conclude upon it to get the Man's Fines to be discharged. This being done,
Peard returns to his business, takes the poor off their hands, and finds them
again the same Li-

In like manner, about 17 Years since, the Bishop of Sarum sends forth
Instructions into all the parishes of his Diocese for bringing them to Church,
or citing them to his Court. There were Eighty Clothiers Nonconformists of
several Judgments in the County of Wilts, who being Alarmed by this Summons,
think of withdrawing their Trade, (the time for provision of their Wool
favoring such a suspention) but considering what a number of poor depended on
them, some employing 500, some 1000 people under them, who were capable of
getting no other maintenance: Besides that, the Farmer was no less concerned
than the Spinner and the Carder, who could have no Money for his Wool; fearing
also, that if they should give over on a sudden, there might so much clamor
ensue, as might turn into some uproar, they agree upon sending up eight or ten
of their sufficient men to represent their Case to the King and Council. Orders
are taken hereupon that the Archbishop writes to the Bishop to desist, and
assurance is given by both the Secretaries to the Clothiers, for their safety
in keeping on their Employment.

What those Justices, and what the Council at that time saw convenient for
that Shire, and those Towns, will be discerned (I doubt not) by the considerate
to be of the like Emolument throughout the Nation.

The Riches of a Nation are the Bodies of Men; for the greatness of a Kingdom
certainly consists not in a vast continent of Ground, but in the multitude of
its Inhabitants; and the thriving of the People, lies in the increase of Trade
Manufacture and Commerce, as is intimated. An Act for Universal Toleration
(Stated rightly, that is, of All, so far as they are tolerable, whereof the
wisdom of a Parliament is the fittest Judge) would produce both these; it would
bring People that are persecuted in our Neighbor-Nations about their Religion,
to England, as it does or has done to Holland; and they must bring their Hands
and Business with them. Besides the infinite Encouragement it would give to
many, who of late have kept in their Moneys, by reason of their obnoxiousness
to the Law, which they must bring forth most Industriously into Employment, as
soon as they see themselves safe under settlement, and their Consciences out of
danger. And when Issachar saw that Rest was good, and the Land that it was
pleasant, he bowed his Shoulder to bear, and became a Servant unto Tribute.

REASON. IX.
IT has pleased our most Gracious Sovereign K. WILLIAM the Third (whom God
bless still with a gentle mind and good days) to declare to the Nation at his
coming to the Kingdom, that these two things, Comprehension and Indulgence,
(which he expresses by A good Agreement between the Church of England and
Protestant Dissenters, and the covering others that will live peaceably from
Persecution, even the Papists themselves not excepted) was one end or certain
Intention of his Undertaking, which therefore in repeated words he confirms;
[And we for our part will concurrin every thing with a Parliament, to procure
the Happiness of the Nation; since we have nothing before our Eyes in this our
Undertaking, but the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, the covering all
men from Persecution for their Conscience, and Secure to the whole Nation the
free Enjoyment of their Laws, Rights, and Liberties, under a Just and Legal
Government.] Then after five days Ananias the High Priest descended with the
Elders, and an Orator named Tertullus, who when he was called forth, spoke
thus, Seeing that by thee we enjoy great quietness, and that by thee very
worthy Deeds have been done for this Nation, we accept it always, and in all
places, most Noble Felix, with all Thankfulness.

REASON. X.
THese are some Reasons (among Multitudes) that have slown abroad for
Toleration, and they are no picked chofen^^nes, but the most ready and ordinary
to the meanest Capacity, such as I have caught upmost easily, from the Papers
only of one or two that were mean men, only changing a little their style, to
avoid the baldness and ^^^lixity: I will now add some Testimonies out of my own
former Reading, and these Testimonies, which are Argumentum ab Authoritate,
shall be my tenth and last Consideration, or Reason.

It is not like in the three first Centuries of the Church, that any thing is
to be found in the Christian writings, for the use of the Sword in Religion,
whilst themselves were under it. In the next ensuing, we have Constantine,
Constantine, Jovian, Val^ntinian, Valens, Theodosius, and after those, Honorius
and Arcad^us may be cited for their larger permissions, especially toward the
Jews, by those that will be at the pains to do it.

In the Year 386. Idacius and Ithacius were condemned by the Gallican Bishops
for being Authors of bringing the Priscillianists to Execution. And St.
Augustine no doubt with the Fathers generally are against any Sanguinary Laws
in this matter. Nullis bonis in Catholica Ecclesia hoc placet, si usque ad
mortem in quemquam Haereticum saeviatur. Contra Cresconium, Lib. 3. Cap. 50.
Hence were they called Ithacians, and held for Heretics, who maintained, That
those who erred in Religion, ought to be put to Death. And it is observed, it
was Dominick was the first that brought up the Fire among Christians upon that
account. Withdraw from them, avoid them (says the Scripture) (...) but not bea^
or persecute them as the Heathens do, says Ignatius. For it is an unheard of,
strange kind of preaching the Gospel (says Gregory) to exact Belief (as the
Egyptians their Bricks) with Stripes. Docere arbitramur (says Theodosius and
Valentiman) nostrum imperium subditos nostros de Religione commonefacere; They
chose not to say (imperare) but (commonefacere) signifying thereby, that
Religion ought not to be forced. Nihilenim (says Lactantius) tam voluntarium
quam Religio, in qua si animus est Sacrificantis aversus, jam sublata, jam
nulla est. Religio imperari (says Cassidore) non potest. And, Suadenda est,
says St. Bernard, non imperanda. Praecepit Sancta Synodus, (says the Tole^an
Council de Judaeis) nemini deinceps ad credendum vim infer. And The New Law
(says Tertullian) does not vindicate it self Ultra Gladio. The Jews took no
such course (as pestilent as their Doctrine was) with the Sadduces, nor Christ
with the Samaritans, See Luke 9.35. Mat. 13.28, 29. John 18.36. John 6.67. And
will ye also go away, says Christ to the Twelve? Which are words removing all
force and necessity from Man in the choice of his Religion. So Chrysostom,
Athanasius, Cyprian, I may also add Aug. and Sa^^i^n.

We may read in the Life of J^seohus, when some of the Trachonites came in f^r
Rescue to the Jews, where himself was Governo^r and the Jews would thereupon
constrain them to be Circumcised, or else not let them abide with them, he
would not permit that injurious Zeal, alleging, That every Man ought according
to his own mind, and not by Man's compulsion to serve God. In our English Story
(to suit this) by Bed^, when Ethelbert the first prince that received
Christianity of the Saxon Heptarchy, was converted by Austin, sent hither by
Grego^y, and many thereupon came into the Church, it is said, He espicially
embraced those that came in, but Compelled none; for he had learned that the
Faith and Service of Christ ought to be voluntary and not of constraint. "It
helps much, says the Imperial Edict of Constantine and Licinius, to establish
the public Tranquillity, for every man to have liberty to use and choose what
kind of worshipping himself pleases; and for that intent is this done of us, to
have no man enforced to one Religion more than to another. A Prince who would
draw his Subjects (divided into Sects and Factions) to his Religion, should not
(in my Opinion) use Force, says Bodin; I will enhance this from the example of
Theodosius that eminently good Emperor, who though he being offended with
Euno^ius, did banish him upon a particular account, used no coertion or
severity upon the person of any other Sect whatsoever. Reliquis neque molestiae
q^i^quam exhibuit, neque secum communicare eoegit; sed singulis copiam fecit in
locis separatis conventus ^^endi, and ita de Religione Christiana sentiendi, ut
quisque de ea opinionem conceperat.

John Barclay (not William that wrote Adversus Monarcho^athos) has a Discourse
on purpose to this effect about the Calvinists (as it is thought) under the
Name of the Hyperephanians, in one chapter of his Argenis. And Camerarius in
his Historical Meditations, has a chapter as Learned, Full, and Grave; as need
to be on this Subject, lib. 3. cap. 18. "It was observed by the Popes Council
(says Guicciardine) that the Prosecution of Luther, since it was not
accompanied with their own Reformation, did increase his Reputation; and that
it had been a less Evil to Dissemble the knowledge of such a matter, which
would perhaps have dissolved of it self, than by blowing at the Brand, to make
the Fire burn the more. I here may be some Notes conferred with this out of
Devilah, upon the deliberations of the Politic Katharine, Regent of France,
about the Pacification in her Son Henry the Thirds time; I will rest in one
after Henry the Fourth succeeded. That great Prince thought fit to declare
himself Catholic, but gets the fame Edict for Liberty to the Hugonots, to be
renewed and passed the Parliament of Paris. "By which means endeavoring to
remove Suspicion from their minds, and confirming them by good Usage, together
with some Guts and Promises to the chief Heads, he insensibly took away (says
the Historian) the pulse and strength of that Party, so that those that are
versed in the Kingdom, believe that a few years of such sweet Poison (if he had
not been disabled in this course through want of Money) would have extinguished
that Faction, which so many years of desperate Wars had not, with the Effusion
of so much Blood, been able to weaken. Violent courses (says my Lord Cook) are
like hot Waters, that may do good in an Extremity, but the use of them does
spoil the Stomach, and it will require them stronger and stronger, and by
little and little they will lessen the Operation.

They that love the Common wealth (says Judge Jenkins) will use means together
with the Restitution of the King, to procure an A^t of Oblivion, and tender
Consciences a just and reasonable satisfa^tion, else we must Perish first or
last.

I will Crown these Testimonies with the experienced advice of CHARLES the
First to our late Sovereign: "Beware of Exasperating any Faction by the
crosness and asperity of some men's Passions, Humors, or private Opinions
employed by you, grounded only on the differences in lesser matters, which are
but the Skirts and Suburbs of Religion, wherein a charitable Connivance, and
Christian Toleration, often dissipate; their Strength, whom a rougher
opposition fortifies, and puts their despised and oppressed Party into such
Combinations, as may most enable them to get a full Revenge on those they count
their Persecutors, who are assisted by that vulgar Commiseration, which attends
all that are said to suffer under the notion of Religion-

There are two Rules in the Preamble of the Statute Primo Mariae; the one is,
That the State of a King stands more assured by the love of his Subjects than
in the dread and fear of Laws. The other is, That Laws justly made, without
extreme Punishment, are more often, and for the most part better obeyed, than
those that are made with that extremity. Unto which my once before-named Lord
Chief Justice Cook Subjoyns this Sentence, Mitius imperanti melius Paretur.

I will close up all with the end of a Speech of Sir Orlando Bridgeman to the
Parliament, when he was Lord Keeper.

"If any just grievances shall have happened, his Majesty will be as willing
and ready to redress them, as you to have them Presented to him, and his
Majesty doubts not, but you will give healing and moderate Counsels, and
Imprint that known Truth in the Hearts of his Subjects, that there is no
distinct Interest between the King and his People, but the good of one, is the
good of both.

Now this is the Copy of the Letter which Artaxerxes gave unto Ezra the Priest,
I make a Decree, that all they of the People of Israel, and of his Priests and
Levites in my Realm, which are minded of their own-free will to go up to
Jerusalem, go with thee.

And Gamaliel stood up in the Council, and said, Ye Men of Israel, take heed to
your selves, refrain from these Men, and let them alone, for if this Counsel or
this Work be of Men, it will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot
Overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to Fight against God.

Printed for R. Hayhurst in Little Britain, 1689.


