Reason against Railing, AND Truth against Fiction. Being An Answer to those
Two late Pamphlets, Entitled, A Dialogue between a Christian and a Quaker, and
the Continuation of the Dialogue, etc. by one Thomas Hicks, an Anabaptist
Teacher. In which His Dis-ingenuity is Represented, His Profaneness is
Rebuked, His Forgeries are Detected, His Cavils are Confounded.
And Thomas Hicks proved No Christian, By several short Arguments raised from
his Ungodly Way of Procedure against us.

By one that cannot but Contend earnestly for the True Faith once delivered to
the Saints, W. Penn.

Ye shall conceive Chaff, ye shall bring forth Stubble; your Breath as Fire
shall devour you,

Isa. 33.11. Printed Anno 1673.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
OF what sort of People soever thou art, sure I am, that Almighty God has
placed a Witness for himself in thy Conscience, unto whom thou must stand or
fall in the Terrible Day of Account. Vain will all prove that gives not to
abide the Test of that Day, when the Works of all Mankind shall assuredly come
to Judgment: But blessed forever will they be, who, not deluding themselves
with Unprofitable Notions, shall appear with Consciences void of Offense before
God, Angels and Men. And as I have been taught to seek that Happiness above all
other, however misrepresented by Ungodly Men, so would I not for many Worlds
hazard the Peace of that State, by any unjust Proceed against this Adversary
now before me, however provokt by his Exorbitances. I would give the Worst of
Men their Due, and as I justly esteem him of that Number, so God forbid that I
should in the least deprive him of his Right, a Robbery I would not (after his
Example) be guilty of.

Sorry I am that so many Occasions are renewed to trouble both thee and my self
with Books of Controversy; did I consult my own Ease, and the common Peace of
the several Religious Interests of this Land, Silence should have been my
Choice,

God is my record, these things have deeply grieved my very Soul, and made me
cry, Oh when will Men rather press after Piety, then contend ^or Opinion, and
devote themselves to the sincere Practice of that true and undefiled Religion,
instead of Pursuing the sinister Ends of what they falsely repute such! Shall
Noise always go for Zeal, and implacable Contest constantly be esteemed
contending for the Faith once delivered to the Saints? Miserable People! Who
know not that of all the Enemies Faith has to overcome, there is not a greater
to be conquered? It is an old F^tch of the Devils to besaint his own
Offspring, that he may beguile the Simple-hearted; and to think of doing God
good Service in persecuting his Truth, was the Condition of the high-professing
Jews of old.

Reader, It has been our great Unhappiness, that we have not been hitherto
known, as we are; for since we evermore desire to be unvailed to God, there is
n^ Reason why we should abscond our selves from Men no, would we were known of
Men, as w^ are known of the Lord: But such is the Impudenc^ of this Adversary,
that whilst we seek nothing mo^^ then to be understood, he would have the World
believe, we glory in being Unintelligible, and seem to make the whole Drift of
his Discourse to be a Discovery of us; who, instead of pulling our pretended
Mask off, puts a frightful Vizard on, and then leads us up and down his
Dialogues for a Sight; This is G. Fox, that G. Whitehead, and the other Edward
Buroughs, or William Penn, etc. perverting, detracting, mis-construing,
vilisying, slandering to the height, and which is worst of all, this Villainous
Practice is to pass for godly Zeal, and in Defense of the Gospel.

Reader, I have only this to request, be Moderate, be Impartial; and this grant
for thy own sake, that what Judgment thou shall hereafter make of us, or our
Enemies, may be such, as thou shall not be ashamed of in the Day of the Lord
God. Certainly it concerns us to beseech all to weigh these Things; For never
were Men more Innocent, and yet never any rendered mo^^ Nocent: Our Reputation
here, and our Welfare hereafter are brought into Question; we must be at once
the Worst and most Imprudent Men, if what be charged, be True; And if False,
our Adversary greatly both: For such is the Accusation, that nothing short of
foulest Wickedness can lie at one of our Doors. And though I know many slight
him, who yet are not of us, reputing him no better then a mere Janizary in
Religion, one that fights for his Pay, and writes for his Living, a kind of
homily-Hireling, not worth our Notice; yet, since such is the Unhappiness of
some, that they stick not to entertain more favorable Thoughts of his
Endeavors against us; for their sakes, and to detect his Envy, Error and
Injustice to the World, am I now engaged: And if God give me Life, I hope to
pursue this undertaking effectually, let him get what Stock of Force and
Ammunition he can. Reader, I omit to say more here, but that I am with all
Sincerity

15th 3d Month, 1673, Thy true Friend, W. Penn.

Reason against Railing, AND Truth against Fiction.
CHAP. I.
The Introduction to the Discourse. Reasons why the Dialogue was not answered
before.

IF it shall be wondered at by any, that we are so quick with our Return to
T.H. upon his Second Dialogue, who seemed no more concerned for his First: it is
fit that such know the Reasons we have to give in our Defense.

First, We esteemed it a Fiction, calculated to the vain and scoffing Humor of
the Vulgar, without all Savor of Mercy, Justice, Seriousness or Civility;
worthy of no Man's Patronage, that would be in earnest about Religion; To
employ our Time about a large, complete and distinct Book, had been to loose it.

2 ly, George Whitehead, the Person most engaged, had given such an Account of
it in brief to the World, that with many it seemed sufficient; since the
Contradictions by him observed, are no ways reconciled, nor so much as
attempted by T.H. in his last Dialogue.

3 ly, Because whatever might seem to carry any Force with it throughout that
confident Piece of Forgery, we resolved to consider among many other
Adversaries in one large Volumn, which is accordingly done. And had it not been
for other intervening Discourses, with the great Difficulty we ^ave to print
our Just Defenses, when we have made them (a Strait our Enemies are not put to)
it had long ere this come to public View.

4 ly; Several other Adversaries were then before us, who, whether they said
any thing more injurious, to be sure, pretended better Proof and Evidence for
what they affirmed.

5 ly, So just Complaint having met him, as well from several unconcerned in
our Way, as our Friends, to wit, That he had charged the Quaker with saying,
what he did not, at least to him, and in that case, if ever he could prove it
to have been either his Saying, or his Belief at any time, or in any case. He
now to vin^icate himself from such Injustice, has given us a Second Part,
wherein he hopes to make good what he charged upon us in his First by
Quotations out of our ow^ Books, which, if faithfully done, I shall freely
acknowledge, that a Quaker is quite another thing than a Christian. And as this
may suffice all, but such as are resolved never to be satisfied with any thing
that comes from us, of the Reason of deferring our further Answer; so having
now that Ground to proceed upon, which we never had before. I shall with God's
Assistance make the best of it I can, in Defense of the Truth, and the
Innocence of them that profess it; only give me leave to hint at a few Things,
which may not be improper to the Matter in hand, because they do not a little
discriminate and give to relish the Spirit of our Adversary.

CHAP. II.
Something of the manner of his Dealing with us.

FIrst then, he has taken a very unequal Way to represent our Faith, Doctrine
and Practice to the World, in that he has rather delivered his own Fury, then
a true Quaker, and shows to the World, rather what he would have us to be, then
what we are.

Can it be fairly done, to propose the most knotty Questions for himself, and
give the weakest Answers for us? Had he but had the Generosity of a Roman, he
would have given us fair Dealing for our Reputations: To make a Fool and an
Heretic both, and then call him a Quaker, is no less then a Rape, because a
violent Robbery committed upon those that go under that Name.

The best of Men can never escape, let their Adversaries have but the
Characterizing of them. It had become T. Hicks, if he would have shown himself
a Christian and a Champion too, first to have set down our Principles and
Arguments, as delivered and urged by us, and then have enervated both by his
pretended greater Strength of Scripture and Reason, before he had made so many
Trophies of Conquest; But because, had we been in the wrong, this had been the
Practice of a true Christian, and that this has not been his Practice, we are
taught to infer, that T. Hicks is thus far Antichristian.

Secondly, He has not only made us Weak and Ridiculous by Answers no ways to
the Purpose, Dial. p. 66.
but to belie our very Consciences and Principles. For when he asks us, Do you
believe the Scriptures to be true Sayings of God? he makes us to answer, So far
as they agree to the Light in me: An Answer never so delivered by us. And when
he queries, Will you be so liberal of your Revilings, whether your Adversary
gives Occasion or not? He answers for us, It concerns us to render them as
Ridiculous as we can, and to make our Friends believe, they do nothing but
contradict themselves, which is enough to us.

Certainly these things show such premeditated and wilful Obstinacy to be
wicked, that were we, what he represents us to be in this very Matter, the
severest Plagues and Judgments of the Eternal God we might justly expect to be
our Portion forever. I fear T. Hicks measures us by himself; and that the
Answer he feigns to the Second part of his Dialogue, will be his Lot as truly,
as he has there feignedly said it. It would take up too much time to enlarge,
only thus much let me say, That Man is hard put to it, and Unjust with a
Witness, who not only invents Answers to dis-repute a Man or People, but such
as are very Lies too against their Faith and Practice.

Thirdly, Nor is this all, but he has managed the whole of his Dialogues in a
Spirit of Profanation, by a tanting and inapplicable Use of many serious
Words, that have at one time or other been seasonably uttered by Sober, Simple
and Religious People to the insnaring Questions of such Trapanners as himself.
As for instance, Thou manifests thy Darkness, that thou art still in thy
Imagination; What do thou witness in thy self? I see thou art a poor dark
Creature, as by thy Talking is manifest; yea, it is manifest in the Light; yea,
verily: Alas for thee! Page 13, 15, 25, 44, 45, 49, 54, 60, 76.
I bear witness against thee: We are dead to Distinctions: Thou manifestest a
Perverse Spirit. These, Reader, with the like Expressions does this Ungodly
Scoffer give to the World in the Name of a true Quaker, as some of his best
Answers; and that to such Questions, whose Matter has been effectually
considered and answered in many of our Books: however, his Spirit shows, to
whomsoever those Answers are improper, in one sense they are not so to him. But
above all, that a Man pretending to Religion himself, and such a one too as
next to us stands fairest for Reproach, should give our serious Language in a
Jeer, as if we were fitter to be Derided than Informed, is horridly wicked. Can
his Conscience be so seared, as to handle holy Things without Fear? Is
Singularity grown so odious to an Anabaptist Preacher, that he should make it a
Subject for his Scorn and Drollery? However this may resemble T. Hicks, he does
not herein answer the First Love of the People who go under that Name, while he
shows so much implacable Hatred to his Conscientious Neighbor, thereby not
discountenancing the profane Rabble in their frequent Scoffs at us, but
furnishing them with such a Work of Darkness, as excites them further to it,
making us to inherit those cruel Mockings, which were once the Portion of his
own Profession. We know, what answers not God's Witness, shall never be able to
abide the Trial, and therefore we are the less concerned in his Comical Abuses
of us, more becoming a Morefield or a Smithfield Stage Play, than a Christian
Treatise. Thus much and no more of the Spirit of the Man in general, because
more largely handled elsewhere.

CHAP. III.
The Question Stated, and accordingly Pursued. Our Adversary proved false and
weak.

WE shall now descend to the main Question, and that which is the Ground of his
Second Dialogue, and without which there can be no Defense of his First, viz.

Whether those Doctrines and Expressions, charged upon the People called
Quakers by Tho. Hicks in both his Dialogues, be really the Doctrines and
Sayings of that People, or not? And afterward, Whether what we do own, and is
by him charged with Error, is sufficiently opposed or proved such?

He affirms, they are; and undertakes to prove his Assertions out of their own
Works, which naturally leads me to consider, what are those Doctrines and
Expressions he has charged upon us to be ours; and what are those Proofs, by
which he endeavors to make good that Charge. I shall first of all treat upon
the more weighty Parts of Doctrine, and reserve the more trivial Matters to the
latter end.

The first considerable thing he endeavors to suggest against us, is, Our
making the Light in every Man to be God, Dial. p. 3, 4, 5.
which he undertakes to prove from G. Whitehead's Discourse upon John 1.4. In
him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men; That if the Life was the
Divine Essence, the Light must be so also; for such as the Cause is, such the
Effect must be. Upon which says T. Hicks, From this kind of reasoning we may
conclude, not only the Light within, but every Creature both Beasts and Trees
are God; these being Effects of infinite Wisdom and Power. Do thou not
Tremble at this Consequence?

Answ. This very thing shows great Dis-ingenuity in T. Hicks, That from G.
Whiteheads asserting and proving the divine Nature of the Light within, he
should insinuate, that every Measure of Light in Man is whole God, and which is
yet more gross, to conclude from G. Whiteheads saying, Such as the Cause is,
such the Effect must be; that Beasts and Trees are God, because the Effects of
his Power; whereas G. Whitehead did not intend it of a mere Potential, but
Natural Effect, that is, something resulting from the Nature, and not the mere
Power of the Divine Life. Men are the Natural Offspring and Product of Men,
but so are not all those other things in the Creation, which are
notwithstanding the Effects of their Art and Power, so that there needs no
Trembling at G.W's Blasphemy, as he afterward calls it, but better Information
to T. Hicks's Ignorance, or Rebuke to his wilful Blindness. Of this I refer the
Reader to G.W's Part of that larger Volum.

Again G.W. affirmed it must be God, because to deny it so to be, was to deny
the Omnipresence of God, Then it seems, says T.H. that the Light within, and
the Omnipresence of God is one and the same thing with him. Is this your
Champion? May we not conclude the Body of Man as well as the Light within to be
God by this Reason?

Answ. By no means, and it is a Shame to hear that a Man pretending to
Controversy should ask so ridiculous a Question. Is there no Difference betwixt
a Man, whose Reins are on his Neck, following the Lust of the flesh, the Lust
of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, and the Light within, that T.H. himself
acknowledges to convince of Sin, reprove for it, and unto which Man ought to
give Attendance? Is there as clear a Proof of the Omnipresence of God in the
one as in the other; I would know who is he that searches the Hearts, and
tries the Reins, and tells Man his Thoughts? do not the Scriptures attribute
this to God, and that as the most convincing Proof of his Omnipresence? And if
he does so search the Hearts and try the Reins, let us understand, if it be not
as the Great Light, that enlightneth every Man that comes into the World,
since the Scriptures testify that God is Light; that every Man is enlightened;
that God searches all Hearts, and that what ever does make manifest is Light:
Now unless a Man may have his Heart searched, his Reins tried, his Deeds
manifested and judged without an inward Light, it must necessarily follow, that
the Light within, present with us every where, is to us the great Proof of Gods
Omnipresence, and therefore of God. And though every measure of Light
distinctly is not that Entire Eternal Being, yet we are bold to assert, that it
is no other then God the Fullness of all Light, who searches the Heart and
tries the Reins, and tells Man his thoughts, that does shine into the Inward
parts of Man, and does there convince of Sin, reprove for it, and lead out of
it, John 1.16. Col. 1.19.
as believed and obeyed: And it is by this Inward Discovery chiefly Men come to
know that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that fear him; whence, when
Men are Innocent, it is frequent with them to say, being unjustly accused, my
Heart misgives me not, my Conscience does not condemn me, I have good Courage
to look my Accuser in the Face; A State transcending the utmost Stretch of all
T.H's imagined Christianity.

In short T. Hicks's confident Conclusions against us arise from these
Mistakes. First, He infers from Man's being Ignorant of all he ought to know,
the Inability of the Light to inform him, never considering Man's Obedience or
Rebellion. 2 ly, From Christ's being the Light that enlightens every Man, every
Man's having the whole Christ in him; And thirdly from our asserting God and
Christ to be one, our Denial of Christ's Outward Person and Bodily Appearance at
Jerusalem, see page 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 14. of the Dialog. and 41, contin. of
the Dial. with much more of that sort: Than which, what can be more grossly
Injurious to any People. Either let him leave of Writing, or understand better
what he writes against us. In short, we are willing to let the Controversy ly
here; that the Quakers own, promote and assert, that the Life of God which is
the Light of Men, with which every Man is enlightened, is sufficient to
everlasting Salvation; And Thomas Hicks asserts and promotes, that this Life of
God, which is the Light of Men with which all Men are enlightened, is not
sufficient to Salvation. I am not willing to break my Design of following his
Charge and Proofs by much controverting the Doctrine in it self, since it is
enough for me to show, that the Doctrines and sayings he fastens upon us, and
the Proofs he brings to maintain them such, are not ours: yet I am willing to
mention one Passage among several others, that if I understand any thing, is a
grand Contradiction to his Opinion of the Light's Insufficiency.

He quotes Stephen Crisp thus, If the Light ought to be obeyed, then it must be
sufficient. To which T.H. returns this Answer. But I appeal to the Light in
thee, whether this be not an Insufficient Proof. I grant it ought to be obeyed,
so ought the lawful Commands of Magistrates, Parents and Masters; yet who will
thence infer, that therefore they are a sufficient Rule to Salvation?

Answ. This cuts the Throat of his whole Design, For by the same Reason, that
such who obey the lawful commands of Masters, Parents and Magistrates are to be
reputed good Servants, Children and Subjects, those who obey the Light are good
Subjects, Children and Servants to God: And if those who so keep the
Commandments of Parents, Masters and Magistrates, escape Punishment, and obtain
their Good Will, Favor and Recompense, which is an outward Salvation; then
those who obey the Light, by his Allusion, do obtain his Favor, Love and
Recompense of the Reward of Righteousness, which Righteousness, that it might
be fulfilled in us, so obeying, and walking after his Spirit, was the End of
God's giving his Son a Light, condemning Sin, and that they that walk
thereafter, Romans 8.9, 10, 11.
might not have Condemnation, minding the things of the Spirit of God, the
Spirit of him that raised up Christ from the Dead, the Spirit of Christ, Christ
in them, not minding the Things of the Flesh, which (...), or Minding, verse. 7.
as it may be rendered, cannot be subject to the Law of God, but they that are
subject and are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Children of God, and
Heirs according to the Promise. Most Ungodly then must T. Hicks's Consequences
be, that because we say, Christ enlightens every Man, page 8, 9.
Saul persecuted the Church, and the Heathens multiplied their False Gods by
the Light within. Like unto which is his Arguing, p. 14. where he thus pretends
to answer his feigned Quaker: If indeed thou know not what I aim at in this
Question, then thy Light cannot be God, as thou say it is; for God knows the
Hearts and Intentions of all Men: thereby confounding the Light and Creature
together, and concluding Imbecility, Insufficiency and Ignorance in the Light,
which are the Imperfections of the Creature. Was there ever any thing more
Scoffing, Profane and Dark then this? might not the Gentiles have treated the
Christians after this manner, that if they knew not all things (whether it
concerned them to know them, or not) the Christ and Spirit they pretended to be
led by, were not God? This is so far from proving the Light not to be God, that
admitting of it, it were to prove every Man a God. Is every Master as ignorant
as his Scholar, because his Scholar knows not as much as his Master? T. Hicks
knows not all truth, nay T. Hicks may be led into many Mistakes; Is his Bible,
which he calls his Rule, therefore the Cause? Certainly by his way of Arguing
against the Light, if he be not Perfect and Infallible, the Scriptures must
needs be Insufficient and Errable: But if it be an Evil, to make the Scripture
accessory to T.H's Mistakes; of equal Reason is it Impious in him to charge
Men's Infirmities upon the Light, and repute that Insufficient, because they
are Rebellious. Education, Prejudice, Interest, Self-Righteousness, Evil
Living, bring Vails over the Understanding, that, though the Light shine in
Darkness, they comprehend it not.

When Readiness Formality, and Pharisaical Righteousness became shaken by the Law
of Light in the Conscience, then, and not till then he cries out, Oh wretched
Man that I am. Whilst Saul gave more heed to his Outward Religion, then the
Light in his Conscience, he did Persecute, and thought it a Duty; 'twas when
the Light struck him, that he became aw^kened: But if he persecuted the Church
by the Light within, why not by the Spirit too, since God gave the Jews his
good Spirit? If T. Hicks will say, But he resisted that; so say I, as to the
Light; Formality, Tradition, and many Superstitions (attended with an Ignorant
and Harsh Zeal) darkened him, that he could not behold it. But it is a gross
Contradiction in T.H. to say, The Light ought to be obeyed; and yet say, That
it led Saul to persecute the Christians.

And he abuses many of the Heathen-Philosophers, as well as the Light, in
saying, That the Light within reproved them not for multiplying their Deities.
For all Learned Men must needs know, as I have elsewhere at large proved, that
by the Light within they have decryed the Heathen-Gods, maintained the Doctrine
of the One only Wise God, and for their Faith and Perseverance they have been
Taken, Imprisoned, Arraigned, Condemned and Executed, though it went for
justice upon the Enemies of the Gods. Who knows not this, is a Stranger to
Story.

But hear T. Hicks, I demand an Instance among the many Thousands of Mankind,
page 9. Dial.
that has been convinced, or reproved for not believing Jesus to be the Christ
by the mere Light within, before any Revelation was brought unto them; though I
grant that the Light in them may reprove for those Sins, the Common Light in
all Mankind will not, because thou have borrowed much Light from the
Scriptures, which all have not.

Answ. I may well suppose, that as many have been reproved for not believing
Jesus to be the Christ, by the Light within, as by the Scriptures; and my
Reasons are; First, Because those who crucified him, were Admirers of the
Scripture, and pretended to prove out of their own Law, that it was both lawful
and necessary, he should be put to Death; whereas had they brought that Deed to
the Light, the Light would have shown it not to have been wrought in God; which
the Scriptures without that Light could not so effectually do. 2 ly, Those who
by Scripture came to any Convincement, originally received it from the
Revelation of the Light within, which both opened the Scriptures and their
Understandings. 3 ly, Peter, Andrew, Matthew, Nathanael, the Centurion, Ruler,
Diseased Woman, etc. confessed him from the Illumination and Operation of the
Light within, since whatever makes Manifest or works Conviction, is Light; They
were not Disobeyers and Rebellers against it, who most readily received and
followed Christ; They who waited for Israel's Consolation, lived in the Just
Man's Path, a shining Light, which shined brighter and brighter to the leading
such as walked in it, to the great Light of Israel, when he appeared.

Further, To say that the Light we have, being much of it borrowed from
Scripture, Reproves for those Sins, the Common Light in all Men will not, is
great Wickedness; for it is to say, that the Light wherewith Christ has
enlightened all Men, will not Reprove for all Sin; thereby placing the Defect
manifestly upon the Light, as before, and not upon the thick and gross Darkness
(through Disobedience of the People) as well as that he attributes to the
Scripture that Conviction, which is chiefly due to the Light. For by what Way
can Mankind arrive at true Sight, Discerning and Knowledge in the Understanding
part, but by the Light, and that as it shines into the Understanding; is it not
the Light to whom every Deed should be brought, to see if it be wrought in God,
or no? What can any Man solidly and beneficially learn by the Scriptures, but
through the Discoveries of that Inward Light? Are they not dark Sayings, or
rather Man dark to those Sayings, if the holy Light arise not to shine forth,
and give to understand their Scope and Tendency? All Scripture but Prophecy,
which was given forth by Inspiration, as Reproof, Exhortation, Doctrine, etc.
were first experienced or witnessed, at whom) Tho. Hicks may equally cavil and
scoff, (What Is your Witnessing to me) and that through walking in the Light of
the Lord, the Just Man's Path; and were written for the sake of others, that
they might be asisted and helped to the same Experience, but not another Way,
then through the same Steps they had trodden: so that the Ground of the holy
Ancients Experiences now written, and of the true Knowledge of the Scriptures,
and Comfort from them, as an outward Mean; and whatever is to be obtained and
enjoyed within, is originally and chiefly ascribable to the Discoveries,
Convictions and Leadings of the blessed Light of Christ within, through every
Generation, however variously the Principle may have been denominated; as, the
Word of God nigh, Wisdom, Light, Spirit, etc. under the Old Testament; and
Light, Grace, Truth, Christ, Spirit, Anointing, Gift of God, etc. under the New
Testament.

Two short Scripture Arguments spring in my Mind for the Divinity and
Sufficiency of the Light; and from thence I shall conside this Objections:

I. If God be Divine and sufficient to Salvation, and the Word be God, and the
Life of the Word, Joh. 1.5.
One with the Word and the Life of the Word, the Light of Men, then is the
Light of Men Divine and Sufficient to Salvation.

But God is Divine, and Sufficient to Salvation, and the Word is God, and the
Life of the Word, One with the Word, and the Life of the Word, the Light of Men.

Therefore I conclude, that the Light of Men, which is the Life of the Word,
which Word is God, is Divine and Sufficient to Eternal Salvation.

II. That which was in all Ages the just Man's Path, and there where the Blood
of Cleansing is known to cleanse, Prove. 4.18. 1 John 1.1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Joh.
8.12. Joh. 11.9, 10.
and by which Fellowship is enjoyed, and the Light of Eternal Life obtained,
is, ever was, and ever will be a Divine, Sufficient and Saving Way; But such a
Way is the Light as the several Scriptures in the Margent will testify.
Consequently, the Light is Divine and Sufficient to Salvation.

The only Cavil at these Arguments will be this; I deny this Light to be the
Common Light in all Men. To which I say, that there cannot be Two Spiritual
Lights of the Life of the Word, and not the same, if Two could be; For whatever
is of the same Nature, though not of the same Degree, is still the same in
Kind. If there be another Light that is Saving, tell us from whence it comes;
but first prove this not Saving. And as these things are too Difficult, I hope,
for him to compass, so is it as Ridiculous and Blasphemous to think, that God
should give Man an Insufficient Light. But why any, if not Sufficient?

I have heard and read often, That all God's Gifts are Perfe^t. It Is strange,
that his Light to Men should be so Lame, Defective and Imperfect, as T.H.
represents it. But suppose this Light to be so; Why an Insufficient Light, and
a Saving Light both? The latt^r would have done our Business. It is Injurious
to Man to let him have a Fallible Guide; For when he may think himself certain,
he may be in the greatest Danger by mistaking one for the other; or thinking
not of them as they are. But Thanks be to the God of Light, we know (for WE
WITNESS) better things, how ill a Reason, and how offensive soever Witnessing
is to Thomas Hicks an Anabaptist-Teacher; to whose Brethren, Experiences once
were the great Foundation of both their Knowledge and Comfort, though now mocked
at by him with great Derision in a Quaker.

But to his Objections faithfully contracted:

1. If this Light ever was and is Sufficient, how comes it, that Men have been
and are so degenerated in Faith, Discipline and Worship? They have all this
Light by your Principle.

2ly, If this Light had been Sufficient, wherefore should God have superadded
so many other Ways and Means; they would be then needless?

3ly, Christ being the Only Savior, who was born of a Virgin at Bethlehem,
wrought Miracles, was cut off, bore our Sins, etc. I query, how all this can be
affirmed of the Light?

4ly, Are not all the Generations of Christians since Christ's time till within
these very few Years certainly Lost and Damned, forasmuch as they acknowledge
not this Light within, as the True Christ?

To the first I answer, There is nothing therein, which may be thought to
reflect upon the Light, but what falls as heavily upon all other Ways, Helps,
Ordinances, Appointments, yea the Scriptures, and which is more, upon God, and
Christ, and the Holy Spirit too; For if the Degeneracy of Man, that is the sad
Effect of his own Rebellion, shall be a valid Proof of the Insufficiency of the
Light within, then must we conclude from the Degeneracy, that has been among
Jews and Christians, and which remains to this Day, that all those Assistances,
Ways and Helps which have been given, in reality were not Potent nor
Sufficient for the End they were given; The Consequences of which Opinion of
our Adversaries are these Two, and sad enough. 1. That God in his Ways must
have been and is Insufficient; and 2. That Man never was, neither is any ways
faulty. In short, that may be sufficient to Salvation, which if neglected, will
never work Salvation; as in the Parable of the Talents may be seen.

To the Second I briefly say, That Man's Mind being so much abroad through
unstable, and vain Wanderings from God's Light, the Lord in Wisdom and
Condescension to the Weakness of Man, and Darkness of that Carnal State did
accommodate both his Discoveries to Man, and that Worship he required from Man,
according to his Capacity to receive the one, and perform the other. If God
went into Outward Things to meet with Man's Mind that was abroad, to the End
that gradually it might return home, shall we infer Weakness in the Light? Man
in that State was incapable; he must have been new-molded, and as another
Creation to have then received that Testimoy in all its Plainness, which God
has brought forth in after Ages.

If any will undertake to charge Weakness upon Man, let him; But I warn all,
how they conclude it against the Light, since the same falls on God and his
good Spirit, who made Use of such Ways and Means in order to gain upon Man's
Mind, and beget a right Understanding and Sense of what was his Will concerning
him: Besides, not only did the Divine Light and Life appear unto Man in, and
through those things as Vailes; But that which gave Man true Discerning,
Repentance, and to do the Thing that ever was acceptable with God in any
measure, and which was as the Soul, Life and Spirit of all the true and
well-pleasing Sacrifices, was a measure of that Divine Light of Life in their
Hearts at that time; though as Samuel in a like Case, they knew it not. Let
none then charge the Weakness of the Administration upon the Light, but the
Generation, to whom he that is the Light of and in Men, appeared, as Mankind
has been able to receive the Knowledge of him: It was not Insufficiency in God,
nor in his Light or Spirit, if Man's Eyes were not strong enough to behold the
Brightness, of what after Ages have beheld; But it was his Mercy and Goodness,
that he proportioned both his Discoveries and Requirings according to Man's
Ability.

To conclude, The Light is still the same in it self through all Ages, and not
a whit the less Sufficient, because through its Invisibility and Spirituallity,
and the Wanderings abroad and great Carnallity of Man's Mind, some External
Means were used, suitable to Man's Weakness, through which to reach into Man,
and raise up some further Knowledge of the Spirtuallity of God's Worship: Nor
because of the Light's Sufficiency as to it self, ought any to infer, that
those Ways or Means were vain or needless; For as the Weakness of Men should
not call the Ability of the Light in Question, nor their Carnallity take off
from the Light's Sufficiency, Spirituallity or Divinity, so neither does the
Sufficiency of the Light render all Means accommodated to Man's Weakness vain
or needless; especially when the Virtue that is in them, comes from the Light
of Life.

To his Third Objection, which with most Opposers carries the greatest Weight,
I have this in Plainness and Brevity to answer.

We own not, neither do we confess to another Christ then him, who after the
Flesh was born of the Virgin Mary at the City of Bethlehem in Judea, who
preached an Everlasting Gospel, worked Miracles, bore our Iniquities, and was
cut off, or dyed for the People. But since Thomas Hicks would have us believe,
that he is not yet Socinian enough to deny the Divinity or Godhead of Christ,
and therefore that Christ was not only a Man, much less that what was born of
Mary, was crucified, and laid in the Sepulcher of Joseph of Arimathia, was the
Whole Christ; I must distinguish.

The Word that was with God in the beginning, and was God, who in time took
Flesh, was and is the Light of the World; in the fullness of time he manifested
himself in a more Familiar and Intimate Manner to Mankind, in order to which he
prepared an Holy Body, in which he preached his Everlasting Gospel, worked many
Miracles, drew many after him: He sustained grieveous Weights, the Burden of
the Iniquity of the whole World lay upon him, he traveled under it, and trod
the Wine Press alone, and was pressed as a Cart with Sheaves; And so well did
he love the World, that, to testify the same, he gave up his Life not only to
recommend his Love, but to confirm his unchangeable Gospel of Remission of
Sins, and Eternal Salvation to as many as believed, and followed him the Light
of the World; that so Remission might not only be preached in his Name, but
Blood also (for it was a time of Blotting-out; for God was in Christ
reconciling the World unto himself) In which Manifestation he not only drew
many to him, and gave Testimony of his Salvation to some particulars; but he
combated the Serpent, bruised his Head, and gave him an absolute Defeat in the
General, scattering his Oracles, chasing his Infernal Spirits, causing his own
Light more universally to clear up, and break forth into the World, insomuch
that Thousands followed him: He qualified and deputed Ambassadors; Commissioned
and Empowered them from on high; whose Message was Powerful, and whose Ministry
was Effectual; yet when all this is said, and believed most surely, as well as
expressed most plainly, That which gave the Life, Power, Virtue, Strength and
Efficacy to all this, and to whom therefore eminently the Work, Salvation,
Power and Glory are most deservedly ascribable, is the Word that was in the
beginning with God, and was God, whose Life was, and is the Light of Men, who
took Flesh, and was manifested therein. Therefore He who is our Light, ought
not to be denied, being the true Christ, and true Savior; For no other Light
and Life then appeared in that Body, that was then an Offering for Sin once for
all, is the Life and Light that we assert and defend. And for that Holy Body,
it was our Lord's, as the Scripture speaks, Joseph of Arimathia begged the Body
of Jesus, Mat. 27.58. Mark 15.43. Luke 23.52. They found not the Body of the
Lord Jesus, Luke 24.3. He prepared it, he took it, he was manifested in it and
by it; how can we deny that Body which was our Lord's? By no means. To
conclude, though our Divine Word of Life and Light dyed not (for Christ as God
over all blessed forever, could not dye) yet his Body did, and fo his Fullness
therein and there by manifested, have we received, and Grace for Grace. So that
all those who are talking of the Body of Christ, and seeking to represent us to
the World as Deniers and Despisers of his Appearance, they are but in the Steps
of the Persecuting Jews, who as they eryed up the Prophets, but being Strangers
to their Divine Life, relisht not, savored not, and therefore yielded not to
Christ (the Rock who followed the Fathers in the Wilderness, the Fountain of
all the Life and Refreshment of the Holy Ancients) but with their Proud, and
Conceited, and indeed Mistaken knowledge, not from, but of the Letter, and in a
bitter Zeal for their dying Forms and Traditions, did they war against the
Breaking forth of that Day of Salvation, and that as Heresy, Blasphemy, and
the like; so now, these Men seem busy and great Sticklers for the Body of
Christ (which they know not) and for Bread, Wine, Water, etc. and all in
Opposition to a more plain and Inward Manifestation of the Divine Light, Life
and Substance shed abroad, as the Accomplishment of the Promise of the Father
in this our Day and Generation. But as it fared with those of old, so shall it
with these Opposers, their Visitation shall pass swiftly over their Head, and
their Temple shall be cast down, and not one Stone of their fair Edifice shall
be left standing upon another.

To his Last Objection I must tell him, that we have not that Uncharitableness
in our Principles, which our Adversaries are guilty of. He, like the Jews of
old, is ready to think every Man damned, nay, by his Principle, it is not
avoidable, who has not heard of the Name Christ, or is not entered into some
kind of Church Fellowship upon common Christian-Confessions, as they are called
and distinguished from mere Morality or Good Life: But for my part, as God had a
People among the Gentiles of old, who became a Law unto themselves, doing the
Things contained in the Law, whom I believe to be at Rest and Peace
(notwithstanding the severe and positive Censures I have heard from several
Professors against them, and Millions more) so, though much Darkness has
prevailed in most parts of the World, and still continues, yet then, and where
the Day of Ignorance remains, and where there has been and is a Walking with
Sincerity toward God, according to their Knowledge I do believe the Lord did
and does wink, and had and has Mercy, though great Strangers to that
Christian-Profession so much boasted of among too many in our Nation: And I
doubt not, but that there may be found some Thousands both of Turks and
Indians, who would not only have detested in point of Credit, but in Fear to
God, dreaded doing a Tittle of what Tho. Hicks has falsely and impudently said
and done against our Persons, Practices and Principles.

In short, though God in every Age has had a Regard to the Sincerity of
Peoples Hearts, and their Upright Living, though subjected under gross Forms,
and in the Darkest seasons of the World; yet, God having now caused his Day
spring from on high to visit, whereby more certain knowledge and sound Judgment
is given of the Darkness that has covered the Earth, the Superstition,
Idolatries, humane Inventions, Will-Worships, Violence, Cruelty, Wantonness,
Intemperance, Avarice, and all manner of Ungodliness; all are required to
harken to the Lord's Voice, to obey his Call, to let him in, and bring their
Deeds unto the Light, that Christ, who is that true Light, may discover the
Enemy, may bind him, spoil his Goods, and cast him out; that he may reign over
Thoughts, Words and Deeds; so shall such be able to say as David did, O, all
that is within me, praise his holy Name! For Christ will be known, as he is the
Savior of the Soul from Death, the Restorer of Paths, to dwell in, who
destroys the Works of the Devil, and brings in Everlasting Righteousness to
the Soul. And though few observe it, That which is truly commend able in any
People, proceeds from the secret Power and Efficacy of that Inward Principle we
so much testify of: It Is that convinces, discovers, reproves, restraines,
tenders, humbles, and affects the Soul, and not their several Outward Forms,
which, with Robbery to the Light or Grace within, they are apt to attribute it
to, and whereby the Devil beguiles them into a Continuance of them. Wherefore
let all our Opposers be dehorted from their vehement out-crys; for who
withstand, revile and set at naught this Blessed Appearance, God, the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, will break them to pieces, if they come not to timely
Repentance for it.

CHAP. IV.
Of the True Evangelical Rule.

ANd this forever raises the Foundation of T.H's Building: as indeed how can
any thing so infirm long continue, built upon Forgery, and the hight of all
Partiality: who makes us Heretics, that he may be found; and abusive, that he
may either show his own Patience, or color his frequent base Revisings of us:
I say, this overthrows his whole Discourse about the Scriptures being the Rule
of Faith and Practice under the New Covenant. For, what ever is more Ancient,
more Universal, and Able to Inform, Rule and Guide, that must eminently be the
Rule; but that has been, and is the Light within: consequently that has been
and ought to be the Rule of Faith and Practice. That it has been and ought
still to be the Rule expressed, is proveable thus.

That which led those holy Men into those things, of which the Scripture is a
Declaration, must needs have been the Rule; But that was the Principle of God
within, by what Name soever denominated. That this is true, let it suffice to
say, That who walked in the Light in any Age, so far walked in the Counsel of
God. And that all Mankind had an Ability from God so to do, is our Belief, what
Abbridgement soever T. Hick's detestable Opinion of Reprobation may make of the
Love of God.

That it ought still to continue to be the Rule of Faith and Life, I prove
thus, That which is every where, which makes manifest that which is
displeasing, and that which is acceptable to God, without which the Scriptures
are unintelligible, and by living up to which Men only may come to witness the
Truth of those things declared of in the Scriptures, must be, and ought to be
the Rule of Faith, etc. But all this is true of the Light; which is further
proved thus.

The Light Thomas Hicks acknowledges all Men have. The Light Thomas Hicks
acknowledges all Men ought to attend unto: Page 7.
Now unless some Man, who has lived unblameably up to the Light can give us a
Demonstration of its Insufficiency to show, and teach him that further thing,
that God requires him to believe and do, there can be no valid Argument against
the Light's Sufficiency. If T.H. dare be the Man, we shall join Issue with him
in the Trial of the Matter: But if the Light be before hand with Mankind,
furnishing him still with Work enough to do, as it certainly ever has done,
and still does, let it be known to T.H. that such as would know more of
Christ's Doctrines, must first do his Will according to what they do know: And
as it is the common Method of the Dealing of God toward the Sons of Men; So is
it great Impiety in any Man to infer or conclude Insufficiency to be in the
Light to discover and teach Man what he ought to know and do, from Man's
Ignorance of all, that he ought to know and do; since the Ground of that
Ignorance is, his not doing, what the Light of God requires from him, as his
present Duty to perform.

That the Scriptures are Unintelligible without it, is easily proved from the
Variety of Judgments that are in the World about most of the Fundamental
Doctrines contained therein; as about God's Essence and Similitude, Christ and
the Spirit, their Divinity, Predestination, Original Sin, Free Will,
Redemption, Satisfaction, Justification, Faith and Works. In short, the whole
End of Christ's Coming, Living and Dying they are strongly controverted: Now
were the Scriptures so clear capable to determine in these Matters, the
Differences would quickly end; But since the utmost Ability they of themselves
can give, is not enough to render those Things obvious, that are now doubtful,
and disputable; There is a Necessity of Man's Recourse to some other thing,
which is able to discover the Mind and Intendment of the holy Penmen. Now I
would be glad to know of any sober Man, if any thing besides the Light shining
into the Understanding is able to give true Sight, Discerning and Judgment
about the Points controverted? would it not be reputed Madness to bid Men read,
that have no Eyes, or if they have Eyes, at least no Light to read with them?
The whole Scripture, as it relates to Man's Duty, is a Declaration of the woeful
State of Darkness, and the blessed State of Light and Life, with the Way of
Translation out of the one into the other. And was this Knowledge without
Experience, or by and through Experience? I hope no Man will say, the holy
Penmen were not Witnesses of the things they wrote: and if they were, I would
fain know, by what other Way they came to understand and comprehend the
Darkness that was within, then by the Light within; And to know the Temptations
and Subtilties of the Spirit of Darkness, the Discoveries, Reproofs and
Leadings of the Light, the Trials, Travels, Exercises, and finally the perfect
Translation so frequently expressed in these holy Writings, but through the
Manifestation of the Light of Christ in the Conscience, their Obedience to it,
and 'its Operation to their Redemption and Sanctification. So that the State of
Judgment, Repentance, Remission, Regeneration, called the New Birth, and
perfect Justification, were their Experiences (or Witnessings, for all T.
Hicks) from the Inward Work of God's Light upon their Hearts and their Souls,
which though the Scriptures declare of them, they can never bring Man into, nor
can any Man groundedly aver the Truth of those things, till he comes through
Obedience to the Light in his own Conscience to experience the same Judgment,
Repentance, Remission, Regeneration, called the new Birth, and perfect
Justification before God; Since then the Scriptures can do none of these things
of themselves, however Instrumental they may be of Good, but the holy Light in
the Conscience, and that these things are not knowable, though they may be
read, talked and writ of, without being lead by the same Spirit, and treading
the same Steps of deep Experience the holy Ancients trod in, and have left us
for an Example, it must be granted, whether T. Hicks will or no, That the
Author of those Discoveries, Convictions, Judgments, etc. must be the Standing
Immutable Rule to the Soul, what, how far, and which way we are to deny or own,
reject or embrace, relinquish or follow, with Respect to those things that
please God, or that please him not.

His Objections I shall contract into these Four, urged by him for the
Scriptures, and against the Light's being the Rule of Faith and Practice; and
indeed they are the greatest Strength of his Book, if any it has.

First, The Light within cannot give a clear and distinct Account how Sin came
to be; if we consult the Wisest Philosophers, Dial. p. 21, 22, 33.
we shall find a deep Silence touching this Point: They saw Sin did overflow,
but could not by all the Improvements of the Light in them, find out how Sin
came to be.

I am persuaded T. Hicks never consulted so much as the meanest of them, at
least effectually; had he, his Dialogue would have savoured of more true
Science and Morality; for I will make it appear that he has contradicted
himself, abused the Philosophers, and blasphemed the Light in this one Passage.

Where there is no Law there is no Transgression; then where there is
Transgression, there is a Law. Now T. Hicks granting that the Heathen knew
there was Sin, they must know it by Virtue of some Law that made it so. This
Law was not written, but themselves declared, God had imprinted it upon their
Hearts, Pythag. Socrat. Cleanth. etc.
as an Immutable and Infallible Guide to them in their Actions. If so, how
could they be Ignorant of Sin's coming into the World? Who knew it to be a
Deviation from God's living Commandment in their own Conscience, and a
Committing quite Contrary Things? If T. Hicks means by clear and distinct
Account the History of Moses; that is, that Adam and Eve were beguiled by the
Serpent, who tempted them with an Apple, etc. it is no ways to his Purpose; For
that which is Sufficient to that Faith which concerns Salvation is, to know
that God is, that he is Pure and Holy, that he has given Man the Knowledge of
himself, and his Will concerning Him by some Inward Law, Command, Light, Grace,
or Spirit; and that who acts not correspondently to this Guide is a
Transgressor, and incurs the Penalty; and that the Heathen had this, their
Books at large tell us: Nor does Tho. Hicks deny it, so that he manifestly
contradicts Himself, and abuses the Philosophers in saying, They could not
find out, how Sin came, since they expressly say, That God made all Good, and
that Man's Erring from the Divine Law in him brought Evil into the World. And I
boldly affirm, and in the next Head will prove, that the mere History is not
absolutely necessary to Salvation.

Now that herein he has Blasphemed against the Light, is evident; since it is
to say, That God gave Men a Law and Light not sufficient to let them see, how
Sin entered the World; which is to say in plainer English, what is Sin; it will
and must end there. Besides, suppose the Philosophers had been Ignorant, must
it needs follow* that the Fault and Want was in the Light, and not in them?
Will T. Hicks become their Warrant in the Matter, that they arrived as high, as
the Light could teach them, and that the Deficiency lay on the side of their
Teacher, and not on theirs? Confident, yea Impudent Man! Why should either the
Darkness of any Age be charged upon the Light, or render it Insufficient; or
the more clear Breaking forth of Light in a following Generation be reputed
another Light, because another Degree then what obscurely shined forth in the
former; since it was not the obscurer in it self, but through the gross
Blackness that might have over-cast that People because of Disobedience, it
seemed so to them? But let us hear him further.

2. Nor can this Light give any Account of that Remedy which God in his
infinite Wisdom provided, Jesus Christ, Page 33. Dial.
that he should be born of a Virgin, dye for others, and rise the third day:
This is the Pinch.

But I answer: First, That the Prophets saw it by this Light, unless that they
saw it without Light, or that the Light they saw it by, was not the Light of
Christ, as the Word that was with God, and was God; which, I hope, T. Hicks
upon serious Thinking will not say; for of no other do we speak. 2 ly, Those
that believed him, when he came, could never have received him, had they not
seen him by an Inward Eye, enlightened by that Light in measure in themselves,
which then so unmeasurably appeared in him; For the Jews had the Scriptures,
and according to their Understanding of them, they reputed him a Blasphemer;
and both plotted, promoted, and obtained his Crucifixion. The Question will be,
Why did they not better understand them? The Answer is, because they Rebelled
against that Spirit which could only so inform them: Had they brought their
Deeds to the Light, they had received sound Judgment, and a true Measure would
have been given them, which they rejecting, that was both the Ground of their
Ignorance, and the Just Reason of their Condemnation. Hence we see, that Light,
and not the Scriptures was the higher Rule and Judge of Thoughts, Words and
Deeds, yea, and which way the Scriptures themselves were to be understood; And
truly it is strange, that the Light in Men should not lead naturally to its own
Being and Fountain. It Is Proverbial among Men The Way to the Fountain Head is
to trace the Stream. I^ the Light in Man leads not to Christ, who gives the
Light, let us leave off all Talk of Religion; for t^ what, or whom else was it
given to lead us?

But Thomas Hicks, tell me, Who, or what w^^ Christ in that Manifestation it
self, but that Divine Word, Life or Light manifested in Flesh? Will not then a
Measure of the same in Man, lead him ^^ course to acknowledge the Fullness, or
in following its Leadings bring to Eternal Salvation; Or can that Light resist
that Manifestation, as thou do elsewhere seem to affirm?

If Christ his enlightened Men with the Light of his own Life, Dial. p. 38.42.
and if they are required to bring their Deeds to be tried by it, and if they
are invited to follow it, and in following it, are promised, no more to abide
in Darkness, but have the Light of Life, because of the Blood of Cleansing,
that is therein met with, whereby such are cleansed from all Unrighteousness,
and yet the Light neither a Rule nor Saving, then what else can be either a
Rule or Saving?

But this Light (says he) could not tell any that Jesus should be born of a
Virgin, dye for Sinners and rise again. But this is so great a Mistake, that
had he conversed with the Sibylls or other Heathen Writers, he might in good
part have informed himself to the contrary. But here I distinguish of Faith,
There is an Historical and Saving Faith, and there is an Historical and Saving
Rule; as the Faiths, so the Rules differ, If T. Hicks says that it is the
Scriptures that give the Knowledge of those Transactions, I m^st then
understand him to mean Historically, if I assent, which is not Saving; for then
all who believe those things to have been, must therefore be saved; the
contrary to which is daily seen with our Eyes: since who believes not that
Report among those, who are yet in great Wickedness? But if we are to penetrate
deeper, and that T Hicks should hold as he seems plainly to do, that what Faith
we can have of the most weighty Truths declared of in the Scriptures, is from
it, and not from the Light or Spirit within, I must firmly deny it; For Faith
is God's Gift, not the Scriptures Gift: No, so far is the Scripture from giving
Faith, that it is God's Spirit alone, that gives both to understand and believe
them. The Scripture tells me of such Prophecies, Histories and Epistles, and of
such Men as Moses, Job, David, Isaiah, Matthew, Paul and John; But what is it
that gives me to believe the Things they writ of to be true? Is it not the
Testimony and most certain Amen in the Conscience? and what is that there,
which seals to those excellent Truths? Which way then can the Scripture be a
Rule to me in believing the Scripture, when that Faith is begotten of God by
his Light and Spirit concerning the Scripture? If the mere Scripture could give
me Faith, then it might be allowed to rule my Faith; but when God by his Spirit
alone begets Faith, and without which I can neither understand nor believe the
Scriptures, tell me, If God's Spirit be not the Rule of my Faith; what, how
far, and which way I am to believe them, or the things believed? Certainly they
can never be my Rule, How far, and which way I am to believe themselves, who of
themselves cannot give me that Faith; but it must be wrought by another thing;
so that what gives to believe, rules the Belief, and not the Thing believed:
Therefore the Scriptures cannot be the Rule of Faith.

Now as to this of Christ's Outward Manifestation, I say, so far as it is
Historical, the Scripture is that which furnishes me with a Belief; But I
utterly deny, that they give to believe it in that deep Sense, which may be
truly called a Saving Faith.

The Pharisees had the Scriptures, and they pretended to admire Moses and the
Prophets; yet they crucified Christ, and sought to countenance their Murder by
Scripture. Now had they believed and esteemed the Writings of Moses and the
Prophets from an Inward Sense of Gods Spirit (which the mere Scriptures could
not furnish them with) they had rightly understood them, and not made so ill an
Use of their Historical Knowledge, as to crucify the Lord of Life and Glory.
This shows that Men may have an Historical Faith, and yet not the True Faith
nor Knowledge of the Scriptures, what then gives to believe aright now? why
truly that which did then: the Light and Spirit of Truth; no Man could call
Jesus Lord without it, that is truly so, or upon good ground. No Man could
confess that Christ was come in the Flesh, but whose Spirit was of God, yet now
nothing is more common, and yet nothing is more True then that Thousands of
them are not of God, but lie in Wickedness alienated from the Life of God, etc.
what is the matter then? why this, Those who then confessed that Jesus was come
in the Flesh, did it by Virtue of an Invisible Sight, and through a Divine
Illumination in their Souls: For impossible had it otherwise been for them in
any measure to have seen through the Vail of his Flesh, into that Divine Life,
Power and Wisdom that Vnmeasurably filled it, but having some inward Sense and
Taste of that most excellent Being, that was manifested in and by that bodily
Appearance, therefore did they confess to it, and their Spirits truly reputed
by John to be of God.

And as in that day it was Impossible for any truly and acceptably to confess
to Christ, without a Discerning given, and Faith wrought by the Light and
Spirit of God in the Heart, which was the saving Faith; so is it now equally
Impossible for any to believe that Christ appeared, and that he spoke and did
all these great things, so as to be benefitted thereby, and any ways accepted
of God therein, but as the Light and Spirit of Truth open those Things to the
Understanding, and from a measure of that Divine Life which then immeasurably
appeared (for we have all received of his Fullness and Grace for Grace) true
Faith comes to be begotten in that Manifestation, and a right Confession unto
it. In short, He that calls Christ Lord, must now, as then, do it by the Holy
Ghost, that is from an Experience or Witnessing of his Dominion, and Rule,
which, through the Operation of the holy Spirit, the Soul is to be subjected
to, so that who believes more then Historically that Christ came in the Flesh,
must do it by Virtue of the Divine Light and Spirit, who alone gives to relish
and savor the Truth, Nature and End of that Appearance.

And though it may be allowed, that the Scripture is a Rule, respecting the
History, as it was to those of old, in reference to the particular Prophecies
fulfilled in Christ's coming; yet as there was then a more Inward and Heavenly
Sense of Christ, which drew many after him, and begot deep Faith in him, so
must there now be a more Inward Spiritual and deep grounded Faith of those
things recorded in Scripture, of Christ's Appearance, etc. then the mere Letter
is able to give. And therefore that Light and Spirit which gives that
discerning, and works that deep Sense and Faith must needs be as well the Rule
as Author of it, and not the Scriptures; For if the Scriptures be the Rule,
then either of Themselves or by Interpretation. If of Themselves, then either
in their Translations, or Originals. Not in the Translations, unless the
Translators had been so inspired, that they mist not a tittle, which I am sure
is not so; and consequently none but Scholars have a Rule, for the Unlearned
are secluded; and therefore the English Bible is not a Rule.

If in the Originals of Hebrew and Greek; Query, In what Copies? There are
various Lections in Hebrew: And for the New Testament, so called, there are no
less then Thirty Copies, and all differing; in fine, there are many Thousands
of various Readings.

Now let us Dialogue a little upon Supposition only.

Quaker, If by Interpretation, who shall interpret? Mere Man?


Anabaptist, No.


Q. The Light within?


A. No.


Q. The Spirit?


A. No.


Q. The Church.


A. What Church?


Q. Shall Right Reason interpret?


A. Yes, says T.H.


Q. I Query, Which of them is the Rule? And when that is found out and
determined, then let T. Hicks prove that it is unquestionably true, and has
remained Uncorrupted through every Generation: And by that time he has done all
this, he shall have done a great deal toward our Satisfaction. But what is
this Right Reason?


A. It Is a Faculty in Man rectified.


Q. Very well; But who has this rectified Faculty?


A. Thomas Hicks, say.


Q. Has none it but he?


A. Yes.


Q. Have none Right Reason but such?


A. It was an old Saying* Dip or Damn; but Interest has taught us more
Discretion.


Q. Well then; Others may have Right Reason that are not dipped?


A. We say so, whatever we think among our selves.


Q. What Is the peculiar benefit of Dipping?


A. Much every way.


Q. But which way?


A. We are brought into Church Fellowship.


Q. Are you brought into Fellowship with God by it?


A. No; I cannot say so.


Q. No! what is your Fellowship worth then? the Saints Fellowship was in the
Light, and the true Church Fellowship was in Spirit: What do you receive when
you are dipped?


A. Nothing.


Q Are you no better?


A. No.


Q Why, I once thought you received the Holy Ghost out of hand?


A. I thought so too, but was Mistaken.


Q. Why were thou dipped then?


A. To fulfill the Scripture.


Q. But what led thee to it?


A My own desire.


Q. Is not that Will Worship?


A. What, to do as the Scripture exhorts?


Q. How know thou it exhorted to it*


A. I thought so.


Q. Is that enough? Where Is your being lead by God's Spirit? But to our
Business.


Q. How shall I know Tho. Hicks has this Reason before mentioned?


A. He loftily says so.


Q. But is that sufficient? Well, but where is this Right Reason?


A. In Men.


Q. Is it so? Then it seems that which gives the true Knowledge of the
Scripture is in Man. But tell me honestly, Do ye believe this Right Reason may
Err?


A. No; For then it were not Right Reason, if it could be Wrong.


Q. Well argued. But if a Man Errs, is it not the Fault of Right Reason?


A. By no means.


Q. Thou speak honestly. But why then does T. Hicks charge the Light, the
Quakers profess, with every short-sighted imperfect Saying or Action of this or
any other Generation.


A. Does he?


Q. Yes; it is the great Drift of his Books.


A. Truly that is not fair.


Q. Honestly said. But if this Right Reason cannot Err, then Man cannot Err?


A. No, that does not follow; for Man may not submit to it.


Q. Why, may Man have something in him that cannot Err, and he not be Unerrable?


A. Yes.


Q Rightly said. But why then does T. Hicks conclude so of ^^?


A. It is unfairly done.


Q. Very well. But you say, that this Right Reason is part of Man's Soul, or I
am mistaken, see Dial. page 32. If so, then Man's Soul must be Infallible?


A. Oh, Infallible; that word affrights us. What, Infallible? Pray what is
Infallible?


Q. Poor Man! I see it scares thee indeed. Why, Unerrable and Infallible are
all one. Yea, Right Reason is Infallible by the same Reason, that it cannot be
Wrong.


A. But the Popes talk of being Infallible; are not you like them?


Q. Never the more like them for that; Talking, and Being so, are Two Things.
Men should not deny the true Christ because of an Imposture; nor any fear
Infallibility because the Pope makes Market with such Pretenses. If thou art
not certain of what thou believe, thou have not that Faith which was once
delivered to the Saints; for that was Certain, and therefore Infallible.


A. Why, Is Certain and Infallible all one?


Q. Yes, Certainty and Infallibility is the same. But what think thou of the
Light in this Case under Debate? for either it is the Rule, or it is given to
understand and use the Rule, or else its given for nothing?


A. It Is not the Rule we are taught to say; and yet we cannot conclude it to be
given for nothing.


Q. Very well; then it must be given in order to understand and use the Rule.
Now supposing the Scriptures be the Rule, that which informs me of my Rule, and
teaches me how to use it, must be greater then my Rule, in that it teaches me
to know and do that my Rule cannot do of it self: I query then, If this Light
be not my Rule, how and which Way I come to understand and use this Rule. So
that it is eminently the Rule because of its Present, Immediate and Certain
Direction and Knowledge, and the Scripture at most but a kind of Declaratory
and Secondary Rule, and therefore subject to the Holy Spirit in the Apostles
and primitive Christians, who took not Measures by it, when it distinguished the
Ceremonial from the Moral Precepts so intermixed in the 19th of Leviticus, and
other places; but their Minds being exercised and guided by that Holy Living
Rule, they left off, or continued for a time several Jewish Observations, as
there might be a Service therein signified to them from that Living Rule. The
Light and Spirit of God then, is both THE Rule of Faith and Guide of Life,
superior to the Scriptures, and That by which only they can be rightly known,
believed and fulfilled. A Doctrine Evangelical, and not disowned by those first
Protestants, who testified that no Man could understand the Scriptures given
forth by Inspiration, but by a measure of the same Spirit. To conclude,
Historical Faith, Scripture is a Rule of, but Doctrinal and Saving Faith the
Light and Spirit of God can only be the Rule of; for that which gives Faith is
only that which rules Faith.


3 But (says he) how could you have known, that Swearing in any Case were
Unlawful, if it had not been written, Dial. P. 22.
Swear not at all; Is not then that Scripture your Rule in this Case?

But this shows both the Ignorance of T. Hicks in the Writings of the best
Gentiles, and his Acknowledgment of the Light's Sufficiency, in case we are
able to prove Swearing disallowed and dispract^ised before Christ's Coming in
the Flesh.

The Seven Wise Men famous among the Greeks, and Contemporaries above five
hundred years before Christ came in the Flesh, esteemed Swearing but a Remedy
against Corruption, in Evidence: Stob. 28.
To be sure, they both believed and exhorted People to that State which needed
it not.

Socrates plainly says, that there is a Life more firm, and unquestionable
then an Oath. Consequently Swearing not the best State. Id. 114.


And Xenocrates was had in that Veneration in Athens for his exceeding Virtue,
Val. Max. 2.10. Cic. pro Bal. Laert.
that the Magistrates thought it a questioning of his Honesty to offer him any
Oath, and therefore refused, implying, that Oaths were not made for the best of
Men, and that there is a State attainable, which is more excellent, then that,
in which Oaths are used.

And thus was that Evangelical Precept, Swear not at all, arrived at,
preferred, and honored by professed Gentiles about five hundred years before it
was uttered by our Lord Jesus Christ, therefore the Light from T.H's Objection
answered is proved Sufficient.

4 But here is an utter Insufficiency (if we will believe him) in this mere
Light within to direct us the right Way of Worshipping God; This, Dial P. 35.36.
says he, is manifest from the great Loss the Wisest among the Heathen have
been, and are at, about this very thing, the Multiplying their Deityes*
Worshipping Devils, etc.

He is an incompetent Witness against the Light's Sufficiency, that has never
tried the Extent of its Ability by a Life conformed to what it leads to: If T.
Hicks walked without all Reproof, it were something; But for a Man to talk of
its Insufficiency, whilst it shows that which he is not come up to, as well as
that it condemns for daily Failings is Arrogance with a Witness.

But why is it Insufficient to direct him the Right Way of Worship. Because T.
Hicks has not found it; Is it a good Argument against the Scripture, that
because those who pretend to Square their Faith by it, manifestly Err,
therefore it is Insufficient to direct them Right? Tho. Hicks will never allow
this against the Scriptures; and yet he calls us Names for not tacitly
suffering his base Abuses against the Lord's Light. Romans 1.19, 20.
What if any of the Heathen became vain in their Imginations, who when they
knew God, worshipped him not as God, will it follow, that God's Manifestation
of himself (as the Apostle plainly speaks) in Man, was an Insufficient
Manifestation? The Jews turned Idolaters, they worshipped a Calf, and offered
their Children to Moloch (Devotion made up of Murder and Idolatry) was God's
Light, Law or Good Spirit, and that whole Series of Love and Mercy shown unto
them, Insufficient, because of their Rebellion? I affirm that Thomas Hicks by
this Argument is the horridst Blasphemer that ever lived among Men; For if the
false Deities of the Heathen, and their worshipping of Devils, with the horrid
Idolatries of the Jews, were not the Effects of their own Erring from a
Sufficient Light or Manifestation, to have better informed and directed them,
but through the Insufficiency of the Light to discover the True God, and how to
worship him, T.H. has evidently laid that horrid Charge at God's Door; for he
could not reap where he had not sown. And thus far does he render the Almighty
accessory to those Impieties, that he gave not Man a Sufficiency of Light to
inform him better, that he might have escaped so gross Abomination; which ends
in that detestable Doctrine of Eternal Vnconditional Reprobation; an Offspring
of Satan, a Murderer from the beginning.

In short, Christ is the Light of Men: The Way of the Just is a shining Light:
He that is the Way, Truth and Life, is the Light; Therefore those who Worship
God according to the Light, Worship him in the Spirit and in the Truth, and
walk in the Just Man's Path: For that Men should walk up to the Light of
Christ, and yet be Ignorant of the Right Way of Worship, is gross Ignorance and
Darkness. For Tho. Hicks then to say, that God does make more known then is, or
can be known by the Light, is false and contradictory; For unless there be two
Distinct Divine Lights by Nature (which is an absurd Thing, so much as to
conceive) or that God can manifest any thing without Light, it will follow,
that both the Light is One, and that by that One Light it is, whereby God has
revealed himself through all Ages: And here I would be well understood; for I
know one Age has been attended with larger Discoveries, yet this argues no
Deficiency to have been in the former Manifestation, though it implies Weakness
in the People that they could not receive the same Light in a greater. The
Light is therefore One in it self, however variously it may break forth in any
Age and Generation; I know it has arisen higher and higher; the Difference is
in Degrees, not in Nature; and so T.H. in great contradiction to himself
acknowledges, Dial. page 36. What has been the Duty of every Age, it has
shown, and the best Reason and Rule for the Obedience to any thing superadded
has been the Convictions and Leadings of the Light, according to that
Manifestation, it gave before: Those that went from the Light, and sat down,
grew Rich in Literal Knowledge, were the Opposers of the more glorious Breaking
forth of Light, and not those who kept close to what was revealed. So it is at
this Day; Such as have kept to the Tendering Grace and Spirit among Professors,
such are most moderate to us, and inclined after us; The Hard, Dry and
Cavilling amongst them, as they are strongest in their Combattings, like the
Pharisees of old, so are they most darkened from the Light, and most of all
despise the Testimony of it, and set at naught and oppose, as to the Death, all
those who are become Witnesses of the fresh Resurrection of Light and Life (If
I may so speak) in the Hearts of People. I know not what better to call them,
then Thieves and Robbers, spoken of by Christ, who have gone aside from the
tender Spirit of Jesus Christ, that in Days past strove with them, and with
whose secret Voice they were in some measure affected, and have set up
themselves in a Form, without Power, Praying, Preaching, Dipping and all other
Acts of Worship, Ordinance, etc. without the Leadings of God's Spirit:
Wherefore, said Christ, of the like People; All that came before me are Thieves
and Robbers, they climb over the Wall, Jo. 10.
they come not in at the Door; which Door is that State of Witnessing, at which
that Light and Frothy Prophanist, T.H. bestows so many foul Reflections;
forgetting how much of the ancient Puritan, Brownist and Baptist Religion (...)
made up of Experiences, which with Men that understand Words, has the same
Signification, as well as that Witnessing is more Scriptural. And indeed, I
wonder not at all at it; for where Men that have had some Inward Sense of Life
Eternal, give not way to the more full Breaking forth of the same, but run into
Forms, and take up their Rest by the way, and so come to withstand it, they
^ose what they had, and center, where those be who at first opposed them,
emptying from one to the other till they arrive at Rome again, that so the
Battle may be of Michael and the Devil, the True Church against the False,
Power and Form of Godliness against Form without Power, and the Traditions,
Superstions and Inventions of Men; by which they have endeavored to make void
God's Law: For whoever have lost their Inward Sense of God, and withstand the
Propagation of that Inward Religion, however their Form may be more scriptural,
the same Spirit enters them that reigned in their old Persecutors, and they at
last run back, and end in that, from whence they at first reformed. So
dangerous is it to rest satisfied with a finer Form, which in Truth is but a
better Covering for the old Enemy of God's Spirit and Power to act more
disguisely and securely in.

But lest any should think that all this is said to justle the Scriptures out
of all Use and Service, read these few lines following with Patience and
Impartiality. Though we eminently account the Light or Spirit of Christ to be
the Gospel, Living and Immediate Rule (as the great Promise of the Father (and
that without being ruled and lead or guided by, there is no being a Child of
God) yet we do not thereby intend an Exclusion of the Scriptures from being
Obligatory, or as not Declaratory of those heavenly blessed Truths, that are
fit to be read, believed and practiced; God forbid. No, we know better and
practice otherwise, and have good Satisfaction therein. Nor do we say that
those essential Things relating to Faith and Godliness mentioned therein are by
us to be slighted or contradicted; or that the Light and Spirit we are led by,
does or can lead to any such thing; for by its Holy Discoveries and Convictions
are we made acquainted with them; and our Faith concerning them is firm, and
they are thereby made our Duty, and such is their Correspondence and Agreement,
that from an INWARD ASSENT AND LIVING AMEN, FROM GOD's LIGHT IN OUR CONSCIENCES
do we testify of their Truth, Use and Dignity. And very vain is T. Hick's
Objection, If your Light be Sufficient, why do you read them? since we may
return to him the same; If the Scriptures be Sufficient why do thou use other
Means? Though God's Grace be Sufficient of it self, therefore is the Creature
always in that Condition, wherein he needs not Means? And notwithstanding it be
the Dispensation of Light and Life, more Immediately then has been known to
former Ages, yet we deny not the Use of such Means, as may be used of God's
Light and Spirit, as will be spoken more largly to elsewhere. Man's Mind being
Carnal and abroad, Means in God's Power are used not as settled Teachers, but
as Instruments in God's Hand to testify of and direct to that one Great
Prophet and Living Teacher in the Hearts of Men, that all may come thither, and
be taught of him.

CHAP. V.
Of his Insinuations against us concerning the Scriptures

BUt T.H. that he may be true to his Ungodly Way of perverting our Principles,
would insinuate, First, That we esteem the Scriptures no farther, P. 19, 20,
21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
then as they were the Experiences of Ancient Saints, thereby rendering the
many Prophecies and Promises therein recorded, not yet fulfilled, Unprofitable.
But to take off all Credit to this evil Suggestion, let our sober Readers know,
that by the Light of Christ in our own Hearts and Consciences as to confirm
what of the Scriptures we have experienced, and press after the Compleatment of
those Enjoyments therein expressed; so are we taught reverently to believe
those holy Prophecies and Promises yet unaccomplished to have been given forth
by the Inspiration of the Almighty; and that they shall be as certainly
fulfilled, as they are written. Yet we dare boldly affirm, and that in the Name
of the Lord (before whom we shall give an Account for every Deed done in the
Body) that the greatest Reason of our Belief concerning them, is not from any
Outward thing, but that Inward Testimony, Record and Heavenly Amen, that we
have frequently received from the holy Light within us, to the Truth and
Faithfulness of those Sayings. And if any Quakers there be that are not thus
minded, they are to me unknown, and I publicly renounce, and protest against
that Principle that would in the least derogate from those Holy Writings; which
leads me to his Second Insinuation, viz. As if because we do deny the
Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith and Practice, in Honor to that Divine
Light, which was the Author of them in the Holy Penmen, that we should
therefore deny all those holy Precepts, Commandments and Rules relating to Life
and Godliness that are therein contained: A Consequence so foul, that God
forbid any of us should ever give any Just Occasion for it; For we both believe
Men ought to liv^ up to them, and that they are highly Reprov^able if they
transgress against them But the Reason why, is that Conviction they meet with
from the Light in their own Consciences; wherefore the Scriptures are so far
from being the great Rule of Faith and Practice, that the Light of Christ
within is both our Warrant and Rule for Faith in, and Obedience to them. And
let T.H. say if he can, that the Waldenses, Albigenses, Lo^lards, Hussites,
Lutherans, Calvinists and other Protestants made not the Testimony of God in
their Conscience the chief Ground of their Belief of the Scriptures; to say
nothing of the primitive Christians and most uncorrupted Fathers, who are many
and positive on our behalf.

3 ly, He insinuates, that we equal, nay prefer our Books before the
Scriptures, because of the Titles we give our own Books. viz. The Voice of
Wisdom, A Testimony for God, etc. and what we give the Scripture, namely.
Letter, etc. This I have largely spoken to in my Answer to J. Faldo, but not
knowing whether ever that may be where this probably may come, I shall say thus
much, If at any time we call the Scripture the Letter, it is not that we mean
thereby, our Books are the Spirit, or that we would irreverently set them below
our Writings, but upon a Comparison only betwixt the Scriptures and the Spirit
that gave them forth, and that, I hope, may be done without the least
Disrespect, though such whose Religion stands in Letter and Time, and not in
Spirit and Power, be angry at it. But that we should be thought to slight the
Scriptures, because we bestow such Names upon our Books, is a strange kind of
Consequence. Are not our Books mostly written in a plain, familiar and
Scripture-stile? Do we not earnestly endeavor to confirm what we write by
Scripture, which not only renders it a Part of our Book, but the most Noble
Part too? And shall we notwithstanding be reputed Sleighters of the Scriptures?
Certainly if our Books are called, The Voice of Wisdom, and A Testimony for
God, because from the Voice of Wisdom, and God's Witness in the Conscience; by
good Reason must the Scriptures be interested therein, who are both a part of
them, and such a one too as unto whom our Quotation implies a Manifest
Preference.

His next Insinuation is, that it is Dangerous for Ignorant People to read the
Scriptures, page 42. Contin. page 3.
flinging those hateful Names of Jesuit and Romanist upon us. This Doctrine he
lays to the Charge of G. Fox and Rich. Hubberthorn, in a Book called, Truth's
Defense, page, 101. But the truth of the matter I will relate out of that Book
it self, which has been most partially and basely represented by him.

The Priest's Query lies thus, Whether the Scripture being Carnal, and the
Letter Killing, as you say, we may read them without Danger?

Answ. The Letter which kills, 2 Cor. 3.6. is Dangerous; for thou take it
here to war withal against the Saints, with thy Carnal Mind, giving out thy
Carnal Expositions upon it: And the Ministers of the L^tter are Ministers of
Death, which is to Condemnation, and you take it to make a Trade with it, and
with what the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles said; so that some have Sixty,
some an Hundred pound a Year: But Christ cried, Woe unto such Whited Walls. And
here you read with Danger, who speak of them, and speak a Lie, because you
speak of your selves, and you wrest the Scriptures to your own Destruction, and
to you it is Dangerous to read or speak of it, who know not the Li^e of it as
the Pharisees, who were learned in the Letter, but knew not Christ. But I say,
Blessed is he that does read, and does understand.

This is the true Account in brief ^f their Answer to the Pri^st's Qu^ry: And I
appeal to God's Witness in the Reader's Conscience, if any thing of wh^t that
Vile Man would suggest, is to be found in these M^ns Words; who by Letter
evidently mean the Legal State of Condemnation; by Dangerous, not what
Edification was to be got with respect to reading, but that Aggravation of
Punishment, which would be the Recompense of those who make a Trade of them,
and oppose them, Pharisee like, to the Life and Spirit of Christ Jesus,
wresting them to their own Destruction. Reading to such End and Purpose, will
prove Dangerous with a Witness. And that it was at such a sort of Reading they
struck, consider this Passage, But I say, Blessed is he that does read and does
understand.

Let this Forgery so obvious, ring through the Streets and Towns, wherever
his Book or Name is known; however this is little to what is behind. For my part
I speak my Conscience in Sincerity; I had rather perish off the Earth, then
live so great a Burden of foul Dishonesty, as I doubt not but a little time
will manifest him to be.

That the Baseness of his Intentions in this kind of Arguing may yet further
appear, let this gross Inference directly charged by him upon our Principle, of
the Light's being our Rule, be diligently considered.

From our Asserting the Light Within to be our Rule, he tells the World, That
we mean the holy Qualification, that is in us: Page 20.
Which were it true, he would hit the Mark, when he says, that Holiness, being
a Conformity to the Rule, it cannot be the Rule But never yet certainly did any
but Thomas Hicks so mis-represent the poor Quaker: Nay, he Confounds and
Contradicts himself. How can we be said to make our Holiness the Rule, when we
affirm it only to be a walking up to the Light within, which is Holy? He says
that we assert the Light to be the Rule, how then is our Obedience to it the
Rule; for that is true Holiness? Is there no difference between a Rule, and
Obedience to it? Holy Life, and that which gives it, or makes it so? What a
Meeting here is of Ignorance, Malice and Lying? Any thing to spoil the Quakers;
but God will break the Bow and Spear of their Enemies.

Again, From his Quaker's telling him, Thou take up the Saints Words; but if
thou have not the same Spirit, See p. 21.
what are the Words to thee; he dares to suggest, that our Opinion of the
Light's Sufficiency in every Man cannot be true; And all the Reason he gives us
for his strange Collusion, is this; That those Words imply, that the Spirit or
Light of God is not in all Men.

Now what is more evident, then first, That it is not our Answer? 2. That it
concerns not the Sufficiency, so much as the Universallity of it? 3. By not
having the Spirit, or Light, is not meant, that we believe that God has not
given a Measure of his Good Spirit unto all to profit with, or that there be
some, whom he never enlightened, but that they so have not the Spirit, as to
walk by it, be benefitted by it, or come to enjoy it as their Teacher and
Comforter; and that some may be said, not to be Enlightened, who are not
through Faith in, and Obedience to the Light, come to be advantaged and made
Children of Light by it. Let this suffice at present to show the Man's
Ignorance of our Principles, or his great Unrighteousness to pervert them.

I shall now attend the next Point by him handled, and that is Christ's Person,
and our Faith in him, which, he says, we deny, and indeed he does but say it.

CHAP. VI.
Of our Faith in Christ.

HIs next Cavil is at our Belief in Christ, and which is worse, he would be
thought a Christian in doing so. The great Stress lies here, Tho. Hicks would
have the World think, we Equivocate about our Faith in That Christ which after
the Flesh appeared and dyed at Jerusalem. Dial. p. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47. Contin.
page 40, 41, 43, 44.
The Reason of all this Clamor and Injustice on the part of our angry and
restless Adversary is this; if I wrong him let him show me: The Quakers say,
that Christ is in them; Christ is God, is God Man in them? Again, The Quakers
say, that Christ is in them; But since there is but One Christ, who was born of
a Virgin, and that he suffered at Jerusalem, being there crucified, can that
Christ be in Man? The false Doctrine or Absurdity he would run us upon, is one
of these two, Either that we deny Christ's Manhood, or that He is actually in
our Bodies with that Body he appeared in at Jerusalem, which is Impossible,
witness this one Passage, If God be Christ, as Penn says; or, If the Light
within you be the Christ, as Naylor and Hubberthorn affirm, is it proper or
safe to say, God was Slain, or the Light in you was Crucified?

To which I answer, That as in other things, so in this, our Adversary has
shown his great Ignorance or Malice. For is it reasonable to infer from our
Affirming in Scripture Language, Christ is in the Saints, that we deny him as
to his Visible and Bodily Appearance in the World; and that because he is God,
therefore he was never Man; or that the Word took not Flesh; Is this to
understand us right, or give the World a true measure of our Belief, who is it
confesses Christ to be every where, and if so, then in his People, see Cont.
p. 34. Ah, God the Righteous Judge shall plead with thee in a Day that thou
shall not be able to escape his Terrible Recompense, if thou repentest not. Let
it suffice to the sober Reader (for of him I have little Hopes) that we do
believe that Christ, who is God over all, blessed for ever, did come of
Abraham's Seed according to the Flesh, that the Body prepared of that Line was
his Body, that what Sufferings befell it, were the Sufferings of Christ, just as
the Body is called the Body of Christ: Yet this we do say, and that not in any
Undervalue to the Body, or Bodily Sufferings of Christ, that the Divine Word,
in whom was Life, and whose Life was the Light of Men (who took that Flesh) is
eminently to be looked upon, and that to believe and obey the Light of his Life,
wherewith he has enlightened us, is both the best way to know the Sufferings of
his Body, and to receive the Benefit of them.

In short, unless Christ be not God, and unless the Light be not Christ, I know
no hurt I have done, to assert him to be God, nor any Reason our Adversary has
to infer, therefore I, or any of us, deny him to have taken Flesh, or that he
suffered without the Gates of Jerusalem; or that he is not as well Christ
without us as within us.

Again I do affirm that by the same Reason the bodily Sufferings of the Word,
whose Life was the Light of Men, are frequently attributed to the Word it self,
as if the Word had immediately sustained them, and not the Body, the Light
which shines in the Consciences of Mankind, which is the very Life of the
Word, or Word it self, is not unconcerned in the bodily Sufferings, but both
gives to believe them aright, and to receive Benefit by them, and that as the
Sufferings of his own Body, by and through which his Glory, Grace and Truth,
did shine forth, in the World: which are now revealed afresh in the Hearts of
all who believe in him. Let our Adversaries deal so fairly with us, as to
distinguish between Christ, and the Body of Christ, as before Abraham the Rock
in the Wilderness, and the Appearance of Christ in the Flesh, and not infer
from our denying that the whole Christ could die; that Christ, that is, the
Body of Christ suffered or died not; And when we say, he who took Flesh has
appeared to, and in our Hearts, that we exclude and deny his then Visible and
Bodily Appearance, or that he is not now as well without us, as within us; and
we shall never doubt of a good Issue. But truly after the rate we have been
used by him, the most Scriptural Assertions can never escape a being accounted
False and Unwarrantable. For because we are with godly Fear Jealous, least the
whole Christ should be thought to have been then crucified, when his Body was,
which strikes at the Life of the Immortal and Divine Being, we are represented
by this Perverter of our right Meaning, as Denyers of that Body, whilst he
himself acknowledges that the mere Manhood was not the Christ, but the Word
made Flesh, Emmanuel. Page 44. Dialogue.

2. Because we assert that true Light, with which every Man is enlightened, to
be in it self the Christ of God, and Savior of the World; he infers that we
deny the Outward Sufferings of Christ in his Bodily Appearance, and in short*
that we deny the True Christ, because he dyed and rose again, etc. which the
Light never did, never considering that if he makes what dyed and rose again
the entire Christ and Savior, he excludes the Divinity or Godhead, which he
confesses to be Christ in conjunction with the Manhood, and which the
Scriptures call strictly the Savior, besides whom there is none; and which J.
Faldo himself page 85. part 2. acknowledges to be such. But if T. Hicks does
allow, as indeed he does, that Christ is God, as well as Man, there is nothing
befalls us from his Inference, but what strikes himself equally; for if the
Light, with which Men are enlightened, be not Christ, because it cannot dye,
then Christ cannot be Christ as God, because God cannot dye. Well! But T. Hicks
tells us, that Christ as God is also Christ, and that it was Christ's Body only
that dyed; Therefore I conclude, that to own Christ to be that true Light,
which enlighteneth all men, or that true Light to be Christ, is no Derogation
from Christ or Undervalue to his Bodily Sufferings.

3. And because that one of us spoak of a Twofold Appearance of Christ in the
Soul, first as a Seed of Light in Man, and next, as perfect Day, or in a full
grown State of Glory, Therefore says he, a Personal Coming in any respect is
denied by you, Contin. page 45. which Conclusion is so horribly Unjust, that no
Impartial Man needs an Answer to it. And let the Partial know, that we have not
only confessed to his Personal Appearance, But T.H. has so much Faith for us.
Dial. page 45. The Baseness and self-Contradiction of the Man is notorious
enough as to this Point.

I shall proceed to the next Particular, and that is, If Christ signify
Anointed, and Christ be God, as Penn says, I would query (says our Adversary)
whether God himself was anointed? Contin. page 47.

But though this might have seemd something from a Socinian hand, yet from T.
Hicks, it gives us no Difficulty at all; for since he acknowledges Christ to
be as well God as Man, and that Christ was not anointed by halfes, but
entirely, as the Word (...) Christ, from (...) to Anoint, does imply, I would
fain be informed (Argumentum ad hominem) Who anointed the Godhead, without
which T. Hicks affirms again and again, Christ was not Christ, because (says
he) Christ is God manifest in the Flesh. Dialog. page 44. And since he is for
Querying, let me ask him, who is understood in that Passage, God even thy God
has anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness, etc? Was that said of Christ or
no? If not, say so; If it was, as most, or all believe, then, whether the
Divine Nature of Christ was unconcerned in that Anointing? And who it was that
anointed him is evident from the place? If T. Hicks will limit God to the
manner of his Manifestations and Operations respecting us, that is, that he is
no otherwise to, and in himself, then what he appears to us to be; what will
he make of that place, To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given; Isa. 6.9.
he shall be called Wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace? etc. Shall God's Condescensions to Man's weak and
depraved state by personating, and representing things to his capacity, be an
Argument that he is no otherwise in himself? Are we confused because we use his
Words? or shall Man rise up against God's way of uttering forth himself
suitable to the shortness of his Understanding! This kind of Cavil might better
become a Carnal Pharisee, or Scoffing Heathen then a Man pretending to
Christianity. Base Man that he is, who rewards the Almighty so ill for his
Merciful Condescensions! But to the Blind all things are dark.

But he thinks that he has caught me irrecoverably: hear his Dialogue. Cont. p.
48.
Chr. Was not Christ God's Gift? Quak. Yea he was so. Chr. To what end? Quak.
His Doctrine, Life, Miracles, Death and Sufferings to God is the Gift and
Expression of God's Eternal Love for the Salvation of Men. Penn's Sandy Found.
Page 19. Chr. Thou have affirmed that God is Christ: If so, Did God die and
suffer to God?

To which I answer, that T. Hicks, as in other places, so here is basely
Unjust, and if he accounts me his Adversary or an Opposer of his Principles,
though I never had to do with him in particular, nor any of that People in
general; It behooved him to be honest, and give me my due; Instead of which he
leaves out some Words, and horribly perverts the rest. For first I did in that
Book acknowledge and confess to Christ's Bodily Appearance, and that he was
born of the Virgin Mary after the Flesh, and that largely and plainly p. 36.
which he wholly omitts to mention. Secondly, I do not remember that I so expressed
my self, that God was Christ, but whether I did or no, to insinuate a Denial of
his Manifestation in Flesh is most perversely wicked and ungodly, as well as
that it plainly shows, notwithstanding his feigned Confession to Christ's
Divinity, that in truth he owns him not to be God, or he has very ill expressed
himself when he says thou affirmest God is Christ (or Christ is God) for it
implies he does not; else what means his following words, did God himself dye
and suffer to God? he thus queries to show the Absurdity of believing God to be
Christ (or Christ to be God) and tells us that he believes what dyed was the
Entire Christ. Certainly, he is either rank Socinian in the Point (which I
mention not in Disgrace, unless it be to that Party that so impious a Person is
of it) or he has not well given us his Mind. But this proves what elsewhere I
observe of him, that from our Asserting Christ to be God, or God Christ, Tho.
Hicks is ignorant or malicious enough to infer, that we deny that ever he took
Flesh; whence he would fasten such like Absurdities upon us, you say Christ
dyed, Christ you say is God, did then God dye? etc.

But if he has represented us to deny the Bodily Appearance, why did he not
also make us to deny his Death and Sufferings too, and then there had been no
room for that preposterous Conclusion; But to insinuate a Belief of our Denial
of Christs's coming in the Flesh, and not of his Death, that he might bring us
upon this Pinch of Contradiction, to wit, that God dyed, and not the Body in
which he was manifested, is such an invented piece of Dishonesty as deserves
nothing else then the Abhorrence of all Impartial Persons; In short, we say,
that God manifested in Flesh was the true Christ that then appeared, that the
Flesh, and not God dyed, and that the whole of the Appearance, whether in Life
or Death, was for Man's Salvation. And if Tho. Hicks is not herewith contented,
we cannot help it, but hope others are not so Unreasonable.

But he proceeds thus; Give me leave to ask you, directing himself to his
foresaid Quaker, Contin. P. 49.
Whether one great End wherefore Christ was given and came into the World was
not to seek and to Save such that were lost. Quak. Yea, he came to seek and
save the lost.

Christ. But who, or what is this that was lost.

He wickedly and with an Aggravation, like the Enmity of his Spirit, thus makes
G. Keith to answer, That which is lost is still in Man, That, Christ came to
seek and save, and all his Ministers preached People to this, the lost in Man,
a lost God, a lost Christ, etc. To which says T.H. Blush O Heavens, and be
Astonished O Earth! Was ever such a thing as this heard of before, that Jesus
Christ came to seek and save a lost God, a lost Christ? etc. Was ever God and
Christ in a Lost Condition? But the Heavens may Blush, and the Earth be
Astonished indeed at such sordid and base Dealing. G. Keith means, that Christ
came to seek and to save, by turning People to enquire after a lost God and a
lost Christ, the Groat within, the Pearl in the Field. etc. that is, to God's
Light in them, by which God and Christ are revealed to the Soul; Romans 1.
For whatever may be known of God is manifest within, which they Rebelling
against, had lost the Knowledge of the only true God, and Jesus Christ: And
this unrighteous Person turns it that G. Keith meant, that Christ came to seek
and to save a lost God, and lost Christ; What Sense can there be in so horrible
a Perversion, as well as that there is no color for it, who endeavors to
insinuate that Christ came to save God and Christ, not the Soul by turning it
to seek after God and Christ; and to represent God and Christ's Condition Lost
and Perilous, instead of theirs, who had or have lost God and Christ? In short,
Lost as taken by T.H. is meant of Man's lost Condition, and as there used by G.
Keith, is understood of God and Christ, whom Man had and has lost the
Knowledge of, and Fellowship with. But such sinister Practices savor of the
height of Dishonesty; The Inventer of BAXTER BAPTIZED IN BLOOD BY ANABAPTISTS
is nothing to this horrible kind of Perversion; And I doubt not, but T. Hick's
Recompense will be more terrible from the hand of a Just God, irritated by such
Irreligious Proceedings. However, I will return upon T. Hicks what more
concerns him then he is aware of: If Christ came to seek and to Save that which
was Lost, then because the whole World was lost, he came to seek and to save
the whole World; And if so, then, Reprobates because Lost, or else there can be
no such thing, as Eternal Reprobation, or Men from Eternity unalterably decreed
to Eternal Destruction; How much more this confounds his own partial Opinion of
Predestination then any thing he has said can the Quakers Principles, let the
Sober minded judge.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Seed, and Redemption of the Seed.

HIs next Stumble, and gross Perversion of our Words, is concerning the Seed,
from a passage or two taken out of the Books of J.N. and G.F. That the Seed is
Christ, that the Seed wants Redemption, as being laden by Sinners as a Cart
with Sheaves, etc. He thus argues; If then Redemption be of the Seed, and this
Seed be Christ, either there must be more Christ's then one, Dialog. page 47.48.
or else Christ came to redeem himself. Again, Christ-without you esteem to be
but a Creature; but the Seed-within you say is God. Tell me seriously whether a
Creature can redeem the Creator. Can you pretend to be guided by an Infallible
Spirit, and yet be guilty of such gibberish and folly as this?

To which, before I make my Answer, I think fit to insert that which he gives
in the Name of the Quakers.

Here thou show thy dark Mind, and that thou art still in thy Imagination,
understanding neither the Redemption nor the Seed; which however feigned by
himself against himself, is so great a Truth, that there is scarcely one
Passage in his Dialogue more allowable.

But to his Argument and Question. We do assert the Redemption of the Seed for
the Light and Life which has been as sown in the Heart of Mankind, has been
loaded with Sin, pressed down with Iniquity, grieved and almost quenched
through Disobedience, which words are not properly, but metaphorically to be
taken, as used by the holy Penmen, whereby to make things the more plain and
easy to common capacities. It is said in Scripture, Out of Egypt have I called
my Son, a Place of Bondage and grievous Weights, Burdens and Oppressions, from
all which the Seed was to be redeemed; and Christ came, or God was manifested
in the Flesh, that the Seed of Light, Truth and Righteousness might break
through and arise over all Corruption, by which it had been grieved and pressed
down. And it is no Contradiction to say, That God did rid himfelf of the
Enemies that oppressed his own Righteous Life, or that he brought Salvation to
himself; for the Scriptures frequently speak on that wise, especially in those
two notable Passages of Isaiah, Isa. 59.16.
And he saw that there was no Man, and wondered that there was no Intercessor,
therefore his Arm brought Salvation to him, and this Righteousness it sustained
him. Again, The Year of my Redeemed is come; Isa. 63.4, 4.
and I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to
uphold; therefore Mine own Arm brought Salvation unto Me, and My Fury it upheld
me. Whence it is no ways absurd that we affirm, that the End of God's
Manifesting himself in the Flesh was for the Redemption or Deliverance of his
Holy Life that was in Man but as a small Seed, even the smallest of Seeds, that
had been long vexed, grieved, bruised and pressed down by Sin and Iniquity; For
the End of that Appearance was, that Sin might be destroyed, and that Christ,
who had been as a Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, might be exalted
in the Hearts of Men and Women, and his, and their Foes, made his and their
Footstool: For the Work is Inward, we do aver in the Name of the Lord; for
where the Devil has Reigned and had Dominion to wit, in Man, there be must be
defeated, and subdued; and Christ alone, by whom that is brought to pass, ought
and must have the Power and the Kingdom forever. And if this be the Folly and
Gibberish the Quakers must be charged with from this Anabaptist Preacher, we
are content to use it, as well as patient to bear his insolent Scoff; only let
all take notice, that we understand not by the Seed's Redemption, its being
redeemed from the Pollution, but the Weight of Sin and Iniquity; for it was and
is pure forever.

Now as to our Calling Christ-without a Creature, I must tell him, it is not our
Language; but if he means by it the Body born of the Virgin, I suppose T. Hicks
is far from believing that to be the Creator, though his manner of speaking
shows a dislike of us, that we don't, because he says that we esteem the
Christ without, or the Outward and Visible Part of Christ but a Creature, as if
he believed it to be the Creator. However manifest it is he believes, that the
Redemption wrought, is not by that God, who in those foregoing Passages speaks
so expressly to that purpose, and who in time manifested himself in the Flesh,
but the Flesh only, by and through which he was so manifested.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Soul of Man.

HIs next Abuse of us that I shall take notice of, is this, That G. Fox and
others hold the Soul to be a part of God, of God's Being, Dialog. p. 1.
and that it is without Beginning; All which (says he) is as much as to say,
the Soul is God. SO THAT GOD SETS UP A LIGHT IN HIMSELF, WHICH HE HIMSELF IS TO
OBEY, AND IN SO DOING GOD SHALL BE SAVED.

Behold your Anabaptist Preacher! A Man of Truth, Tender Conscience, of the
first Form of Christians, a Contender for the Faith once delivered to the
Saints, and what else he falsely pretends, and in vain would have us think him
to be. What so Base? What so Irreligious as this Perversion? Men nor Devils
could never study more our Wrong, then this pretended Christian has done. If
this be his Christianity, The God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob preserve my Soul
from ever coming within the Borders of such Religion; but Christianity is
absurd by such Traducers, and God's Spirit is grieved by such Injustice. I
would not use the worst of Men, no not Devils themselves, at that unequal Rate
he deals with us, who both mis-cites his Words, and abuses the true Meaning of
what is truly cited. G. Fox says thus, God breathed into Man the Breath of
Life, and he became a Living Soul, and is not this of God, of his Being? etc.
and is not this that comes out from God, part of God, and from God? Where
nothing can well be clearer than that G.F intends that Divine Life, Power and
Virtue by which Adam in Soul and Body came to live to God. Can T.H. say after
all this, that he cited G F. right, and ask the Quaker in his Dialogue, Dare
thou say I have not quoted him truly? Hardened Man!

Breathed that is Inspired: Breathed being the English Word, Inspired borrowed
from the Latin Inspirare; the Greek has it (...), as Joh. 20.22 has breathed
into, enlivened, inspired, quickened; the Hebrew (...) and he breathed or
blowed: on which R. Nachmanni and the Author Hiskuni in P. Fagins's Comment on
the Place, speak thus, That God inspired Man with something of his own
Substance; that he contributed something to him* and bestowed something of his
own Divinity upon him, and that God did inspire Man with the Holy Ghost; and
that (...) is a proper Word for it. Which is as much as can be collected or
justly concluded from what G. Fox has said concerning Man. But this Ungodly
Person would infer from our Asserting that the Breath God breathed into Adam's
Soul, whereby it lived to God, was of God's own Divine Life, that the Soul of
Man, as a mere Creature, created Capacity, is of God's own Being and Substance;
and when he his done, with a Taunt becoming none but a Profane Person, tells
us, that then God sets up a Light in himself, which being obeyed by him, he
comes to be saved; as (...) the Soul needed either a Light or Savior, in case
it were God; or, that God could obey any thing, or needed Salvation. O
monstrous Blasphemy against God, and horrid Injustice to us! For as God can
obey none, nor need Salvation, neither in sense can we be thought so to believe
of the Soul, as by him represented; Read G. Fox 's Gr. Mist. p. 91.
since our pleading for a Saving Light, the necessity of Obedience to it, the
Eternal Reward of Life or Death, Happiness or Misery, as it is conformed to, or
rebelled against, prove our Faith in that Matter to be quite another thing. If
this be your Champion, I dare warrant his own Baseness shall be his own
Overthrow; we need no more against him, then his own Ignorance, Malice, Lies,
Forgeries and Slanders to his utter Confutation in the Minds of all Impartial
Persons.

CHAP. IX.
Of Justification, and something of Satisfaction.

THe Doctrine of Justification is the next Particular that I am to take notice
of. He begins with the Quaker thus, Pray what is your Opinion of Justification
by that Righteousness of Christ which He in his own Person fulfilled for us
WHOLELY WITHOUT US. Quak. Contin. P. 50.
Justification by the Righteousness which Christ fulfills for us in his own
Person WHOLELY WITHOUT US, we boldly affirm it to be a Doctrine of Devils, and
an Arm of the Sea of Corruption, which does now deluge the World, Will. Penn
Apol. p. 148.

This Apology cited was written against a Malicious Priest in Ireland, who in a
Book by him published not long before, laid it down as Unscriptural, and a very
heinous Thing in us to deny Justification (without any Distinction expressed) by
the Righteousness which Christ wrought in his own Person WHOLELY WITHOUT If
wholely without us, then none of it within us.
US. To whom I made the Answer given by T. Hicks; And if therein I have crossed
the express Testimony of the Scriptures, It was such a Justification, as
respected being made just by the Destruction of Sin inherent by the Spirit and
Power of Christ Jesus, and not being accounted Just from the Guilt, and former
Sins freely Remitted in his Blood, as an Offering for Sin once for all to every
one that truly repents.
let any show me; But if I have only thwarted a most Sin-pleasing (and
therefore Dangerous) Notion; let such as hold it look to that: He has not
offered me one plain Scripture, nor the Shadow of a Reason, why this Passage
ought to be reputed unsound or condemnable. If any Living will produce me but
one Passage out of Scripture, that tells of a Justification by such a
Righteousness as is WHOLELY WITHOUT US, I shall fall under its Authority; but
if we only deny Men's corrupt Conceits and Sin-pleasing Glosses* and they offer
us nothing to our Confutation, or better Information, we shall not think bare
Quotations of our Books to be sufficient Answers. But to the end all may
understand the Reason of my so Answering that Priest, take those short Reasons
then rendered, with any one of which I am to suppose T. Hicks desired not to
meddle.

First, No Man can be Justified without Faith (says Jenner.) No Man has Faith
without Works (any more then a Body can live without a Spirit) says James.
Apol^g. p. 148.


Therefore the Works of Righteousness, by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, are
necessary to Justification.

Second, If Men may be justified, whilst Impure; then God quits the Guilty,
contrary to the Scripture; which cannot be, I mean while in a Rebellious State.

Third, Death came by Actual Sin, not Imputative, in his sense; therefore
Justification unto Life comes by actual Righteousness, and not Imputative.

Fourth, This speaks Peace to the Wicked, whilst Wicked; but there is no
Peace to the Wicked, says my God.

Fifth, Men are Dead and Alive at the same time, says this Doctrine* for they
may be dead in Sin, and yet alive in another's Righteousness, not Inherent, and
consequently, Men may be damned actually, and saved imputatively.

Sixth, But since Men are to reap what they sow; and that every one shall be
rewarded according to his Works; and that none are Justified but the Children
of God; and that none are Children but who are led by the Spirit of God; and
that none are so led, Gal. 6. Rev. 22. Romans 8.
but those that bring forth Fruits thereof, which is Holiness; It Is not the
Oil in another Lamp, but in our own only, which will serve our turns; I mean,
the Rejoicing must be in our selves, and not in another: yet to Christ's holy
Power alone do we ascribe it, who works all our Works in us.

All which was not only not answered, but not cited by him.

He brings me in again thus; Justification is not from the Imputation of
another's Righteousness; P. 51. Contin.
but from the actual Performing and Keeping God's Righteous Statutes, Sand.
Found. p. 25. To which, after this base and disingenuous Citation, he returns
me this only Answer; Is it not written, Romans 5.19. By the Obedience of one many
are made Righteous? But before I explain the Truth of that Scripture, be
pleased to hear my Argument, as it is laid down in my Book, and then give thy
Judgment, Reader, upon the Man.

The Son shall not bear the Iniquity of his Father; The Righteousness of the
Righteous shall be upon him, and the Wickedness of the Wicked shall be upon
him. When a Righteous Man turns away from his Righteousness, Ezekiel. 18.20, 26,
27, 28.
for his Iniquity that he has done shall he dye; Again; When the Wicked Man
turns away from his Wickedness, and does that which is Lawful and Right, he
shall save his Soul alive; yet says the House of Israel, The Ways of the Lord
are not Equal. Are not my Ways Equal? If this was once Equal, its so still;
for God is Unchangeable; And therefore I shall draw this Argument, That the
Condemnation or Justification of Persons is not from the Imputation of
another's As wholely without us.
Righteousness; but the actual Performance, or not keeping of Gods righteous
Statutes or Commandments; otherwise God should forget to be Equal: It is to be
understood of a Righteousness Wrought by Christ's Power within, when I speak of
being justified; that is, made just by it.
Therefore how wickedly Unequal are those, who not from Scripture Evidences,
but their dark Conjectures, and Interpretations of obscure Passages, would
frame a Doctrine, so manifestly inconsistent with God's most pure and equal
Nature; making him to condemn the Righteous to Death; and justify the Wicked
to Life, from the Imputation of another's Righteousness. -- A most Unequal Way
indeed.

Where observe that the Answer he makes me give in his Dialogue, is delivered
by me with an If it be so, fetched expressly from the Text it self: so that the
Scripture, and not W. Penn is most struck at by him. However it be, he has
offered us no Opposition yet, but that Passage out of the Romans, which will
not be found inconsistent with Ezekiel's Testimony, on which my Argument was
grounded.

The whole Verse was thus, For as by one Man's Disobedience many were made
Sinners, Romans 5.19.
so by the Obedience of one shall many be made Righteous; which if the whole
Chapter be well considered* is no more then this; that as Adam, representative
of Mankind (from whence he had that Name) was he by whom Sin entered into the
whole World; So Christ was He, by whose comeing, and Obedience Righteousness
had an entrance to the Justification of many. In short, the Work Christ had to
do was twofold. 1 To remit, forgive, or justify from the Imputation of Sin
past, all such as truly repented, believed and obeyed him. And 2ly, by his
Power and Spirit operating in the Hearts of such to destroy and remove the very
Ground and Nature of Sin, whereby to make an End of Sin, and finish
Transgression present and to come; that is, the first removes the Guilt, the
second the very Cause of It. Now I grant that his Obedience unto Death was in
order to make Men Righteous, because it was in the Nature of a Sacrifice by
which God testified unto the World his Desire of Reconciliation through the
Remission of the Sins that are past, which was held forth, and came, and was
confirmed by that Obedience, even to the Death of the Cross; In which Sense the
Just sufferd for the Unjust: Romans 2* 3, 4, 5. Chap.
and whilst we were Sinners Christ dyed; He was made Sin, that is, to take away
Sin for us (an Hebraism) and he justifies the Ungodly, that is, remitteth the
Ungodly upon Repentance, and bore our Iniquities, 2. Cor. 5.19.
or bore away our Iniquities, that is, by this Offering for Sin, was Remission
for Sins past declared and confirmed unto all, as an Universal Propitiation;
For God was in all these Sufferings showing forth his Love and reconciling the
World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them. But still
Repentance was that which brought home the general Pardon promulgated, in and
by that holy Offering up of his Body once for all unto every particular Soul.
Thus by the Obedience of that one Man, even to the Death of the Cross, many
come to be made Righteous, that is, justified from many Offenses, see Romans 5.6,
7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. But if this first part of Justification,
which is Remission of Sin, be not obtainable by any, however general it be in
Christ, without Repentance from dead Works, which implies Faith, Contrition and
Amendment of Life; How miserably is T. Hicks out, who brings this very
Scripture we are upon, to prove that we are completely justified (which takes
in both Forgiveness of Sin past, and a being Inwardly made Just through the
casting out of Sin by the just and holy Power and Spirit of God operating in
the Heart and Conscience) by Christ's Righteousness WHOLELY WITHOUT US.

I grant it that Forgiveness of Sin is God's free Love, mere Grace and rich
Mercy, declared in and by Christ Jesus to the World, and that this Grace
abounded unto all; for He was a Propitiation, not only for the Sins of those
that believe, but of the Whole World; yet the whole Benefit thereof should
never redound unto any, whilst alienated from God by wicked Works.

Peter preached another Doctrine: For though Christ dyed for the Ungodly, yet
they were not thereby Justified, that is, pardoned for Sin past, while
Unrepentant. Peter says, Repent, and then they should receive Remission of
Sins. Act 3.38.
Now I would fain know how this Repentance is wrought, by which, as a
Condition, any come to have an Interest in that great Pardon held out to the
whole World; Is the Spirit of Christ unconcerned in it? Can we think one Good
Thought of our selve^? Are we not altogether degenerated Plants of a Strange
Vine? by Nature Children of Wrath? etc. Is not this frequently confessed by the
Professors of Religion in our times, and the most affected piece of their
Righteousness too? Well then! If we cannot repent of our selves, and that
Repentance is a Condition, and that it is in the Soul, and that it cannot be
there without the Spirit of Christ work it, tell me plainly if something is not
to be done within, and therefore of the Nature of Inward Righteousness, before
any Benefit be procured, derived or received from Christ's Death and Sufferings
to any particular Person. This is close to our Point; for therefore is it that
we affirm, that such as go on to transgress against the Law of the Spirit of
Life, and so disobey the Light, and grieve the Holy Spirit by wicked Works, are
not in that State Justified; I mean now, that they are not so much as forgiven,
and least of all, that they should be looked upon as completely justified, that
is, by Qualification and Participation of the Divine Nature, truly and inwardly
made Just; since it would be to say, that by the Obedience of one, many shall
be made Righteous, who notwithstanding remain Disobedient and Rebellious to
God's Grace which has appeared unto them. We do say again, that such a
Doctrine, so speaking Peace to a State of Sin and Death, and shutting out an
Inward Work many ways necessary to the Forgiveness of Sin past, or daily
Acceptante with God, IS NO LESS THEN THE DOCTRINE OF DEVILS, and the worst they
have to propagate, to the Dishonor of God, and the Eternal State of People
Souls. In short, here lies the gross Mistake of our Adversaries: They make the
Sufferings of Christ which peculiarly relate to the first part of
Justification, Remission of Sins past, to be that which has answered, not only
for Sins past, but present and to come, so as to acquit them from all Inward
Work as necessary to Justification completely taken, contrary to express
Scripture. Romans 5.25. and the great End of Christ's Spiritual Manifestation in
his People. There might be much more said in this matter, but because he
thinks, I have not made a little for him in my Book truly entitled The Sandy
Foundation Shaken, and that I am to be short, I shall proceed to dispatch what
remains, as God shall enable me.

To that Answer he gave out of the Romans by the Obedience of one, etc.)
already with other Scriptures explained and vindicated from his Abuse of them,
he makes me thus to answer him.

Quak. It is a great Abomination to say, God shall condemn and punish his
Innocent Son, that he having satisfied for our sins, we might be justified by
the Imputation of his perfect Righteousness. O why should this horrible thing
be contented for by Christians? Penn. ibid. p. 25.30.

To which he returns. Chr. How now Mr. Penn, Is this the Doctrine of Christ's
Sufferings for Sinners, to make Satisfaction to Divine Justice an horrible
thing, and an Abomination to you? Do you consider what you say? And thus brings
me in answering him. Qu. This I do say, that the Consequences of such a
Doctrine are both Irreligious and Irrational. Penn. ibid. P. 16. Now that he
has dealt Blasphem ously with God, and Injuriously with me, as well as that he
has given me no account of his thoughts upon the Error he makes me guilty of,
in case I held it, besides that impertinent Question, plainly appears.

First he has dealt Blasphemously with God in calling Christ's Suffering, God's
condemning and punishing his Innocent Son, etc. which his Censure of my so
Phrasing their Opinion, manifestly implies. Now I appeal to all Impartial
People, which of us two is most to be blamed, I that confess to Christ's
Sufferings as the Effect of Gods's Love; thereby not to satisfy himself, as a
Revenger, or as he could not forgive (for none of that is in the Verse at all)
which yet is in their Sordid Opinion; but as a God full of Mercy, Forgiveness
and Pardon to all true Penitents, to declare to the World his free Remission of
Sins, and that he would not impute their Iniquities unto them, if they would
repent, believe and obey; or T. Hicks, who holds that God condemned and
punished his Innocent Son for other Folks Sins, that he might be satisfied:
for pardon he neither could, nor would: And which is most absurd; Christ being
this same God, he at once makes him the Party satisfying, and the Party
satisfied, which is absurd and impossible; besides it is such a Satisfaction as
has paid all Debts, past present and to come, whereby all Inward
Righteousness, though of Christ's Working, is not necessary to Justification in
any Kind.

Secondly, He has dealt Injuriously with me, and that in two Respects, 1. In
not stating the Doctrine truly, which I opposed, and my Words at length, that
they might speak for themselves (But in that case, perhaps he thought he should
have been obliged to answer them, a thing he every where seems afraid of, his
Trade ^s Cavi^^^g,) And 2l^, In that he brings this Passage which oppos^d suc^
a Satisfaction, as is said to have paid for Sins p^st, present, and to come, to
answer a Scripture which concerns Justification, and that part of it too, which
relates to Remission of Sins; Insinuating, that I make Men's own Works
sufficient to Justification in the first sense, I mean, Remission, and in the
second sense, I mean daily Acceptance upon being made Just; and lastly, that I
overturn all the Righteousness, Death and Sufferings of Christ; whilst in Truth
and Sincerity of Soul, 1. by Justification, not by another's Righteousness
WHOLELY WITHOUT, I only meant, That it was Christ's Righteousness wrought in
us, and not our own, which made Inwardly Just, and which gave daily Acceptance,
and brought into the heavenly Fellowship with the Father and with the Son; the
Justification then intended by me. 2 ly, Since God has made his Truth known to
me, I have ever understood Christ's being offered up to signify, the carrying
away of Sin, the bearing away of Iniquity, that by which God declared Remission
and Forgiveness of Sins past to all that repented. And this Justification,
called Romans 4. ver. 5, 6, 7, 8, God's not Imputing Sin, I have ever owned to be
the Free Unmerited Love of God to the World; And was not that Justification by
me spoken of in the Passage cited? 3 ly, That which I opposed was so rigid a
Satisfaction, as made it absolutely unavoidable or necessary in God to require
a Satisfaction, thereby robbing him of the Power of his free Mercy and
Loving Kindness to remit and pass by, and that Christ did not answer or pay, by
the Act of his Suffering, for Sins past, present and to come; but as he
declared Remission by his Blood for the Sins past of the whole World, the
beginning of his Work; so that he does by his Power and Spirit, subdue, destroy
and cast out Sin out of the Hearts of all who believe in him, whereby their
Consciences come to be made pure, they sanctified throughout in Body, Soul and
Spirit, which necessitates to Good Life, and speaks no Peace to the Wicked in
their Wickedness, nor yet to the sloathful, formal and carnal Professor of
Religion. Therefore such rage, and imagine a vain thing against us.

That the Consequences of the common Notion of both Satisfaction and
Justification are Irreligious and Irrational, though what has been said might
suffice with Sober and Impartial Readers; yet I may anon have further Occasion
to prove it. In the mean time, Contin. P. 52.
He tells the World, that William Penn, in Answer to this Question, How did
Christ fulfill the Law for Sinners? says, That Christ fulfilled the Law ONLY as
our Pattern or Example, S.F. p. 26. In which he has done exactly like himself;
For if he can find the Word ONLY there, or such an Answer to such a Question,
or the Matter strictly contained in that Question, he has not wronged me; but
sure I am there is no such Question, and as sure, that the Fulfilling of the
Law, was not the Subject treated on, and very certain, that the Word Only was
not there; therefore a Forger. That which I said, with the Scripture on which
it was grounded, Sand. Found. Shaken. p. 26.
follows: If ye keep my Commandments ye shall abide in my Love, even as I have
kept my Father's Commandments and abide in his Love.

[From whence this Argument does naturally arise; If none are truly Justified
that abide not in Christ's Love, and that none abide in his Love that keep not
his Commandments; then consequently none are justified but such as keep his
Commandments. Besides here is the most palpable Opposition to an Imputative
Righteousness that may be; For Christ is so far from telling them of such a Way
of being Justified, as that he info^m^th them, the Reason why he abode in his
Father's Love, was his Obedience; and is so far from telling them of their
being Justified, whilst not abiding in his Love, by Virtue of his Obedience
imputed unto them, that unless they keep his Commands, and obey for themselves,
they shall be so remote from an Acceptance, as wholely to be cast out; in all
which Christ is but our Example] Now that this concerned not the Whole Law
Christ came to fulfill; The whole He was Our Example in Holiness, though not in
his Ending Types and Shadows.
Law he fulfilled, the place of Scripture quoted, the Nature and Matter of the
Argument clearly proves. Next, If Christ had been other then our Example in
that case, then he should have fulfilled his own Commandments in our stead, who
from Obeying his Father's, taught us, our Duty was to obey His. And supposing
that he could have kept his own Commandments, and obeyed himself for us, or in
our stead, it would have followed, (1.) That we needed not to have kept them,
unless they were to be observed twice over. And that (2ly,) in not keeping of
them, we had been notwithstanding justified from his alone Fulfilling of them;
unless his Answering them had been Insufficient. The first of which, if I
understand any thing, opens a Door to all Licentiousness (however Upright some
may be in their Intentions to the contrary) And the last strikes dead their own
Opinion of the Sufficiency of Christ's Personal Obedience, to perfo^m all
needful on our Account; Contin. p. 52.
From hence he undertakes to charge me with the Merit of Works. My words at
length are these, which he thought good to conceal.

Was not Abraham justified by Works when he offered Isaac? Sand. Found. Shaken,
p 30.
and by Works was Faith made perfect; and the Scripture was fulfilled, which
says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness. By
which we must not conc^ive, as do the dark Imputarians of this Age, that
Abraham' s Offering Personally was not a Justifying Righteousness, but that God
was pleased to account it so; since God never accounts a thing that which it is
not; nor was there any Imputation of another's Righteousness to Abraham; but on
the contrary, his Personal Obedience was the God's Love is not excluded, nor
his Power that so worked in Abraham's Heart.
Ground of that just Imputation; and therefore that any should be justified
from the Imputation of another's Righteousness, not inherent, or actually
possessed by them, is both Ridiculous and Dangerous. -- Ridiculous, since it is
to say, A Man is Rich to the value of a Thousand Pounds, whilst he is not
really or personally worth a Groat, from the Imputation of another, who has it
all in his Possession: Dangerous, because it begets a confident Pe^swasion in
many People of their being Justified, ^ whilst in Captivity to those Lusts,
whose Reward is Condemnation; whence came that usual Saying amongst many
Professors of Religion, That God looks not on them as they are in That is,
within them as to Qualification.
Themselves, but as they are in Christ; not considering, that none can be in
Christ, who are not New Creatures, which those cannot be reputed, who have not
disrobed themselves of their old Garments, but are still immantled with the
Corruptions of the Old Man.

In all which I see nothing Unsober or Unsound. But he thinks he has caught me
fast in my Caveat against Popery, Ibid. p. 52.53.
where in distinguishing betwixt Grace and Merit, I say, Grace is a Free Gift
requiring nothing; and now ask, says he, was not Abraham Justified by Works?
and that Good Works may be said to procure, deserve or obtain, Apol. 198. Is
this writ like an Infallible Dictator? Thus far T.H.

There is an old Proverb, That some love the Treason, but hate the Traitor. No
Man that writes, rants it more imperiously then Tho. Hicks. It is hard to say,
whether his Dishonesty or his Impudence be the greater. I think, I never used
Tho. Hicks so ill, or any of his Way, as to deserve so many Scoffing Taunts,
Base Detractions, and Downright Scurrilities from his hand; But let that pass.
To the Point. Hear what I have said in the Caveat. p. 12.

Grace and Merit, as stated by Calvinists and Papists, are taken for Faith
without Works; and Works without Faith; like the two Poles. Doctrines the most
opposite; Now Rewardableness is neither, but something in the middle, and
indeed the most true; for Grace is a Free Gift, requiring nothing: Merit is a
Work proportionable to the Wages: Rewardableness, is a Work without which God
will not bestow his Favor, and yet not the Meritorious Cause; for that there
is no Proportion betwixt the Work that is finite, and temporary, and the Reward
which is infinite and eternal; in which sense both the Creature obeyes the
Commands of God, and does not Merit, but Obtain only; and God rewards the
Creature, and yet so, as that he freely gives too.

Now what Contradiction is there in all this? I plainly distinguish the Word
Merit in the strictest Acceptance of it, from that which is truly Scriptural,
respecting us at least. That I did not mention Merit in my Sandy Foundation
Shaken, the Book proves. Is there no Difference between obtaining the
Justifying Presence of God by the Fruits of the Spirit in our Heart and Lives,
and strictly meriting his Acceptance of us by Works, and those of our own
making too, Dialog. p. 38. Contin. p. 53.
as what T.H. does wickedl^ suggest? I say, Abraham was justified in offering
up his Son, because he had been condemned if he had disobeyed. But says T.
Hicks, He was Justified before. And why was not his whole Life mentioned to his
Justification? But I must tell T.H. that as among Men the Will is taken for the
Deed, so the Lord finding Abraham right in his Heart, that he believed, and
would obey; he was as much justified therein, as if he had actually done it. We
have cause to believe T. Hicks never knew what the Consequence of that working
Faith, and offering up an Isaac to God is. Nor was it needful to recite the
whole of his Life: Measures are frequently taken by some eminent Trial. If he
was accepted in that, Obedience being the Condition, where that was before, he
was before accepted no doubt. But says he, see the Caveat, p. 12. and Apol. p.
198. How do they agree? Truly very well: For Grace is Free, requiring nothing.
How? Nothing at all? By no means. How then is it free? Grace is free, because
it was the good Pleasure of God both to give Remission of Sins, and Eternal
Life to as many as should Repent, Believe and Obey to the End, and thereby come
to be conformed to the Image of his Son. But may T. Hicks say; Is Repenting
nothing? Believing nothing? Obeying nothing? No, T.H. not one jot of Merit in
all that; It is the great Grace of God, to give us Eternal Life upon so small
Conditions. They obtain it; but that is God's good Pleasure, and no Purchase,
therefore Grace still; All that is our Duty; the Reward is Free; God gives it,
but chooses a Way by which to do it. If T.H. will understand Grace, as my Caveat
condemns it, I cannot help that; sure I am, I never writ such Doctrine as my
Faith, and therefore no Contradiction to my self, whatever it may be to him.
But says he, Your Apology speaks that good Works may be said to procure,
deserve, or obtain, etc.

My Apology as my self, and other Books, are not Apology enough for me and my
Friends against such Envious Perverters as T.H. though I doubt not but they may
be effectually such with more moderate Persons; thus it speaks,

The Word Merit, so much snarled at, allows a twofold Signification; the
First, a Proportion or Equali^y betwixt the Work and Wages, which is the
strictest sense, and that which he (S. Fisher) least of all intended; The
Second, something that may be said to procure, AND IN SOME SENSE to deserve or
obtain, and so good Works do; since without them there is no Acceptance with
God, nor Title to Eternal Life.

Where it is observable, how basely he has left out, both my absolute Denial of
the strict Sense of the Word MERIT, and those qualifying and distinguishing
Words, which come after Procure and before Deserve, namely, AND IN SOME SENSE,
to deserve or obtain, with the last Clause. Certain it is, that whatever sense
I had T. Hicks took me in the worst he could invent, yea in that very sense,
which all along I have most particularly refused and condemned; A Baseness, and
piece of Forgery, unworthy of any Man pretending to Good Conscience!

But he proceeds still, and much after the same manner; he would have People
believe, That we assert the Ground of our Rejoicing and Acceptance to be not
in, Contin. p. 53.
and from the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us by Faith (where observe,
that WHOLELY WITHOUT US, is omitted, to render us Denyers of Christ's
Righteousness in any sense) but only in a Righteousness inherent in us, and
done by us; Which great Untruth he gives the Lie to, in his own Book. But
because he pretends to fetch this out of my S.F. Shaken. p 27. let us hear what
I have said. But let every Man prove his own Work, and then shall he have
Rejo^cing in himself alone, and not in another Be not deceived, for whatsoever
a Man sows that shall he reap.

If Rejoicing, and Acceptance with God, or the contrary, are to be reaped from
the Work that a Man sows, either to the Flesh, or to the Spirit, then is the
Doctrine of Acceptance, and Ground of Rejo^cing from the Works of another
utterly excluded; every Man reaping according to what HE has sown, and bearing
HIS OWN Burden.

The Question will now be, Whether I meant this of the Creature alone, or by
the Assistance of God's Holy Spirit, by which his Children are led?

Concerning which I need say no more, then what that Book speaks in my Defense,
yea, that very Page, from whence he fetches this pretended Dangerous Assertion.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God.

How clearly will it appear to any but a Cavilling and Tenacious Spirit; that
Man can be no further Justification not as Remission, but as made Just.
Justified, then as he becomes obedient to the Spirit's Leadings; For if none
can be a Son of God, but HE that is led by the Spirit of God, then none can be
justified without being led by the Spirit of God; because none can be Justified
but he that is a Son of God: so that the Way to Justification and Sonship, is
through Obedience to the Spirit's Leadings.

By all which it appears, that I am not speaking of Remission of Sins, as if by
our Conformity to the Spirit it self, we could so justify our selves. No; but
that by being Led by the Spirit of God, and Fulfilling of his Royal Law, Men
come to be accepted, as Children of God; and the Ground of their Joy is from
their own Experience of the Work of God in them. What was it made the Faithful
Servants that improved their Talents be accepted; and gave an Entrance to the
Wise Virgins into the Bride-groom's Chamber? Were it not the Improvements of
the one, and the Oil in the Lamps of the other? And if T. Hicks come not to
know that holy State, he shall never know Eternal Rejoycings, that is the Word
of Truth to him; For such as he sows, such shall he reap in God's Day of
Account. Contin. p. 54.
Wherefore that Scripture by him brought out of Isaiah makes greatly for us;
Surely shall one say, in (or from) the Lord have I Righteousness; that is, not
in or from my self; Isa. 45.24, 25.
In the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory. Is
there no being in the Life, Power, Nature and Virtue of that Seed? then no
Salvation. Also that of the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31.
Christ is made unto us Righteousness; wherefore let him that glories glory in
the Lord. For this I affirm, and that with Boldness and Truth, that Isaiah and
Paul speak of a Real and Inward Righteousness, not the less in the Creature,
because not of the Creature, but of Christ. Was not Paul's Righteousness the
Son of God revealed ^n him? that everlasting Righteousness, that Christ binding
and casting out of the strong Man, making an End of Sin, and finishing of
Transgression, he brought and brings into the Soul? For that their
Righteousness should be in or from him, or that he should be made their
Righteousness, and they never know a being clothed and made Righteous by it,
were Absurd and Impossible. In short, As we know no Righteousness out of Christ
our Lord, so knowing his Appearance in us, and that Grace for Grace, received
of his Fullness, in whom are hid the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, and
being obedient thereunto, we know and witness a Participation of his
Everlasting Righteousness, Holy Wisdom and Saving Knowledge, which qualify and
adorn the Soul for the blessed Marriage of the Lamb, who takes away the Sins of
the World; not only the Guilt of Sins past by Remission upon Repentance, but as
a Redeemer from under the Power and Nature of Sin present and to come, through
the Virtue of his Holy Life in the Soul, which is the Compleatment of
Justification, and the Thing now insisted on.

Lastly, he gives under the Quakers name, as a dangerous Doctrine, this
Passage; Justification goes not before, but is consequential to the mortifying
of Lusts, and the Sanctification of the Soul. Cont. Page 59.
Penn, Sand. Found Sh. p. 27. To which he answers. Does not this import that a
Man must be formally just before he be justified? I would ask whether Remission
of Sins be not one part of Justification? Qua. I suppose it may. Chr. Can one
be forgiven that is not Guilty? It looks like a Contradiction, to pardon one
that is Innocent. Certainly he that is pardoned must be a Sinner. To all which
I return this much were he True and Honest in his Reasoning, I had been to
blame for my Ignoronce, and T. Hicks to be commendable for his Answer; but he
dodges basely. He would avoid my Argument about the second part of
Justification, by suggesting that I meant it of the first, to wit, Remission of
Sins, as much as if he had said; What, must all Sin be mortified before a Man
be pardoned his old Score? and can a Man's own Good Works so remit, Cancel or
justify? But his Slight will not do. I have oft^n declared that upon
Repentance God does not impute past Iniquity to any, therefore that part of his
Answer which seems most smart upon me, that is, Can one be forgiven that is not
Guilty? etc. vanishes of Course; for the Question is not, Whether Man in his
natural Estate is Guilty before God, and such can be no otherwise so justified,
that is, Remitted, then by the free Love of God* which is the first part of
Justification, as David speaks, Blessed is the Man unto whom the Lord will not
impute Sin. But whether Men are daily accepted as Children of God, redeemed,
and saved of the Lord, and justified as such, in his Presence, further than as
they come to be led by his holy Spirit, and know Victory over Sin? which is the
second part of Justification. So that he did dishonestly with me, to suggest my
Denial of Remission of Sins past, upon any other Score then the Mortification
of Sin in the Party so pardoned: For though Sin may not be mortified, yet if
there be a Foundation of true Repentance laid, the Guilt of former Iniquities,
I have often said, is not imputed. It was therefore very unfairly done of him,
from my Asserting daily Acceptance, and Fellowship with God, to be the
Consequent of a Self-denying and mortified Life through the powerful Working of
the Spirit of Christ in Man, to infer, that before this Work was done, there
could be no Remission of Sins past; as if it were the procuring Cause of
Pardon, and not the free Love of God upon Repentance. In short, it is to say,
that because I deny Men may be justified in the second Sense, without being
made truly and really Just; that therefore Men are to be made Just and Innocent
before they are forgiven; which is Justification in the first Sense. And thus
has he dodg'd disingenuously with me throughout this Point: Where I meant by
Justification, Remission of Sins, he has run It the other way; And when I have
understood it of a State of Fellowship and daily Acceptance with God, then he
has taken it for Remission, with manifest Design, to render me as confused,
contradictory and unscriptural as he could; but that all lights upon himself,
and I doubt not but in the end it will appear, that I have contended for the
Justification of Life, whilst his aims will have been at nothing more in all
his Bussle, then to promote a Justification in a State of Death, where the
indwelling Life, Power and Virtue of Christ, which gives to live to God in the
nearness of Life, cannot be enjoyed nor known: else, what means his reputing
that Assertion in my Sandy Foundation shaken, so Erroneous, namely, without
Good Works there is no Acceptance with God, which, without any Wrong to him,
causes me to believe, that it is his Faith, that Men may be accepted with God
without Good Works; and consequently that they are not necessary to Salvation.
I wish for his sake, more then mine own, he had been no more Injurious to me,
and the Truth I have defended, then I have been to him, in expressing but the
natural Result and Tendency of his Doctrine.

I shall now be as good as my Word, and that is, to produce an Argument or two
against the Common Doctrines of rigid Satisfaction and Justification, as they
have been opposed by me in this short Discourse, and that out of my Book
called, The Sandy Foundation Shaken, because it has been most in this
Adversary's Eye; That if he thinks fit to reply, he may have something else to
employ his Mind about then to write Dialogues filled with Lies, Shifts,
Forgeries, Scoffs, Impudence and Scurrility.

Of SATISFACTION.
1. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons Iniquity, and passes by the
Transgression of the Remnant of his Heritage? Micah. 7.18.
He retains not his Anger forever: because he delights in Mercy. [Can there
be a more express Passage to clear, not only the Possibility, but real
Inclinations in God to pardon Sin, and not retain his Anger for ever? since the
Prophet seems to challenge all other Gods to try their Excellency by his God,
herein describing the Supremacy of his Power and Superexcellency of his Nature,
that he pardons Iniquity, and retains not his Anger for ever: so that if
the Satisfactionists should ask the Question, Who is a God like unto ours, that
cannot pardon Iniquity, nor pass by Transgression, but retain his Anger until
somebody make him Satisfaction? I answer, Many amongst the harsh and severe
Rulers of the Nation; but as for my God, he is exalted above them all, upon the
Throne of his Mercy, who pardons Iniquity, and retains not his Anger for
ever, but will have Compassion upon us].

2. And forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors. [Where nothing can be
more obvious then that which is forgiven, is not paid: Mat. 6.12.
And if it is our Duty to forgive without a Satisfaction received, and that God
is to forgive us as we forgive them, then is a Satisfaction totally excluded.
Christ farther paraphrases upon that part of his Prayer, v. 14. For if you
forgive their Trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. Where he
as well argues the Equity of God's Forgiving them, from their Forgiving others,
as he encourages them to forgive others, from the Example of God's Mercy in
forgiving them; which is more amply expressed in Chap. 18. where the Kingdom of
Heaven (that consists in Righteousness) is represented by a King; Who upon his
Debtors Petition had Compassion, and forgave him; but the same treating his
Fellow Servants without the least Forbearance, the King condemned his
Unrighteousness, and delivered him ever to the Tormenters. But how had this
been a Fault in the Servant, if his Kings Mercy had not been proposed for his
Example? How most unworthy therefore is it of God, and Blasphemous may I justly
term it, to be in any's daring to assert that Forgiveness impossible to God,
which is not only possible, but enjoined to Men.]

Consequences Irreligious and Irrational.
1 That it is Unlawful and Impossible for God Almighty to be Gracious and
Merciful, or to pardon Transgressors; then which what is more Unworthy of God?

2 That God was inevitably compelled to this way of Saving Men; the highest
Affront to his incontroleable Nature.

3. That it was Unworthy of God to Pardon, but not to inflict Punishment on the
Innocent, or require a Satisfaction, where there was nothing due.

4. It does not only disacknowledge the true Virtue, and real Intent of
Christ's Life and Death, but entirely deprives God of that Praise which is
owing to his greatest Love and Goodness.

5. It represents the Son more Kind and Compassionate than the Father; whereas
if both be the same God, then either the Father is as Loving as the Son, or the
Son as Angry as the Father.

6. It robs God of the Gift of his Son for our Redemption (which the Scriptures
attribute to the unmerited Love he had for the World) in affirming the Son
purchased that Redemption from the Father, by the Gift of himself to God, as
our complete Satisfaction.

7. Since Christ could not pay what w^^ not his own, it follows that in the
Payment of his own, the case still remains equally grievous; Since the Debt is
not hereby absolved or forgiven, but transferred only; and by consequence we are
no better provided for Salvation than before, owing that now to the Son, which
was once owing to the Father.

8. It no way renders Men beholding, or i^ the least oblieg'd to God; since by
their Doctrine, he would not have abated us, nor did he Christ the last
Farthing, so that the acknowledgments are peculiarly the Sons: which destroys
the whole current of Scripture Testimony, for his Good Will toward Men. -- O
the Infamous Portraiture this Doctrine draws of the Infinite Goodness! Is this
your Retribution, O Injurious Satisfactionists?

9. That God's Justice is satisfied for Sins past, present, and to come,
whereby God and Christ have lost both their Power of injoyning Godliness, and
Prerogative of punishing Disobedience; for what is once paid, is not
revokeable; and if Punishment should arrest any for their Debts, it either
argues a Breach on God's or Christ's part, or else that it has not been
sufficiently solved, and the Penalty completely sustained by another;
forgetting that every one must appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, Romans
14.12. 2. Cor. 15.10.
to receive according to things done in the Body: Yea, every one must give an
account of himself to God. But many more are the gross Absurdities and
Blasphemies, that are the genuine Fruits of this so confidently believed
Doctrine of Satisfaction.

Of JUSTIFICATION.
1. Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, but He that does the Will of my Father. Mat 7.21, 24, 25.
Whosoever hears these Sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him unto
a Wise Man which built his House upon a Rock etc. [How very fruitful are the
Scriptures of Truth in Testimonies against this absurd and dangerous Doctrine;
these Words seem to import a twofold Righteousness, the first consists in
Sacrifice, the last in Obedience; the one makes a Talking, the other a Doing
Christian. I in short argue thus, If none can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
but they that do the Father's Will; then none are justified, but they who do
the Father's Will, because none can enter into the Kingdom, but such as are
justified. Since therefore there can be no Admittance had without Performing
that Righteous Will, and Doing those Holy and perfect Sayings, Alas! to what
Value will an imputative Righteousness amount when a poor Soul shall awake
polluted in his Sin, by the hasty Calls of Death to make its Appearance before
the Judgment Seat, where it is impossible to justify the Wicked, or that any
should escape uncondemned, but such as do the Will of God.]

Romans 2.13.
2. For not the Hearers of the Law are just before God, but the Doers of the Law
shall be justified. [From whence how unanswerably may I observe, Unless we
become Doers of that Law, which Christ came not to destroy, but, as our
Example, to fulfill, we can never be justified before God; wherefore Obedience
is so absolutely necessary, that short of it there can be no Acceptance; Nor
let any fancy that Christ has so fulfilled it for them, as to exclude their
Obedience from being requisite to their Acceptance, but only as their Pattern,
For unless ye follow me, says Christ, ye cannot be my Disciples: And it is not
only repugnant to Reason, but in this place particularly refuted; for if Christ
had fulfilled it on our behalf, and we not enabled to follow his Example, there
would not be Doers, but One Doer only of the Law justified before God. In
short, if without Obedience to the Righteous Law none can be justified, then
all the Hearing of the Law, with but the mere Imputation of another
Righteousness, whilst actually a Breaker of it, is excluded as not justifying
before God. If you fulfill the Royal Law, ye do well; so speak ye, and so DO,
as they that shall be judged thereby.]

3. If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall dye; but if ye through the Spirit do
mortify the Deeds of the Body, Romans 8.13.
ye shall live. [No Man can be dead and justified before God, for so He may be
justified that lives after the Flesh; therefore they only can be justified that
are alive; from whence this follows, If the Living are justified and not the
Dead, and that none can live to God, but such as have mortified the Deeds of
the Body through the Spirit, then none can be justified but they who have
mortified the Deeds of the Body through the Spirit; so that Justification is
completely taken.
justification does not go before, but is subsequential to the Mortification of
Lusts, and Sanctification of the Soul through the Spirit's operation.]

4. Was not Abraham our Father justified by Works, when he had offered Isaak
his Son upon the Altar? Jam. 2.21, 24.
Ye see then how that by Works a Man is justified, and not by Faith only. [He
that will seriously peruse this Chapter, shall doubtless find some, to whom
this Epistle was written, of the same Spirit with the Satisfactionists and
Imputarians of our t^me; they fain would have found out a Justification from
Faith in, and the Imputation of another Righteousness; but James an Apostle of
the most high God, who experimentally knew what true Faith and Justification
meant, gave them to understand from Abraham's self-denying Example, that unless
their Faith in the Purity and Power of God's Grace, had that effectual
Operation to subdue every beloved Lust, wean from every Dallila, and entirely
to resign and sacrifice Isaak himself, their Faith was a Fable, or as a Body
without a Spirit; and as Righteousness therefore in one Person cannot justify
another from Unrighteousness, so whoever now pretends to be justified by Faith,
whilst not led and guided by the Spirit into all the Ways of Truth, and Works
of Righteousness, their Faith they will find at last Fiction.]

Consequences Irreligious and Irrational.
1. It makes God guilty of what the Scriptures say is an Abomination, to wit,
that he justifies the Wicked.

2. It makes him look upon Persons as they are not, or with respect, which is
unworthy of his most Equal Nature.

3. He is hereby at Peace with the Wicked (if justified whilst Sinners) who
said, There is no Peace to the Wicked.

4. It does only imply Communion with them here, in an Imperfect State, but so
to all Eternity; Romans 8.30.
for whom he justifies, them he also glorifieth. Therefore whom he justified
whilst Sinners, them he also glorified whilst Sinners.

5. It only secures from the Wages, not the Dominion of Sin, whereby something
that is sinful becomes justified, and that which defiles to enter God's
Kingdom.

6. It renders a Man justified and condemned, dead and alive, redeemed and not
redeemed at the same time; the one by an Imputative Righteousness, the last by
a Personal Unrighteousness.

7. It flatters Men whilst subject to the World's Lusts, with a State of
Justification, and thereby invalids the very End of Christ's Appearance, which
was to destroy the Works of the Devil, and take away the Sins of the World.

CHAP. X.
Of the Doctrine of Sanctification and Perfection. The Ignorance or Malice of
T. Hicks Detected.

OF the Doctrine of Sanctification he has several Unsanctified Passages, though
he bestows not much time upon that Important Subject; some of which I shall
take a little notice of.

Christ. Let us understand your Opinion of Sanctification, Cont. p. 56.
what it is? Out of Ed. Buroughs he answers himself thus, Quak. It Is Christ.
Hence we conclude, to say Sanctification is Imperfect in this Life, is as much
as to say, Christ is Imperfect. To which he replies. Christ. It Is true, it is
Jesus Christ by his Spirit is the Author and Worker of Sanctification; but will
it therefore follow, that the Work of Sanctification in us is Christ, or that
this Work is perfect in all its Degrees?

Now let any tell me wherein T. Hicks could have more grossly mistaken E.
Buroughs, who frequently insults over the Grave and Labors of that Faithful
Servant of the Lord, then he has done, on purpose I doubt not, to insinuate his
Belief of the contrary to what he opposed. But hear Edw. Burrough's Words at
large in Answer to Priest Eaton.

Thou say, Sanctification is not Perfect in this Life; And the New Man, the
Spirit or Law of the Mind is that Grace or Imperfect Sanctification: Then
Christ is not Perfect in this Life; for He is made of God unto us
Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30.

In this it is evident First, That the Priest did not so much strike at the
Work done in the Creature, as at the Perfection of the Principle, by which the
Work should be perfected in the Creature.

2dly, E. Buroughs did not in that place merely intend the Work of
Sanctification, but the Author and Worker of it, who is oftentimes called by
the Name of the Work it self, the Cause by the Effect, as is plain from the
Scripture quoted, in which he used but Paul's Words.

How basely done was it then, in Tho. Hicks, not only to leave out what the
Priest asserted, but to misconstrue E.B's Answer, and (that such Perversion
might go the more Unquestionable) omit the Insertion of that Scripture, in
which Christ is by the A^stle said to be made Sanctification to the Saints; the
mention of which would have given a clear Understanding of E. Burroughs's
Answer, and broke the Neck of his Ungodly Purpose to misrepresent him. We say,
and it was the Faith and Tendency of the Writings of that Just Man, 1. To
assert a Perfect Principle of Righteousness and Sanctification, which is
Sanctification and Perfection in the abstract. 2. The Possibility of being
Perfectly Sanctified by it. 3. That such Sanctification, when taken for the
Author of it (who is the Fountain of all Holiness and Purity) is Complete and
Perfect. 4. When taken for the Work of the Spirit in the Creature, it is first
Perfect in Degree only; but as the Creature comes into perfect Subjection unto
the Spirit and Power of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead, which has
wrought that Perfection in Degree, 1 These. 5.23.
he comes to experience that Sanctification throughout, in Body, Soul and
Spirit, which the Apostle (otherwise minded then T. Hicks) prayed the Churches
might witness, which is that blessed State, wherein he that is born of God SINS
NOT; Old things are done away, 1 John 5.18. and 2.1, 3.
ALL IS BECOME NEW; No more I, but Christ that lives in me. I write unto you,
Matthew. 15.48.
Young Men, because ye have OVERCOME the Wicked One: Ephesians. 4.13.
Be ye Perfect as your Heavenly Father is Perfect. 2 Timothy 23.17.
-- unto a PERFECT MAN. Hebr. 13.12.
That the Man of God may be PERFECT. 1 Pet. 5.10.
The God of Peace make you PERFECT IN EVERY GOOD WORK. 2 Cor. 7.1.
The God of all Peace make you PERFECT. Let us cleanse our selves from ALL
FILTHINESS OF FLESH AND SPIRIT; Perfecting Holiness in the Fear of the Lord.
With many more Places of like Importance.

But he objects, Why does the Apostle exhort Sanctified Persons to put off the
Old Man (from Coloss. 3.5.) If where the Old Man, the Body of Sin remains none
are Sanctified, as says E.B.

This indeed is the Drift of the Man, he would be Sanctified whilst
Unsanctified; as Dangerous, as it is Absurd: For what thing can be and not be
the same thing, at one and the same time? But I deny they were then Sanctified
who stood in need of that Reproof and Exhortation, to wit, that they should
mortify such Lusts, as Fornication. Uncleanness, Inordinate Affection, and
Covetousness, which is Idolatry. Sanctifying such are, who are Mortifying: but
when Sin is not Mortifying, none are Sanctifying; and where Sin is not
Mortified, no Man is Sanctified. We may easily see, what a Church Fellowship
T.H. can allow of, and what a Gospel-Sanctification it is he pleads for. Can
Men be Sanctified, and yet so Corrupt? If they can, tell me in what sense, and
from what they are cleansed? Is this the End of pleading for Perfection in
Degree, to allow these Abominable Enormities, as Church-Infirmities? Away for
Shame! But that a perfect Sanctification is no Heresy, suppose they had been
Sanctified Persons to whom the Apostle wrote (which could not be, Sanctifying
was the most) yet since he exhorted them, to put off the Old Man, which Old Man
is the Body of Sin, and that when he is off, he is not on, and that the Apostle
exhorted them Not to an Impossible thing, I conclude from his Question, that a
State of Perfect Sanctification is attainable. He pretended to correct E.B's
Extravagancy; but whatever Face he puts upon it, this is the Mark he aims at.
To conclude, and sum up his Ungodly Method; E.B. speaks of a Perfect
Sanctification in Christ. T.H. infers, that same perfect Sanctification
immediately to the Creature; not only confounding the Worker and Work, the
Cause and the Effect, about which one piece of Baseness he bestows not a little
Pains; but suggesting thereby, that we deny all Sanctification or Perfection in
Degree, and that we are as completely Perfect as Christ himself. Next, He
leaves out those words, that would best explain his Mind. And Lastly, All his
Opposition is, because the Quakers are for having Men Sanctified before they
are Accounted so, and New Creatures before they ought to be reputed Good
Christians; which so directly Vn-churches and Vn-christians T. Hicks, that we
may well believe it a main Reason for his Implacableness against them.

CHAP. XI.
Of COMMANDS, MOTIONS and MINISTRY. T. Hicks proved Unjust to us, and an Enemy
to God's Law, Gospel, the Quakers, and himself.

HE has not less abused and belyed us in these three Particulars, then any
thing he has written against us, which I shall briefly show.

To this Passage in E. Burroughs's Works, That is no Command to me which is a
Command to another, E.B's Works, p. 47.
neither did any of the Saints act by a Command that was given to another, he
thus answers, Then that Law which forbids Idolatry, Adultery, Murder, Theft and
Bearing false Witness is no Law to you. And after having made this indirect
Consequence, he breaks forth, Impiously Horrid, Ungodly, Irreverent
Patronizers of Blasphemy, Countenancers of such Novices, Profane Scribler, and
abundance more.

Now though I have said something to this before, and have largely vindicated
that Passage against J. Faldo, yet I cannot well omit touching here upon it,
the Matter being so aggravated by this disingenuous Person.

These Commands must either relate to Ordinary or Extraordinary Duty, I mean,
they must either be such Commands, as that of Moses 's going to Pharaoh,
Isaiah's going Naked, Jeremiah 's making Yoaks, Amos 's going to the Kings's
Chapel; with many more: And here I do affirm with that Faithful Young Man of
God, that the Command which came to them, not coming to another, that other
Person is not only not warranted, but condemnable in an Imitation of any of
them. If then such Extraordinary Commands, as these before mentioned, must not
be intended, then those that are Ordinary and Common to Mankind, as Fearing
God, and working Righteousness toward God, toward their Relations both
Natural and Civil. Now I would ask T.H. if he believes that Idolatry, Murder,
Adultery, Theft and Bearing false Witness be not reproved by the Common Light
in all Men? if not, T.H. gives the Lie to all Mankind, Dialog. p. 8. Cont. p.
68.
and his own Books too; Nay, what is it good for? But if they be; query, If any
can confess to one God, love his Neighbor, be Chaste, be Just, and speak Truth
in his own and Neighbor's Cause, without being thereto obliged by that Light
they have? Did the Gentiles of old the things contained in the Law, without a
Word, Commandment, Law or Light within, inducing them thereto? I perceive T.
Hicks owns no Command in himself against Idolatry, Adultery, Murder, Theft and
Bearing false Witness; which is to say, if the Scripture did not restrain him,
he should be guilty of all. Farewell Grace, Spirit, Light and all Inward Rule
or Judge, by which to see, taste, relish and determine of things. But in this
Condition, how knows he that the Scriptures were writ by Inspiration? If he
says he was told so; I ask how they knew it? If they say they were told so
too, and so upwards; I ask what Assurance can any Man's Say-so or Hearsay be
in a Matter of such Importance? Nay, Suppose I should grant them a True
Tradition from the Apostles times, I ask, how knew they to whom they were writ,
that they were the Fruits of Divine Inspiration? In short, take away all Inward
Testimony, or the Certainty and Sufficiency of it, and Farewell to all Right
Belief of the Scriptures themselves. Behold the Strait he is run into! But if
at last T.H. shall desire a little more room, and acknowledge the Spirit must
give the Discerning, and Relish, and most Convincing Testimony; will it not
follow that he believes the Scriptures, and performs what may be his Duty
therein, upon that Conviction, and not merely because written or recommended by
any Man whatever?

But he proceeds to prove E.B. as he thinks, an Enemy to God's Commandments,
and a very Liar. Contin. p. 61.
The thing he Wickedly, but in vain aims at.

He quotes him thus, Quak. You are not dead with Christ who are yet subject to
Ordinances, E.B. p. 105. To which hear him. Christ. The Spirit of God in the
Scriptures assures us, that they who are subject to, and keep the Commandments
of God, are the Children of God, and they who do not are Liars. See the first
Epistle of John 2.3, 4. and Chap. 5.2, 3. Yet this Wicked Man says, That they
who are subject to Ordinances are not Dead with Christ.

Edw. Burroughs's Words are those of the Scriptures of Truth, therefore true
Words in themselves. But how does E.B. abolish what God perpetuates? I am sure
I can plainly perceive that Tho. Hicks does call a Conscientious, Departed
Sufferer, and Prisoner unto Death for the Testimony of Jesus, Wicked Man,
because he dared not be guilty of Will Worship, by going into any Practice of
Worship, without the Leading of God's Spirit. Six Particulars comprehend my
Answer in brief.

First, That Edw. Buroughs only pleaded against such Performances, under the
Name of Ordinances, as were but Shadowy, Observe how T. Hicks can quote
Scripture to keep Ordinances, never mentioned nor intended in it. Again, that
he puts more Value upon such Commands as are Temporary then those that are
Immutable; and brings Scripture that concerns the Latter to confirm his Belief
of the Former.
Elementary and Perishable Things; and which they were not led to by God's
Spirit, but took up unwarrantably, and by mere Imitation, and therefore
Will Worship.

2. That Thomas Hicks implies by calling him Wicked Man, that it is a
Wickedness, not to take up any Outward or Visible Part of Worship in a Man's
own Will' and Time; But to stay God's Time, and wait for the Leadings of God's
Spirit: From whence I infer, ^e is no Child of God; for every such one, is led
by the Spirit of God; therefore no better then an Ape, or Imitator of the
Outsides of Religion; In short, a Will-worshipper, and not a Worshipper of God
in the Spirit and in the Truth.

3. Let it be observed, that there is not so much as the least mention made in
all the Epistles of that Beloved Disciple of any of those Ordinances, which
stood in Visible and Corruptible Elements; but the Scope and Tendency of them,
is the most Inward and Spiritual of any of the Apostolical Writings: So that to
bring in things of a Temporary, Shadowy Nature, among the Spiritual and Durable
Commands of Christ under the New Covenant State, without keeping of which Men
incur Eternal Wrath, is an Abuse both of the Apostle's Words, and E.B's, which
he intended by them to confute.

4. T. Hicks does as good as tell us, That the Commandments of God may be kept
without the Spirit of God; since he opposes the Necessity of our Doing God's
Commandments, to our doing them in the Time and Will, and by the Assistance of
God's Spirit. O Irreligious Man, and Enemy to God's Spirit!

5. It plainly tells us, that Tho. Hicks has no Command in himself for doing
what he does; that the bare Authority of the Scripture is all he has to induce
him, which raizes to the Ground that old Protestant Doctrine of Believing the
Scriptures from an Inward Testimony, and Worshipping God in Spirit and Truth.

6. Lastly, If all are Liars that keep not God's Commandments, and therefore
none of his Children, as says the Place, and as asserts T. Hicks, then either
T.H. keeps God's Commandments, and so is perfect, or he must be a Liar, and so
no Child of God.

That he keeps not God's Commands I prove.

If such, as say that Man cannot fulfill, obey or keep the Law, nor the Gospel;
pray, preach, dip, eat Bread and drink Wine, nor live without Sin, keeps not
God's Commandments; but so does T.H. expressly or implicitly; therefore he
keeps not God's Commandments, and consequently is a Liar, and no Child of God;
For the Liar is for the Lake.

To say, we deny Obedience to God's Commands, because we deny the present
Necessity or Use of their Water, Bread and Wine, will never hurt us; For,
First, we know, and they confess, that they were in the beginning used as
Figures and Shadows of a more Hidden and Spiritual Substance.

2. That they were to endure no longer then till the Substance was come: Now
the time of the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, Christ's only Baptism, therefore
called the One Baptism, has been long since come; Consequently the other, which
was John's, Mat. 3. Acts 1.
was fulfilled, and as becomes a Forerunner, ought to cease. The like may be
said of the Bread and Wine; for as there is but One Baptism, so is there but
One Bread. The Least in the Kingdom was Greater then John 's Water Baptism; He
was to Decrease, Christ to Increase. Jesus Baptized not with Water: It Is true,
he bid his Apostles Go, Teach, Baptizing, etc. but no Water is mentioned: But
Luke in the 1st of the Acts, says that before Christ gave that Commission
mentioned by Matthew, said, John Baptized with Water, but ye shall be Baptized
with the Holy Ghost not many days hence; and then comes the Commission in
Force, Go, Teach, Baptizing, etc. How? With the Holy Ghost; turning People from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God.

3. They were but the more Noble among the Meats and Drinks, and diverse
Washings, that the Apostle said were but Shadows of the Good Things to come;
For I would not that any should be so Sottish as to think, that Christ came to
abolish those Shadows of the Jews, and institute other in their room; by no
means: He came to remove, change and abolish the very Nature of such
Ordinances, and no^ the particular Ordinances only, to wit, an Outward, Shadowy
or Figurative Worship and Religion. For it was not because they were Jewish
Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings, but because they were Meats and Drinks,
and diverse outward Washings at all, which never could, nor can, cleanse the
Conscience from dead Works, nor give Eternal Life to the Soul: else wherein
would the Change be? I affirm by that one Scripture, Circumcision is as much in
force as Water Baptism; and the Paschal Lamb, as Bread and Wine: They were both
Shadows, and both Elementary and Perishable. And though the Letter were more
immediately fore-running and introductory of the Substance it self, yet not to
be perpetuated; For a Continuance of them had been a Judaizing of the Spiritual
Evangelical Worship; The Gospel would have been a State of Figures, Types and
Shadows, which to assert or practice, is as much as in such lies, to pluck it
up by the Roots; The Appellation, Ordinances of Christ, I therefore renounce,
as Unscriptural and Inevangelical: Besides, a Spirit of Whoredom from God,
gross Apostasy into Superstition and Idolatry, yea, a Spirit of Hypocrisy,
Persecution and Murder, and all manner of Wickedness has got them, and covered
It self with them, Jezebel-like, the old Enemy of God's Faithful Prophets and
People. And we can testify from the same Spirit by which Paul renounced
Circumcision, that they are to be rejected, as not now required; neither have
they, since the False Church espoused and exalted them, ever been taken up
afresh by God's Command or, in the Leading of his Eternal Spirit: And the Lord
will appear to gather People out of them; but never to establish, or keep
People in them, no; they served their time; and now the False Church has got
them; yea, the Whore has made Merchandise with them, and under such Historical,
Shadowy and Figurative Christianity has she managed her Mystery of Iniquity,
unto the beguiling Thousands, whose Simplicity the Lord has, and will have
tender Regard to.

But they Baptized after the Holy Ghost was poured out. True; And they also
would not eat the Flesh of things Strangled, nor Blood; They Circumcised and
Purified themselves in the Temple, and had Vows after the Pouring forth of the
Holy Ghost. By which we may learn, that Condescension and Practice are quite
differing things from Institution; else Paul would never have said. He was not
sent to Baptize (i. e.) with Water; whose Commission doubtless went as far as
any of the rest.

But they brake Bread, and Paul received it from God. True; But Paul never
enjoined it; He said, As often as ye do it, etc. which is very wide of any
Institution. Again, Read the Chapter foregoing 11. or 10. where he tells the
Wise Men of another Bread then that he spoke to the Weak of, who eat and drank
to Excess, not discerning the Lord's Body.

Further, Let it be considered, that no other Apostle recommends these things,
nor Paul himself to either the Romans, the Corinthians (in his first Epistle)
the Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Collossians, Thessalonians, Hebrews (if
his) nor to Timothy, Titus and Philemon, when he set down the Order of the
Churches. What an Oversight (might one then say, according to T.H.) was it in
him, not only not to press and charge, but not to mention the Sacraments of the
Church, necessary to Salvation, as they are called and esteemed? Would it not
have been accounted a great Neglect and Defect in Calvin, if he had been silent
to any Church instituted in his Time and Form; or to say, He thanked God he
baptized none but such and such? Yet how full are his and their Epistles of
Divine Exhortation, Information, Reproof, Instruction, and the like? Is it not
very Wicked then in T. Hicks to tell the World of our Denying to keep God's
Commandments in general, because we Refuse to practice these Shadowy,
Temporary, Perishing Things, especially at this time a day, after such an Abuse
of them, and that the Gentile-Spirit has trodden them under ^oot so long, being
part of that Outward Courts of Religion, given to them, which were left out at
the measuring of the Evangelical Temple of God. Rev. 21? Besides, what
Authority have these Men for Using them? To do as Men would be done to,
concerns all in all Ages; but to practice Figures and Shadows in Religion, we
know does not. A Church cannot be without one, yet without the other. Would it
not be Ridiculous in any Man to adorn himself either as some eminent Commander,
or other Officer, because it is required by Office or Place of every such one
that really is so? The Apostles baptized, therefore must T.H? The Apostles
anointed with Oil, therefore should T.H? Nay, Christ washed his Disciples Feet,
telling them, they ought, or it was their Duty so to do one to the other,
therefore should T.H? The Believers sold their Possessions, and had all things
Common; but will T.H. either imitate, or enjoin this upon his Hearers? But
since T.H. and his Adherents, do not several such things, once done and
enjoined to, as Blood, Things Strangled, Anointing with Oil, Washing of Feet,
etc. why are they not to be as much blamed, as we are for omitting that of
Bread and Wine? Or why should not they rather desist Practicing of those with
the rest, and that upon the same terms? I will warrant T.H. for going to
Synagogues, Decr^ing Hirelings, Preaching Freely, Exposing himself to all
Hardship for the Gospel's sake, which the Apostles did.

To conclude, God never condescended to use such Things (to lead to, and hold
forth the hidden Substance) that People should rest there, and much less in a
Way of Opposition to the Substance it self: such an Use of them has caused God
to loath them, and enjoin us to testify against them. Remember the Instituted
Brazen-Serpent of old, etc. what became of them in the like case? We would be
glad to see more Honesty, Meekness and Godly-mindedness in our Opposers, though
there were less of this Imitation: They are for such Commands, as they call
them, which Hypocrites, Apostates, the False Church, yea, the Devil himself can
come into; but as for those that concern the Daily Cross and Victory over Sin,
they can Wickedly pl^^d a kind of Liberty from, at least to their Unconquerable
Infirmities, as they are willing to believe them. But we testify against the
False Church, whose Faith and Worship stands not in the Life, Power and Spirit
of God, however decked with the ancient Attire of the True; for her finest Forms
out of the Life and Power of God we renounce, and as becomes the true
Evangelical Church, we assert, That he is not a Jew or Christian, who is one
Outwardly, neither is that now the Circumcision, Baptism and Supper, which is
Outward; but he is the Jew or Christian, that is one Inwardly; and that is the
Circumcision that is of the HEART, that the Baptism, which is of the HOLY GHOST
and FIRE, and that the Supper, which is of the BREAD THAT COMES DOWN FROM
ABOVE, which gives Eternal Life to as many as eat thereof, and that is of the
WINE WHICH IS TO BE DRUNK NEW WITH CHRIST IN THE KINGDOM OF GOD WITHIN, Luke
17.20.

Much might be said in this matter, but I refer the Reader to the Book
entitled Quakerism a new Nickname for old Christianity. However let it be
noted, that our Adversary is for Will Worship, and not the Quakers; For we
affirm that no Sacrifice nor Performance can be acceptable with God, to, and in
which his Holy Spirit leads not; by the which only, Self is abas'd, kept under,
and in perfect Obedience to, and watchful Observance of God's Holy Will. But
Tho. Hicks makes this a Strange and Dangerous Doctrine, insinuating that we
perform nothing but upon a kind of Spiritual Compulsion, as if that God
required Man to do all his Commandments without his holy Spirit, always ready
to incline and help them, either to begin or perform any such Duty: or that
there were no Difference between waiting for the natural Springs of Divine
Power to assist, and being compelled to worship. But this shows his great
Ignorance of God's Spirit, its daily Movings upon the Heart of Men, either as a
Reprover or Comforter for Good; for were he better acquainted with its
Dealings, it would not be so uncouth to him, to hear of our Waiting to feel the
holy Stirrings of it, in order to every Religious Performance: wherefore let
not his Ignorance be any Argument against our holy Gospel Practice. The Saints
of old had a Warrant in themselves for what they did: They were not wont to run
into the Imitation of former Generations as to any External Appointments
because then commanded, and practiced as proper, but consulted the Anointing
they had received about the Continuation or Dis-use of such Figures or outward
Services; and as they received Wisdom and Counsel therefrom, either to use or
decline the Practice of them, they acted, and no otherwise; making good the
Apostles Saying, that as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of
God: Are we led by It in ALL things, then in, and about God's things. Had it
not been for this, how could the Apostles have preached down the whole
Ceremonial Worship of the Jews? The mere Letter of Scriptures could never have
been their Rule in the Case. If any say they were extraordinarily Inspired, I
answer, how did such as then believed know that, if not from an Inward
Testimony? Nay, what Rule had the many Thousands then to worship God by? The
Hebrew Bible was little, or not at all known to the Gentiles. The Scripture
tells us that whole Churches were settled in the Faith before the Epistles were
writ; And it is hard to think, when they were writ, that they could be suddenly
collected; and when collected, that every Individual could get a Copy, that to
be sure, ought to have a Rule; for Printing was not so early in the World, and
Transscribing must needs have been to Irksome for every Person to obtain a
Copy for his or her peculiar Benefit: But because we are taught to believe
that they wanted not True Rule of Faith and Practice, and that the Scriptures
especially of the new Testament, could not be all that to them, our present
Adversaries conclude to make the great Rule, let them not be displeased if I
infer from hence, that a Measure of that Holy Spirit, which was given to every
one to profit with, was their Rule, and therefore ought to be, our great Rule
and Guide, in all things relating to Faith and Worship. And let it be
remembered, that Christ promised to send the Spirit of Truth to lead into all
Truth; as much as to say, none are led into the Truth, nor in the Truth, but by
the holy Spirit of Truth; or that their Practice is a Ly, or they are led into
a Ly, who are not led by the Spirit of Truth, that alone leads into all the
Ways of Truth: where by Truth, is not to be understood the mere Letter of the
Scripture, which notwithstanding is True, but the Living, Powerful Truth;
Christ the Way, the Truth, and the Life, of which the Scripture is but a
Record, or Declaration: Many may run into a Practice of several Outward Things
mentioned in the Scriptures to have been the Practices of the Saints of former
Ages, and yet, not be led into the Truth; for all that is but Will Worship,
Imitation and Unwarrantable. To be led into the Truth, is to be led into God's
Living Power, Wisdom and Righteousness, whose Fruits are Peace and Assurance
for ever; This is the Truth, the Spirit leads and is all-sufficient to.

Certainly, Christ, intended This for the Great Evangelical Leader, Rule,
Judge, Lawgiver and Guide through the whole course of Regeneration, the only
Way into the Everlasting Kingdom. And all those who are not by this Holy Spirit
prepared, moved and assisted to perform Divine Worship unto God, but run into
that weighty Duty, or any other (supposed) Ordinance, without its pure
Leadings, which makes it a Spiritual and Living Worship, they are but those
anciently foretold of, LORD, LORD-CRYERS, whose Portion shall be that dismal
Depart from me, I know you not; who has required these things at your hands?
Let this therefore be a Warning unto all Professors in the Name of the Lord,
that they run no longer Unsent, nor think to be accepted for their many Words;
God regards the Heart that he has broken, and is made contrite before him, and
which trembles at his Word; It Is not mere Worship, but that which is Spiritual,
which he expects and accepts; and to perform that, Man must Cease from his own
Spirit, Strength, Strivings and Imitations, and become Dumb before the Lord,
and as a Man dead to Self-Performance, and then will he breath into him the
Spirit of Supplication, and raise him up in the Newness of his own Divine Life;
whereby (though but in Sighs and Groans) a Spiritual and most Acceptable
Worship shall be offered unto God, in which his Soul will be well pleased, and
every such one come to be refresht and established in Righteousness. For all
Offerers and Vpholders of strange Fire, of what sort of People soever they may
be, in the Great and Notable Day of the Lord God, will he cause to lie down in
Sorrow.

And because he thinks his Advantage is not small, that he has against us by
basely inferring and aggravating such Consequences as this, What of Duty we
neglect, we are to charge upon the Spirit's not moving us to it; or because we
must not obey without a Motion, we are acquitted from all Fault till then, etc.
Let me tell him, that he strikes himself, and not the Quakers; For they hold,
that God's Spirit ought to be daily waited for; And that it is always ready to
inform and instruct Man's Soul, and to move it to those Thoughts, Words and
Deeds, with respect to God and Man, as are Well-pleasing to the Almighty: For
we do not only teach, that the Spirit of God is always present to convince of
Sin, but to lead out of it, and in that Way of holy Living, which is
well-pleasing unto God. In short, God's Worship stands in the Spirit; and I
testify from the Eternal God, all other Worship then what springs from a Mind
touched, sanctified and moved of his holy quickening Spirit, is abominable to
him; His Righteous Soul loathes it: And what else were their Sacrifices, as
theirs were, who in my hearing said, Pray Brother will you Pray? No, Brother, I
am not so well able as you are; Let Brother such a one Pray, he is better
gifted for the Work, etc. Complementing, Shifting, and at last Praying, etc. in
their own Wills, and not in God's Motion -- This God hates.

Next, Since the Pouring forth of the Spirit is the great Gospel Gift, and that
the Children of God are to be led by it; In what should we more diligently wait
for its Heavenly Assistance, then in that part of our Duty, which we owe to
God? Is his Worship Spiritual, and can we perform it out of the Motion of his
own Spirit? For what then was his Spirit given? Again, If Men should pray in a
known Tongue, much more with the Spirit, as the Apostle speaks. No Wonder the
Professors ask Pardon for their Prayers. Indeed God's Spirit gives them to see
the Emptiness of their Righteousness, and condemns them for it, wherefore they
are at times dissatisfied in them; yet they will not learn of him, to be guided
by him, who would cover them with Everlasting Righteousness. Blessed would they
be, if their Minds were stayed in his Counsel: But instead thereof T.H. does as
good as say, that if he should stay till the Spirit moved him, he might stay
long enough; rendering the Spirit Wanting in that for which he was shed abroad
in the Heart: Because through his Enmity and Darkness, and hasty Running in his
own Spirit, he feels it not to lead him: else he would never infer, from our
Asserting the Necessity of the Spirit's Moving to Right and Acceptable Worship,
that we are acquitted from any Fault in omitting to do that which is Good, and
the Blame must be laid upon the Spirit. But let me ask him, Can any Man do Good
of himself? Surely he will say, No. How then shall Man do that Good he ought to
do, but by the Holy Ghost? Can thou call Jesus Lord by any other Power or
Spirit? Read the Scriptures. What greater Contradiction can there be, then to
believe, Man of himself can do no Good; and yet to say, he can do it without
God's Spirit to incline and assist him thereunto? But if the Spirit do not,
what does? Tell me, what can tender the Heart, prepare the Soul, raise the
Affections, give true Feeling of Wants, and help to perform all in that Fear,
Reverence and deep Sense (which becomes all New Covenant, Spiritual
Worshippers) if this cannot, or do not? Nay, what an Affront is it to God;
since it is to suppose, that Man wants him not, that his Spirit neither moves
to Duty that ought to be performed, nor yet condemns for Duty omitted? Behold
the Impudence of the Man! He talks of Gospel, Christ, the Mysteries of his
Glorious Kingdom, etc. What grosser Opposer of the New Covenant can there be,
who denies the very Life, Virtue and Soul of all true Gospel Worship and
Discipline; and without which the otherwise best Christian-Church that ever
was, would be worse then Legal? For they that worship not from the Motions of
God's Spirit, James 4.3.
offer strange Fire, set up their own Worship, and are Image Makers; such ask,
but they receive not, because they ask not aright. For if no Man can call Jesus
Lord, but by the Holy Ghost; no Man can pray to the Lord, or in his Name,
without the Holy Ghost; yet a Sigh or Groan from its holy Operation, that
Sacrifice, though without Words, is manifold more engaging and effectual with
the Lord, then the most excellent Performance of Man's own Spirit. It Is the
Fear and Heavenly Sense of God in the Soul that recommends the Performance, and
that the holy Spirit begets: And as the Minds of Men and Women are exercised in
the Law of this pure and quickening Spirit, as it appears in them, they shall
know the true Worship, which stands in Life and Power, whose End is Everlasting
Peace; when the LORD, LORD-CRYERS, that have Prayed and Preached in their own
Wills and Wisdom, as well as to their own Ends and Advantages, Mat. 7.21.
shall be cast out forever, with a DEPART FROM ME YE WORKERS OF INIQUITY. But
there is one Objection taken from my Book called, The Spirit of Alexander the
Copper-Smith, etc. which he thinks, splits us irrecoverably. It runs thus;

Either there is such a thing as a Christian-Church, or there is not; if there
be, Spir. of Alex. p. 9.
then this Church either has Power, or has not; If no Power, then no Church;
If a Body or a Church, then there must be a Power within it self to determine.

To which says Tho. Hicks; For Christians to plead this, who own the
Scriptures for their Rule, and not the mere Light within, Contin. p. 64.
the Argument may safely be allowed; But you cannot stand by this: For will you
say, what a Man does without an Inward Motion is accursed, and yet disown him
for not doing what he is not moved unto?

But though this be plausible, it is no more; For the Difficulty remains, in
Case the Scripture be admitted for the Rule; for Instance: The Church unto
which Tho. Hicks belongs own the Scripture to be the Rule: But suppose Tho.
Hicks in some one Point believes the Scripture not to intend the same thing,
the rest of the Church understand it to mean, as in Case of Free Will; I query
how this Matter shall be reconciled? They affirm the Scripture to be the Rule,
and say, This is the true Sense of the Scripture; Thomas Hicks also affirms the
Scripture to be the Rule, but that his Sense is the Mind of the Scripture: This
occurs almost daily among those who believe the Scripture to be the Rule of
Faith. Now observe the Parallel.

The Quakers by the Light within them, as their Rule, judge that rude
Imagination of keeping the Hat on in time of public Prayer. The Anabaptists by
the Scripture, as their Rule, censure Thomas Hicks for upholding a Contrary
Sense to the Scripture. The Dissenter from the Quakers says, The Light (which
he calls his Rule) manifests no such thing to him, nor does he believe it to be
the Mind of the Light to him. Thomas Hicks makes Answer to the Church, that by
the Scripture he understands quite another thing; and the Scripture is his Rule
for what he says and maintains in the Matter.

I would ask any Man of Common Sense, if the Scripture is not as well set in
Opposition to it self by these two Pretenders, as the Light within? and if the
Church of Anabaptists would not therefore doubt the Truth of their
Interpretation, but proceed to censure Thomas Hicks as a Disturber of their
Church in its Doctrine or Discipline by the Introduction of New and
Unprofitable Opinions? Neither are the Body of the Quakers to question their
Judgment given by the Light within as their Rule, to be a true and
unquestionable Determination against such Alexanders and Enemies to the Peace
of their Jerusalem.

But I would further tell Thomas Hicks, that though we renounce all Worship not
led to by God's Spirit (his Reflection upon which, showing it to be none of his
Faith or Practice, and so no Spiritual Worshipper) Yet the Men testified
against in that Book were such as had been in Unity with us before, and in
going from that into differing and opposite Practices, we imposed nothing upon
them, but they innovated Unseemly Customs upon us, so that which Thomas Hicks's
Conscience had no Mind to observe, least he should loose the Force of his
Cavil, removes it out of the Way.

Let Thomas Hicks tell me by what other Rule then God's Spirit, Men's Spirits,
and the Inside of their Religion can be tried, relisht, or favored and he does
something. The Devil can transform into all Outward Forms, and subscribe the
best Methodiz'd true Articles that ever were written; Who, or what shall unmask
him? God gave us the true Taste, Savor and Discerning of that Spirit that
leads out several from the Heavenly Unity, and from thence we gave our
Judgment. If Men become darkn'd, and led by a Delusive Spirit and call that the
Light, though it give the Lie to the Light, and strikes at the Life, they
whilst faithful, felt among us, they must look to that. You say, Every Man
ought to make the Scripture his Rule, some that say they do, you say do not; do
you think your Judgment the less valid? By no means; Neither do We. Will you
not desist from censuring those that answer not the Scripture, though they
fancy that they do? Why may not we also by the Light of Christ judge those to
be deluded, who notwithstanding pretend to be ruled by it? Ye turn People to
the Scripture, and they mistake it; We direct People to the Light, but they
mistake it: So that here is the Difference between our Saying, that Men should
do nothing but what the Spirit requires; and your Teaching, that Men ought to
do nothing but what the Scripture requires. For if we disown them for not doing
what we know the Spirit requires, you daily disown such as do not somethings
you suppose the Scriptures do require: And as you think the Scripture to mean
the same you ever did, notwithstanding your Opposers Suggestion, we are by you
justified in mantaining our judgment against those Pretenders to the Guidance
of the Light.

To conclude, I see no Difference between Tho. Hick's saying to me, William
Penn, thou bidst me obey the Light within me, and because I do thou disownest
me; and my saying to him, Thomas Hicks, thou bidst me obey the Scriptures, and
because I do thou censurest me. This d^ives unavoidably to an Infallible
Spirit, whereby to savor all Spirits, Words and Works; for the Anointing is
Judge, and mere Pretenders weaken not its Judgment: And till Men come thither
their best Duties are Unholy Things, indeed.

Let none fancy an Impossibility of Trying Spirits by that without which it is
utterly impossible to try them. God's Spirit gives his Children to savor and
discern Spiritual Bad, as well as Spiritual Good Things; It is not unknown to
such as are led by God's Spirit, of what Nature and to what Tendency such Words
or Actions may be. It was on this alone, and upon no other Foundation, the
Spiritual Gospel, Sound and Heavenly Fellowship stood of old; for by One Spirit
were the true Christians baptized into One Body.

O You that are Professors of Religion, who in days past, and years that are
gone over your Head, Prayed loud and fervently for the Spirit, rise not up
against it because it stains your Beauty, subjects your Wills, brings you out
of Self, and overturns your dead Forms, where the Spirit of this World has had
its Seat for Ages, and in a Mystery ensnared and beguiled you; But wait upon
God in deep Silence to all Fleshly Conceivings, and Will-Worships, so shall you
come to feel God's Pure and Quickening Spirit, to Inliven, Tender and Affect
your Hearts; in which State one Sigh or Groan is more Valuable, then Years of
unprepared and unsanctified Will-Sacrifice.

The next thing aimed at in this Cavil, attended with so much Bitterness and
rude Language, is this, that Thomas Hicks being desirous to represent the
Quakers to greatest Disadvantage, takes not a little Pains to incense Parents,
Magistrates and Masters against them, as Neglecters of all Lawful Commands,
without an Immediate and Extraordinary Impulse to perform them.

Were we such Wretches, as he would render us, we should not deserve to live in
Civil Societies. What I shall say in our Defense is briefly this.

1. The Quakers Principles and Practice have proved themselves consistent with
Government, because they have encouraged to Good Life, Peace and Honest
Industry. I shall not here seek an Eye for an Eye, nor tell any of those Black
and Horrible Tragedies, that go up and down the World, under great Authors
Atestations of the People called Anabaptists. No, I have more regard to the
Sincere and Moderate among them; though it is a great Shame to the Profession
that T.H. should be suffered among them, at least as a Teacher, after such
Forged, Profane and Abusive Trash, which lies more dangerously exposed to the
Lash of Story then we do: But for this time I spare him; yet if he proceeds on
this wise against us, perhaps ^e may hear further of me* and that People to
whom he belongs, if they take not some other Course with him.

2. As to the Commands of Parents I have this to say, and that by good
Experience of more then one, That those who have had Children of our Way,
though with great Disquiet, and not a little Displeasure and Severity against
them at the first, they have left the World with this Testimony of their
Children, they never disobeyed them, but for Conscience sake, and from
Threatening them with the Loss of all, have become so Affectionate toward them,
and Confident in them, as to entrust them with the Whole of their Worldly
Substance. It Is true, here and there a Crooked, Perverse Professor, whose
Husbands, Wives, Children or Servants convinced, have the worst of Lives,
through their extreme Opposition, and Watching for Evil, may perhaps have spied
an Indiscretion, which, though against his own Blood or Family, his Enmity has
aggravated to an Heinous Offense, and then it must be given for a Demonstration
of the Erroneousness of the Quakers Way. But how Just, Natural or Conscientious
such Proceeding is against such Dissenting Relations, or the People they
associate with, let all Impartial Persons judge. This is not doing as they
would be dealt by; Liberty of Conscience! Tyranny, and Egyptian Oppressions. I
ask, Would the Anabaptists be thus served concerning their own Proselytes? Did
they never any of them suffer from their Parents? And have not their Parents
complained of them? And has that been taken by their Church always for
sufficient Proof?

And for the Story of the Woman that went rambling from her Family and Husband,
Contin. p. 63, 69.
bidding him take another Woman, etc. with some pretending Revelations to
refuse just Debts, I shall say no more but thus, We know of no such things, and
believe them to be downright Lies, as others that are gone before them;
However, should they be as true, as we hope they are false, we can but judge
them, and that we do, by the Light of Christ Jesus to the Pit forever. But if
we should take this Course, of proving the Anabaptists those vile Impostors, he
does call and pretend to prove the Poor Despised Quakers to be, p. 69. How many
Miscarriages might we collect and publish against the People that are called by
that Name: but we do not desire that Prophanists should have any such Theames
from us, to sport their Unclean Minds upon, notwithstanding Thomas Hicks's
Liberality to them: Is it not then wickedly done in him, to tell us in the same
page, That if a Miscarriage be, it is improved by us to make the Truth Odious,
who without such Arguments and his own Forgery, would in Truth have nothing
against us? But truly it is very hard, that we should suffer, as we have done,
for the Miscarriages of other Parties, and yet receive these gross Abuses at
their hands: But our Eye is to the Lord, and our Innocent Suffering Cause will
he plead in his own time, whose Will be done by us, and that will be our
Everlasting Rejoicing.

3. For Masters, I must speak my own Experience; many have desired to retain
us, and great Trusts have been reposed in us. To whom were we False? Of whose
Service were we Negligent? When did any of us say, I am not moved to do this or
that, when so required thereto? Shall a Lying Dialogue be Demonstration enough
to prove us what so invective an Adversary would have People believe us to be?
We do declare to all, that the Light whereby we are enlightened, always
commands and strictly enjoins us Duty, Obedience, Love, Peace, Gentleness,
Faithfulness, Industry, Holy Living; And whatever is supposed to the Contrary,
we disclaim it in the Fear and Name of the Righteous God of Heaven and Earth to
be no Product of our Holy Principle.

I shall now attend his Cavils about the Ministry, and give a short Taste of
the Rancour of his Spirit therein. He asks, What is the True Ministry? Comin.
page 65, 66, 67.
To which he makes G.W. answer. Quak. In the New Covenant God is the Teacher
of his People himself immediately, by his Immediate Spirit, Power and Unction,
Christ Ascended, p. 64. Christ. If so, wherefore were Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors Teachers, etc. giver, and set in the Church for the Work
of the Ministry? And why do you set up one among your selves, and appoint
Ministers beforehand to speak in such a place, and at such a time. From whence
I plainly collect thus much.

1. That T.H. in so many words denies God's Immediate Teaching by his Spirit,
Power and Unction under the Gospel; And in that one Expression strikes out,
what in him lies, the whole Pourings out of the Holy Ghost, the great Promise
of the Father; being led by the Spirit; no more I, but Christ that lives in
me; the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he will dwell with them; the
Anointing which ye have received of him abides in you, and ye need not that
any Man teach you, or you need not Man's Teaching, etc. In short, the very
Dispensation of the Gospel, which is a State of Power and Life immediately
received of God, is denied by him.

2. That in acknowledging such Officers to continue in the Church, he must
confess to their Qualifications, or he does nothing. Now, that which qualified
them was the Receiving of the Holy Ghost, and those Heavenly Gifts by it, which
were necessary for the Discharge of those respective Services in the Church. By
this it appears, that either Thomas Hicks must now yield to Preaching and
Praying by the Motion of the Holy Spirit, or in opposing of it, acknowledge to
his own Contradiction, that there are no such Apostles, Prophets, etc. (who
ministered to the Church, as any thing was revealed to them, the great
Evangelical Qualification to the Ministry) in our days.

3. But why should Tho. Hicks therefore degrade the Dispensation because the
People are not yet fitted to It; or oppose the Means used to b^ing them to It,
to the End for which the Means are employed; Besides, is it Man's Teaching, or
Christ by and through Man? God was in Christ; and Christ in his Ministers
reconciling the World unto himself, that he might be the Immediate Priest,
Prophet and King to the Souls of People. Might not the same Objection be more
colourably made against the Apostle John, who at that time wherein the Churches
were so weak, 1 John. 2.27.
and the Means so many, and lately established, said unto them, But the
Anointing which ye have received of him abides in you, and ye need not that
any Man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you of all things, and is
Truth, and is no Lie; And even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him:
Where he is so far from mere Man's Teaching (T. Hicks's only Teaching) that by
his words one would think, the Churches to whom he wrote, had as well been
gathered without Means, as that he admonished them to abide in that holy
Unction, as Sufficient to their Instruction and Comfort: Therefore let him go
ask the Apostle John, why Men were to attend upon the holy Anointing as
Sufficient; not withstanding thos^ Means then provided? And the Answer to that
Question will be ours. But here is the Darkness of the Man from our denying of
empty Vnauthoriz'd Imitations he infers our Denial of such Means as God's Power
uses; and from out Using such Means to our Contradicting our selves, and
Immediate Teaching: and because we use Means in God's Power, to bring People to
God, the Judge of all, that he may be their Judge and Lawgiver, and that from
his Immediate Hand they may receive Wisdom, Knowledge and Comfort, he
ignorantly concludes that Men, where they are, ought not to have Means used to
bring them to this Blessed State; but that God should Immediately teach them
there.

4. I charge him with another Lie, in saying that we appoint Ministers before
hand to speak in such a a place, at such a time, Ibid.
and much less that the End of our Meeting is to decoy, trapan and inveagle
others, as he scoffingly and falsely insinuates. We deny the Suggestion, and
renounce and judge such Practices by that pure Spirit that has otherwise
taught us; God preserve us from that dry, Hireling Custom, and Practice of Tho.
Hicks, who will avenge our Cause upon the Head of this Ungodly Slanderer. But
he thinks he has uterly foiled us in his Representation (indeed Perversion) of
our Belief about the Seed, which though spoken to some distance before, yet I
am willing to say something to it, least it be taken for granted, and his
scurvy Names accounted due Titles to such miserable Wretches as he endeavors
to render us. The Objection entirely is this.

You say, that the Work of the Ministry is to point People to this Seed; That
to the Carnal Mind, which rules in any, the Commands of Christ are not given;
And that the Spirit not only manifests the Promises, but exercises Faith in,
and fulfils them; out of E.B. G.K. G.W. p. 106. ^m. Rev. p 77, 78. Chr. Asc. p.
10. Query Is ^othi^g else taught but this Seed, then your Min^stry is only God
Preaching to Himself? etc. Will you (...) of Infallibility, and Talk like
Madmen? YOU ARE IMPLACABLE ENEMIES TO THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION; MEN INSPIRED BY
SATAN, AND AS VILE IMPOSTORS AS EVER WERE. Here stop a while.

Certainly, Reader, No Man was ever given up to a Spirit of greater Injustice,
Dishonesty and bitter Rage against any People then T. Hicks seems to be against
us: He does not so much prove us Bad, as he would make us so, that he may cover
his Wickedness against us. What false Doctrine is it, to preach People to the
Seed God has sown, in which is Virtue, Life and Power, to bring forth blessed
Fruits to God? To suggest from thence, that there is nothing to be taught but
the Seed, is great Darkness and Prejudice; For the Ministry is not to teach the
Seed, but to bring down, and humble the Mind of Man to it, that the Mind may be
taught, and the Seed delivered from under the Pressure of Sin and Ignorance.
Strange Contradiction, that the Seed should be sown in Man for its own
Salvation, and not for Man's! What but Wickedness it self could thus write of
us?

And that the Carnal Mind receives not the Things of God, because it perceives
them not, is according to Scripture, if not according to Tho. Hicks. But it is
not the first time by many, that Scripture in a Quaker's Book has been given
under that Name, for gross Error and Delusion. That the Spirit manifests the
Promises, exercises Faith in, and fulfils them, cannot be False Doctrine, if
it be allowed to give a true Understanding of them, and if it gives to exercise
Faith in them, and finally, to accomplish or fulfill them. But his Insinuation
lies here, that the Spirit of God is that which believes in God, and exercises
Faith for it self in God, which was never G.W's Intent. But as I have said, the
Spirit is that only which gives us Faith, and exercises that Faith it gives in
the Promises of God, which are Yea and Amen in that Seed, the Quakers preach
People to believe and grow in; for which T. Hicks is pleased to call us
Praters, Canters, Enthusiasts, Mad Men, Idle, Non-sensical, Blasphemous,
Inspired of Satan, and as Vile Impostors as ever were, etc. For which God
Almighty rebuke his Envious, Enraged and Unclean Spirit.

CHAP. XII.
Of Resurrection and Rewards.

THe last great Doctrine he insinuates our Denial of, is that of the
Resurrection from the Dead. Dialog. p. 57.
That which he brings under the Quaker's Name, as a sufficient Proof for that
Suggestion I shall relate, that every Impartial Reader may be satisfied of the
Man's Inconsistency with sound Doctrine, as well as the Common Justice of Doing
as he would be done by.

In Answer to his Questions about the Resurrection of the same Carnal Body that
Dies, he brings in G. Whitehead thus:

Q. Is it not written, Thou Fool, that which thou sowest is not the Body which
shall be, but God gives a Body as pleases him?

Thus (says Tho. Hicks) Whitehead replied; and G. Fox the Younger speaks to
the same purpose. Two Fools that say, This Body of Natural Flesh and Bones
shall rise. I say, The Body which is sown, is not the Body which shall be. I
query, (says he) Whether both these Persons do not tacitly deny the
Resurrection of the Body?

Now that T.H. has shown himself at once Dishonest and Erroneous too; Let it
be observed, 1. That from our Denial of the Resurrection of the same Natural,
Fleshly Body, he absolutely infers and concludes our Denial of the Resurrection
of the Body in any Sense; which is great Injustice to any Adversary. 2. Let it
be well observed, that he makes the Scripture it self to deny the Resurrection,
and so Heterodox, by Accounting G. Whitehead and G. Fox their Answers in
Scripture Language, to be a Denial of the Resurrection: For if Thomas Hicks
does not intend by his Arguing, That the same Body that dyed, without any
Mutation shall rise again, what makes him to quarrel the Apostle Paul's saying.
Thou Fool, that which thou sowest is not the Body which shall be; and repute us
Heretics for believing him?

Certainly his gross Belief of the Resurrection is inconsistent with Scripture,
Reason, and the Belief of all Men right in their Wits in the Point. Who can
have the Confidence to call the Scripture his Rule, and yet Contradict it so
egregiously, as when the Apostle tells us, It is not the same Body that is sown
that shall be, to assert, that it is the same Body, and that who says the
Contrary, denies the Resurrection of the Dead, and Eternal Recompense? In
short, We do acknowledge a Resurrection in order to Eternal Recompense, and
that every Seed shall have its own Body, and rest contented with what Body it
shall please God to give us; But as we are not such Fools as curiously to
enquire What? so must we forever deny the gross Conceits of T.H. and his
Adherents concerning the Resurrection.

But Tho. Hicks would have us believe, that the Apostle said Thou Fool, to him
that denied, and not him that owned the Resurrection; But he must excuse us if
we refuse to Credit him; for it was not, Whether every Seed should rise with
its own Body, or that Bodies should rise; but, as taking that for granted, the
Question was, What Bodies they should be? So that T^ou Fool is most due to T.
Hicks and his Associates, who are not with us, satisfied to leave all with the
Lord, but intrude and query, What Bodies shall rise? Wherefore no Answer can be
more proper to him then, Thou Fool (Thomas Hicks) That which thou sowest is not
the Body that shall be.

But he thinks he is not without Reason; For, says he, Dialog. p. 58.
If the It in the Text be not the same Body, how can that be called a
Resurrection; for that supposes the same?

I Answer, If a thing can yet be the same, and notwithstanding changed, for
Shame let us never make so much Stir against the Doctrine of
Transsubstantiation; for the Absurdity of that is rather outdone, then
equalled by this Carnal Resurrection.

The Papists say, That the Bread and Wine after Consecration are very Christ,
though the Accidents remain. Tho. Hicks, and abundance of that sort of Men
hold, That Man's Body in the Resurrection is the same with that Carnal Body
buried, and yet that it is changed to a Spiritual Body: How it is possible that
It should be the same, and not the same? How that Body, and yet, as the Apostle
says, Thou sowest not that Body that shall be, is very hard to reconcile.

And truly, that which yet is very strange, Those Three Scriptures peculiarly
cited in Defense of his gross Conceit of the R^surrection, are either relative
of another Matter, or directly opposite to, and inconsistent with his Assertion.

1. And this Mortal shall put on Immortality, Dialog. Ibid.
this Corruptible shall put on Incorruption, 1 Cor, 15.53.

I grant that this implies a Change; but I deny, that it so much as intimates,
that Men shall rise with those very Carnal Bodies that were buried. No, the
Apostle not only tells us, that the Body sown is not the Body that shall be,
but that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, verse. 50. If the
Flesh and Blood be transmuted, or changed into no Flesh and Blood, I query (and
I think I may do it safely too) Whether It be the same Flesh and Blood that is
changed into no Flesh and Blood, that is the Body raised? O Absurd, Dark and
Carnal Man!

Nor am I afraid to tell him, that the Scripture cannot rationally be taken
strictly, as translated (neither ought many more) for there are certain
Figures, Modes and Ways proper to that Language in which this Epistle was
written, which are to be understood with Allowances; for how can the Mortal
(taken for Mortality, and not him who in part is Mortal) put on Immortality; It
is Impossible. Can Mortality be clothed with Immortality? then it seems that
Mortality is the Person, and Immortality the Garment. If Thomas Hicks should
tell me, No; it is meant that the Mortal Body should be changed into an
Immortal Body, it follows that he is gone from the Letter of the Text into an
Interpretation, as well as that it contradicts his absurd Identity or Sameness
of Body: If so, it is as Lawful for me (and more, if in the Right) to construe
It thus, That we, who are Mortals respecting our Bodies, put off the Mortal
Part, and put on instead thereof Immortality; 2 Cor. 5.1.
suitable to that weighty Passage of the Apostle Paul, For We know that if our
Earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a Building of God, an
House not made with Hands, Eternal in Heavens; which as directly concludes the
Charge, not of Accidents, but Bodies, from an Earthly House or Tabernacle, to
an Heavenly House or Building, as ever any thing can be spoken by Men or Angels.

To conclude, Since Mortality can not properly put on Immortality, but Man that
is clothed with Mortality, may put off or exchange Mortality for Immortality,
because otherwise Mortality would have Immortality for its Garment; a thing
impossible and absurd; I do infer that this place yields no Strength at all to
Thomas Hicks's gross Apprehension of the Resurrection.

2. His next Scripture is that in the Romans, But if the Spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the Dead, Romans 8.11.
dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken your
Mortal Bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you.

But this is nothing to T.H's Purpose in the least; For the Apostle treats not
here of the Resurrection of Dead Carnal Bodies in our Adversary's Sense, as the
whole Chapter seriously read proves; but of the Inward Work of the Spirit, in
order to the making Man's Body a fit Temple for the holy Ghost to dwell in, as
he writ to the Corrinthians.

3. The third place he brings, is out of the Epistle Paul, writ to the
Philippians: He shall change our Vile Bodies: Upon which he say^s, This cannot
be meant of a New-created Bod^, because such a Body cannot be said to be either
Vile or Changed.

But what makes this for his Conceit? Surely nothing; For if the Vile Body he
changed, then it is not that Vile Body; therefore not the same Body. Again to
say that Scripture cannot be meant of a New-Created Body, because such one cannot
be said to be either Vile or Changed, makes much against him: For 1. It is to
say that the Body that shall be, is Vile, else what means his Saying Because
such a Body cannot be said TO BE (not to have been) either Vile or Changed. 2.
Though the Body That shall be, may not be said to be either Vile or Changed,
yet it may be given of God in lieu of a Vile Body, and so the Vile Body Changed
for one that is Glorious. It was either Ignorantly or Sophistically done in
Thomas Hicks to imply. That Body that shall be, could not be said to be
Changed, since the Change lies on the side of the Vile Body, that is exchanged
for a more Glorious Body; Therefore all along we must conclude, it is not the
same, but another Body. But how Disingenuous is Tho Hicks to repute G.W's
Answer in the Apostle's Words, a pressing the Metaphor too far, and yet by so
doing, runs himself into this Dark Imagination of a Fleshly Resurrection.

But Tho. Hicks thinks, The Joys of Heaven Imperfect else.

I Answer; Is the Joy of the Ancients now in Glory Imperfect? or are they in
Heaven but by halfes? If it be so Unequitable that the Body which has suffered
should not partake of the Joys Celestial; Is it not in measure Unequal that
the Soul should be rewarded so long before the Body?

This Principle brings to the Mortality of the Soul (held by many Baptists) or
I am mistaken: But why must the Felicity of the Soul depend upon that of the
Body? Is it not to make the Soul a kind of Widow, and so in a State of
Mourning and Disconsolateness, to be without its Beloved Body? which State is
but a better sort of Purgatory. See T.V. and T.D.

What made the Apostle willing to be absent from the Body, 2 Cor. 5.8, 9.
that he might be present with the Lord, if such a Dissolution brought Sadness
instead of Joy, as our Adversaries in the Point of the Resurrection suggest, if
not boldly affirm? In short, If the complete Happiness of the Soul rests in a
Reunion to a Carnal Body, for such it is sown, then never cry out upon the
Turks Alcoran; for such a Heaven and the Joys of it, suite admirably well with
such a Resurrection. The Reasons I have to give against this Barbarous Conceit,
I thus Contract.

1. Because that the Scripture speaks of a Dissolution and no Resurrection of
that which is dissolved, being Earthly, and Unfit for a Celestial Paradise; and
therefore holds forth a Building of God, and House Eternal in the Heavens.

2. If the Body be the same, it must have the same Nature, otherwise not the
same Body: But if it have the same Nature, it will be Corruptible still: Mortal
Seeds bring forth Mortal Natures, not Immortal; Neither can Mortal be Immortal,
and yet the same Nature as before; for that Change made, tell me, What remains
of the Old Earthly Body?

3. It makes the Soul Incapable of Complete Happiness without a Fleshly Body,
as if Heaven were an Earthly Place to see, walk in, and all our Outward Senses
to be enjoyed and exercised, as in this World, though in an higher Degree;
which I call Mahometism: For what Spiritual Happiness the Body now can have,
respecting God, is derived through the Soul to the Body, and not through the
Body to the Soul. Besides, if so great a Change or Alteration pass upon the
Body, how is it that Carnal and Sensible Body that suffered? And how can that
same Body be equally sensible of Celestial Delights? for the Flesh and Blood
that suffered is not to enter God's Kingdom; and if that very same Carnal Body
enter not, which sustained any part of the Tribulations, the great Knot is
broken, and our Adversary's strongest, if not only Plea, is rendered Invalid:
For if the same Natural Body, Parts and Senses, consisting of Living Flesh,
Blood and Bones, that suffered and dyed, rise not, another is given in which
the Children of the Resurrection (who have suffered in the Flesh) have their
Recompense: and if they do so strictly rise as they dyed, then every Man is to
rise Married, Low, High, Fat, Lean, Young, Old, Homely, Handsome, and according
to former Complexion and Sex: And which is yet more Unreasonable, This Body is
to be Incorruptible, Immortal, Spiritual, Fashioned like Christ's Glorious
Body, and as the Angels of God. May our Adversary blush at these Dark
Imaginations but here touched upon, because more largely handled elsewhere?
Only I cannot but signify, that this Sort of Resurrection pleaded for, is
renowned by some Baptists, and several other more Clear-sighted Professors.

For our Parts, A Resurrection we believe, and of Bodies to, unto Eternal Life.
What they shall not be, I have briefly said and proved; What they shall be we
leave with God, who will give every one a Body as pleases him, and THOU FOOL,
belongs to the Unnecessary Medler.

CHAP. XIII.
A Collection of some of T. Hicks's many CONTRADICTIONS, PERVERSIONS, LIES,
FORGERIE^, RAILINGS, and SCOFFS at WITNESSING; from all which he is proved to
be neither a True Christian, nor a True Man.

His CONTRADICTIONS.
Argument I. HE that Contradicts Himself, is not led by Gods Spirit, and
consequently no Child of God, nor certain of their own Faith; but so does T.
Hicks; therefore No Christian Man.

He tells us, That the true Light has enlightened every Man, from John 1. and
that it ought to be attended upon, making the Light to be distinct from the
Soul, and not the Soul. Dial. 7, 22. In Contradiction to which he makes this
Light to be but a part of the Soul, by which he falls into the same Confusion
he falsely would fasten upon us, namely. That if the Soul ought to obey the
Light, it would obey It self, which is absurd and cannot be, Dial. p. 14, 32.
2. He acknowledges, That the Light checketh within for many Evils, and exciteth
to many Good Things, and that he ought to shun those Evils, and do that Good, p
8. In short, That Christ is the Light and Life of Men, p. 22. Yet he dares to
tell us, that this Light, in directing to its best Actions, swells Men but
with Proud Conceits, and that it does deceive and misguide such as follow it,
p. 3, and 37. 3. But I do, and must bear witness against thy Erroneous Opinion,
if true to the Light in me, p. 8. I am to do what the Light in my self directs
me, and herein is my Comfort. p. 91. Again, Where a Rule is, there must be
Light in the Subject, yielding Obedience; otherwise no Reasonable and
Acceptable Service, p. 14. I grant it ought to be obeyed, p. 7. To Unsay, which
he assures us, as his Judgment at least, That the Light is Uncertain; In one
Man it teaches one thing, in another the directly contrary; so that (sa^es he)
there can be no certainty of Truth or Error, SIN or DUTY BY THIS. Again, He
says, that it is no Disparagement to the Lightin with, to say, that God does
make any thing more known of his Will then is, or can be known by it; for it is
but to say, that each DEGREE OF LIGHT is serviceable to its End, p. 36. In
direct Undervalue of, and Opposition to which he tells us, within 2 Pages
after, that the Improvement of the Light within subverts the Covenant of Grace,
the only Way God has revealed for Salvation; And that it directly opposes it
self to the Ends of the Covenant, and ought to be Rejected, p. 38.

From all which it is very observable, 1. First, That the Light is Christ's
Light. 2. That it ought to be Obeyed. 3. that it is not a Distinct Light from a
Gospel Light, but in DEGREE only, and Consequently One and the same Light;
therefore Saving in its Nature. But in Contradiction to all this he says, 1.
That it is part of the Soul. 2. That it will Misguide and Deceive. 3. That it
is Repugnant to the Ends of the Covenant of Grace, and ought to be Rejected.
These are a few of his very many Self Oppositions. Now if this be to argue
safely, prudently, and like a Disputant, I am greatly mistaken: sure I am there
is nothing of Truth or Christianity in such Confusion. For that Man should be
obliged to obey a Light that does misguide, or that Tho. Hicks should talk of
A^^ing according to the Light in him, making his Appeal thereto in others; and
yet suggest that it may deceive and oppose the very Ends of the Covenant of
Grace, is with me the Top of all Impudence, and Self Contradiction.

Of the Quakers PRINCIPLES And Tho. Hick 's PERVERSIONS.
Arg. II. Who Perverts and Misrepresents another Man's Principles, acts not
like a True Christian-Man; but such is T. Hicks, therefore no Christian-Man.

1. Because we hold, Christ is God, and God the Light, and that all Men are
enlightened by him; He concludes, that every Man comprehends whole God, and
whole Christ. Dial. p. 2, 3, 4, 5. 2. Because we assert it to be sufficient to
save all from Sin, who are led by it, and walk in it; He concludes from the
Ignorance and Wickedness of those that have it tendered to them, but obey it
not, that the Light is Ignorant, Weak and Deceivable, Ibid. p, 10, 32, 33, 34
3. From our Belief in the Light's Sufficiency to Save, as that which was and is
given of God for Salvation, to as many as bring their Deeds to it, and are
translated by it. He infers, That all other Means are needless, not considering
it was not the Light's Insufficiency, but Man's Weakness, that has necessitated
the great Light to make use of External Means to bring men's Minds from wandering
abroad to the Inward Light, which is the Just Man's Path, Ibid. 12.36, 37. 4.
From our making the Illumination in Man to be a Natural Emanation, or Product
of the Divine Word which made all things. He wickedly turns it to an Effect of
God's Power, and so would by that Argument make the Trees, etc. also Divine,
Ibid. p. 3, 4. 5. From our asserting that Christ shines by his Light in the
Heart of every Wicked Man, as well as every Good Man. He tells People, that we
hold Christ to be in every Wicked Man, as he is in his Saints; Cont. p. 45, 46.
though such Ungodly Persons partake not of his Holy Life and Power, neither are
subject unto his Government. 6. From our affirming God's Promise made good,
that he would be the Teacher of his People; and Directing People to God's Light
in them, as the Gospel-Instruction to the Way of Life. He wickedly infers
against us, yet as our Meaning, that we deny all Ministry, all Visible Worship,
etc. though they stand in God's Power and Spirit; Dial. p. 41, 43 A thing never
believed nor intended. 7. When we speak of Christ's Manhood, or Christ's,
Visible Appearance, and when we speak of his Eternal Godhead, or as he is now
to his Saints and People, saying, he was never as such, Visible to Wicked Men.
He is not ashamed to tell the World in our Name, that Christ was never Visible
to Wicked Men, as to that Bodily Appearance, and therefore that we deny any
such Appearance at all. Cont. p. 37, 40, 41. 8. From our Believing Christ to be
in his People, according to express Scripture, and our asserting that as such,
he is Crucified by Wicked Men. He infers, that we deny Christ to be as well
without, as within; not that he was ever Crucified in the Flesh, Dial. p. 44.
Oh Wicked Man! 9. From our Denial of their rigid Satisfaction, that is, that
Christ was punished by his Father for our Sin; and that Sins past, present and
to come, are answered for; and that Men may be Holy in Christ, by Virtue
thereof, whilst not New, but Old Creatures, and so Unholy in themselves, their
Consciences not being Purged from dead Works; He unworthily concludes, that we
disown Christ's Death and Sufferings as a Propitiation, that his Body was an
Offering for Sin; that he bore the Weight of the Iniquity of the whole World,
that he carried away sins past, and sealed Remission in his Blood to as many as
believe; and that we expect to be both forgiven and accepted, not for Christ's
sake, nor in his Sacrifice and Righteousness, but our own Works, Dial. p. 9,
10. Cont. 48, 49, 50* 51, 52, 53. All which is an horrid Abuse of us. 10. From
our asserting that the End of Christ's Coming to be not only the Forgivenes of
Sin past upon Repentance, but the finishing of Transgression in the Creature by
the Operation of his Power in his Inward and Spiritual Appearance; He Wickedly
infers, that we make his Visible Appearance of no Value, and deny the End of
Christ's Sufferings. Dial. p. 10. Cont. p. 50, 51, 52, 53, 44, 55. 11. Because
we say that Men are not accepted of God, but upon the Inward Work of the Holy
Spirit in the Soul, as to daily Comunion with God: And that there is not
another Way to be saved from Sin present and to come, then by Christ's Inward
Manifestation and Operation; He Insinuates as our Faith, that we purchase our
Forgiveness by our own Good Works, and not that Christ was Gods Propitiation,
by whom Remission of Sins past came; which is the mere Love and Mercy of God,
declared then by him in the World more eminently, and now by the Light in the
Conscience, to all that Repent. Ibid. p. 51, 52, 53. 12. Becauce we make
Obedience a Condition to Salvation; He would have People believe, that we make
it the Meritorious Cause, and so Papists, Dial. p. 2, 63. 13. Because we say
that Christ is but our Example in his abiding in the Father's Love by keeping
his Commandments; So Wicked is he as to conclude, that we believe Christ to be
in ALL THINGS BUT AN EXAMPLE. Ibid. p. 54. Behold this Wickedness! 14. From our
pleading for a Perfection from Sin, and a Growth to the Measure of the Fullness
of the Stature of Christ in this Life. He confidently infers our Denial of a
Perfection in D^g^^es, and our Belief of as high a State of Perfection of Glory
in this World, as hereafter. Dial. p. 48, 49, 50, 51. 15. From our asserting
True Rejoicing to be the Result of God's Work in Man, and Man's Conformity to
him, and what Man sows he reaps. This Person basely infers our utter Denial of
any Cause of Rejoicing from what Christ had done for us, when bodily in the
World, or by his Righteousness now in us, Ibid. p. 53. 16. Because we say, that
such Works as are wrought by the Holy Spirit in us, are necessary to Eternal
Life, and may in a sense be said to obtain it; since the Lord has so freely
offered it upon the condition of Believing and Obeying, the Fruits of the
Spirit of God in Man. He wickedly suggests in our Name, that we expect to Merit
Eternal Life by Good Works, and those of our own working, as the Spider Weaves
his Webb out of his own Bowels Thus does he pervert and misconstrue our pure
Faith. Dial. p. 38. Cont. p. 51, 52. 17. Because we say all True, Spiritual
Liberty stands in God's Power, that loses from Satan's Snares. He unrighteously
infers, That who are not of our Way, should have no Liberty. Cont. p. 87. O
Impious Man! God will reckon for these things with thee. 18. From our asserting
that the Breath of Life, which came from God, by which Adam became a Living
Soul to God, was something of God himself. That he may keep his old Wont, he
falsely renders it as our Meaning that the Soul is a part of God; and then
fastens all his hideous Consequences Dishonestly upon us. Dial. p. 45, 46. 19.
From our Preaching the Redemption of the Seed from under the Weight and
grievous Pressures of Sin, and calling it the Lost Groat, and Pearl in the
Field, etc. He dares to give it as our Faith, that we believe that Holy Seed to
be in a Lost, Undone or Polluted State, Dial. p. 47 Cont. p. 49. then which
what can be more Wicked? 20. Because we say the Scriptures are not the great
Gospel-Rule but the Spirit, because the Dispensation of the Spirit is that of
the Gospel more peculiarly, and that without it we cannot understand, or
savingly believe any thing declared of in the Scripture; and therefore that it
is our Rule for believing the Scriptures themselves; He basely suggests, that
the Quakers cast off all Precepts in the Scriptures, and will not bound either
their Doctrines or Lives thereby, and so will not b^ing their Cheats and
Impostures to the Test thereof, counting them of no more Authority THEN ESOPS
FABLES. Dial. p. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. Cont. Epist.
to the Reader. Behold your Anabaptist Preacher! Indeed an Ungodly Wrester to
his own Destruction. 21. From our asserting, that what was a Commandment to any
Servant of God in old times, is not so to us, because so to them; that is, such
as going to Pharaoh, going Naked, going to the Kings Chapel, as Moses, Isaiah
and Amos did; as also those Elementary Types, Shadows and Figures appointed for
a Season, and to pass off, That such are not Commandments to us unless required
by the same Spirit anew; It is not a little his Endeavor Unrighteously to
infer, that those Moral, Perpetual, and Eternal, Holy Precepts thou shall have
no other God but me; thou shall not Murder; thou shall not commit Adultery;
thou shall not Steal; thou shall not bear False Witness, etc. are not binding
upon us: But that we give our selves the loose of such horrid Principles, as
the contrary; and are therefore inconsistent with Civil Government, Cont. page
59, 60. As if that Eternal, Holy, Omnipresent Light, with which we are
enlightened, did not continually declare and require these Just and Righteous
Things at our hands. God rebuke him. 22. From our Use of the Scripture, and a
Ministry with such like Means, though by the Assistance and Leadings of the
Eternal Spirit, and for this End, that all may come by them, as Helps, to the
Life and Power it self; the great End of all External Means; He would insinuate
the Insufficiency of the Light, and does prefer the very Beggarly Elements of
the Jewish Religion before it, which holds as well against God, Christ and his
Power, Grace and holy Spirit, because the like Means are used notwithstanding
to reclaim and restore Men to a State of Happiness; but if that were Wicked,
what can his Reflection be upon the Light? Dial. p. 37, 41, 42, 49, 23. Because
we say that no Man can rightly worship God, without the Preparation and Motion
of his holy Spirit, which we daily wait to feel, and accordingly are prepared
and drawn forth to worship the Lord, whether in public or private; for we
never sought his Face in vain. This Envious Man suggests, that we never wait to
be so prepared or moved; But if the Spirit of God compels us not, God must go
without his Worship, and not blame them, with such like; making as if the
Spirit were as far off, as he would have Christ; and that to stay till Men were
moved, were never to worship: which sufficiently shows his Ignorance of that
Spirit, whose alone Leadings make a Child of God, as well as the Wicked Use he
makes of that Holy and Christian Practice, Cont. p. 60 61. 24. From our
asserting, that every Man ought to be convinced of what he does, and that by
the Light in him, as his Rule of Faith and Duty, before he sets about to do or
perform it. He insinuates, the Impossibility of our Renouncing and Rejecting
any tenacious Disputer about unprofitable Questions, that may go out from us as
a Religious Society, because such Person or Persons, may plead the Light within
for it, Cont. p. 64, 65. As if they might not as well plead the Scripture too,
upon his Belief of a Rule, and give him the same Difficulty? Must every one use
the Scripture right that pretends to it as their Rule? If not, then why may not
several pretend to the Guidance of the Light, for that which the Light really
condemns. 25. From our denying the Resurrection of the Natural and Corruptible
Body, and leaving it with the Lord to give us a Body as pleases him, This
Caviller and Foolish Intruder into Sacred Mysteries, endeavors to possess
People with our being Shufflers about, and Denyers of the Resurrection of any
Body to Life Eternal, however Spiritual or Glorified, Dial. p. 56, 57, 58, 59,
60, 61, 62. 26. And from our asserting the Unity of God and the Soul, and our
Denial of their Carnal Resurrection, He blindly concludes, that the Soul is
part of God, and so no future Rewards or Punishments at all to be expected by
any. Dial. p. 16, 17.

Thus much to give the World a Taste of the Man's Spirit. He that can thus far
believe him to be an Honest Man, ought to be condemned for great Ignorance and
Inhonesty. God that made Heaven and Earth, will Recompense it into his Bosom
with a Vengeance, if he Repent not.

A Collection of a Few of his Many GREAT LIES.
Arg. III. He that Lies is not of God; but Thomas Hicks is a Liar; therefore
not of God, then no Christian.

1. First, That our owning of Christ Jesus is indeed no other then A MERE
MYSTICAL ROMANCE, and that the Christ we own is no other then a MYSTICAL
ROMANCE, Dial. p. 10. Contin. p. 9. A Profane Untruth; Untruth, in speaking so
of us; and Profane with a witness, to call the Light a Mystical Romance, which
he just now said, ought to be obeyed. Is this your Champion?

2. That according to the Quakers Conceits, Scripture and Reason must not be
made use of, Ibid. p. 26. A Lie our Books and Practice plentifully prove.

3. That the Light in us sees no Necessity of a Mediator, Ibid. p. 35. When God
knows we feel the daily Benefit of one.

4. That the Quakers account the Blood of Jesus Christ no more then they do the
Blood of a COMMON THIEF. Ibid. p. 38. An Ungodly Aspersion.

5. That we deny his Visible Coming and Appearance in the World, Cont. p. 37,
45. Though a Contradiction to himself.

6. That the Quakers hold, they can work a Complete Righteousness OUT OF THEIR
OWN BOWELS, Ibid. Epist. and p. 53. Dial. p. 38. and yet a while since, all was
to be done by the Motion and Operation of God's Spirit alone. O Confusion it
self!

7. They own Christ in all he did, ONLY as an Example, Contin. p. 54. yet just
now he made us deny his Coming at all. What strange Lying and
Self-Contradicting is here?

8. That the Quakers Dissemble when they tell People they own the Scriptures,
and that they render them of no more Authority then ESOPS FABLES, Cont. Epist.
That a Quaker should say, That which troubles thee is thy PUZLING thy self so
much in that BOOK THE BIBLE, thou will never be settled till thou throw that
Book AWAY, Cont. p. 76. A Wicked Lie. Also, That a Quaker should sa^ to one T.
Hollbrow, What do thou tell me of the Scriptures? they are no more to me then
an old Almanac Which we renounce both as being a Lie, and an Irreverent
Expression. For J. Nobbs on whom it is charged, was a Ranter; and if I mistake
not, it was spoken before the People Quakers were known in the Southern Parts,
if not before God's Breaking forth by them.

9. That any thing against our Ministry (though never so true) must be looked
upon as the greatest Lie, Ibid. Epist. But this is one to be sure; God will
clear their Innocence, and confound their bitter Enemies.

10. That Nicholas Lucas said to one of T. Hicks 's Acquaintance, that he might
burn the Bible, and serve God as well without; and that he might write as good
Scripture himself, if he would have any, Ibid. page 5. A Lie, he disowns, and
in the Appendix may be seen.

11. That they appoint their Ministers aforehand, to speak in such a Place,
and at such a Time; and that they go to Meetings only to encourage (that is, to
decoy, trapan and inveagle) others, Ibid. p. 66. Very Lies, I testify in God's
Fear.

12. That the Quakers bid People follow the Light within, and if they do so,
then will they load such with most bitter Revilings, Ibid. p. 68. A Lie, every
title of it. What? Are they represented to be Overturners of all things to
exalt the Light within, and now revile People most bitterly if they obey it?

13. That one of us should bid her Husband take another Woman* Ibid. p. 63. We
charge upon him for a Slander.

14. That Motions of God's Spirit are pretended by Quakers, at least one of
them, to refuse Just Debts, and that they may do so by their Principles, Ibid.
p. 69. is also a Story hatched in Hell.

15. That scarce a Man that reads W. Penn, but thinks him to be either
DISTRACTED OR WORSE, Cont. p. 87.

16. That such as ask us Questions we call Reprobates, in the Sorcery,
Witchcraft, polluted Beasts, Serpents, Sots, etc. Ibid. p. 86.

17. That one of us should say, if one that had writ against us, that if he
writ any more against us, that we would Print any thing against him, that any
would report, BE IT WHAT IT WOULD. Dial. p. 73.

18. If any Discourse with us, it is the Man, and not the Argument that we will
be concerned with. And if we can fix anything that is Odious, it shall pass for
an Answer, and a Confutation; And to fill up their Wickedness they will in
their solemn Way of Profaneness and Blasphemy, bless God that they have thus
answered.

But who has most meddled with Persons may be seen, who unprovokedly has taken
into Twelve Sheets about 20 Persons, and all of them such as have been wholely
unconcerned with him, and are Strangers to him; a Way I never took. How far we
meddle with our Adversaries Strength, our Books will best declare. Nor are his
Dialogues with me less then a most undeniable Demonstration of the highest
Forgery, Partiality, Cowardliness and Impudence that ever was given by Man, who
falls upon our Conclusions, and never concerns himself in our Premises: A
Principle obtained through many Arguments, he can tell how to crop, clip,
pervert and disguise, and then call it ours; But to engage an Argument that
leads to it, as by us defended, it is not in him so much as to adventure; His
Forgeries have been his Answers; And our Principles abused, he thought
Confutation enough to themselves. When he has given an Error for a Quaker's
Principle, truly all may believe it, if they will for him, he has offered in no
place but little to the contrary, and in most places nothing at all.

How Honestly or Worthily he has dealt with us is further evident, who brings
in five of us, Fox, Dewsbury, Crisp, Whitehead, Penn, under the Suspicion of
being Wilful Liars, Fornicators and Adulterers: For though he says but some of
them; yet not Naming Who, the Blemish lies against us all, every one being left
to his Liberty to think, which are the Men.

Ah! the God of Vengeance will repay this Murdering, Wicked Spirit, that as
greedily Haunts after our Ruin, as the Evening Wolf does after the Prey. If
these Defamations are to pass unjudged of the Anabaptists, God's despised Light
will judge them, when all their Profession shall never relieve them from under
Burden of it.

Thus far of Contradictions, Perversions and Lies. Now for a few of his
Forgeries.

Some of Tho. Hick's FORGERIES Detected.
I shall now endeavor to give some brief Account of his FORGERY; and
notwithstanding the Hole he hopes to escape at, I doubt not to make it appear
that he is guilty of it, and therefore a FORGER. My Argument runs thus.

Arg. IV. He that gives that for a Man's Answer to any Question, that is not
his answer to that Question, is a Forger; but that Tho. Hicks has done,
therefore a Forger, consequently no True Christian.

He agrees to the First Proposition; the Second he denies, as I suppose, which
I will prove.

T.H. Anabaptist, Is it Honest in you to deny the Scriptures to be a Rule to
others, when at the same time you make it a Rule to your selves? Dial. p. 24,
52.


Quak. Thou mistakest us when we make Use of the Scriptures, it is only to quiet
and stop their Clamours that plead for it as their Rule.


Anab. Did this Light within create the Heavens and the Earth, etc. it being
proved that it self is but a Creature?


Quak. Yes.


Anab. Is this Light within the Immediate Object of Divine Worship?


Quak. Yea.


Anab. Does not this justify that horrid Act of James Naylor's at Bristol, in
receiving Hosannah's with Divine Worship, etc? Dial. p. 64, 65.


Quak, I think not meet to answer such Enquiries. A wicked Lie; for we disowned
what was Condemnable, as himself afterward did. Again,


Anab. If this Light be the Rule, who is the Subject capable of understanding
it? Ibid. p 13, 14, 15.


Quak. Thou art Drunk with Words and Carnal Distinctions, I know not what thou
would be at. A very Lie,


Anab. More the Pity, if thou so furiously Contendest for this Thing, and yet
know not what I would be at, etc. He makes us Bad that he may condemn us.


Quak. Thou art a Wicked Creature; Blackness of Darkness is reserved for thee.
This is given in Derision.


Anab. Was not my Question Plain and Familiar; but is this Answer pertinent? Is
it not needful we should be informed, who must obey this Light? etc.


Quak. Thou art a Serpent, and the Curse of God is Eternally upon thee. A
Question never so answered that he can prove.


Anab. This Language is so Natural to you, that it is as difficult for you to
leave it, as for the Ethiopian to change his Skin, etc. Ungodly Man! Who sees
not that it is his Design not to be informed, nor inform us; but to Scoff and
Deride us?


Quak. Thou manifests thy Darkness, and that thou art still in thy Imagination.


Anab What need these Impertinencies? T. Hicks is the Father and Forger of them.


Quak. I comprehend thee, and see the Serpent's Subtilty in these Questions;
thou art out of the Truth, and drunk with Words. What is he that spues out
these invented Answers?


Anab. Either thou can, or thou can not answer me; be so free and honest as
to tell me so. If thou can, pray let me know, whether the whole Person, or
part, or something else? What is this but to incense People against us, and
beget Derision?


Thus Reader, does this Ungodly Anabaptist (the Scandal of his Profession)
treat us. We charge it all with Forgery in the Name of God, the Lord of Heaven
and Earth; and every Body that is not Blind, may s^e enough Scorn, Ignorance
and Profaneness. But hear a little more.

Anab. Do you believe the Scriptures to be the true Sayings of God? Ibid. p. 25.


Quak. Yea, so far us they agree with the Light within. An Ar^ant Forgery.


Anab. How shall I know that?


Quak. I Witness it.


Anab. Must I believe thee upon thy own Words?


Quak. I would have thee do so. Abominable Forgery!


Anab. Were thou never Mistaken about Persons and Things?


Quak. This is an Ensnaring Question.


Anab. Did the Primitive Christians use to answer thus?


Quak. We deny Imitation; We are to speak as we are moved. O Ungodly Mocker and
Forger!


Here Is your Anabaptist, a Preacher, a Perverter, a Forger, and a Prophaner of
wholesome Words. Who moved him to this Romance, but the Father of Lies? What
Quaker can this be besides his; I mean, that Unchristian Tho. Hicks? God will
avenge the Quakers Cause upon his Head, as sure as he is God, if he for these
things repent not. But yet a little more upon Perfection.

Anab. Will this convince me, or any other, of your Perfection? Ibid. p. 72, 73.


Quak. Though it do not, yet thereby we shall render you so Odious to our
Friends, that they will believe nothing that is spoken by you against us.


Anab. Then may I not conclude, that the Reason why you so freely Rail against,
and Reproach your Opposers, is only to secure your Credit with your own
Proselytes?


Quak. I cannot deny, but that there may be something of that in it. O
Unreasonable Man!


Anab. Will you be so liberal of your Revilings, whether your Adversaries give
Occasion or no?


Quak. It concerns us to render them as Ridiculous as we can, and to make our
Friends believe, they do nothing but contradict themselves; And if this fail,
we will insinuate something by way of Question that may be Reproachful to them.
O Horrible Impiety! God, our God vindicate our Innocence from these Hellish
Slanders.


Anab. But does not this signify a very Dishonest and Malicious Mind in you?


Quak. We care not what you think, provided our Friends think not so. Again, We
will give it out, that we have both Answered and Confuted our Adversaries, and
our Friends will believe us, which is enough to us.


Observe Reader, what a very Villain this Anabaptist has made of a Quaker; But
where will it light, when the Anabaptist shall be known to be the Maker both of
the Quaker and the Villain too? If this be not Forgery, there is no such thing
in the World? O my Heart trembles within me to think of this detestable Piece
of Cheat. He writes as if he were hardened against God, desperate against us,
and resolved to the Abuse of the poor People, to make them believe his Fictions
to be Truths. But the Devil always spoils his own Business: For who (not quite
distracted) can think it to be more our Interest, to please our Friends, that
we are already sure of, then those who are not yet such, with Design to make
them ours?

I charge these things with abundance more, relating to both our Doctrine and
Practice, upon him, as abominable Forgery; And the Weight hereof shallly upon
his Soul in the day of his Death. And the Righteous God of Heaven and Earth
will terribly plead our Cause in his Conscience to his great Amazement, and
perpetual Anguish, if he repent him not of these Undertakings.

But he objects, what Fierce and Impertinent Language he has given in Answer to
several Questions E.B. furnishes him with, in his Answer to one Phili^ Bennet
^ Priest; As these: Thou art a wicked Creature, Blackne^s of Darkness is
reserv'^ for thee. Thou art a Serpent* and the Curse of God is eternally upon
thee. T^o^ Beast, to whom the Plagues of God are due; with which he makes ^
great B^ast in his Continuation of the Dialogue written, in part, to prove the
first no Fi^^ion: But till it be better done, he will remain a Forger in the
Minds of all Impartial People; For that i^ not the ^wentieth part of what he
ha^ given under the Quaker's Name. Should that be admitted for a Proof so ^ar
as it extends? We have little Reason to believe that to be a sufficient Proof
of the Reality of the f^rst, whose very first Question and Answer is a
downright Forgery in G. Whitehead's Name and that with no Quotation, though he
promised it; at once proving himself Liar and Fo^ger too. But in Defense of
that worthy Sufferer, and d^ceased Prophet of the Lord, I have this to say.

1. First, God having raised him with others by his Eternal Power which was
very dreadful, and lived as a flaming Fire in the bosom of them against the
Formality, Hypocrisy, Covetousness, Persecution and other Wickedness of that
Generation of Covenant Breaking Professors, both with God and Men, from whom
they under-went bitter Mockings and cruel Sufferings. He and they have been
drawn forth of the Lord to check, rebuke and strike dumb that Unclean,
Unregenerate and Serpentine Spirit and Nature which was predominant, and that
under the show of Worship, and Forms of Religion, acted in a Mystery against
the Life and Power of Godliness. Wherefore, when this Priest in his Subtilty
and unclean Wisdom of the Tribe and Trade of the Ungodly Pharisee proposed
these De^p and Weighty Queries (not so much to be informed as to ensnare;
that is God's Word of Truth) whose State was to come to Judgment for Sin, and
into the deep Fear, Aw and D^ea^ of Allmighty God, because of Iniquity, that
through God's Righteous Terrors and Judgments, he might learn the true and
experimental Knowledge of what was convenient for him to know (For they that do
the Will of God, can only know the Life and Truth of his Doctrine) I warrant it
from God, and by the Sense of his Eternal Spirit do declare, that it was the
Portion, and only fit Answer to be given to those trapanning Questions. And had
E.B. gone into a familiar Opening to his Vulturous, Unclean, Serpentine Eye,
all the deep Things of the Spirit of God, and Mysteries of his holy Kingdom,
who was in that Nature that crucified the Lord of them, E.B. had brought the
Wrath of the Eternal, Allwise God upon himself instead of the Priest, whose
righteous Judgments were come, and at that time abroad in the Earth; And I do
believe they struck him home, or we had heard of him ere this; For Hypocrites
and Disob^dient Men sometimes are sooner struck with Judgment then Argument.

2. Nor did the Priest enquire so harmlessly, as Th. Hicks would falsely
insinuate. Cont. P. 18.
It is the Language of a white Devil, onset to Carp, Cavil, Catch and Ensnare
the Innocent, for the Promotion of the outside and formal Religion; then cried
up, and secretly to smite at, and withstand the Lord's Spiritual Appearance
then breaking forth in the Nation. But the Priest queries smoothly? And what
then? Is it ever the farther from being Serpentine for that? Was it not Then
the Jews sought to entrap Christ by their Questions, when they came with a
seeming Veneration and Acknowledgment, calling him Master, and the like? Are
sharp Words a greater Provocation, then a subtle Twining and Dec^itful Spirit.
If Tho. Hicks can no better discern Spirits, than to believe every thing fairly
spoken, to be true, his Judgment is like to be little minded; he is dead to all
right Feeling. Every Spirit and Question is not to be answered; And can he so
basely misconstrue our planest and most upright Assertions, and yet put so high
an Estimation* upon every thing writ against us? He shows he would have us
misrepresented at any rate. Let it suffice that E. Borough gave no harder
Names then the Scripture by Rule allows, we read of Dogs, Bears, Wolves, Swine,
Serpents, Vipers, Foxes, Children of the Devil, and such like; and as that
Nature to whom they were then given, thought them hard, so does T.H. now; but
the same Power that then gave them, has now used them, to the same End and
Purpose, and I abide by it.

3. Whereas Th. Hicks insinuates, that what E.B. said was to the Man,
especially as to determining his Eternal State; I say, he has in a great part
mistaken both him and us; For it was not so much to the Person, as that
accursed Seed which was transf^rmed in him, by whom the Soul was deceived, and
the Heel of the true Seed bruised: Therefore it was an Answer of Love to the
Priest, though a sharp and heavy Answer of Judgment upon that Mind in him,
which never did, nor never will, nor can please God in any.

4. It Is very (...) and wicked with a Witn^ss, in T.H. Ibid. P. 27.29.32, 33,
34 38.
that he should run (...) with two o^ thr^e leaves of a large Folio Book of
about nine hundred pages consisting of so (...) so^id T^stimonies, pertinent
Answers, heavenly Epistles, his P^eas of Liberty of Conscience, his Letters,
Prophecyes and Messages to the Powers (some of which his party is concerned in)
and overlook them all; yea, and like a most Irreligious Miscre^nt indeed (for
it is but a Misbeliever) and with as much Hard-heartedness and Inhumanity, as
could be shown by one Man, trample upon all his Valiant Acts, Tedious Labors,
Great Sufferings, and Testimony unto Death it self for the free Exercise of a
Good Conscience to God and all Men: And as if it were not enough, to rob him of
the Praise due to his Life, and to speak Evil of him, now he is dead, he
endeavors what in him lies, to invalid his Reward, by rendering him unworthy of
any Portion but what is to be had in Hell. God is my Record this day, I would
not, to inherit more Worlds then there are Stars in the Firmament, have so
viol^^ed the Law of Charity; against the most violent of our deceased Opposers;
and God is a^l-sufficient both to find out, question, and recompense this
Ungodly Traducer, whose Envy, I doubt not has Fire enough in it, to burn that
good Man's Bones with his Books, as the Blood-thirsty Pope did honest Wic^^^ss;
But Thanks be to almighty God, it is not in his Power, nor any of his old
Covenant Breaking cankered Adherents: God has swept them off the Stage; And I
declare it to be both my Faith and Prayers, that they may never come on it
more; For it is scarcely to be doubted, but if that Day were come, rather then
not root out the Quakers, Th. Hicks would first forge Faults, and then Evidence
to prove them. No Man can be secure of him in common Converse, who to compass
his End, upon such as oppose him, will SELF-CONTRADICT, PERVERT, LY, FORGE,
beyond which in this World is nothing but direct Murder, and that is a Question,
since in some Cases it were less irksome to die, then to be defamed.

Is this Doing as Men would be done to? Was D. Patricks Friendly Debate betwixt
the Conformists and Non Conformists so Unrighteous in the Account of the
Non-Conformists, because he made their Answers? and does Tho. Hicks pursue that
Example; yea, to a Continuation also, as he did before him* Nay, did not T.
Hicks once, upon a time, condemn the Disingenuity of that Way of Writing? Yet
himself the Man. Let us but consider the Early and great Care of some called
Anabaptists, to detect the Forgery of the New England Bloody Baptism, lately
cried and vended in this City. Could one think that a Chieftant of them should
be so Guilty of the same Injustice? and which is worse, hardened in it too? and
which is worst of all, at that very Instant when they were testifying their
great Abhorrence to all such Actions, and using all possible Means to check and
interdict the Forgery? But we may learn from hence how hard it is for Th. Hicks
and some of his Abettors, in the midst of all their pretended Zeal for the
Christian Religion, to do as they would be done by: They can fly to the
Council Board for an Order against it; to the Lord Major for a Prohibition of
its Sale; To the Archbishops Chaplain, both to recall his License to the
Forgery, and give them one to detect it. What have they mist to clear
themselves? But this had less suspected to be done merely out of Reputation, if
they had taken that Vile (yet their Brother) Anabaptist, T. Hicks into hand,
for his Envious, Lying Pamphlets against us; whose Greater Pretenses to
Religion renders him far the worse Forger of the two: For the Author of that
Pamphlet did not so much make it the Principle of those People to destroy, as
to recount under the Relation of a Brother to the Party murdered, the
Lamentable Tragedy acted by a Member or two of that People, which if it had
been true (as perhaps it is a Lie) the whole Body had not been concerned to
answer for the Passion and Fury of two or three particular Persons, further
then to renounce that Action. But T. Hicks has publicly avowed Lies against
us, the Grossest imaginable, rendering us Inconsistent with Christanity, and
Destructive of the Government under which we live, and that by OUR PRINCIPLES
too; then which no greater Charge can be given, as well as no greater Lies told
against us. Well! God will be even with them for these things; and will rid
both Himself and us, of that Generation of Vipers and Hypocrites, who make Lies
their Refuge, and glory in their Warfare against the Lamb, and his Followers;
who will assuredly have the Victory: But the Tenderhearted God will gather,
and that speedily, I do believe as well, as that I do very greatly desire it.

To conclude, In both Books he has given those Answers in our Names, which
never were our Answers at all; And that little he has quoted out of our own
Books, he has given as those Answers to other Questions, and many times to
other Matter; therefore not our Answers, but his own: And consequently Th.
Hicks is guilty of Forgery, and so a Forger. Thus much of this Subject, to his
eternal Infamy, if not wiped away by unfeigned Sorrow and Amendment of Life.

Of his RAILING, ILL LANGUAGE and EVIL TREATING of our Friends in general, and
my Self in particular.
Arg. V. He that Rails, Reviles, calls Names, etc. is no True Christian; but
such is T. Hicks; therefore no True Christian.

It seems a great Crime with Tho. Hicks, that the Quakers will not own the
Scurvy Reflections of their Adversaries (which were the next way to be thought
Guilty) And which is stranger, he calls them Names for defending themselves. If
we refuse their base Epithetes, reject their Lies, and lay their Slanders at
their own Door; they report us a sort of Foul-Mouth'd-People, Censorious and
Judging; and which is most intolerable, they account such Carriage toward us
Gospel-Zeal and Plain-Dealing, which are only better Words for Reviling and
Railing. But whilst some have thus shown themselves against us, upon close
Encounters with our Books, Tho. Hicks, that he may be Extraordinary (though in
Wickedness) forges Ill Language under our Name, that he may the better practice
Railing against the Quakers, and insinuate with the Vulgar for a Reality, a
very Fiction; but since the Answers as they are, he pretends to condemn as bad,
he is at once to be blamed for Forgery, and forging that which is Reprovable
too.

But that which deserves our notice is, that Tho. Hicks should be the Man of
all others, that takes most upon him to rate the Quakers for their Sharp
Dealing with their Adversaries, who is not only Unjust in doing so, but
Excessive in his Bitterness against them, witness th^se Scurrilous Invective
Expressions.

A Dialogue between a Christian and a Quaker. Their owning Christ, and the
Christ they own, a mere, Mystical Romance. Dial. p. 1, 10, 27, 28, 41, 43, 78,
79, 80, 81, 89. Cont. Tit. Pa. p. 50, 56, 58, 66, 68. 70.
Cheats and Impostures. Liars. Malignant Errors. Their Hypocrisy, Deceit.
Equivocations. The way they arived to that Degree of Perfection, was by
Quaking, Foaming at the Mouth, with dreadf^l Roarings and Howlings, and this,
he says, the Devil Influenced us unto. Again, Delusions, Impertinent Canting,
Nonsense, Blasphemy, The Devil's Slaves. Paganism. Satan's Snares. Pernicious
and Perilous Errors. They are inspired and influenced by that grand Impostor
the Devil. Blasphemous and Ridiculous Canting. Enthusiastical. They decoy and
trapan. Your Idle, Non-sensical and Blasphemous Prating. Inspired by Satan. You
are as Vile Impostors as ever were.

Thus much of Us and our Way in general, besides his Knaves, Cox-combs,
Impudent and Audacious Fellows, that he has called our Friends in Religious
Conferences. I think it not unseasonable to say something of that Entertainment
I have had at his hand. I am wholely a Stranger to him; I ever had an Esteem
and tender Regard to the Sober and Tenderhearted among that People with whom
he walks; I know not that ever I had to do with them in general, and I am sure,
nothing at all with Tho. Hicks in particular, as to Religious Controversy. I
may further say, that some of them have known me long, my Temper, Education,
early Dissent from National Worships, my Sufferings upon it; and if they will
be true to me, they must say, I have had the keeping of a Good Conscience above
the one half of my Life in my Eye, being now about twenty nine Years old. Now
that T. Hicks in the midst of his severe Rebukes of us as abusive to our
Adversaries, should treat me with such Unhandsome Reflections, as Confident
Dictates, Dial. P. 83, 84, 85, 92, 93, 94. Contin. P. 87.
intoxicated with Pride; Tinkling and Ridiculous Words; Arrogant and Conceited
Man; Confident Dictator; Rash, Inconsiderate and Opinionated; I appeal from W.
Penn in his Rage and Fury; His Talk beray'd his Arrogance, transported with
Pride and Error* Brazen'd with Impudence Rage and Folly; Presipitate into
Blasphemy. I say, that he should thus vent his Passion and Displeasure upon me,
who never had to do with him, is certainly very Unchristian, and altogether
Unworthy of any Man that pretends to correct others.

But why Transported with Pride and Error? only, because I said, in Defense of
God's revealing his Will to Man, that methinks this one Demonstration should
satisfy all (viz.) when neither Man, nor Scriptures are near us, there
continually attends us that Spirit that immediately informs us of our Words,
Thoughts and Deeds, and gives us true Directions what to do, and what to leave
undone.

And this is the whole Provocation, or Reason assigned by him, for such Rude
and Unhandsom Expressions, and that to a Man that never had to do with him.
God's Witness in all Consciences judge betwixt us, if so true an Expression
deserves such Affronts; and if such an Answer ought to pass for a Confutation.
Besides it is basely done of any Man to run down the Labors of any Man by
Shreads and Scraps of Matter; or to fall upon a Conclusion without so much as
encountering one of those many Arguments that leads to it. A Way, T. Hicks of
all Men, has proved himself most Expert and most Unjust in. But why Confident
Dictator, and brazened with Impudence, Rage, and Folly? Because in my Second
Part of the Apology in Answer to T. Jenner, a Priest in Ireland, who had
published scores of Lies, Scandals and Personal Defamations against many of our
Friends, and particularly against my self (that his Book seemed but an Epitome
of Lies and Abuse) I did say, O wretched Impudence! Could any but a Priest
brazn'd with Rage and Folly, ever pronounce so great a Lie, as that we should
persecute the Truth and its Followers, with bitter Revilings and Reproachings?
when yet says T. Hicks, that, to which Penn thus replies, is such a matter of
Fact, that Thousands can bear Witness to the Truth of it. But herein has he
done foolishly, for it being yet disputable betwixt us, what is Truth, and what
is Persecuting, and what is Reviling? Can he have so little Modesty in his
Cries against Impudence, as to make our Accusers and Parties, either Judges or
Witnesses? We shall submit it to an Impartial Judgment; but not to Tho. Hicks's
Pride and Passion. However, this is most true, that to call Christ's Light an
Ignis Fatuus, a dim Light, the Spirit of the Devil, that we are of the Devil,
that we are possessed, are Witches, acted and moved by Satan, Enemies to God,
Christ, the Spirit, Religion, humane Societies; with many Stories that we have
offered to prove Lies in the Sight of all Men, and particularly what he charged
upon my self, viz. That Penn, another of their Teachers, did boldly affirm to a
Friend of mine in Dublin, that whosoever shall expect to be saved by that Jesus
Christ that was born in Judea, and suffered at Jerusalem, shall be deceived;
which I declare to be a Lie in the whole, and every part of it. I say, this is
certain, that so much evil Treatment may well extort that sharp and just Rebuke
from me: But if it be Criminal, (I know in T. Hicks's account it is) for me so
to Character a Priest that had written an entire Book against us, in which he
had most wickedly belyed our Principles, and abused our Friends, and
bespattered my self in particular.

What can He think of himself, to say so much more of me, who never writ
against the Anabaptists in general, nor Tho. Hicks in particular, much less,
that I have vented or aggravated so many horrible Lies against either them, or
him? If his Conscience condemn him not of Baseness, Passion and Partiality it
is feared; and if the Party he belongs to, judge him not for such Unjust
Procedure, they will be condemned of God's Light, that will bring every
Unfruitf^l Word and Work into judgment.

His Insinuating that I entitule J. Nailors Blasphemy and Railing, wherewith he
was charged at Bristol, upon the Holy Spirit* and that neither he had, nor I
have Words enough to signify our Venom and Malignity; because I said of James
Nailors Book writ long before his being so charged, That if he had treated that
accursed Stock of Hirelings ten thousand times more sharply* it had been but
enough; is like the rest of his Ungodly Perversions already noted; For first I
speak against Hir^lings; and I have said nothing of them, that the Holy
Prophets have not exceeded, who called them Dumb D^gs, Greedy Dogs, Wolves, and
such like. But T. Hicks's Concern for Hirelings shows both that he is one
himself (and indeed has been so a long time) and next, that he is fallen with
many more from the first Love and Principle of that People called Anabaptists.

2. From my Justifying James Nailor's Sharpness in a particular Contr^v^^sie
against a Deceitful, L^ing Pr^e^^; he infe^s, that I d^fend him as to his
p^blick Misc^ri^g^s at Bristol. I^ this thy Conscience? has all thy pretended
Sc^iptural Doctrines Knowledge, ^tudy, Preachm^nts, etc. brought thee no
further? God will b^^^t it all, and bring thee to Judgm^nt for ^ cler^^^gs.

Well may I return the third particular against thy self, and Warn all People
how they adhere to a Man f^^'d with so much Vn^ruth, Slander, Perversion and
Forgery; who art alien^ted from G^d's Light as near as it is to thee, and that
Heavenly Life that is felt therein of all those who believe and obey the Light.

Reader, Let us not be esteemed Railers because we rebuke Railing; Nor our
Rel^gious ^ensure of their Perversions, Forgeries and Proph^ness, be accounted
Reviling? It Is Trouble enough to us to be thus conce^ned in Controversy; We
would find other Employment if such Envious Spirits found not this for us. It Is
not our Choice, but theirs; They began, and which is worse, when the Powers
left off. Their Restles^ Spirit shows, it must have its Vent some way. Policy
and Enmity together have turned it upon us: so that our Peace from the Powers
proves a Persecution from some of the Professors, as the Experience of the base
Cowardice of many among them gives us to remember, that the Powers Pe^secution
was the time of their Peace; who like Insects lay dead during those Winter
Seasons: We were then their made Walls to flat the Shot, and Bulworks, to
resist the Assaults; and the more Moderate prayed, that we might be enabled to
stand; But no sooner were we come out of that Fiery Furnace then we were
saluted with an Imposture from Lincoln, and a L^e from Dover, both subscribed
by Anabaptist ^re^chers, with several Clamor^us Books since. An Ill Rec^mpenc^
indeed for our Love and Sufferings: But from God is our Reward, therefore we
are not moved; with whom we leave our Innocence; and ^e will Effectually plead
our Cause with our Adversaries.

His SCOFFS, or slight ESTEEM of WITNESSING; With a Word to Professors; With a
Conclusive Supplication to the Lord.
Arg. VI. He that Slights and Scoffs at Witnessing is no True Christian; but
that does Tho. Hicks, therefore no true Christian.

It was the Way of the True Prophets, Apostles and Churches of Christ to
declare of what they had known Experimentally of God and his Work, otherwise
they must have been uncertain of the Truth of those Things they have
recommended to us: The Waldenses accounted themselves Witnesses; their best
Argument was their Conscience, P.P. Perrin. Hist. Wald.

Luther opposed the Pope and his Adherents, particularly about Justification by
Works, upon Experience. He made it to stand in the Testimony of God in the
Conscience, that he was accepted from an Inward Work of God's Spirit, and not
any Outward Works, much less such as their Works were, Wessel, and Luth.
confer. Fox. Mart. 2. Tom.


And since the Times of Reformation, from the Thickness of Popery, Experiences
have been very Excellent Things. I remember, though very young to Thousands,
what a great Stir and Flockings there has been in my time after such Preachers,
who could by any Experiences, approach the Consciences, and tell People upon
Trial what God was, and what Christ was, and the Holy Spirit, with respect to
the Soul of Man, as to Manifestation, Operation, Conviction, Faith, Temptation,
Victory over Sin, Regeneration, The English Martyrs laid the Stress of their
Opposition to Popery, upon their Witnessing better things, Book of Mart.
and the like. Indeed, it was the Want of this Preaching that gave such a
Dis-relish to People of the National Priests, and they suffered not a little
for their Change: Sure I am, The Brownists call themselves, God's-
Sack-Cloth-Witnesses in their Apology dedicated to King James, in the beginning
of his Reign, 1. yea, in that Epistle Dedicatory, they speak several times to
that purpose, their being Witnesses, that they did Witness, etc. The like often
in the Preface and Book it self, with great Zeal and Honesty. 'Twas what they
al in their several day felt springing up in them, that gave them to relish
Persons, Words, and Things; and as they savoured, so they testified. Their
Experience was the Ground of their Knowledge; And their inward Witnessing the
Work and Will of God, the Reason of their outward Witnessing for it unto Death
it self.
some Forms, reputed less Phanatical then that in which T. Hicks is, pressed
closely after such a Ministry, and utterly decryed all other to be Beneficial
in the Church of Christ: But the Lord God having appeared in a more Immediate
and Spiritual Manner, and some having taken up their Rest by the way, (thereby
losing their first Desire and Love, and so the more Insensible of these further
Breakings forth of God's Power amongst them) under the more refined Form they
have sat down in (and where the Lord in some Measure might have appeared to
them) do they in this Day set themselves to War against the Light and Life of
Christ within; For indeed it is a State too Inward, Self-less, and Spiritual
for their Carnal Minds, that can only perform an Outward and Formal Worship, to
arrive at. Now such being closely beset in their Fading and Dying Forms, and
many on all hands, in whom there are any tender Desires after God's Invisible
Presence, falling from them (like Men that seek themselves, and not the Lord)
they are belabouring hard to prevent such a Separation from them; and indeed,
they are grown so Dry and Barren of all Good, by their Opposition to the Lord's
Truth, as now revealed among us* that they come to lose (with their former good
Desires) their very Doctrine; And that which above all things was once most
desirable to the better Sort of them) and applauded by all, is become a Theme
for Scorn and Derision; I mean, WITNESSING.

Thomas Hicks, though an Anabaptist-Preacher, cannot abide to hear of
Witnessing. He had as lieu meet with the Lie, Dial. p. 20, 25, 68, 72. Cont. p.
23.
as Witnessing for an Answer. He commonly bestows Ignorance, Folly, or such
like upon It for a Companion; And though another Return might be as easily
found out by him, yet because it may not so well suite the Scoffer and
Profane, WE WITNESS IT, is to go in its room. To which kind of Answer he
usually replies, What is Thy Witnessing to Me? Do not put us off with your
Witnessings, which signify nothing to us. Thy Commands and Witnessing are much
alike to me, with more of this kind.

My Friends, In the Love of God, that would have you redeemed and saved, I
beseech you, turn away from such Blind Guides, their Paths are Darkness, and
the End thereof Death; If ever you will know and worship God aright, you must
come to the measure of his Spirit in you, that is given to convince the World
of Sin, and you must know the Work thereof Experimentally in you, or your Souls
perish for ever. My Friends, I have a great Stress upon me concerning you,
would I could reach into every Soul of you, that you might be touched with this
true Testimony; for I know not more truly that God is, then that I feel him to
be a Rewarder of every Man according to his Works; and such as Men sow they
must reap. And truly, my Friends, Time passes away apace, and the Day makes
haste over you, if your Visitation be shut up in God's Withdrawing the Light of
his Countenance (inwardly to be felt and known by such as turn to it) your
Condition will be miserable for ever. I beseech you in the Bowels of the Love
of Christ Jesus, unto whom this comes; Be Still, Cool and Moderate, let him in,
whose Right it is; He will affect your Hearts, purify your Souls, destroy your
Enemies, and finally save you from Sin here, and Wrath to come; for to that End
was he given a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and for Salvation to the Ends of
the Earth. And hold no Communication with such Unsavory Persons as Thomas
H^^ks, a Man turned, I testify, from the Grace of God into Dryness, and
Wantonness, and Prejudice, who makes a Mock at Experience, and to whom the
Weighty Work of Witnessing is Matter of Derision. O the Ill Use he has made of
Religion, and the Lamentable End he is come and coming to! My Friends, get to
Experience, get to Witnessing by all Means, and that with all Speed; for those
who cannot witness God's Work and Will done in them to their Sanctification,
shall never see Heaven; That is the Word of the Lord God of Life and Power, and
it is sealed for ever. Ah! Life for your Souls, or you perish, which is only
known in the Light; and ye must be born again, or you enter not into the
Kingdom of God. No splendid Show, no Methodical Articles, no Outward
Fellowships will serve turn; Friends, they will all stay behind, when you must
go away once and for ever. Therefore be not Opposers of God's Work in your
selves, nor others; but seek after Invisible Life for your Souls, that will go
with you: And if you will believe in the Light, you shall not abide in
Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life; which, blessed be God, we do
Experience, yea, Thomas Hicks, we Witness it. And though thou have bestowed
much time to Abuse, Belie, Slander, and Traduce our Friends in general, and my
self (a Stranger to thee) in particular, yet I can forgive thee, and the Lord
is Record for me, I wish thy Salvation. O that these heavy things might not be
laid to thy Charge^ For, so sure as God lives, Great will be the Wrath that
shall follow; yea, God will visit for these Unrighteous Dealings: And I
testify to thee from God's Living Spirit, if thou desist not, and come not to
deep Repentance, the Lord will make thee an Example of his Fury, and thy Head
shall not go down to the Grave in Peace; and by this shall thou know, that not
a Lying, or Delusive, but a true and Infallible Spirit has spoken by me; yea,
the Light within will bear Witness to the Truth of these things on thy Dying
Bed; and then remember me. I wish well to all; I seek the Good of all; I have
nothing in my Eye, but the Glory of my God, the Prosperity of his Truth, and
the Salvation of all People, through their Belief in it, and Obedience to it.
Wherefore my Heart is not discomforted, but I have Peace with him, whose
Presence I feel, in which is Life to my Soul, Strength toward my Labors,
S^pport under Sufferings, and a plentiful Reward for them all.

A Conclusive Supplication.
O Lord God! Plead thy own Cause, and the Innocence of thy own poor People. O
Lord! Reach into the Consciences of all thy Enemies; Breath a Blast upon all
their pleasant Shows; Stain the Glory of their Will Worship; Bring them down,
that thou may exalt them; Wound them, that thou may heal them; Break them,
that thou may bind them up. O, that they may all Hunger and Thirst after thy
Appearance; that thy Life, and Power, and Wisdom they may come to witness, that
they may be all saved in this thy Day, O Lord, from every Barren Way, and from
every Evil Work; that the Life of thy Pu^e Spirit may shine forth by them to
thy Eternal Praise, who over all art worthy, who art God, Blessed forever, Amen.

Magna est Veritas, and Prevalet.
Great is the Truth, and it does Prevail.
A Postscript of Complaint Against the Unfair Dealing of our Public Enemies.
SInce God visited us by his Glorious Light, and that he Alarmed, Q^icken^d and
Ra^s'd us by his Almighty Power, that broke in upon our Hearts and Consciences
to Discover Sin, wound for it, and redeem from under the Yoke of it, that our
Religion might not stand i^ Word and in Form only, but in Power and Life) But
specially since our Outcry against the Formality and Emptiness of the many
Religions in the World, preaching the Necessity of Obedience to the daily Cross
unto Salvation; many have been our Enemies, and those of diverse sorts. What
Stratagems they have used, may be better known when it shall be considered,
what they have not used to our Destruction; Indeed ^ew, or none: For if Lies,
Forgeries, Perversions, Mis-representations, Aggravation of Invented
Miscarriages would have done, we had not been now in the World: But God has
preserved us to this day, and the Point of their Arrows have retorted upon
themselves, and the Hole they have dug for us, they have often fallen into
themselves; and our Pati^nce and Resolution will wear out their Envy and
Cruelty.

Among other of their Essays, Writing has not been the least in Practice and
Request. But this we have publicly to declare of, and that in a way of Just
Complaint: Our Enemies multiply their Books against us; yet never answer our
Defenses. The utmost of their Endeavors toward it, seems to end either in
Cavilling, Perverting, Mis-representing our Words and Meanings (rather
disguising then confuting our Principles) or else inventing Error and Weakness
in our Name, that they may the more easily convict us of both; though guilty of
neither.

Since therefore they afford us no Just Dealing, but instead of weighing our
Reasons, in Vindication of our so much decryed Way, seek to defame it, through
Ignorance or Malice, or both; We thought it fit to let them know, that we have
several Books already out, which contain a large and effectual Defense of our
Principles and Practices, which we demand a serious Consideration of, and full
Answer to, before we shall think our selves obliged to any further Tracts in
our Vindication, then what have been already writ, and which we are now in hand
withal. For that we should so often defend our selves, and our Defenses be
neglected; and instead of an effectual Consideration of them, that they should
fall to their old, and so often repelled Charges and Accusations, as if they
writ, not to have us clear our selves, nor yet that they would justify their
Mis-representations of us, by confuting our Apologies, but to be dirt and
disguize us to the People, is most Unreasonable on their side, as well as that
it would argue great Indiscretion on ours, to follow them into every
repetitious Accusation. For our parts, we can never think our selves obliged to
justify our Principles so many times over against the same Charges, till our
Answers have been better weighed: For as such Trouble would be almost endless;
so in reality, it looks more like making us Work, then Refuting us. Besides, I
must needs tell the World, the base Cowardice of this Adversary in hand; for we
have offered him a free Meeting with his Books in our hands, proffering to
refute them viva voce before the World; but instead thereof, or any other way
(as several have been tendered) he disingenuously slincks away, and ^uts us off
by mere Shifts and Evasions: His Business is to write Dialogues, which he is
sure to answer himself, and to back his Forgeries with Lies.

But avoiding all Party-Reflection, or any further Aggravation of this base
Fear and Injustice too; we shall among the many Books writ by us in general in
Defense of our Way we profess, lay these few upon the Heads of our several
Adversaries, as containing much of what can be said in behalf of our Principles
and Practices.

1. Priests and Professors Principles, writ by G. Fox.

2. Rusticus ad Academicos, writ against J. Owen, R. Baxter, J. Tombs and T.
Danson, by S. Fisher.

3. (...), writ against Bishop Gauden, by Samuel Fisher.

4. Edward Burroughs's Works.

5. The Divinity of Christ, etc. writ against J. Owen, T. Danson, T. Vincent,
W. Maddox, by G.W.

6. Oaths no Gospel-Ordinance, against A. Smalwood, writ by Francis Howgil.

7. The Great Case of Tithes, by Francis Howgil.

8. Immediate Revelation, etc. writ by Geo. Keith.

9. The Serious Apology, etc. writ against T. Tailor and T. Jenner, by G.
Whitehead and W. Penn.

10. The Nature of Christianity, etc. writ against R. Gorden, by G. Whitehead.

11. Christ Ascended, etc. writ against J. Newman, by G. Whitehead.

12. The Light and Life of Christ within, etc. writ against W. Burnet, by G.
Whitehead.

13. No Cross, no Crown, etc. writ by W. Penn.

14. The Spirit of Truth Vindicated, etc. writ against the Socinians, by W.
Penn.

15. Quakerism a New Nickname for Old Christianity, etc. writ against J.
Faldo, by W. Penn.

16. The Christian-Quaker, etc. writ against the Strength of all our many
Adversaries in general, and several of them in particular; divided into two
Parts, the first by W. Penn, the second by G. Whitehead.

These, with our present Discourse, let them answer; and if they have any thing
that is new to offer, we shall, we hope, by God's Assistance, freely and
faithfully consider it; otherwise let Shame cover the Face of our Enemies for
their Unjust Outcries and Base Forgeries against us, whom they cannot by
Reason silence, nor sober Argument confute.

W.P.
AN APPENDIX: Being some SOBER and SHORT ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Certain Passages
in Tho. Hicks's Dialogue and Continuation of the Dialogue; by which his
Unchristian Spirit is further Detected to the WORLD. Also a Collection of those
Doctrines and Principles, which have been chiefly Controverted between us,
Granted and Confessed to by our present Opposer Thomas Hicks, and others of the
Baptists Persuasion Drawing the Present Controversy to an End.

By George Whitehead.

His Mischief shall return upon his own Head,

Psalm. 7.16. Printed in the Year, 1673.

Moderate Reader,
IF any of these our present Opposers, to wit (some angry Anabaptists, and
traducing Dippers) be minded to Quarrel and Scold at us for the Last Word or
Pamphlet, I do not think it any Disparagement to our Religion, nor any
Lessening of our Christian Reputation, if they should have the Last Word, and
we should mutely slight their Revilings; but as yet we have a Necessity on us,
both for True Religion and Christianity's sake, to manifest to the World their
Abuse of both; together with the Envious, Lying, Perverse and Abusive Spirit,
that appears in their Scornful, Irreligious Agent Thomas Hicks (who will bring
no Honor to them, nor their Religion, but Disgrace) who has forged up a
second Dialogue to render the True Quaker no Christian, but the most implacable
Enemy to the Christian Religion. p. 68. and has therein improved his Study to
render us Odious, and not in any serious o^ solid way of Treatise to answer our
Principles, but with a bundle of impertinent Introrogatories, Cavils, Scoffs,
Jeers, Flouts, Forgeries, malicious Revilings, perverting our Words, in diverse
places mistaking them for his own Malicious Dsiegn, to render us, our
Sufferings and Consciences Odious and Contemptible; and to destroy our
Reputations both as Men and Christians, as appears in the whole Tenor of his
Work in these two Pamphlets, and as may be seen particularly in the 67, 68, 69.
pages of his Continuation. And to conclude his Work, as one consciously Jealous
of what he had done, that he might be detected; for Prevention, and to keep us
mute, he gives us a kind of severe Threat, saying, page 88.
I have been sparing touching your Practices, horrid Enormities reigning, etc.
if therefore you will provoke me to speak all I can, either respecting your
Opinions or Practices, blame me not, etc. They that have read his Dialogues,
may judge, how sparing he has been; and if we were guilty of horrid
Enormimities or Immora^lities, what Mercy we should have from such Judges as
he, who is thus liable and ready to be provoked. But as we expect no
Christian-Dealing nor that Charity from him which is not easy to be provoked;
so his Threats shall not deter us from making our Just and Christian Defense on
Truth^s behalf, a^^ such Malicious Forgers and Perverters, whilst n^^ ^^ve the
Testimony of a good Conscience to plead, and a holy Confidence in God's eternal
pow^rful Truth, which shall out live all the Emnity of its Adversaries, wherein
they fret and we^ry themselves for very Vanity, who have conceived Chaff, and
brought forth Stubble; they have traveled in Pain, and brought forth a Lie,
whose own Breath as Fire shall devour them, and they shall be caught in their
own Snares, and fall into the Pit, which they have dug. Observe, that
Ingenuous Disputants or Contenders (especially for Christianity) will
diligently take notice of the very Strength and Stress of their Opponents
Objections and Arguments, and endeavor their Conviction by a candid and fair
Answer; but instead thereof the Dialogue-Man frames Objections and
Interrogatories in the Christian's Name with what Subtilty he can, and feigns
Answers in the Quaker's Name as silly, feeble and contemptible as he can
(together with gross Calumnies and manifest Slanders) to render them Ridiculous
and Odious, passing by the Strength of their Arguments, and perverting both
their Words and Intentions in their Books against their Opposers, particularly
those of his Party: therefore while he pretends, that all he intends is only
our Conviction and Recovery, he is guilty of gross Hypocrisy and Falsehood, as
in the Sequel will surther appear.

G.W.

Vnprejudiced Readers,
LEt it be observed, that after Thomas Hicks has pretended faithfully to
represent some of the chief Opinions of the Quakers in his first Dialogue
(T^tle Page ^ And in his second to give a more full Relation of their Dangerous
Tenets.

Continuation Epist. page 2. He says, The Doctrines delivered by them are such,
as neither themselves, nor any for them, can give us a distinct and
intelligible Account of: and that the Tendency of all their Writings and
Declarings does but lead People into the Thickets of Absurd, Inexplicable and
Unintelligible Dotages. Epist.

How plain is it, that the Absurdity and Dotage (yea, and Falsehood) is his own,
let the Rational Reader judge in his pretending Faithfully to Represent those
Opinions and Tenets, which he confesses neither themselves, nor any for them
(excluding himself with all others) can give a distinct and intelligible
Account of; and that they are inexplicable, I do not so much regard his absurd
Lie herein, as take notice how Inconsistent, Fruitless and Absurd his Work
against us is. But why can neither themselves, nor any else, give a distinct
and intelligible Account of their Doctrines? If you will believe him, he says,
They talk like Madmen, as having lost their Common Reason* and were absol^tely
Infatuated, Cont. p. 67. and would make the World beli^ve, as if they were
either Distract^d or ^orse p. 70. and says, That scarce a Man that reads W.
Penn, but thinks him to be either Distracted or worse, p. 87. Surely, if this
Man believed all this of us, he would not perplex and trouble himself with so
much Studying and Scribbling against us, as he does; his Vexation and Torment
would not increase, as it does: What! Madmen? absolutely Infatuated?
Distracted, or worse? and yet their Doctrines and Tenets Dangerous? How can
this be? especially if neither Intelligible nor Explicable? His Lie against
W.P. is so apparent, that all in their Wits, who read him, may see it: O T.
Hicks! why had thou not so much Wit as to have hid thy Folly in Silence?

Thy Prayer is, The Lord in Mercy vouchsafe to us (in this Hour of Trial,
wherein the Spirit of Error does so fearfully prevail) that his Holy Truth may
shine out, etc. Epist. [Shine out] Must not that be in Man's Conscience then?
How agrees this with his opposing the Light within as a Rule? By [Spirit of
Error] no doubt but he means the Spirit of the Quakers; But what need this Hour
of Trial thereby come so near him, or he fear its prevalency with Errors, if it
appear in such Distraction, and so unintelligible and inexplicable therein, as
he renders it? But how Mad and Distracted soever he represents us, his charity
and pretended Christianity leads him not to pity us, but grossly to Revile,
Slander and Abuse us, both as Men and as Professors of Religion: His Malice
cannot enough vent it self against us by counting us Madmen, absolutely
Infatuated, Distracted, etc. but also Cheats, Wicked or Vile Impostors,
Monsters in Religion, Dissemblers, Profane, Immoral, Knave, Impudent Fellow,
and guilty of Decei^ and Hypocrisy, Equivocation, Idle Pra^ing, Horri^
Blasphemy, Arrogance, little Respect to Magistrate^, Wilful Lying, Vile
Hypocrisy and Deceit, the most Implacable Enemies to the Christian Religion,
as Vile Impostors as ever were, Destructive to all Humane Society, Horrid
Enormities, etc. But how well this kind of t^^a^i^^ us with most Calumnious
Reviling agrees eit^e^ with his Accusation before, of Mad Men, Distracted, etc
o^ ^ith his Pretense to Meekness and Fear, p. 3^. Scripture Language and Terms,
p. 38. or with his intending only our Conviction and Recovery, let all sober
Readers judge: we are sure, that this Way of Des^ming, rendering a People so
grossly Odious to the Nation, and Obnoxious to the Powers, is not the Way either
to convince or recover them, if deceitved or mis-guided; much less to Belie and
Slander them in Matters wherein they know themselves clear, as he has done by
us. As when we declare ou^ Faith in a Matter, and give as plain and sincere
Answers as we can, and that according to plain Scripture, he tells us, We do
notoriously Equivocate and Dissemble, p. 54 and that we do not in truth believe
what we persuade many well-meaning People we do, p. 69. Such is the measure we
meet withal from this Malicious Accuser, who most falsely presumes to be a Judge
of our Minds and Intentions, contrary to what we in Plainness express* wherein
our Consciences bear us Reco^d in the Sight of God, he grossly belyes us; and
the Deceit and Falsehood lies upon himself, and he cannot wash his hands of it.
He told us in his Dialogue, p 90. That if the Quakers return him the Common
Answer, that they are Lies and Slanders, and that he is an Envious, Railing
Man; To the first he should not think himself concerned to give any Reply,
because he is fully satisfied, etc. Upon which (as I had sufficient Ground) I
did charge him with being Guilty of ^oth Lies and Slanders against the Quakers,
of which ^instanced Seven, Dipper Plung. page 16, 17. Notwithstanding he has
promised, he should not think himself concerned to give any Reply on this
Occasion; yet he has not only written a second Dialogue Which if it must be
taken for any Reply, he has broken his Promise; but if no Reply, then it
clears him not.
to vindicate himself from b^ing a Slanderer and a Forger; but for ^roof of his
own Lies and Forgeries has added more against us. And for the most ^art of his
Contradictions, I charged against him in the said Dipper ^lung'd, he has not so
much as made ^n Essay to reconcile them: Neither has his Brother V. Kiffin, nor
any else of his Brethren appeared in ^rint, either to vindicate or excuse him,
though rferred to therein; but he must either stand solely ^on his own Legs, or
fall. In that they do somewhat Wisely and Warily, but neither Prudently, ^r
like Christians, to suffer their Brother Hicks, thus Headily and Out-ragiously
to persist in his Perverse Spirt to Clamor, Vilify, Reproach and Defame both
particular Men, and a Body of People fearing God, together with their Religion
and Sufferings; nor will he Grace the Anabaptists Cause with ^is Defaming
Pamphlets, nor they in spreading them, being patcht up with both Lies and
Falsehood.

Be it further observed, That Tho. Hicks would persuade the Reader of his
Honesty and Conscienciousness, touching his Work against us, in his seeming
Solemn Appeal, Epist. p. 2, saying, God forbid, that I should be guilty of such
vile Injustice, as to charge them with false things; Examine the Quotations,
and th^^ judge.

He would make the World believe, he is very Just; But let us try him (though
he be fully handled before) if he be not guilty of such vile Injustice, as he
mentions.

Where he says, The Holy Scriptures are esteemed by them (viz. the Quakers)
inferiou^ to their own Pamphlets; These are both Abominable Lies.
yea, they render them to be of no more A^thority, then the Fables of Aeso^,
Epist.

Where are his Quotations from the Quakers, that they thus render the Holy
Scriptures? He refers us to none at all; I charge him with an Abominalle
Slander, Vile Injustice and Gross Deceit in the: And we utterly Disown and
Abominate such an Undervaluing Comparison of the Holy Scriptures, as here he
has accused us of. O seared Conscience to appeal to God, as one not guilty of
such vile Injust^ce, as that of charging us with false things, and refer the
Reader to Examine the Quotations, when here ^s not one Quotation, nor the
color of one, that the Quakers did ever thus speak of, or render the Holy
Scriptures to be of no more Authority, then the Fables of Aesop. What will not
Envy and Wickedness had this Man to say against us? Does this agree with ^is
Pretense, That all he intended, was only our Conviction and Recovery? Dial. p.
10. Is it not rather to do us what Injury and Mischief he can by Slanders and
Forgeries?

Tho. Hicks's Charge against Nicolas Lucas, viz.

That N.L. a Real Quaker, was moved to declare his Mind thus (to one I know
very well Where is his Quotation for the Reader to Examine here?
) Thou may burn thy Bible, and when that is done, thou may serve God as
well without it; and if thou have a mind to have a Scripture, thou may write
as good a one thy self.

N.L's Answer follows.

These words (whereof T. Hicks has thus publicly and positively accused me,
and that diverse times over in his Pamphlet) were never spoken by me, nor was it
ever my Principle, Way or Motion, to Dis-esteem, Undervalue or speak evil of
the Holy Scriptures; for I really believe, that Holy Men of God spoke them
forth as moved by the Holy Spirit. Therefore this Charge against me is an
Abominable Lie, and Wicked Slander: And with a clear Consience I speak it, I do
neither know nor remember, that ever any words past from me, whereby Tho. Hicks
could so much as color this Lie and Slander against me. And I cannot but look
upon my self to be greatly Injured and Abused by T.H. until he, o^ his Brethren
do me Right in this thing, in as public a Manner to the World, as he has done
me Wrong. Which i^ they do not, I commit my Cause to God to judge between us,
and clear my Innocence herein.

London, the 29 th of the 3 d Month, 1673. Nicolas Lucas.


Whereas Nicolas Lucas was referred to Owen Horton and his Wife for Proof of
Tho. Hicks's Charge before, to whom Nicolas spoke about it, and she referred
her self to Hen. Stout to witness the Charge, to which Hen. Stout answers thus,
viz:

I Hen. Stout of Hertford never in all my days heard Nicolas Lucas speak the
Words (nor any of the like Import or Tendency as) charged on him before, nor
any Man else, before Tho. Hicks, that I can call to mind; But am satisfied in
my Conscience, that he has most grossly Wronged Nicolas Lucas.

To which I subscribe H. Stout.


Another Accusation is, viz. That S. Eccles, discoursing with a Friend of his
in London, told him, The Scriptures were a Lie. But that this may appear a very
likely Lie against S.E. he adds, 'Twas replied, Why then do thou mention them
that? The Quaker answered, To silence thee.

That he should say, the Scriptures were a Lie, or that he made use of a Lie to
silence his Opposer, appears a most absurd Slander: and where is his Quotation
the Reader must examine for Proof? Has he not here Abused his Reader? But let
S. Eccles's own Words clear him of this Lie and Slander.

In his Book Mus. Lect. he often cites the Scriptures, calls them, The Holy
Scriptures, page 13. Thou that say, the Quakers deny the Scriptures, belyest
the Innocent, page 20. Do not belie the Scriptures, nor the Spirit that gave it
forth; for Holy Men wrote, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, page 22.

Whereas Tho. Hicks begins his Continuation thus:

Chr. I have formerly detected you of several Pernicious Opinions concerning
the Scriptures, the Light Within, the Person of Christ, and the Resurrection,
etc. I presume, by this time you have considered, what say you thereunto?


(To this he feigns the Answer thus, viz.)

Quak. I say, the Plagues and Judgments of God will follow thee. G. Whitehead.


Rep. I testify against this as a Fiction; for this was not my Answer, neither
has he referred us to any Quotations of mine; though upon this he is pleased to
accuse me with Passion, Furious Replies and Sarcasms for his own Fiction, to
which he has counterfeited my Name: I question not but the Judgments of God
will follow him, and such Forgers and Spreaders of Lies. But that was not my
Answer to the said Objection: This Dialogue-Man's Liberty in these Forgeries,
and silly Botcheries is neither Christian, nor Civil.


As to what he says page 3. I answer:

1. That the Life, which is the Light of Men, John 1. is not a Creature, but
Divine, and of the very Being of God, I still affirm, and have elsewhere
proved; though the whole Essence or Being of God is not contained in Man, yet
enlightens all Men. And

2. That the Inward Speaking or Living Ministration of the Spirit of Truth, is
of greater Authority then the Scriptures or Writings in the Abstract.

3. S. Crisp does own the True and Real Christ, the Son of the Living God (in
his Spiritual Divine Being) to be without either Beginning, Date, or End. This
he has fully answered elsewhere.

4. That the Soul, or Spirit of Man (as it relates to the Creaturely Being) is
a distinct Being from the Infinite Being of God, and is not properly a Part of
God. For he is not divided into Parts or Particles; but with respect to its
Original Life, whereby it immortally subsists, we are God's Offspring, and the
Breath of Life, or Immediate Inspiration of God (by which Man became a Living
Soul) or the Original Life of Man's Soul. Of this G.F. spoke, when he said, Is
not that of God, which comes out from God? viz. the Breath of Life? His words
are perverted and mis-cited by T.H. For in another Consideration and State he
owns the Infinite Being of God, and the Soul or Spirit of Man to be distinct
Beings, where he speaks of the Soul being in Death, in Transgression, Man's
Spirit Unsanctified, the Soul being in Death, Transgressing the Law, see Great
Mist. p. 91. This he could never intend or speak of the Infinite, Incorruptible
Being of God; for that never sinned.

5. That G.W. denies the Resurrection of the Body (that is, of the Dead, or any
Body at all) is false; nor is this proved against G.W. from his Saying, Thou
sowest not the Body that shall be, it is raised a Spiritual Body, and Flesh and
Blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. 1. Cor. 15. And T.H. may as well
charge it upon the Apostle, and upon his Brother Tho. Collier, who in his
Marrow of Christianity p. 40, 94, 95. plainly says, The Form, in which they
shall be raised, that is in a Spiritual Form, not in a Fleshly etc. All Flesh
shall be swallowed up in Spirit; and our Body shall be changed and made like
his glorious Body. But Tho. Hicks plainly contradicts him saying, That the
Apostles and all true Christians say, This Body of Flesh and Bones shall rise
again. Dial. p. 59, 60. which he could never yet prove.

The Contradiction I placed upon T. Hicks was not between his Denying the Light
within to be a Sufficient Rule, and his Granting, it ought to be obeyed (as he
falsely states it, Contin. p. 8.) but between his Saying, the Light within
(which we attend to) has in many things misguided thee, and his granting, it
ought to be obeyed, appealing to it; See Dip. plung. p. 5. Is that which ought
to be obeyed (or appealed to in things relating to Salvation) a misguiding
Light?

T.H. his Comparison between those Signs wrought by the Light within, and what
is spoken of the Man of Sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 9. or that what we have said thereof
may as well prove Mahomet to be the true Christ as the Light within. Dial. p.
11.12. -- I say, still this is Blasphemy, and contradicted by T.H. himself in
his Saying, that Christ is the Life and Light of Men, Dial. p. 22. Of which
Contradiction he takes no notice, but abuses and accuses me with Deceit and
Falsehood.

His sleighting our Obeying the Commands of the Living Eternal Word in us, and
reflecting upon our owning Jesus Christ, as being with such a mental and
mystical Reservation (as he falsely says) which that it is no other than a mere
Mystical Romance, Dial. p. 10. and now (to mend the Matter) that the Christ we
own is no other then a Mystical Romance. Herein I must still look upon him to
have acted the Profane Romancer, and Irreligious Miscreant: And the
Condemnation and Deceit he would cast upon me falls on his own Head, and not
mine. I speak my Conscience; We attending upon the Light of Jesus Christ in us,
it naturally, leads us to know and own Him, who is our Life and Light; whom to
call a Mystical Romance, is Horrible Blasphemy.

He puts me off at an easy Rate, when he says, Th^se other things are so
frivolous, that I think them not worth any Reply, Contin. p. 9. Will this
reconcile his many Contradictions, which I have jus^ly charged him with in his
own words? He has only seemed to take notice of one before, and that he has
falsely stated, as is hinted.

Why should he charge me with affirming the Light within to be the Divine
Essence, p. 10. (though they are not my words) when he himself has confessed,
Christ to be the Light and Life of Men? And Philip Bennit, whose Queries are
cited, and commended by him, confesses Query 17. That Christ, in respect of
his Divine Nature, is in all Places, p 34. What say thou T.H. to this? Do
thou not believe this? If not, why did thou cite it without opposing it?

It was never my Assertion, that the Principle of Divine Light within is but an
Effect of Power, or Thing made, as thou beggest the Question, in calling the
Light within but an Effect, or mere Creature, Dial. p. 3, 4, 46. but that God's
Immediate Illumination or In-shining is a Natural Effect, flowing from himself;
which therefore is Divine. I never could intend (much less affirm) that all
kinds of Effects were in every Respect such as the Cause, though in some sense
they are: but God's Immediate Illumination, or Shining in Man, is Natural to
himself, and so Divine, as the Effects of the Law written in the Gentiles
Hearts were agreeable and natural to the Law it self, which is Spiritual, Holy,
Just and Good; and so were the Effects.

His Proof (that we deny the Person of Christ without us) is ve^ lame, being
from something he would lay hold on, since he did first so accuse us, and that
is, Jesus Christ a Person without us is not Scripture Language, page 10. Mark,
here he va^ies f^^m the Person of Christ, to Jesus Christ a Person without us;
wherein he has also va^^^ in his own words in ^is first Dialogue, p. 9. Jesus
Christ, God-Man, a Person without thee -- Which Phrase I did and do say is not
Scripture Language, but the Anthropomorphites, who prosest a Personal God,
denying him to be an Infinite Spirit: Does it therefore follow, that I deny the
Man Christ Jesus, in his Being either without or within us? But T.H. his words,
God-Man, a Person without thee, equally excluding God under the Limitation of
Man and Person without us, he is pleased now to leave out the word God-Man, and
to accuse us of Denying the Person of Christ without us; he should have
explained what he means by the Word PERSON; for though we are not satisfied
with the Words before, being Unscriptural, this is no Denying of Jesus Christ
in his being either as without us or within us; We confessing, that he is
ascended into Glory far above all Heavens, and that he is at the Father's Right
Hand of Power in his Glorious Being -- which yet does not exclude or limit him
from being within us.

Of Election T.H. says, viz. Why art thou so much concerned about Election,
who believes no such thing of Persons, either absolute or Conditional? That
Election you generally hold, is only of the Seed, which is Christ himself, p.
11.

He says, I do not know his Belief in this Matter; but I am sure, he mistakes
our's. If he counts us in Error, he should have informed (and not reproacht)
us. Though we own, That God's Election or Choice is originally of and in the
Seed, ( Behold mine Elect. etc. Isa. 42.) yet this also extends to Men and
Women, as chosen in him through Sanctification of the Spirit and Belief of the
Truth; I have chosen you out of the World, says Christ; The Saints are a
chosen Generation. But an Eternal, Absolute, Personal Election or Reprobation,
as held by some Predestinarian Anabaptists, and others, I own not; nor a
Perpetual Hatred to particular Persons, as absolutely and unchangeably designed
of God from all Eternity: but that in the first place God's Free Love and
Saving Grace is free to all Mankind, till Men rej^ct it. He calls all Men to
Repentance, tenders Life and Salvation in his Son to all, and condemns none
upon mere Will and Pleasure, but for Unbelief and Rebellion, which God is not
the Author of. If T.H. deem us in Error herein, he should have Informed (and
not Reviled and Abused) us.

And seeing he often in his Continuation mentions Election, without explaining
his Belief therein (if he have any settled Belief in the Point) I ask him*

1. First, Whether does he not intend it as absolutely designed, and
unchangeably decreed of God from Eternity to particular Persons?

2. Whether this be not one main Ground of his and some others consining, or
limiting Saving Grace, or Divine Light, to such a narrow Compass as only
afforded of God to a few particular Persons?

3. How should I believe, that God does not afford a Divine or Saving Light to
every Man (but only to some few) or that the Light within, that is given to
every Man, is but a mere Creature, Natural, Uncertain, Variable, and no
Sufficient Rule to direct to God, unless it can be proved unto me, Either that
God has from all Eternity, particularly and absolutely designed and decreed
the Eternal Destruction of (and Hatred to) the greater part of Mankind, or the
Passing them by (with Displeasure) for that End?

Whereas T.H. quotes me for saying: That I cannot believe, that he (Christ;)
has a Personal Being at the right hand of God without all Men, To this he
subscribed G. Whitehead, Christ ascended, p. 18.

Those are not my Words, he has falsely cited them: but these are mine, I
cannot believe his Body to be a Carnal Body in Heaven, or that he consists of a
Carnal Existence. See Christ Ascended p. 18.

It seems, that by [Personal Being] he means such a Carnal Body; but he does
not vindicate his Brother Newman his asserting Christ to be a Body of Flesh and
Blood in Heaven, a Personal Being at the right Hand of God, without all Men
remote etc. and this to prove, that Christ does not dwell in any Man. Which I
opposed. The ^o^ition as U^scriptural, the Consequence as false, as not only
confining and limiting Christ from his Saints, but God and his right hand also
unto a remoteness from his Temple (how then does his Right Hand save and uphold
us?) In all which th^se Baptists show their too carnal and mean Th^ughts of
Jesus Christ (as in Glory) and of God, and is right hand of Power, wherein they
are fully answered, as also about Christ's Second Coming to Salvation. Christ
ascended. p. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 24, and 69

But when T.H. can neither vindicate his Brother Newman's Limitation or
Confinement put upon Christ and G^^'s Right Hand, nor answer my Objections
against him* he Queries, viz. Is Christ no ^t^^rw sc^^ God's Right Hand, then
as he is in you p. 43. and wi^h this agrees the Socinians If T.H. did not pick
and call out of our Adversaries Book^ ^o^ t^^^^ his Butchery against us, but
(...). In partially Mo^^rate, we should have fairer Deali^g^ than we have from
^im.
false: Inference drawn from my Words, Controversy ended p. 48.49. his Words
are, It seems then that Jesus Christ is no otherwise in Heaven, then he is in
the Saints, which is as false, as his Saying, that we do absolutely deny Christ
to be a Man, p. 47. herein both the Water-Baptist and Socinian have drawn a
false Inference upon my Objection; for though I (...) that Christ's being in
Glory at God's r^^^th^^d of Power is no Proof, that he is not in Man (...) is
(...) be proved that God, and his right hand are (...) only to a remoteness
from all Men, and so that he is not Infinite God, or that his right hand is
merely to be taken Literally, as a Man's hand) It follows not that I intend,
that Jesus Christ is not otherwise in Heaven at God's right hand then as in the
Saints on Earth; for his Exaltation and Glory (into which he is ascended not
only into the Heavens, but far above the Heavens) Transcends that Degree
attained in these Suffering Earthly Tabernacles; his inaccessible Glory is
above Men and Angels, above all Suffering Natures and Conditions; he is made
higher then the Heavens, in all things has the Pre-eminence, yet not excluded
nor limited from his People (so far as they are made capable to receive him)
nor from being touched with the feeling of their Infirmities.

And it is said, whilst we are at home (or Strangers) in the Body, we are
absent from the Lord. 2 Cor. 5. which though it cannot be as remotely separate
from his Presence, yet in Comparison of that more Full and Glorious Enjoyment,
that we shall have of him when absent from the Body, there is a Degree of
Absence while Strangers in the Body, howbeit by Faith, whereby we now walk, we
have both a living Knowledge and Enjoyment of him, and walk with him, being the
Sons of God, though it appears not what we shall be.

The Socinian tells u^ of a Personal Christ; Con. End. Page 47. and that the Man
Jesus, our Lord (although he is the Eternal God, has in Heaven a place remote
from Earth, a Humane Body p 49.

But does he believe, that Jesus Christ is the Eternal God? I cannot think it
while he imagins him to be a Personal Christ or Humane Body so ^^^^ted or
confined into a Remoteness,

But seeing these Anabaptists and Socinians do so much concur in their opposing
us, because we cannot own their Limitations, and Unscriptural Terms about
Christ's Being. I ask both the Author of Controversy Ended, and Tho Hicks, If
they really believe, that Jesus Christ is a Humane Body of Flesh, Blood and
Bones, and in that Sense a Personal Being, not in Man, according to J. Newman?
or that he consists of a Humane Body of Flesh and Bones, according to Henry
Grigg in his Light from the Sun, p. 30, 31.33? But is it good Doctrine to say,
that his Glorious Body that we shall be fashioned like unto, is a Humane Body?
If in th^se things they agree, as they seem to do, then does it not follow,
that they must concur in the Consequences, viz That though they own three
distinct Persons in the Deity, yet not Coeternal Persons, but that Jesus Christ
is a mere Creature, a Personal Being, or Humane Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones,
and therein limited? But if Socinians do not look upon Christ's Personal Being
in that gross Sense, but rather with respect to his Spiritual Existence, then
is not Christ confined to a Remoteness, from the Saints; for they have received
of the Spirit of the Son, but then what mean these Men by Humane Body in
Heaven? Is not Humane Body an Earthly Body? Hence it seems we must look upon
Personal Being as applicable to the Father, Son and Spirit in a different
Sense, viz. 1. To the Being of God. 2. To the Being of Christ as a Creature. 3.
Else to the Body that he took upon him in time, whereas Christ the Son of God,
who took upon him that Body, that was prepared for him, did pre-exist (or was
before) that Body, and therefore he himself consists not of such a Personal,
Created Being, or Humane gross Body, as is limitable like our Earthly Bodies
(the Asserters of a Trinity of three distinct Persons, do not call them so many
Personal Beings, but distinguish the Personallity from the Being) and though
Christ was made a little lower then the Angels in his Suffering State in the
days of his Flesh on Earth, yet he is above Angels in his Glorified Estate,
and surely then his Glorious Being and Body must not be inferior to their's.

If T.H. would strictly limit us to confess our Creed in his terms, it is meet
they should be strictly defined and he to be at some Certainty without varying
therein, as from [ Jesus Christ, God Man, a Person without thee] to [Jesus
Christ has a Personal Being at God's Right Hand without us] (I question,
whether he rightly knows either what Person, Being, Essence or Substance is) In
the first he concludes God as well as Man under the Limitation of Person
without, in the second that Christ has a Personal Being without us; how then
does God and Christ consist thereof? or is that Personal Being? But if by
[Personal Being] he intends an Intelligent Being, or Rational Substance, I
grant, Christ is such a Being or Substance: or if by Personal Being he means, a
Body distinct from our's, I believe, he has a Spiritual Glorious Body,
distinct from all these Earthly Sublunary Bodies.

But for T.H. he has as little Knowledge of Christ's Personal Being (as he
calls it) in Heaven, as he has Scripture for this Phrase, or Faith in his
Light within, if by Personal Being he means the Manhood of Christ, our
confessing the Man Christ as Mediator, is sufficiently evinced, and the
Socinian clears me in his Controversy Ended, page 50. where he says, Geo.
Whitehead uses the word Manhood, viz. he took upon him the Manhood in time.

Is the Heavens that must retain him only the Hearts of Men? p 43.

It is not the Heavens must retain him, but whom the Heaven must receive, etc.
Acts 3.21. and this is above and larger then the Hearts of Men. Where proves he
by Scripture, that Christ's Second Coming without Sin to Salvation is a
Personal Coming? while he answers not this, he says nothing to purpose about
it, p. 43, 44. and answers not what I have writ, Christ Ascended, p. 20, 21,
22, 23, 24.

But is it a Contradiction in me to confess, that Christ arose with the same
Body that was Crucified and put to Death, and that he ascended into Glory, and
yet either to say, that I cannot believe his Body to be a Carnal Body in
Heaven; and these words are not Scripture Language, viz. to say, that Christ is
a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, a Personal Being at God's Right Hand, remote,
and not in Man; or that his Second Coming without Sin unto Salvation is seen
Spiritually, not Carnally; and that they are like to be disappointed of their
Hope and Expectation, who are expecting, that Christ's Second Coming or
Appearance to Salvation will be such a Personal Coming, and his Reign a
Personal Reign? The Believers in the primitive Christians days, who looked for
him, Heb. 9.28.
were not thus disappointed of their Hopes and Expectations.

But to say, I cannot believe that Christ ascended (...) the same Body which
rose from the Dead etc. p.44. (...) one of my Words, though he cites them for
mine, O gross Forgery! (...) then to infer upon is that I did but dissemble in
the first, viz. in saying, that Christ arose with the same Body that was
crucified and put to Death, and that he ascended into Glory. God, who knows my
Sincerity, will judge this Forger of Falsh^^ds and Slanders against me! and my
Conscience bears me Record in the Sight of God, I speak my Belief sincer^ly,
without Dissimulation.

Touching the Body of Christ, he answers not the Objection he lays down in my
name, viz. Where does the Scripture say, that Christ's Glorified Body in Heaven
is of an Humane Nature? p. 45.

Whereas T.H. queries, Does not the Scripture say, that the same Jesus that
went away, shall in like manner come again, Acts 1.10, 11. And then frames the
Answer for us thus, viz.

Quak. I deny he shall come visibly; and though it be said in like manner, yet
every like is not the same. And to this he subscribes Whitehead, page 22. of
Christ Ascended.

And then for Answer says, Is not this a plain Denial of the Second Personal
Coming of Christ, Contin. p 43.


To all which I answer, In his subscribing my Name to these as my words, viz.
that I deny he shall come visibly, he has abused me and my Name with a Forgery
of his own, they are not my words. But I quoting Rev. 1.7, 8, 13, 14, 16. about
Christ's Appearance, I said, In none of which is Jesus Christ called a Body of
Flesh, Blood and Bones visibly to come again; but that he is Alpha and Omega,
the First and the Last, verse. 11. he proves not by Scripture, that Christ's
Second Coming to Salvation is such a Personal Coming, as he imagins; but in
like manner he shall come again. Its true, I said, every like Manner is not the
very same, nor all Clouds the same, Christ Ascend. p. 22, 23. and therein I
would be understood, that though I own Christ's Coming again the second time to
Salvation as certain and manifest, as he was seen to ascend, when the Cloud
received him out of their Sight, who stood gazing up into Heaven; yet he after
that came again, and signally appeared variously to diverse, and in a more
glorious Manner then he was seen to ascend; for he ascended into Glory, which
his Coming again does not divest him of: and he shall be universally seen to
some Men's Terror and Sorrow, and to others great Comfort and Joy. To Paul he
appeared in a Heavenly Vision or Light from Heaven above the Brightness of the
Sun, in so much that he fell down to the Earth, and was without sight for three
days; So that he could not stand gazing at his Coming, as the Men of Gallilee
did at his ascending. And when John was in the Spirit, he appeared to him, so
that his Eyes were as a Flame of Fire, his Countenance as the Sun shines in
his Strength; insomuch that he said, When I saw him, I fell at his Feet as
Dead, Rev. 1.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. So that John could not stand gazing at this
Appearance, which is like unto the Angel's Appearance unto Daniel in his great
Vision, insomuch that he said, there remained no Strength in me, see Dan. 10 5,
6, 7, 8. compared with Rev. 1.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And I must own Christ's
Coming universally in his Kingdom, and the Glory of his Father to be after a
more Transcendent Manner and Higher Glory, then Men shall be able to stand
Gazing at, as they did at his Ascension; And must conclude, that it is a Design
of Satan, to keep some Men in Carnal Imaginations, and dark Thoughts of an
Humane Personal Christ, consisting either of Flesh, Blood and Bones like
theirs, or of Flesh and Bones without Blood; and so of God's Right Hand, as
limited to that Remoteness, that they neglect to wait for Christ's Inward and
Spiritual Appearance, and the Knowledge of God's Right Hand near them, to save
and preserve them from Sin and Death; In this the Enemy has deceived them, and
the Devil blinded them from the Spiritual and Saving Knowledge of Christ, and
his coming in his Kingdom.

But why must I be counted guilty of vile Hypocrisy? Is it for saying, Every
Man has not the Son that is revealedly and unitedly in Possession, which was my
very Intent) and yet a Light of the Son appears in every Man in some degree? or
for denying that this Light is a mere Creature, and asserting, that in him was
Life, and the Life was the Light of Men; and this Life and Light is Divine and
Increated, In what Sense Christ is in Man, and in what not, is explained,
Serious Apology, p. 35. Not. Christ. p. 49.
p. 46, 47. I am still of the same Mind; and though the Man repeats some of my
Words, he has brought me no Argument to Convince me, that this Life, which is
the Light of Men, is but a mere Creature; But if it be Divine and Increated, he
takes it for granted it must needs be Christ; And let it be so then, if it must
either be a mere Creature, or else Christ (though he is not revealedly in every
Man, neither do Reprobates know Christ in them; and he that hates his Brother
has no Eternal Life abiding in him.)

Well, I affirm then, that there is an Immediate, Divine Light of God and
Christ in every Man (to which their Minds, Reason and Understandings are to be
directed) and thus far, or in this sense, God and Christ is in all, and through
all, even in them, who yet know him not, in whom his Light is veiled and
obscured.

But mark T.H. his great Charge in his first Dialogue, p. 3. It Is Blasphemy to
say, that the Light in Man is God or Christ. Is it so? How agrees this with
their saying, That Christ in respect of his Divine Nature is in all places, and
that Christ is the Life and Light of Men? If in respect of his Divine Nature he
be Christ, then is Christ in all places; how then shall this agree with his
saying, it is Blasphemy to say, that God and Christ is the Light in Man? Seeing
he cannot do it, let us endeavor it; I suppose by the Light in Man ^e means
Natural Reason, or else the Spirit of Man; indeed that is neither God, Christ,
nor the Light, but Blasphemy to affirm it is: But that Light in Man, which we
contend for, and direct to, is an Immediate In-shining of Divine Light upon
Man's Conscience, that kindles and lights Man's Spirit, and makes it bec^me
the Candle of the Lord, which shows him Good and Evil, and moves him to decline
Evil, and excites him to Good; and this with resp^ct to God and his own
Salvation.

(...) who deny Christ to be the Light, through (...) every Man, or him to be
the Light and ^ife of (...), are A^^ichrists, as E.B. says, (...) T.H.
opposes this, he opposes his own Concession.

T.H. excepts against my saying, In the New Covenant God is the Teacher of his
People himself by his Immediate Spirit, Power and Unction within, which I still
affirm, and he cannot confute, but questions, If so?

1st, Wherefore were Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers given
and set in the Church for the Work of the Ministry? p. 65.

Answ. Hereby he has employed, as if the Work of the Ministry did argue, that
God is not the Teacher of his People in the New Covenant, when both true
Prophets and Ministers are taught by ^im, and tell us, that he is, and we must
wait on him ^or that End; which implies no Defect in the Anointing within, any
more then John's Epistle did, wherein he directs them to, and testifies of the
Sufficiency of the Anointing within to teach them, 1 John 2.

2. Why do you set up a Ministry among your selves? p. 65.

False; it is of God's setting up, it proceeds from the Holy Unction within; and
God has blessed our Ministry with his Presence, for the turning many from
Darkness to Light* and from Men's Corrupt and Lifeless Preaching to the
Anointing within; and this you Angry Water-Baptists cannot hinder with all your
Quarrelling and Reviling.

3. Why do you appoint your Ministers beforehand to speak at such a Place at
such a Time? p. 66.

A gross Falsehood; we appoint them not so to do; they attend each Man upon
God's Call and Motion in themselves, and in Subjection to him is our Society;
we do neither appoint them to Preach nor Pray, as Baptists were wont ^o do,
saying, Brother, do you Preach, or do ^ou Pra^, and then the Brother to make
Answer* Nay, pr^^ Brother do you, ^ou are more able then I, etc. on such
Motions you can Preach or Pray without feeling any immediate Motion from God's
Spirit to either.

4. You invite others to your Silent Meetings, telling us, they will be such;
how are you assur^d that those you invite may not be moved to speak? p. 66.

False ^gain, we do not conclude beforehand they will be wholly Silent
Meetings, nor limit the Lord from moving any one to speak in them.

Whereas he abuses our Distinction between the Soul of Man, Cont. p. 40.
and its Savior, as if it were but the same that is between Christ and his In
shining Light or Gift in Man, or between God and some part of himself
(supposed.)

Answ. Man's Soul and ^s Savior are distinct Beings, the one Creatural (having
a Beginning) and the other Divine and Infinite: Christ and his Light within,
which we vindicate, are but one in Being; Its grossly Fals^, That the Meaning of
my Distinction must b^, That Christ is not Divine and Increated, but his Light
is, p. ^0. For the Meaning of mine is between the Giver and the Immediate Gift,
as flowing from him; the Fountain and the Stream, the Sun and its immediate
Shining. God is the Fullness of Light and Life, and yet its by degrees, that he
makes known his Discoveries or In-shining in Man: but my Distinction between
the Soul of Man and its Savior is of another kind, as appears by my citing
those Scriptures in the Cas^, viz. Romans 2.9. and Isaiah 3.9. The Distiction is
plain, see Dipper Plunged. page 15. and The NATVRE OF CHRISTIANITY, page 15,
17, and 27.

I may not well omit briefly to retro-inspect some perverse and corrupt
Passages in Tho. Hicks his Continuation. I still affirm it a gross Slander,
that the Quakers account the Blood of Christ no more then an Unholy or Common
thing, Dial. p. 9. and no more then the Blood of a Common Thief, Contin. p 4.

And our asserting the Sufficiency of the Light of Christ-within to bring to
eternal Life proves neither: nor does his Inference follow or amount to any
Proof against us, vizt. where he says, Then the Shedding of Christ's Blood
upon the Cross was needless, Contin. p. 4. which is as good an Argument as to
say, If God makes manifest any thing in Man that is Saving, then all the outward
Testimonies of his Love to Man were needless: and thus he might as well argue
against the Sufficiency of his Spirit, Ingrafted Word, Life or Light of his Son
in Man (in what Age soever) and tell us, the shedding of Christ's Blood on the
Cross (which was an Act of his Persecutors and Murderers) supplies the Defect
of all Inward Manifestations, how Spiritual and Divine soever. O what profund
Divinity and exquisite Logic is this!

His other Proofs (as charged upon the Quakers) are but Additions to his
Slander and Forgery before, vizt. 1 That the Sufferings of Christ were only
Exemplary. 2 That the Mystery of Iniquity lies in the Blood of Christ.

To the first I say [only] is added, yet Christ left us an Example of perfect
Obedience and Holiness, that we should follow his Steps.

To the second; it is gross and blasphemous to say, the Mystery of Iniquity lies
in the Blood of Christ, and (...) of the Quakers Assertion; but that it lies in
the corrupt Mind, that carnally and falsely applies it, to ^^se and cover it
self in Sin and Iniquity: For we affirm, viz.

1st, That Jesus Christ in the Flesh was more th^^ a meet Exemple of Holiness.

2dly, And his Blood was of peculiar Value and Estimation with God.

Thomas Hicks Proceeds in his Envy and Falsehood sti^^ ^^ bring our Sufferings
into Dis-esteem, viz. (...) People, that ever boasted so vainly of their
Sufferings (...) you do, that scarce a Pamphlet can come out from yo^ (...) but
the World must hear of your Brags of this kind, Contin. p. 6.

A manifest and twofold Falsehood: for,

1st, We do not vainly boast of our Sufferings, but have rej^yced in Christ
Jesus that we have been counted worthy to suffer for his Name, when you, who
now enjoy our Prosperity, durst not show your Heads in public for your
Profession or Worship, but fled into Corners and Obscurities, and your public
Meetings were deserted, and put by. For thy part T.H. I do not think thou have
much Suffering for Conscience (or any for Christ) to boast of.

2. [Scarce a Pamphlet] Is also false; for many of our Books and Papers relate
not our Sufferings (but other Subjects) much less vainly boast or brag thereof:
But it seems, that it both judges and vexes thee and such Creeping, Envious
Spirits to hear of our deep Sufferings, since they have had such a blessed
Effect in the Nation, as the inclining the Hearts of many to the Living Truth,
and the Increase of our Number in it.

Thou T.H. and such Envious Spirits are most quiet toward us, when you see us
under Persecution; and appear most outrageous against us, when we have Liberty,
as if you were discontented and perplexed at our Liberties, and as desirous of
Persecution and Ruin upon us.

3. I am not sorry that I was made Instrumental in obtaining the Liberty of
some of thy Brethren the Baptists out of Prison the last Som^er, who among a
great Number of our Friends were released; though I am but sorrily and badly
requited by thee: but thou art one of them who art more ready to persecute and
scandalize our Sufferings, then to suffer or sympathize with them that suffer
for Conscience sake: but have not some of thy Brethren both commended of our
Sufferings, and the Service thereof both to themselves and other Dissenters?
why then do thou insinuate, as if Carnal Interest, Wills and Lusts were our
chief Motive to suffer? God, and his Witness in many Consciences will judge
thee for this gross Abuse.

Again T.H. did most falsely insinuate (though by way of Query) That our
Sufferings were only to satisfy our Wills and Lusts, and for Carnal Advantage;
which to excuse he now says; In this I only queried, what it should be, that
does influence you to suffer; forasmuch as you deny that this Body shall rise?
And G.F. maintains, that the Soul is part of God's Being. Contin. p. 6.

1. To the first I answer, that every Seed shall have its own Body as it
pleases God, and every Man shall be reserved spiritually in his own proper
Being, though not in the gross fleshly Form: Is this either to deny the
Resurrection, or an Eternal Advantage?

2. To the second, G.F. does not so speak of the Soul or Spirit of Man (nor are
his Words directly and truly cited) but of the Immediate Inspiration of God (or
original Life or Soul of Man's Soul) by which Man became Living, a Living Soul;
in this he queries, Is not that of God which came out from God?

3. Its an absurd and most abusive Insinuation, that our Sufferings either were
or could be for any carnal Advantage or Interest, seeing we freely have often
offered up our Lives and our All in this World therein.

4. Its still a manifest Slander, that we deny any Eternal Advantage to Persons
after Death; neither is it any (much less direct) Consequence of our saying,
Not that Body which thou sowest, shall be; and Flesh and Blood shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God; or That the Body which God gives, shall not be in
a Fleshly, but in a Spiritual Form, as Tho. Collier confesses; dare he say,
this is to deny any Eternal Advantage? But with T.H. This is no more then the
Genuine and a direct Consequence of denying the Resurrection of this Body; Is
it not? then the reaping Eternal Advantage must be placed upon this Earthly
Tabernacle or Carnal Body, though it must be dissolved, and no New one to be
created, according to his former Doctrine Dial. p. 58. O wonderful Philosophy!
Eternal Advantage placed upon these same Earthly Bodies, yet they not to be
renewed by Creation, after dissolved and turned to Dust! and how contrary to
the Apostles Testimony is his so much placing Eternal Advantage upon this
Earthly disolvable Body? see the 2. Cor. 5, 1 2, 8. Phil. 1.21.23. Our
experiencing Christ's second Appearance without Sin unto Salvation in Answer to
our Hope, and testifying to Eternal Life and Felicity as Inwardly and
Spiritually received by those that now suffer for Christ, can be no Denial of
any Future or Eternal Advantage (according to his Instance against me p. 7.)
seeing we know, that to live is Christ, and to die is Gain unto us; they that
walk up to his Light in them here, cannot miss of an Eternal Advantage
hereafter: Our light Affliction, which is but for a moment works for is a far
more exceeding weight of Glory, see 2, Cor. 4, 10, 11. to the end of the
Chapter.

Concerning Justification, Imputation and Sanctification p. 50, 51, 52* 53, 54,
55, 56, 57 58 wherein we differ, he is fully answered in our Books, viz. Divin.
Chr. Serious Apol.

But where he says, viz. I know of none, that hold Justification of Persons in
their Ungodliness p. 55. Are there not those, that hold Justification before
Sanctification? or in a sinful Estate by a mere Imputatation? And those that
thus argue for it by the Rule of Contraries, As Christ was made to be Sin for
us, who knew no Sin: (i.e. by an inherent Guilt or Operations of Sin in him) so
we are made the Righteousness of God in him? they adding [as and so; as he, so
we] i.e. we are not actually made Righteous by any inherent Righteousness or
Holiness of Christ wrought in us any more then Christ was made Sin; but
reckened Righteous only from his active and passive Obedience without us; This
Doctrine we have not only opposed, but refuted* Divin. Christ. Ser. Apol. The
wicked Slander he calls upon us in this, is his own. T.H. we plead not for a
Righteousness Imputed to overthrow a Righteousness Inherent, or the Exercise of
Christian Virtue p. 55. But do you not oppose a Righteousness inherent, as to
Justification? or deny, that those Christian Virtues within are reckoned or
esteemed of God unto Justification?

T.H. It Is you would separate and divide them, not we. p. 55. False; we make no
such Separation between Christ's Righteousness Inherent in us, and
Justification on the Imputation as ours, we experiencing a Participation
thereof, Christ being made unto us both Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption.


T.H. Does not this import, that a Man must be formally Just, before he be
Justified; for nothing is imputed or reckoned to us (according to your
Reasoning) but what is inherent in us? p. 55.


Answ. [ Your Reasoning] It seems it is not his then, would he not here separate
and divide between a Righteousness imputed, and a Righteousness inherent, or
the Exercise of Christian Virtues? if so be that a man must be justified (i.e.
in his Sense) imputed, or accounted Righteous, before he be formally just? how
agrees this with his Concession before, viz. that they would not separate and
divide between Imputed and Inherent Righteousness?


T.H. I would ask you, Whether Remission of Sins be not one part of
Justification?


Answ. yes: it is a Degreee of it, the next Step to an absolute Justification;
Remission is of Sins past, received upon true Repentance, and Conversion from
^in to newness of Life; Justification and Acceptance with God in Christ is
enjoyed in the Newness of Life by such as continue in sincere Obedience to
Christ.

This Remission, Pardon or Justification from Sins past, though not inherent in
the Natural Fallen or Sinful Man, yet it is inwardly received through Faith in
the Name of Christ, by such as truly depart from Sin and Evil, and give up to
serve the Living God.


T.H. Certainly he that is pardoned must be a Sinner, p. 56.


Answ. No, He must be one that cease from Sin; for, if I sin, then thou
markest me, and thou will not acquit me from mine Iniquity, Job 10.14. And
certainly, he that is not acquitted, is not pardoned nor justified. But I must
confess, ^e somewhat mends the Matter in adding, viz. That is such that were so
(viz. Sinners) till Justified, not such as remain so being Justified, p. 56. At
length we agree in this, 1st, That such as are pardoned, were sometimes
Sinners, and Disobedient before. 2. But being pardoned and justified by the
Grace of God in his beloved Son, they do not remain Disobedient; therefore they
that remain Sinners and Disobedient, are not in a Justified State.


I had writ something against T. Hicks's gross Abuse of our Reputation as we
are Men, Contin. p. 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69.
as well as Christians, by his most false and Unjust Consequences he draws from
our Owning the Light within as the Rule, and Immediate Motions and Directions
of the Spirit of Christ within (especially in Matters of Worship) and T.H. his
Persecuting Spirit, in his falsely Accusing us with Disrespect to Parents,
Magistrates etc. being destructive to all Humane Society; But W.P. having
reprehended him in these things in his part before, I forbear to publish mine
at present; for I have in this endeavored Brevity.

G.W.

THE Present Controversy Drawing to an End.
Or those Doctrines and Principles, which have been chiefly Controverted
between us, Granted and Confessed to by our present Opposer Thomas Hicks, and his
Brethren.

Here the Reader may see, how like to us called Quakers, diverse of the
Baptist-Teachers have been made some times to speak and hold forth Truth in
Words; which I would have them seriously to review, and lay aside all Envy and
Prejudice, which has caused so much Contradiction and Gainsaying on their
parts, both to themselves, and the Truth professed by us.

Our Principles and their Concessions truly Stated and Compared.

1. Quaker. THat God is, and that he is Light, the Eternal Word of Life and
Power, (which was with God, etc was God) was that, in which was Life, and the
Life was the Light of Men; and that was the True Light, that enlightens every
Man coming into the World, John 1.1, 4, 9.


Baptist. Christ in you, and he is the Life and Light of Men, Dial. p. 22. And
Jesus Christ is God, the most high God, of the same Substance and Essence, H.G.
Light from the Sun, p. 83, 84, etc.


II. Qua. The Light of Christ, or, the Eternal Word in Man is Divine and
Increated.


Bap. The Lord Jesus Christ, as the Eternal Word enlightens all Men and Women,
that come into the World, Light from the Sun of Righteousness, p. 8.


III. Qua. God is Infinite and Omni-present, and his Presence does both afford
Life, Virtue and Light to Man: and Jesus Christ as God over all in respect of
his Divinity, or Divine Nature is therefore in all, through all, and over all,
though not revealedly nor unitedly.


Bap. Christ in respect of his Divine Nature is in all places, Contin. page 34.
How could you call the Light Within Christ, if some Scriptures had not
mentioned Christ in you, and that he is the Life and Light of Men, Dial. p. 22.


IV. Qua. The Light of Christ in Man is a certain Rule and Guide to direct Man
out of Sin and Death into the Way of Life and Peace; and for that End ought to
be obeyed.


Bap. I grant, it ought to be Obeyed: I acknowledge, there is something within,
that checks for many Evils, and excites to many Good Things, and that I ought
to shun those Evils, and do that Good. It will be our Wisdom, yea our Duty to
attend to the Light Within, we being accountable to God for every Dispensation
of Light, Dial. p. 7, 8, 13.


V. Qua. Though this Divine Life or Light of the Son of God be manifest by
Degrees in Man, yet the Degrees alter not the Property of it; and it ought to
be obeyed with respect to God, and Man's own Salvation.


Bap. No Disparagement to the Light Within -- Each Degree of Light is
Serviceable to its End, Dial. p. 36.


VI. Qua. This Light Within is that General Rule extending to Man always, or
throughout Ages; and that is the Will of God, that Man should always be under
the Obligation of this Rule, that he might acknowledge God's Soveraignity and
Power, and be in Subjection to him, as having the sole right to Rule in the
Creation, that Man may truly discharge the Duty he owes to his Maker, in true
Obedience and Worship.


Bap. Indeed it is not to be denied, but that Man was always under an
Obligation of a Rule, that God's Soveraignity over him, and his Inferiority
unto God might be acknowledged -- This Rule must be the Will of God revealed to
us -- for it is the Will of God, which is the Formal Reason of the Obligation.
The Will of God being the Ground of the Creation of Men and Ange^s; therefore
as it is the Ground of their Being, it must be the Rule of their Acting, Dial.
page 31. There was something commendable in the Heathens, p. 36. That Light in
every Man, that does convince of Sin, and reprove him for Sin, Christ, as he
was the Wo^^ with G^d so he was the Light of the World, etc. W. Burnet's
Capit^^ p^in. p. 8, 10, 16, 17.


VII. Qua. That the Holy Spirit, Unction or Living Word within (which is
received by them that wait in, and obey the Light thereof) is to be preferred
as a more Eminent and Universal Rule, then the Scriptures; and it opens them,
and brings Man to the true Understanding of them, and leads him into all Truth
as he obeyes it.


Bap. Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, etc. had a Sufficient Rule
before the Scriptures were written (viz.) the Spirit's Rule, God's Speaking and
Directions from his own Mouth -- and that they had a more Infallible Word to
wa^k by, then now is to us. For it is possible, that some Scriptures may be
corrupted, having been in the hands of corrupted Men. The Scriptures may be and
is corrupted by Man -- This may be granted, that the Spirit is the Rule -- Of
more Efficacy then the Letter -- The Spirit is greater then the Letter, Jo.
Newman's Light Within, page 19, 20, 104, 105, 106, 108, 110, 112.


VIII. Qua. It Is possible for True Believers, through the Power and Help of
Jesus Christ, to attain to such a Perfection in this Life, as the keeping the
Commandments of God.


Bap. The Spirit of God assures us, that they who are subject to, and keep the
Commandments of God, are the Children of God; and they who do not, are Liars, 1
John 2.3, 4. cap. 5.2, 3. Contin. p. 61.


IX. Qua. That Remission, and Pardon of Sins past thr^ugh the Blood and
Righteousness of Christ Jesus, and the Justification of Persons (whether it
import the making; or declaring them Righteous in Christ by a Living Faith) are
neither imputed, nor reckoned of God t^ them in an Unconverted, Unsanctified,
Disobedient or Ungodly State, but to the truly Repentant, Converted, Believing
and Obedient Souls.


Bap. I know of none, that hold Justification of Persons in their Ungodliness.
We plead not for a Righteousness Imputed to overthrow a Righteousness Inherent,
or the Exercise of Christian Virtues -- He that is pardoned, were a Sinner till
justified; not such that remain so being sati^fied, Contin. p. 55, 56. The
Saints are made the Righteousness of God; that is, God now, as in Christ,
d^^^'s and ^^^s in the Saints h^ h^^ spirit, writes his Law in their Hearts,
makes them Partakers of his own Nature, and so goes o^ in Fulfilling his own
Righteousness in th^^. For the Righteousness of the Law in the Spirit is
fulfilled in us, Marrow Christian. p. 38.


X. Qua. Though the Soul and Spirit of Man be not of God's Divine and Infinite
Being, but related ^o the Being of Man, and (as Corruptible) has a mut^bl^
Habit; yet as we are his Offspring, and Man is the Image and Glory of God, the
Original ^ife, o^ Soul of the Soul, that came from God, and is immutable, is of
his own Being. In short, God (in whom we live, move and have our Being) is the
Life of Lives, and Great Soul of Son's and the Soul that is Saved and United to
God, does partake of his Divine Nature; and he that is joined to the Lord, is
one Spirit.


Bap. The Condescension of God and Christ into the Hearts of his People to wo^k
up his Saints into the s^^^ Nature with himself, etc. God and Christ i^ Holy;
so his Word is Hol^; and through Faith in t^is (...) Christians are wrought up
into the Nature of it self, and into God. J. Newman 's Book. Light Within, p
78, 84, 87, 88. There were the Prope^ties o^ G^^ i^ some measure imparted to
Adam. Adam was in the Image of God, in respect of Eternity he h^d given him an
Everlasting Being, Marrow of Christianity, page 4, 5. Christ was both the Power
and Wi^dom ^f God: and as Christ, so all the Saints are (...) one i^ th^s
Wisdom. Christ is made unto us Wisdom, not only by w^y of Imputation, but by
the Operati^n of the same spirit, who dwells as truly in every Believer, as in
Christ, ibid. page 34, 35. (And have not some of their Brethren conf^st, That
there is a kind ^f Infiniteness in the Soul?)


XI. Qua. The Children of the Resurrection shall be equal unto the Angels of
God in Heaven, and their Bodies not Natural, Earthly, and (...) the very Gross
M^tt^r, that n^w they are (...) Celestial, Spiritual, like unto Chri^^'^ (...)
Body. God gives a Body, as it pl^as^th (...) in Subjection to whose Good
Pleasure we (...) quiesce, till it be effected, as he se^th (...) own Praise.


Bap. That there shall be a Resurrection of the ^ody at the Last Day, is
Evident, John 5* (...) 11. with 1 Cor. 15. Rev. 20. although (...) some denied,
and by others too ca^^lly looke^ (...) Some thinking, that our Bodies of Flesh
shall be Raised in the same Form, in which it Dyed, etc. The Form in which they
shall be raised, that is a Spiritual Form, not in a Fleshly -- It is sown a
Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body -- When Christ, who is our Life,
shall p^e^r we shall appear with him in Glory; all Flesh shall he sw^llowed up
in spirit, and our Bodies shall be changed, and made like unto his Glorious
Body, Marrow of Christianity, by T.C. page 93, 94, 95. And those Saints who are
alive at the Coming of Christ shall be changed in a Moment, in the Twinkling of
an E^e 1 Cor. 15.51* 52. and so shall be caught up in the Spirit to meet the
Lord in the Air, 1 These. 4.17. Ibid. p. 92.


XII. Qua. The Son of God does not consist (or is not made up) of a Humane Body
of Flesh, Blood and Bones: For he was the Word, and One in Being with the
Father from Everlasting. But in the Fullness of Time, he took upon him Flesh, or
that Body prepared for him; and being Ascended into Glory, his Body is a
Glorious Body, surpassing all Humane, Earthly, Carnal and Corruptible Bodies.


Bap. Christ was a Son by a Spiritual Proceeding and Coming from the Father,
who was Eternally One in the Father, Marrow of Ch^. p. 30. Our Bodies shall be
changed and made like his Glorious Body, Ibid. p. 95. The^ shall be raised in a
Spiritual Form, not in a Fleshly, p. 94. The ^on took Flesh upon him, the Word
took Fle^h, the Father did prepare him a Body, Dialogue, p. ^5, 4^, and 83.


XIII. Qua. Christ being so highly exalted, and Glorified as it God's Right
Hand, as he is, can be neither Proof nor Argument, that he is not i^ any Man;
nor that either Christ or God's Right Hand is limited and circumscribed to such
Remot^ness, as not to be in the True Believers to save and uphold their Souls.


Bap. When a Soul is satisfied from its Union with God, and its Dwelling in
God, that all the Administrations and makings forth of God is Love unto it,
thus it dwells in Love, and from hence is filled with Joy: It causes the Soul
always to dwell at the Right Hand of God, where is Joy and Pleasure for
evermore. Marrow of Christian. p. 28. Christ the Son was Eternally one in the
Father; and so in him all Believers are made by the same Spirit the Adopted
Sons of God, being made Partakers of the same Divine Nature. Marrow of
Christian. p. 30. Christ dwells Spiritually in all the Saints -- If Christ be
in you, you shall be sensible of it. Ibid p 31.32. T^is Indwelling of Christ in
his People -- God and Christ cannot be separate -- Christ in them the Hope of
Glory -- Newman's Light within, p. 81, 82, 83, 86.


XIV. Qua. That through Faith in the Power of Christ Perfection, that is, a
Freedom from Sin, is attainable (and comes to be attained) in this Life by the
Soul, that experienceth the Restoration by Christ.


Bap. If God in his Son draw up the Soul to himself Jo. 6, 44. -- The more
Special and Spiritual Condition of Souls thus drawn up to God in Christ is not
only a Restoration to the Condition of the first Adam, with relation to a
Freedom from Sin; this every Believer enjoys by Christ a Freedom, a
Justification from Sin: But secondly, every Soul drawn ^p out of it self to
God, is brought into the Condition of the second Adam, Marrow Christian. p. 29.


XV. Qua. That Soul that is restored unto the New Covenant-Dispensation (and
come to taste, how good he is, to partake of his Spiritual Wisdom, and Counsel
therein) does own and follow this Spirit, and the Light thereof, as the Chief
Rule of Faith, Obedience and Worship, above the Scripture or Letter, and the
Spiritual, Saving Knowledge, of God and Christ therein, beyond all Literal
Knowledge and Profession of him received from without.


Bap. This Wisdom (namely of the Spirit, which is spiritual and heavenly) sets
the Creature out of himself in the Power of God: that Wisdom (namely of the
Flesh and first ^dam, carried on the Creature to the Answering of God in the
Letter (and yet in all this come s^o^t) This (...) (of the Spirit) carries on
the Soul, where It (...) is n^^ after the Oldness of the Letter but after the
Newness of the Spirit* In ^ w^rd, that Wisdom could not hel^ to the Knowledge
of God in the Spirit; This does. 1 C^r. 1. Marrow of Christian p. 35.
Certainl^, that ^oul who has once tasted, how Good, and how Gracious the Lord
is in the Spirit, (...) never be satisf^^ with ^ Knowledge of him in the
Letter. The Knowledge of a Spiritual V^i^ with God, produces an acting (...),
and ^^er the Spirit of God. How does the Creature (...) work, and ^^ls it self
even in the Letter of the Gospel, as well as formerly in the Letter of the La^
for want of Knowledge of the Union in the Spiritual Power of the Lord, Marrow,
p. 44.


XVI. Qua. Christ's Second Appearance, or Coming to the Salvation of them that
truly wait and look for him is a Spiritual Appearance or Coming in Sp^^^ to
s^v^ his People, and not (in Scripture) call^ a P^^^ ^^d or Fleshly Coming, nor
his Reign a Personal Reign in his Kingdom; for it is a Spiritual Kingdom, and
his Reign in it Spiritual.


Bap. Christ's Presence (and so his Kingdom) will be a Spiritual Presence, and
not a Personal -- His Reign in the Latter Days will not be Personal, but
Spiritual. Jesus Christ is no more to be known of the Saints after the Flesh;
therefore his Presence so; and his Kingdom will not be a Fleshly or Personal
Presence and Kingdom, but a Spiritual; his Glory Spiritual; his Kingdom not of
this World, etc. [See the Point argued at large, Marrow Christian. p. 77, 78,
79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, to the end of the Section]


XVII. Qua. That there is an Immortal and Incorruptible Seed (of the Nature of
Christ Jesus) to be known in the Soul, whereof true Believers come to be born
again, even by the Word of Life and Power, which lives and abides forever;
and so comes Christ to be formed, and Spiritually born in them, and they to be
renewed up into his Nature and Image.


Bap. Although we have known Christ after the Flesh, yet know we him no more;
why? If any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature, Christ is formed in him
after the Spirit, and he comes now to (...) a Spiritual Christ within him,
Marrow, p. 55. Faith may be acted not only on Christ's Dying (...) the Cross,
but in Christ's Living in the Soul; that is my believing. That Christ is
Spiritually formed in me, as well as that he dyed for me, Ibid, p. 56.


XVIII. Qua. We are fully satisfied, that God is so far from having absolutely
and particularly decreed Men's Destruction from Eternity (or designing
perpetual and mere voluntary Hatred to particular Persons, or withholding his
Saving Grace from them) that his Love is in the first place Universal to all
Mankind; his Grace, which brings Salvation, has appeared, and is free to all
Men, till they reject it; the Appearance whereof is in, and by the Light of his
Son in all, which is sufficient to leave all the Disobedient without Excuse,
whereby Men are at sometimes put into such a Capacity, as that they may be
saved; and so receive the Benefit, and good End of Christ's Coming, Suffering,
Death, and becoming a Ransom for ALL, for a Testimony in due time of God's f^^e
Love and Grace. And with this the General Baptists agree, against the Contrary,
Partial and Pinching Opinion of the Particular Electioners.


Bap. 1. We believe, and are very confident, that there is one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things, who is the only begotten Son of God -- whom God
freely sent into the World (because of his great Love unto the World) who as
freely gave himself a Ransom for all. 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. tasting Death for every
Man, Heb. 2.9* a Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but also for
the Sins of the whole World, 1. Jo. 2.2.

2. That God is not willing, that any should perish, but that all should come
to Repentance, 2. Pet. 3.9. and the Knowledge of the Truth, that they might be
saved, 1 Timothy 2.4. for which End Christ has commanded, that the Gospel (to
wit, the glad Tiding of Remission of Sins) should be preached to every
Creature, Ma^k. 16.15. So that no Man shall eternally suffer in Hell for want
of a Christ that dyed for them, but, as the Scripture says, for denying the
Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2. or because they believe not in the Name of the
only begotten Son of God. Jo. 3 18. Unbelief therefore being the Cause, why the
Just and Righteous God will condemn the Children of Men* it follows against all
Contradiction, that all Men at one time or other are put into such a Capacity,
as that (through the Grace of God) they may be eternally saved, Joh. 1.7. Act.
17.30. Mark. 6.6. Heb. 3.10, 18.19. 1 John 5 10. Joh. 3.17. See Art. 3.4. of
Confession of Faith presented to the King, subscribed by 46 of them.


Serious Reader, I having diligently traversed the present Controversies
between some of these Water-Baptists and us, called Quakers, have thus far
labored for Quietness and Reconciliation by thus obviously laying down those
Principles and Doctrines of ours, that have been chiefly struck at by the
Dialogue-Man, and some others of them; together with his, and his Brethren's
own intermixed Concessions and Assenting to the Truth thereof in most things
very nearly concurring in Matter and Substance; which while he or any of them
otherwhiles oppose, and contradict, and count us Impostors, Heretics, etc. for
these Matters, they oppose and contradict themselves like Wavering, Unsettled
and Uncertain Persons, not to be credited in their Contentious Work. As for
those Passages of Tho. Collier, they were Printed in the Year 1050. (which was
before these Controversies happened between us, and so before their Enmity
broke forth, as it doth^ and therefore the more to be taken notice of, as being
writ from an Unprejudiced Mind, and a Capacity more fit to receive Spiritual
Sights and Openings, which diverse of them heretofore have had: But now plain
Prejudice. Darkness and an Apostasy is come over these Carnal Contenders, who
have lost that former Sincerity, Tenderness and Spiritual Desires, that
appeared in diverse, and now with their Flesh, Darkness, Carnal Imaginations and
Selfish Spirits they are Raising up a Smoke, and Darkness against the Glory of
this Dispensation of Spirit, Life, Light and Power revealed among us, which
will outlive their Enmity, and wear-out their Shadows and Empty Profession;
For this Spiritual, Transcending Dispensation shall Increase, their Shadows
shall Decrease, grow into Disesteem, naturally Decay, and by Degrees Vanish
thereupon.

G.W.

THE END.

