URIM AND THUMMIM: Or the Apostolical Doctrines OF LIGHT AND PERFECTION
MAINTAINED; Against the Opposite Plea of Samuel Grevill (a Pretended Minister
of the Gospel) in his Ungospellike Discourse against a Book, entitled, A
Testimony of the Light Within, anciently writ by Alexander Parker.

By W. P.

This then is the Message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you,
that God is LIGHT, and in him is no Darkness at all. If we say that we have
Fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we Lie, and do not the Truth; But if
we WALK in the Light, AS HE IS in the Light, we have Fellowship one with
another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from ALL Sin, 1 John
1. 5, 6, 7. Printed in the Year 1674.

THE EPISTLE.
Candid Reader,
SInce it has pleased the Everlasting God to visit a poor despised People in
this Nation, with a more direct, immediate and clear Sight, Sense and Knowledge
of him, then heretofore they had, by the Shinings of his Eternal Light and
Spirit in their Hearts, thereby giving them a true Discerning of the Ways and
Worships that have been in the World, which gender toward mere Outside and
lifeless Formality, and of that Pure, Straight and Narrow Way, that stands in
the Power of God, and holy Life of Righteousness, many, very many have been
their Trials, Exercises and deep Sufferings, and that of Slandering them and
their most precious Faith, has not been the least in their Eye; for by that
Practice has the Enemy of Christ's Kingdom cast such Mists and Vails over the
Truth, as have obscured the divine Beauty and Excellency of it from the Sight
of People, insomuch that some have dreaded nothing more then the Reception of
that Principle, which bears true and faithful Witness for God in their own
Consciences. It is cried down for Insufficient by such as never tried the Power
and Efficacy of it, and termed a Natural and Dim Light, though It discovers
and instructs Man in and about Spiritual and Supernatural Things. O that they
would obey this Day of small things, and remember, that Obedience is far better
then Sacrifice; How much is there of the latter? But how little, O how very
little of the former! What Degeneracy is there among all Professions? Their
Tenderness is withdrawing, their Greenness withering apace; and with the former
do they earnestly contend, as the Jews of old, against the very Power and Life
of Godliness; and see not that the God of the World has entered those Outsides
of Religion, wherein perhaps the Lord may formerly in Condescension have
appeared, that he might lead them nearer to the Substance it self; and for want
of a true favoring Spirit in this Matter, Millions are deluded, yea, so far, as
therein and therewith to oppose a more clear and heavenly Appearance of God to
the Sons of Men; thus do they resist the Visitations of God's Love to their
Souls, and reject their own Mercies. Oh, that an inquiring tender Spirit were
more generally raised in the Hearts of People, that they would consider our
Relation to the latter days, and how much it concerns them in these New
Covenant Times, to be in Covenant with God; which it is utterly impossible
those should ever be, who rebel against the Light by which he has visited them
with daily Reproof and Instruction; I have given him, said the Lord of his Son,
for a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and for my Salvation to the Ends of the
Earth. This is that true Light, which enlightens the Souls of all, 1 John 9.
as John testified; and the Nations of them that are saved must walk therein.
Come, let us walk in the Light of the Lord. This Measure of Light leads to God,
Isa. 2.
who is Light; and this Measure of Grace and Truth guides the Soul unto him,
who is full of Grace and Truth, where Salvation is known, and plentious
Redemption witnessed; Blessings and Praises be to his Name forever.

Reader, This Controversy, begun by S. Grevill, who calls himself a Minister
of the Gospel near Banbury, though briefly handled, is of great Weight; for it
consists of two fundamental Doctrines of the Gospel, and indeed the very Bottom
of our Testimony, viz. Christ's Manifestation of himself in the Hearts of his
Children; and the End of that Manifestation, namely, To make and End of Sin,
destroy the Works of the Devil, finish Transgression, and bring in everlasting
Righteousness, John 1. 3, 5, 8. Dan. 9. 24. These two Principles, or rather
Christ Jesus within the Principle, and his Work, complete Redemption, are
lately opposed by S G^ as laid down by Alexander Parker, in a Book by him set
forth about Seventeen Years since. This is a sober Consideration, and I hope, a
plain Enervation of his utmost Force, in Defense of those Evangelical New
Covenant Doctrines. I recommend it to God's Witness in thy Conscience, who will
judge Righteous Judgment; whose Servant I am, in Body, Soul and Spirit, and
whom dare not but confess and vindicate before men.

W. P.

A General Defense of the LIGHT WITHIN, by way of Introduction.
THough there be no Passage or Proposition to be found from one End of holy
Scripture to the other, more clearly laid down, then that in John 1. 9. That
was the true Light that lights every man that comes into the World; yet so
strong has been the Envy, and so subtle the Endeavors of the Prince of
Darkness, as scarcely any one place has been more wrested and abused, on
purpose to hinder Mankind from minding the Manifestations of it, and yielding
all ready Obedience to it, as the way appointed of God to Eternal Life and
Salvation.

Some will have it to be a Natural Light, though it be the very Life of that
Word, which is God over all blessed forever, and wrapped up within those Verses,
which only concern his Eternal Power and Godhhead.

Others will have it read thus, Not, that he enlightens all Mankind, but that
all who are enlightened are enlightened by him; thereby, not only narrowing and
wronging the Text, but rendering God so partial and injust to his Creatures, as
to cause his Light of Righteousness to arise on some, without ever visiting the
greatest part of Mankind with so much as a Day of Salvation; though he says,
He would not the Death of any, but rather that all should Repent, and come to
the Knowledge of the Truth.

There is a third sort that will needs have it understood not of any
Illumination by a Divine Light or Spirit, but the Life Christ lived* and the
Doctrine he preached, when visibly in the World, which neither reaches the
hundredth part of Mankind, nor can be consistent with the Nature of that Part
of John's History which wholely relates to his Divinity, or what he was before
he took Flesh.

It Is true, Christ was the Light of the World in that very Appearance, and
shined forth by his Heavenly Doctrine, and Self denying Life, a most holy
Example; yet not so, as the exclude himself from being that spiritual Light,
which shines in the Hearts of the Sons and Daughters of men. He was full of
Grace and Truth; yet of his Grace has Mankind received, Grace for Grace, which
is that Grace of God, that in all Ages has appeared for Salvation; whose
Nature and Property is so plainly described, and the Salvation it brings,
unfolded by the Apostle, 2 Tit. 11, 12. viz. Teaching us, that denying
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should live Godly, Righteously and Soberly in
this present World. And so far is that Universal Light and Grace we testify
of, from leading us to undervalue Christ and the Scriptures, that we cannot but
declare to all the World in pure Conscience toward God, and every moderate
Enquirer, that we never had any true Knowledge of God or Christ, any right
Sense, of the Work of Conversion upon our Souls, nor any right Sight or Relish
of those Heavenly Truths declared in the Scriptures, till we came to know, and
be obedient to the Manifestation of that true Light, which enlighteneth every
man; and the Appearance of that Grace which brings Salvation in our own Souls.

They are standing Truths, That whatsoever may be known of God is manifested in
man; for God has shew^d it unto him: That whatsoever is reproved is made
manifest by the Light; and that whatsoever does make manifest is Light, Romans 1.
19. Ephesians. 5. 13. This cannot be Natural, unless of the Divine Nature, which
reveals to men Divine Things. It Is rare that we meet with any Adversary, who
denies it to reprove Evil, and to cherish that which is Good. And the Wise Man
tells us, That the Reproof of Instruction is the Way of Life, Prove. 6. 23. If
the Light reproves for that which is Evil, and that Reproof seals up
Instruction to Life Everlasting, how dare any call it a Natural Light, common
to, yea, a part of all men in their Natural Estate, especially when the Apostle
Paul has so long since declared That the Natural Man receives not the things
of the Spirit of God; for they are Foolishness unto him; neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned? 1 Cor. 2. 14 Our very Case in
Defense of the Light Within against the wise Master Builders of this Age.

Nay, so far is Man in his natural Estate from being acted and guided by this
very Light, which our Enemies call Natural, that Christ himself says, He
hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be
reproved: But, on the other Hand, He that does Truth comes to the Light, Joh.
3. 21.
that his D^eds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God; where it is
evident, that the very Manifestation given, is Divine; much more the Nature of
that Light that gives it. Indeed, how is it possible for Man to know Christ,
who is Light, without Light? It was John's Message to preach, That God is
Light. The same Apostle testifies, That the Blood of Cleansing is to be found
of them that walk in the Light, ver. 7.

If it be objected, That this is not that Light wherewith every Man is
enlightened: The same Apostle in his History says, That in the Word was Life,
and the Life was the Light of Men, and that very Light was the true Light that
lights every Man that comes into the World, 1 John 4. 9. Let such give me as
plain a Text against either the Sufficiency or Universality of the Light, if
they can.

Its Properties and Effects prove it Divine; in that 1st, If manifests God,
Romans 1. 19. 2dly, It manifests Evil, Ephesians. 5. 13. 3dly, It is made the Rule of
walking by the Apostle: See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but
as Wise, ver. 15. 4thly, It is made the Path to walk in, Joh. 8. 12. 1 John 1.
7. Isa. 2. 5. Come, let us walk in the Light of the Lord: And the Nations of
them that are saved shall walk in the Light of the Lord, Rev. 21. 23. And so
says the Scripture of the Spirit of God, 1st, In that it reproves for Sin,
Joh. 16. 8. 2dly, In that it gives Understanding of the Things of God, Job.
32. 8. 1 Cor 2. 10. 3dly, That it is a Rule for the Chi^dren of God to walk by,
Romans 8. 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of
God. 4thly, We are also to walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5 16. This I say then, walk
in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh: I hope none will
deny that this Light and this Spirit must be of one and the same Nature.

But if any shall yet object, That this is to be understood of a spiritual
Light, and that ours is but a natural one: I shall desire them to do two
Things, 1st, To prove that a Natural Light does manifest God, reprove for Evil,
and cherish that which is Good; since whatever is Part of Man in his
Degeneration from God, is so far form giving one good Thought, that it cannot
rightly reprove an evil one; and it is granted by our Adver^aries, that what we
call Divine, and they call Natural Light, can do both. 2dly, That in Case this
Light be Natural, and can so manifest and reprove, that they would assign us
some certain Medium or Way, whereby we may truly discern and distinguish
between the Manifestations and Reproofs of the Natural Light from those of the
Divine Light, since they allow the Manifestation of God and Reproof of Evil, as
well to the one as to the other. And I challenge them all to give us one
Scripture that distinguishes between a Natural and Spiritual Light within,
reproving Evil, etc. They may with as much Reason talk of a Narural and
Spiritual Darkness within: It Is true, there is a Natural Darkness, to wit, the
Night of the outward World; and there is a Spiritual Darkness, viz. the misty
and clouded Understandings of Men, through Disobedience to the Light and Spirit
of God: Let them assign us a third, or rather a second Darkness of the
Understanding in the things of God, if they can: Christ never distinguished
between Darkness and Darkness, or Light and Light in any such Sense, nor did
any of his Disciples I ever read of; yet both have frequently spoken of
Darkness and Light; what Difference does the Scripture put between spiritual
Darkness and Darkness, mentioned in these Places, Luke 1. 79. Math. 4. 16. Joh.
1. 5. Joh. 3. 19. Joh. 8. 12, 35, 46. 1 These. 5. 4. 1 John 1 6. Act. 26. 18.
Romans 13. 12. 2 Cor. 6. 14. Ephesians. 5. 8. Col. 1. 13. I find none; It is all one
spiritual Darkness: neither is there so much as one Scripture that affords us a
Distinction between Light within and Light within, that really are Light:
peruse Math. 4. 16. Luke 2. 32. Chap. 16. 8. Joh. 1. 4, 5, 7, 8, 9. Chap. 3.
19, 20, 21. Chap. 8. 12. Act. 26. 18. Romans 13. 12. 2 Cor. 4. 6. Chap. 6. 14.
Eph^s. 5. 8, 13. Col. 1. 12. 1. These. 5. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 9. 1 John
1. 5, 7. Chap. 2. 8. Rev. 21. 23, 24. Chap. 22. 5. And le^ the greatest Enemy
to our Assertion do his utmost to sever real Light from Light, or find out two
Lights in these Passages if he can; if he cannot, he is irrecoverably gone, and
that upon his own Concession: For, as he yields to us, that the Light in
Controversy manifests Evil and reproves for it; so does Christ himself
teach thus of the Light, Joh. 3. 12. For every one that does Evil hates the
Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be reproved: And the
Apostle Paul plainly says, Ephesians. 5. 13. But all things that are reprove are
made manifest by the Light; Therefore not two distinct* Lights in kind, but one
and the same manifesting, reproving Light: And this the Apostle John proves
beyond all Exception, to wise and considerate men; First, in that he calls God
Light, Chap. 1. 5. 2dly. In that he puts no medium or third thing between that
Light and Darkness, verse* 6. If we say that we have Fellowship with him, and
wa^^ in Darkness, we lie; intimating, that men must walk either in Light or
^arkness. I am sure, that which manifests and reproves Darkness cannot be
Darkness; And so say our Adversaries of our Light. And as if the Apostle John
would have anticipated their Objection, viz. It Is true, your Light within
reproves for Evil; but it is not therefore the Divine Light, which leads into
higher things, and which comes by the Gospel; he thus expresses himself, Chap.
2. Darkness is past, and the true Light now shines. He that says, He is in
the Light, and hates his Brother, is in Darkness even until now, which is not
another Light from God the Light, Chap. 1. For, as Light there is put in
Opposition to Darkness, so Light here is put in Opposition to Darkness: The
Darkne^s is one and the same, so the Light; Wherefore we may plainly see, that
it is not another Light then that which reproved a man for hating his Brother,
that brings a man into Fellowship with God, and to the Blood of Cleansing, as
the next verse speaks: Therefore that Light which reproves a man for hating
his Brother, is of a Divine Nature.

In short; That Light which is opposite to, and reproves spiritual Darkness, is
a spiritual Light: But such a Light is that within, as our Adversaries
themselves confess, therefore spiritual. It is worth our notice that the
Apostle uses the same manner of Expression here, Chap. 2. 8. The TRUE Light
shines, that he does in his History, Chap. 1. 9. That was the TRUE Light,
intimating the same Divine Word or True Light now shines; and that it was that
same True Light (for there is but one) that reproved such as hated their
Brethren; consequently that Light, that so reproves, is the True Divine Light.

And strange it is that Christ and his Disciples, but especially John, should
so often make that very Light, which stoops to the lowest Step of Morality, to
the Reproof of the grossest Evils, to be no other then the same Divine Light,
that brings such as follow it to the Light of Life, and those who walk in it to
the Blood of Cleansing, and to have Fellowship with God, etc. Nay, not only so,
but make the very best of man's being a Child of God, to depend upon his
answering of the Light in a palpable moral Case, viz. not hating of his
Brother; And yet that our Adversaries should shut their Eyes from beholding its
Divinity, and conclude it therefore a mere Natural Light, This is both
Unreasonable and Unscriptural.

But here is the very Ground of their Ignorance and slight Apprehension of the
Light within, They have never known it further then in the Capacity of a
Reprover of Evil (though that is enough with a considerate and tender-spirited
man to feel from whence it came) and so conclude it unable to give either
further Discoveries of God's Will, or Power and Virtue to enable to do it. But
to all such as object against the Sufficiency of the Light of Christ within,
either as to its Knowledge or Power, I say, Try it; you are not proper Judges
in the Case, till you have walked in it: If then you meet not with the Blood of
Cleansing, and pure Fellowship with God, who is Light, it will be time enough
for you to object. Do not infer from the Discovery of small and great things,
two distinct Lights, instead of two Manifestations of one and the same Light;
such as do the Will of God, so far as the Light in the Conscience enjoins them,
shall know more of the Doctrine it teaches all the Children of Light.

However, it has pleased the man we have now to deal with, to undertake a
Refutation of a Book, entitled, A Testimony of the Light Within, written about
Seventeen Years since by Alexander Parker, a Servant of God in the Work of his
Gospel: But I hope my Reader has received that Satisfaction in what has been
already ^inted in Defense of the Light of Christ within, that he is in a very
good Posture to hear what may be objected against it, by one that never yet
knew the Power and Efficacy of it. It is the Advantage God has given us over
our Enemies, They fight us Blindfold, and entangle themselves in their own Net:
With Moderation, Plainness and Brevity I have considered his Opposition, in
Faithfulness to God, his Truth, and the Souls of all People.

URIM and THUMMIM: Or, the Apostolical Doctrines of Light and Perfection
MAINTAINED; Against the Opposite Plea of Samuel Grevill (a Pretended Minister
of the Gospel) in his Ungospel-like Discourse against a Book, entitled, A
Testimony of the Light Within, anciently writ by Alexander Parker.
SAmuel Grevill in his Rejoinder to A. Parker, Page 5.
p. 5. brings two places against the Sufficiency of the Light within: The first
is Deuteronomy. 31. 13. That their Children which have not known any thing may hear
and learn to fear the Lord your God, as long as ye live in the Land whither ye
go over Jordan to possess it. But this is answered without Difficulty; for any
thing is not in the Hebrew: And it appears both from the place it self, and
Chap. 11. 2. that those many great and wonderful Works of Deliverance the Lord
had wrought for them, and which their Children through Nonage knew not, were
only intended; And because the hearing of them might be a deep Engagement upon
their Spirits to fear and worship the God of their Fathers; therefore were they
to hear of those Noble Acts at the Mouths of their Parents, as the place
speaks. How this Instance proves the Insufficiency of the Shinings of Christ's
Light in the Conscience, with Respect to their Duty to God and Man in that Day,
is left with every man of Sober Conscience to judge.

The other is 2 Timothy 3. 15. The words, Through Faith in Christ Jesus, he omits.
The Scriptures through Faith are able to make Wise, but not without Faith: This
does not prove that therefore Faith cannot make wise without the Scriptures;
for that was before the Scriptures were written, as in Abraham and others.

To John 16. 2. They thought and apprehended, the Scripture commanded them to
do God good Service, when they persecuted the Saints. Does this set the
Scriptures above the true Light, by which only we must rightly understand them?
Not that we would exclude the Scriptures of that Service the Lord has appointed
them to, but to maintain the true Light against vain Cavils; for God's
Super-adding of Scripture, no more renders the Light Insufficient, then the
Spirit, Grace, yea, God or Christ; Man being abroad from the Spirit, and not
abiding in the Light, the Lord went forth into outward Means to bring him home:
Is God's Condescension to Man's Weakness a Proof of his Insufficiency? The
Scriptures came from the Light, and testify of it, that the Nations of them
that are saved must walk in it; this was the End of the Evangelical Ministry.
And as for taking true Light from the Scriptures, without true Light within,
how absurd and impossible it is, is obvious to all. That Light, that gives to
understand the right Meaning of the Scriptures, must be true Light; else, how
can it understand right? And how can it be put in us by the Scriptures, when we
must and do bring it with us to the Scriptures before we read them? Does the
Bible send forth a Spirit to read it with? or does God send it from it? or does
not he rather illuminate the Soul to understand it, as held all Ancient Fathers
and Protestant Writers? See what Testimony this man gives for his pretended
Light without, against the Light within; and after what rate he disproves it,
to satisfy his Neighbor: He manifestly sets the Scripture and the Light
within at Variance that Harmonize.

But shall the Evil, Envy, Pride, Passion, Murder and Darkness then in the
Jews, Discredit, Undervalue, or render Insufficient the blessed Light of the
Lord, that at that time shined in them (though their Blindness and Darkness
comprehended it not) Why may I not as well say, they had no Scriptures, or that
they did all those infamous, hardened Acts against Christ, by the Scriptures
(since they thought so) as that S. Grevill should infer the one or the other
against the Light within? Every man has Light from the Creating Word, and that
is Divine, because the very Life of that Word; and by it, God, who is Light, is
only truly known; and while men hear, obey, and live in the Counsel of it, they
walk in the Way of Truth and Path of Life, they feel the Light of Life, and
experience the Blood of Jesus Christ to cleanse them from all Sins.

To his Answer about Perfection, viz. That he pleads not for Sin, because he
denies perfect Freedom from it, since he pleads for Sin, that tells men, they
may sin. I say, If any hear an Advocate plead that such a man must break the
Law as long as he lives, will it not be understood, that he pleads for a
Toleration of him in the same Evils after he has been pardoned? But if any
hear him plead, that the Lawmakers say the same (that is, the Teachers) will
they not conclude, that he makes them tolerate Injustice, that he blasphemes
and slanders them, as the Word signifies? yet this is S. G's Case in point of
Indulgence of Sin.

To his other Comparison, p. 6. viz. Who favors a Disease most, He that
prescribes to his Patient to take Antidotes, or He that tells him, He has no
Disease, nor needs to use any Means?

I answer, He weakens a man most, that persuades him, That his Disease is so
rooted, that it is impossible for him to overcome it, yet prescribes Remedies,
and puts the poor man to Cost.

Nor does Christ say, That all men must offend, and that as long as Heaven and
Earth endures; but that one Jot or Tittle from the Law shall not pass, till all
be fulfilled: And he that breaks one of the least of these Commandments, and
teaches men so, shall be called Least in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat 5. 19. And
if the least be not to be broken, then all ought to be kept.

Because A. P. says, Where God is manifest within, he must needs be Light; S.
G. would make him to conclude, That God, Christ and the Spirit are the Light
within us. It feems he dares not fasten his Consequences upon the Scriptures,
but upon what A. P. alleges out of them: And does not S. G. deny them by
Consequence, as he denies the King that denies the King's Writ, since they hold
forth that very Doctrine. If to reject Scripture be Erroneous, S. G. cannot be
sound, that makes that Consequence matter of Error, which he himself
acknowledges to be Scriptural: Hear him.

If A. P. intended not, that God and Christ are the Light within, to what
Purpose did he allege those Scriptures, which say, God is Light, and God is in
us: Christ is Light, and Christ is in us? Which Reader, If I understand any
thing, is to allow; that we have Scripture for our Assertion, and to give up
the Cause as far as ever we contended for it, to wit, That God is Light, and
Christ is Light, and as such, do shine or appear in the Hearts of Men, to give
them the Knowledge of those things which concern their Eternal Peace.

But S. G. says, If Christ were the Light within, the Prophet would not have
said, They have no Light in them. That Christ is the true Light, John
testifies, and that he was and is such a Light, as was to enlighten the
Gentiles, the Prophet Isaiah tells us; and that the Nations of them that were
saved, were to walk in this Light, John the Divine in his Revelation assures
us. Now, unless the Soul of Man be not to be lighted with this Light, or that
it is not to be understood of the Soul, but Body only that was to walk in the
Light of the Church; it will follow, that this Light must needs shine where the
Soul of Man is, which is within; consequently, that Christ is that Light which
shines within.

Paul that took Counsel to persecute Christ without, was stroke at the
Appearing and Shining of Christ within; and when it pleased God to reveal his
Son in him (the true Light that enlightens all Mankind) he consulted not with
Flesh and Blood, which is their State that reject and vilify his spiritual
Appearance and Revelation of him in the Soul: But for all their vain
Expectations and loud Boasts, in that State they shall never inherit the
Kingdom of God; that is God's Word of Truth. As to the Prophet's Words, they
are not to be understood, as it those wicked Men had no Light from God; but
that they rebelling and blinding themselves against it, and following their own
Imaginations for Truth, They had no Light in all their Ways; or as S. G. well
says, Their conceited Light was Darkness; They walked in Darkness, and so
participated or partook not of the Benefit and Blessing of the Light; but it
shined in the Darkness uncomprehended: There was Light, but it was not risen
upon him, or no Morning risen in him, as the Words may be rendered: Is there no
Sun in the Firmament, because Men that are blind, or shut their Eyes, cannot,
or will not see it? Or, I* a Schoolmaster Unlearned or Insufficient, because
any of his Lads play truant, and neglect his Reproof and Instruction? Or, Is it
reasonable for any of us to say, that such Scholars have no Schoolmaster,
because they are idle and regard not their Book, notwithstanding his daily
Checks and Reprehensions of them? Or, Can they be said to have no Lesson,
because they neglect to get it?

In short, Christ is the great Priest, Prophet, King, Judge and Lawgiver under
the new Covenant: He is the Shepherd that daily overlooks and feeds his Flock;
and such as know not him so revealed in them, to be the very Hope of their
Glory, are in a reprobate Estate: And how he should be within, and not be
Light, who is the true Light it self, from whom all they that have Divine
Light, received it, will lie on S. G's Part to show. And so far are we from
lessening the Scriptures hereby, That they are they which testify of Christ to
be the true Light that enlightens all: And with their holy Record have we great
Unity, and our Souls bless God for them, and the Benefit we have received, and
yet do, in reading of them, through the Revelation of his holy Spirit, without
which they are but a sealed Book; as well said learned Bishop Jewel against
Harding, p. 532, 534.

In p. 7. Page 7.
he would set these as Contraries, Great Light and No Light, as without a
Medium; and so argues, Because Great Light was before deny^d to the Ephesians. 2.
12. therefore they had no Light, and so make as if God had left himself without
a Witness amongst them, Acts 14. 15, 17.
which is a worse State then the Lycaonians, who had a sense of his Wi^dom,
Power and Goodness from his visible Works, which outward Witness had been
Insufficient, without an Paul teaches, that whatever is reproved, is made
manifest by the Light, Ephesians. 5. 13. And whatever may be known of God, is
manifested in Man, Romans 1. 19. And that which manifests is Light, as says the
same Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 13. And he desired to be made manifest to the
Conscience. Then there was Light; for Men were reproved, Rom 2 15. and they
could not be r^prov'd without it, Ephesians. 5. 13.
inward Witness to join with it, and evidence it more ^^esly unto them. No
better Success had the Preaching of the Gospel had among the Ephesians without
it, which because their Light in time of their Ignorance of these things, which
then in due Time God revealed unto them in a great Measure, did not teach (it
being too high for their State) Therefore by his Consequence they had none,
Col. 1. 26. Ephesians. 2. 7. and 3. 5.
nor any before that Time. For the Was not that Mystery the great Work of
Redemption? And were not Thousands redeemed before? If it was hid, it was to
such as had lost it by Rebellion. It was the same Light, not the same Degree
that ever saved.
Mystery was hid from Ages and Generations, that then was made manifest to his
Saints; for if they had, as he seems to reason, it would have taught them
Baptism, Supper, etc. Nay further, as he argues, All the Opinions that the
Episcopalians and Presbyterians hold, Common Prayer or Directory, whether you
will: So Tryphon asked Just. Martyr, as I remember, why Christ came nosooner?
and not only to Thou and Thee Magistrates, as they did always; but to stir up
People for them or against them, as serve their own Interest.

It is true indeed, an Outward Literal Knowledge of these Things by the ^^elp
of Literature, as Men now have them, the Jews and Gent^les had not; for they
were not written, as they are now, with Ink, but with the Spirit in the Heart,
and they resisting that, could not know him This proves not they had no Light;
at most, it only sh^ws to us, that it did not shine so clearly forth, which
stil^ implies, that it was the same in Nature. How could those in Job rebel
again* the Light, if they had it not? Codurcus, ^usius, Clarius, Vatablus and
others, are not of his Mind; for it is an invincible Truth, that such as
rebelled against the Light, as Job 24. 13. and God's good Spirit, as Nehem. 9.
20. 26. (notwithstanding their Formality and external Preciseness) could not
receive Christ Jesus; but crucified him when he came.
outwardly, because (though they knew the Words and Sentences, yet) they knew
not the Voices and Senses of the Prophets, but looked for a Conquer^r like
David; as the Gentiles, like Jupiter, etc. And why may not Men now with their
Light he speaks of, mistake the Scriptures of the New, as they then did of the
Old Testament, as he says, the Quakers may do with theirs; unless he can
prove, that his Light is the true one, because he says, it is Natural Reason,
and the Quakers false, because they maintain it to be of the Divine Nature,
Word, Reason or Wisdom, that was in the Beginning with God, and was and is God,
as say several Fathers in our Defense, For Christ that lightens every one that
comes into the World, is called (...), the Word or Reason of God, who as
Irenaeus says, rationabiliter and se sibiliter Legem statuit, John 1 9. Prove.
8. 4. 31.
established the Law reasonably and sensibly. And Fe^ Ardentius interprets
(...), in Iren. Verbum, Sermo, Ratio, Word or Reason. And says Irenaeus, page
326. Man being made reasonable, Iren. l. 5. c. 18.
lost Reason, and living unreasonably, gave himself ov^r to the Earth^y Spirit,
Psalm. 48. 21. And Justin Martyr says, that Christ was (...), whole Reason, as
his Interpreter Langius renders it; and that which the Philosophers and Poets
conformed to, Justin Martyr Apo^. pro Christianis, p. 51.
was (...), a Part or partaking of the Reason that was sown; and he says, The
Seed of the Word or Reason is sown or ingrafted in all ki^d of Men, p. 46. And
Origin his Author uses almost the same Words, Orig. Commenon Romans 2. 14. page
428.
The Law sown in the So^l by comm^^ Notions, and the Word written in the Heart.
And Justin in the place quoted, makes (...) and (...), common Notion, and Word
or Reason, and (...), or Mind, synonimous, or of the same Signification, as
Origin, and Irenaeus do; Almost the very Words of some of the ancient
Philosophers; For Plotin calls it a Divine Principle, that makes the good Man,
which says he, Stan. Vit. Philos.
is the Root of the Soul. And Cleanthes, The Eternal Nature, sown and diffused
through the Race of Man, and is the most sure and infallible Guide; Hieron
calls it a domestic God; Seneca Diffused reason; Epictetus, God within;
Plutarch, a living Rule, interior Guide, and Everlasting Foundation of Virtue;
Philo, The Immortal Law, engraven on the Minds of Men, no lifeless Precepts
written on Paper, Ursin and Paraus Quest. 6.
etc. Nor do Modern Writers much, if at all, vary: David Paraeus, another of
his Authors, says, in Vrsin's Body of Christian Doctrine, augmented, corrected
and consummated by him, Quest. 6. The Image of God contains all the Natural
Notions of God, of his Will and Works, that is, perfect Wisdom in the Mind,
perfect Righteousness and Holiness in the Heart, and all outward Actions.
Perfect Wisdom is here said, says he, not that which is ignorant of nothing;
but that which is competent to a created Nature sufficient to its Felicitys: So
there is an Homonymy or double Signification of the Word Perfect. And in Quest.
92. he says, We were created, redeemed and sanctified to this End, Quest. 92.
that we should KEEP THE LAW MORAL AND NATURAL, BEING THE SAME IN THIS LIFE AND
THE ETERNAL, IT NOT BEING ABROGATED AS TO OBEDIENCE. Now these Men, a Irenaeus
said of the Poets and Philosophers, Every one seeing that which was connatural,
from Part of the divine-sown-Reason, spoke excellently; and where right and
consistent with themselves, they are ours; so far Irenaeus. And the Reader may
take these quoted, better from us, then S. G's. from him upon mere Trust.

Some ancient Fathers and Protestant Writers expound the Word Nature as I do,
says S. Grevil, if you will trust him: I say the like of my Exposition, and
have already quoted them, and told him how far I credit them; and therefore in
page 8. he wrongs the Quakers; for they would not cite them, if they gave no
Credit to them, as he would have People to believe, as Paul would not have
quoted the Greek Poet, if he had not believed that to be Truta that he said
concerning God, That we are of his Offspring; which he brought to prove, Acts
17. 27.
that he is not far from every one, On which Place Grotius cites, Grot. on that
Place.
for the Essential Presence of God, as he terms it, several Heathens, Jews and
Christians, no fewer then Ten: I shall instance but in one. Minutus Felix, who
^yes, God is every where, not only very near us, but infused; which because A.
P. said not expressly, though S. G. charges him to say it by Consequence, he
makes it A. P's Page 1.
Principle to shut him out of Men (who charges it for an Error that he dwells
in Men) and all that is not by Generation, p. 8. And so not only many primitive
and later Christian Doctors; but also many others, that deny the rational Soul
to be ex traduce or by Generation, but infused, to be as great Blasphemers, as
he would make the Quakers. And if he can produce neither Scripture (as I am
sure he cannot) nor ancient nor modern Writers, for his Gift of the Spirit that
comes by Generation, He must be the Author of that new Doctrine: Page 3.
A Gift or Grace is not one's self, nor a Part of one's self, nor one's own
originally; but another's, freely conferred; (...), Graces or things freely
given.

He says, To do as we would be done to, is sown in our Natures; then the Seed
of the Law and the Prophets contained what more eminently appeared, Luke 6. 31,
32. Romans 2. 14, 15.
and was extended in the Gospel, even to the Love of Enemies, with the Reason
of it; for if you love them that love you, etc. which the Gentiles had in them
in Effect, though not in Letters. And D. Paraeus says, David Paraeus in his
Epitome of Arminian Artic. 3.
In the State of Sin, a Man is not apt to do or think any Good of himself
according to the Scriptures, Ephesians. 2. 9. and 2 Cor. 3. 5. etc. Then neither the
Law, nor the Work of the Law* was of themselves, else how they could condemn
them that had the Law, and transgressed it. And the Scripture says, That which
may be known of God is manifest in Men; Romans 1. 19.
for God has showed it to them; and God has showed unto thee, O Man! what is
good, etc. Mic, 6. 8. which S. G. denies, calling it a special Presence, from
what ground, he shows not, nor can he; for the Manifestation is common and
universal, the Words themselves prove it; consequently, there is a common
Presence; and indeed a special Manifestation implies a Common.

He eavils about the word Perfect, distinguished before out of Paraeus; and
tells of Darkness dwelling with Light, ^very Grace or Gift of God is perfect,
Jam. ^, 17,
and Ignorance with Knowledge; I know not for what, unless it be to confess to
us, That his Knowledge is not without Ignorance: But it seems, he is afraid
le^t his Kingdom of Darkness, Ignorance and Sin should be destroyed; therefore
proceeds to write against a Freedom from Sin in this Life, and to oppose the
Expositions of the Fathers and Protestant Doctors (which it seems, are of less
credit with him, then with the Quakers) that hold, Psalm. 19. 7. 9* Romans 7. 14.
Ursin. Qu. 92. and Para^us.
That the Doctrine in Christ's Sermon tends to a Righteousness beyond that of
the Law, charging them, as if they meant, that Christ set up a Righteousness or
a Law, above his own perfect, Everlasting, Spiritual Law, which some call
Natural and Moral; The same in Nature, Orig. Com. ad Romans p. 428.
says Origin, entire, agreeing with the Eternal and Immovable Rule of
Righteousness in God, abiding the same from the Beginning to the End of the
World; and therefore were we redeemed and regenerated by the holy Ghost, that
we should keep this Law in this, 1 John 2. 7.
and the Life Eternal, that is, Love God and our Neighbor with all our Heart,
not a new Doctrine, but the old, which was from the Beginning: Tertul. advers:
Judaeos,. 2. and de Coron.. 6. See Chryso^^ 1 To. Hom. 17. Oecumen. on Jam. 5.
12. Basil on Psa. 14. Hill. on Mat. can. 4.
Which Law Natural Noah and Abraham kept (says Tertullian) and were justified
by it. And further: In this Primordial and General Law of God given to Adam,
were all the Precepts of the latter Law given forth in their Seasons; for, what
Wonder if he increase the Discipline who instituted it? And God at a certain.
Season exhibited a subsequent Law to the Gentiles; and that which was promised
again by the Prophets, reform^^ to the better, that it should be kept.

These are their words; which shows what Law was meant; namely, the Law of
Moses, Gal. 3. 10. Verse. 19. verse. 24, etc. Origin. ut supra. Romans 8. 1, 2, 3,
etc. Mat. 18. 1. Acts 3. 21. 1 Jo. 3. 5, 8. Titus 2. 14. in loc. citat. Bp.
Sanderson de Cons. regul. prelect. 4.. 31. Hebr. 9. 9.
which was added because of Transgression, t^ll the Seed should come; before
which time many things were winked at, and su^ered because of the Hardness of
their Hearts, that from the beginning were not so, which Christ brings to, that
he might recover all that was lost, and so give Power by his Spirit to them
that walk after it, that his Law may be fulfilled in them in the Everlasting
Righteousness of it, the very End of his Coming, The Law being obscured by the
Fall, much obliterated and lest, lest the Relics in the Minds of men, might be
thought to be an Opinion, GOD REPEATED IT, says Vrsin; which they that walked
after the ^lesh could not keep, and the Knowledge of it, did only condemn them,
and in that Manifestation and Capacity in might be said to be weak, and all
those Rites and Sacrifices added, ever unable to purify the Conscience: But
they that Love him, keep his Commandments, and they are not grievous So that it
was the Relics of the Law Natural repeated in the Decalogue, that Christ (as
they say) came to set up a Righteousness beyond; and not only to repeat and
confirm the Relics, but restore the whole in due season, 1 John 5. 3. Calvin.
Remigius. 1 John 4. 18. John 14. 15. Romans 13. 10.
and bring on the Perfection, to be Merciful (as says Calvin himself) and Love
Enemies, beyond which, Remigius says (as S. G. cites) there can be no Love;
and therefore having commanded this, Christ says, Be ye Perfect; this being
the Perfection of Love. Perfect Love casts out Fear, and is the Fulfilling of
the Law; And he that loves God, keeps his Commandments.

But S. G. p. 10. page 10.
having taken away their Distinctions by his Distinctions of the Moral Law,
comprehending all Ceremonies, etc. relating to the Old Testament and New; Under
the Name of Parker, he tacitly charge not only Remigius and Calvin, but also
Chrysostom and many other Fathers and Doctors quoted, to be of the same mind
with the Scribes and Pharisees in their narrow Interpretations of the Law in
some particular Precepts of it; for this he flings on A. P. for saying but the
same things; while indeed it is to be s^ared, that S. G. is one of those who
rests satisfied with a partial and outward Observation of things, making void
or at least de^lining the weightier Matters of the Law, since he suggests, that
an Endeavor is enough without keeping them.

But of the Difference of the Times and States under the Law and Gospel, in
Manifestation and Power, he says nothing, whatever he knows; for that would
cross his Interest gro^nded on this Kingdom of Sin, in putting an entire and to
it: But how can he without Hypocrisy, say in the Lord's Prayer, Thy Kingdom
come, Thy W^ll be done in Earth as it is in Heaven; whilst he is so far from
believing it, and promoting it, that he sets himself to oppose it, and dispute
against it? And how can the doing of God's Will in Earth as it (...) Heaven,
stand with Praying for Forgiveness of Sins all their Life long? What does this
but over-turn the whole Condition of the Gospel; Unless thou take up my
Cross, and follow me, thou can not be my Di^iple?

He is not (I perceive) for being Baptized with the Baptis^ Christ was baptized
with; nor for (...), of that bitter Cup he drank of; He is rather for (...)
himself and others asleep in this pernicious Hope, That Christ (...) taken up
the C^^ss, been baptized, and drank that bitter Cup for them, and so they need
not do it over again; otherwise he would not dare hold and maintain such a
Continuance of Imperfection, as he does. He is not of the Apostle's Mind, that
prayed for a Sanctification of the then Believers, not in part, but throughout,
in Body, Soul and Spirit. God will bring down this Kingdom, and it shakes
already.

Page 11. page 11.
As to his Reconciliation with God in his Continuation in Sin, they are
inconsistent, considered in the same Degree: So that we may truly say, Whilst
there is no Separation from Sin, there is no Reconciliation with God, but if
there be separation from Sin in some measure, there is Reconciliation with God
in some measure: As separated, so reconciled; perfectly separated, perfectly
reconciled. As we ^ee in natural things, so full of Air, so empty of all else.

But he makes A. P. to say, till a Man be perfectly separate from Sin, he is
altogether out of Reconciliation with God; but proves it not, nor indeed is
such Doctrine provable out of his Book.

Whereas he says, God's Commandments do not show Man's Power: If he mean the
Power that is given of God to Man, it is false; for that were to make God
unjust, and an Hard Master; for, where ever God commands, it follows, that he
has given Power to do; And where he is not obeyed, it is a Sign that that
Power is withstood, lost or taken away, and man harde^ed through Disobedience.
And without that Principle of Faith and Love, which only fulfills the Law, to
think that a Man may be justified by a mere Performance of outward
Observations, is as impossible and absurd, Gal. 3. 12
as if a man should think one should rather live by Virtue of outward Raiment
or Apparel, then by Breath and substantial Nourishment. God gave such a Measure
of his Spirit to the (...), tha^ if they had loved and followed it, and not
been stiff necked, they might have continued in the Obedience to all things
that were written in the Book of the Law to do them, (unless God commanded
Impossibi^ties) and in that Way that they were commanded them, Neh. 9. 10.
to (...), to separate them from the (...); And they, if they had been
thankful, and glorified God by their Obedience to what they kne^ of him, had
not been given up to a Reprobate Sen^e; Romans 1. 21.
and if they had followed the Goodne^s of God, leading to ^epentance from time
to time, and had not had an impenitent Heart, they had received according to
their Deeds, Glory, Honor and Peace: for if it be given to the good Gentile,
Romans 2. 5.
then surely to the good Jew. And if the Jews in Christ's Day had not brought
forth Wild Grapes, and been like their Forefathers, Isa. 5. 3, 4. and 6. 9,
10, 11, 12 Joh. 12. 31, 42. Mark. 12. 9, 10.
that rebelled against God's good Spirit (under Pretense of magnifying the
Scriptures, and contending for the Faith of their Fathers) they had not been
blinded like them, nor the Vineyard taken from them, nor theirs laid waste.

As for Phil. 3. 12. Not as though I had already attained, or were already
Perfect: Phil. 3. 12.
It proves not that Paul was not clear from Sinning, but that he had not yet
perfected or finished his Course, so as to have kept the Faith to the End, to
be out of Danger to miss of the Reward, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7.
as he was afterward, as appears plainly by the Comparison he uses, of a
Course. He does not say (as this man would have him) That some that were
Perfect were otherwise minded; But these that were Perfect had a perfect
Understanding of those things that were in Difference among them, of which he
speaks in that Chapter, Verse. 2.
about the Concifion, as he terms it diminutively, and Righteousness of the
Law, Verse. 9.
and Pre-eminence sought by it, without the Righteousness of Christ, which they
had perverted and slighted, See Zegerus and Grotius, and Erasmus on the place.
, being Dogs, making their B^lly their God, and minding Earthly Things, and
glorying in their Shame, being Evil Workers, of whom he bid them beware.

To his Sinning, Page 12.
through always needing more Grace: He that is capable of receiving more, and
refuses and resists it, sins; but to use his own Similitude, A Little One
(as Christ calls some of his) that has but a little Heart, yet if he give it
all to God, he can do no more, he sins not, but fulfills the Law.

The Hebrews were chid because they had not improved their time; Hebr. 5. Mat.
14. 31.
which if they had done, they had not sinned. Peter and the Rest of the
Apostles were in that manner of Speech taught and instructed of the Power and
Effica^y of Faith in its extent, which they should receive after they were
endued with Power from on high, See Grotius on the place. John 7. 31.
which they were commanded to wait for, that had they neglected, they had
sinned; and to expect it before the time (as for a Child to aspire to the
things of a man) is the part of much Heat and Confidence, and is good to be
discountenanced sometimes, 1 Cor. 14. 20.
though not always to be disliked. Not to be at present, what they are
exhorted to be for the future, to make that Transgression, is, to set
Transgression in order of time before the Law; whereas, where there is no Law
there is no Transgression; for Sin is the Transgression of the Law that is
known: To him that knows to do Good, and does it not, to him it is Sin; but
in the time of Ignorance God winkes.

The Corinthians were exhorted to be in understanding perfect as the Word (...)
signifies: Ignatius, Epist, to the Ephesians. says, He that possesses the
Word of Jesus, can truly hear also his SILENCE, that he may be PERFECT, p. 26.
To accuse them of Imperfection, and so of Sin, because then Children, and in
their Minority, (though born of God in John's sense) were to accuse not only
the Saints departed, but all the Angels of Sin, because they have not attained
to that Measure of Wisdom that God is, upon his Principle; for his Argument
implies as if there were no End of needing of Grace. I wonder he has forgotten
his School Distinction of a quo and ad quem; for men may be perfect from Sin,
and not perfectly grown up to the Wisdom and Knowledge of all the Weighty
Mysteries of the Gospel.

For his Notion of Sanctification and Purification, I say, Where the Conscience
is not defiled, it is purified; and men are sanctified or dedicated to God by
the Truth, and the Belief and Obedience of it, and there is no sinning; else,
how Temples and Tabernacles for God to dwell and be worshipped in?

For the Place he brings that men must sin because they are men, 1 Kings 8. 46.
Eccl. 7. 20.
he might better have given that Reason for the Devil's sinning, because he is
a Devil; for sinning is not man's State, as man, though in joining with the
Devil he may Sin, as the word (...) signifies, being potential; and so Pagninus
renders it by peccet; but he makes use of a bad Translation, his Holy Ghost, as
his words imply, to countenance his bad Conclusion, That because they may Sin,
therefore they must sin. See more in D. Gell's Essay to the Translation of the
Bible, p. 762, 768, 772.

Because David, page 13.
Psalm. 19. thought it a hard Matter for him, or those in his Condition at that
time, to understand their Errors from the Law of Moses, those Statutes and
Precepts, etc. which through Neglect they might be ignorant of, and therefore
there was a Sacrifice appointed for a Propitiation, and Prayers for Cleansing
from them, v. 12. And because the Psalmist, Psalm. 130. being in the Deep by
reason of Iniquity, prayed for Forgiveness, verse. 3, 4. And because the Apostle
James says, In many things we sin all, he concludes, that not only David, but
the Apostles to in their best Condition, even to their Death, did sin; and that
James was a Curser to his Death, because he said, with the Tongue curse we men,
taking Advantage of these Holy Men, to make them Offenders for their Words: But
what good Man will believe him? No wonder if he traduce the Quakers, and
pervert their words, when he is one of them that David speaks of, that wrests
his words, and imagines Evil of him. And for any thing we know (for we cannot
take his words without Quotation) he may as much wrong or wrest those Passages
out of Origin, Theophylact, Chrysostom, Ambrose, and the Protestant Writers,
that he says he has read, about (...), which is for Destruction it self; In my
Mind the De^il may more fitly be said to correct it: For if they that are Dead
have ceas^d from Sin, then the Damned shall not blaspheme God, or else their
Blasphemy is not Sin; which Protestant Writers say not, nor the Fathers ever
taught.

But Grotius a famous Portestant Writer interprets it thus, Grotius on the
place. 1 Pet. 4. 1. Zegerus on the place.
, That as the Dead return not (...) their former Life, so neither he that is
truly Dead to Sin, (...) his former Life again. And Zegerus, another says,
(...) is, being (...) from Sinning, so that he may not sin, unless he well. But
this man would have it, as if Paul meant, that Bodily Death took away the
Possibility of sinning, and Life the Possibility of not Sinning. However, he
acknowledges, that by the Death of the Body of Sin is meant, the Separation of
Sin from a man, Romans 6. 18
and being freed from Sin, and ceasing from sinning; yet says, that in Romans 6.
there is not a word to d^hort them not to suffer any Sin to be in them: But how
can a man let Sin be in him, and he not sin? For it is not a Sin to be tempted,
but to enter into the Temptation: He that ceases from sinning, ceases from Sin;
and whenever any yields to obey Sin, then he is the Servant of Sin: Can any
man commit a Sin, but he is captivated under the Power of it? And therefore in
that Condition Paul cried out, as a Distressed Captive, for Deliveran^^ from
the Body of Death, not from the Natural (...), for, before that was dissolved,
2 Timothy 4. 7. Erasmus and Grotius on Romans 7.
he said, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith; that is, He had
endured to the End, and arrive^ at Perfection. E^asmus says, It was in the
Person of (...), which the Apostle spoak in Romans 7. And Gretius on the some
place, will not have it Paul's Condition when he wrote the Epistle to the
Rom^ns. It is to be noted, says he, that Paul speaks in the first Person, not
that he deals concerning himself, but for Modesty's sake, he had rather so
express odious things, which he calls to transfer in a Figure, 1 Cor. 4. 6. so
in 1 Cor. 6. 12, 15. chap. 10. 29, 30. chap. 13. 2. Gal. 2. 18. Chrysostom ad 1
Cor. 12. says; He takes heavy things on his own Person. Hieron ad Daniel,
Because he is one of the People, he reckons their Sins in his own Person, which
also we read, the Apostle did in the Epistle to the Romans. But this man
interpreting it, the Death of the Body, instead of the Body of Death, first
gives a Reason, why Sin must be destroyed by the Death of the Body, namely,
because it entered by the Conjunction and Union of the Soul with the Body; but
that he proves not, and it were to disprove himself in page 8. For there he
says, page 8.
The Light is Reason, wherewith God has endued man's Soul, and is a Natural
Gift, that comes by Generation: How then, say I, is it conjoined and united to
it, if it be generated with it? for so it is one with it. Are there two
Generations, one of the Body, and another of the Soul; one with Sin, and
another without it; and the latter united to the former, that it may receive
Sin, and say, A Body have thou prepared me, O God, to do not thy Will on Earth,
as it is in Heaven, but the Will of the Devil, that at my first Entrance into
it, and during my Continuance in it, I may always do thy Enemy some Service,
who must have a place allowed him in it as long as it lives? Is not this
blasphemous and contrary to the Scripture, 1 Cor. 3. 17.
which says, He that defiles the Temple of God, him will God destroy.

I would fain know of S. G. how the Man of Sin got entrance to defile this
Temple, if it was not through the Mind, by entering that with his Temptation, of
becoming as God, knowing Good and Evil, which was sometime after that God had
breathed into Man the Breath of Life. If he says, it was, as inevitably he
must, then will it follow, that sin came not by Conjunction of Soul and Body,
as he teaches, but after that Conjunction; and so his Reason for Death's
destroying of Sin, which implies, the necessity of sinning til men dye, is
quite overturned. Besides, how can a House of Clay, a lifeless Lump of Earth,
be capable of Pollution any ways, but by him or them, that inhabit or enter
it, as becoming his or their Organ, Instrument or Habitation?

Again; S. G. to prove that Death destroys Sin, brings Romans 7. 24 as in the
common Translation, This Body of Death; whereas the Greek has it (...), who
shall deliver me from the Body of this Death, which considered with the
Context, shows it to be metaphorically and spiritually intended, Zegerus on Rom
7. 24. I. Capellus and Drusius on Romans 7. 24.
which agrees with Ambrose's Interpretation, produced by Zegerus on that place,
and which he approves (viz.) all Sins. J. Capellus says, It is the Mass of
Sin, not the Mass of the visible Body. And Drusius says some do understand it
turbam malorum, a Multitude of Evils. And as for Chrys^stom, The^doret and all
those Protestant Writers he has read (who knows who or where) you may either
believe him upon trust, or read all their Books, till you find his
Interpretation; for particular Citation he affords us not.

But he asks, how A. P. will prove that the Body of Sin is the same with the
Law of Sin? Grotius on Romans 7. 23, 24.
a thing easily done after his way of proving things; for Grotius says, That
the Law of the Members is the strong Affections of the Flesh, and the Law of
Sin the Vehe^nency of Affections arising from the Flesh, and the Body of Sin,
chapter 6. 6. A Conjunction of many Members, that is, Vices, Col. 3. 5. Ibid. on
Romans 6. 6.
And indeed, the Scripture mentioned shows that one and the same thing is
intended: And it is but reasonable for any to believe, that the Body of Sin
gives Law to them that are under the Power of it.

But S. G. from Gal. 5. 17. where it is translated, The Spirit lusts against
the Flesh, so that ye cannot do the thing ye wo^ld, seems thus to infer, that
therefore men must of Necessity fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh, and cannot do
otherwise: Whereas it should be translated, See D. Gell's Essay, sermon. 19. p.
775. page 15. Mat. 12. 26, 27, 28, 29. Luke 11.
so that ye may not do the things that ye would; which is thus interpreted by
D. G^ll, That the Spirit hinders them that they may not do the W^ll of the
Flesh.

But says S. G. Paul says not, Romans 6. 14. No Sin shall be in you, but Sin
shall not have Dominion over you. I answer, Nor does he say, that Sin should be
in them, and serve them: Where men sin, Sin has Dominion. But tell me, S. G.
Is not the strong Man to be cast forth, 1 John 3. 5, 6.
Sin taken away, and the Devil's Works destroyed?

Again, says S. G. Flesh is the Root of Evil Affections and Lusts. But if that
Doctrine be true, say I, then God in giving men Bodies of Flesh is the Author
of the Root of evil Affections and Lusts; consequently the Life of them is not
a Blessing, but a Curse.

Further, S. G. tells us, That the legal keeping of God's Commandments, is an
universal and perpetual keeping of them; but the Evangelical is not so, but an
Aim and Endeavor: Which if I understand any thing, is to make God in these New
Covenant Times, to indulge in man a slacking of Obedience to his Righteous Law.
At this rate Christ came not that we should fulfill the Law, but only that we
should endeavor it: Strange Gospel* Are men under a less Obligation to
Holiness, now they have more plentiful Assistences to compass it? Is this the
Way to finish Sin, restore Man's Nature, and cloth it with Everlasting
Righteousness? which is so far from deterring man from not observing God's Law
inviolably, that the teaches, that an Endeavor to keep it without exactly
keeping ^t, is the Privilege and Obedience of the Gospel.

Whether this man writes like a Gospel-Minister, or Servant of the God of this
World, let the Conscientious Reader judge. But he was not always of this Mind;
for in page 10. he seems to plead for the highest and most exact Obedience, not
only to the Law, as understood by the Jews in point of moral Righteousness, but
as Christ wound it up to a higher Degree of Righteousness. But let us hear what
Bp. Sanderson says, in this Matter, a Man venerable I suppose, in S. G.'s
Account.

The Precepts of Christ in the new Law, B. R. Sand de consc. reg. Prel 4. Sect.
34. ^is Oxf. le^^.
as the holy Fathers of the Church every where witness, are much more excellent
as to some Things, then the Precepts of Moses in the old Law; not only in
respect that they are propounded more fully, clearly and plainly; but also,
inasmuch as they rise higher, and call up Christians to a more eminent Degree
of Perfection, and that with more efficatious Allurements; namely on the one
Hand propounding the Example of Christ past; and on the other, the most ample
Reward of the Kingdom of Heaven for the future* As in those two great Duties of
Christian Life mostly appears, of loving Enemies, and taking up the Cross,
commanded in the new Law. And they are Commands univer^ally obligatory; to the
Ob^ervation whereof, all that profess the Faith and Name of Christ, are bound
under Crime of most grievous Sin (namely, of denying Christ) and Penalty of
Eternal Damnation, unless they repent. And he himself brings in P. Andrews
thus, That a Man moved by God's Spirit, out of Love to God, may be said to
fulfill the Law. So that here are two Bishops advancing Evangelica Obedience
above that of the Law, in point of Strictness and Purity, against t^ is Man's
libertine Undervaluue, and dangerous Dimin^^^n of it.

But this Adversary thinks he says a great deal against us* in telling People,
That it is an Error to think, that any can be s^ved partly by their own
Righteousness. And alas! whoever said it was not, that is rightly called a
Quaker? We know better; and that it is by Grace we are saved; yet so, as that
we must be thereby taught to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lasts, and to live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present World, which is not our own
Righteousness, but the Righteousness of God's Grace, Tit. 2. 11, 12. 2 Cor. 12.
9.
that is all sufficient for so great Salvation: And another Sort of Salvation,
then that which comes by and in the Way of this Grace, is a Satanical
Deluusion, suited to the corrupt Minds of Men, that would be saved from Wrath,
the Wages, but be indulged in Sin, the Work. However, it is plain by the Verses
foregoing, That the Law there spoken of, is the ceremonial Law, which not only
they, but other Churches in those times had and made some Scruple of
relinquishing, as may appear in his Epistles all along, wherein he dehorts them
from any such Observation, which they inclined to, even upon an Opinion of
Necessity; Ibid.. 29.
And which the said Bp. S. from Gal. 5. 2. observes, not only to be d^ad, but
d^adly, after Augustin's Distinction. But that Christians are held to the Law
moral, not as given by Moses; but as declarative of the Law Natural, which
before he had called Divine;. 31.
He, the said Bp. Sand. does with others agree, which as Bp. Andrews well
says, must be fulfilled with the Motion and Power of the Spirit of Christ, who
was sent, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, by
walking after the Spirit, whereas, Romans 8. 3. B. San. ibid.. 32. Joh. 15. 22.
the Flesh is weak, or a Man in his fleshly State being weakened, cannot
perform. Bp. Sanderson says further, The new Law, that is the Gospel, binds
all to whom it is preached to the Obedience, both of Faith and Life: To believe
in Christ as a Redeemer, and ebey him as Lawgiver, both which, unless they do,
for their Duty neglected they shall suffer Everlasting Punishment.

S. Grevil expounds 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God, he cannot sin, that
is, He cannot make a Trade of it, from J. Leigh.

Answ. H. Grotius, a Man, worthily of greater Authority, calls that a
pernicious Exposition, whereby, says he, they infer, that a Study and
Endeavor to live well suffices for one to be accounted a Son of God, although
the Things be not fulfilled, the Custom of Sin prevailing; Grotius on 1 John
19. A direct Knock to S. G
and he brings Tertullian in his Book, De Pud^citia, saying thus of Sin and
Sinners, He that is born of God, will not at all commit these, and shall not be
a Son of God if he shall commit them: Mat. 7. 18.
So a good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit; but it may become barren,
rotten, vicious, and after it is so degenerated, it may be cut down; also an
evil Tree may become good, and then consequently no more an evil Tree. And
likewise Chrysostom on Romans 8. has the same Comparison. And Jerome Didymus's
Disciple, l. 1. adv. Pel. says, He that is born of God sins not as long as the
Seed of God abides in him, viz. lively. And on Math. 7. A Good Tree cannot
bring forth Evil Fruit, as long as it perseveres in the Study of Goodness.

But, S. Grevil says, He hopes Parker will not say, God gives his People the
Enjoyment of Heaven in this Life.

I answer, Bish. Hall says it, and entituleth his Book, Heaven upon Earth,
acknowledging the same in Nature, though not in Degree: How ignorant is this
Man of Scripture, or forgetful? Does not Paul in the Epistle to the Hebrews
(supposing he wrote it) speak of some that may have tasted of the Powers of the
World to come, Heb. 6. 5.
and may fall from that Taste?

But what means he by his always needing more and more Grace? If a Man be
filled, he needs no more. And a Man needs no more in this State, then what he
is capable of in this State. And for his part, it seems he needs no more; for
he has more then he uses, though there is great need he should make more use
of what he has* S. Grevil scoffingly comparing the Quakers Speakers with Paul,
says, If they could give that which they think is the Spirit, they would make
more Quakers; as much as to say, if Paul could have given the Spirit, more of
his Hearers should have had the Spirit; and consequently, he was not a Minister
of the Spirit in that Sense; as if it had been Paul's Fault: But was not the
holy Ghost given by Paul's Hands? 2 Timothy 1. 6.
Acts 19. When he had laid his Hands upon them, the holy Ghost came upon them,
and they speak with Tongues and prophesied, What Gift was that Timothy received
by the laving on of his Hands, called, the Gift of God? It plainly appears,
that God by the Ministry of Paul did give the Spirit to several; Gal. 3. 5.
and was he not at that time a Minister of the Spirit? Was not he that
ministered the Spirit to the Galatians, a Minister of the Spirit himself? It
must follow undeniably: many Thousands were by his Ministry turned from
Darkness to Light and from the Power of Satan to the Power of God, to walk in
the Spir^t with God. And for all S. G's unworthy Taunts; whether those that are
now called forth, as they were, not by Men, nor of Men, to wit, the Quakers
Speakers, as he is pleased to call them; or those that are made, called and
upheld by Men, to minister the Letter, Writings or Declaration of the Gospel,
after their own Imaginations, as S. Grevil and his Fraternity (not unlike the
false Prophets of old time) which he calls, but falsely, the Doctrine whereby
the Spirit is conveyed) do awaken more Consciences, and turn more to walk in
the Spirit, to bring forth the holy Fruits of the Spirit: Let the Fruits that
are brought forth in the World under both their Ministries, speak.

To prove that the Scripture or Writing is the Gospel; He says, The Scripture
preached the Gospel to Abraham; therein producing a Place against himself; for
it plainly proves the Scripture is not the Gospel, since the Gospel was
preached to Abraham by God, before it was recorded or wratten by Moses: That we
choose to call the Gospel, which the Scripture declares of, that is, The Good
Will of God to Men, by his Mercy, Power and Goodness manifested to them; and
that may be resisted, as well in an inward Manifestation, as outward
Declaration; for Stephen said to the Jews, You have always resisted the Holy
Ghost, Acts 7.
as your Fathers did, etc. Jonas also disobeyed the immediate Call of God.

And whereas he says, John Baptist preached the Gospel: That is also clearly
against himself; for that was before the four Books, which he maintains to be
the Gospel, were written.

The Gospel is called a Mystery, Ephesians. 6. 19. Chap. 3. 3, 16. Col. 1. 26. 1 Timothy 1. 11.
hid from Ages and Generations, and is still hid from all the Rebellious and
Disobedient, who walk not after the Spirit, but their own Lusts: But so are not
those four Books, so called; neither are they the glorious Gospel, but that
which they declare of.

None of those Fathers he speaks of, I dare say, if he quoted the Places, would
be found to countenance his Definition; for he confesses, they say, It forgives
and justifies, which the four Books do not; they only declare such Things to
Believers. If Matthew and John, and Paul and Peter were not the Gospel, because
they were Powerful Instruments to declare it; no more are their Books and
Writings: They were not the glad Tidings, but the Bringers and Publishers of
it; their Books are no more, if so much, not being viva voce, as they say; the
like Power not usually accompanying the mere or dead Letter, Epist. ad
Philadel. p. 44.
as the living Voice.

Where did ever any hear or read, that the Reading of Peter's Sermon converted
3000. at one time? Ignatius says, The Gospel is (...), the Perfection of
Incorruption; Paper and Ink are not so. Orig. Comment. n^ Joh. page 9. Clem.
Alex. Pedagog. l. 1. p. 111.
And says Origin, John calls the Gospel Everlasting, which may be properly
called Spiritual, that the Books are not, though they hold out Spiritual
Things. Clemens Alexandrinus says, The Angel, Exodus 32. held forth the
Evangelical and leading Power of the Word: That Evangelical Power was not then
of the Books, but of the Word, which was and is God blessed forever. Chrysostom
plainly says, they are not the Gospel. R. Allen on the Gospel says, R. Allen
on the Gos. p. 1.
It is a Divine Message from God himself, that teaches and assures, etc. How
can it be Divine and work Assurance, if it be not a Spiritual and inward Work
which the Books are not, nor of themselves can work. Peter Martyr says, It is
such a Doctrine as effereth Christ unto us, and his Spirit and Grace, P. Martyr
Comm^ Places. p. 3. c. 2.
whereby is ministered Strength unto us to perform those things that are
command^d, which the Books of themselves still cannot do, though they declare
of that which can: Not that we would lessen them, as our ungodly Wresting
Adversaries say; or that we would take off People from reading them; but if
they of themselves could do, or had that Power which belongs to the everlasting
Gospel, how comes it that so many Studiers of them receive no clearer Knowledge
and living Sense of God, Christ, the holy Spirit, Scriptures, etc? We do teach,
That to read them with a good Understanding, Men must come to that which g^ves
it, which is the Inspiration of the Almighty, Job 32. 8.

But it is worth our while to consider what Work he makes of A. P's saying,
That the Gospel is the Power of God to Salvation; an absolute plain Scripture,
as any in the Bible. A. P. does not deny that the Gospel was before all Time,
consequently that it is the Essence of God, and he is a Disciple of the
Heretic Swingfield. Did ever Man pretending to Sense or Seriousness, make such
wild, foreign and lame Conclusions? These are, it seems, to serve for
Bugbears, to scare the People: He might have as well said, The Quakers believe
the Life Everlasting, and conclude, Therefore they make it the Essence of God;
which as reasonably proclaims the Church of England a Company of Heretics;
nay, all the World that believe that Article, as he can brand A. P. for one,
because he said, The Gospel is the Power of G^d, and Everlasting, which the
Scripture calls it.

In these things he truly partakes with the F^lse Brethren he speaks of,
mentioned Act. 15. 24. who did not only teach and establish against the
abolishing Power of the Gospel, transient Observations, but their own vain
Trad^tions for Doctrines, Mat. 23 23, Luke 11* 4.
glorying in them, as did the Jews, crying, The Temple, The Ord^nances, while
they neglect the weightier Things, and make void the Commandment of God and
Christ, the Old Commandment and the New Commandment, 1 John 2. 7, 8. Psalm m 19.
9. 1 Cor. 13. 8.
the same that was from the beginning, the First and the Last, even that which
^ndures forever.

Methinks these Hireling Ministers are like some Mercenary Soldiers, or
Soldiers of Fortune, as they are called, that cannot bear to think of the
Enemy's being totally routed, lest their War end, and their Pay with it: Such
Persons, instead of pursuing the Enemy, turn about against their valiant and
faithful Followers, that cry, They run, They run, we shall utterly rout and
subvert them: No! rather then highten and pursue that Resolution, they will
basely betray the Cause, and its most sincere Abettors, into the Arms of the
public Enemy: They make no Scruple of doing this Evil, not that Good, but Gain
may come of it: They had rather the Devil were unsubdued, then they disbanded,
that his being unconquered might be a Pretense for keeping such Mercenaries
always on foot; who are therefore the greatest Enemies of Christ's Kingdom in
the Hearts of his Children.

These are they that will flee, because they are Hirelings, and care not for
the Flock, John 10. And it so falls out, that now we have not only the old
Adversaries, but these also betwixt them and us, who instead of going on
against them, first turn themselves manifestly against us, and endeavor what
they can to obstruct our March: But the Lord God Jehovah is sufficient, our
Pillar of Cloud by Day, and Fire by Night; he goes before us; Power and Might
and Majesty are with him, whose Holy Pure and Clear Voice we have certainly
heard, and in whose Blessed Appearance we have firmly believed; and it is so
well with us, who retain our first Love to him and his precious Truth in the
inward parts, that we can sing for Joy, though in a weary Land, and in the
midst of many Distresses. And this we know assuredly, That he will shake
terribly the Nations, and bring Amazement upon the People; Their Consciences
will he suddenly awaken, and with terrible Judgment will he plead with all the
Proud Professing, as well as Profane Flesh in this Land; it shall wither as
the Grass, and the Beauty of it fade as the Flower of the Field: And in that
Day shall Obedience to, and Communion with the Light of Christ within, be
honorable and desirable in the sight of Thousands; and the Truth shall have
the Victory, and the Dominion shall not be any longer the Devil's, but the
Saints of the Most High, over Hell, Death and the Grave; the Ancient of Days
will bring it to pass: Then shall Babylon fall, and her Merchants howl; for the
great Judgment will surprise them, as Travil a Woman with Child, and the Lord
God will reckon with them for the Souls of his People. O fear before the Lord,
ye Priests! and turn you unto him all ye Children of Men.

W. P.

Page 3. l. 27. f. former r. Form. Page 4. l. 36. r whom I dare.


