Truth Rescued FROM IMPOSTURE. OR A Brief REPLY to a mere Rapsodie of Lies,
Folly, and Slander; But a pretended Answer to the Trial of W. Penn, and W. Mead
etc. writ and subscribed S.S.

By a professed Enemy to Oppression. W.P.

A Fools Lips enter into Contention, and his Mouth calls for Strokes,

Prove. 18.6. A Whip for the Horse, a Bridle for the Ass, and a Rod for the
Fools Back,

Prove. 26.3. Printed in the Year, 1670.

To the READER.
I Take him to be an unhapy man, that knows not an Enemy upon Earth; and
therefore judge my self not a little happy to be so ill reputed by S.S. that of
all men, I have reason to believe one of the most infamous. Yet, that I may be
just to him, as well as to my self, I do beseech the Reader, first to peruse
his Fardle of Impostures, and Abuse, before thou read'st me; lest thou should
think I have wronged him in citation: So scurrilous, so false, and withal so
ridiculous is, he in his whole conceited Enterprise, that but a little charity
would make one think, that no man could be so great an Enemy to Truth, and to
Himself.

Surely, his Fondness of being in Print, wholly blinded his discretion, or else
methinks he would have stopt't, to give so great an evidence of his Folly.

One would have thought it Impudence enough, to act such Tyranny without an
Appology to defend it. But as that is an aggravation of his Gilt; so let the man
remember, that Litera scripta manet.

I know it well become his Front, and every part thereof bears exactly his
resemblance.

It Is pity but all the Peoples Enemies should give as wise grounds of their
abuse, of them, and their Laws, as this Man has done.

I am concerned in a double sense: First, in defense of my Conscience, and
therein, the Liberties of my Country. And next, of the Reputation of my
deceased Father, by him injured, beyond the instance of a Presedent, or
allowance of an Excuse.

Being then, thus boysterously attaqu'd in my Religious, Civil and Natural
Capacity, let not any wonder, that I imply the force of all to my just defense;
And if I have so much credit with the Reader, believe me, I will (without the
least Scruple) give him his complete weight and measure: for I desire not to
hold my Life or Liberty, on better terms, then whilst I am bold to justify
the Truth at any Cost, against the false and peevish Essays of her Adversaries:

Truth Rescued from Imposture, etc.
Part I.
I Have to do with one, who dares to profess himself a Patriot and that of so
great importance to his Country, Page 1.
as on his happy Cry of ( Miles noli regem ferire) the Safety of King and
Kingdom have their sole dependence.

But, as I am persuaded, that piece of Arrogance was unexpected by most, and
his inability too notorious, to admit any the least jealousy of such an
Enterprise; so has he given the greatest Stroke imaginable to himself, and
those he would seem to vindicate, in offering at the poor Quakers, for whom his
weakness makes sufficient Appollogy; and amongst them, I am not the least, that
ought to account my self indebted.

The second discovery of himself, is not less Incharitable, then the first was
Proud and Impudent.

He does not only take occasion to fall most foolishly upon our Trial, but as
unwarrantably believes 'twas I that writ it; Page 1.
but should I grant him so much Faith ( for I believe him to have little) I
shall appeal to all impartial men, If a bare Conjecture (and more he proves
not) be ground sufficient for him to vent so many rank Reflections, and that
not only upon my self, but my deceased Father: It either argues he had better
Intellegence, in the following Pages, or that his desire I should be Author of
it, had changed his Faith into a fancied Certainty, which gives sufficient
testimony of his Prejudice.

And as if he doubted there might have been another William Penn, that might be
an whole Quaker, he is pleased to distinguish me from him, with this diminitive
Expression, of William Penn the half Quaker, thereby intimating how much worse
he supposes half Quakers to be, then whole Ones; for none can think he said so
out of Kindness to me, when his Discourse not only singles me out for all
Abuse; but as not contented with that, disturbs my Fathers Grave with his
forged Aspersions, and then places them to my Account.

But whilst I think not my self a little injured by his scurrilous Epethite
(believing he meant, I was not a sincere, but interested and turbulent One) I
heartily rejoice, that out of his own Mouth he has justified my Friends, by
preferring an entire Quaker, before all half, or mungril Ones; yet if an half
one be so fatal, and heavy on the Shoulders of Oppressors, that they do scarce
dare to own their own Appologies, how dreadful must an whole One bereversed; He
says in this Expression, so much for us, that he scarcely needs more against
himself.

But because he believes I writ it, therefore he can give it no other Name (to
use his own words) but the Second Part to his Blasphemous Treatise, Page 1.
called the Sandy Foundation shaken: O egregious Nonsense! This ridiculous Non
sequitur, either shows him, to have been a man of a very stegmatick head, or
else that he has ill bestowed his time, who can write no better sense yet; for,
that these two Subjects are in the nature of them very different, is manifest*
But perhaps he thinks it no small piece of Blasphemy, to tell the World of the
late irregular Proceedings at the Old Bailey: Nor does he less wound his own
Cause by acknowledging the Book entitled, The Peoples Ancient and Just
Liberties Asserted, (which designs to detect, on what Foundation the Mayor,
Recorder, etc. did proceed) to be the second part to the Sandy One, manifestly
implying theirs to be such.

His sense of my Faith, or rather Disbelief of the Trinity is a wretched
Mistake, not to say a voluntary one; for I never quarrelled the word Trinity,
it being borrowed of the Latin word Trinus, in English Three, but always did,
and do believe the same.

But why should I insist upon a Point so abstruse; and that, to a man, so
unintelligent in more minute matters, as that he has not yet learnt a
distinction betwixt Discourses of Civil Liberty, and Divine Faith, but
ignorantly makes the one, to be a necessary Consequence, from the ( Supposed)
Mistake in the other.

I might here overlook his abusive Reflections upon me, as Author of the
Trial, etc. (which he urges with no small Zeal) by unconcerning my self in the
matter: But I confess to owe so much of Real Kindness to the Author, and many
parts of the Discourse, that I shall gladly embrace the occasion of making his
Defense.

The Man resolving I must be the Author, sets me up as such, and then fights
me, or rather pelts Dirt at me: He says that, Penn does not blush to Vilify
the Kings Court, Page 1.
and falsely Reproach the Kings Justices, and revile all Methods of Law, calling
Indictments detestable Juggles; and his, a Romance Indictment; and W. Mead,
his, a Bundle of Stuff: Page 2.


Penn designing, in a popular way, to subject the Laws, making the Jury Judges
both of Law and Fact.

If I had blushed, it must either have been from mine own Guilt, or by way of
reflection from the Bench; but as I was wholly innocent of that Crime, which
could have made me conscious; so was there not Modesty enough, amongst some of
the Bench to blush at their Irregularities.

I detest that Aspersion, of vilifying Law, or reproaching the Kings Justices;
since the greatest Crime some observed against me, whilst at the Bar, was my
frequent Demands of Right, by those very Fundamental Laws, I am charged to have
contemned.

These are but mere Phrases of Abuse, ready at every man's hand, for his
interest,

Indictments I Esteem not Juggles: nor do I believe the Author intended so, but
that way of crouding most unnecessary and untrue Allegations, under the
pretense of Form of Law, contrary to all Reason, is no less: This is explained
by him, and his own sense fully vindicated.

He therefore understood what he said, when he compared the falsity of our
Indictment, to that of a Romance, which however methodical, yet is but mere
Fancy still. For those things being absent that render an Indictment true, it
will follow that such an Indictment, is altogether incongruous ^^d
inapplicable. It is an hard Case that men should so Nickname things, as to call
an honest Confidence, Impudence; and my asserting of the Supremacy of
Fundamental Laws, against their new Inchr^achments, a subverting of them.

I Rejoice to think, that many were there present, whose relation of that
Transaction, has done me the justice of a vindication, and given our Trial the
Credit; which it is utterly impossible for the endeavors of S.S. and his
malicious Cabal, ever to diminish or traduce.

He makes it a Capital Crime to assert the Jury, Judges of Law and Fact, but
poorly shifts off those Arguments aptly used by the Author of the Trial, in
def^nce of his position: for farther satisfaction I referr the Reader to the
Fourth Part of this Discourse.

He says I was commanded to the Bale-Dock for Turbulency and Impertinency: I
confess, if I had been as Guilty as I was innocent, of being so offensive, they
had been very incompetent Judges, whose own passion rendered them so much what
they say of me, that many Spectators questioned, If the^ were themselves.

They that read the Trial may quickly inform themselves of my kind of
Impertenency, and with the same trouble, of their Billingsgate Rhetoric, in
Phrases so scurrilous, that never did Men subject themselves, to a more
deserved Censure of want of common Civility, then at our Trial.

But the man breaks forth into an extatical Caution, to those of the Long Robe,
Page 2.
lest we should assassinate their Persons, at least besiege and rifle their
Westminster Hall: His words are these, Now Gentlemen of the Long Robe, look to
your selves, and your Westminster Hall. And why? Because that Juries are
affirmed to be Judges of Law and Fact; as if that were an overthrow to the Law,
that the most learned and honest of the Robe made an hearty Profession of, in
the sense urged.

But I appeal to those of the Long Robe, (as he styles them) whether such
Arbitrary Proceedings, as overruling all Pleas, Verdicts, Prisoners, and
Juries, at the rate of the Old Bailey, 1st, 3d, 4th, 5th of September, 1670.
with their severe Rebukes and harsh Menaces, be not more apparently
destructive, of the Fundamental Laws, in the free course of them, and practice
of Lawyers* then the Authors Assertion, in his Discourse of the Peoples Ancient
and Just Liberties, etc.

He urges this Caution to the Lawyers, with no small pretense to Reason and
Rhetoric; For says he, If that these learned Reformers of Religion, shall
likewise reform your Laws and Methods of Proceedings (as doubtless they design
it) farewell then to your great Acquisitions, etc.

But I must tell him, that as he is an incompetent Judge of Religion, that
practices so little of any, so I publish a plain Challenge to him, and the old
Man within the Curtain (the Oracle of his Law Gibberish) to produce an avowed
Instance, by any Lawyer, of the Irregularies and Arbitrary Actions, they vainly
attempt to defend.

And whether our well*meant Plea, for English Privilege, be most destructive
of great Acquisitions, or their unhinging the well hung Laws of England, to
turn all Trials upon the sole pin of Will and Power, let the very Lawyer judge.

I affirm, such give the justest ground of bidding farewell, to all great
Acquisitions, that are so ready to welcome INQVISITIONS.

^e ventures to urge the Great Charter, and to give an Exposition, as
ridiculous, as the other is fictitious; his kindness for the Law, being to kill
it, in palliating his real fear, and abhorrence of all good Laws, with his
pretended respect for them.

But of this I will say little, leaving it to an whole part by it self; and
proceed to consider the rest of his Wild Reflections.

His comparison of us to John of Leyden, is ignorant and malicious. Ignorant,
because he seems to know no better our Principles, that utterly abhor to
promote Religion by Blood. Malicious, because he slanders us, without the least
desert; and seems not so much to heed the Truth, as odium of his Comparison:
And but that it is a vulgar Trick, to put the Woolfs Skin upon the Sheep, and
the Sheeps Skin upon the Woolf, I should enlarge upon his ugly Epithites.

Part II. S.S. his Answer to the pretended Calumnies of the TRIAL Considered.
HAving given my self a loose shake of the Calumnies of his first Section
(saving that part which concerns the power of Juries, to be considered by it
self) I shall descend to examine his second, if possibly I may find more of
Truth, Sense, and Civility.

He pret^nds to so much Scripture (and which is worse, applies it to his own
shame) as to front his second Section with the 9th and 10th Verses of the
Epistle of Jude.

Ver. 9. Yet Michael, the Archangel, when contending with the Devil, he
disputed about the Body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing
Accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee.

Ver. 10. But these speak evil of those things which they know not.

Upon this Text he preaches thus. page 4.

These People called Quakers (if they are to be believed) will tell, they have
this Angellical Spirit, the Meekness of Moses, the Patience of Job, and all
other Graces; but the contrary appears, fol. 57. of W. Penns Book, vide this
Passage.

But above all, Dissenters had little reason to have expected that boarish^
sierceness from the Mayor of London, when they consider h^s eager prosecution
of the Kings Party under Cromwels Government; as-thinking he could never give
too great a Testimony of his Loyalty, to that new* Instrument, which makes the
old Saying true, viz. That one Renegado is worse then three Turks.

To which I answer, not as W.P. but as one they call a Quaker.

His application of the first Scripture will be this.

If Michael did not bring a railing Accusation against the Devil -- then the
Author of the Trial should not have brought one against him.

It is so plain what he has said of him, that we need not further blacken him.

But this latter part, he grossly mis-understands, and mis-applies; for it is
denied, that any part of this Scripture affords one just Reproof, of that so
much abused Author.

We know how frequently the Devil himself has taken to the Scriptures for a
Refuge* and after this man's strange construction, it will be railing to tell a
man his Faults: And truly, when I seriously consider, how gross and numerous
his are, as by his very Book appears, methinks he was hard put to it for a
Covert.

A railing Accusation, is a false, as well as wrathful one, which he proves,
page 5. therefore a true, though sharp reproof is none.

I know it is the humor of such, who would live unrebukt, to render it more
criminal to reprehend, then to commit a Fault; that they may save their heads
from the knock of just censure.

But who the Railer was, we shall take leave to mention in its place: However,
what has this to do with W.P.

The second Verse we are equally unconcerned in. Could he have found a Text
that says, But these speak well of those things they know not; he might have
more approacht the matter by excluding our science in the Law, in owning our
great Good Will unto it. Of the latter, our Trial, as by him represented, is a
demonstration; but I could wish he were no worse, then those concerned in that
Scripture, which was, to speak evil of things they know not: For I am
persuaded, he spoke malignantly evil of things he knew did not deserve it.

We do not only tell the World, the tendency of our Doctrine is to incline
mankind to Meekness, and Patience, etc. but we bless the God of Heaven and
Earth, many ten thousands do believe the same; and that on better Evidence,
then hearsay, or bare report.

But whether S.S. or his Juncto, can with any tolerable show of modesty
condemn the Quakers, as destitute of Meekness and Patience, who have so much
wanted both, as they (Instrumentally) have given the clearest evidence of the
contrary, by their inhumane Persecutions, as well as we have done it, by
Suffering the same, I am sure will be the Question.

He begins his Appology thus. An high Charge against Sr. Samuel Starling, Page
5.
then Lord Mayor, (if true) Cujus contrarium verum; and therefore a railing
Accusation; and that Light (which is as they say) within them (by which they
are acted, and speak as they pretend) is the spirit of the Devil, the Father of
Lies.

These words both deny, and give a Charge, but with how much Truth and Reason I
shall examine, and begin with the latter.

I take this Expression to be the most venomous of all his Libel, and seems to
come hot from a Blaspheming Gnashing Spirit, through a vexed Consciousness of
Guilt.

The Light we profess to be guided by, is so far from being the spirit of the
Devil, the Father of Lies; that its of God, the Father of Truth.

Here may be read the Text, inserted in the Period of his Title Page, For he
speaks evil of Divine Dignities, who speaks against the Light; for God is Light.

And he that says he has Fellowship with God, and walks not in the Light, he
lies, and deceives himself.

And if this scurrilous Libeller had ever known what it was to obey this holy
Light, he would have forborne so impudent an Assertion: But it is an evident sign
of a feared Conscience as well as great ignorance, to publish to the World,
that Light is the spirit of the Devil, and not of God.

How many times do the Scriptures commemorate God and Christ by this Epethite?
Christ was promised by that very Name, I will give him for a Light, to lighten
the Gentiles. And John said of him, That he was the true Light, that
enlightneth every man. And Christ gives this Testimony of himself, I am the
Light of the World. Also the Apostle Paul, What ever is reproved, is made
manifest by the Light, And John thus, God is Light, etc. If you walk in the
Light, as Christ is Light, etc. And in the Revelations, The Lamb shall be thy
Light, etc. And of God its said, He dwells in Light God is Light, and in him is
no Darkness at all, etc. But in this man there is the very blackness of
Darkness, who calls Light Darkness, and Darkness Light, Evil Good, and Good
Evil.

Next I cannot chose but observe, how abruptly he falls from the matter of his
Chapter, to blaspheme our holy Light. A high Charge, the contrary whereof is
true: And that Light, which is in them, is the spirit of the Devil. Behold the
Confusion and Incharity of the man; nay, a rude pulling upon his own head the
Vengeance of the God of Light.

Did he, or any else, ever hear us pretend to own another Light, then in the
Phrases, and from the Scriptures before mentioned? I am assured they did not:
And though I deny his Imputation, yet what if I, or any Quaker on Earth, or all
of them, had acted injuriously to him, or any man; must that blessed Light, we
say is given of God (and more then pretend we are guided by) be villified for
our Failings?

Nor is it less then wretched Blasphemy, for any to say, That because S.S. is a
most horrible Imposter, therefore the Grace, or Light which God has given him,
is the Spirit of the Devil.

But this proves to me his Impiety beyond all other Demonstrations; for
nothing's more common, then where men with wilful obstienacy, have lived a
rebellious and wicked life against Gods Light and Spirit in their Consciences,
there to spurn with gnashing Teeth, and scalded Tongues, in blasphemous
Expressions against God, and his Tabernable, and those that dwell in Heaven.

But besides, his very words carry such Weakness and Confusion with them, that
I will easily from thence infer, a Vindication of our Light and Friends.

And that Light which is (as they say) then he does not say it, which implies,
that he thinks (we lie, at least are mistaken) within them (by which they are
acted and speak, as they pretend) which supposes that he believes we are not
really so acted, nor do we speak by it, only that we make it our pretense) is
the spirit of the Devil, the Father of Lies. If I understand him, or his words,
this is the genuine and true construction of them.

That Light, that is in them, is the spirit of the Devil the Father of Lies;
yet I wont say it; and I believe its but their pretense to say they act or
speak by it.

If this been't the very sense of the words, none can be; and if this sense
does not vindicate our Light in his own Thoughts, from being Diabolical, and Us
from being led by such a lying spirit, let the understanding Reader judge.

In short, this I must and will say, by the knowledge of that Light, and for
it, That as it gives man the true Discerning, Weight, and measure of Spiritual
things, with their differences; so can no man have access to God, in any Duty
or Action of his life, nor feel true Peace with him, or the cleansing benefit
of the Blood of Jesus Christ (who is God over all blessed for evermore) but as
he comes to be directed and guided by it to keep the Commands of God, and
himself unspotted from the World. But trouble and remorse of spirit ever was,
and ever will be the Portion of such as rebel against it. In him was Life, and
his Life the Light of men; If ye walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, ye
shall have fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus shall cleanse
you from all Sin.

More might be said of this Particular, but I am persuaded, here is enough to
satisfy the Consciences of all unbyast Readers.

The former part relating to his denial of the Charge of Disloyalty and
Temporizing, against him they call Sr. S. Starling; I shall so far take into my
consideration, in defense of the aspersed Author of the Trial, as to tell this
Parisite Libeller only what the World says of him, and particularly the City of
London; which if not true, its both little to the purpose, and he is the more
belyed; but first we will hear the Defense.

I think it necessary (says this Apologist) in his Vindication, to desire the
Courteous Reader, to enquire of Sr. Ed. Deering, Dr. Whitcock, Mr. Christopher
Flower, and Francis Pemberton, Esquires of the Middle Temple; who can bear
witness of his Loyalty at Cambridge, in the years 1643, 1644, 1645.

And in the years 46, 47, 48, 49. he applied himself to the study of the Laws,
and could not be admitted to the Bar, because he utterly refused to subscribe
the cursed Engagement: Witness Cornelius Hooker Esquire, Nicho. Jacob Esquire,
both Barristers of Greys-Inn, and his Contemporaries.

We want the Consequence. What? Was he therefore no Temporizer? Nothing less.
Not that the reputation of the Persons named must therefore be impeacht, or
lessened.

But some are ready to ask, why S.S. should think it fit to name so many
Persons, in his Defense, and yet omit to insert a Certificate from any one of
them: Their Testimonies are at best but in Embrio (Unborn to us;) nor is it
possible they should be Witnesses of all the Actions of his Life. But granting
what is said, to be true: Was he accused of Temporizing when a Boy at
Cambridge? Although methinks it is indiscreetly urged, that we should ask of Dr.
Whitoock if he were not compelled to leave the University, ( Loyalty being out
of fashion,) who remained a Master of a College there. I do not mention it to
spot that Doctor; for I know none of that Coat of a more universal Temper, and
worthy of being esteemed learned; but to detect this ridiculous Sribler of
Inadvertency.

I must confess, the first he refers to, I have an experienced knowledge of,
and to whom I esteem my self oblieg'd by many high Instances of Kindness; which
not so much, as his own evenness of Temper, would make me entertain more
favorable Thoughts; but as he is cited to determine a Case, not timed to the
charge, so is he wholly silent in the matter: And though his Name, with me,
gives the most of reputation, to his whole Paragraph; yet, Quod non Lego, non
Credo.

Nor is the Instance of being at Gray's Inn esteemed material to the purpose, it
being of later times, to which the Reflection quarrelled with, has no relation,
and therefore overlookt as frivolous to this Occasion, though some say, they
talk as if there were no such matter.

But he hopes, to supply this defect, with this general and dubious Addition.

From 1650. until his Majesty's Restoration, he was a Trader in the City; and
how he demeaned himself in those Crumwellian times, all that knew him will
witness he walked Antipodes to the genious of that Age, to the endangering of
his Life and Estate. page 6.

Answ. That this is a general reference, is manifest, and of whom to enquire he
does not tell us: Would he have us send to enquire who knew him then, in order
to know what he was then; some think it might have been as cheap for S.S. to
particularize one in those ten years time of Loyalty, which was to the Purpose,
who Instanced so many before to no purpose: This leaves* a stronger Jealousy
then before, but with none less then the Quakers, because none are less
concerned in the matter.

But that he was this invincible Royalist, he gives us this Instance.

His Majesty being by Gods Providence restored, he was esteemed for his
Loyalty, a fit person to be of the Jury, upon the Kings Judges, and passed a
Juror upon no less then Eighteen of those Assassinating Traitors.

But how unwise, if not disloyal, this expression is, some think it may concern
the King, at least his Justices to consider: as if that those Persons had not
been condemned by indifferent men, swayed by the only force and sense of Law;
But such, as were therefore esteemed fit to be of the Jury, because aversly
principled in point of Judgment and Affection, I boldly affirm it a reflection
so indiscreet and malignant that it deserves a check severer, then any
Expression in the Discourse, entitled, The Peoples ancient and just Liberties
Asserted; and that not more from the Kings Justices, then the Person he would
be thought to vindicate.

After all that he has said, the Apologist thinks it needless further to
vindicate his Loyalty, since never questioned by any, but those skeptical
Quakers, whose business is to asperse our Religion, Laws, and all men, that are
not of their cursed Principles.

Therefore he makes this offer; that if W.P. can make out that the^ late Lord
Mayor, ever wronged any of the Kings Friends, either in Body, Goods, or good
name one penny, that he shall restore to the Gentleman, whosoever he be, a
thousand pounds, for every penny worth of wrong.

But as I do assure this Libeller, that some of eminent Rank, and no Quakers
(as he is pleased to term them) were the first that took occasion to speak of
that Persons temporizing; and therefore questioned by others; so is it an
Aspertion wickedly groundless, that we defame Laws, Religion, and all men, that
are not of our Principles, since we have ever been on the suffering hand; and
still proclaim it as one of our fundamental Points of Doctrine, to live
peaceably and inoffensively, which we have not only done (notwithstanding all
provocations) but resolve, in Gods strength, to continue the same passive
People we have ever been.

Besides, I would fain know, why above others this offer should be made to
William Penn; perhaps the Author of the Libel, thought him so great a Child, as
to be ensnared into such reflections, as would subject him to the Lash of his
Sr Samuel, for a Defamer; but as I have learnt more prudence, so indeed more
Religion.

I abhor to use Scurrility instead of Reason, and so should this Libeller, of
supplying the defects of his Cause by Railing.

Were I a man as bitter, as S.S. shows himself choleric; and but as apt to
revenge, as he is to wrong, I might take this occasion to write the Stories of
the times, concerning his Patron; But since I hear he denies it any Patronage;
and that I know that these things are no ways profitable to the Reader, but
mere incentives to prejudice; I heartily forgive all, having otherwise learnt
Christ; and think it as well unmanly, as it is unchristan, to place the
miscariages of any man, to the account of his Cause. For though a good
Principle may be professed by a bad man; yet is it impossible that a bad man
should make that good Principle bad; and therefore its clear of any just
suffering by his miscarriages. Nor is there any such indigency in the Case; for
the Cause defended by S.S. is in it self so weak (not to say wicked) as we need
not take Sanctuary to personal miscarriages, the matter being too fruitfall of
them.

His base Reflections on my Father, shall be considered by themselves, and
therefore I omit to answer them, as placed by him. But shall proceed to examine
the remainder of his Section.

He charges the Author of our Trial of false Accusation, against Alderm.
Bludworth, that he moved at the Sessions to have a Witness against Harrison the
Friar, and Firer, sent to Bridewell and whipped; affirming, that neither did Ald.
Bludworth make any such motion, nor did it appear, that Harrison was a Friar,
or Firer. page 7.

But as a bare denial is a weak Apology; so that he either threatened, or moved
to have an evidence against a suspected Fierer, sent to the House of Correction
to be whipped, I have heard several affirm: But whether this be true or false, it
concerns not the legality or illegality of the Old Baileys procedure.

As for Harrison's being a Friar, I never believed it, nor can I think so
meanly of the Contrivers, as that they should employ so witless an Emissary (at
least for an eminent Agent) But if Harrison may be exempted from that concern,
it follows not that the Friar should.

He pretends heartily to wish, that these Libelling, Lying, and Discontented
People, were as free of the design of putting the whole Kingdom in a Flame, as
Harison was, from the actual firing of the City. But I as heartily believe,
that if as strong an Evidence, and but half the Circumstances (urged against
Harrison) had been brought against Us, to prove so detestable a design, as that
of inflaming the Kingdom, we should have hardly found that can* did release, I
am sure, not so kind an Apology; since S.S. sticks not to suspect Us, more of
the One, then he does Harrison of the other.

But whilst he hypocritically uses Michaels words to the Devil, The Lord rebuke
thee, they are truliest applied to Himself; whose Diabollical suggestions are
plain discoveries, how cheerful he could Sacrifice us, to his malice and fury;
for which the God of Heaven and Earth, will judge and recompense.

The Indiscretion of the Recorder, he rather aggravates, then defends; but it
is so much his practice, through his whole Discourse, that the wonder would be,
to find it otherwise.

He begins thus: The Accusation against the Recorder is twofold. First, That he
should say, that there would be a Law made the next Session of Parliament, that
no man should have the protection of the Law, but such as conform to the Church.

This saying of the Recorder is falsely and maliciously recited, For he said, we
shall not always be at this trade with you; you will find, the next Session of
Parliament, there will be a Law made, that those that will not conform to the
Law, shall not have the protection of the Law. page 8.

I hope, for the reputation of this famous City, their Recorder was not at the
finding out of this malicious difference in the recital, as S.S. is pleased to
term it. How much the two Expressions differ, or rather, how little, is
obvious; since it is the word Church that makes it (if it makes any) I am of
opinion, that the former is but a necessary explanation of the latter; for if
the Law we must be conformed to, relates to Ecclesiastical Affairs, then what is
the difference, betwixt our not receiving the protection of the Law, unless we
conformed to the Church, and our not receiving the protection of the Law,
unless we conform to a Law relating to the Church, or a Church Law. The
wretched folly, and bala stupidity of this Libeller, has wounded more the
Persons he would vindicate, then what the Author of the Trial was supposed to
do, with all his opposition.

What he means by those blessed Saints, whom he says, we follow, that made a
Law, that those that would not subscribe the wicked Engagement against King and
House of Lords, should not have the benefit of the Law etc. we are to seek; and
are as far from finding, by the help his ill-stockt Ingenie may afford us; but
I perceive the Man can venture to profane as well as lie, though his wit fails
him more in the former, then his wickedness does in the latter. It Is sad, that
naught but holy ground will serve such Swinish spirits to trample on.

But what if they acted irreligiously, and inhumanly too, must that be laid at
their Doors, who not only were unconcerned with them, but persecuted by them?
and that for writing against the imposition of that Engagement, and refusing to
take it: But if it was then esteemed so great an evil by S.S. how comes it now
to be transmuted to a moral good?

Was it unreasonable then, and is it reasonable now? can the nature of a
Persecuting Act be changed, because the Parties in point of power be?

His lex Talionis, is not lex talionis to us; for never having sufferred by us,
there is no ground for retaliation or revenge.

But we understand the man's meaning, and still fail not to meet with frequent
instances of his wishes for us. I shall conclude this Section with one of them,
and the most fatal both to Religion and the Law.

The second Accusation against the Recorder is, that he should say, Till now I
never understood the reason of the policy and pr^dence of the Spaniards, in
suffering the Inquisition amongst them, and certainly it will never be well
with us, till something like the Spanish Inquisition be in England. page 9.

The Infererence the Libellers make, is, what does this but justify that
hellish design of the Papists, to have prevented the first Reformation?

This is a wretched and uncharitable construction of the Recorders words. These
words do no ways justify the Papists, if these Libellers had but the least
grain of Charity, they would have construed the words, cum grano salis, as the
Rule of Charity directs all words to be come strued.

And they will admit of no other construction, but this, viz. That if the
Papists be so pollitick and prudent by their Inquisitian, to maintain their
false Religion, surely it will be the Protestants prudence to find ways, for
the preservation of their true Religion. page 9.

I have been very faithful and patient in the recital of this poor Defense, of
which I can give no better Character, then that it is like the rest.

It Is manifest, the words are granted, I now hope they will not be longer
dis-believed when confirmed by the hands of two Witnesses, the Author of the
Trial, and this privileged S.S.

But he says, it ought to be construed cum grano salis, with allowances, and in
the best sense, which Counsel had been tolerable from any, but from him that
has shown himself so void of any; and that which is the Masterpiece of all his
foolery, is, his ridiculous Construction he makes of it Himself; as if that
could be a good Way of preserving the Protestant Religion; that is an Hellish
ONE in the Papists. But why an Hellish One? Because it intends to force to an
Hetrodox Religion, and not rather by reason of the coercive barbarous Nature of
the Punishment it self. And can any think, that an Inquisition, to enforce Men
to Confess to the Protestant FAITH, is not equally Cruel, with that of the
Papists.

The Protestants would be so far from having any Advantage upon the Papists,
for the Inhumanity of his Inquisition, that his own Practice would seem but The
Second Edition of the Papists Cruelty. It is not either of those Names that
renders it more or less lawful, but the Nature of the thing it self. And had
this Libeller but ever read the ancient Protestant Apollogies, he might have
better informed his peevish Mind of their Opinions.

The true Religion took ever Sanctuary to its own Innocence and Verity, and not
to the Dumb Materials of External Force.

But this Expression would make one think, that under a Protestant Profession,
there lodges a Popish Spirit; and that the same Interest, which urged Spain to
erect an Inquisition, in the Recorders sense, should obliege England to employ
the same Hellish Tyranny, to torture her poor Dissenters, (though Freeborn
Natives.)

But if that were his Meaning, and such Counsel should be taken, it were
endless to consider the unexpressible Miseries, that would attend us: All Law
would be subjected to the zealous Anathemas of Ecclesiastical Officers; and
Religion speak no other Language, then that of INQUISITION. We have hitherto
boasted much in the Self-evidencing verity of the Protestant Faith, but this
were to bring it justly into jealousy with all; that having so long decryed
Coercive Power, should vehemently employ it, to its own-promotion. The Papists
would not only have cause to believe the ground of primative Separation, was
single Interest, but an Example to their hand, what measure they ought to meet
to the Pootestants abroad; which reduces all Religion in a way of subserviency
to the Government, and Conscience to its Convenience: But this had been
forgotten, as well as it is forgiven, had not the Inadvertency of S.S. brought
it the second time upon the Stage.

Part III. A Vindication of my Deceased Fathers Reputation, from the False and
Unworthy Reflections of this Scandalous Libeller.
SInce to Disturb the Grave, and Rake into the Ashes of the Dead, was ever held
detestable with Infidels; we may on easy terms inform our selves, to what an
ebb of Virtue this man has brought himself, who is so dry of all Christianity,
that there remains not the least Drop of that vulgar Decency, eminently in
vogue with very Heathens: For as with them such might justly be accused, as
were not disabled from answering for themselves; so Death having dislodged the
Persons of any, their Charity esteemed it a protection to their Names; from
whence came that common Saying, De mortuis nil nisi bonum, Let us speak no ill
thing of the Dead.

But though this be urged, yet that its as ill observed by S.S. I shall proceed
to show.

He takes occasion in the close of his defense of S. Starling* to fall thus
heavily upon me and my Father, as if he could not do the one without the other.

But I suppose this wild rambling Colt, W. Penn, mistakes, when he charge
these things upon the late Lord Mayor, he means his SEIR deceis'd.

Doubtless the Man was touched: What course Similitudes are these? Did ever man
so Brute himself in Print? But I despise his Drayish Terms, and apply my self
to scan the matter, leaving him to wipe himself, of that Dirt, he thought to
cast on others.

I had so little reason to doubt my Fathers constancy, that in the sense
debated, I know few of greater.

It Is true, He was actually engaged, both under the Parliament and King, but
not as an Actor in our late Domestic Troubles; his Compass always steering
him to eye a National Concern, and not Intestine Wars; and therefore not so
aptly theirs, in a way of opposition, as the Nations.

His Service therefore being wholly Foreign, He may be truly said to serve his
Country, rather then either of those Interests, so far as they were distinct to
each other; and for this Evil, I hope he may be held excusable.

But the Rayler proceeds [ Who from a Captain was made Oliver's High Admiral,
for his great Service, in promoting* that new Instrument.] Which is a Lie so
impudent, as both his Commission, and Men of note can prove, That First, he
made no such extempory leap, as is suggested to have been his Recompense, for
promoting Crumwells Interest; but past through many known Offices, as of
Rere-Admiral, Vice Admiral, and Admiral of Ireland, and Vice Admiral of
England* before he had the General ship conferred on him.

And Secondly, That Oliver was but then General himself, and not proclaimed
Protector till several Months, if not above a Year after the death of General
Dean, whom my Father immediately succeeded. And therefore a very Forgery, that
for promoting that new Instrument, he first was advanced to the Office of
High-Admiral. I would that this Libeller should know, that from a Lieutenant,
he had past through all the eminent Offices of Sea-Imployme^t, and arrived to
that of General, about the Thirtieth Ye^r of his Age; in a time, full of the
biggest Sea-Action, that any Story mentions,; and when neither Bribes, nor
Alliance; Favor, nor Affection, but Ability only could Promote. I write not
this to Vaunt; it is below my Principle and Practice; but to defend an abused
Relation, I could say no less.

He adds [ Who afterward did eminent service, for the English Nation, at
Hispaniola, when he delivered the Flower of the English-Souldiery a Sacrifice
to the Cow-killers,] This is an Untruth so manifest, that no man, making
Conscience of telling Lies, did ever charge it on him. It Is most notorious, that
his employ, was only as General of the Fleet: And that the Miscarriage lay not
there, the History of that Affair not only relates, but the Libellers own words
prove: For what had he to do with the English Army? who, First, had no command
over them, it being the Charge and Office of a distinct General. And next, He
never went a shore during the whole Exploit (but at Barbados, many Hundred
Leagues short of the Theater on which that Tragedy was acted,) And Lastly, Let
me tell the Man, That when the Forelorn and Land-Generals Regiment were Routed,
it was the Sea-Regiment (commanded by Vice Admiral W. Goodson) that stood the
shock, and stopped that Deluge.

And not to reflect on any, but Vindicate my deceast Father; that Conquest,
which was in any respect obtained, was owing mostly to the Fleet, and that no
less by Land then Sea.

But why the FLOWER of the English Army? It Is manifest. The man had better
Thoughts of those Times then he dares express; For what he rails furiously
against elsewhere, as Persons imposing the Wicked Engagement, and Assassinating
Traitors, etc. He now intitles to the Defense of the English Nation.

And since the then English Army, was the remainder of those Soldiers, that
not only subverted the Kings Forces, but Protector'd Oliver Crumwell; it is
evident he makes it his Army (at least) so far as he was concerned in being an
Englishman.

Besides, methinks the man bemoans their loss, though in Circumstances very
untrue; for neither were they the Flower of that Army (I thought they had been
all Weeds in his account) Nor could the Flower of them have been sacrificed to
the Cow-killers: But the Author of that ingenious Pamphlet, of the Worlds
Mistake in Oliver Crumwell, has rendered a true Reason of that Miscarriage, viz.
That because the Design was laid in A^arice and Pride, hoping by the
inexhaustible Wealth of the Indies, to have established a new Gentry and
Nobility, as a Foundation for a new Monarchy; Heaven set it self against the
Enterprise. And therefore 'twas not so much the Miscarriage of the People
there, as the just Vengeance of the Almighty, for making that unjust War with
Spain, and disguizing the Design to the Spanish Ambassador, with reitered
Dissimulations, and horrible Impostures, as the same Author more at large
relates.

I then submit to the judgment of sober men, if this Reflection carries the
least of weight or verity with it.

But he will not leave the Matter here; for says he, This was the Renegado,
worse then three Turks, that performed such excellent Service, in the late
Ducth Wars, in Plundering the two East India Dutch Ships of the Prize-Goods,
for which he was turned out of the House of Commons.

I shall still wave his surrility, and attend the Matter: His Service in the
last Dutch War, will not be questioned by any man, that dares to set his Name
to it: Not that I would be thought to justify Wars; I know they arise from
Lusts. But this being matter of Fact, I shall take leave to tell this Libeller,
that the success of the first Engagement, where about Twenty Four Ships were
Taken, Burnt, and Sunck; Two Thousand Five Hundred Prisoners (said to be)
brought home, besides what were slain, and wounded of the Hollanders; at the
expense of but one old Duch Prize ( that for want of sail fell into their Body)
and about Three Hundred English Men slain, h^s been greatned, beyond all common
Ellogi^s, by the insuceesfulness of later Engagements, whence greater things
were promised and expected.

In short, how far he was a Master of his Art, both as a Seaman, and as a
General; I leave to the Observation of his Friends, his own constant success,
and what hereafter may come to public view of his own Remarks.

As for that false Aspersion, of Plundering the Dutch East-India-men, I shall
avouch my Narrative of the Fact to be true, being an Eyewitness, and more then
any concerned in what related to his Proportion.

It Is not unknown that two such Ships were taken, though it was never known,
nor believed, by any in their Wits, that they were worth the fifth part of what
was vulgarly bruited in the World. One of them was taken by a Captain,
belonging to his Squadron they call the Earl of Sandwich; and the other, by one
of my Fathers: But that my Father was ever on board of either, or that he would
suffer her to be main'd by any of his own Ships-Company; or that he ever took,
or caused to be taken, one Clove, Nutmeg, blade of Mace, or skain of Silk, the
common Lading of the Prizes; but by written Order from his Superior, as his
share of the Divident (for about sixteen Months Service at Sea, and the
expense of a constant Table) I utterly deny, and am persuaded, no man on Earth
can ever prove; for could it have been, I am not ignorant how some of this
Libellers Complexion, would have compast Sea and Land, to have fecht him to
Brook house; but to as little purpose as others were; so that as from wrong
Premises there can be no true Conclusion; so to say he was therefore turned
out of the House of Commons (or for any thing else) was a downright Falsehood;
but Suspensions upon Bills against any Man, are Customary.

He concludes his Slanders and Scurrility with this Hope, That my Father
leaving so great an Estate of Just (he means Unjust) gotten goods to so
Conscientious a Son, as my self, I will make satisfaction to the King.

But as this Fools bolt is soon shot (and that to have an Estate in this Age,
there seems nothing more requisite then that it be thought so) so do I affirm
upon very good knowledge (if I may be credited) That after all my Fathers
great, many, and continual Employments in the World, for near Thirty Years
past, and his frequent Opportunities of Enriching his Family; he could never
call himself Master of half that Estate, which is the private Acquisition of
ordinary Merchants (not to say Brewers, and for ought I know Just-gotten Goods
too) And if War be allowable with S.S. and the consequence of it; he has had
many single hits, each of which might have enricht him more, then what he left,
had he been but as forward to Feather his own Nest, as he was heartily inclined
to acquit his Conscience in the discharge of his trust to his Country; of which
I will give an Instance, to be attested by many.

Being Admiral in the Streights of the Mediteranian, about the years 50, and
51. many Prizes were taken, and some of great value: Amongst the rest, was one,
that had Five Chests of Silver and Gold, amounting to several Thousands of
Pounds; which he was so far from embezling (to his own use) or admitting of the
plea of his Captains (Distribute it amongst us, and if ever it be demanded, it
shall be paid, or we will serve it out) As he wholly denied his Wife the
curiosity of changing of but one piece of foreign Gold; for its equal weight
of our own. And as in those times there was two great a watch over such men in
Employment, to enrich themselves at the cost of the Public; so must I say,
that his whole Employment at Sea, since the Kings return, was not above sixteen
Months; and for his other Offices they admitted not of Perquisits; and I
challenge the whole World to lay the just ignominy of but one Bribe to his
charge; though, to speak modestly, a thousand Families owe their advancement to
his favor.

But of how ill report and consequence it is, that men devoted in life and
estate, to the service of the Public, should meet with so ill entertainment
from the hands of such Privateers, that never knew what it was to be of public
importance, may deserve the notice of all true Patriots.

But perhaps the Libeller thought, that I ought as well to Inherit my Fathers
Miscarriages (if any) a^ his Estate; which is contrary to Gods Practice, that
imputes not the Fathers Iniquity to the Son: but that may be one reason why it
is his; he shows a Mind not a little Anger-bit, who is not contented with the
Living, but besieges the Tomb of the Dead for farther satisfaction.

Yet after all his Impudent Folly and Slander, he concludes with* [Taceo
caetera, de mortuis nil nisi bonum.] but as he would make one believe, he could
say worse, so he would have us to think he had said nothing; who not only
vented his worst Abuses, but what are in themselves most wretchedly false.

And as his Saying, He should speak well of the Dead, when he had said so ill,
is a Contradiction; so his pretense of not saying more, is not less injurious;
for his silence has wronged us more, then his Discourse: Since to Brow-beat the
Dead, and Triumph over their Graves, s^ows a greater want of Humanity, then I
was wiling to think the debauchery of our Age had reduced any man to; but the
pregnant Instances of S.S' s Accomplishments have better informed me. And
whosoever he is, I wish him repentance of these Impieties, and sincerely
declare my hearty forgiveness of all his aggravating Injuries.

Part IV. The Grand Case in Controversy, about the Power of Juries, clearly
Stated and rationally Resolved.
AS a deserted Path, overgrown by Time, makes men to question if it had ever
been a Way: So the neglected case of Juries Power, overrun by the
Inchroachments of the Bench, make many doubt if ever they had any.

I shall therefore endeavor to State and Vindicate the power of Juries, from
the Assault of Innovation; and re-instate them of that Authority and Privilege
they are entitled to, and defended in, and by the Fundamental Laws of England.

1st [ Per Judicium parum] As explained by the universal concurrance of Laws
and Lawyers, we are to understand, A Jury of our Equals.

2d That no man shall be Taken, or Imprisoned, or be Disseized of his
Freehold, Liberties, Free-Customs, or be Outlawed, or Exiled, or any other
way destroyed; nor we shall not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by the
Lawful Judgment of his Peers, Or, by the Law of the Land, 3 Hen. 9.29.

This is the ancient Law of the Land, Confirmed by thirty two Parliaments,
acknowledged by all Lawyers; nay confessed and quoted by the man in hand, page 3.

3d The Question will be this, Whether from this Clause, and what is recorded
as Explenatory and Confirmatory of it, there be sufficient to prove, That
Juries are Judges of Law and Fact.

First, In order to the clear stating and full resolving of the Question, I
shall explain briefly, and rescue the latter part of this Law-text, from the
wretched construction of S.S. which is this.

OR, is either Disjunctive or Copulative; if Disjunctive, then it must imply
some other Judges besides the Jury: If Copulative (Or for And) it still implies
another Jurisdiction, besides that of the Peers or Jury; his consequence is,
that Per Legem Terrae (or the Law of the Land) in that place, cannot (as this
Novice insinuates) be understood to be the Trial of the Jury, but to be the
trial both of Judge and Jury, according to that Maxim, Ex facto jus oritur.

I must confess my self to be a Novice to this preposterous way of Paraphrazing
out of pure reputation.

Why if ( Or) be disjunctive, it must imply some other Judges, I cannot see,
and wonder at the man's impertenency (if what is so natural to him were to be
wondered at) for though Expressions, or the manner of Phraizing things may be
disjunctive, yet that does no way follow, that the matters included in them
should be so disjunctive of each other, as to imply a thing not con-natural:
For instance, If I should say by way of promise to a man, Do me such a service,
and I will give thee an hundred Shillings, or five pounds: Does, Or, imply
another sum? or that such a Child is one thousand ninety and five Days, Or
three Years old: Does Or suppose a Different Age?

In short, [ Per Legem Terrae] or by the Law of the Land, cannot be understood
Exclusive of a Judgment by Peers, it being but a more ample and comprehensive
way of phraizing the peoples right and privilege of trial by Juries.

If (Or) be considered Copulatively, He thinks it will fetch in the Justices,
as Co-Judges with Juries; but that conclusion is wrong; for as such copulation
disowns an exclusion of judgment by Peers, and makes it part of the Law of the
Land; so let me tell him, that what is conceived to be additional (as by the
Law of the Land) cannot so easily be understood of Justices, as of the whole
legal form and method of trial in the case mentioned with the whole rights and
privileges of Juries and Prisoners.

That this is not mine own sense, but the Laws, if his so much honored Lord
Cook be to be credited, let him turn to fol. 50. of the 2d part of his
Institutes, where he will find this Doctrine, Trials by the Law of the Land,
are by due course and process of the Law; and they are by Indictment and
Presentment of good and lawful Men: And what is this, but, Per Juditium parum,
or Judgment by Iuries? But of this more in the Appendix.

Next, That as Iuries are Judges of Law and Fact (as has been unhappily
distinguished) men's interest, putting that assunder, that Reason and Law
originally joined together) I shall proceed to evidence.

1. The first Argument is drawn from the Record of their own Indictments.

The Indictment is found and given into the Court as Billa Vera, or a true
Indictment, by the Grand Inquest, or Jury of twelve men, before the Court can
take cognizance of the Cause; upon this its recommended to the Petty-Jury, to
judge the whole matter, and to deliver in their Verdict or Opinion, whether
A.B. be guilty in Manner and Form.

If then the Indictment comprehends both Law and Fact, and that the Jury is to
give their Judgment in Manner and Form, and that Manner and Form takes in, and
includes the whole Law and Fact of the Indictment (as they manifestly do) then,
with great strength and clearness we may infer, That the Jury is Judge of Law
and Fact.

2. My Second Argument is drawn from the nature of the Verdict given.

Judgment is the determination and result of Law, therefore those who are
Authors of such Determinations or Resolutions must needs be I^^ges of the Law.
How is it possible, that a Jury can pronounce Legale Iudit^um, Legal Judgment,
and yet not be Judges whether the Fact proved be obnoxious to the Law, or not.
Juditium, quasi juris dictum, or the Mouth of Law; which being the Juries, they
pronounce Law as well as Fact: A Verdict is a Child composed of Law and Fact,
and inspirited with the Opinion of the Jury.

This is further evidenced from their own Proceedings at the Old Baily, where
they imprisoned the Jury for not bringing in their Verdict, so as to render our
Meeting Unlawful, which they could never do, and not be Judges of that Law the
Meeting was supposed to have transgrest.

In short, Since Guilty, and Not Guilty, are Verdicts; and that they cannot be
given, but where a* Fact is obnoxious, or not obnoxious to Law; and since none
are to give that Verdict, but the Jury, it follow^, that the Jury are only
Judges, because they only can criminate or clear. And where the power of
determination is, there is the judgment of Law; but that is in the Jury.

Where there is no Law, there can be no Transgression. Now such Transgression
being supposed, in the Verdict of Guilty, it is most plain, that Guilty cannot
be pronounced but with a reference to the Law transgrest; and that reference
cannot be made, but by such as are Judges of the extent of the Law.

3. My third Argument shall be drawn from the Punishment of the Malefactors.

To Punish any as a Malefactor, it is requisite he be proved such; but it is
impossible he should be so, but with respect to some Law transgrest: Nor can he
be concluded such a Transgressor, unless his Fact be judged obnoxious to the
Law: And where thi^ judgmen^ is, there rests the judg-ship of Law and Fact; for
that he should be legally punished, pursuant to a legal Judgment, and yet the
Authors of this Legal Judgment, not to be Judges o^ the Breach of Law, is some
of the profoundest Nonsense in Nature: What is this but to render the Jury
mere Ciphers, when they shall only tell the Court, that which the Witness shall
have swear to their hand? But because their Verdicts are Guilty, or Not Guilty,
which determine the Fact meritorious of Punishment, or Acquittance; therefore
have they the only power of Judgment.

4. My fourth Argument shall be drawn from a Maxim of their own, viz. Ex facto
jus oritur. Therefore, says S.S. The Jury are not only Judges.

It is such a way of drawing consequences, as I have not been acquainted with;
for nothing can be clearer then the contrary to this Conclusion.

If out of the Fact the Law arises, then those who are Judges of Fact, cannot
escape being Judges of Law also; for Fact gives it.

This Passage puts a Ne plus ultra to the pretense of difficulty, and the
necessity of always asking Questions of the Justices; since the nature of the
Fact clearly proved, carries the legality, or contrary in the bosom, if not in
the front of it; and therefore obvious to the plainest and most rustic
capacity.

5. My next Argument shall be drawn from the ill-consequences of the opposite
Opinion, viz. That men may be bought or sold out of their Lives, Liberties and
Estates.

For if an enraged Bench, or otherways interested be the sole Judges of Law,
then let any man be indicted of the most lawful act imaginable, it being such
as he cannot deny, and which is proved by Evidences; the Jury must bring him in
guilty, and so expose him to the sentence of the Justices, by leaving the
Judgment of the Law, to their prepossest breasts.

6. My last Argument will be this, that upon the opinion of our Adversaries,
there must be two Evidence; one of the Fact, which is the Juries; and one of
Law, which is the Justices. But because the Law knows no such conceit, and that
the single Verdict of twelve men, is, and must be legally binding; therefore
are they Judges both of Law and Fact.

Object. Their main Objection is, That if the Justices be not Judges of Law,
How comes it to pass that the Jury asks the sense of the Law at their Mouths?
according to that Maxim.

Ad questionem Iuris respondent Iudices, et ad questionem facti respondent
Iuratores, as in page 2. of the Libel under Examination.

Answ. This is so far from lessening the force of our preceding Arguments, that
from this Objection we will fetch matter enough, to make a subsequential one,
and that of no small import to the business controverted.

I grant a possibility of such an ignorance in Iuries, that there may be a
necessity to inform them of the Law, by the better skill of the Justices: But
what then? therefore must they not be Judges of Law, so far as concerns the
Fact? nothing less; For though the Justices may tell them the Law (and its
their place) yet that is no part of the Verdict, as so said by the Justices; but
as understood, digested, and juditiously made the Iuries, by their own
free will and acceptance, upon their conviction of the truth of things reported
by the Bench. As a man may be educated in any Religion; but to make it his
proper Religion, it is requisite that he believe and embrace it juditiously, not
implicitly.

Thus we frequently find the House of Lords to ask the opinion of the Justices
in Parliament; is the Vote, Order, or Act, therefore the Judges, and not the
Parliaments?

The like in the Kings Council; Is the opinion of the Kings Attorney, or
Solicitor, the Judgment, Resolve, and Order of the Council, because he said it,
and not because they made it theirs, by submitting to the reason, or legality
of the thing debated and delivered?

And in London, Are the Orders of the Mayor Aldermen, and Common Council, the
Recorders, or City Council's, because his, or their Opinion in point of Law was
asked? experience shows the contrary.

From all these Premises, it is time we draw this one most evident Conclusion;
That notwithstanding Juries of late are grown so out of fashion, and of power
with some, that to show any, is to incur the Threats and Menaces of the Court,
to have their Noses Slit, their Throats Cut, their Bodies Imprisoned, and
dragged at a Carts Tail through the City, etc. Yet that they are by the ancient
Laws of England, and force of Reason, the only right and proper Judges, as well
of Law as Fact.

Part V. The Trial, as related by S.S. Examined; and his Notes thereon
Animadverted.
THAT I may appear to all impartial Men, unworthy of those Reflections, and
hard Names S.S. is pleased to heap upon me, I shall conclude the Vindication of
my Innocence with his own Relation of my Trial.

And truly, when I weigh his frank Confessions, concerning Passages the most
notorious; I should be amazed at his Indiscretion, did I not know how usual it
is with God to leave such men under strong infatuations: For, to give it a
short Character, its almost Verbatim, The Second Edition of our own Trial; I
mean that part which related to the Transactions of the Court and Prisoners.

And whether he has vindicated them from those Expressions, which to all sober
men are most detestable, or backed the Accusation of the Author of our Trial, by
his public acknowledgement of them; let any but S.S. and his Juncto judge.
How then the Author of that Trial could justly be condemned,. for his Relation
as scurrilous, and malicious, which is so exactly copied after by S.S. will be
hard for any man of Sense to think, unless he brings his own Account under the
same imputation.

But he tell us, That he thought good to set down the Names of those Justices
who were present (Honoris Causa) with all their Additions and Titles; that so
the World may know that the City of London wants not worthy Patriots, who dare
call to an account these vile railing Rabshekahs of this Age. And the rather
because the Libeller has in a disgraceful way prefixed their names without any
Additions to his Narative, thereby intending to make them odious to the People.

The Persons Named are,
Sr. Sam. Starling, Knight, then Lord Mayor. Sr. Jo. Robinson, Knight. and Bar. Sr.
Tho. Bludworth, Knight. and Alder. Sr. Will. Peak, Knight. and Alder. Sr. Jo. Howell,
Knight. and Recorder. Sr. Rich. Ford, Knight. and Alder. Sr. Jo. Shelden, Knight. and
Alder. Sr. Jo. Smith, Sheriffs. Sr. Jam. Edwards, Sheriffs.
To which I must needs say, I knew a time, when the City of London had a better
Advocate. What man in his Wits would not despise the Folly and Meanness of this
wretched Pedagoge? The weakness of whose Discourse eminently shows the
ricketted constitution of the Author.

First, He has but little of Religion, that dares to lie in the common Field of
every man's knowledge; since he denies that ever the Author of the Trial gave
the aforementioned Persons, any Additions, when ( Alder.) is to every one of
them, that really is so.

Next, I cannot chose but observe his vanity, as if the omitting of the Title (
Sr.) had been a robbing them of their Honor (I am sure they have very little
that have no more) But if to give them their own Names, be matter of Disgrace,
it is worth our while to consider, how disgraceful those Persons were in this
Libellers account, before they had that Title given them; though I am apt to
think, they were not less reputed before, then since; and because they write
not themselves so much as that Author Printed them, and that none can suppose
them to omit those Titles, disgracefully to themselves; it is both ridiculous
and false to charge such a Design upon the Author. But whilst he calls me, and
my Fellow-Prisoner, the vile and railing Rabshekahs of this Age, and ventures
to load us with Slander and Reproach; methinks he proves himself to be of that
ill-bred Tribe, in accusing us for such.

But to his Nota's upon the Trial.
Nota 1. page 13.
THE Prisoners in stubborn manner refusing to take their Hats, they were put on
again by the same Person.

Answer, This is a Lie, to be confirmed by hundreds; we never did, nor never
shall refuse to take our Hats, and put them on too, which we had no time to do;
for having been taken off by the Keepers (I suppose in Kindness) seeing the
Cour^ displeased, or rather some in it) the Mayor (I think it was) cried out,
Sirrah, Who bid you pull off their Hats? Put on their Hats again. At which the
same Keepers put them on, of which the Author of our Trial has been more
particular.

Nota 2. page 13.
The court observing that the Prisoners standing on the Leads behind the Bar,
with their Hats on, facing the Court all that day, as it were daring the Court
to a Trial; so that the Court, and all the Spectators looked upon them, as
offering a great Affront to the Honor of his Majesty's Court; the Justices
were resolved to chastize them for the same.

Answ. His second Nota, is his second Lie. For first we were not upon the Leads
any time of the day, as many can attest, but in the Bale-dock, or within the
Bar, attending upon the Trials of Thieves and Murderers, to the displeasure of
the Spectators* but not on our part. Besides, that this was done upon mere
design, is evident, because neither were the Goaled, nor we, so hardly treated
the first day of our appearance, when there was equal ground for it.

Nota 3. page 14.
This is a great Falsehood; for their Hats were put on, behind the Bar, before
they came into Court.

Answ. But it is a great Truth that we were not behind the Bar at all, until
toward the Evening, when cast into their stinking Hole, and there indeed they
stayed us behind the Bar three Hours. And for mine own part, I do declare, my
Hat was clapped upon my head by the Keepers hand, within a very little space of
the place in which we usually stood during the whole time of our Trial.

Nota 4. page 14.
This is insignificant Canting.

Answ. What? Will. Mead saying, Fear God, and dread his Power. O stupendous
Impiety! That ever any professed Protestant should have so much out-sinned all
Sense of God, and his Dreadful Power, as to repute that Seasonable Exhortation,
Insignificant Canting: But this makes us the less to wonder at our Sufferings
from such.

Nota 5. page 14.
It was by Sr. John Robinson observed, that Bushel, the Tender Conscienced
Jury-man, made an offer to kiss the Book, but did not; wherefore he was called
upon by the Court to be Sworn again.

Ans. How much that quick-sighted Lieutenant, had more Jealousy and Prejudice
then others in his Eye, the many Spectators present can best decide; or mine
own share, I did not observe him to gratify the common Custom of the Court,
more in the latter then former tender of the Oath unto him: But with what
prepenst Unkindness and disdainful Ketch, he was treated, was obvious to those
about him.

I perceive it is as Criminal to be Tender-conscienced, as it is esteemed
Canting, to bid men Fear God: For as that Religious Advice was made matter of
Mockage, so this good quality is not less rendered Suspicious. But how
Tender-conscienced such persons are, that make so ill use of such Expressions,
is best manifest in their severe Prosecutions of men that really are so.

Nota 6. page 17.
As clear Evidence as ever was offered to any Jury, Two Witnesses prove the
Fact against both the Prisoners, and the Prisoners confess the whole matter in
effect, and justify themselves, and declare they will do the like again,
whatever Laws the King and Parliament can provide against the same. O confident
Impudency! Surely both King and Parliament will take notice of Penn's Arrogance.

Answ. It will be wholly needless to repeat the Evidence, twice done already;
but to his Nota I answer thus, 1st That the Witnesses did not Swear, that we
were at an Unlawful Assembly, and that they were there, the Jury never
scrupled. That part of the Indictment, which was so Indigestable with the Jury,
was the Illegallity of the Assembly; and since the Court was not content with
their Verdict upon a mere Fact, it argues, that they would have made them
Judges of Law, by determining the Legallity, or Illegallity of the Meeting, not
sworn to by the Witnesses. 2d The Mayor and Recorder differed in the Point; The
Mayor was for sacrificing Me only; The Recorder thought it Unreasonable that I
should go without a Mate, and justifies his Apprehension, from the word
Conspiracy; but where the Conspiracy was, we have leave to think.

The Bench being thus divided in the Point, 'twas ill observed by S.S. since
the Person he most vindicates lies most liable to reflection. 3d Though we
confess to have been there, yet we deny to have been at an Unlawful Assembly;
which being the purpose of the Indictment, it was unseasonably observed. But
4ly We acknowledge before God, Angels, and Men, that MEET we must, and
encourage others to do the like; yet so, as never to Contrive, or Abet the
least Disturbance to the Civil Peace: And if from hence he styles Me Impudent,
and Arrogant, I am contented to bear his Scurvy Epithites till he is better
learnt.

One Passage I cannot well omit, because it gives the man the Lie that spoke
it. When W. Mead asked R. Brown, What he did there? Was he a Justice or no? If
not, desired him to come down: R. Brown is said to answer him, by the relation
of S.S. Sir, I am a Justice, and you are an impudent Fellow.

Which Answer carries as much of Falsehood, as Incivility and Folly. For, First,
he was no Justice in that place, the ground of the Question. And next, He might
have spared the insolency of stiling Him an Impudent Fellow, who is, in
external Respects, a Person no ways inferior to himself. And lastly, He shows
not a little Folly, or S.S. for him, who ventures to call him an Impudent
Fellow, in the end of the Sentence, that he styled ( Sir) in the beginning (a
Title of so much Honor with S.S. page 10.) But if the Author of the Trial gave
not Titles and Additions, this Man has not been wanting in either.

Nota 7. page 17.
How Mr. Penn plays upon the word Common.

Answ. I played upon nothing, but for working in defense of the Common Law.
Some were so prodigal, as to play away my Liberty.

But S.S. will have it, that the Mayor had Law enough, to define the Common
one; but at the rate he expresses it, he might have let it alone, unless his
Exposition had turned more to his account: For, if the Common Law be Common
Reason, (as he says the Mayor defined it) and that being a man, I have common
reason (which none of them had so much extrordinary Reason, as to evince the
contrary) methinks they might have forborne so great an Instance of no Reason,
as their commanding me to the Baledock, for demanding Common Reason.

I am well assured, that common Reason criminates no Assembly, peaceably met to
Worship God, without the least appearance of Weapons Offensive or Defensive.

Nota 8. page 19.
This Nota referring to the Jury's being Judge of Law and Fact (as unhappily
distinguished) I omit to consider it further, it being fully unswered already in
the fourth Part of this Discourse.

Nota 9. page 21.
Penn made such an uncivil Noise, that the Court could not give the Jury the
Charge, he was therefore put into the Bale-dock, which stands even with the
Bar; and the Prisoners might hear the Charge there, as well as a Prisoner might
hear at the Bar; this therefore was a causeless Exclamation.

Answ. If my noise was uncivil, it was because it was Legal; and I expect not a
better Character from such, as so proclaim me a broacher of new Heresies,
because I honestly demanded the free course of the Fundamental Laws of England.
The plain truth was this; that because I endeavored to inform the Jury of my
Case, and to take off the asperity of some men's passions, they turned me, and
my Companion, into the Bale-dock, which though even with the Bar, yet besides
the main Court, and so deeply impaled, that we could not see the Court, nor
hear the Charge; but upon information, that the Recorder was charging the Jury,
I stepped up, and my Fellow-Prisoner after me, and exclaimed against the
irregularity of such proceedings. And for this plain Reproof, and but necessary
demand of the English Right, of Prisoners being present at the giving of the
Charge, commanded us into the Hole, a place so noisome and stinking, that the
Mayor himself would have thought it an unfit Sty for his Swine.

Nota 10. page 23.
Six or seven of the Jury men did agree to the Mayors question; upon which
Bushel, Hammond, and two others opposed themselves, They allowed of no such
word, as an unlawful Assembly in their Verdict.

Answ. Its not the least unhappiness this Libeller is attended with, to be
frequent in self-contradiction; for in the Interogatories immediately
precedent, the Mayor speaks thus to the Foreman of the Jury.

May. What, was it not an unlawful Assembly?

Fore-m. My Lord, This is all I had in Commission.

And yet this man was one of the seven S.S. would have a Dissenter.

I hope, since the Foreman had no more in Commission, S.S. is to blame for so
impudent an Assertion, as that seven at that time dissented from the rest.

Nata 11. page 25.
A peaceable innocent people indeed; that when the King had seized the
Meeting House into his hands (as by Law he might) they would come and break
open the doors; they violently overpowered the Constable; and his Watchmen and
it is proved, that the people, at this time kick and spurned the Constable, and
his watchmen; ^e endeavoring to dissipate this unlawful Assembly, as is
sworn by Read the Constable.

Answ. This does but still aggravate: How much S.S. is an Enemy to all truth,
What if the Door was broken open? had not the Quakers (in Justice and Equity)
right to the Place? However, it is a most false Consequence, that they spurned
the Constable, because he was spurned at their Meeting, since many are
accustomed to crow'd after the Constables and Soldiers, who are no Quakers,
but come to see their usage.

Nor does Read swear it was the Quakers, but some people present: And some of
the Jury fully answered that part of the Evidence, in this discreet
Observation, That it was impossible any man could pass through so great a
Throng, and not be pusht, or his Feet trod upon.

Besides, It does not appear that the House was seized pursuant to any Trial,
Conviction, or Judgment by the Laws of England, and that such seizure is not
according to the sense of them, appears by the Statute of the 17th of Charles
the first, Cap. 10. where it is expressly said, That neither his Majesty, nor
his Council, have, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power or Authority by
English Bill, Petition, Articles, Libel, or any other arbitrary way whatsoever,
to examine or draw into question, determine or dispose of the Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels of any Subjects of this Kingdom, but that the
same ought to be tried and determined, in the Courts of Justice, and by the
ordinary Course of Law.

Nota 12. page 2^.
The Jury in Mr Pen's opinion, and Bushels both, are perjured men, for that at
last they brought in a Verdict contradictory to this.

Answ. Those that have read the Trial will apprehend his meaning; for upon
their bringing me in, not guilty, of an unlawful Meeting; but guilty only of
speaking in the pl^ce called Grace Church Street (and the Court menacing them
much, and saying, They would have a Verdict, meaning Guilty.)

I said, the consent of Twelve men, is a Verdict in Law; and if they bring in
another Verdict, contrary to this, they are Perjured Men. But what then?
Therefore when they brought me in Not Guilty, had they perjudred themselves?
Nothing less. I am ashamed to read so ridiculous a Non Sequitur in Print.

If I understand what Contraries mean, the opposite to Not Guilty, must be
Guilty: But that they gave no such Verdict absolutely, is manifest from the
Courts not receiving it; for above all things they waited and pressed hard for
it. Therefore to be guilty of Speaking in Grace Church Street, and not at an
Unlawful Assembly, is a not being guilty in Law; and consequently their Verdict
no Contradiction.

Nota 13. page 26.
At this time some of the Jury complained to the Court, that the four men, viz.
Bushel, Hammond, and the other two, would starve them, and that they had
brought Strong-water-Bottles in their Pockets designedly.

Answ. It Is not the Quakers Light, but S.S. his Darkness that is the Father of
Lies; and Miserable will be the End of such, as make them their Refuge.

For, First, There was no such Complaint made.

Secondly, Nor was there any just Occasion for one.

And Lastly, Methinks this Libeller might remember that if he thought me
condemnable, for not giving the Justices more Titles and Additions then their
own Names, and that of Aldermen; he upon greater cause deserves a Check, that
cannot afford, those able and honest Citizens, more then half their Names, and
scarcely that too.

Nota 14. page 26.
The Court having regard to the Health of the Jury, adjourned till seven next
morning, although it was Sunday, which otherwise they would not have done.

Answ. It was, and is a real Question, Whether the health of the Jury, or
condemnation of the Prisoners, was most in their eye; but no matter which: I
shall briefly insist upon their adjournment to that Day.

I suppose it is not unknown to those that know Law, that Dies Dominicus non
est in lege dies, or, That the Lords Day, is not a Day in Law: That is, There
ought not to be Assizes, Sessions, or Terms held on that Day; because it is a
time the Law takes no cognizance of, nor has any relation to; thus Cook in his
first Instit. Sect. 201. fol. 155. where he excludes that day from the number
of those he calls Dies Juridici, or Days in Law.

The consequence of which must needs be this, That their whole procedure at
that Session, becomes questioned, and void in Law. But to justify those
Transactions, they got a Commission after Sessions, anti-dated, from the time
of that Adjournment.

I shall not much reflect upon the Passage; it carries, its own Comment with
it: But methinks more Skill in Law, or Moderation to the Prisoners and Jury,
might have prevented such an extrajudicial procedure.

Nota 15. page 28.
This is the fourth time the Jury brought in this insignificant Verdict, viz.
That they find Penn guilty of speaking in Grace Church Street, and how this
answers the Question, viz.

What say you? Is W. Penn guilty of the matter whereof he stands indicted, in
Manner and Form, or not guilty? Let the World judge whether that be a Verdict
or not: They thus often abusing the Court, made the displeasure of the Court
against them, and surely not without cause.

Answ. This Nota is upon the Juries continuance of their Verdict, of only
bringing me in Guilty of spe^king in Grace Church Street, delivered First*day
Morning: But how reasonable will be the matter of our inquiery and answer.

If S.S. will have the Jury only Judge of Fact (which the Recorder expressly
aff^rmed on the Bench, using words to this purpose, We will have you to know,
that you shall not be Judges of what the Law says, etc.

Why are they here condemned for undertaking no farther? The ^rought in the
Fact, but that the Court thought incomprehensive of the Indictment, which being
complicated of Law and Fact, were to answer the Question in Manner and Form.
And if this does not inthrone them Judges, how far the Fact reaches the Law,
and whether by Law A.B. is guilty or not guilty, I must confess my self
mistaken; and I am sure to have company enough of all men of sense and Sobriety.

So that what the Jury is denied elsewhere, is given here, and S.S. equally
angry, for their being, and not being sole Judges.

Nota 16. page 28.
William Penn made such a Noise in the Court, that the Court could not hear the
Jury, nor the Jury the Court.

Answ. If to speak to be heard, be Noise. I was guilty of his Observation; but
I need the less to vindicate my self, who have so many living Witnesses of
Credit, to do it for me: If they would not hear me, they ought not to have
condemned me; but if they could condemn me, they in Conscience ought not to
overruled, but hear me.

But would any know the Noise I made, read my words and 'twill be found S.S.
has only Noised a Fiction. Upon their menacing of the Jury, I thus spoke.

It is intolerable that my Jury should be thus menaced? Is this according to
the Fundamental Laws? (thus far S.S.) Are not they my proper Judges by the
Great Charter of England? What hope is there of ever having Justice done, when
Juries are cheek*t, and their Verdicts rejected? I am concerned to speak, and
grieved to see such arbitrary Proceedings. Did not the Lieutenant of the Tower
render One of them worse then a Fellon? and do you not plainly seem to condemn
such for factious Fellows, who answer not your Ends? Unhappy are those Juries,
who are threatened to be fin^d, and starved, and ruined, if they give not in
Verdicts contrary to their Consciences.

This was the Noise charged upon me, and for this Fetters commanded to be
brought by the Mayor; how justly, let the ingenious Reader judge.

Nota 17. page 29.
Upon this Mr. Penn was silent and quiet, though nothing was done to him.

Answ. I perceive the man will rather play at small Game (as the Proverb is)
then sit out. What? Would he suggest my fear to the World, after his own
relation has given such large testimony of my Boldness, in so much as to dare
the Court to a Trial, page 13? Or is he angry that I held my Tongue (as he
says) And yet the Mayor and Recorder so angry, that I spoke, as that I must be
Staked with Iron Fetters to the Ground; an Unkindness I forgive, but which will
render their Carriage Infamous with all Sober and Moderate Men. But three
things I observe, and conclude this ridiculous Nota.

1s^ That my retort upon the Mayors Menace was omitted by S.S. which was this.

Do your Pleasure, I matter not your Fetters. Which was very far from being
over-awed by their Displeasure, as the remainder of my Trial manifested (which
I speak to Gods Glory, whose holy Power carried my mind over the heads of all
that there arraigned or judged me.)

Secondly, There was no occasion for much Discourse, as by the Trial appears,
the Court being ready to break up, and then to whom should I speak.

Thirdly, I would that S.S. and his Brethren should know, That I only Worship,
Fear, and Bow, before the Glorious Everlasting God of Heaven and Earth, and
therefore Dread not Mortal Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, and has power
only to hurt the Body, and that no further then a permitted him of God; whose
holy Will I am resigned to answer, in Doing and Suffering, as he shall enable
me. And whatever my Portion be from this Generation, whether Good-report or
Bad-report, Acceptance or Suffering, I matter not; but bles^ his Providence,
and shall accept it all as an Earnest of his Eternal Love, and rest in Glory.

Nota 18. page 29.
These men were very like to be starved, when they had Rost-Beef, Capons, Wine,
and Strong-Drink, sent them (as is ready to be proved) during the time they
were considering of their Verdict.

Answ. This is but a vain Surmize, and how positively so ever asserted, the
Proof remains behind, which had there been any; it is not to be thought this
Libeller would have omitted it; besides, the Officers of the Court were sworn
to keep them from all sort of Refreshmen. But had it been so, I see no evil in
the thing, unless it be an Evil to prevent men from starving, especially since
they were not there encloyster'd for not agreeing in their Verdict, but for
agreeing in a Verdict some Persons humors would not allow for one, as the
Juries frequent Cries, We are Agreed, We are Agreed, etc. do plentifully
evidence. This ends his Nota's, and I shall now take leave to remark on him.

Nota 1.
My first Observation will be this, That in his relation of my Trial, though in
many things he does me Right, yet in some places, he does both me and the Law
wrong; For its familiar with him to slip over those Expressions of mine, which
tell the World, how vehemently I called for Right; and willing I was to be
tried by the Fundamental Laws of England, whilst represented as a Seditious
Person, which my Soul abhors, thus page 17, 28, 31.

But more especially that Clause, I can never urge the Fundamental Laws of
England, but you cry, Take him away, take him away: But it is no Wonder, since
the Spanish Inquisition has so great a place in the Recorders heart. To which
I might add his threatening to Cart the Jury about the City, etc. page 19. The
intent of which unfair dealing must needs arise from an apprehension of the
disadvantage and guilt that would be attributed to them; whilst nothing more
manifests both, then the partiallity of these parts of the Narrative.

Nota 2.
My second Remark will be upon the folly of this Boaster, which shows it self
so great, that it is become already the scorn and raillery of the Town: For
instead of casting a friendly Covert over the Nakedness of his Patrons, he
brings them out-stript in Print, and allows, nay vindicates, those very
Indiscretions, which are irreconcilable with the sense of every sober man, and
that hitherto were scarely credited by their Enemies in the relation of our
Trial, but now believed by their best Friend, because divulged with a seeming
Privilege in the Account given by S.S. This appears. First, page 1, 22. In Jo.
Robinson 's Expression to Edw. Bushel a Jury-man, That he deserved to be
indicted more then any man, that had been brought to the Bar that day. 2dly
page 22. In the Recorders Saying to that Person, You manifestly show your self
an Abettor of Faction. 3dly page 3, 27. In the Recorders Menace, I Will have a
positive verdict, or you shall starve for it. 4ly page 28. The same person to
Edw. Bushel, You are a factious Fellow, I Will set a Mark upon you; whilst I have
to do in the City, I Will have an eye on you. 5ly page 29. Again, You will find
the next Sessions of Parliament, There will be a Law made, that those that will
not Conform to the Law, shall not have the Protection of the Law. 6ly page 29.
The very same person thus again, Bring another verdict, or you shall starve.
7ly page 29. And as that which is fittest to bring up the rear of all his
Threats, because the most Malignant, I shall insert that notorious Passage of
the Inquisition, as by S.S.


Till now I never understood the reason of the Policy and Prudence of the
Spaniards, in suffering the Inquisition among them, and certainly it will never
be well with us, till something like the Spanish-Inquisition be in England.

Of the Mayor, he gives us this Account.
8ly page 22. The Mayor to Ed. Bushel thus, You are an impudent Fellow, I will
put a mark upon you. 9ly page 24. To the Jury, What will you be lead by such a
silly Fellow as Bushel, a canting Fellow. 10ly page 37. To Edw. Bushel again.
You are a factious Fellow, and a course ought to be taken with you. 11ly page
27. Edward Bushel to T.B. I have done according to my Conscience. Mayor, That
Conscience of yours would cut my Throat.


E.B. No my Lord it never shall.


Mayor, But rather then you shall cut my Throat, I will in defense of my self,
cut yours first.



This last Expression horribly belyes the Mayor, and wrongs his words; for many
sufficient Witnesses, they say, will deposite, that he fairly said, But I will
cut yours, as soon as I can.

12ly page 28. And speaking to the Jury, in reference to E. Bushel, says he,
Were I of the Jury, rather then he should starve me, I would slit his Nose for
him.
It was fairly done of S.S. and the whole City and Kingdom are great Debtors,
to his franck Discovery, and plain Acknowledgements.

We may now easily understand the meaning of the word MARK, by the Paraphase of
Slitting of Noses; for that Expression seems to be the Key that opens the
Mystery of the former: Of how ill consequence that Threat has proved, the late
tragical Assassinates, in several places show. I will not say, they may be
imputed, to so ill a presedent as the Mayors Menace to Edw. Bushel, from his
Tribunal Seat, in all his Court Formalities; But certainly they must be as near
a kin, that offer such barbarous Affronts to Parliaments and Juries, as
threatening and doing are.

It is hoped, there will be no further need of such Remarks, and that the Act
expected, will prove as well a Protection to the Noses of Juries, as Members of
the high Court of Parliament.

By this time the Courteous Reader cannot but see, with how little of Truth and
Reputation he triumphs over us, and vindicates his Friends; since more could
scarcely have been said for us, and against them, then the impudent Repetition
of things so Scurrilous, Injuditial, and Ill-timed: And indeed, the cold
reception it finds, with all that read it, might have saved me this labor; but
that I was informed, how much a Reply was expected from me.

And that I am not ignorant, how natural it is, for men of this Man's form of
understanding, to conceit their Pamphlet unanswerable, because not answered,
though the only reason of it, may be its indesert of so much Pains*

To conclude, However busy some sort of men may be (and I hear not a little of
their Projects, to mis-represent me to the King, and Persons of eminent Employ,
that with less hazard to themselves, they may sacrifice me to their injust hate.

I do declare my Judgment, and that of my abused Friends, in things relating to
Civil Government, and by it we would be measured, and in the Strength of God
resolve to stand.

First, That we acknowledge Government to be necessary, because of
Transgressors.

Secondly, That this Government should consist of wholesome Laws, to supress
Vice and Immorral Practices, as Oaths, Whoredoms, Murders, Lies, Thefts,
Extortion, Treachery, Profaneness, Defamation, and the like Ungodly and
Immodest Actions; and in the encouragement of Men contrarily quallified: These
are Fundamentals in Law and Gospel. In short, We heartily own the English
Government upon its ancient Civil Bassis.

Thirdly, That there be many other temporary Laws suited to State Emergency, in
civil matters, as in Trade, etc. to which we also account ourselves oblieg'd.

Fourthly, That we there only dissent, where Conscience in point of Faith and
Worship toward God is concerned.

Fifthly, That we utterly renounce, as an horrible Impiety, the Promotion of
our Interest or Religion, by the Blood of our Opposers.

Sixthly, That if we are denied our Freedom, in the Exercise of our Consciences
to God (though otherwise peaceable and industrious) as it has been so will it
still be our constant practice (However it appears intolerable to Flesh and
Blood, that we should always be the Anvil, on which the Hammer of every Power
beats the heavy streaks of its unmerited Displeasure) to sustain all in Peace
and Patience, because Vengeance belongs to God, who certainly will repay it.

If therefore any that think themselves concerned in this Treatise, shall offer
to suggest the contrary to these Assertions and Confessions, I do hereby
declare them Slanderers of the greatest Innocence upon Earth; and give them
this public Challenge once for all, that as we will never baulk a fair
debate, where every point in controversy may receive a full discovery and
decission; so do we charge such Adversaries for the future, if they would* have
the reputation of true men, to bring their Names and Scruples into open view,
that so the Apprehensions of us may be justified, or our Innocence relieved
from the heavy pressure of their injust Slanders.

Newgate, the 12th Month, 1670. W. Penn.

An APPENDIX; Wherein the Fourth Section of S.S. his Pamphlet, (entitled, The
Fining of that Jury, that gave two Contrary Verdicts Justified, to prevent a
Failer of Justice in London) Examined.
READER,
UT obstruatur os iniqua loquentium. Have I undertaken to answer this
scurrilous Libeller: And in clearing these Jurors from his so foul Aspertion,
shall manifest to the World, not only the horrid falseness of his Charge
against them; but lay open the Vn^ustness and Arbitrariness of those
Proceedings, which this Author seems to have the Confidence now in Print to
vindicate.

The Wiseman asserts, That he that utters a Slander is a Fool, Prove. 10.8.
And the Psalmist commands, That the Lying Lips be put to silence, Psa. 31.18.

And to evidence his folly, let Truth (the Mother of Justice) arise, and plead
their Innocence, against one who endeavors to abuse and traduce, as well the
Liberties of all the Freemen of England, as these respective Jurors, whose
Actions have rendered them worthy Citizens of London, and faithful Friends to
their Country.

THE Cause for which the Jurors were fined and imprisoned (by the Bench at the
Old Baily) S.S boldly asserts was for [ their giving in two Contrary Verdicts.

The Falsehood of which Assertion may not only be manifested by many Hundreds of
Citizens, who were Eye and Ear Witnesses of their Arbitrary and Illegal
Procedure (as well toward the other Prisoners there, as these Jurors) but also
testified by many of this Libellers own Approved Authorities.

1. Let us look back into the third Sect of his Pamphlet, where he has given
frequent Tests against the verity of his fourth Sect's Assertion.

The Jury having had no Evidence of any unlawful Act done by W.P. could not
bring him in Guilty Modo and Forma etc. yet four times brought in so much as
was by Witnesses proved against him, viz. That Will. Penn was guilty of speaking
in Grace-Church Street, as page 23, 24, 27, 28. Which (being all the Fact
proved, yet far short of what was laid against him in the Indictment) the
Recorder declared was no Verdict in Law, redou^^ing the Expression or Substance
thereof, no less then four or f^ve times, as page 23, 24, 27, 28, 29. And in
page 30. the Jur^^s brought in W.P. Not Guilty in Manner and Form as he stood
(...). Other Verdict I never heard that the Jurors brought in neither does S.S.
in his Relation of the Trial pretend i^

And why he should thus Reproach the Jurors, Groundlesly, and so palpably give
the Lie to himself, Let the Juditious judge.

2. Let us examine the Retorn of the Cause, of the Jurors Imprisonment, which
now lies before the Justices of Common Pleas at Westminster. (Wherein S.S.
Mayor, J.H. Recorder, and their Council, with long and tedious consideration
had accumilated so much Formality and needless Circumstances, as swelled up the
bulk to at least Twelve Sheets of Paper) The matter or cause of their
Imprisonment therein is only this, viz. De eo quod ipsi pred. Jur. modo hic
eosdem Will. Penn and Will. Mead de pred. transgr. contemt. assemblac. and
tumult. contra legem hujus Regni Angliae, et contra Plenam and manifestam.
Evidentiam, et contra Directionem Curiae in materia legis hic de and super
premissis eisdem Jur. versus prefact. W.P. and W.M. in Cur. hic aperte dat. and
declarat. de praemissis eis impoit. in Indict. pred. acquietaverunt in contemt.
dicti Dom. Regis nunc legumque suorum etc. The substance of which is, That the
aforesaid Jurors did acquit the said William Penn and William Mead from the
Trespass, Contempt, and unlawful Assembly, and tumult against the Law of this
Kingdom of England, and against full and manifest Evidence, and against the
Direction of the Court in matters of Law openly given and declared in Court
against the said W.P. and W.M. in contempt of the Lord the King, and his Laws
etc.

By which it is plainly manifest and evident that these Jurors were never guilty
of giving two contrary Verdicts, or fined and imprisoned by the Bench for any
such Fact, as S.S. has falsely and scandalously suggested.

And truly if S S. has been an Eye and Ear Witness of all that passed in this
affair (as he affirms pa. 10) we may without breach of Charity, charge him with
having a very treacherous Memory, which is an ill Companion for a Liar.

But next we come to enter upon the matter promised, and to examine whether or
no he has justifi^d the fining of that Jury, by reason Law and Authority or any
of them in order to which let us recite his words (he says.)

Page 31. In regard that this is a Case, that very much concerns the King and
Kingdom, and is now under the Consideration of all the Judges, I shall only
make four Remarks upon this Case, and leave the Determination of the same to
the honorable Sages of our Law.

Answer, Surely our Author had but a small stock of courage, that it should
fail him in writing half a dozen Lines, What? (in uno flat^) to justify the
fining of a Jury, and to leave it again to the Determinations of the Sages of
the Law.

He might have left it at first to their Determination, and have spared his
pains, of appearing in Print, and yet have been thought never the unwiser Man
for his silence.

S.S. His first REMARK.
As Nature ( says he) abhors a vacuum in the Universe, so it is the honor of
our Law, that will not suffer a Failer of Justice, according to that Maxim, Ne
curia regis desiceret in Justitia exhibenda. Therefore it is that although our
Law appoints all Trials to be by Juries, yet in six Cases cited by my Lord
Cook, 1. p. Inst. sect 102. fol. 74. the Trial is by Certificate, as in case a
person be in Scotland, in Prison, and at Bordeaux, etc.

Answ. Our Author who quotes Cook, might also have remembered thi^ Maxim used
by him, 4 Inst. 308. Vbi non est lex ibi non est Transgressio, Where there is
no Law there is no Transgression: As for the matter of Trials by Certificate,
it is as Foreign to the matters in debate as Bordeaux or Scotland is distant
from Westminster Hall. Neither does S S in any wise, by his Discourse, apply it
to that purpose, but barely proceeds.

In like manner Petty-Jurors, that have given their Verdict contrary to their
Evidence, have been fined by the Justices, in Cases where the Law has provided
no ot^^r Punishment, as by Attaint etc.

Answ. First, Observe the strangeness of S.S. his consequence. Because the Law
provides, th^^ For^eign matters a^^ed (in partibus, transmarinis) shall be
evidenced or tried by Certificate from those parts: Therefore Facts done or
acted at home, in public Courts of Justice, shall not be determined in
ordinary Courts o^ Law ( per legale judicium parium) but by the arbitrary
judgment of the Bench or Court.

Secondly, Observe how various this l^tter matter is to S.S. his Text, viz
Juries Fined for giving two Contrary Verdicts Justified; changed into Juries
Fined for giving in a Verdict Contrary to Evidence. And since the latter is the
Text to his subsequent Discourse, let us try and examine his Doctrine.

Our Author to prove, That Justices have fined Jurors, for bringing in Verdicts
contrary to Evidence, gives us his Authorities thus.

Vide Whart^ns Case, Yelverton fol. 23. Noy reports the same fol. 48. And Judge
Popham said, there were diverse Presedents to that pupose, and cites diverse, one
by Justices in Eire.

Watts verse. Brains, in an Appeal to B.R. Crook l. 3. 779. vide Leonard l. 2.
102. pl. 175. and l. 3. 147. pl. 196. Southwels Case in the Exchequor. Moor
730. Lemons Case in the Court of Wards. Cook l. 12. 23. Prices Case in the
Star Chamber.

Answ. That these Cases are material to our Authors purpose (more then to amuse
the Reader with Cotations) I cannot find, neither does S.S. set forth the
substance, whereby this Age might understand their Drift and Intent.

But Cook, who he quotes in his justification, was clearly of another Opinion
to what S.S. would suggest; for in the Case he cites 12 Reports 23. That Lover
of his Country, and England's Liberties, Pas. 5. Ja.
speaking of Jurors Freedom by Law to give their Verdicts, declares, That the
Law will not suppose any indifferent, when he is sworn to serve the King etc.
To which agree^ says he, the Books in 22 Ass. 77. Assise p. 13. 21 E. 3 17. 19
H. 6.19. 47 E. 3.17. 27 H. 8.2. F.N.B. 115. A -- And the Law presumes that
every Juror will be indifferent when he is sworn; Nor will the Law admit proof
against this presumption.

But S.S. as conscious of the nullity, of those before recited Authorities, to
justify his Cause, gives us one, as he supposes, to purpose, viz. Wagstaffs
Case Trin. 17. C. 2. in B.R. This (says he) agrees with our present Case in all
points.

And concludes with this, Mich. 16. Car. 2. in Banco Regis: Leech and five
other, being of the Jury, at Justice Hall in the Old Bailey, the last Sessions,
refused to find certain Quakers guilty, according to their Evidence, and upon
that they were bound to appear in the Kings Bench the first day of the next
Term; they appeared accordingly, and the Court directed an Information against
them, and upon that they were fined.

Upon which S.S. concludes the fining of Jurors, that find contrary to their
Evidence is no innovaton, but always practiced, and that by as learned Judges,
as ever England Bred.

We shall not much insist upon the imparity of this last Case in its Points, to
that in hand, being of little further use then to manifest the ignorance and
falsity of our Author, so only say* this to it, that (1) see his ignorance,
that appears by his own showing. Leech's Jury, says he, were fined upon an
Information brought against them in the King's Bench; which much varies from the
Case of Edw. Bushel etc. in that they were Arbitrarily fined by the Bench at
the Old Bailey, without Information or matter of Record, or being brought to
answer by any prec^ss of Law, expressly against the Stat. 25. E. 3. cap. 3.

(2.) See the impudent Falsity of this Libeller; Its acknowledged that Leech,
with five other Jurymen, of whom were Anthony Selby, Oylman, in Pudding Lane;
Edward Briscoe, in Lothbury; -- Brown, a Dyer, in Thames Street, London etc.
Persons of good Reputation, and well known in this City, were (as S.S.
alleges) bound to appear in the King-Bench, by R. Hyde then chief Justice, who
after many foul Reproaches and daring Menaces to those Citizens of London, (as
is too frequent a practice in that Court) commanded an Information to be
exhibited against them in the Crown Office, for acquitting some Quakers, who
were given them in charge at the Old Bailey, to which-they all willingly
appeared; but that they were sized thereon (as asserted by S.S.) is a most
horrid Untruth; for Hyde never afterward in his life time, was so hardy to
prosecute the same to Trial; nor had J.K. his Successor so much Courage to
complete his Predecessors -- Enter^rize, but prudently surceas'd the Su^t: So
this Case cited by S.S is but like the rest of his Authorities, with which he
would patch up and salve his Patrons illegal and arbitrary Procedures.

But that we may come more closly to the point in hand, First, We absolutely
deny S.S. his Conclusion, and do affirm, that as well the Fining and
Imprisoning, as otherwise punishing a Jury of twelve men (I^ pannelled to try
etc. betwixt the King and a Prison^r) for giving a Verdict according to their
Conscience, though (in the sense of the Bench and Justices in Eier) contrary to
Evidence, is an Innovation, and the practice of it against Reason, the Law of
England, and the Liberties of its Freeborn People.

This Point is so considerable, that I may say and affirm, that the fairest
Flower, that now grows in the Garden of the English-mans Liberties, is a fair
Trial by his Peers, or Twelve of his Neighbors, which so much Artifice and
Violence is used, by the wild B^res of our age, to pluck up by the Roots.

In order to its defense and security, let us first remove that grand Ob^ection
of our Adversary, which he makes a Foundation for his after superstructure of
violence and Oppression; And that is from the 29th Chapt^r of the Great
Chapter, on these words, Or by the Law of the Land, intimating therefrom, that
by, (or by the Law of the Land) is meant ^ome other Judges, Judicatu^e, or
Jurisdiction, then Judgment of Peers, as in the third page of his Pamphlet.

The Judgment of ^oke, 2 Instit 50) an undeniable Author, and authority, may
serve. o ^ear the p^^nt. who writes thu^ upon his Exposition on ( per (...))

First, For the true se^ce and expo^ition of these words (says h^) See the
Statute of 37 E. 3. cap. 8 where the words, By the Law of the Land, are
rendered, without due prosess of Law. For there it is said, though it be
contained in the Great Charter, that (...) man be taken, imprisoned, or put out
of h^s Freehold without (...) of Law, that is, by Indictment, or Presentment
of good and Lawful men, where such Deeds be done in due manner, 25 F. 3, and 4.
or b^ Writ original of the Common Law.

Secondly, Without being brought in to answer, but by due process of the
Common Law.

Thirdly, No man be put to answer without presentment before Justices, 28 E.
3.3.
or thing of Record, or by due Process, 37 E. 3.8.
or by Writ original, according to the old Law of the Land* 42 E. 3.3.


By which is most apparent to every rea^onable understanding, that by the words
(or by the Law of the Land) is not meant other Jurisdi^tion, Judges or
Judicature* (wherein, or whereby any man is to be tried) as S.S. would
ignorantly have it; but that the Proceedings against a Freeman of England, in
order to the Judgment of his Peers, or twelve Neighbors, shall be according to
the Laws of the Land, as by Presentment, Indictment etc. Statute 37 E. 3 cap. 8.

And Coke declares, that the said 29 th Chapter was but Declaratory of the old
Law of the Land, which knew no other Judgments, or Jurisdictions for its free
Inhabitants, but Legale Juditium parium suorum; neither have the Freemen of
England heard of any such, except by those arbitrary Innovators, who have felt
the smart of their sore Oppressions, by the hand of Justice, and have received
condign Punishment, as due rewards for their introducing of new Jurisdictions,
as the Reader may see at large, Cook 2 Instit. fol. 51. Cook 4 Inst. fol. 41.
And Horns Mirror of Justice, cap. 5. sect. 1. And this seasonable Caveat and
Caution Cook* has left as a Legacy to such Time-Servers, Qui little Vestigjis
insistunt, little exitus perhorrescant.

This having SHAKEN HIS SANDY FOUNDATION, by the stablished Fundamental Laws,
and the Responsis Prudentium, upon the Ancient Statutes of England. Let us try
the strength of his Babel-superstructure by the same infallable Rules and
Measures.

Says S.S. [ The fining of Jurors has been always practiced.] as page 33.

Answ. Truly his Prescription for time is unquestionable, if he but prove by
Authority, what he barely affirms, but this I fear he will fall short in: Does
he bring his Examples Usages or Customs (so to fine Jurors) from the times or
Laws of Alfred, Athelston, Edmundus, Edgar, Canutus, Edward the Confessor,
William the first, Henry the first, Noble and Famous Princes of this Nation,
(many of whose Laws are yet in force,) from our Charter of Liberties, ancient
Statutes of this Realm? Nothing less.

But should I grant that he had brought a Presedent of later standing to
countenance the late illegal procedure (as by Wagstaffs Case it appears he has)
will it not deservedly fall under the Censure of a Tortious Usage (having
neither the Statute, Law of the Land, nor Reason, the Ground of the Law to
warrant or justify it) which Andrew Horn, a Writer of the Law, in the Reign of
E. 1. accounts no more of, then those of Thieves, whose Vsages are to Rob and
Steal, Mirror Justice cap. 5. sect. 1.

And that we may as aptly suit a Case to our Libellers, as he would have that
of Wagstaffs to answer us, Take a Resolve of a Court not inferior to the
Consideratum est of the K -- Bench, whose Reason and Authority was never
subjected to the Opinion of three or four interested persons, as S.S. by his
bold Pamphlet would have it: I mean the Parliament of the Commons of England,
who upon Justice K -- fining of Wagstaffs Jury Resolved, That he had used an
Arbitrary and Illegal Power, which was of dangerous consequence to the Lives
and Liberties of the People of England, 11 Dec. 1670. Lib. asserted, page 60,
61.
and tended to the introducing of an Arbitray Government.

And that the Presedents and Practice of Fining and Imprisoning Juries for
Verdicts, is illegal.

Hence we may observe, that ( Illo die) Englands Fountain of Justice was clear
and wholesome, although the Rivolets or lesser Streams might be troubled and
corrupted.

Therefore it is worthy our observation what Cook, that Master of Reason
(directing himself to the sobordinate Courts or Seats of Justice said, Quod
fatius est petere fontes, quam sectare rivulos. Cook 4 Institu. Epilogue.
(adding) That they should assuredly prosper and flourish in the distribution
of Justice, if they derived all their Power and Strength from their proper
Roots: Advising them, Not to fear to do Right to all, and to deliver their
Opinions justly according to the Laws.

This wholesome Advice, had it been but timely received by J.K. might have
prevented that Presedent of Oppression, Wagstaffs Case 17. Ca* 2.
quoted by our Author, which rash and unadvised Sentence of his the Parliament
took occasion so to rebuke, though S.S etc. to commend and immitate.

The Auguments and Reasons against Arbitrary Fining of Jurors respect a two
fold Interest, viz. The Freedom of Jurors in particular, and the Freedom of the
People of England in general, who are equally hurt and wounded by the
consequence of such tortious Proceedings.

1. First, Its unreasonable severity, that a Iuror should be enfor^ed to appear
( Nolens aut Volens) at Assizes or Sessions of Peace, and there to be sworn.
Well and truly to try, and true deliverance make, between etc. according to
evidence; and when he has conscientiously performed his Duty, (for which he
receives no Reward) to be Fined at the Will of a Mercenary Justice.

2. Secondly, If a Court has Power Arbitrarily to Fine a Jury, that give not in
a Verdict according to their sense of this or that Fact in Issue, it must be
because the Bench is presumed to have a fuller or* nearer understanding of the
matter in issue, then the Jurors can, which is clearly otherwise in the sense
of the Law; and appears in that the Jurors Summons is for persons ( Per quos
rei veritas melius scire poterit) by whom the Truth of the matter may be better
known.

3. Thirdly, If the Integrity and Honesty of persons judging are to be esteemed
of weight, to evidence the Equallity of the Judgment given; then, surely
twelve Honest Men of the Neighborhood, where the Offense (if any) was
committed, are the most proper Judges; since that twelve men may neither be so
easily corrupted as one single person, nor their Judgment of such fact (twelve
men agreeing in one) so likely to be erroneous, as the single apprehension of
one.

4. Fourthly, If Satisfaction is to be made to a Party grieved, how can it be
done more fully and equally then at the choice of the person offended. The
People or Neighborhood, who are pretended to be wronged or injured, are called
to be judges, to redress their own Grievances; and surely that Satisfaction
they measure out to themselves shall be judged Correspondent to their sustained
Damages.

5. Fifthly, If our Predecessors had thought that the Arbitrary Determination
of a Bench of Justice, had been as equal a Judgment, as that of our Peers;
surely in vain did they exspend so much Blood for the reprizing the latter, and
exterpating the former, Cook 2 Inst. prefact.

6. Sixthly, If a Bench, or single Justice, Recorder, Bailiff etc. shall have
power to fine and imprison a Jury of twelve men, until they gratify their
Wills and Pleasures in their Verdicts, which of our Lives and Liberties can be
secured against the Lusts of such petty Prerogatives, when the Courts
Discretion, not the Law of England ( our Birthright) shall be the Standard to
measure out every man's Desert and Portion. Vide Cook 4 Inst. fol. 42.

We might in this sort much more enlarge to evince of how evil consequence
these Arbitrary Practices are, and will be to the English constitution of
Government. But I have here used the more of Brevity, in as much as this Case
needs no greater, or further Argument to enforce it into any man's
Understanding, then his being an Englishman, and so Born Free, and not a Slave.

But altogether to omit our Stablished and Fundamental Laws would be as blame
worthy, as tediously to enlarge upon them. Therefore I shall from them, and
some Maxims of the Law of England further prove the Unreasonableness and
Unjustness of such Arbitrary Proceedings upon and against Juries.

1. First, Such Proceedings are absolutely against the Great Charter of
Liberties, C^. 2. Inst. 28.
as cap. 14. No Freeman to have Amercements assessed upon him, but by Good and
Honest Men of the Vicinage. As also cap. 29. No Freeman to be Condemned without
the lawful Judgment of his Peers. 2 Institut. 48.
Which two Chapters by Reason and Arguments (in that Discourse of Liberty
Asserted at the Trial of Will. Penn and Will. Mead) are by that Author expounded,
and applied to this present Case, as the Reader may find at large, page 46, 47,
and 48. of that Treatise.

2. Secondly, Such Arbitrary Judgments are against the Statute of 25 E. 1.
cap. 1. which says, That Justices, Sheriffs, Mayors, and other Ministers,
which under us have the Laws of our Land to guide, shall allow the said
Charters to be pleaded before them in all their Points. This is a Clause (says
Cook) Worthy to be written in Letters (...) Gold, that the Laws are to be the
Judges Guides, and therefore not the Judges to guide the Law by their Arbitrary
Glosses, which never yet misguided any, that truly followed them. ^ Cook 2 Inst.

Now to Fine and Imprison Jurors for their Verdicts, which by the Laws of
England they are to give freely, is waving the Rules of Law, and embracing
their own Discretion for a Guide in giving of Judgments. Stat. 25. E. 1. cap. 2.
Notwithstanding it is expressly Enacted, That if any Judgment be given contrary
to the Point of the Great Charter (which was declaratory of the Common Law) by
the Justices, Cook 2 Instit. prefact.
or other the Kings Ministers, it should be Undone, and holden for Naught.

Thirdly, By the Statute of Westminst. 1. Anno 3 E. 1. it is thus Enacted, Co* 2
Inst. 161.
Rex vult and precipit quod Justitia singulis tam -- quam -- nulla habita
Personarum ratione, That Justice shall be done to all without respect of
Persons.

This (says Cook) is an ancient Maxim of the Ccmmon Law, repeated and affirmed
amongst the Law, of King Edgar. And Fleta (says that Author) recites this
Fundamental Law in few words, Lib. 1. cap. 29.
Quod Communis Justitia singulis pariter exhibeatur; That Common Justice be
afforded to all.

If Jurors then be Freemen of England, I know not wherefore they should be
denied that common right (in case they offend the Law) of Trial by their Peers;
and have a Judgment passed upon them against this Common and Fundamental Law,
which is commanded by the express words of the Statute, Inviolabiliter
Observanri, be to Inviolably Observed; that Peace may be kept in this Land.
Cook 2 Inst. 161.

4. Fourthly, Cook in his 2d Inst. fol. 689. affirms that, Ratio Legis est
Anima Legis, The Reason of the Law is the Soul of the Law; and therefore says
he, Quaecunque intra Rationem Legis inveniuntur, intra ipsam Legem judicantur,
Whatsoever shall be found to be within the Reason of the Law shall be adjudged
to be within the Law.

Had the Law of England presumed, That a Mayor, Justice, Bailiff, Sheriff etc.
had been more knowing, and so more proper per Judges, who might give a better
and more equal Determination (of such Facts, which for decision came before
them) then a Jury of twelve men could, or would do: Surely the Law would then
have left all Controversies to their sole Arbitrary Determination; and never
have required and commanded Trials by Jurors, which are not only chargeable to
the Iury-men (Freeholders of this Nation) by reason of their Attendance and
Expense at Assizes and Sessions, but also dangerous, and hazardous to perform,
and do their Duty there.

But according to that Maxim, Lex intendit vicinum vicini facta scire, Cook 1
Inst. 78.
The Law presumes that each man best knows his Neighbors Actions: Therefore
the most proper Judge, whether to condemn his Neighbor as guilty, or to acquit
him as innocent. So we must either lose our Reason, or conclude it Illegal and
Irrational, that Justices whom the Law ( quo ad hoc) concludes Ignorant, should
judge or condemn Jurors (for Ignorance) whom the Law ( quo ad hoc) concludes
more knowing then themselves.

5. Fifthly, the fifth Reason and Argument to evince the Illegality of such
Arbitrary Proceedings, may be drawn from that Maxim of Law, more then once
used by the learned Cook, viz. Lex est tutissima Cassis, 2 Inst 56. and 526.
The Law is the surest Sactuary that a man can take, and the strongest Fortress
to protect the Weakest: Yea (says that Author) Sub clipeo Legis nemo
decip^tur, It fails none that put their trust in it. We have no reason to
believe, that that Author put an Encomium upon the Laws of England (we mean the
Fundamental Laws, the Charters of Liberties, of which he then treated) beyond
their real Worth and Value: But must rather conclude, that such Arbitrary
Proccedings, which leave the Freemen of England void of Defense, and Remediless
of Relief, are not according to the Rules and M^xims of Law, but clearly
otherwise.

And that the Fining and Imprisoning of Jurors are such; may further app^ar in
these Particulars.

First, In that the Jurors are condemned without a Trial, whether they have
done their Duty or not; that is, whether they have found with or against their
Evidence etc.

2. Secondly, In that the Judgment against them (be it Vicious or Erroneous,
either in respect of the irregularity of the Proceedings or nullity of the Fact
charged upon them) cannot be examined or reversed by Writ of Error.

3. Thirdly, In that no such Superior Court can receive or hear their Appeal,
as upon Indictments, and all other Proceedings by due course of Law they might.

Manifesting that such Arbitrary Proceedings against Jurors are far more severe
and hard, then any Convictions of Traitors, Thieves, and Murderers, (who are
apprehended ( Flagranti Delicto) and tried by due Course of Law.

And since they are so unreasonable that they allow not a Jury of twelve ( Boni
and Legales Homines) Good and Lawful Men, neither liberty of defense before
Judgment, nor an after Trial or Examination of the Fact for which they were
condemned, we must necessarily conclude them Illegal and Irrational, so null
and void, according to that known Maxim, Co. 2 Inst. 11.
Cessante ratione Legis cessat ipsa Lex: And leave them to that just Censure of
the Parliament of the Commons of England, Votes Par. Ang. 11. Dec. 1667.
THAT THEY WERE INNOVATIONS IN THE TRIALS OF MEN FOR THEIR LIVES AND LIBERTIES.

S.S. his 2d, 3d, and 4th Remarks Examined.
(Says S.S.) If it be objected, That in the present Case, being an Indictment
for a Trespass, an Attaint does lie, and therefore ought to be punished in
Attaint. Which he thus himself answers, Brook, Title Attaint 130. says, Et sic
admittitur, quod si le Roy fuit merement. Party, Attaint negist. Where the King
is sole Party Attaint does not lie: In our present Case, the King is sole
party, and therefore by the old Law no Attaint does lie.

In the answering of his own Objection the Author has taken up no less then
four or ^^ve Pages of his Discourse; and the whole of his second, third, and
fourth Remarks, in quoting nine or ten Book-Cases and Statutes, to prove his
Assertion, that no Attaint lies where the King is Party; Ending his Libel thus
-- From these four Remarks I conclude Nothing, but leave the Determination of
this important Affair to the honorable Sages of our Law; and Pray, that in
this, and in all other Businesses of Concernment, that God (the Great Judge of
Heaven and Earth) would guide and direct them.

Answ. 1st The Righteous God (whom this Libeller imprecates) has declared. That
the Prayers of the Wicked are an Abomination to him, Prove. 15.9. and 28.9.

2d The Frivolousness and Impertinentness of this Ribaldry to the Controversy
in hand, will appear to the meanest Capacity, that will take the pains to
compare it, to the Libellers own Text, viz. The fining of that Jury that gave
two Contrary Verdicts Justified.

3d The King being Party, so no attaint lies (the matter of these three last
Remarks) is so far from being an Objection, to be offered by the Friends of
those oppressed Jurors, that they not only grant to him, that no attaint lies
against such Jurors, but that it is horrid Injustice and Oppression to punish
them by that, or any other way; which we shall clear briefly in these
Particulars.

1. First, It might suffice any rational man, That Jurors, betwixt the King and
Prisoners, ought not thus (by Arbitrary Fines, or other Means) to have
punishment inflicted upon them, in as much as the Ancient Common Law of England
is so far from directing of Pai^es, that it declares, That all Restraints of
Jurors are Abusions of the Law: Which we have from Andrew Horn, a learned
Writer of the Law in the time of Ed. 1. who amongst the great abuses of the
Common Law ( for some of which King Alfred executed several of his corrupt
Judges) sets down this, Title Abusions of the Common Law; cap. 5. sect. 1.
viz. It is Abuse to compel Jurors to say that which they know not, by distress
of Fine and Imprisonment, after their Verdict. And that this is the Statute Law
to this day may appear.

2d, In that the Grand Councels of England in Parliament have no less then
Twenty several times, Vide Poltons statutes, Title Attaint.
given their Judgments about the false or vicious Verdicts of Jurors; Enacting
twenty one Statutes for the correcting and punishing of such Defaults. And
doubtless, (they having been so often near the Point) had the Law of England,
and Right and Liberty of its People, admitted of such Punishments, as the
Adversaries of both at this day put in practice, they would have let us
understood it, and not suffer the Law so many Ages to be ( Vagum and
incognitum) But those Councels making no such Breach upon our Fundamental Laws,
Rights, and Liberties; and this our present Parliament, by their Resolves,
confirming the same, we may and must aver the contrary procedures, Innovations,
so illegal and opressive. But to conclude.

3d Lex semper intendit quod convenit Rationi, 1 Inst. sect. 103
The Law (says Cook) always intends that which is agreeable to Reason. And
Reason will with ease reconcile; wherefore the Law has not prescribed nor
directed a Punishment for Jurors, who give a Verdict according to their
Consciences, though contrary to the sense of a Court or Bench of Justices in
Causes where the King is Party, as for Felony, Trespass, etc. viz. As our
English Government is now stablished ( Potestas Regia est facere justitiam)
It Is regal power to do Justice. Co. 2 In. 375.
And therefore all Indictments are prosecuted in the name of the King, although
the Felony, Trespass etc. was committed upon the People, who really received
the Tort and Wrong; yet because the King has undertaken, for the Safety,
Defense, and Protection of his Subjects, the Trespass etc. is said to be done
to him: Yet Experience and Reason tells us, that the People of England are not
therefore the less interested in, nor will be the less careful of the Security
of their Persons and Estates, but do and will use their uttermost endeavor to
defend the first from Violence, preserve the second from Ruin. So 1st the (
Boni and Legales Homines) or Jurors impannelled to do Justice upon such Fellons
etc. being Freeborn Englishmen, and as nearly interested and concerned in the
Punishment of public Offenders, as any, who are said to Prosecute. And 2dly,
The Law presuming they would be no more Treacherous to their own Peace and
Safety, then the King faithful to preserve them, thought good to lay no other
Obligation or Engagement upon Jurors in such Cases, but the consideration of
their own Weal, Peace, and Safety; which many hundred years, has by experience
been found sufficient, Stat. 28 E. 1.
Till Justices on the Benches and Seats of Judicature turned Informers and
Prosecutors, Vide Cook 2 Inst. 178, 179.
and instead of not knowing persons in Judgment, appeared (contrary to their
Oaths) as Counsel for the King, and Prosecutors and Executioners upon the
Prisoners.

This I shall take the Liberty to Remark upon S.S. the Writer of that
Scandalous Libel, that however he would recommend himself to the King and
Country, as a Man of Reputation and Truth, or at least to the deserving, the
estimation of Learning and Ingenuity; this Work of his has given them an
opertunity to take other measures of his Deserts, who has in this one Section
of his Libel, not only manifested mere Falsehood in his Charge, but also
Ignorance in his Proofs.

First, His Falsehood appears, in calumniating the Jurors with mere Untruths,
and that by his own showing.

Secondly, His Ignorance, in that he has not in the least colourably justified
his Assertions, or those Practices of his Patrons (whom he appears for) against
the Jurors. Yea, I may say that his Folly has so accompanied his Knavery, that
he needs no other Character then his own Work in Print.

And whether he has Reason to assume that Title he takes to himself in the
Front of his Piece, viz. To be a Friend to Justice and Courts of Justice. I
submit to those of the Long-Robe, he allarums to look to themselves, and to the
juditious Reader, that will weigh his Discouse; For my own part, I am not in
the least jealous that he is any such Person: But if this Author would favor
us with the knowledge of his name, then Justice and its Courts might express
their Gratitude, for his seasonable Vindication of them; and the Mayor,
Recorder's etc. Candor and Integrity in their juditial Proceedings, at the
Old Bailey, against the Jury and Prisoners.

Less then this I could not say, by reason of those false Aspertions that this
Libeller has cast upon my Friends the Jurors; to enlarge I shall forbear,
inasmuch as the Author has closed his Discourse with pretense to leave the
important affair to the Judges determination, whose Judgments I desire may, and
I hope will be measured by the straight Metwand of the fundamental Laws of
England, and not by the crooked Line of Discretion, for say, the wisest of Men,
and noblest of Princes, Co. 2 Just.
Qui derelinqunt legem, laudant improbos; at qui observant legem, miscent
praelia cum illis.

I had no other end in this short Discouse, but to vindicate Truth and Justice
from Falsehood and Violence; so my earnest Zeal is, that the first may ever
stand over the heads of their Opposers and Oppressors.

Newgate Prison in London, the 12th Month, 1670. T. Rudyard.

Postscript.
TO Answer the Libellers Challenge, and defend the Author of the Trial etc. in
reference to S.S.S. it may not be impertinently observed, that if he will
please to enquire of one John Barnes of Hornsey, whether the late Mayor was not
a Commissioner for settling the late Powers Militia, and so brisk and sharp a
Reflecter upon those that went under the notion of Cavaliers, above the rest of
the Committee, as to incur the rebuke of his Brother-Commissioners; we hear
that he may receive very ample satisfaction, if it may be any to be found in a
mistake of what he so confidently ventured to assert.

Nor is it less worthy of notice, that upon enquiry made of Dr Whitchcock, he
could not but acknowledge, that S. Sterling was so far from deserting the
University, for want of conformity to the Scottish Covenant, that it never was
tendered to any of that College.

Which is not remarkt out of Prejudice to the Mayor, but love to the Truth, and
a desire to manifest his libellous Apollogist, who rather then his defensive
Flatteries should fail his Diana, or his injust Slanders miss us, resolves to
break through all the bonds of Truth, Law, and Religion. Not that we would
render it so criminal to serve the Nation under both Govenments, as (having
served both) to persecute either.

But we will end the whole with this solemn Declaro', and protest,

First, That we are Freeborn Englishmen, and esteem our selves undoubted
Heirs of our Countries Liberties, not to be dis-inherited upon any religious
Difference, it being no Clause or Proviso in our first Civil Constitution, or
Forefathers last Will and Testament.

Secondly, That we have been deprived of our dear Liberty and Property, and
that merely for Worshipping the God that made Us; against all Law, Reason, and
Scripture ( particularly at the Old-Bailey.)

Thirdly, That notwithstanding such daily provocations, we do as heartily
forgive, as we are maliciously persecuted; (bearing no ill will to the persons,
of any) The Title and Tenure of our holy Gospel being Glory to God on High, on
Earth Peace, and Good Will toward all men.

And we could desire of God (if it might please him) to open their Eyes, and
affect their Hearts with a right sense of things, that they might understand
how much more it would be their true Interest to rebuke Vice, then punish
Opinion, and that in themselves first: So would Oppression cease, the
Spring-Tides of Intemperance fall; and Mercy, Truth, Justice and Peace flow
over all the Banks of Animosity, Self-interest Revenge; to the once more
refreshing of our Weary, Dry and Parched Country, with the pleasant Streams of
through Reformation.

From Newgate Prison in London, the first Month, 1671. W. Penn.


THE END.
Courteous Reader,
THou art desired to place the numerous Errors of this Discourse to the account
of difficulty in Printing any thing that comes not out with an IMPRIMATUR in
the front of it: But as we cannot fly to the Hills, to hide us; so will it be
esteemed civility in thee to excuse the Authors from the Mistakes; be they
Points, Letters, Syllables, or whole Words. A short Collection follows.

Page Line Errors Corrected 3 17 Gilt Guilt 18 srcipta scripta 19 become
becomes 4 4 imply employ 5 last doubted thought 12 last Christ God 16 1 ginious
genius 19 15 conformed conform 27 17 maind manned 39 23 Goaled Goalers 40 5 Mead
Mead's 41 7 they we 17 or for 43 2 so to 14 commanded they commanded 44 12 it
was the they were 50 3 out-stript out, stripped 7 Friend Friends 52 10 impudent
imprudent 53 20 the their 54 last that that it 59 11 This Thus 25 cient ancient
28 it appears he pretends 60 28 Auguments Arguments 33 Proceedings Proceedings
as appears th^s.


