William Penn's RETURN To John Faldo's REPLY, CALLED A Curb for William Penn's
Confidence, etc.
Writ in Defense of his Answer to John Faldo's Printed Challenge.
MY Answer to J. Faldo's Challenge was in terms so Modest, that no man not bent
to be Abusive, and resolved against all Candor and Moderation, could have taken
such Pains as he has done, to bedirt it. Would I so ill bestow my Time, I
could well nigh fill as great a Compass with the Hard Names he flings upon it;
The Refuge and Practice of Petulant and Empty Adver^aries. His Title charges it
with False Inf(...)a(...)s and Juglings: I seriously pro^ess, I never intended
any thing with more Tr^th, Plainness and Softness then that short Answer. And
truly, that which renders this Usage at any time ^neasie, is the fastening
unjustly that Character upon me and my Friends, which is most deservedly their
own, thereby concealing and securing the Offender, and substituting the
Innocent in his room, to the Deceiving of the Simple, and exposing us to the
Bate of the rude and ignorant Multitude: But it is our Lot, and mine at this
time more particularly; I was treated at another rate whilst I could cry
Hosanna to his Order.

But let us hear what he says to prove that my Answer contains f^lse
Insinuations and Juglings. I told him, That it was unfairly done of him to
choose the Barbican-Meeting, to divulge his Challenge to me, which I had
received no notice of. To this he replies; That the Meeting was occasioned by
the Quakers Appeal: Which, beside that it is nothing to the Purpose, is a great
Untruth: Did we occasion any Meeting, wherein we were concerned to be present
without our Notice and Consent, either as to Matter or Manner, Time or Place,
taking the word Occasion in the common Acceptance of it? Nobody surely, but
J. Faldo, and such Prejudgers can think so. For Shame be Just!

But he believes such a Critical Season seldom happens, wherein both G. W. and
I before so long a Season out of the Reach of so public a Concern. What then!
Therefore were we not then out of Reach? What would he be at? Lamentable
Weakness! Is this to justify his Cowardly Brags? I will call them so now,
since softer Terms fair'd so ill at his hands. But let J. F know, that for that
Glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, our Lord, he with as much Envy as Untruth
s^ggests us to deny, we are frequently engaged in remote Places, and that for
Weeks, and sometimes Months, where no Letters can be sent to us with any
previous Knowledge where to find us; insomuch as that our nearest and dearest
Relations may have taken their Leave of this World, and exchanged their House
for Grave; before our Return, or Knowledge of their Condition; which might have
better bee^ considered by this Stipendiary Resident, who though he gets more
Money by it, is not exposed to that and many other Hardships.

But to palliate the Injust Procedure of the Baptists against us at their first
Barbican-Meeting, he tells us a Tail of G. Whitehead's surprising him with a
Dispute upon three days Notice, which he says, was not according to the
Agreement made betwixt him and some of our Friends, to wit, Mutual Consent;
which granted to him, neither helps the Baptists, nor hurts us: for first, G.
Whitehead went principally to a Meeting of our Friends, and if he might have
Opportunity, to allay the Heat of this Vapouring Adversary. 2dly, It was so far
left with J. Faldo, either to accept or reject, as that it was most remote from
the Thoughts of G. W. upon his Refusal to assemble the Inhabitants of the
Place, and in his Absence exclaim both against his Faith and Pra^tice; our
manifest Suffering from T. Hicks and his Confederates 3dly, There can be
nothing well falser then his insinuating the Issue of that M^eting to have been
his Q^iet from the Quakers; if by Quiet he understands any Fear upon them from
his Force of Argument to encounter him; since he could neither recover our half
Proselyte, as he is pleased to call that Person once a Hearer of him; nor did
he re^t one Month without a fair offer of another Meeting from some of our
Friends near the Place of his Residence, which, as I am informed, he declined:
I blame him not for doing so. But suppose G. W. was as culpable as he
represents him, who so little deserved his Reflection; how does this excuse T.
Hicks, or extenuate his own Injustice, who without any Notice given to G. W. or
my self, did so publicly at Barbican in our Absence abuse the one, and
challenge forth the other in Defense of himself and Friends, from a Charge then
exhibited by him against our Faith and Principles, suggesting to the Auditory,
as if what were in Reality but his own crooked Consequences (detested of us)
had been the express Articles of our Creed. If yet he can presume to believe
himself Modest, Just or Christian, his Case is desperate, and I heartily pity
his Mistake.

But he faults me for saying, He could not but know of my being at a great
Distance; telling me, That I either make him an Extraordinary Gnostick, or my
self such an Over-Lasher as needs to have my words well measured after me.
Truly if J. Faldo has the Doing of it, I am sure to be wronged, unless he has
changed his Wont. How near a kin he is to the Gnostics in other Respects, I
will not undertake to determine; only if what Epiphamus writes of their Self
Conceit, be true, J. F. has printed himself one of the Extraordinariest
Gnostics of this Age: But I will stand to my words, that he must needs know of
my Absence; for they that gave him notice of the Meeting, being some of the
Persons concerned, might also inform him, that I was at a great distance, they
receiving that Answer: But left he should deny all this, as proba^le as it is,
the Prolocutor's Gloss upon the Word EAST, does the Business to an Hairs
breadth; for unless J. Faldo's Ears happen like J. Ives's, to be all of a
sudden thick of Hearing, or to have as great an Impediment as T. Hick's Tongue
(that is, in Cases unpleasant to them) he could not but observe, that W. K.
insinuated, as if I had Voyag'd to the East-Land, or the East Indies, too far
for the Noise of J. Faldo's Charge to be heard, as Empty as it was* But I must
not forget, and yet take no Delight to remember, that Grave Person purposely
left out England, joined to East, in the Letter, that he might better break his
Jest.

But be it as it will, I cannot but return J. Faldo an Allusion in his first
Book, it may be, not in the very Words, yet the same Sense, viz. That he does
with me in this as nicely and unjustly, as some Physicians, who strictly
prohibit that to their Patients they eat themselves with great Gusto.

I further told him, as he observes, that I had twice Defended our Faith in
Print against him, and that a considerable Book lay at his Door unanswered. To
this he gives me several Returns, worth noting, for something or other: one is
this, That he perfectly knows the Contrary; To what? That I have twice defended
our Belief: The Quibble is here; I have twice Writ, but not twice Defended;
notable! but he goes of late for a Critic. however, who say so? John Faldo.
Does he prove as well as say? No such matter. He would not be mistaken, yet in
asserting he transcends; for he further tells us, That I have not overthrown
one Line of his books; in which, as he explicitly proves his own Impudence and
Ostentation, so implicitly he calls many, far from Quakerism, as he terms it,
Fools or Knaves for the^r contrary Judgment.

But to the next Reason; My Prints have confirmed him; which, though no
Evidence to others of the Reasonableness of his Belief, yet a great one to me,
that that Scripture is fulfilling upon him, Wicked Men shall wax worse and
worse. But this is not all:

He tells us, That it is not a Considerable Book. Who expe^ted J. Faldo should
say any other? But does he not hold himself obliged to help others to the same
Creed* if his Heat be any better then Mercenary? should he not endeavor to
disintangle those that otherwise opinionate of the Matter? Doubtless he thinks
it not less deserving his Pains, then those his first Book pretended to refute:
If he does, he would have done well to point in what; if he does not, why does
he not answer me as well as them? Or why did he begin at all, if he intended no
to make good what he said? But I would not be tho^g^t to imitate Pharaoh's
putting the People to make Brick without Straw, by urging him to defend that
which indeed is indefensible: Only, it is worth our Notice, that the Book is
not considerable; but prithee, why? I think so. Ergo, what? It is not
considerable. This Way of arguing calls J. Faldo an Idle Meddler, for ever
writing an Half-Crown or Three Shillings Book, to terminate here, My Adversary
is not Consid^rable. So much Wit, Folly, or Shuffle, call it what he will,
would have saved him much Brainwork in the beginning; but it may do the Man
some good: Fol^s ^ay so of Experience dear bought; and better Rep(...). late
then never, though its commonly judged to be a Repentance per force.

Well, but there is more behind, viz. Whatever Qualities my last Book had, he
tells me, it is more then I knew, that ever he saw it; He is sure, I never laid
it at his Door, by sending one of them to him. If he had said, by receiving one
of them it had past him; for I might have sent it, and it might have many ways
miscarried: But I will not press him with this, nor talk either of Gnostics,
or Over-Lashers to Lash him with. And that I may right my self, and show him
how willing I was it should lie at his Door, I did to the best of my
remembrance, order him one, and if it came not to his hand, it neither accuses
me, nor excuses him. J. Faldo sent me none of his, and I think I never gave
that for a Reason why either of them lay at my Door.

But it seems J. Faldo has lately been at Bedlam, and one would think so by
the Story he tells; an Impertinent one it is Some Body said something of W. P.
etc. but Who he knows not; here is the Upshot. What I should say I know not;
for he neither directs me to the Person, nor House: So I must be contented to
leave it as I found it, with J. Faldo and Bedlam, a Place that suits the
Relation.

He has not yet done: My Book is said to be printed in 1673. and it stuck in
the Birth till many Months were past of the Year 1674. This hits the Book in
the Head, provided the Title Page may stand for one* But how does J. Faldo know
it stook so many Months in 1674? Which way came he so well acquainted with the
Secrets of the Press? But let us see what this Objection amounts to. The Title
is either printed first, or last: If first, say in 73. would he have the
Printer foresee all those Difficulties that may obstruct the coming forth of
the Book till 74. in order to set down 73, 74? This were to make a Gnostick of
him with a Witness; or if he does not, his Book shall be charged with an
Untruth: If the Title be printed last (which I suppose is not common) say in
74. and he sets down 74. he tells an Untruth of the Book, though not of the
Title: Should the Printer then have set it down 73, 74. because some of the
Book was printed in 73. this had been an Untruth respecting the Title Page; for
that was all and only printed in 74.

That ever a man that loved Reputation at the rate they that know him say he
does, should be so Idle in Print! Suppose his Observation true; Is the Book
therefore not Considerable? or does it not lie at his Door? or is W. P. to be
blamed, which is the Business in hand? What he would be at I know not; unless
he designed to show that he is a Critic and well skilled in Annals: but I am
of Opinion that Baronius (after the old Proverb) may sleep in a whole Skin for
all J. Faldo's Attempts.

His next Reason for not giving my Rejoinder any Return, is, as he says
elsewhere, Magnipotent. I have two Thousand Pounds per ann. in Possession, as
reported: I may waste Paper, but he (Alas for him!) must write no more then is
deemed Convenient and Satisfactory.

I perceive that J. Faldo is governed much by Reports, and that may be one
Reasen why the Man reports so much Untruth: But if he will make the Report
good, I will give him a Years Rent, and let him waste Paper, or waste it in
Paper, and then call it an Answer to W. P. if he pleases. I observe that his
Want of it is the Reason of his not being a better Friend to the Printer; for
his words, that He must write no more then what is deemed convenient, imply,
that had he wherewithal, he might Write and Waste, and Waste and Write. But
what is the true English of this Apologetical Sentence? It is to be suspected
this, viz. I must write no more then can be sold: The Booksellers do not deem
more of my Writings Convenient and Satisfactory; For I cannot believe that J.
F. could not write what he deems both Convenient and Satisfactory. But what is
become of that greedy Appetite in Learned and Unlearned after his Books, not
only certified by the Booksellers, but with a most nauseous Self Glorying
proclaimed by himself in his Vindication? For my part, I know not what else to
infer from all this then that his Books are become a Drug; at least, they so
far stick undigested in the Peoples Stomachs, if not unsold in the Booksellers
Shops, as there is neither Appetite enough in the one, nor Room enough in the
other for more of the Labors of the Author of Quakerism No Christianity.

But he thanks me that I have put one Argument into his Mouth, viz. Wherefore
has W. P. made such a Bussie against Mr. Hicks and me, seeing he has not
touched, or much less answered the far greater part of my first Book?

Oh that J. Faldo would but learn to write Truth, and not cover great Weakness
and Baleness with so much Untruth! Have I not answered to every Charge in the
first Book? Examined 2, 3, 4 or 5. of his Witnesses at a time to each Charge;
that is, Testimonies out of our Friends Books, he brought to justify it? It
seems then that my not fully Answering of his first Book is one Reason why he
has hitherto declined Publishing something against my second; but had the Man
been of this Mind before, doubtless he would never have writ a Second.

But what says J. F. to my second Book, wherein I charge him in Point of Fact
with so many horrid Abuses or our Principles and Writings? Not one word, unless
that it is a considerable Book for Railing, Confidence, abusing Authors,
Impertinences, Falsehoods, and unfaithful Gi^^ng what I pretend to confute. What
sense can be had against such a Flail? Is this through the aboundings of the
Man's M^desty? Am I not like to be cured of my Confidence by a Curb made up of
such Links? Certainly unless J. Faldo has as little Brains, as this Character
of my Book shows him to have of Honesty, he cannot think tkis Entertainment
should prevail with me to step over the Kennel to meet such A --. If ever Man
was wronged, I am in that Expression; though his Saying and Not Proving helps
it a little. I will at present overlook all but the last Ill Quality he fastens
upon my Rejoinder, and that is, Not fairly citing his Reply: I think I may say,
I have quoted the better half of his Reply into my Rejoinder, and that with
such Distinction as any Capacity may discern his Matter from mine; And where he
has quoted One Line of mine, I have quoted Three of his. But I cannot think
this the Way to Carb my Confidence; or to Act the Modest Man, To Charge and Not
Prove; Nay, to Overlook so much Charged and Proved against him in my Rejoinder,
That is, Vnfairly Citing us, grossly Perverting what is cited, Adding or
Diminishing, as best answered his Ends; overlooking my Matter and Arguments,
and evading the Strength of most of what he cited; Charging Consequences
unfairly drawn upon us for our Principles, and abusing our Writings to maintain
that Abuse; which is not only proved in the Body of the Discourse, but summed
up at the End of my Rejoinder, to help the Readers Memory. And so far has the
Man been from Defending himself Do^trinally, that he suffers himself to remain
without all Defense against my Charges.

But he has told us very seasonably, His farther Writing is not deemed
Convenient or Satisfactory; A great deal of Wi^dom, believe me, in the D^emers;
and a great ^hare of Submission in t^is Adversary. I confess it is no Argument
to do Indiscretly a third time, because a Man has done so twice before. Had I
returned him a Seurrilousc Frothy and Evasive Pamphlet (like his Reply) to his
great Book, I should have blamed my self, not him; but I did conscientiously
consider it, and bestowed a large and grave Discourse upon it, faithfully
citing, and (I hope) as fully enervating it. But to this he objects, and that
seems the Strength of his Sheet, if there be any in it; that is, That he made
12 Citations out of our own Books, and brought 13 Texts of ^cripture to prove
(one Point of many) and that I took bu^ 2 of each; which granted, makes nothing
against me, but proves himself Weak to say no worse: For either each of them he
brought was pertinent, or not; If not, then his urging them calls him
Impertinent; If pertinent, I answered the Law that says, In the Mouth of two
Witnesses, etc. for I examined Two, I thought of his Considerabl^st, and sound
them nothing to his Purpose, but that he had aggravated his Evil by grossly
Abusing our Books, to prove his Infamous Charge: Now I would fain know, if it
became not J. Faldo rather to have shown how weakly I invalidated his Evidence,
and proved him as Abuser of our Words, then to tell the World I took but Two
into Consideration; for if he be gone upon them, he is gone upon all; for they
are not a Jot more to his Purpose, if so much, as those examined: And I did not
holy my self obliged to answer every impertinent Line in his Book: If I skipt
the Strength of his Evidence, or that those I left had something not expressed or
employed in the other, it had been proper for him to have particularly and
expressly excepted against me; all which he not doing, his Objection is
frivolous, and amounts to no more then a mean Shuffle.

But he tells the World, That also a whole Chapter of Apostolical Inspirations
lie at my Door untoucht, and that they may judge at what rate I have answered
his Book.

Poor Man! Is this all he can do, after he has thought fit to give us a second
Book? Must his first be his Asylum still? Why did he not tell T. H. and W K. so
to excuse his coming to Barbican? Is he for Disputing notwithstanding, and yet
not for Writing? It seems then that it is not deemed Inconvenient to Dispute,
but Write. Well! But why will J. Faldo drop things against himself, and, as he
terms it, put Instances in my Mouth, to prove him a most Disingenuous and
Impudent Person? for did I not tell him, That what concerned us upon the Point
of Inspiration, I had treated at large else where, and there was no need of a
Repetition? Now has he shown or attempted an Enervation of that? Nothing less.
Or that we were concerned in that more then in his 4th Chapter? No such Matter.
Or has he given us one Reason, why I ought to have considered it? Or dare he
say, the other contained not the Matter of it? What more can we say to a Man of
this Forehead? I told him of Scores of Passages given by him under our Name,
he had not so much as cited Person or Book for, as well as abundance wilfully
abused by him, that he did cite: To all which he is as mute as if I had never
accused him, or he had nothing to say in his own Vindication. Is his
Recrimination (suppose a Reason for it in its place) a valid Answer? Would he
have thought this enough to his two Books? How easily could we have told J. F.
Thou have abused our Religion, Books and Persons; but would he have accepted
this as a sufficient Answer or Rejoinder? He tells the World of our Denying the
Man's Nature, or Man Chirst Jesus, and brings a Company of wrested and
misapplyed Sentences to vail his Abuse from the Vulgar; who most faithfully and
honestly believe it, and never speak or write undervaluingly of it: But because
we press and exalt his Spiritual App^arance, or Christ as come in Spirit to the
Soul for its particular Redemption, the Work of our Day; the other being
granted on all hands; therefore men of his Leaven inser, That we make void the
ourward Coming and Sufferings of Christ, and utterly deny and reject him, as he
is the Man Christ Jesus. I wish for their sakes that thus traduce us, they were
as far from drawing such Consequences, as our Faith is from countenancing them.
Of this I have spoak so largely both in my Answer and Rejoinder disingenuously
overlookt by this Adversary.

But he faults me for saying, That W. Smith 's Catechism is scripturally
written, etc. but never takes notice of his unworthy Assertion, nor my Answer,
as he ought to have done. The Matter was this: J. Faldo making use of this
Instance, to prove we preferred our own Writings before the Scriptures, viz.
That we called our own Sayings and Books, The Voice of the Son of God was
uttered forth by him, etc. Truths Principles; Shield of Truth, etc. I answered,
that those Titles were given with respect to that Divine Truth they declared of
and testified unto; not in Comparison with the Scriptures: That not one of
those Books were destitute of Scripture; but it either generally writ in a
Scriptural Still, or particularly defended by express Scripture cited; therefore
of necessity the Scripture must also partake with them in common of those
famous Titles: And thus far have they the Preference that they are quoted on
purpose to give the Truth we write of greater Credit; What is that greater
Credit then to be exactly agreeable with them?

This and more I gave for Answer; He replieth thu:

I leave it to my Reader to give a Name to this Passage, the like to which for
a daring Untruth the World has scarcely been acquainted with; yet the Man
pretends, besides all other Graces, to * Infallibility.

It is frequent with him, and that Sort of Adversaries, to fling Infallibility
in our Teeth; and here he does it with manifest Derision, as if it was a
greater Evil to be Infallible, then to Err; but let the Reader know, that we do
not so much as pretend to any such Thing, as mere Men; for as such, Humanum est
crrare; but in our Judgment of the Things of God, so far as we receive it from
the Grace of God. And if this be a Piece of Quakerism in Opposition to
Christianity in J Faldo's Account, the Scripture must answer for it; only I
cannot but take Notice how he beats the Air, who either defends or opposes any
Religion upon Fallible Grounds.

In many a large Libel I could produce, where there is not one Quotation of
Scripture. W. Smith in his Directory for Religious Principles, consisting of
above 200. Pages, has not one Scripture quoted, not one Exhortation to read
the Scriptures; but as his main Scope, denies and throws Dirt upon them.

This was J. Faldo's Reply, I shall now contract the Substance of my Rejoinder
to it.

First, I did not say that there was not one Book without plenty of express
Scripture, but that those Books (whose Titles he quoted) were either generally
in a Scripture Style, or particularly defended by plenty of express Scriptures.

Secondly, To confute me, he produces one of those Books, wherein he says,
one Scripture was not quoted; as if that was sufficient to prove, it was not
written generally in a Scripture Style one half of the ^uestion; Upon which I
made him this Challenge, to give me one Book out of a Scripture style, that is
not Controversial, or any Controversial Book without express Scripture cited:
If he could not, his vain Insulte should fall upon his own Head. In this
particular, though he has ove looked all the rest of my Discourse in Defense of
our Faith, Writings and Principles, he undertakes me in his pretended Curb to
my Confidence, in these words, To accept W. P 's Challenge is no bold thing;
and to show his unparalled. Falsehood and Confidence, I shall need to give
you but a few Instances out of W. Smith's Catechism and Primer.

But J. Faldo, Three instances, few enough to be sure, prove 200 Pages
generally unscriptural, the Terms of the Question? Methinks this shows more
Confidence then a Man that undertakes to Curb another Man's Confidence ought to
have: but all J. Faldo's sayings are to be construed cum grano salis. But to
the first Instance.

Child. I would know Father, how it is concerning those things call'
Ordinances, as Baptism, Bread and Wine, which are much used in their Worship?

Father. Why Child, as to those things, they rose from the Pope's Invention --
And then the Priest gives it to the People, and tells them that it is the Blood
of Christ shed for them, when it is Wine, and not Blood, Smith's Catechism,
page 39.

I see nothing unscriptural in either. Question or Answer; unless J. Faldo
quibbles upon the Pope. It Is true, he rose not till several hundred years after
the Scriptures were written; but if there be a use of those things called
Sacraments, invented by the Pope, after another manner then they were ever
practiced by the ancient Christians, which is undeniable with J. Faldo, and
that scuh an unscriptural use may be called an Invention, and that the Pope be
a Man, ^ea, the Man of Sin, as also J. Faldo, I suppose, and many more do
conceive, and all this Scripturally; then, I hope, it cannot with any sober
Pretense be denied but that W. S's Answer is very Scriptu^^l. But what makes
this great Pretender to Truth and Modesty decline taking any notice of that
Charge I published against him upon occasion of his most gross Abuse of W. Smith
upon these words? who would needs have it, that W. Smith calls the Lord's
Supper the Pope's Invention, when I expressly proved out of the same place, that
W. Smith intended it of the present Practice of them, and not of any primitive
Institution? W. Smith's words are these: The whole Practice of those things as
THEY USE them, had their Institution by the Pope, and were never SO ordained of
Christ; for he did not ordain Sprinkling of Water in a Child's face, or to make
a Sign of a Cross in his forehead, nor Godfathers and Godmothers to undertake
for it; neither did he ordain Bread and Wine to be SO (or after that Manner)
used and received. If this be to make Baptism and the Supper Popish, what
becomes of his Antipaedobaptists and all Protestants, that maintain the same
respectively? But most evident it is, VV. Smith intended not that Baptism and
Supper used by the Ancient Christians; but most true it is, that J. Faldo made
VV. Smith to intend so. I leave the Reader to give a Name to this Carriage; the
like to which for a Daring Perversion I yet know nobody guilty of, J. Faldo and
T. Hicks excepted.

Now for the next Instance brought to prove our Books unscripturally written.

Child, Then the Scriptures are to be owned and believed as a true Testimony of
what the Saints were made Partakers of in that Day.

Father, Yes, they are to be owned and believed, and they that do not so they
are to be denied.

An admirable Confession to the Scriptures: Is this the way to prove W. Smith's
Book unscripturally written? That there is not an Exhortation to read the
Scriptures, and that the whole scope of it is, to throw Dirt upon them, yea, to
deny them, though J. Faldo himself tells us, that W. Smith, teaches that those
ought to be denied that do not own them; but the Truth is, J. Faldo's Proofs
against the Quakers are like Hebrew to be read backwards; He has a Faculty
beyond the common rate of men, to facilitate his own Confutation. But he makes
W. Smith further to Answer.

Thou must take heed Child, of giving more unto the Scriptures, then unto them
belongs, lest in so doing thou diminishest from the Glory of Christ.

What of all this? May not People Idolize, as well as undervalue the
Scriptures? Ought they to be put in the room of Christ? Or is it ill done, to
exhort People to prefer Christ before the Scriptures? How can J. Faldo call
this part of W. Smith's Answer Unscriptural, and yet believe those words of
Christ be any part of Scripture? Search (or rather, ye search) the Scriptures,
for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life, and they are they which testify of
me, and ye will not come unto me that ye might have Life, Joh. 5. 39, 40. I am
the Way, the Truth and the Life, Joh. 14. 6. Christ himself here teaches us,
to give him the Preference; and implicitly rebukes the Jews from expecting
Eternal Life in the Scriptures rather then in Him, who is the Way, the Truth
and the Life.

His last Instance is this:

Child, I am sensible that there is something in my Conscience that lets me see
my ^ecret Thoughts, and the Intents of my Heart; but I have not known what it
has been, nor hitherto have much regarded it.

Father, That is the true Light, etc.

Child, But if I should turn to it, and obey it when it reproves me for Sin,
is there Power in it to save me from Sin, and to deliver me from Iniquity?

Father, Yes, Child; All Power in Heaven and Earth is in it, etc.

Now judge Reader, says J. F. If all these things are contained in the
Scripture. But I will help the Reader to judge rightly in this matter; and
question not if by Containing he means as he ought, the Substance of such
Answers, and not that they are so laid down, to prove them, to be according to
Scripture; and therefore Scriptural.

Is It, That it is God, who searches the Heart, tries the Reins, and tells
unto Man his Thoughts, the Prophet affirms; and I know no body that pretends to
Christianity, denies it.

2. The Apostle asserts, That which may be known of God is manifest men; for
God has shown it unto them, Romans 1. 19.

3. That it was the Apostolical Message, That God is Light, 1 John 1. 5.

4. That whatsoever does make manifest is Light, Ephesians. 5 13.

5. That Christ, who is God over all, blessed forever, is that True Light,
which (thus) enlightneth every man.

6. That all Power in Heaven and in Earth belongs to Christ, the true Light.

Now unless he denies, Christ to be God, or Christ to be Light, or, that He,
the true Light, so searches, etc. or that all Power in Heaven and Earth
belongs to Him it will naturally follow, that to say, All Power in Heaven and
in Earth belongs to God, Christ or the Light of the World, is Equivalent: For
we do not assert, as some Ignorantly, and some Maliciously have printed and
reported, That all Power in Heaven and Earth is in the Ma^ifestation; but in
him that g^ves the Manifestation. I have taken great Care with several others,
to explain our Belief in this matter, if possible, to prevent such Evil-minded
Men as this Adversary, from making so Ill and Use of our Innocent Expressions,
and giving their own monstrous Consequences for our Scriptural Principles.

Thus much to evidence to my Reader, how groundlesly J. F. flung Vnparall^l'd
Falsehood and Confidence upon me for asserting, that those Books before
mentioned were generally written in a Scripture Style; and with what Weakness
he has endeavored to disprove me.

I shall among a multitude of Instances that might be given, produce 10. to
show to my Reader with what Truth those Imputations belong to J. Faldo, and how
exactly he charactered himself when he bestowed that Reflection upon me.

1. J. Faldo affirms that W. Smith not only quoted never a Scripture and writ
unscripturally, but that he had not one Exhortation to read the Scriptures,
nay, that the main Design of the Book was to deny them, and throw Dirt upon
them; yet J. F. thus cites him concerning the Scriptures:

Child, Then the S^riptures are to be owned and believed, etc.

Father, Yes, they are to he OWNED and BELIEVED, and they that do not so are to
be DENIED.

To this let me add another notable Passage in the same Discourse, cited by me
in that very Page of my Rejoinder, where my Challenge lay (which he thought no
Boldness to accept) though he was so modest, as not to be so bold with this
Passage.

Quest. Of what Service are the Scriptures as they are given forth and recorded
without?

Answ. MUCH EVERY WAY unto those than have received the same Spirit from whom
they were given forth; for unto such they are PROFITABLE, and MAKE WISE unto
Salvation; and are unto them of Service, for INSTRUCTION, EDIFICATION and
COMFORT, Rejoynd. page 61. Is there no Exhortation lodged in these words? And
is this to Deny or throw Dirt upon the Scriptures? If any shall object W.
Smith's making the Spirit necessary to the profitable Reading of the
Scriptures, let them go to W. Tindal, J. Bradford, Bp. Jewel, J. Philpot,
Luther, Calvin, Peter Martyr and others, they will preach them the same
Doctrine; which I have observed in my Rejoinder, and may easily be found in my
Catalogue of Authors.

2. My second Instance shall be this, That he makes W. Smith call the
Scriptures Traditions of Men, Earthly Root, Darkness, Confusion, Corruption;
All out of the Light and Power of God; which he only asscrib'd to degenerated
men, their Worship, Imaginations and Traditions. See Quakerism no Christianity,
page 117, 119. Vind. p. 41, 45. My Rejoinder from page 141. to 157.

3. That the Quakers understand by Knowledge according to the Flesh, the Use of
the Understanding, though santified, Qu. no Chr. page 41. Vind. p. 24, 25, My
Answer. p. 35. Rejoynd. p. 424.

4. That I. Penington should call Visible Worship as sub, the City of
Abomintion, Vind. p. 50. Rejoynd. l. 194, 195.

5. That by Traditions of Men, we understand the Scripture, or written Word,
Qu. no. Chr. part 3. p. 86. My Answer, page 250.

6. That the Quakers mean by the Vail that is over People, their Belief of the
Man Christ Jesus born of the Virgin Mary to be now existing in Heaven, Ibid. p.
87. Vind. p. 93. My Answer, page 251, 252. Rejoynd. page 395, 396.

7. I take occasion to censure men's adding their Comments and Glosses framed
from Study TO any part of the Scripture; and J. Faldo cites me, as complaining
of such as frame them from the Study OF the Scriptures; as if Studying OF the
Scriptures, and men's Adding their own Glosses TO the Scriptures, were one and
the some thing, Vind. page 42, 43. My Rejoynd. p. 159.

8. From E. Burrough's making the Light of Christ within to be one in Nature
with the Spirit of Christ; J. Faldo infers, That the Quakers hold the Soul to
be God, as if that had been said of the Soul which was said to the Light of
Christ shining in the Soul, or that they were Synonymous, Vind. from p. 75. to
87. Rejoyndr, p. 348, 349, 350.

9. Because E. B. rejected that Carnal Notion that confines the Infinite,
Omnipresent God to a Residence only above the Stars, he makes no Difficulty of
inferring that we deny the Manhood of Christ Jesus. As most absurd as base! Q.
no C. p. 9, 10. My Answer, p. 14. Vind, p. 9. Rejoynd. p. 420.

10. From our affirming that such a kind of Reading of Scripture as the
Pharisees used, and to those Ends, makes men harder to be wrought upon to true
Conversion then the Heathen, J. Faldo infers, that reading the Scriptures, and
getting Knowledge thence puts Men into a worse Condition then the Heathen; and
that there is scarcely anything more Dangerous then reading the Scriptures: Yea,
he accuses us of Charging the Miscarriages of Men's Souls on the Knowledge the
Scripture by God's Blessing both convey, Vind. p. 21, 37. Rejoynd. p. 126, 127,
425.

Thus much, and I wish here had been no occasion for this, to evidence the
false and unworthy Practice of J. Faldo against the Writings and Sayings of our
Friends, in order to compass his Designs I shall now give some touch upon his
Confidence. since he has entitled me to an unparalled share, and counts
himself the fit Person to Curb me for it.

J. Faldo began with us in a great Book called Quakerism No Christianity; I
answered him in a Book, entitled Quakerism a New Nickname for Old Christianity;
against this he put forth his Vindication, unto which I made my Rejoinder
consisting of TWENTY THREE CHAPTERS, in which I vindicated our Principles,
striping them of those frightful Vizards and hateful Disguises he put upon
them, confirmed them by many Scriptures and Reasons, and to complete our
Defense, produced iin favor of the whole above TWO HUNDRED TESTIMONIES out of
both ancient and modern Authors.

Besides all this I faulted his Conduct and Behavior in this Controversy, in
above FOUR HUNDRED PARTICULARS, and that under distinct Sections, most of which
were not less unworthy of a good Christian, yea, an honest Heathen, I will say,
of any fair Controvertist, then the Ten I just now mentioned. Notwithstanding
this great Obligation upon him, either to answer my Book, or ente Muter to any
farther Proceed in this Debate; in my Absence at the first Barbican Meeting,
before a great Concurse of People, after T. Hicks had won the Goal by running
Alone, the Man, as one in Love with such Romance-Trophys, starts up like some
Herald at Arms, bids Defiance to the Quakers and their Religion, gives forth
his Challenge to W. Penn, to dispute him, I that he would; and instead of his
Glove, flung a Paper to bind it, which when all came to all, was but some of
the Contents of his first Book twice largely answered; and because no farther
Notice was taken of this Giant, partly by not receiving his Paper so soon as
might expect, and partly by reason of these other Contests that claim
Precedence; That he might not be thought NoBody, when so many strove to be
Somebody against us, he prints it, without all consideration had to my
Rejoinder, or so much as an Apology for his Silence to it, which at least had
become a Modest Person to give: After all this can any man think J. Faldo
Bashful, or one that is so out of Love with Confidence in himself, as that he
is fit to Curb it in others? Me thinks he should not believe that repetitious
Farthing or Halfpenny Paper feat enough toi excuse him; or so sufficient to
acquit him of old Debts, as that without any Breach of Modesty or common
Honesty, he might increase his former Score by fresh Charges: It is but
reasonable that he should make good what he has done first; and not, that we
should gratify every importinent, tautological Humor of J. F.

But what says John Faldo, to this part of my Answer to his Challenge? viz.
But that I may acquit my self of that Duty incumbent on me for the Truth, I do
hereby signify, That in as much as the Controversy depending between T.
Hicks, etc. and us, takes in the most of the particulars of his Charge, we
freely consent, that he should come in with them for a Share as Confederate in
the same work, and use his utmost Abilities to maintain his Accusations; And,
if in any thing his Charge is singular, we shall be ready to hear and fairly
debate it at the same Meeting or Meetings, to avoid fresh and unnessary
Contests, as much as justly may be. To this he thus Replieth:

1. I must fall into a Confederacy which the Antipaedo-baptists, in the same
Work: Hold a little Mr. Penn! If I have my Option, I must deal with you singly;
More confuse rather then assist: But it seems I must be wholely at your
Appointment; for, although you had consented that in your Contest about Mr.
Hicks's Dialogues there should four of each Party have Liberty to speak; yet I
no sooner began to oppose you (being desired to be one of the four) but you
told me, you were not to dispute with me, but Mr. Hicks, and called to T.
Hicks, and were followed by the Quakers Clamours of Hicks, Hicks, which
answered your End, and forced my Silence.

Contradiction and Falsehood make up this Paragraph. Was he not of the
Confederacy, when he tells us himself, that he was not only a Party with them,
but One of the four pitched upon to manage their Cause?

But if he have his Option, he must deal with me singly.

It is time for him indeed, who has been a double-dealing so long: But
certainly, if the man were not more then ordinarily fond of hearing himself
talk, or extravagantly ambitious of a single Crown, he would be contented with
a Partner; but this Option holds no Concord with his Adoption into the
Confederacy: He has begun already as one of the four, what hinders that he
should not continue so? But he thinks that more then one confounds rather then
assists: If so, what made T. Hicks, have three to help him? And why did J.
Faldo attempt it? Certainly he did not design to confound T. Hicks. To all this
Confusion of his let me add his Untruth: He charge me with telling him at the
Barbican-Meeting when he began to speak, I was not there to dispute with him,
which is false to a Title; Either his Ears were as infirm, as his Voice was
low, or else he says this to serve his present occasion: however, I said no
such thing; but understanding it to be him that spoak from some better
acquainted with his * person, I answered, I never saw him before; and he
asserts in his this printed Paper, that he never saw me till the Barbican
Meeting, yet several Moueths before in his printed Vindication he says, he had
spoaken with me*
Thus the Noise of the Multitude was so great, We could not hear what he said;
Though had I given that Answer he made for me, I think it had been very
reasonable, since he never told us, That he was One of the four; besides, more
then that fixed Number had spoaken before him. That the Quakers should clamor,
Hicks, Hicks, to answer my End, and force his Silence, is as true as the rest;
It was the Multitude that frequently and importunately cried, Hicks, Hicks,
Hicks; as looking upon it unreasonable that one who had shown himself so arch
in abusing us, should pretend such Inability to answer our Charge, as that
other Folks must mostly manage his Affair. But that to silence him was to
answer my End, is both to tell A -- and proclaim the good Opinion he has of
himself, as if it stood our Cause so much upon, to have him silent, and T.
Hicks speak, Poor T. Hicks! this was not kindly done of J. F. but perhaps he
meant it of his better Elocution and Skill in stating the Question, recommended
to us in his Curb to my Confidence: Modest Man that he would be thought!

But what says he to this part of my fair Offer, That if in any thing his
Charge be singular, we should be ready to debate it at the same Meeting or
Meetings with the Baptists, to avoid Unnecessary Contests; since most of the
Particulars of his Charge are taken in by the Controversy depending between us
and the Baptists: It is not only an Untruth (says J. F.) but a mere Shift; for
in the One and Twenty Proposals to be debated by them, there is not one of the
Particulars of my Charge: Besides in Position to be disputed on, not only the
Matter, but the Form, and each Term is of great Consideration. Which is as much
as to say, if I understand J. Faldo's Meaning, that after we have disputed the
Matter of the same Questions with T. H. and his Three Assistants, they must be
disputed over again upon J. Faldo's new Model, which one Nice and Humorsom
Impertinency shall make Disputes both Endless and Useless: Let him bestow his
Skill upon T. Hicks, his Cause wants it, and do their utmost together. But he
would fasten an Untruth upon me, for saying, that most of the Particulars of
his Charge are taken into that Controversy, affirming, That in our One and
Twenty Proposals there was not one of the Particulars of his Charge; To which I
need say no more but this, The Charge we exhibited against T. Hicks contained
so many particular Charges: I grant they related to Matter of Fact, and in that
sense the Particulars of J. Faldo's Charge against us, were not explicitly
there; yet they that please to read what follows the One and Twenty
Particulars, as given in to the Baptists, exhibited and read at Barbican, and
since printed in our first Account, they will find that we offer after a full
Consideration and Determination upon the foresaid Particulars, to come to
Doctrinal Points, which are chiefly in Controversy between us and them upon T.
Hicks 's Three Dialogues; and I hope J. Faldo is not grown quite so desperate
as to deny that most, if not all the Particulars of his Charge, fall in with T.
Hicks's Attempts against us, and that materially too. I have heard as if such a
Confession was one part of his Speech at the first Barbican-Meeting: However,
if he denies their Endeavors to have been so harmonious, I offer to prove them
so; but could I not do it, yet I made Provision for him, wherein his Case is
singular. Besides, I desire the Reader to take notice, I did not say, the
Particulars of J. Faldo's Charge were expressed in the Catalogue of our Charge of
Matter of Fact against T. Hicks, but that they fell in with the Controversy,
which word Controversy takes in both Fact and Doctrine: And since he could
fall in with T. Hicks upon Matter of Fact at Barbican, wherein he was not
concerned there can be no just Pretense for him to refuse falling in with T. H.
in Matter of Doctrine, wherein he is concerned: So that, in short, I am neither
guilty of Untruth. who never said, that most of the Particulars of his Charge
were concerned in the One and Twenty Particulars of Fact exhibited against T.
H. but in the Controversy, which is most true; nor yet of Shis^^ng, in
referring him to our Meeting with T. Hicks, since I therein only offer what his
own Words and Practice countenance me in especially, since I further added (as
before said) That if in any thing his Charge was singular from that
Controversy, we should be ready to hear and fairly debate at the same Meeting,
to avoid fresh and unnecessary Contests. One would think this were pretty fair
to a Man under J. Faldo's Circumstances with us. I leave the Reader to say
where the Shift and the Untruth lies. Only let me add Two Passages more, that
will not a little help him to make a true Judgmenr of the Man.

The one is his telling the World, That by my Manuscript Letter to him, I do in
effect unsay all again, that I said of accepting his Challenge in my Printed
Answer, and yet neither prints the Letter, though but short, nor that Passage
he fastens his Consequence upon. Its true, I told him, that it was our present
Resolution to stick to the Matter of Fact against T. H. and so much he prints;
but what is that to the Purpose? Will any scuh Passage bear an Ergo, W. Penn
unsaith all he said of Accepting the Challenge, etc? Or, therefore W. Penn will
never proceed to Matter of Doctrine, because he first resolves to stick to
Matter of Fact, the Method agreed upon?

The other Passage is this: For my part, though I shall not refuse any
Opportunity offered to defend the Christian Religion from its Adversaries; yet
I expect that Mr. Penn shall undertake to defend the Quakers (and himself
especially) from my Charge, entire as it is exhibited, and until then I shall
look on him as declining it.

At what rate I decline a Meeting, and how well J. Faldo, proves it, impartial
men may judge: But one would think by what he says, as if he were another
Tertullian, and the Quakers a pack of obstinate Heathens, He is unfit to defend
Christianity, whose Works prove he does not understand it, unless the Jew
outward with all his Envy, be the Jew inward; or a froward Pharisee, a good
Christian: No, No. J. Faldo we affirm has first charged impious Errors upon
us, and then abused our Writings to countenance them with; And though this be
largely and effectually discovered in not only my Answer (at which he let fly a
squibbing Reply) but in my Rejoinder too (being a more particular Resumption of
the whole Controversy, and unto which he never yet made any Return) we see he
has Forehead enough to insinuate as if the Quakers still remained undefended.
This is the man that undertakes to Cure my Confidenct, who begs so unreasonably
and importunately, and does as good as threaten, if I refuse his Terms; and
which aggravates the Matter, he would have People believe, that I shift
defending the Quakers, whilst he is yet so manifest a Debtor to our Defenses.

Well, but for all this, that it may sufficiently appear we neither did not do
decline a Meeting with him; Let it be observed, 1st, That I gave him timely
Notice of our Wheeler street-Meeting, with an Invitation to be there, and went
more in Expectation of him then T. Hicks, from a Report that T. H. would not,
but that John Faldo intended to be present, though both thought fit to be
absent. 2dly, If he yet thinks it convenient to embrace that ^ffer already
made, viz. To be one of the four, a Place he confesses to have accepted at the
Barbican-Meeting, even about another man's Fact. Or Lastly, If through the
Apprehension he has of T. H's ill Elocution, and great Conceit he has of his
own Oratory, with his better Skill at Forming and Terming the Question, he can
prevail with the Baptists, to be their Mouth in the present Controversy, we
shall through God's Assistance be ready to embrace any convenient Time and
Place for a free and public Meeting.

And that he may not think himself unconcerned in this Proposal, nor want any
Encouragement we can well give him to accept it, I do hereby offer at such a
Meeting or Meetings, first, To prove him as well as T. Hicks, an Abuser of us
and our Writings by Forgery and Perversion; And next, to maintain those
Doctrines which are indeed believed and asserted by us, to be Scriptural, and
therefore Christian. And if this will not please him, I shall not think my self
obliged to gratify every nice and critical Humor he is troubled with; but
leave him to tire himself with the Pain of his own manifest and merited
Disquiet: Though my Soul beseeches Almighty God, if it please him, to turn him
and the Hearts of our Enemies, that they may see how much they wound
Christianity, in pretending to defend it, and grieve that Holy Spirit which
would lead them into Holiness, Meekness, Patience and Love, by these
Tempestuous Assaults upon the Faith, Practice and Persons of their Harmless
Neighbors.

12th 9th Mon. 1674. I am a Real Friend in the Universal Principle of God to
all men, and therein seek Peace with all men, William Penn.

THE END.

