The Reasonableness, OF TOLERATION, AND The Unreasonableness OF Penal LAWS And
Tests. Wherein is proved by Scripture, Reason and Antiquity, That Liberty of
Conscience is the Undoubted Right of every Man, and tends to the Flourishing of
Kingdoms and Commonwealths; And that Persecution for mere Religion is
Unwarrantable, Unjust, and Destructive to Humane Society.

With Examples of both kinds.

Offered to the Consideration of a Person of Honor.

LONDON: Printed for John Harris at the Harrow against the Church in the
Poultrey, 1687.

The Reasonableness of Toleration, and the Unreasonableness of Penal Laws and
Tests, etc.
IT has been for many hundreds of years the main Scope and Aim of the Clergy in
most Opinions, to grasp into their Clutches the exercise of Temporal
Jurisdiction; and as in former times, so now of late our Church of England Men,
have not been the least ambitious of that Authority: It Is true, the Clergy of
England could never fix such Jurisdiction in themselves: but what they could
not perform by their Spiritual Authority, they brought to pass by the
assistance of the Civil Power. They found that the Scripture, had not given
them the least title to lord it over the Consciences of Men in matters of
Religion, nor had left them any weapons to combat Dissenters in Opinion, nay
even Error it self, only Christian Admonition; and at last, when that would
not prevail, Public Separation from Communion with such as obstinately
persisted in defyance of the Truth. For this reason they never ceased to Amuse
and Alarm the Civil Magistrate with continual Suspicions and Fears, to render
him jealous of all other Men that were not conformable to their Humors and
Ceremonies. A passionate conceit of their own Perfection above others, which no
man of common sense can be reconciled to, and a convincing argument that those
Persons must have but little or no Conscience themselves, who with so much
Vigor and Obstinacy labor to uphold a Civil Persecution so directly opposite
to all the dictates of Scripture, Reason, and Conscience.

As for Scripture, the Authority of it is so evident to the contrary that
nothing can be more, where it instructs the Servants of God, to be gentle to
all men, sorbids Christians to Judge one another, and tells us, that every man
is to stand or fall to his own Master; that one man esteems one day above
another, and another esteems all days alike; yet happy is he who condemns not
himself in that which he allows: That is to say, whose Conscience does not
inwardly accuse his outward profession: The same great and zealous Preacher of
the Gospel, in the case of the unbelieving Wise and Husband gives such a mild
and condescending answer, as if he had taken his Pen from a Doves wing; Let
neither Her nor Him that unbelieves depart, if pleased to stay; for that God
had called us to peace; adding withal, that as God has called every one, so let
him walk; and so he ordained to all the Churches: Certainly there could be
nothing more divinely uttered to oblige the Professors of Christianity, in
Charity and Meekness to forbear one another, then such an express Injunction of
so authentic an Apostle, to live peaceably with an Infidel. Nay, writing to
the Christians, he absolutely denies that even the Apostles themselves, have
any Sovereignty over the Conscience, but only commissions to aid and assist
their Consciences: Not (says he) that we have dominion over your Faith, but are
helpers of your Joy: Altogether conformable to that Doctrine of Meekness
wherein Christ instructs his Disciples, not to aspire to the Title of Rabbi, or
Master, in Spiritual Affairs: besides that we are admonished to let the Tares
grow among the Wheat, till the time of Harvest.

Nor is it for any man to suggest, that this mild and moderate Temper was only
intended for those Primitive Times, when the Christians were liable to
Persecution without any Temporal Power to defend themselves: For let the
choicest Champions but grant that those were the best and purest times, and
then it will behove them to show a Dormant VVarrant in the Scripture, by which
Christ ever gave Commission to his Disciples to cut the Throats of all
Dissenters, or to despoil them of their Estates, and send them to perpetual
Banishment, and they have done their work: But if they can bring no such
authority, they must acknowledge that Lording over the Conscience is an
unwarrantable piece of Tyranny over the Rights and Liberties of a Christian.

True it is, that the Successors of Constantine were taught by their
Eclesiasticks, that there were two Duties required from them; one as
Christians, the other as Sovereigns: that as Christians, they were bound to
obey divine Precepts, as every private man is bound to do; but as Princes, to
make good Laws, and keep their Subjects steady in the practice of Piety,
Honesty and Justice, chastizing the Transgressors of his sacred Laws,
espeaclally the Deacalogue. And because they who transgressed against the first
Table, which relates to divine worship, were worse then they who transgressed
against the Second, which relates only to Justice between Man and Man,
therefore Princes were obliged to punish Blasphemy, Perjury, and Heresy, more
severely then Murder or Theft.

As for Blasphemy and Perjury, there was reason sufficient why they should be
punished by civil Penalties, For Blasphemers and Perjured Persons cannot be
thought to be men of Conscience, nor are they that take that Liberty to be
endured, for that Blasphemy and Perjury are criminal in all Religions, and
differing opinions whatever, as being contrary to good manners, and
contaminations of civil Society; but it does not follow from hence, that every
man must be punished as a Heretic, who differs in his judgment from the
Church of England. Certainly it must be first agreed upon, what a Heretic is,
and who is that Heretic, and which is that Law that reaches his offense,
before they can punish him by any Law. Now those things that make a Heretic,
are Errors in Fundamentals or about Fundamentals, Conviction and Contumacy; And
they are Heretics, who obstinately and against the most evident light of
Truth, defend some doctrine directly or of necessary consequence tearing up the
foundations of Christian Faith. The Church of England therefore should have
made it out, that the Dissenters and Roman Catholics were Heretics of this
sort, Convicted and Contumacious; and then all they could do, was to put them
under Excommunication, not to torment their Persons and Estates, with Mulcts,
Imprisonments, Fines, and Sequestrations, which how dissonant it is from the
Golden Rule of God Himself, still preferring Mercy above Sacrifice, is
evidently apparent. The character of Menelaus in the second of Maccabees is,
that he was unworthy of the Preisthood, as one that had the Fury of a cruel
Tyrant, and the Rage of a savage Beast. Conformable to which, was that of
Cicero, quoted by Lactantius, It is the most miserable thing in the world,
(says he) to carry a savage and cruel disposition under the shape of a man. It
is said that Diana of the Scythians, had a Temple and an Altar near the
entrance into the lake Meotis, upon which it, was the custom of the Heathens to
Sacrifice the Bodies of living Men; a Cruelty little differing from the
severity of those People that seem to make their Interest their Scythian Diana,
and living Men the Sacrifices to their Ambition, and the support of their
Spiritual Grandeur. Yet this must be the main design of those that study thus
the destruction of all other Mortals but themselves within the Verge of their
Jurisdiction; which as it is a great Argument of a Spiritual Arbitrary
Government, so is it at the same time a sign of no less Presumption for a
particular number of Men, enclosed within the narrow Circle of Episcopacy,
compared with those vast multitudes of Dissenters and Roman Catholics, that
under various names of distinction invented by their Adversaries, spread
themselves over the fourth part of the World, to arrogate to themselves to be
the only Flock of Christ; and that they are the only Pastors who have power to
drive men to Heaven; for this is to disclaim the Popes Supremacy, and usurp it
to themselves; to Preach down one Antichrist, and set up six and twenty: For if
Meekness, Mildness, Unity, Peace, and Concord, are the Virtues that embellish
Christian Jurisdiction; Cruelty, Rigor, Persecution and Violence, must be the
marks of Antichristian Tyranny.

They therefore that so vehemently Persecute the Professors of Christianity,
because they either doubt or happily err in some particulars that will admit of
Ambiguity, and which it may be, have been otherwise understood in former Ages,
are most unjust. For we find that the Ancient Jews did never Punish the
Sadduces, tho they denied the Doctrine of the Resurrection. For that tho it
were most true, yet then it was but only glanced at in their Law, and not
taught at all, but covertly under Types and Figures. But supposing the Errors
to be such, as among equal Judges might be easily confuted, both by the
Authority of the Scriptures, and the common Consent of the Fathers;
Nevertheless the great strength of an overgrown Opinion is to be considered,
and how the Endeavors of Men to defend their own Sects, diminishes the
strength and liberty of their Judgments. A Man will sooner part with any thing
than his Opinion: An Opinion, says Chrysostom, that has taken deep root through
Custom, is hardly to be removed: for that there is nothing that we alter with
more unwillingness then our Customs in Religion. But whether this different
Opinion be an Error, and how it is to be Punished, he only can without danger
judge, who is the Eternal Judge, who alone knows the true measures of Knowledge
and the proportion of Faith. Let them Rage against you, says St. Austin
concerning the Manichees, who can presume to be without Errors themselves; for
my part I neither can nor dare, for I ought to bear with you as others did
formerly with me, and to treat you with as much Patience, Meekness, and
Gentleness, as they did me, when I was blindly carried away with your Errors.
Religionis non est Religionem cogere, says Tertullian; And Athanasius also
highly blames the Arrians, because they were the first that called in the Civil
Power to their Assistance against their Antagonists, and that endeavored by
Force, Stripes, and Imprisonments, to draw such to themselves, whom they could
not win by the strength of their Arguments. Gregory, Bishop of Rome, writing to
the Bishop of Constantinople, said that it was a new and unheard of manner of
Preaching, to enforce Faith by Stripes and Punishments. History also affords us
the Examples of several French Bishops, who were condemned by the judgment of
the Church for calling in the Civil Power against the Priscillianists; and of a
whole Council in the East that was Condemned for consenting to the Burning of
Bogomilus. Conformable to the sayings of Plato, The Punishment of him that
Errs, is to be Instructed. And of Seneca, That no wise man ever hated those
that Erred; for if so, he must necessarily sometimes hate himself: And
therefore the Emperor Valentinian is highly commended, because he never
Persecuted any man for his Religion, nor ever commanded this or that to be
Adored; nor forced his Subjects to Embrace his own manner of Worship.

Infinite are the sayings of the Primitive Fathers and Men of Learning, their
Successors, who have all along condemned the forcing of Conscience, or
compelling Men to do a thing which is contrary to their Conscience, or to
abstain from such Exercises as they in Conscience esteem necessary and
profitable for their Salvation: all centring in the utter detestation of all
manner of Violence and Imposition in matters of Religion. A Maxim which not all
the Usurpations of Ecclesiastical Persons have bin able to corrupt. And
therefore it was the saying of Montluc, a Roman Catholic, and Bishop of
Valence, That the Rigors of Torments was never to be practiced toward People
who had no other Crime but only a Persuasion which they thought to be good and
pious. Peter Martyr speaking of the Power of the Church, It is her Duty, says
he, to correct Sinners, not with the Sword, not with Penal-Laws or Fines, not
with Imprisonment or Exilement, but after her own Method, by the Efficacy and
Power of the Word.

It is said of Maximilian the Second, Emperor of Germany, That tho he
persever'd to his death a Roman Catholic, yet he was never the less disesteemed
by the Protestants; for that in matters of Religion he observed an exact
Moderation between both Parties, and never ceased till he had obtained the use
of the Cup in the Eucharist, for those of his Subjects that desired it. The
same Emperor also gave this Advice to Henry the Third of France, then
returning out of Poland, to quiet all disturbances in his Kingdom at his first
Entrance into it; according to the Example of his Father Ferdinand, who after
he had long toiled and labored in the Reign of Charles the V. to appease the
troubles in Germany, and settle the differences about Religion, when he found
the Minds of the People more provoked, then any remedy obtained by force and
violence, with the Consent and Applause of all the Orders of the Empire, made
those favorable Concessions, which when nothing also would do, restored
Tranquillity to the Empire.

More Remarkable was that saying of Henry the Third of France Himself, upon his
Deathbed, after he had received his Deaths wound from Clement the Monk, Nor
let the cause of Religion deter ye: This Error long possessed me, and drew me
into inextricable Mistakes. The pretense of Religion hurried us into Faction.
Leave that to the judgment of the Orders of the Kingdom, and keep this in your
Minds as a fixed and constant Maxim, That Religion, which is inspired into the
Minds of Men by God, cannot be commanded by Men. Nay, Pius the Fourth, the none
of the best of Popes, yet being Solicited by the French Ambassador for the use
of the Eucharist in both kinds, had so much kindness for Toleration, that he
gave for answer to the Ambassador, That he had always thought the use of the
Sacrament in both kinds, and liberty for the Priesthood to Marry, were things
indifferent, and as depending rather upon the Decrees of the Fathers, then upon
Divine Authority, might be altered according to the constitutions of Times, and
alteration of Customs.

And in the Council of Trent, several of the wisest and chiefest of the
Prelates stiffly argued against the Prohibition of the Use of the Cup,
affirming those to be void of Christian Charity, who stood so strictly and so
nicely upon a particular Ceremony, the granting of which might prevent the
Effusion of much Blood, and recover into the Bosom of the Church many that were
fallen from Her.

And thus what Scripture and Humane Authority justify, Common Reason is no less
ready to uphold. For first, If the word of God be the sole Rule of Faith, and
no Humane Authority be so highly empowered as to bind up our Assents to whatever
Interpretations shall be proposed, then of necessity it follows that every
Christian indifferently has an equal Interest in the will of the Creator, so
that no particular Person has a right to impose a force upon the judgment of
his Brother. Thus one holds the Baptizing of Infants to be necessary; another
deems it lawful; a third denies both these Opinions, yet admitting that it may,
but that there is no necessity it should be done; therefore they conferr Texts,
and examine the Original; yet after all diligence used, they still are but
where they were. Now what reason can there be to advise Persecution for such a
difference as this?

Besides, There are several Disputes upon various Points of Christianity, that
cannot be cleard to any man by Arguments merely natural, as being matters of
Fact, such are the Miracles and Resurrection of Christ, the Real Presence, etc.
For the belief of which therefore, there is a need of Faith, which is the Gift
of Grace, and not of Nature: which being so, and seeing more-over that it is
not within the power of Man to give a reason why some Men believe, and others
are of a contrary Opinion; it cannot fall under the Imagination of Man, that
either the defect or surplusage of belief, which may perhaps glide into
Superstition, which of the two so'ere be the cause of the difference, should be
subject to the Punishment of Human Laws; for tho both have the same outward
helps and means to inform themselves, yet the potent cause is in the will of
God, who will have Mercy upon whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will he
hardens. And therefore for this cause it was that Tertullian avers that the New
Law of the Gospel does not call for the Sword to revenge the Injuries done it.
And Sisibutus King of Spain, was justly taxed for compelling the Jews to
Christianity by the coercive power of the Sword, when he ought to have won them
to the Faith by meek and gentle Persuasions.

In the next place this violent and rigorous Proceeding and tyrannizing over
the Consciences of Men, is contrary to the purpose of God in the Order of the
Creation, who made and ordained all Mankind free from Bondage, and never
advanced him over all the Works of his Creation, to be a contemptible Slave to
the Will of his fellow Creature, even in things Temporal; much less in matters
Spiritual and relating to Eternity. So that this same actual Violence of
Imposing by force in matters of Faith, Worship and Duty to God, of one Man upon
another, or of some Persons over all, is an Act of the highest Presumption
imaginable, that goes about to subdue to Bondage and Slavery, those that are
Created by God to equal Privileges and Immunities with themselves; subjecting
them by Oppression, not to the Divine Will of the Creator, but to the Will,
Ambition and Interest of Mortal Creatures, no less frail and subject to Error
then they over whom they affect illegal Dominion. A thing which is quite
contrary to the most pure and perfect order of the Creation, which was
altogether blessed. From which whatever is degenerated by Corruption, or has
deviated by Temptation from that pure and regular Order, either in things
Temporal or Divine, must be included within the curse of Sin, and be looked upon
as an opposing the Creator himself. And of this nature, is Compulsion exercised
in Spiritual matters; as being the highest product of degenerate Usurpation,
and the grandest swerving imaginable from the chief design of the Creation. For
without all question, the Creator himself reserved and retained in his own
power alone, the privilege of Supremacy over the Inward Man, in all matters
touching Immortality, that he might be the only Lord in that case, to give
Spiritual Laws, and to command the Souls and hearts of men, in reference to his
own Worship, and that Obedience which is due to himself; so that of necessity
it must be a Usurpation of the Creators rightful Dominion, a robbing Him of his
Dignity and Prerogative, an act of Violence against his Sovereignty, and a bold
intruding into his proper Right, for any Persons to assume to themselves
Dominion and Authority over others, by Commanding and Imposing in Spiritual
matters upon their Consciences, in the Worship and Service of God.

Add to this that Force is Punishment, and consequently unjust, unless the
offense be voluntary: but he that believes according to the evidence of his own
Reason, is necessitated to that Belief, and to compel him against it, were to
compel him to renounce the most essential part of man, his reason: And that
same injunction would be altogether vain, To hold fast that which w^ find to be
best, if after the most serious and deliberate Election, we must be whipped out
of our Consciences by Penalties. It Is but odly done to Preach a company of poor
Souls into just so much Liberty of Scripture as may suffice to beget their
torture, and not permit them to rest where they find their satisfaction: Either
utterly prohibit the search, or let them enjoy the benefit of it. To believe
what appears untrue, is somewhat impossible; but to profess what we believe
untrue, is absolutely damnable.

Nor is it one of the least arguments against Compulsion of Conscience, that it
breaks the bands of civil Society, and annihilates all manner of Love, Unity,
Fellowship, and Concord among men. Neighbors are at enmity among Neighbors,
Brethren with Brethren, and Families are divided among themselves. Princes and
their Subjects, Rulers and their People are at discord and debates, that many
times turns to absolute Disobedience and Rebellion; while the one labors to
Impose, the other to keep off the Oppression. Men, says Zenophon, resist none
with greater animosity, then those that affect to Tyrannize over their bodies;
more especially such as seek to establish an illegal Dominion over their minds
and Consciences. They contend pro Aris in the first place, and pro Focis
afterward; thereby preferring the Liberty of their Consciences, before the
security of their Estates; which they rather choose to abandon, then to be
deprived of their Spiritual Freedom. And this is that which causes, and has
caused so many thousands in this Nation to forsake their native Soil, their
Friends and Relations, to the decay of civil fellowship and Commerce, and out
of a detestable Antipathy to their Oppressors, to seek for foreign Protection,
under which to enjoy the more noble and agreeable pleasure of enjoying the free
exercise of their Sentiments in Divine Worship.

Again, Grotius tells us, That there never was any Sect that could discern all
Truth, nor any but what held something that is True; as then they are to be
favored for what they hold of Truth, so are they not to be punished for what
they maintain of mistaken Belief; since all men are free by nature to believe
whatever they think to be Good and Honest. We cannot love God too much. Now
supposing that the Clergy of England, may esteem the Roman Catholics over
zealous in some points of Worship which may be thought too Superstitious, what
then? For Superstition does not sin in worshipping God too much, but in
worshipping him erroneously; in point of which Error and consequent
non-complyance with the Episcopal Tenants of the Church of England, these
failings of theirs, are not to be squeezed out of their Bones and Purses, but
to be reformed by gentle Instructions and Convincement, according to the true
duty of Bishops to Instruct, Persuade, Exhort and Reprove, but not to Command
or Compel.

To what has been said, may be added the vanity of the Undertaking, it having
been all along evinced by the stories of all ages, that forcing of Conscience,
and Persecution for Religions sake, have not only become frustrate, but
increased the number of those Sects and Divisions of which they sought the
extirpation, and that the Sword, Exile, Faggot, Imprisonment, and heavy Fines,
rather provoak then cure the obstinacy of reluctant Minds. For the conformation
of which, we find from the beginning and for a long time the Christian Relgion
industriously opposed by the most Potent Adversaries, then ruling in the World,
and Extirpation of it no less cruelly labored by the fury of Ten Persecutions;
yet could not all that vast effusion of Blood put a stop to its progress, nor
prevent its growing to such a Head, as at length to turn Tyrannick Heathenism
with all her fantastic Abominations, and false Divinities quite out of the
World. The same may be said of the Albigenses, against whom the Friars
preached, the Inquisitors Plotted, the Princes made War, while the Pope
accursed their Persons, and interdicted their Lands, yet for all the Pope could
do, they could not be suppressed. And of the Waldenses, says Thuanus, tho they
were tossed from Post to Pillar, yet there were ever some found, who still in
their several courses renewed their Doctrine, buried as it were for a season.
For Sects and Opinions are like Books, which the more they are suppressed, the
more they are sought after and caressed: And therefore Tacitus, speaking of the
Annalls of Cremutius Cordus, condemned by the Senate to be burnt, for advancing
the Praises of Brutus and Cassius, relates that some indeed were burnt by the
Edils, but more were preserved, and, afterward published. An argument (says
he) sufficient that the vanity and madness of those men, is to be derided, who
imagine by present Power to stifle the remembrances of future Ages. And the
Author of the Council of Trent, speaking of the prohibition of Heretical Books,
observes that it did more harm then good, while the Books being sought for as
such, did but serve to raise and instill new doubts and scruples in the minds
of the Readers. The same is to be said of the Persecutions of Men in their
Bodies and Goods; for others observing the extreme Patience and Constancy of so
many People suffering for their particular Opinions in matters of Religion,
become curious to understand what that Religion should be that inspires men
with so much resolution to suffer the worst of Miseries, rather then abandon
the Profession of it, which is the reason that Persecutors according to the
Opinion of Strada, though they are not concerned in tormenting, yet they dread
the Triumphs of the Tormented at their Executions, for that it has been
frequently known that one Martyr ^ made many Proselytes, by his resolute
maintaining to the last, the Profession for which he dyed.

From hence we may proceed to show the dreadful Effects and Mischiefs that have
attended the Persecutions of tender Consciences in matters of Religion, which
have generally proved most fatal, and in the end redounded to the greatest loss
of the Persecutors themselves; for of all the Roman Emperors that exerciz'd
those horrid Cruelties upon the Christians under their subjection, only Trajan
and Septimius Severus died a natural Death; for as for Antoninus the
Philosopher, tho he suffered a Persecution in Asia, yet in other parts of his
Dominions the Christians were unmolested, and served him in his Army, where
they fought for him so effectually, as well with their Prayers as with their
Swords, that he acknowledged to the Senate, as much hated as they were, that
certainly the Christians had God for their Protector. All the rest came to
untimely ends; either their own Executioners, or Murdered by their own
Soldiers and Servants; tho none so remarkably punished for their Cruelties as
Valerian, who being vanquished by Sapor the Persian, was by him made his Foot,
stool when he took Horse, and at length was flead alive. What occasioned the
Cossac War so prejudicial to Poland, but because the Russian Polonians of the
Catholic Religion would have forced the Cossacks to the Observation of their
Churches, and to that end have shut up the Grecian Churches? What occasioned
the Revolt of the Rustic's in Germany, and the Hussites in Bohemia? What
occasioned the League of Smalcald, and the cruel War that ensued, but the
Oppression of the Ecclesiastics? By which all that was got was this, that the
Bloody Ecclesiastics satisfied their Revenge with the slaughter of the poor
People; while the other indulge'd their hatred, and Sacrificed to their
Antipathy the Wealth and Religious Structures of their Persecutors; and
between both, whole Regions and Countries were depopulated and ruined. What
lost Philip the Second so fair a Portion of his Dominions, but his severity in
forcing Conscience? But his bigoted Zeal to gratify the Interest of Rome, by
suffering his Grand Executioner Alva to ride Triumphantly in the Chariot of the
Abominated Inquisition, over the Necks of his tender-Conscienc'd Subjects, till
he had by all manner of Torments disburden'd the Country of no less then
eighteen thousand Innocent Christians.

The Reign of Charles the Ninth, deformed with Civil Wars, with various
success of Battle, with Seiges and Sacks of Cities and Towns, and havoc of his
Subjects, was rendered yet more in famous by the Parisian Massacre, then which,
there never was a more Inhumane piece of Barbarity known among the Heathens
themselves. But what was the Advantage of their Butchery? What the Issue of it
to the King, after he had emptyed his Kingdom of ten thousand of his Subjects,
among which five hundred all Persons of Quality? In the first place, upon too
late a Consideration, a deep Repentance for having given his Consent, and a
Resolution had he lived to have Punished his Advisors: then every Night his
Slumbers interrupted with nocturnal Terrors, till having lingered under most
grievous and tedious Pains, and long perceived his death approach before he
died; he ended his days a young Youth, in the 24th Year of his Age.

To omit the loss of the Low Countries, by reason of the cruelty of the
Inquisition, we find the People in all places the most devoted and accustomed
to Ecclesiastical Rigor, mutinying even to Bloodshed, against the Torments of
that Tribunal.

In Naples, Peter of Toledo the Viceroy, in Obedience to the Pope, would fain
have brought it in; but when he began to put it in Execution, it caused such an
Uproar among the People, that it came to be almost a petty War between the
Commonalty and the Garrison, wherein many were slain on both sides, so that the
Viceroy was forced to desist in his design; neither has any offer been made to
obtrude any such kind of Office upon that Kingdom ever since.

Even in Rome it self, the People detested the Cruelties of the Inquisition to
that degree, that the Breath was no sooner out of the Body of Paul the IV. but
that they went with great fury to the new Prison of the Inquisition, brake
down the Doors and let out all the Prisoners therein detained, and could hardly
be restrained from setting on fire the Church of the Dominicans, as being the
Persons entrusted with the Execution of that rigid Employment More then that,
in detestation of the Inquisition, all enraged, they forced their way into the
Palace, and meeting the Popes Statue all of Parian Marble, and a noble piece of
Workmanship, they cut off the Head and the right Hand, and for three days
together kicked them about the streets, and made them the sport of the whole
City.

Nor has England it self felt the least share of the Inconveniences of
Spiritual Persecution: where Acts of Parliament have been made use of only as
Traps and Snares to dis-People the Nation. What false Crimes were laid to the
Primitive Christians by the flatterers of the Emperor Sep. Severus, to Incense
him to the first Persecution, the same Accusations were lately thrown upon the
Dissenters, of being Homicides, Turbulent, Sacrilegious, Traitors against
Caesar, and in a word mere Canibals: And by virtue of which pretended Calumnies
and meditated Slanders, the Civil Magistrate, out of the good Opinion he has of
those that make the clamor, not presently discerns the Trapan which is put
upon them to make Laws for the punishment of those Persons, over whom they have
indeed no jurisdiction; till at length the ill use of those Laws better informs
their judgment, and that they were imposed upon to frame Persecuting Statutes,
and authorize Prosecutions, not to prevent disturbances in Government, but to
gratify the Pride and Ambition of their hotheaded Advisers; hence under
pretense of disaffection to the Civil Power, continual Plots and Treasons are
discovered, and the discovery so well managed, that some are Hanged, others
Fined, others condemned to long Imprisonment. Which Accusations, because they
reach not many, therefore all the rest, as being Birds of the same feather,
must suffer for their sakes; and the same pretenses being still kept on foot
for a Covert, they let fly the Arrows of their Indignation against the whole
Body, and chastize the pretense, where they could not find any fact committed
to punish. And indeed the grounds of the pretense are the only crimes committed
against them; all that will not conform to their Ceremonies are supposed to be
seditious Persons; none that go to Meetings and Conventicles can be Good and
Loyal Subjects: and therefore all that will not Conform, or Refrain from going
to Meetings, must be scourged with the scorpions of Ecclesiastical Censure and
Excommunication; must be amerc'd at pleasure, Imprisoned till Submission, many
to their utter Impoverishment, or till they pine away in Jayle: and they that
would live peaceably and quietly under the Government, can have no rest in
their own Families. Upon this thousands take their flight beyond Sea, and draw
off their Estates, by which means the Kingdom is depopulated, the Manufacture
of the Nation carried into foreign Countries, and the Prince loses the
Assistance of the Wealth and Persons of so many of his Subjects, to the ruin
of the Kingdom and scandal of the Government. A sort of Christian Politics
which the Church of England could only learn from the uncharitable bigotrie of
that same Prince, who cried out, That he would rather choose to be King of a
Country without People; then of a Kingdom Peopled with Heriticks: Contrary to
the saying of Adrian, one of the wisest among the Roman Emperors, That he
wished his Empire strengthed rather by the increase of People and Inhabitants,
then excess of Treasure. But this was neither the Policy of the Ancient
Heathens, nor of the more prudent Common wealths and Governments of latter Ages.

Among all the Heathen Nations that we meet with in History, the Egyptions were
the first from whom all the world beside, the Jews excepted, derived that same
Dark Knowledge which the other had of the Gods and Divine Worship. Their early
Superstition had set up no less then twelve Divinities to begin withal, who
were all worshipped in various Shapes with various Rites and Ceremonies; all
which with their several Portraitures and Sacred Mysteries (for so they called
the Rites of Adoration belonging to every Idol) the Grecians afterward
translated into their own Country, and for a while exactly observed the
Precepts and Methods of their first Instructors. Here was a great number of
Divinities with every one a particular form of worship attending him, and yet
we do not find that the Grecians were afraid to transport them all into their
several Cities, for fear least the variety of Superstitions, should set their
People together by the Ears, while one Priest cried up his Divinity, another
extolled his, and shattered the Vulgar into Factions and Contentions, which was
the best. No, the Priests were still contented with what followers they had,
and every man was left to his freedom to worship what Divinity he pleased, as
his Affection and Devotion governed him. A strange misfortune to Christian
Religion, that the Heathens should be so conformable in the midst of so much
variety of feigned Divinities, and we not be able to adjust those few
Ceremonies in dispute relating to the worship of the true and one God, when we
have his own inspired Scripture for our Guide.

In Athens there were as many Sects and Opinions daily taught, as there were
almost Philosophers in the City; and many differing in their Sentiments even
concerning the Gods themselves. Yet the Magistrate was never called upon for
their Suppression, but rather they were cherished and honored with Statues
after their Death. The Magistrates, Rulers and greatest Captains of that Age
were their Hearers and Disciples, adhering at pleasure to whom they thought
fit, as their Reason and Judgment lead them. And this public Toleration it
was that rendered Athens one of the most Famous and Flourishing Cities of the
World. Nor was Socrates punished for introducing an innovation in their
Religion, but because he neither could inform his Judges, nor they were able to
understand who that God was, therefore they put him to Death for injuring all
the rest whom they believed to be as true as his unknown Deity.

I pass but lightly over the Jews, by reason they had the knowledge of the true
God, and were obliged not to engage in the Superstitions of the Heathens; yet
were they not so rigid neither as to exclude the Gentiles from among them, but
had their Atrium Gentium for their Reception, although unconverted; nor did they
refuse the Sacrifices and Oblations of the the Kings of Egypt, nor those of
Augustus and Fiberius; all which they thought no breach of their Laws to offer
up in their Holy Temples.

But to return to the Gentiles, this is farther to be observed, that they were
so far from Suppressing variety of Opinions, that they took no notice of the
many Fables of the Poets, that daily uttered such irreverent and mean Thoughts
of their adored Divinities, as to make them Robbers, Adulterers and Drunkards;
incident to all the frailties, and guilty of all the Crimes that the worst of
men can be said to commit. How soever these Fables every day made some change
or other in their Religon; for the Gods still multiplying by procreation and
Canonization of Heroes, Greece was so stockt and replenisht with Deities, that
they sent whole Colonies of feigned Divinities among their Neighbors, who gave
them free admission, without disputing the Toleration of their new invented
Sacrifices, Lustrations and other Superstitions, tho perhaps never heard of
before. It Is true, their Gods would be sometimes out of humor; but their
particular Priests had a care how they pusht their feigned Anger too far, and
found out a way by some Oracle or other to understand their meaning and set all
right again. However it shows that had the Priesthood been as captious then,
as some of ours at this time, they might have put so many Capricio's into the
heads, sometimes of one, and sometimes of another Idol, as might have given the
Civil Magistrate no small vexation.

Among the Romans the Catalogue of their Gods exceeded Thirty Thousand; and
their forms of Worship were as various as they. For their God Pan they had
their Luperci and Lupercalia. For Ceres their secret Mysteries and Female
Priests. For Hercules they had their Potitij and Pinarij. They had also their
Arval Fraternity, and their sixty Curiones to offer up Sacrifice in behalf of
the several Curiae or Parishes in Rome. They had their College of Augurs, and
their Flamin's; for Mars they had their Salij; for their Goddess Dea Bona, they
had their Vestal Nuns; for Cybele, their Galli and Corybantes. All this looked
like the Variety of our Sects and Opinions at this day; and yet we never hear
of those Contentions, Disputes and Enmities that rage among us. They never
incensed the Magistrate to Persecution, but as they agreed singly together, so
they agreed in the whole; or if any difference happened among them in point of
Religion, 'twas but repairing to the College of Pontiffs, where their
questions were immediately resolved, and their determinations never
contradicted. And for a farther mark of this general Toleration, we find the
Pantheon erected, and after it was burnt down, Rebuilt by Adrian, where all the
Gods were worshipped in common. Moreover we find mention made in Suetonius of
Collegia antiqua et Sacra, in the Plural Number, upon which Cujacius
Animadverts, That the Senate and Princes of the Roman People permitted several
Colleges as well for the Exercise of Foreign Religion, as of that of their
own Country: And Augustus confessed, That he permitted the Colleges and
Assemblies of the Jews, because he found them to be the Schools of Temperance
and Justice, not as they were reported, the Seminaries of Sedition.

To proceed to the Christians, They were no sooner grown numerous, but we find
them mustered in the Armies of the Heathen Emperors, and tolerated without
disturbance by Commodus, tho a bad Prince; in whose time Pontienus set up a
School in Alexandria, where he publicly Taught the Christian Religion.
Alexander Severus gave public Toleration to the Christians, in so much that
when a Complaint was made to him by the Rabble that kept public Tipling-Houses,
that the Christians had taken possession of a place to Build a Church in the
ground that belonged to them, he returned for his answer, That 'twas much
better that God should be Worshipped in that place after any form, then that it
should be allowed for Houses of Debauchery. And thus we find that Toleration of
Religion was allowed so long as Heathenism continued in the World.

To these succeeded Constantine, the first of all the Roman Emperors that made
open Profession of Christianity. By whom we find such an Indulgence given not
only to the Christians, but to all manner of Religions, with the consent of his
Colleague in the Empire, Licinius; that we could not omit the Insertion in this
place of the most material part of it.

At what time, I Constantine Augustus, This was finished before the Translation
of Lactantius, and therefore as not being borrowed from him, I thought fit to
let it pass with this Advertisement.
and Licinius Augustus happily met at Millain, and had in Consultation whatever
might conduce to the public benefit and security; among the rest we thought
those things were first to be taken care of, which would prove most profitable
to most men, as relating to the Worship of the Supreme Deity; to which purpose
we thought fit to grant to the Christians and all others, free Liberty to
exercise what Religion every one best approved, to the end we might render that
Supreme Divinity who sits in his Celestial Throne, propitious to Us and all
the People under our Dominion: Wherefore following this wholesome Counsel, and
the Dictates of right Reason, we thought it our safest and wisest course not to
deny Liberty to any one, who either followed the Profession of the Christians,
or addicted himself to any other Religion which he thought most agreeable with
his Judgment, that the most High God, to whom we freely and heartily yield
Obedience, may afford us his wonted Favor and Kindness in all our Enterprises.
For this reason we give your Excellency to understand that it is our pleasure,
that all Restraints formerly appearing in your Office in reference to the
Christians being disannulled, we do now Enact sincerely and plainly, That every
one who has a mind to observe the Christian Religion, may freely do it without
any disturbance or molestation. Which we have thought fit fully to signify to
your Excellency, to the end you might understand that we have given free and
absolute leave to the Christians for the Exercise of their Religion. And as we
have granted this Indulgence to them, so your Excellency is likewise to
understand that we have granted the same open and free Liberty to all others to
Exercise the Religion to which they have chosen to adhere, for the Tranquillity
of our Reign, to the end that every one may be free in the Election of his
Worship without any Prejudice from us, either to his Honor or to his Religion.
And this we thought fit moreover to decree in reference to the Christians, that
their Meeting-Places be restored them without any hesitation or delay, and
without the demand of any Fees or Sums of Money: And if any Fines or Mulcts
have been Sequestered formerly into our Exchequer, or taken by any other
Person, that the same be also restored them without the least Diminution. Or if
they have any Favor to request further at our hands, let them make choice of
any of our Advocates to take care of their Affairs. [The rest I omit, as less
pertinent to our purpose.]

But after them, when the Emperors began to lend an Ear to Ecclesiastic
Rigor, and Sects became Predominant as they were guarded by the Power and
Protection of the Civil Magistrate, it is a strange thing how soon the several
Schisms and Opinions that had taken root under the milder sway of the Heathens,
began to rend the Church into a thousand Factions; and whereas a single
College of Pontiffs would serve the Heathen Priesthood to resolve their
Doubts the Determination's of National Councils could not put a stop to the
Growing Controversies of the Christians, but from words they fell to blows; and
happy they who could get the Sovereign Prince on their side, for the other were
sure to go by the worst. So early was the Civil Power made an Engine to support
the Pride and Ambition of Spiritual Contenders. At what time an Eutychian Pope,
by Name Horsmisdas, having the upper hand, gave this Motto for answer to all
that admonished him of his Severity. Nos Imperare volumus, nos Imperari
nolumus. It were to be wished that this Motto may not have got too much Footing
in England.

And now Liberty of Conscience seemed for a time exterminated from the Earth,
till we meet with it again among the Goths, who as Procopius alleges, would
never in the height of all their Conquests, compel the vanquished to embrace
the Religon which they professed, but left them to their own: it being always
the Maxim of Rulers truly generous, to engage men rather as their Friends then
as their Slaves, thinking themselves far more safe in a free, then in a
compelled Obedience.

But to descend to latter times, we find that even among the Mahumetans, all
over Turkey, no man is compelled to embrace the Mahumetan Superstition, but that
all People, unless the Professors of Heathenish Idolatry, are left to the
exercise of their own Religion. And this, as several Authors observe, was at
first the chiefest means by which the Turks enlarged their Empire over the
Christian World. For that many People rather chose to live under the Turk,
permitting them the Liberty of their Consciences, then under the Exorbitant
Tyranny of the Spanish Inquisition. And further, others observe, That nothing
has rendered the Turk more powerful then the King of Spain's Expulsion of all
the Moors and Turks out of his Territories, in the Year 1609, at what time
above a Hundred and twenty Thousand of those Exiles retired into Africa and
other parts of the Turkish Dominions, to the great benefit of the Turks, who
learnt from them to Combat the Europeans with their own Weapons, and their own
Arts of War.

The Persians give Liberty to the Melchites under the Patriarch of Antiochia,
who obstinately maintain all those Errors that were condemned by the Synod of
Florence; together with the Nestorians and Christian Armenians, who have no
Patriarchs of their own; nor are the Roman Catholics excluded the chief City of
Ispahan. To which we may add their Toleration of the Jews, and the Dissenting
Sects in their own Religion.

In Poland, tho generally the Nobility adhere to the Church of Rome, yet they
prohibit none; and the mixture of Lutherans, Calvinists, Socinians,
Anabaptists, Greeks and Jews, who there enjoy most ample Privileges,
apparently demonstrates, wellconstituted Government to be no Enemy to Liberty
of Conscience. Nor does the scrupulous Muscovite exclude those of the Augustan
Confession from having a Church of their own within view of the City of Moscow
it self.

That the Switzers are a Prudent People appears by the permanent constitution
of their Government, by them upheld and propagated for so many Ages together;
their Concord has rendered them Populous, and their Populousness has made them
formidable to all the Neighboring Princes, by whom they have been all along
courted for their Assistance, and to whom they have been beholding for the
chiefest part of their Conquests. All this while a People half Protestants,
half Catholic's, yet in general so equally unanimous, and in some particular
Cities so peaceably intermixed, that you never hear among them, since they
first leagued together for the common Security, of any Quarrels or Contentions
for Superiority; or of any Fines, Imprisonments, or Banishing of the Dissenting
parties; nor do they refuse their Protection to any that fly from other
Countries to seek Tranquillity of Conscience among them. There is the same
mixture of the two Professions of Popery and Calvinism among the Grisons, and
the same Unanimity; and this Confirmed by the league of the Ten Jurisdictions,
by which all Disputations concerning Religion are forbid, to prevent
Exasperation and Contests among Nations and Friends, tho differing in Opinion.

In Venice the Roman Catholic Religion prevails; yet such is the Prudence and
Generosity of the Government and Governors, that they cannot deny to others
that Liberty which they enjoy themselves; in so much that tho they admitted the
Inquisition into their Territories, yet they filled it is sharp Fangs in such a
manner, that the malice and fury of it was rendered ineffectual; for they
decreed that the Inquisition should not meddle either with Witches or
Inchanters; nor with those that should offer to Buffet an Image, or Lampoon the
Vices and Disorders of the Clergy, nor indeed have any power to prohibit the
Printing of any Books whatever. That it should have no power over Blasphemy, or
such as married two Wives; nor in causes of Usury. That it should have no
Jurisdiction over Jews; Infidels, or those that follow the Ceremonies of the
Greek Church; nor any Authority over any secular Trade or Profession; and in
all other Causes whatever that were brought before the Tribunal of the
Inquisition, they reserved to themselves the Examination, Judgment and final
Determination of the Matter; which indeed was an absolute Toleration of Jews,
Infidels and Greek Christians, and under that Notion, of all other Opinions
that they pleased themselves.

As to Witches, They gave this reason why the Inquisition should not meddle
with them, For that they were generally Women, a poor People Crazed in their
Understandings, and therefore more fitting to be instructed by the Minister,
then punished by the Judge.

As for Blasphemy, the punishment of it belonged to the Civil Magistrate; and
so for Bigamy and Usury.

As to the Toleration of Jews, etc. they argued from St. Paul, That the
Ecclesiastical Authority had no power over those that were not in the Church.
And in behalf of the Greeks they urged, That the Difference and Disputes
between the Greek and Roman Church were yet Undetermined, and that therefore it
was not sit the Church of Rome should be Judge in her own Cause.

Lastly, Against the Prohibition of Books they pleaded, That it was the way to
stifle Learning, and prevent the coming forth of many good Books, necessary for
the Instruction of Man kind. That it belonged only to the Civil Magistrates to
prevent the Enormities of Scandalous Writers, and therefore that the
Ecclesiastie's were not to thrust their Sickles into other men's Harvests. Thus
we find the Venetians, tho in other things Obedient to the Sea of Rome, yet in
the point of Toleration altogether Dissenting from it; for they believe it to
be their Interest to take care, least the People being deprived of the Liberty
of their Minds, should be alienated in their Affections from the Government;
therefore they are contented that the People should enjoy their Liberty,
provided they do not disturb the Public Peace.

To return into Germany, even in Vienna it self, the chief City of the Empire,
the Emperor Maximilianus the Second allowed the Evangelic's the free exercise
of their Religion in the Monastery of the Minorites, which tho it were denied
them by his Son Rudolphus the Second, was again by the Indulgence of Matthias
the Emperor restored them; so that they had their public Assemblies at
Hornals, a Village close by the City; within the Walls of which they had
besides the freedom to Baptize, Administer the Sacrament, and Marry according
to their own forms, till Ferdmand the Second retracted their privileges, and
forced them, whenever the Duty of their Worship required, to go as far as
Presburgh or Edinburgh.

It would be too long to trace the several Regions of Germany, where so many
Sovereign Princes and Free States, exemplary for their Justice and Moderation,
foster Liberty of Conscience as the main support of their Governments. 'Twill
be enough to mention briefly those of chiefest note; the Dukes of Saxony,
Brunswick and Lunenburgh, the Dukes of Wittenbergh and Holsatia, the Elector
Palatine, the Duke of Bavaria, tho of the Romish persuasion, the Duke of
Newburgh and the Landgrave of Hessen, the Cities of Ratisbone, Frankford upon
the Main, and Spire, where the Evangelic's are allowed the free exercise of
their Religion, and meet every Sunday, from seven till eight in the Morning,
and from twelve till one in the Afternoon: not to omit Auspurgh, where the
chief Magistrates of the City are half Protestants and half Papists; nor those
most Noble Emporiums of the Northern parts of Europe, Hamborough, Lubeck, Breme
and Dantzick: to which if we should add the States of the United Netherlands,
it would be only to trouble the Reader with what is known to all the World. And
yet the Flourishing condition of these Countries and Territories, the Number of
People, and the Tranquillity which they enjoy, apparently Demonstrate, That
Liberty of Conscience is no such Enemy to Mankind, as to be so rudely
harrass'd and exterminated from the Earth with all the Rigors and Vexations
that render Life uncomfortable.

Having thus established the Truth of Religions Toleration upon the Foundations
of Scripture, Reason, Authority and Example, certainly the wonder must be very
great among discerning Persons, that men who boast a more refined Profession of
Christian Religion, who aspire to Peace, to Love, to Moderation, and Truth
toward all men, should with so much Passion and bitter Animosity, exercise
their hatred upon their Brethren, for the Niceties of different Opinions; so
that if we come to know of what Profession they are, it is their imperfection,
not their Perfection that makes the discovery: Which preceeds from hence, That
Ecclesiastical Functions and Dignities are esteemed for the Benefits and
Advantages men reap thereby either of Wealth or Fame. Which Abuse once crept
into the Church, was the first occasion that many men of Evil Principles
greedily thirsted after Ecclesiastical Preferments; and that the love of
propagating Sacred Religion degenerated into Avarice and Ambition; and that the
Church it self was turned into a Theater, where the great Doctors studied not
the plainness of True Preaching, but to show the quaintness of their Oratory.
They never bent their minds to Teach the People, but to Tickle their Ears into
an Admiration of their Elegant Expressions and gingling Satyrs upon Dissenters
and Papists, as they thought their Themes would be most pleasing to their
Auditors; which did but Inflame the Contentions already raised, and beget
contempt and hatred to themselves, and breed an Animosity not easy to be
reconciled in them who had been so rudely, tho undeservedly handled. No wonder
then that nothing remained of Primitive Religion besides the External Worship
(with which the People rather seemed to flatter then adore the Supreme
Divinity) and that Faith was now become no other then Credulity and Prejudice.
That very Prejudice, that renders men of Rational Creatures, Brutes; as being
that which hinders every Man from making Use of his free Judgment, and being
able to distinguish Truth from Falsehood; and which seems to have been invented
on purpose to extinguish the Light of the Understanding. Piety and Religion are
made a Compound of Erroneous Mysteries of Humane Policy; and they who contemn
Reason, and reject the directions of the Understanding as corrupted by Nature;
would themselves be thought to have the Divine Light; tho had they but the
least spark of Divine Light, they would not so proudly insult, but learn more
Prudently to worship God, and as now in Hatred, so then in Love, to excel the
rest of their Brethren. Nor would they Persecute with such an open Hostility,
those that cannot in Conscience comply with their Impositions, but rather take
pity of their failings, unless they would be thought more fearful of their own
worldly Interest, then sollicitous for the others Salvation.

Seeing then that the Establishing of any Religious persuasion by force, is so
contrary to Scripture, Reason and common Sense, it remains then that only
Worldly Interest, and the support of a Domineering Hierarchy, must be the chief
Motives that engaged the late Persecutors to procure those Penal Laws, which in
contempt of the Light of Nature, and their own Videmus Meliora's, they put so
rigorously in Execution. Laws that punish the very supposition of Crimes and
Transgressions in Conceit; Laws that punish the Body with Corporal Vexations
for the supposed Transgressions of the Mind and Will; Laws that pretended to
dive into the Breasts of Men, and to discover Evil in their Thoughts, as if
enacted to torment the Souls of Mankind before their time: In a word, Laws that
were abolished by Reason as soon as made; for if Laws are grounded upon Reason,
and these Laws are contrary to Reason, as it is plain they were, for that Laws
are made to redress, not to increase the grievances of the People; then were
they null as soon as formed. For if Laws do not arise out of Natural Reason,
but are only made to avoid some greater mischief pretended to be foreseen; we
are not rashly to admit of such an Interpretation, as to make that Sinful or
Criminal which is otherwise Lawful. Thus to separate from the Church of
England, is a thing no way in it is self Unlawful, and therefore cannot be made
Criminal by a Law, there being no natural Equity to make it so, and
consequently not Punishable by the Law.: Nor can their Meeting in Conventicles
be a Crime; for that the Doctrine of men that teach those things which are Just
and Honest, can never be feared, especially when they are exact in their
Obedience to the Magistrate; nor should their private Assemblies be envied or
suspected, as being Just and Innocent Men, till they are convicted of being
otherwise. And therefore they that Persecute such People, ought rather to be
Prosecuted themselves; for that by them the Law of Nature is brok'n in doing
injustice to them that never offended; and it is but natural equity to punish
those that wrong their Neighbors without a cause. Which Cause can never be
found in a Law made contrary to Reason; in a Law made to gratify the Ambition
and Interest of a Single Party, to the disturbance of the Greater part of the
Nation, which is contrary to the Common Good, and consequently the End of Law.

Moreover, There is no Humane Law that can command or prohibit an Act, purely
directly and Secundum se, internal. And this is grounded upon the common
Axiom, Cogitationis Paena nemo meretur: no man incurs the Punishment of
Thought, for the Law has nothing to do with Internal Acts; and therefore
because it cannot naturally and of it self punish those Acts, therefere neither
can it either command or prohibit them; for the Legislative Power is
Compulsive, and if it cannot be Compulsive as to the inward Act, neither can it
make a Law in reference to it:

The reason of this Assertion is, for that the Legislative Power among men is
only ordained for preservation of the outward Peace and honesty of Humane
Community, to which those Acts have no Relation which are conceived in the
Mind. Then again this Power springs immediately from Humane Community it self,
by the means of Natural Reason. Now there is no Humane Community that can grant
a Power immediately and of it self, over Actions merely Internal, as being
altogether without the Limits of its Knowledge, and without the Bounds of its
Jurisdiction; for no man is naturally subject to another in his Soul, but in
his Body. Therefore said a Learned Schoolman, He is in an Error who believes
that Servitude lays hold of the whole Man; the better part is excepted. Our
Bodies are liable to our Superiors and Governors, but the Mind is its own
Lord and Master.

Then again, The conditions of Humane Laws are, That the Law must be Honest,
Just, Possible, convenient to Time and Place, and conformable to Religion and
Reason.

The Penal Laws are not Honest, because they would enforce men to abandon the
worship of God, which in their Cons^^ences they have made choice of, as
believing it to be the most ^^^e and conformable to Scripture, and to submit
themselves (...) Ceremonies, which they as firmly believe to be no way
necessa^^ for their Salvation, but rather contrary to those Sentiments which
they have of the Truth of Sacred Adoration.

They are not just, because they would bereave men of that Christian Liberty
which all men have a privilege to claim; and which the most zealous promoters
of the Penal Laws would take most heavily to be themselves deprived of.

In the Second place, They ought to command those things which may be justly
observed; but these Laws would enforce men to Sin against the Dictates of their
Consciences, the Consequence is easy to any.

Thirdly, The Penal Laws are not agreeable to Religion, for they prohibit what
the Laws of God allow, which is Liberty of Conscience, and uphold what the Laws
of God prohibit, which is Spiritual Tyranny and Dominion in matters of Religion.

Fourthly, The Penal Laws are contrary to Reason and the common benefit of
Civil Society; for it is not rational that People should be Imprisoned, Fined,
and Banished, and common security of Liberty and Property be infringed even to
the loss of men lives, and the depopulation of a Kingdom, for pretenses over
which the Civil Magistrates pretends not to have any Jurisdiction.

Add to this, That to rendering Laws effectual, there are required all the
three parts or sorts of Justice. First, Justitia Legalis, whose Office is to
aim at the Common Good, and consequently to preserve the due privileges of all
the Subjects in general. Secondly, Justitia Commutativa, which requires that
the Legislator command no more then lies in his power. Thirdly, Distributive
Justice, which takes care that the private good of a few, be not respected more
then the public good of the whole Body. In all which parts of Justice, the
Penal Laws being defective, it follows that they were not duly made,
consequently invalid and no way obliging. And this is the Opinion of all the
Famous Casuists, Aquinas, Sctus, Medina, Caster, Tolinus, Panormitanus, and
others, conformable to that of St. Austin himself, l. 19. de Civit. Dei. c: 21.
The perverse Constitutions of Men are neither to be accounted nor to be said to
be Laws; when that is only to be accounted right and just, which flows from the
Fountain of Justice. Now that it is the intrinsic end of all Laws duly made, to
aim at the Common Good, is plain from the Laws of God themselves, which are
such, that tho ordained by God himself to his own Glory, yet he seeks therein
not his own advantage, but the good and benefit of men. In like manner as all
Humane Laws are imposed upon a Community of People, so ought they to be made
for the general good of that Community, otherwise they are irregular; for it is
against all Justice to reduce the Common Good to Private Interest, or to
subject the whole to the part for the parts sake. Another reason may be deduced
from the end it self, for the end must be proportionate to the Act, its
beginning and efficacy. Now the Law is the common Rule of Moral Operations;
therefore the first Principle of Moral Operations ought to be the first
Principle of the Law; but the end or happiness is the first Principle of Moral
Operations; for in Morals the beginning is the end of the Operations, and so
the Ultimate end is the first Principle of such Actions; but the Common Good or
Felicity of a City or Kingdom is the Ultimate end of it in its Government,
therefore it ought to be the first beginning of the Law, and therefore the Law
ought to be for the Common Good. Now it is apparent that the Penal Laws were
made only for the particular good and felicity of the Church of England men,
all others being by them excluded from the benefit of their native Privileges,
that could not in Conscience conform to the Ceremonies of their Worship, to the
Ruin and Vexation of many thousands, which was positively against the Common
Good and Felicity of the Nation and general Community of the People, divided
only in some points of Religion, but in an equal poise of Obedience and Loyalty
to the Supreme Magistrate, and therefore justly deserving equal share of
provision by the Laws for their Security and Protection. And therefore unless
it can be proved that it is for the Common Good and Benefit of the whole
Nation, that men should be persecuted to uphold the Hierarchy of the Church of
England, the Penal Laws are unduly made, and therefore as of no force, to be
repealed and annul'd. Therefore the Intention of the Divine Laws might have
taught the Promoters of these Penal Statutes better and more Christian
Learning; for therefore are Prelates called Pastors, because they ought to lay
down their Lives for the good of the Sheep; not the Sheep to lay down their
Lives for the good of them: they are called Dispensers and not Lords; Ministers
of God, not Primary Causes, and therefore they ought to be conformable to the
Divine Intention in the Exercise of their Power: God principally intends the
Common Good of men, and therefore his Ministers are bound to do the same. They
are Tyrants, not Governors in the Church, while they seek their own Support
and not the Common Benefit.

As to the Injustice of the Penal Laws, expert Materiae, in commanding those
things which ought not to be observed, this Axiom from thence arises. That no
unjust Law can be a Law, and then there lies no obligation to accept it, or to
observe it if accepted; for that the Subjects are not only not bound to accept
it, but have it not in their power, when the command is clearly and manifestly
unjust: as when men are commanded not to meet above such a number under such a
penalty, for the Exercise of their Religion according to their Consciences.
This is an Evil Command, because it debars men from the free Worship of God;
for unless it could be proved that the Religion of the Church of England is the
only True Religion in the World, and they the only Infallible Ministers upon
Earth, it is unjust in any Law to constrain others to believe that, which may
be as Erroneous in them, as what the other professes: For tho I may believe the
Liturgy of the Church of England to be the purest form of Supplication under
Heaven, yet another may not believe so, neither is it a Crime in him to believe
otherwise.

We have said that the Penal Laws are defective in point of Honesty, which is
another reason why they are invalid, and therefore to be annulled. For the
Immorality of the Precept is contrary to God himself, because it includes a
Crime and a Transgression against God, and therefore ought not to be observed
as no way obligatory: seeing that it behooves us to obey God rather then Man,
which is the reason these Laws ought not to be observed, as contradicting our
Obedience to God, and subjecting us to the Compulsions of Men.

In the last place, no Law can be valid beyond the Intention of the
Legislators. Now it is not rational to think that those Persons who made the
Penal Laws upon a presumption of danger from Factious and Turbulent Spirits,
ever intended those Laws sor the punishment of those that lived peaceably and
obediently toward the Government in all the Passive Duties of good Loyal
Subjects, for that had been to make Laws for the punishment of good men, which
was never the design of any just and virtuous Legislator in this World. Now
then the Presumption of the danger being removed by his Majesty's most Gracious
Indulgence, the Foundation of the Penal Laws are removed, and consequently the
Obligation to them; for it is not to be imagined that the Framers of these Laws
ever meditated to Establish the Dominion of a Spiritual Oligarchy upon the Ruin
of so many Families of Pious and Religious People; and therefore the suspicions
which were the grounds of these Laws being vanished, the Laws themselves are to
be laid aside, as altogether vain and frivolous, and such as have only served
to gratify the Revenge and Animosity of their promoters: for we never heard of
Traitors or Factious Persons, that were ever tried upon those Laws, there being
others of greater force to take hold of such Criminals.

As for the Test, it appears to be an Oath continued to prevent the sitting of
any Commoner or Peer in either of the Houses of Parliament, from coming into
his Majesty's Presence or Court, and from bearing any Office or Employment,
Military or Civil, in any of his Majesty's Realms of England or Ireland, etc.
And they that are to take this Oath, are thereby to abjure the belief of
Transubstantiation, Invocation or Adoration of Saints, and the Sacrifice of the
Mass, etc.

The Learned are of Opinion, That to make an Oath binding, it is requisite that
it refers to things Lawful; for that if the thing promised upon Oath be
forbidden either by the Law of Nature, or by the Divine Laws, or Interdicted by
the Laws of Men, it has no power to oblige the Swearer.

Now the Q^^^^^^n will be whether this Oath does not positively (...) Laws of
the Land, by enforcing a Peer of the Realm* or any other freeborn Englishman
of lower Degree, to ac^use himself, with so strong and dangerous a Temptation
to Perjury, where the Choice is only this, Either to forswear their Religion,
or lose their Native Privileges and Preferments, and all possibility of
advancing their Fortunes. A piece of severity that constrains the inward Belief
of the Mind, which God the searcher of all Hearts has resorv'd to himself. That
this is an Act contrary to the known Laws of the Land, is undoubtedly true, as
is apparent from the great Charter, and several Statutes of the Realm;
therefore the Test has no power to oblige the Swearer, and consequently to be
repealed as Useless.

That it is against the Law of God, is apparent from hence, for that there is
nothing more strongly prohibited in Scripture, then to ground a Penal
Prosecution upon the enforced Oath of the Party without Witness or Accuser.

In the next place it seems a hard case to oblige the Papist to Swear away his
Religion, before he has another provided for him by those that Impose the Oath.
For certainly Transubstantiation is no point of State: nor does the Doctrine of
good Works make a man a good Subject: and it is possible for a Papist to be
Loyal to the Supreme Authority, and yet believe there is a Purgatory. All these
are no Fundamental points of Christian Faith, clearly set down in Scripture,
but inferred from passages and glances of the Text, to which the Answers are
believed as probable by the Papists, as the Objections against them by us; and
therefore there is no reason they should be so cruelly Tested for Doctrines
that are but either obscurely revealed, or not necessarily enjoined. As little
reason is there to enforce this Test upon the Papists, when we know that many
of our own persuasions would Scruple to take it, and some so nice as absolutely
to refuse it. At least it is very severe to compel such as are young and
unlearned (for all are not Casuists that enter the Parliament House, or have
Preferment in the Kingdom) to Swear that such an Opinion or Doctrine is not
true, which they have been always bred up to from their Infancy; especially to
come bluntly upon them without any preceding Instructions or endeavors to
convince their Understandings, only Swear or else depart the Kings Presence and
quit your Employment.

But all this is done, they say to prevent the growth of Popery, and secure the
Public Peace: as if the taking the Test would avail to make a man either a
better Neighbor or a better Subject. For Experience tells us, That they who
impose this Test, conside never the more in those whom they have frighted to
take it; and tho by taking it they may preserve what places they have, yet is
it not in it self any step to Preferment. Rather indeed is there less reason to
conside in those that are unwillingly drawn to an outward Compliance, then in
those that Obstinately refuse to be obliged; since there can be no greater
cause of Hatred and Resentment, then the remembrance of their being compelled
publicly to Swear against their Consciences; unless their Judgments are really
changed, and then all Penalties to enforce them are superfluous. Whence it must
be concluded, that the Tests and all Oaths of that nature, are always either
absolutely pernicious or altogether unnecessary: if against the inward
Judgment, damnable, as being the highest degree of Perjury, and Spiritual
Murder of the Soul; if according to the Internal Sentiments, useless. More then
this, it was the Opinion of Isidore, That a man ought to make no scruple to
break an Oath that would bind him to a dishonest and unjust Action: for that
the promise must needs be wicked that cannot be fulfilled, but by making a man
wicked. And what can make a man more wicked then to renounce his Religion for
private Gain? So that if the Test, as it is an Oath that would bind a man to
such an unjust Action, as the Renouncing his Religion for Worldly Honor or
Preferment, may be so easily broken, to what purpose is it kept on foot? Since
it has not power enough to bind the Person that takes it. And indeed, if the
power of an unjust Oath were so great as some would make us believe, how deeply
are they Perjured that took the Covenant and Engagement, yet after that were so
Instrumental in Restoring of his late Majesty of Blessed Memory, whose Right
and Title to the Crown they had so solemnly abjured. But they have their
Absolution from St. Ambrose, who tells us, That some Promises cannot be
performed, nor some others kept without the Violation of our Duties both to God
and Man.

Upon these considerations we have just reason to believe it was, that our
Supreme Legislator and Sovereign Prince set forth his most Gracious Act of
Indulgence, thereby to free from Spiritual Bondage, the Enflav'd Consciences of
his Suffering Subjects, Groaning under the Tyranny of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. Therein truly resembling the Divine Majesty, whose Vicegerent
upon Earth he is, while he sheds down down upon all in general, the Rays of
his Christian Compassion, and spreads the Cherubim Wings of his Mercy over
multitudes so latety tormented with the Unsanctified Vexation.

He has publicly declared it to be his Aim to fix his Government on such a
Foundation as may make his Subjects happy in the Enjoyment of their Religion
with freedom of Exercise, and their Property without Invasion.

Under the Reign of such a Prince, whom God preserve, what Cause or Grounds can
there be for Fears or Jealousies? It Is an ill sign of Obedience in Subjects,
when they distrust the Solemn Declarations of their Prince: And on the other
side, to deny him so small a Recompense for his Excess of Benignity in his
Royal Toleration, as the Repeal of Cruelty and Injustice; Cruelty in the Penal
Laws, and Injustice in the Test; is the highest Ingratitude in the World.
Certainly it cannot be thought but that a Monarch so tender of the Liberties
and Consciences of his Subjects, must be ill at ease till he has removed those
Scourges of Imposition that hang over their Heads in such a Threatening posture.
And therefore since Sovereign Consideration thinks it meet to have them taken
away, it is a very rude piece of Obstinacy, to be Froward and Peevish in
Opposition to Sovereign Reason.

FINIS.

