Wisdom Justified OF HER CHILDREN, From the Ignorance and Calumny of H.
HALLYWELL, In his Book, Called, An Account of FAMILISM, as it is Revived and
Propagated by the QVAKERS.

By William Penn.

But all these things will they do unto you for my Names sake: Yea, the time
comes, that whosoever kills you, shall think he does God Service. But be of
good Cheer, I have overcome the World.

John 15. 21. and 16. verse. 2, 33. Printed in the Year 1673.

DUM CLAVUM TENEAM


TO THE Justices of the Peace IN THE County of Sussex.
A Certain Person in your Parts has lately troubled himself and the World with
a Book entitled An Account of Familism as it is revived and propagated by the
Quakers; and this dedicated to Sr. J. Covert, Knight and Barronet, etc. How ill
he spent his time in Writing it, and how unadvised he was in Publishing it, an
impartial Perusal of this small Discourse will briefly yet abundantly manifest.

I come not to you for Protection ( a thing he and his Cause wanted) but for
Impartality and Justice; Truth is sufficient to patronize and defend her own
Cause from the Lash of Envy, without the weak Auxiliaries of Humane Force; She
gives Sanctuary to all that take to her for Refuge, but is all-sufficient to
her own Relief from the deepest Pressure, and most inveterate Prosecutions of
her implacable Enemies. And though the Evil Disposition of the World to receive
her Apologies, seems to conspire with the Indefatigable Ende^vours of Her
Adversaries to traduce Her; yet her own Purest Innocence and Unwearied Patience
has ever in the End broke forth to that clear Conviction of its Opposers, as
has proved at once both their Confutation and their Shame.

And let it seem no Riddle to you, that I write so assured of Truth on our
side, There is no Objection our Adversary has made to the contrary, we shall
not easily remove. Our Meaness in Quality, Breading, Literature and Fortunes in
the World (badges of Reproach with him) will r^ceive an ample Parallel from the
best Persons and Times, and is so far from making to our Overthrow, that if the
Scripture and other Story be to be credited, they tell us, that not many Wise,
Learned or Noble; Not that they are excluded, but as Persons stumb^ed at the
Cross of Christ, and the Simplicity of the Gospel, through the Power that
Greatness and Pleasure have with them, they exclude themselves.

But since Great and Rich Men have Souls to be saved as well as Poor, it is
equally their Concern to inform themselves of that Way which most assuredly
leads to the Rest that is Eternal. I confess the Variety of Sects in the World
to be a great Discouragement, especially when we consider with what Confidence
each Party pleads the Truth and Divine Original of his own Persuasion; But Men
are not to be satisfied with Pretense but Evidence: Education is too short, nor
will Tradition reach far enough to ascertain any Man of the Verity of his
Persuasion.

Could the two first have done, there had been no need of Relinquishing the
Roman Church, who was neither wanting in Pretenses, nor an Education prejudiced
enough against all Reformation; And if Tradition had been all-sufficient, the
Direction of God's Unerring Grace, and the necessary Conviction of Men's
Reasons, might have been spared.

For if Men are to believe what is recommended for true, because Recommended,
and not because True, we are to believe we know not what, and shall be to seek
so far for a Reason for the Hope that is in us, that in Reality we can have no
other Answer to give, then that such or such told us so, and therefore we
believe it: But if the Ground of our Faith ought to be more sure and better
founded, it will stand us greatly upon to examine, What is the Reason we have*
to render for our Faith and Hope in God, and that Belief we have of Holy
Scripture? If we err here, our Building is insecure; and the Danger is, that
we shall not only one day loose our Faith, but, which is worse, our Souls too.
This necessarily brings Man to a more Inward Search and Testimony, some Divine
Principle in Man, planted by God himself, which gives to believe that God is,
and that he is a Rewarder of them that fear him.

This the best Heathens, as well as Jews and Christians, have highly venerated,
and many are the Testimonies they have left upon Record, to the Divine
Original, and excellent Use of it, both to know God, and our selves; And truly
it was this Holy Principle in all Ages that has attended Mankind with those
Checks, Reproofs and Directions, by which he has had any Discerning of what
should, from what should not be done. This is that which has given him the
certain Sound and true Relish of what God has ever required at his hand, as
said the Prophet Micah, God has showed thee, O Man, what is Good, and what he
requires from thee; to do Justice, love Mercy, and walk humbly with thy God,
Mic. 6, 8. In the Psalms thus, Thou give thy Mouth to Evil, and thy Tongue
frames Deceit; Psalm 50.19, 20, 21.
Thou sit and speak against thy Brother; These things have thou done,
and I kept Silence; Thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thy self,
but I will Reprove thee, and set them in order before thine Eyes, says the
Lord. And the Apostle Paul tells us, What ever may be known of God is
manifested within. And what can that be by which God so manifests himself,
but what Moses called the Word nigh, in the Heart, that the Children of Israel
were to obey; That Job calls Light, which the Wicked rebel against, not loving
the Ways thereof: The like does Christ in John, when he complained, that Men
would not bring their Deeds to be examined by it. In all Ages has the Almighty
more or less pleaded his own Cause in the Consciences of all People by this
Divine Principle of Light, however variously denominated; And what ever Faith
or Hope Man has, not grounded upon the Discoveries, Convictions and Directions
of This, it is a by-rote Faith, Hope, and Religion.

Therefore I beseech you to whom this Discourse, is more particularly
dedicated, to consider of us, not by Tradition, Education, Religions established
by Human Laws, or Imperial Decrees, but by that Understanding this Immortal Law
and Everlasting Foundation of Virtue (as Heathen Plutarch calls it* will afford
you to judge us by.

It has been Man's Venturing to wade into the Holy Scriptures without this
Divine Principle, that has caused so many fearful Miscarriages about Religion.
Something in Man prompts him to Religion, but Man being not wholly guided by
that which so inspires him with Religious Desires, hastily spoils all with the
Intermixture of his own Fancies and Conceits; and because He is assured that
What first inclined him was Right, he sticks not to style his own Inventions
Orthodox; and then Impatient of Contradiction, with a Fury, as great as his
Ignorance, endeavors the Overthrow of what ever stands in his Way, and refuses
to receive his Mark in his Forehead, or in his Right Hand. This has occasioned
so much Trumpery in Religion; Ceremonies, Show, and mere Formality have
swallowed up the greatest part of It: Now were Men brought to God's Heavenly
Gift in themselves, it would reclaim and leaven the Mind, chain the Affections,
and bring Religion into Holy and Sel^-denying Living, and erect an Holy
Regiment in the Heart and Soul, by which the Heavenly ^mage would be renewed,
and Man become as one born again, without which Translation, there can be no
entering into God's Heavenly Kingdom.

This the first Protestants made to be their Reason of their Revolt from Rome:
For though it is true, that they charged the Papists with making God's Tradition
(the holy Scriptures) void by their numerous dark Traditions; yet That which
begot that holy Loathing of Rom's Superstitions, Idolatries and Will Worship,
was God's Grace in their Hearts; and their best Argument against Rom's Assault
was this, The Scripture which I believe from the Testimony of the Spirit of God
in me, and which I can only understand from the Illumination thereof, owns no
such thing, and therefore I reject it.

Such as converse with Luther and his Followers, Zuinglius and his Followers,
will find this to have been the Foundation of their whole Work. And our own
Martyrology is full to our Purpose, particularly Tindal, Times and Philpot.

I omit to mention a whole Cloud of Witnesses, because I intend not to dwell
here; only this I would be at, and I entreat you all to weigh it, If any thing
can give to understand aright, and enable to practice those things of God,
which it is necessary for Man both to know and do, then God's Light, Grace or
Word in the Heart? What else can give us to relish the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures themselves, or to believe the Things therein treated of to be
undeniable Truths? Indeed, the Want of This has been a great Occasion of
Atheism; for Man making, practicing and enacting That for Religion, of which
People has had no Assurance in themselves: But if they should speak their
Hearts, it is more probable, They do not believe it, but instead thereof deride
it, and so under a Show of Religion, live as Men without God in the World.

To prevent which, and to bring Men to the true Understanding of what God
expects from them, in order to that great Account they are to give unto Him at
the Revelation of his Righteous Judgments (when he will judge the Secrets of
all Men by Jesus Christ) we do exhort all to Christ's Pure, Unerring Light in
the Conscience, Joh. 8.12. 1 John 1.5, 6, 7.
which is sufficient to daily Understanding and Duty, that what they believe
and profess in Matters of so high Importance, They maybe convinced in their
very Conscience, by the good Understanding the Inspiration of the Almighty
gives, Job 32*8.
of the Truth and Necessity thereof; and not suffer themselves to be carried
away with the Torrent of Fathers, Councils, Synods, Doctors, Scholars, National
Constitutions, etc. (big and most times untrue, and too often empty Words)
without that inward Conviction and Testimony of God's Good Spirit in Your Own
Consciences, the old Protestant, and only primitive Ground of Tru^ Faith and
Obedience.

I know, and shall always acknowledge, that in the time of Ignorance the
Almighty winked, and that in every Age he has expressed his Regard to those
under the various Forms of Religion ever in the World, who have been
Sincere-hearted and of Sober and Conscientious Conversation; But I must also
tell you, that by how much the more, needless and unwarrantable Customs,
Will Worship and Human Religion built upon the dark and uncertain Conjectures
of Men, are receeded from, and the Minds of People engaged in a diligent
attendance upon that Divine Principle which only can clear up their
Understandings, and give them an experimental Knowledge of the True God, and
that Way of Worship and Service which may be most acceptable with him, by so
much more certain will they be of the Truth of their Religion, in as much as
they have over and above all external Record, the Assurance of Unquestionable
Convictions in their own Consciences.

Thus God, that made Heaven and Earth, knows, we came to receive that Knowledge
of him, Which we now expose our selves to all Hardships, to mantain.

We professed God; but like our Neighbors, in Works we denied him. We worshipped
him after Men's Conceivings, insomuch that I may say, we worshipped the Unknown
God in a False Way. No doubt but we were stockt with the Common Talk of
Religion, but the Cross of Christ we were Strangers to. His Blood we extolled,
whilst by Wicked Works we trod it under Foot; And believed our selves Saved by
it, Who were Uncleansed from Sin. The whole End of His Coming we esteemed the
top of all Love; but never knew enough of It, truly kindled in our Hearts,
whereby to work such Faith and Resignation, as could give us Victory over the
World. Thus were we, Jews-like Children of God whilst we crucified the Son of
God; and of the Seed of Abraham, whilst the Serpents Seed reigned; Heirs of the
Kingdom, yet not born again; Free, yet the Bondslaves of Vanity. Oh! at this
time of day it was that God ^ound us out, and broke in upon our Souls with his
Righteous Judgments for Sin, and laid Judgment to the Line, and Righteousness
to the Plummet, within us, the Book of Conscience was Opened, and great Fear
surprised us, and Deep Sorrow fell upon us, which brought that sudden and
Strange Change, that made us both the Derision of Profane, and Wonderment of
Sober Men.

The Author of the Account of Familism, for want of more Skill, and
Seriousness, calls it the Hypochondria, as if it only had been a Flux of
Melancholy overpowring the Strength of Reason, and carrying the Understanding
captive at the Impetuosity of its Fancies. But having been thus made sensible
of the Terrors of the Lord for Sin, and being brought into a True Understanding
of that Religion and Worship which most please God, some of us were
constrained, and in Conscience bound, to go forth into the World, and publish
these Tidings of Judgment for Sin, and Conversion through Righteousness wrought
by the mighty Power of God in the Conscience, that all might be awakened to try
their Works, Faiths, Worships and whole Religions, whether they were of God or
Men; or they had been doing their own Wills, or the Will of God; that so they
might be brought to experience God to be a God nigh at hand, reconciled in
Christ, blotting out Sin, and renewing a Right Spirit within, by which their
Religion might not longer stand in the Traditions of Men, nor only Education of
Parents, but upon the Convictions and Operations of God's Grace in the
Conscience. And thus is all that Christ did without, brought nigh and home to
the very Soul. The Seed of the Woman is known to Bruise the Head of the
Serpent; Christ, the Light, and Lamb that takes away the Sins of the World,
not only to take away Sins past through Remission, but Cleanse from the Nature,
Root and Ground of Sin, by His Holy Blood, which sprinkles all Consciences that
wait and walk in the Light (the Just Man's Path) from Dead Works, to serve the
Living Lord God in Uprightness for ever.

For this Cause are We brought out into the World; and behold the Vessel we are
embarked in, our Lading and the Country we make for! The Vessel, Truth; the
Lading, Faith and Good Works; Our Souls, the Passengers; and the Country, the
Land of Everlasting Rest.

This I could not but present you with, that no Endeavors of our Enemies may
be able to lodge a False Character of us and our Principles with you; Though I
must faithfully tell you, that I should wrong my own Reason, as well as your
Judgment, and speak against my Conscience too, if I should let in one Thought
of this Man's Ability to do us any great Mischief with you: for, out of no
Insult, but in Real Truth, I take Him for a very Unskilful Pilot on our Coast,
a Man unacquainted with our Concerns; and a most Incompetent Person for an
Antagonist.

Accept (for I can ask no Excuse for) my Plainness, I have not fawned, I never
could, and now much less: These Matters not only deserve, but require greatest
Plainness. And Men that believe they shall have to do with God, after they have
left having to do with Men, ought to act with greatest Circumspection and
Sincerity. Remember your Original; remember your End; and know assuredly that
but Breath is in your Nostrils; and for every Deed done in this Mortal Body,
whether it be good or whether it be evil, will God, the righteous Judge require
an Account from You before his great Tribunal, where may you all be able to
answer with Joy: I am

Your Faithful Friend, William Penn,

THE CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I. HIs Epistle considered, page 13. CHAP. II. His Comparisons of us
with ancient Heretics considered, p. 21. CHAP. III. His Comparison between us
and the Familists, p. 30. Of Christ's Ministration, p. 31. Of Revelation, p.
37. Of Miracles, p. 40. Of Forms of Prayer, p. 43. Of Baptism, p. 45. Of the
Supper, p. 57.
CHAP. IV. Of Holy Days, p. 63. Of Holy Places, p. 67. Of Tithes, p. 72. Of
Gospel Ministers, p. 81.
CHAP. V. That Quakery is not Saduceism, as charged, p. 88. CHAP. VI. The
People, called Quakers, not inconsistent with Government, p. 92. Swearing not
lawful to true Christians, p. 96. CHAP. VII. Of the Nature and Sufficiency of
the Light within, p. 101. CHAP. VIII. Of Lies and Slanders promoted by him
against us, p. 110. CHAP. IX. Of Perfection, p. 114. CHAP. X. Our Ways of
Conversion Scriptural, and justified, p. 117. The Conclusion to the Justices of
the Peace, p. 131.
ERRATA.
READER,
SOme Faults have escaped the Press, which thou art desired to Excuse and
Correct; the Book otherwise asks, and I hope, needs neither.

Page, Line, Error -- Corrected. 13 14 he I 35 5 and who 44 26 it be it to be
66 1 I I should 67 9 any. any thing. 71 28 a House Houses 91 28 object and
Faith and blot out and Faith. 98 19 to to be 26 their his 100 22 Affirming
Affronting 107 25 Jo. 1.1. Jo. 1.1, 5. 112 1 was done was not done.

Wisdom Justified OF HER CHILDREN, From the Ignorance and Calumny of H.
HALLYWELL.
CHAP. I. His Epistle considered.
THe Adversary we have to do withal begins his Dedicatory Epistle thus, The
daily and Numerous Increase of the Heretical Generation of Quakers in these
Parts made me a little more then ordinarily inquisitive into their Doctrines
and Persuasions; which ^^ found not only Destructive of Civil Government but
Religion it self.

It Is natural with Ignorance to be Proud, and Envy to slander. His Enquiry has
been at our Adversaries Door, not ours. They that read him, and those Books
that lately came out, may know his Informers without further Cost: But
Book-Robbery, though to Untruth, is an old Priest-trick.

If his Sort of rendering us Unconsistent with Government could incense the
Civil Magistrate to our Destruction, we know very well Traducers would not be
wanting. Truth has never been persecuted under that Name: Heresy is an old Blot
the Devil has cast upon it, that it may become suspected with the Simple; And
Christians were of old worried in Beast Skins: Such Coverings the present
Heathen Spirit has provided for us. But as we cannot but bless the Name of
Almighty God, that he has brought us to the Knowledge of his good old Way of
Truth in the Inward Parts; Jer. 31.33, 34. Hebr. 8.10.
So do we affirm it to be neither averse from Government, nor destructive of
Religion; right Government being according to it, Jam. 1.27.
and pure Religion being to keep our selves Unspotted from the World, and to do
or suffer, which we have ever done: and God knows, to that is the Tendency of
our Holy Principle, to wit, Moderation, Justice, Industry, Temperance and
Upright Conversation. But the true English of this wicked Suggestion is no more
then this, The Quakers and their Persuasion are inconsistent with
Will-Worshippers, Hirelings, Men-Pleasers, Persecutors and Oppressors; They
give the World an Alarm for these things, and Round their Ears with the
Necessity of walking in so straight and narrow a Way, as gives great Disquiet
to the Libertin, and brings the Priests Qualification into great Question, and
his Trade into absolute Danger.

No wonder then, so many hard Names, are cast upon us, to deter such as are
unacquainted with us; and beget Scruples in them that are Well disposed to us.
However, this Contentment his Paragraph gives, that notwithstanding all this
Opposition, we daily and numerously, increase, for which my Soul is greatly
glad, and my Knees bow to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he
would continue to prosper and speed his own great Work of Redemption in the
Earth. But he goes on.

For what else can be expected from them who deny the Scripture to be the Word
of God, and Rule and Guide in matters of Salvation.

Answ. We do not deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and Rule and Guide
in matters of Salvation, out of any Undervalue of them, but from that reverent
Regard we have to Christ the Great and Eminent Word, who was with God, and was
God, by whom all things were made, Who is the Way, Truth and Life, John 14.
Acts 7.37.
the great Prophet, Judge, Lawgiver and Priest to his People, whose Lips
preserve Knowledge. He is the New Covenant, Rule and Judge, and without him we
can neither understand nor believe the Scriptures as we should do; Nay, so far
are they from being a Rule, etc. that a thousand Cases may happen wherein they
cannot be a Direction to us. Nay, they may be burned, drowned, torn, lost,
mistranslated, added to, diminisht, Men may be robbed of them, imprisoned from
them; but none of all this can or ought to be said of the Great Gospel-Rule:
God has ever been Sufficient to his People in every Age; And since they only
are Children of God, who are led by the Spirit of God, and that it is the
Spirit of God alone which leads into all Truth, It follows that the Law of the
Spirit of Life, writ in the Heart, and not a Law writ on Paper (a State less
excellent then the Jews, whose Law was written upon Stone) is the great
Evangelical Rule of Living; Ye^ ^re the Scriptures an Holy Declaration of the
Word of God, and of the Rule and Guide in ^atters of Salvation: And we reject
for ever that Spirit which leads into those Principles and Practices, that in
the least contradict the standing and permanent Truths therein mentioned; For
they were written by Holy Men of God, being inspired thereto, and contain Godly
Reproof, Admonition, Exhortation and Prophecies, for the Edification of the
Church, and perfecting the Man of God to every good Word and Work, through
Faith in Christ Jesus; and as such, many Directions, Precepts and Rules are
therein laid down, Tit. 2.11, 12. John 3.19, 20, 21. Romans 8, 13, 14. 1. Joh.
2.27.
yet they all refer to the Grace, Light, Spirit, Word or Anointing within, as
That by which Man ought to be Ruled, governed and ordered to God's Glory and
his own Comfort, as they first were who gave them forth; for they were
Witnesses of the Truth of what they writ. So that they are an Holy Declaration
of the Way of God, Read Quakerism a New Nickname for old Christianity. from
page 24. to p. 202.

also Reason against Railing from p. 24. to p. 47


and that Holy Principle which leads to it, and in it, without which the Book
is sealed, the Scriptures are unknown; and consequently not the Scriptures, but
that holy Key of David is the Rule, how far, and which way we are both to
understand, interpret, believe and practice them.

This may be enough to show the Disingenuity of our Adversary in representing
us to his Knight; For because We cannot give that Title and Office due to
Christ himself from him to his bare Declaration, he would insinuate that we
refuse all Conformity to the Holy Examples and Testimonies therein related and
expressed, as if we were a most dissolute Crew of Libertines.

But he tells us, that this Person (whose Name I suppose we shall prove he has
made too bold with) so well knowing our obstinate and perverse Humor in the
Discharge of his Trusts committed to him under his MOST SACRED MAJETSY, he
could do no less then present him with this Treatise, that going under the Name
and Protection of so worthy and accomplished a Person, it may in some measure
obtain its desired Effect, by putting a Stop to the growing Evil, and
confirming those who are not seduced in the Truth of their Profession. A most
non-sensical Expression.

Answ. But I am willing to hope better things of him, then that be should go
upon the Priest's Message, or turn their Knight Errant. But what is the Matter
that the Quakers are so Perverse? They cannot say right Worshipful, because
they think that of right belongs to God; nor most sacred Majesty, that being
fit for no mortal Man: Neither can they ly and flatter with Your most Obliged
and Affectionate Servant, for they are more obliged to God then Man, and to one
Man more then another. He either knew not, forgot, or slighted the Rebuke of
Paulinus to Sulpitius Severus, who said, It becomes not Christ's Freemen to
subscribe themselves Servant, etc. But it is nothing with such as our Adversary
to Cog, Ly and Flatter; It Is one Part of his Manners.

I would fain know what Rule he had for all this? Did the Holy Prophets and
Apostles teach him any such Trash? Will he prate of Scripture for a Rule, and
yet bridle his Flattering Tongue no better? The Customs of the Heathens have
entered the Profession of Christianity, and that Old Spirit under this New Trim
goes off for a very Good Christian.

Oh, but the Quakers are Obstinate in other Cases for all this!

Answ. Why so? Because they will by all means stand to their Principles; They
will not play the Sycophants; Threats do not fright them, nor Promises gain
them; They love their Conscience above their Convenience; and seek to please
God rather then Men. Perhaps, this sort of Men, the Knight has found them, but
could have wished them more pliant to the Laws, it may be, that he might have
some color to be kind: must therefore this Busy-Body entitule his Name to all
his own Follyes, Lies and Slanders against us? What can any moderate Person
think but that the Patron of such a Discourse, has been an eminent Persecutor,
whose Protection is so plainly called for to a Book that without doubt would
have him so? For my Part, I think the Knight ought to repute that Ignorant and
Disingenuous Discourse so far from being a Testimony how much the Author is his
most obliged and affectionate Servant, that for Interesting his Name and Power
therein, he should hereafter look upon him as an Enemy to Him, his Name and
Family.

Before I conclude, give me leave to ask him, why he sought for Protection. Is
his national Cause defended by Princes, Parliaments, Navyes, Armies, the
Learned, Rich and Powerful Clergy, both Universities, the generality of the
Gentry and Commonality so weak and gasping; or are the poor, despised, traduced
and trodden down Quakers so potent and terrible, that a Book of eight Sheets
dare not peep out against them, but a big Title must be got to recommend and
patronize it. But how Worthy soever the Knight be, that will not hinder my
Proceeding to show the Unworthiness of the Book, and therein of the Author, as
well to his Patron as the despised Quakers.

CHAP. II. Containing an Answer to his first Chapter, in which he pretends an
Agreement to be between the Quakers and other Ancient and Modern Heretics. The
Comparison examined and proved defective.
OUr Adversary, that he may the better prejudice his Reader against us,
introduces his Discourse with a Comparison of us, to the most noted and odious
of the reputed ancient and modern Heretics, doubtless hoping, that what he
wants of Argument to render us such, may be supplied by that ill Opinion, Men
have of those he brings us into parallel with. The first Man he thought fit to
pitch upon is Simon Magus, page 3.
a Man famous for his infamous Sorceries, with whom he wickedly yoaks that
faithful Minister of God, George Fox, because, says he, Simon Magus gave out
that he was God the Father; And George Fox before the Justices at Lancaster,
that he was equal with God.

Answ. There is no believing a decimating, persecuting Priest against a Quaker
till he makes more Conscience of telling Lies, who have given too many
Demonstrations of their Desire to have us run down at any rate, to be credited
by those who love Truth more then Partiality.

George Fox denies the Words, they were never so spoken by him, much less were
they ever intended in that Way our Adversary takes and improves them; For
though there be not an Equality, yet there is an Unity, as testifyeth the
Scripture; Let the same Mind be in you, Phil. 2.6.
that was also in Christ Jesus, who being in the Form of God, thought it not
Robbery to be equal with God. And He that sanctifies, Heb. 2.11.
and they that are sanctified are all of One; for which cause he is not ashamed
to call them Brethren. Again, They that are joined to the Lord are One Spirit;
1 John 3.7.
and, He that does Righteousness is Righteous, even as He is Righteous. To deny
this is to deny the most Heavenly Benefit we have by Christ, namely Unity and
Fellowship we have with the Father and with the Son. That it was an Unity, not
an Equality, especially in the Sense he takes the Word, the faithful Narrative
of that Proceeding, printed in the Year 1654. will further testify.

How great then must this Man's Miscarriage be, who, to render a good Man an
Impostor, turns Forger himself? but God will reward him.

The next Pair he pitches upon to prove his Assertion, is Maenander and James
Nailer. page 3.
The one for affirming Himself to be sent from the invisible Regions to be the
Savior of Mankind. And James Nailer for asserting himself to be Christ and
accepting Hosannah's and Divine Worship in the Streets of Bristol.

Answ. What Maenander was I know not, and it is hard believing a Character of
any Man, when it is given by his Enemy: But sure I am that James Nailer never
asserted himself to be the Christ of God; Neither did he ever deny Him that
appeard at Jerusalem to be the Lord's Christ, as his Writings plentifully
declare, especially one Paper written by him to the then Parliament, when a
Prisoner in Bride-wel.

Christ Jesus the Emmanuel (of whose Sufferings the Scriptures declare) Him
ALONE I confess before Men, Jam. Nailer' s Pos^. L. Faith.
for whose sake I have denied what ever was dear to me in this World, that I
might win him, and be found in him and not in my self, whom alone I seek to
serve in Body, Soul and Spirit, night and day, according to the Measure of
Grace working in me; even to that Eternal Spirit be Glory, and to the Lamb
forever. But to asscribe this Power and Virtue to JAMES NAILER, or for that to
be exalted or worshipped, TO ME IS GREAT IDOLATRY. So having an Opportunity
given (with Readiness) I am willing, in the Fear of God the Father, in Honor
to Christ Jesus, and to take off all Offenses from every Simple Heart, without
Guile or Deceit.

His third Comparison lies betwixt Photinus who is said to have denied the
Trinity, page 4.
and G. Fox, as guilty of the same Error in his Account.

Answ. I can find no such place in the Book so called; Either our Adversary
sets up for a New Controvertist, or he dishonestly shunned giving us the Page:
But I am willing to believe, that he took it as he found it in some other
Adversary; for any thing reported or printed against a Quaker is ground enough
for an envious Priest to accuse him.

But what if G. Fox denied the Unscriptural Expressions, viz. The Trinity of
distinct and separate Persons? must it necessarily follow that he denied the
Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, 1. Jo. 5.
Word and Spirit? We justly renounce those Barbarous School-Terms, as not
suited to God's Heavenly Manifestations, but the dark Conceits of some Popish
Doctors.

His fourth Comparison is made between So^inus and James Nailer, in that the
one denied the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ, Page 4.
and looked upon his Passion only as an Example.

The other in that he affirmed, The End for which Christ did suffer, was to be
a living Example to all Generations, Love to the lost, page 56.

Answ. He has not truly delivered the Opinion of Socinus, whose Books show
(however mistaken about Christ's Divinity) that he ever esteemed his Death and
Passion to have more in it then a bare Example: Nor has he faithfully dealt
with J. Nailer in this Quotation; For first I find not the Words as cited; and
next the Word (ONLY) is by himself omitted, which alone renders the Passage
heterodox. Suppose then that J. Nailer writ, that Christ was in his Suffering a
living Example to all Generations; Is there no Difference between Christ's
being in his Death and Passion Only our Example, which he charges upon Socinus,
and Christ's being our living Example in Suffering, which he attributes to J.
Nailer? How can there be a Comparison, where there is so great a Disparity? The
First is denied by all that own Christ: The Last is owned by all that do not
deny Peter, who thus writ to the scattered Brethren, For even hereunto were ye
called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example that ye
should follow his Steps. 1 Pet. 2.21.

His fifth Comparison he makes between the Valentinians and the Quakers. The
Former, Page 4, 5, 6.
he says, arrogated to themselves a Knowledge beyond Christ and his Apostles;
The Latter impudently throw away the written Word of God, and delude the
credulous Vulgar with new fangled Revelations; which he thinks he has proved by
two Inances. 1. That Th. Hollbrow a Quaker, to One that urged Scripture,
answered, What do thou tell me of Scripture, which is no more to me then an
Old Almanac. 2. That Fox and Hubberthorn in a Book, called Truth's Defense,
say, The Scriptures are no standing Rule, and it is dangerous for ignorant
People to read them.

Answ. To the first I say, there is great Difference between one that was no
Quaker, and one that was or is a Quaker; We have examined the matter, and by
all we can find, both that Saying is not true as charged, and it is of an
ancienter date then the coming of any of our Friends into those, Parts
therefore not the Saying of a true Quaker. To the second I return thus much,
It Is true there is such a Book, and it was written by G. Fox and R.
Hubberthorn; but he has not given us so much as one Page to direct us to the
Passage: So that either People must read till they find it, or else take his
Perversion for our Assertion. Unworthy Man! does he think us such Wretches,
that we deserve not common Justice? Methinks Justice should not be denied where
so little Mercy is shown.

But to answer the Instance. Our Judgment about the Scriptures being the Rule,
we have already delivered; And in what sense it is Dangerous to read them,
their own Book will declare.

It Is dangerous, say G. Fox and R. Hubberthorn, to read the Scripture in order
to make War against the Saints, to give carnal Expositions upon them, and
Meanings contrary to them, and to make a Trade of them; but Blessed is he that
does read and does understand them. If this prove that Slight to Scripture,
our Adversary would suggest them to be guilty of, then let us be condemned: But
God's Witness in every unseared Conscience will acquit them, and judge him for
corrupt Citation, and hard Speeches, who dares to cry thereupon, Are these not
as Impudent Heretics as the Valentinians (whom he represents to have arrogated
to themselves a Knowledge above Christ and his Apostles) which, how true soever
it may be of them, I am sure is False enough of us; for those hideous
Consequences he makes, are not deducible from any unperverted Saying to be
cited out of Truth's Defense.

And least any should think, we deny with the Papists the Perusal of the
Scriptures to Ignorant People, from what our Adversary says, know that they
spoke of such Ignorant and Unlearned Persons, as in reading, wrested them to
their own Destruction; now unless it be not Dangerous to read to Destruction
they are not chargeable wit^ B^ame in that Matter.

But who are the Knowing and Learned? The Jewish Doctors? and Greek
Philosophers? No, but Fishermen and poor Mechanics discipled in Christ's
School, for the Excellency of whose Knowledge Paul reputed his
Gamaliel-Acquisitions but Dross and Dung: So that their Knowing and Learned are
many times the Ignorant and Unlearned we speak of, whose Wisdom God will
confound, and whose Understanding he will bring to naught.

His last Comparison of us in this Chapter is with Marcus, page 6.
an old Heretic. The Agreement he makes betwixt us, lies in our mutual
Pretenses to Inspiration and Prophecy. For as he reports him to have abused
many silly Women, under color of conferring on them the Gift of Prophesying,
and that he had a familiar Spirit by which (...) brought himself into Credit
with his deluded Followers; So he tells us that he has had it confidently
affirmed, That about the first rise of the Quakers in the North of England,
several Persons by Gloves and Ribbands and diverse Charms were really bewitched
by them. And doubtless many of their Quaking fits were real Possessions by the
Devil.

Answ. What Marcus was is nothing to us; If he has done amiss, he has answered
for it by this time. I confess, Page 7*
I am not over-fond of the Characters left us of ancient Heretics, knowing
what kind of Creatures the best Protestants are with Papists; and what fearful
Monsters several sober Separatists are reputed among some Protestants: But this
I know, if what he has said of several Ancients be no Truer then what he has
said of us, he has grossly abused their Doctrines and their Memories.

For the Witchcraft of our Gloves, Ribbands and Charms, it is scarce worth my
Notice; his Folly in mentioning it, being a sufficient Reproof and Confutation
to himself. A Story fit for none at this time of day, to report or believe, but
a Man of his size. I thought they had been worn out by this time.

But let the sober Reader judge which savours most of Satan's Design, this Idle
yet Scandalous Story, or our Fearing and Trembling at the Word of the Lord, and
those Terrors that broke in upon our Souls because of Sin and Iniquity? It Is
but the old Spirit of Mockery that acted the Jews and Heathens against the
Christians, and Papists against Protestants and too many Protestants of several
Sorts, against some more reformed Separatists.

For had the Reverent Fear of God possessed our Adversary's Heart in the
writing of this Discourse, there had been no room for such Irreligious Scoffs
against an inoffensive People. But the Devil, because he would be God, calls
God the Devil, Christ, Beelzebub, Light, Darkness, and the Power of God, the
Power of Satan, and the Fear and Trembling brought by the one, the Possessions
and Witchcrafts of the other. Certainly such Men live in a dry Land, they see
not when Good comes. But what will not an Enraged Tything Priest do to destroy
us, who (he knows) are Discoverers of such Deluders?

CHAP. III. His pretended Agreement between the Authors of Familism and the
Quakers considered. His Objections answered.
I Now come to consider the Reason of the Title of his Book, and what Ground he
had to name us the Revivers and Propagators of Familism, with the most weighty
Objections he makes against us (if in Truth I may repute the strongest of them
such) and that with what Brevity, Truth and Faithfulness I can.

The great Authors of this Doctrine of Familism, he says, were David George,
and Henry Nicolas, but more especially the latter, as having more improved and
disseminated the pernicious Errors introduced by the former. He bestows many
severe Expressions upon them, more, I think, then becomes a Man of any Charity
to give. I am not their Advocate; But so much Spleen and so little Reason
against Dead Men can be neither Christian nor Manly. What he says they held,
and how far we are concerned in it, it is our Business to enquire.

1. Of Christ's Ministration.
And first he tells us, that H.N. should say, that not only the Law of Moses,
but the Ministration of Christ and his Apostles were only Temporary things
instituted to bring Men to the perfect Reign of the Spirit; and then, like
Horn-Books and Primers to grown Understandings, to be thrown away, page 10, 11.
And that this is the full Sense of the Quakers, says our Adversary, Hear John
Crook a Quaker; page 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
We believe by the same Gift of Grace that there are several Ministratitions,
and several Operations, according to 1 Cor. 12. And all by the same Spirit, as
before and after the Law by Moses, and after by John the Baptist, and Christ
and his Apostles. And by this Spirit were the Scriptures given forth, and the
Holy Men of God did speak, prophesy, preach and pray, as they were moved; and
to answer the Service God had for them to do, they were to wait, as Christ
commanded his Disciples, to receive the Promise of the Father -- And therefore
as it was the Practice of the People of God in old time, to wait for the Moving
of this Spirit, that they might speak as it gave them Utterance in the Evidence
and Demonstration thereof; so do this People, called Quakers, now. Upon which
our Adversary dares to observe, that we with the Familists, deny the
Ministration of Christ to be the Ministration of the Spirit, and consequently a
Blasphemous Derogation from the Honor of our Blessed Savior, who said to his
Apostles, Joh. 16.14. He shall receive of mine, and show it unto you.

Answ. If our Adversary's Weakness has run him into this strange Parrallel, he
is to be pittyed; but if his Envy, he is severely to be rebuked. Will any Man
that has Sense or Honesty say, it is all one to affirm that Christ's
Ministration is an Horn-book that time casts off with Infancy; and that it is a
Waiting to receive the same Spirit Christ commanded his Apostles to wait for,
as the Promise of the Father, and the peculiar Gift and Privilege of his own
Ministration? Does not J. Crook expressly draw a Parallel between the Holy Men
of God of old, and the Quakers of our time; that as they then, so the Quakers
now wait to be taught, moved and ordered by the same Eternal Spirit, through
which all come to be baptized into One Body? How was that then no Spiritual
Ministration, when we desire to be conformed unto the Spirit and Holy Example
thereof, not making this anew, but reviving that old and durable Ministration
of the Spirit? Therefore Blasphemous Derogations will return to our Adversary,
as unduely charged upon us, with a Charge upon him of base Derogation from the
Truth of our Belief.

But he thinks that Humph. Smith has made much for him in thus Querying; page
15.
Whether should People be led in these days by Moses, according to his outward
Ministration, or the Person of Christ ( limiting it to his Visible Appearance)
or the Spirit of Truth, which he promised to pour out after his Ascension;
which contains the Substance of what he quotes out of H. Sm. and to which he
thus answers, There is no sober Christian can read this Passage without Anger
and Disdain to see such wicked Wretches scoff, and fleeringly insult upon the
sacred Person of our Lord Jesus; The whole History of whose Life and Death in
the Letter of it, they esteem no better then one of Aesop's Fables.

Answ. But our Adversary will not so easily escape the Hands of the Just God
(whose is Vengeance) for these Ungodly Defamations, as he well knows he may do
ours: Anger, Disdain and Lies become him, and it is little to be wondered that
he should be guilty of them all against a Quaker. If H. Sm. had asserted that
Moses could not be our Leader, neither the Visible Person of Christ, but the
Spirit of Truth, he had not exceeded the Warrant of Scripture, nor the very
Judgment of this Reviler. It is not two pages off that he quoted Joh. 16.14. He
shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you: Which, if I understand any
thing, imports thus much; That those things which they knew not whilst Christ
was with them, after his Ascension the Holy Ghost should reveal unto them, as
these two preceding Verses fully prove. I have yet many things to say unto
you, but ye cannot bear them now; Howbeit, when the Spirit of Truth is come, he
will guide you into all Truth, and he will show you things to come. Nay, Christ
himself says in the 7th Verse, Nevertheless I tell you the Truth, It is
expedient for you that I go away; For if I go not away the Comforter will not
come unto you. And in the 14th Chapter he speaks thus, verse. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
I will pray the Father, and he will give you another Comforter, (...) will
abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth: So that the personal
Ministration was manifestly transient, and temporary; but That of the Spirit
was to abide for ever. But I would not any should think it to be less Christ's
Ministration, because the Ministration of the Spirit; for the Lord is that
Spirit, as his own Words manifest: Again, I will not leave you comfortless, I
will come to you. Yet a little while, and the World sees me no more, but ye
see me: Because I live, ye shall live also; For he that dwells with you,
shall be in you. At that day you shall know that I am in my Father, and you in
me, and I in you. And that this Comforter is Christ in his Spiritual Coming and
Appearance, let it be further observed, that the same Word for Comforter
((...)) in John 16.7. is the Word used by the same Apostle in the first Verse
of the 2d Chapter of his first Epistle for Advocate, when he says, We have an
Advocate with the Father, Christ Jesus the Righteous.

In short, the Dispensation of his Visible Appearance was but Temporary: It is
expedient for you that I go away. But his Ministration, who so appeared, then
dis-appeared, and after re-appeared in a Spiritual and unalterable
Ministration, Math. 28.20.
Lo, I am with you to the End of the World. And truly thus much our Adversary
in Contradiction to himself, page 13.
grants us, that the Ministration of Christ was indeed the Ministration of the
Spirit. Now what Scoffs, Fleerings or Insults against the sacred Person of our
Lord Jesus any can see in this Doctrine, to incite a sober Christian to Anger
and Disdain, I leave to any but such an Angry and Disdainful Enemy to judge?

I cannot forget his horrible Ly of us, concerning the Scriptures, stolen
probably out of an Anabaptists lying Dialogue lately printed against us.
Prelaticks and Sectaries can sometimes agree against Quakers. Aesop's Fables
have more worth in them, then all the Books that ever were written against the
Quakers; I do not at all doubt but there are Twenty Fables in Aesop that, well
considered, would have taught them more Discretion and (it should have been
their own Fault if not) more Honesty too, then any or all of them have shown in
their utmost Endeavors against us. But that we have no more Regard to, nor
Belief in the Holy Scriptures of Truth then in Aesop's Fables, is a Story more
profane and fabulous then any Fable in Aesop; and God will recompense with a
Vengeance this Defamer of an Innocent People, unless diverted by his unfeigned
Repentance.

. 2. Of Revelation.
He tells us the second thing wherein the Familists and Quakers are all one, is
the Pretense of Immediate Revelation. Dav. Geo. and H.N. both pretend to
receive their Doctrine from the Angel Gabriel. And W. Gibson, the Quaker,
says, that the Gospel which they preach they have not received it from Men,
nor from Books, Page 16.
nor from Writings, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ in them, and then
denies the Scriptures of the old and new Testament to be the revealed Will of
God.

Answ. After what manner D.G. and H.N. received their Commission I know not,
but sure I am that W. Gibson's Assertion is sound. Take away Revelation and the
Gospel ceases of course; Christ is put besides the Dignity of his Prophetical
and Priestly Office; the Promises of God will be broken; and the most excellent
part of the Scriptures, God's Traditions, made void. Who was it said, A Prophet
shall the Lord your God raise up like unto me, Him shall ye hear in all things.
Deuteronomy. 18.18. Job 32.8.
There is a Spirit in Man; and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives
Understanding. As for me, This is my Covenant with him, Isa. 59.21
says the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my Words which I have put in
thy Mouth, shall not depart out of thy Mouth, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed,
nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed's Seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and
forever. Jer. 33.6.
I will REVEAL unto them the Abundance of Peace and Truth -- I thank thee,
Matthew. 11.25, 27.
O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from
the Wise and Prudent, and have REVEALED them unto Babes -- And no Man knows
the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will REVEAL him. No Man can come
unto me, Jo. 6.44.
except the Father which has sent me, draw him -- But God has REVEALED them
unto us by his Spirit. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11.
For the Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God. For the
things of God knows no Man but the Spirit of God. If anything be REVEALED to
another that sits by, Chap. 14.30.
let the first hold his Peace. For when it pleased God to REVEAL his Son in me.
Gal. 1, 12, 16.
For I neither received the Gospel of Man, neither was I taught it, but by the
REVELATION of Jesus Christ. Phil. 3, 15.
If any be other-wise minded, God will REVEAL it to him. As I said before, so
again, Who uttered these excellent Sayings, and for what End? If no
Inspiration, no Understanding; If no Revelation, no Knowledge; And if the
Spirit cease to teach (as it can never teach, but by Inspiration or Revelation)
then the Administration of Christ and his Apostles is ceased indeed; And so not
the Quakers, but their Adversary overturns the Gospel-Ministration, as begun
and preached by Christ and his Apostles. And be it known to all the World, we
think Revelation no Disgrace to our Cause. Parrats may learn Scripture but can
never experience it; And those know little better who know not by Experience:
They are unprofitable Canters indeed who confidently talk of what they never
felt, and Idle Boasters who bo^ up themselves unto the Reputation of Ministers
and Christians, with a loud talk of their Travels, Trials, Inspirations and
Experiences, whom they plainly mock in their Posterity, concluding all blind
because they cannot see. In short, Let it be the Character of the despised
Quakers (and we glory in it) that all the Councils, Synods, Universities,
Doctors, Scholars, and the most Unanimous Decrees, Learned Books, and what ever
the Power and Art of the Spirit of Man can produce, will never be able to give,
or rule that true Faith which overcomes the World; For that which may be known
of God is manifested within Man: And though outward Records may testify of, and
direct to that Unerring Light and Spirit, by which Man comes both to know God,
and to be made conformable to his heavenly Image; yet nothing below the
Discoveries, Convictions, and Effectual Operations of the Eternal Spirit, can
give Man the certain Knowledge of God, nor that daily Ability by which alone he
may be enabled to obey him.

But he opposes to us Miracles and Reason, insinuating that we have no more of
the last then the first, page 16, 17, 18.
and therefore not to be believed. To the first I say, we pretend to no other
Religion, then what was professed and practiced by the Apostles, and therefore
need no new Miracles after that Manner to confirm that which has been confirmed
by Miracles already; especially by those who believe those Miracles: And to
deny Revelation where there are no Miracles, is to discard many of the
Prophets, and to deny the Pouring forth of the Spirit upon the primitive
Christians. But above all, hear the Man's Interpretation of Deuteronomy. 18.22. When a
Prophet speaks in the Name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to
pass; that is, says this horrible Perverter of holy Scripture, if he do no
Miracle; whereas the Verse intends no such thing. Is this to rant over the
Quakers for Idiots, as if he were some Doctor of the Chair, that where the
Scripture speaks of Prophecy, he should render it Miracle; as if he that is a
Prophet, is a Worker of Miracles, and that Miracles and Prophecy are
equivalent? But ( Argumentum ad hominem) let us see how it will hold. He that
is a true Prophet must necessarily work Miracles; But the Priests of England
cannot work Miracles; therefore, the Priests of England are all False Prophets.
A true Conclusion, yet false Premises; A Paradox. Now for the Reasonableness of
our Doctrine: He thinks a very mean Capacity can find none in it; for how
should there be any Reason in what they teach, when they themselves, says he,
deny the Use of Reason. Page 18.
But none have less then they which pretend to so much. This Man dares swagger
for Reason, and yet cries out, Heresy, as soon as he sees it. His Reason is,
the Authority of his Church, The SAY-SO of some University Doctor, finally, The
Works of some learned Men, and offer never so much Reason and Conscience
against them; and your Reason is Sophistry, and Conscience, Enthusiasm. The
justest Separation in the World is with such but Schism, and which is the last
Stratagem, such Persons must be Enemies to Caesar. But I may say of those Men,
as Heraclitus said of their Forefathers, If blind Men were to judge of Sight,
they would say Blindness were Sight. God is the Fountain as well of Reason, as
Light: And we assert our Principle not to be without Reason, but most
Reasonable; Whence it is frequent with us in our Reproof of Cruel Men, to say,
they are Unreasonable, whether it be to Man or Beast, making good what the
Prophet says, For his God does instruct him to Discretion and does teach them.
Isa. 28*26. Isa. 1.18
Again, Come and let us Reason together. And Tertullian will have the first
Verse of John thus rendr'd; In the Beginning was Reason, and that Reason was
with God, Joh. 1.^.
and that Reason was God; by that were all things made, etc. And this seems no
foreign Interpretation, for in the 10th Verse of Jude we have sensual Men not
having the Spirit, called (...), Unreasonable Creatures, 1. Pet. 3.15.
according to which the Apostle Peter speaks, (...), to him that asks Reason
ready to give it.

Thus much (to overlook our own Translation in Paul's second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, where he calls such Unreasonable Men that have not Faith)
concerning Reason: So that it is very evident by our Adversary's denying, and
the Quakers asserting an unerrable Principle to be in Man, and the Refusal of
the one, and the Readiness of the other to be governed thereby, not the
Quakers, but their Enemies are Unreasonable both in their Faith and Practice.

. 3. Of Forms of Prayer.
Our Adversary spends two or three Pages in proving the Necessity of Bodily
Worship, p. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
and he does it so lamely, that if it were so much my Judgment to deny it, as
it is to practice it, I know nothing he has said, to incline me to it. This he
makes an Introduction to that Agreement, he says, there is between D.G.H.N.
and the Quakers, in their mutual Renouncing both Bodily Worship and Visible
Ordinances. For Bodily Worship, I need say no more, then that our public
Meetings judge him guilty of great Dishonesty. For his Visible Ordinances, we
shall proceed to consider them. The first is concerning a Form of Prayer, hear
him.

With the like silly and weak Confidence they exclaim against Forms of Prayer,
whereas our blessed Savior* taught his Disciples a Form. Math. 6.9. After this
manner therefore pray ye, etc. And least, says he, we should think that this
was only a Pattern, Saint Luke Chapt. 11. expresses it, when ye pray, say, Our
Father, etc. that is, do it in these Words. Moreover John taught his Disciples;
and one of Christ's Disciples desired that he would teach them: where we are
told, first that John delivered a Form of Prayer to his Disciples. 2. That
Christ's Disciples besought him that he would also give them some Form of his
making.

Answ. But can this Man have the Vanity to plead the Necessity of the Use of
this Form, much less of those that are of Men's Invention and Appointment from
those Quotations? Has his Religion brought him no farther? Can he believe that
Matthew writ by the holy Ghost, and yet imply an absolute Reproof in his so
much more commending Luke's account, which he thinks, requires the express
Words, and not others like them? But let it be considered, that this was a time
of Infancy; and that it was before the more full pouring out of the Spirit, is
certain; and that they knew not Gospel. Prayer as afterward, is undeniable.
Besides, It is either Sufficient, or it is not; If Insufficient, it reflects on
Christ, beside who can supply its Defect? If Sufficient, why do you use any
other? What ever it is upon our Principles, you must confess it be a setting of
your Posts by God's Posts; your Invention by his Institution. It is mere
Deceit to attempt the Defense of the Popish English Mass Book from Christ's
Prayer. Prove your Forms to be of Divine Institution, and that God by his
Spirit now requires them, and the Debate will end; otherwise we reject the
Allusion as improper and incoherent. The Spirit is not confinable to set Forms,
though in times of Ignorance he has administered Comfort in* them by those who
were sincere, and knew no better: But Forms are not therefore to be
perpetuated; for that were to obstruct the more free Operation of the Spirit,
and our Expression by it: It is at best but a State of Weakness to be
condescended to, but never to be pleaded for; God's Spirit will be unlimited,
as well as the Words he prompts us to, must never by another be confined.

. 4. Of Baptism.
He says, we both deny Baptism (by which I understand Water) because Christ
finding it among the Jews adopted it into his Religion; a Ceremony neither
burdensome nor offensive, P. 26, 27, 28.
and the only Door set open under the Gospel for Salvation. For which he brings
three Scriptures, Matthew. 28.19. Go, and teach all Nations baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, etc. To the same purpose by Mark, Chap. 16. v. 15, 16. And
Christ's Saying, Joh. 3.5. Except a Man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

Answ. If Baptism was ever Jewish as our Adversary grants, then because Christ
came to end all Jewish Ceremonies, Water Baptism can bear no Evangelical
Perpetuity. And if it should be objected, that it was used after the Pouring
forth of the Holy Ghost, I answer, so was Circumcision, Vows, Purification,
Forbearing to eat things strangled and Blood; And the common Practice of
Christendom, so called, sufficiently tells us, what is become of those
Observations. Using and Instituting are two things. The Apostles condescended
where they never commanded.

In the two first Scriptures, which contain a Commission, there is no Water
mentioned; That there is a Baptism of the Holy Ghost, I hope, all will grant;
That such a Baptism admits of no outward Water is plainly employed: And that it
was the Baptism of the Holy Ghost (and therefore not of Water) which Christ
intended, I will briefly prove.

First, this Commission was some of the last Words Christ spoak; that it is to
be fulfilled is certain; that they could not do it without Power is clear; that
neither of those Chapters mentions any such Endowment must be granted. Whether
then must we go to fetch that Account here omitted? I would desire my Reader to
turn to the first Chapter of Luke's Acts of the Apostles, where we shall find
Christ's last Words to his constant Followers thus left upon Record; And being
assembled together with them, Acts 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
he commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the
Promise of the Father, which, says he, ye have heard of me. For John truly
baptized with Water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many
Days hence. When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying,
Lord, will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel? And he said
unto them, It is not for you to know the Times or the Seasons which the Father
has put into his own Power; But ye shall receive Power, after that the Holy
Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be Witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem,
and in all Judea, and (...) Samariah, and unto the uttermost part of the Earth.
And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld he was taken up, and a
Cloud received him out of their Sight. Now if the Promise of the Father was the
Pouring out of the Holy Ghost, and if the Pouring out of the Holy Ghost be the
Baptism of the Holy Ghost, and that the Baptism of the Holy Ghost was that
which qualified them to be his Witnesses, as the whole place fully proves;
Then, Go, and teach all Nations, etc. in Matthew, and, Go ye into all the
World, in Mark, must not have been spoken before these Words in the Acts, at
least not to take place till they themselves had been baptized with the Holy
Ghost; and consequently the Baptism mentioned in that Commission, must not have
been a Water Baptism, as John's was, but that of the Holy Ghost which they were
to be baptized with: so that the Order of the Words, at least in Execution, if
not in Expression, must have been this, John indeed baptized with Water, but ye
shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many Days hence; Then go ye and
teach* all Nations, baptizing them in (or rather into) the Name of the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost; And lo, I am with you always unto the End of the World.
Nor is this incredible, when we consider without their so baptizing, it had
been utterly Impossible for them to have turned them from Darkness to Light,
and from the Power of Satan unto God. And doubtless they might as well baptize
with the Holy Ghost, as reconcile by the Word; For where the one was, the Power
of the other could not be wanting.

For the third Scripture, though Water be mentioned, yet what Water will be the
Question. That it is not meant of outward Water, I offer several Reasons. 1. To
be born of Water and of the Spirit is no more, then to be born of Water or of
the Spirit, (...) being here explicative; For were it otherwise, and that by
Water were understood External Water, this Absurdity would inevitably follow,
that the Soul of Man which is Spiritual and Internal, could in part be
regenerated by Water External and Elementary: But this place is excellently
unfolded, by that notable Passage of the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to Titus,
Not by Works of Righteousness which we have done, Chap. 3. v. 5,
but according to his Mercy he saved us, by the Washing of Regeneration and
Renewing of the Holy Ghost; where we not only have the WASHING of Regeneration
to parrallel being born again of Water (which say we, must be as Spiritual as
the NewBirth it produces) but also the Renewing of the Holy Ghost to answer
being born again of the Spirit, That as the washing of Regeneration, or
Renewing of the Holy Ghost, are Synonymous; or Expressions to the same Purpose;
so being born again of Water, or being born again of the Spirit, are equivalent.

But if our Adversary will have this Water to be material in Honor of his
Baptism, Let him never refuse the like Liberty to us in Construction of that
great Water-Baptist's own Words: But he shall baptize you with the holy Ghost
and with Fire, Math. 3.11.
that is, material Fire. My Judgment is, if that were the Church of Englands
Baptism he had never been her Son, though such Sons are ready to Christian many
with that Fiery Baptism. But if such an Interpretation be absurd, let him not
esteem his own Rational: And if it must be the holy Ghost, or Fire, then let it
be Water, or Spirit; for indeed they are but so many Words, intimating the
various Operations of one Divine Power.

In short, John was but a Forerunner, therefore not to be perpetuated: He was
the Water (but Christ the great Spiritual) Baptist; The Former to decrease, the
Latter to increase: And the least in Christ's Kingdom, which is not of this
World, is greater then John; not then his private State, but outward
Administration.

Paul (whose Commission was larger then any Priests in England) tells us, He
was not sent to baptize (with Water) but to Preach; And instead of enjoining
the Practice of it upon others, he thanks God that he baptized but very few
himself, which surely he had never done, if it had been part of his Commission,
or the durable Baptism of the Gospel; For he had just Reason to suspect some
disaffected would make that Ill-Use of his Liberty, that it was to ingratiate
and set up himself, being conscious that he had no Authority for what he did.
This he further gives us to believe in that pertinent Passage to our Purpose;
There is One Body, One Spirit, 1 Cor. 1.15, 16, 17. Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, One God and Father of all. If more Baptisms
then one, then more Bodies, Spirits, Lords, Faiths, Gods, and Fathers of all,
who were above all, and through all, and in them all, unto whom Paul wrote. If
this be absurd, and that there is but one Baptism, I hope, it will not be
denied to be that of the Holy Ghost, which is both most suitable to the
Evangelical Ministration, and the peculiar Baptism of Christ Jesus our Lord. I
shall touch upon one Passage more.

The like Figure whereunto even Baptism also does now save us; as our modern
Translation has it, From which, though our Adversary would infer that
Water Baptism is to be used, Page 28, 29.
as coassistant with the Answer of a good Conscience, to Salvation, I doubt not
unanswerably to mantain from it our foregoing Assertion.

This Verse admits of various readings in ancient Copies, and diverse
Interpretations by learned Men. We shall a little disquisite the matter, that
he may see we shall not refuse Learning where it may perform the Office of an
honest Servant not an Usurper. (...) (some has it (...) or (...); the modern
Greek (...)) (...) (Augustine has it Vos, and our old Books, says Zegerus)
(...) (which Vatabalus makes the truth relative to the Type Flood. And says
Grotius, Vox (...) est communis utrique relat^, i. tam figurae tribuitur quam
rei per figuram significatae, signifiing Type and Antitype, or the thing
signified by the Type) Erasmus has it, cui nun^ simile sive respondens
Baptisma, so that Baptism may answer as the thing typified, not another Type)
(...), says Dr. Hammond (a famous Man of the English Church) is certainly best
renderd Antitype; yet there be ^wo different senses, sometimes Contradiction;
thus Zenophon and Hesychius. Then Destruction was by Outward Water, now
Salvation by Inward; otherwise pro or in lieu of another, as (...), he that
supplies the Consul's place, so (...) (as in an old Copy in Oxford) is the Ark
inward, supplying the place of the Ark outward. (...), which Capellus
understands to be Baptismum internum, quo fimus mortis and resurrectionis
Christi participes. Hujus interni baptismi typos aliquot habemus in V.T.
imprimis autem arcam diluvii et arcam Noae. By Inward Baptism* we are made
Partakers of Christ's Death and Resurrection. Of this Inward Baptism we have
several Types in the old Testament, of which Noah's Ark was one. Grotius refers
us to these Scriptures for an Apostolical Exposition, Romans 6.3, 4. Ephesians. 4.5.
Gal. 3.27. Col. 2.12. all which refer to Man's being baptized into Christ's
Death, his putting on of Christ, and to the One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism.
And indeed Beza showed them the Way, who will have it, that the Baptism which
answered to Noah's Ark, was not material Water, but the Power of Christ within,
which preserves us cleansed, and enables us to call on God with a good
Conscience. Nor is Doctor Hammond of a different Judgment in this Case, who not
only will have (...) rendered Antitype, but the Baptism that is that Antitype,
answering to Noah's Ark, to be the Inward Washing of Men's Consciences from
Pollution, and delivering them from the Deluge of Sin and Destruction.

Not only from all this do I conclude, the Baptism mentioned in that place to
be the Antitype, or Truth answering to the outward and typical Salvation of
Noah's Ark; but for those Reasons which were with me, before my Perusal of
these Authors, and which I shall now briefly offer. First, If (...) were but a
Type or Figure, one Type would answer another, which is not proper. 2 dly, It
were both to suppose, that the Gospel were a State of Figures (which is the
Substance of all) and of such Figures too as are less demonstrative or
significant; for what is that Sprinkling, Baby-Baptism (for Dipper or dipped I
suppose our Adversary to be neither) to the Worlds Deluge and Noah's Ark. 3
dly, The Baptism in the Text must be such a one as has Efficacy enough in it
to save, which outward Water cannot do; Besides, the Word (...), or saves, has
Relation to Noah's Ark, wherein the eight Souls were saved; Therefore the
Antitype, or Truth answering to That, as Type. 4 ly, It is such a Baptism as
saves by the Power of Christ's Resurrection, answerable to Romans 6.3, 4. Know ye
not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into
his Death? that like as Christ, was raised up from the Dead by the Glory of the
Father; even so we also should walk in Newness of Life. 5 ly, And this the
Parenthesis in the Verse undeniably proves, being an Illustration of the
Baptism intended, not the putting away of the Filth of the Flesh, but the
Answer of a good Conscience toward God, or as some have it, interrogatio,
Jacob Capell. Salm. Sac. ling. Profess. in loc.
(...), Inquisition or Enquiry, alluding to the Oracle URIM and THUMMIM, by
which Men have Boldness and Access to God; so as to render the Verse, Cui etiam
ex adverso oppositus, nos servat Baptismus, non is quo carnis sordes
abjiciuntur, sed is quo fit ut bona conscientia Deum interroget per
resurrectionem Christi, i. e. To which the directly Opposite Baptism also now
saves us, not That by which the Filth of the Flesh is cast off, but That by
which it is effected, that a good Conscience may ask God by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ. From all which, two things result; First, that the Verse ought to
be thus rendered, Answerable to which Figure Baptism now also saves us, not the
putting away of the Filth of the Flesh, but the Account of a good Conscience to
God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. And indeed the most disputable part
of this Verse is abundantly confirmed on our side, by the Simplicity of the
Ancient English, French and Spanish Translators. And I wonder that any Man of
common Sense, not greatly abused by Prejudice or Custom, can think, that the
Baptism mentioned, should be that of Water, when the middle of the Verse
provides this material Distinction, not the putting away of the Filth of the
Flesh (the Effect of Outward Water) but the Answer of a Good Conscience to God
(the Fruits of the Holy Ghost alone) to that very End that People should not
think so; I mean, that it was a Water Baptism.

2 ly. It may not be improper for us to observe, That if one Verse has such
Variety of Copies, Readings, Transpositions and Senses, as has been noted,
beside what we could yet produce, that they are at a miserable pass for an
Universal, Living, Constant and Unerring Rule, who esteem the present
Scriptures such, exclusive of the Spirit, which Time, Variety of Transcribers,
Translators, Interpreters and Expositors have rendered so Uncertain. But if we
had been unprovided of all this to our Defense, what has our Adversary to do to
charge us with a Discontinuance of Water Baptism, till he had first cleared his
own Opinion from Popish Innovation and Invention? What Scripture or pure
Antiquity has he for INFANT*BAPTISM, one of the Unscriptural and Senseless
Ceremonies of his Religion, about which such as he makes more Stir then that of
the Holy Ghost? A Man may guess what a Christian he is, and how well he is
versed in Christ's Doctrine, who can call a little Water shed by a Priest's
Hand the Door into God's Kingdom. How much is this short of the Romish Priest's
making his God, who says, the Bread is Christ after Consecration, since
Christ, who is God over all, Blessed for ever, says, He is that Door; which H.
Hallywell will have his Infant-Water- Baptism to be.

. 5. Of the Supper.
But he says of us and the Familists, By the same Diabolical Spirit, wherewith
they are possessed, they lay aside the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper as a
thing too Carnal. p. 30, 31.
In Opposition to which he produces Matthew. 26.26, 27. How that Christ took
Bread and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, and said,
take, eat, this is my Body; Then he took the Cup and gave thanks, and gave it
to them, saying, drink ye all of it. St. Mark Chap. 14. repeats the very same,
and says, they all drank of it; But St. Luke Chap. 22.19. and St. Paul 1 Cor.
11.24. added these Words [do this in Remembrance of me] which import both a
Commission and Direction to use and continue them.

Answ. It Is granted, that Christ eating the Passover with his Disciples, He did
familiarly represent that Flesh and Blood, which he gave for the World, that
whosoever eat thereof should have Life Eternal abiding in them. Nor is this
strange; For it was his Familiar Way o^ opening his deepest Mysteries, and
recommending the most excellent of all his Commandments, witness his Discourse
concerning the Blessed Unity of Christ and his Members, by the Similitude of a
Vine and its Branches; And both his Washing his Disciples Feet, and requiring
them to follow his Example. Jo. 13.5, 14.


That this Practice was enjoined his Disciples, is not warran^ed from Matthew,
Mark or John. Luke indeed has these Words, do this in Remembrance of me, as our
Adversary observes: But that they should be Paul's also, as he affirms, is both
an abuse of the Scriptures, and them that read them; For these are the
Apostle's Words, as often as ye eat this Bread and drink this Cup, etc. which
amounts to no more then this, when ye do eat this Supper do it worthily; so
that there is no Command to do it, though as often as they did do it, they were
exhorted to do it discerningly: As often as you do it; and Do it often, are
differing Sayings.

And that Luke's Words do not perpetuate it, especially as now used, I shall
prove. First, If it be but a Sacrament or Sign, as says our Adversary, then
can it not of right continue longer then till the Thing signified shall come.
Do this till, that is, when that is come, till the coming of which, the Sign
was to be used; there remains no longer any Institution.

Now between all Types and Antitypes, Shadows and Substances, Parables and
Morals, there must needs be some Resemblance, or else the End of their being
used will be lost to them, for whose sakes they were appointed: For instance,
Christ is called a Door, because no Man comes to the Father, but through him; A
Lion, from his Strength and Dominion; A Lamb, because of his Innocence; A Vine
because of that excellent Fruit he brings forth; and lastly, he calls himself
by the Name of Bread, because of that inward Strength and Nourishment such
receive that feed Spiritually upon him: wherefore the Substance shadowed out,
by this outward Bread and Wine, is no other then Christ, as the Bread that came
down from above, and that Flesh and Blood which all were to eat and drink of
that would have Eternal Life; mentioned at large Joh. 6. So that admitting of a
Command, it must be thus read, Do this till I come, who am the Heavenly Bread,
and Flesh and Blood, that give Eternal Life to them that feed thereon; which
Bread the Apostle very well understood, when in the foregoing Chapter to the
Corinthians he thus delivered himself, I speak as to wise Men, Judge ye what I
say, The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood
of Christ? For we being many are One BREAD, and One Body, for we are all
PARTAKERS of that ONE BREAD, 1 Cor. 10.15, 16, 17. And this Christ himself
intimated in the following Verse to that Passage out of Matthew, But I say unto
you, I will not drink henceforth of this Fruit of the Vine, until that day
when I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom. And I query if that was
not made good, on the Day of Pentecost, when scoffingly, yet truly (like
Caiaphas in another case) several Spectators said of the Disciples, Acts 2.13.
They were full of New Wine? which was the beginning of the Restoration of
that Kingdom of God to Israel, that the Disciples a little before so weakly
queried after.

In short, The Father's Kingdom is within, Luke 17.20. What was that Fruit then
that was to be drunk anew in that Kingdom? Certainly it came from himself, the
true Vine, and must be of a Spiritual and Inward Nature, like to the Kingdom.

To conclude, If Bread and Wine be but a Sign; And if things signified ought to
resemble their Signs; And if Spiritual Bread and Wine mostly answer those
Visible Signs; And if they are to be had in the Kingdom of God; And if the
Kingdom of God be within; And that who eat not that Bread, and drink not that
Wine, have no Life in them; Then because the Apostles had Life Eternal in them,
and we a measure of the same in us, Christ, the Heavenly Bread and Flesh, and
Wine and Blood, was then and is now come, and consequently, the Shadows of
those good things (as to any Institution) were and are at an End: And as there
is but One Spirit, and One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, One God and Father,
One Heavenly Kingdom, One Holy Body; So but One Bread, and but One Cup, and but
One Communion and Fellowship, and that is with the Father and the Son, by the
Holy Ghost.

But here, as in the case of Water Baptism, it will be objected, why were they
then afterward used?

Answ. The Practices of good Men, though in things temporary, are many times to
greedily received, and too long doted upon by those who desire to be reputed
their Followers. Any thing once becoming customary is hard to be left; Several
Jewish Ceremonies the Holy Ghost thought fit to be dispensed with for a Season,
that were never to be perpetuated. But what has our Adversary and the several
sorts of Protestants in the World to do with Baptism and the Supper, and deny
that Qualification and Commission the Apostles had? They will never stand our
Enquiry about their Call, which they know, we have great Cause to scruple,
indeed to deny; For all must or should know that it was either Immediate, or
Mediate and Successive. If Immediate, then they must necessarily confess to a
Commission upon Inspiration, and then Quakers. If Mediate and Successive, then
either beside the Church of Rome, or through the Church of Rome; Not beside the
Church of Rome, because she cannot prove any regular Ordination, or
uninterrupted Succession, either as to Faith or Discipline. If through the
Church of Rome, then they own the Ordination of a Church they renounce, and
grant Her the Keys, A Sad* contr. mon. Burd. J. Reynold. J. Jewel. A. Willet.
whom they have writ against for these six score Years, under the Name of Whore
of Babylon, and Mother of Harlots, and all Abominations of the Earth. Can that
which you account a corrupt Fountain, bring forth clean Streams? Will Men seek
Ordination at the hands of that Church, they resolve to employ it against? Has
she forfeited her Religion, and not her Power? When did ever God make over his
Authority by such an Entail? If Men's Errors and Vices do not un-minister them,
It will follow, that they may be Ill Christians, but very good Ministers. For
Shame never renounce the Roman Church as False, if her Ordination must be True;
For what has Power to make a Minister, must be allowed to have Power both to
instruct and conclude him in what he is to minister: Wherefore never let any
own her to have Heaven's Keys of Church Authority, and then deny her as
Heretical; For wherever any Church or People are truly such, that Church or
People have thereby forfeited all Right thereunto: And as the contrary Opinion
has long enricht the Popes Coffers, so the Unwary Concessions of some certain
Protestants thereto, have too evidently given away a great share of that good
old Cause.

I have dwelt longer upon these Particulars, then my Adversary's Weakness could
deserve at my Hands, but their Information has induced me to it, who are
assaulted by the envious Endeavors of our several Adversaries, that daily
seek, how to mis-represent us, and our most Evangelical Principles.

CHAP. IV. His third Chapter examined, which consists of the Holiness of Times,
Places, Things and Persons under the Gospel.
. 1. Of the Sabbath Day.
His Accusation is, that these Familists and Quakers put no Difference between
one Day and another, page 34.37, 38, 39.
the Sabbath no more then another Day; That many times they follow their usual
Trades on a Sunday.

Answ. What the Familists did is nothing to us (if they did so) But sure I am
he has abused the Quakers; For it is well known, that in what Country soever
they live, they follow the Practice of the Apostles, in Assembling together on
the first Day of the Week: They do it constantly and reverently. Who most
profane that Day, the Quakers, or the Sons and Daughters of the Church of
England, Their Feasts, Drunkenness, Wantonness, Gaming, and other Recreations,
as they call them, are so many Demonstrations, to help every common
Understanding to a Resolution in the Point. And to say, That we many times
follow our usual Trades on that Day, is a plain Untruth, the whole World knows
better, though we do not Judaize; For Worship was not made for Time, but Time
for Worship: Nor is there any Day Holy of it self, though Holy things may be
performed upon a Day.

But he tells us, yes; For the fourth Commandment being as Moral as the rest,
and that requiring a Sabbath Day, the Sabbath Day is perpetual also.

Answ. But this hurts us not, since the Jewish Sabbath is not observed by the
Church of England: But if a Sabbath Day be Moral, because mentioned in the
fourth Commandment; Then because the Jews Seventh-day Sabbath is there
particularly mentioned, Their Sabbath must be only Moral, and consequently
Unalterable.

But he says, No; For that the Apostles and succeeding Church of God, may very
reasonably dispose of us in matters of this Nature; And it is obligatory from
the Ten Commandments, every one of which is moral, and binds all Christians
still; and therefore the Church of England (though these rebellious Quakers
disown their Mother) does make it part of her Liturgy.

Answ. If it be as Moral as all the rest, as it must be if it be Moral, because
of its being there, they could no more dispense with it, then with any of the
other Commandments: To call that Day Moral, and make it Alterable, is
Ridiculous. It Is true, the Apostles met upon the First Day, and not on the
Seventh; but as that released us from any pretended Morality of the Seventh, so
neither did it confer any Morality upon the First; yea, so far were they from
it, that not one speaks any such thing; but Paul much the contrary: Let no Man
judge you in Meats or in Drinks, Col. 2.17, 18.
or in respect of an Holy Day, or of New Moons, or of the Sabbath-Dayes, which
are a Shadow of things to come, but the Body is of Christ. The outward Sabbath
was Typical, of the great Rest of the Gospel, which such come to, who cease
from their own Work and in whom the Works of God's new Creation come to be
accomplished.

And though I, acknowledge the other Commands to be Moral, yea, and Time too,
both respecting God's Worship, and the Creatures Rest; yet there is no more
Reason for the Morality of that Day, because amongst those Commandments, then
for the Ceremoniousness and Abrogation of several Moral Precepts, because
scattered up and down among the Ceremonial Laws, recorded in Leviticus.

I grant, the Apostles met on that Day; But must it therefore be Moral?
Certainly, the Scriptures Silence in this particular must either conclude a
great Neglect against those Holy Men, in not recommending and enjoining more
expressly both Water, Bread, Wine and Holy Days in their several Epistles to
the Churches; or warrant us in our Belief concerning the Temporariness of those
things. Let not our Adversary reproach us for not believeing that to be
durable, which was weaning off and vanishing in those days; but soberly
consider, that the Practice of the best Men, especially in such cases, is no
Institution, though sometimes it may be an Example. But I perceive he makes
bold, like an Irreverent Son with his Ghostly Fathers, who through his
Reflections upon us, severely rebukes them. Has he so quickly forgot the Book
of Sports, and who put it out; when not to profane this Sabbath with Dancings,
Ryots and Revels had been enough to render a Man an Enemy to Caesar, and a
schismatical Puritan to the Church? If he be not satisfied with this, I refer
him to Calvin's Institutes, Bp. Ironside, and Dr. Peter Heilin, concerning the
non-morality of the Sabbath; and a great Wonder it is, that John Calvin and
Peter Heilin should be of an Opinion in any.

. 2. Place of God's Worship.
He is very angry with us for denying a more then ordinary Sanctity to Places,
and says, that we esteem a Church no more then a Stable; That the Jews, page
34.42* 43, 44, 45.
Heathens and Turks have their Synaguoges, Temples and Mosches to pray in; That
Christ went to a-Prayer-House, Luke 6.12. and Act. 16.13. Where Paul and others
went out to a River's side, where an Oratory was reported to be.

Answ. We value the true Church more then a Stable, but we value a good Stable
before a False Church, as such. But I suppose he means by Church, an House; and
then I must tell him, that I prefer a Stable better then no House, but a good
House better then a Stable. But why is a Stable such an Ill-favored place? Has
he forgot that the Head of the true Church first lodged in one, when there was
no room for him in a whole Synagogue, yet room enough for a Company of
Cavilling, Murdering Scribes and Pharisees? There is no doubt but the Jews had
Synagogues enough; for it was out of them the Apostles were to be haled,
because of their Testimony against those that were in them. It Is true, the
Heathens had Temples, and the Turks have their Mosches: I like the Comparison
and the Proof very well; For I take some of your Steeple-House-Guests to be as
good Christians, as some of the worse sort of them. It was the old Heathenish
Spirit which under the Cloak of Christianity, both erected those stately
Edifices, instituted that Pompous Worship, and exacted those vast Revenues,
that have burdened the World these many Ages; whilst the pure Apostolical
Spirit, and Religion have been as driven into a Sack* cloth and Wilderness
Estate.

That Christ went to a Prayer-House, and that Paul and the Church met in an
Oratory by the River side, is a pretty Rattle for Children, and may pass as
unquestionably with those who are willing to be cheated, as the Story of St.
Denyse's Body, that went a Mile without his Head, and St. Wimfrid's Head a
great Way without her Body to a Papist.

But he affirms, that the first Christians had distinct places to meet in, p.
47, 48, 49.
and that they called them Churches.

Answ. Christ went not to the Synagogue or the Temple to eat the Passover; It Is
certain that the Twelve met in an upper Room, Act. 1, 13.
upon their return from Christ's Asscension; and it is said, when the Day of
Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in One Place, Act. 2.1,
2, 3, 4.
at what time that excellent Glory appeared; but here is no mention made of
either Temple or Synaguoge: One would have thought those Conventicles (for so
they were then called and since) should not have born away the Glory and Honor
of that Holy Solemnity from those Cathedral and Canonical Places: what sullen
Separation did the False Jew then repute it, as well as the False Christian now
the like Practice. Certainly this ran retrograde to the grain and humor of that
Age; And the poor Apostles therefore esteemed as great Phanaticks, and as much
reproached as any of the Quakers in this. I must also confess, Act. 2.46.
they continued daily with one accord in the Temple, but they broke not Bread
there, that was done (...), that is, in the House, if he will have it so,
instead of from House to House; to be sure, it was not from Church to Church,
as he would have the House called; for then we should understand the following
Verse thus, and the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved,
that is, to the House.

But I see no Reason why he should fall so hard with his Criticisms upon (...),
and let (...) in the same Verse alone; For, as Valla and Erasmus well observe,
(...) is as well rendered per singulas domos, or domesticatim, i. from house to
house, as (...) per singulos dies, sive quotidie, i. daily, or from day to day,

But he will needs have it that the Apostle Vetabl. Ecclesiam vel
congregationem.

Clarius, Ille conventus in Ecclesiam non ea causa fit hoc quod facitis in
contemptum Ecclesiae Dei redundat, et eorum pudorem qui minus habent.

Zeger. Confunditis eos qui non habent quod offerant et manducent.

Cameron. Ecclesia hic privatis aedibus non opponitur. Dei Ecclesiam contemnere
est pudore afficere tenui^res, qui magnam Ecclesiae partem constitu^bant.

Locus loco opponitur grammatice, non logice. i. e. Church or Congregation. The
Church is not opposed to private Houses. To despise the Church is to make
ashamed the Poor of it.


1 Cor. 11. meant by Church the House, when he said, have ye not houses to eat
and drink in, or despise ye the Church of God? His Reason is, if it may be
thought one; because the Apostle in the eighttenth Verse says, when ye come
together* in the Church; and in the twentieth Verse, when ye come together into
one Place; So that the Word Church signifies the Place.

Ans. When ye come together in the Church, signifies no more then in the
Congregation or Assembly, or among your selves as a Church (observe well the
Margent) And to make the Church allude to Place in the twentieth Verse, is a
base Wresting of our Adversaries; for there is no Greek Word there for Place.

But he thinks he has one Argument more, from Paul's greeting Priscilla and
Aquila, Romans 16.3, 5.
and the Church that is in their House. And again, sending S^lutation from
them; Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, 1 Cor. 16.19.
with the Church in their House.

Answ. If this be to prove a House to be a Church, I never saw the like. It
seems we must read, after his dialect thus, Greet Priscilla and Aquila, and the
House that is in their House. But in Contradiction to all this, he tells us in
the next page, By the Church at such a Man's House must be meant the whole
Congregation of the Saints assembled at such a Man's House; and truly, Reader,
I think so too. But if the Saints met make the Church, then the House is not
the Church, nor indeed can ^ Housesmeet together in a House.

But now I will tell this Defamer of us, that though we have no stately
Basilicos or Palace-Churches, as some call them, beautifyed with Painture,
Images. Flaggs, carved and ingraved work, and built to the East, in Imitation
of the Heathen Idolatrous Temples; yet, like unto the Apostles and primitive
Christians, we assemble from House to House, and if he will have it so, there
are several convenient Public Places on purpose to meet and perform divine
Worship in.

. 3. Of Tithes.
His next Section, and as became a careful greedy Hireling, by much the largest
of any in his Book, is employed in the Defense of the Priests Maintenance, From
page 51. to 69.
the sine qua non of their Calling. His first Argument is, That God will have a
Rent and Tribute paid him. That thus he dealt with the Children of Israel, from
whom he reserved a Tyth to himself, and that in Abraham's time Tithes to
Melchizedeck were paid, after whose Order Christ was made a Priest.

Answ. The Tithes that were paid Melchizedeck, were but of the Spoils Abraham
took from his Enemie^; and that not by Compulsion but Choice. Melchizedeck was
King of Salem, Genesis 14.
King of Peace, Priest of the most high God: He freely administered Bread and
Wine to Abraham to refresh him; and when he had done, prayed and praised God
for him without Bargain or Hire: Whereupon Abraham gave him the Tyth of all, as
a Token of his Thankfulness.

Now let the Priests of England prove themselves to be of Melchizedeck's
Offspring, Men of Peace, Priests of the most high God, and let them but
minister to us of the Living Bread and Wine, and wrap up all with such Prayers
and Praises to God for u^, as he will accept; and when all this is done, if we
refuse them the Tyth of our Spoils, let us be recorded for Ungrateful Men: But
whilst Priests are Men of Contention, Hirelings, that seek Gain from their
Quarter, prepare War against them that put not into their Mouths, are not
Priests of the most high God's Anointing, and who instead of giving us Bread
and Wine, oppress us unto Death for a 4 d. Easter-Reckoning, and in lieu of
Prayers and Praises to God for us, Anathematize, Whip, Imprison and Banish us
for Impostors, Heretics, Men inspired by Satan, and such like, let it not be
wondered at that a poor Quaker has a Testimony against such a Priest; and that
he rather chooses to die (unjustly his Prisoner) then pay Tithes to him, that is
an Usurper of the Name, Authority and Office of a True Evangelical Minister.

And for his Instance of the Land of Canaan, it brings no Obligation upon us.
England is no Canaan, neither as to its Acquisition, nor Distribution; When the
Saxons came into England, God reserved no such Rents. And if it be well argued
of the Apostle, Heb. 7.12.
that because the Law is changed the Priesthood is also; Then certainly it is
no ill Consequence, that the Way of Maintenance must be changed too, at least
as to Institution.

But says our Adversary, in the Apostle's Words, 1 Cor. 9.14.
The Lord has ordained, That they which preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel.

Answ. We are contented with this, but the Priests are not. They cannot prove
themselves Ministers of the Gospel, unless by that never failing Argument of
human Law and Force, if yet that can prove them such. Besides, here is no Stint
or Method; What or How? It is l^f^ to God's Witness; but that they dare not
leave themselves with: Earthly Powers must first make them Ministers, and then
get them Maintenance. But here is not a Word of Paul's Working with his own
Hands, nor Christ's explanation, of the Labourer is worthy of his Hire, to wit,
that he should eat what is set before him, and Melchizedeck- like, bless the
House if worthy: Nor do I hear of so much as one Itinerary-Preacher, who to be
sure carried no Tithes upon his Back, as the Priests of our Days do into their
Barn; they suited, excommunicated, imprisoned none unto Death for Hires sake.

He that minds God more then his Belly, shall never want for his Belly; for the
Authority of Him in whose Name he goes, makes sufficient way for his
Subsistence, without the Force of Imperial Decrees; The Cattle upon a thousand
Hills are the Lord's. The primitive Christians paid no Tithes that we read of;
yet they forbore not to administer freely to the Necessities of those who were
faithful Laborers and Travelers amongst them. The Law that settled that
Maintenance, was the Law in the Heart, and the Witness of God in the
Conscience, to which Paul particularly desired to be made manifest. It Is true,
about four hundred years after Christ the then Christians began to lay up the
Tithe of their Substance, Gratian. Cause. p. 16. R.C. Dec.
toward the Maintenance of such Members and Ministers of the Church, as
wanted; But this was out of their own free Will, not as settled Maintenance,
Seld. c. 6. p. 80.81.
nor by Compulsion, as our Country Man Jo. Seldom, a learned Antiquary, tells
us.

But our Adversary says, that Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, and other
Nobles, by the all-wise Providence, inspiring their Hearts, have given Houses,
Lands and Tithes for the Maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, and
secured such Possessions. And therefore, such are Sacrilegious and Robbers of
God, who withold them; Such Tenths being as much the Minister's as the Ninths
are the Peoples.

Answ. I perceive the Priest allows Inspiration for Tithes, Though we are
Familists, Quakers and Phanaticks for abetting the Doctrine of Inspiration in
the Worship of God. O Mercinary, O Hireling and Irreverent Saying! that God
should be more concerned for Carnal then Spiritual Things, and inspire Men
about Tithes, and not about Divine Worship. Who but a Dark and Mercenary Priest
could have uttered so impious an Expression?

I grant that when Austin came into England, he desired Tithes of Ethelbert, as
I take it, King of Kent; But the King's Care of his People, and the Averseness
of their humor to all Encroachments, disappointed the Monk. However, Seld. p.
67.
Time bringing forth Murd^r and Adultery, They brought forth Tithes. For Off a
killing Ethelbert, gave a Tenth of his Goods to pacify his Ghost. And Edgar
being greatly in love with Ethelwold's Wife, to obtain his End, murdered him;
upon which the Pope sending forth his Bull, Edgar to appease him, confirmed to
the Church the Tenth of all the Fruit of his Field and the Cattle, to them and
their Successors. And as Murder and Whoredom introduced them, so the Cunning
and Coveteousness of the Clergy have continued them; For when the Heptarchy
became a Monarchy, the Priests evermore would thrust in for a Share with the
Conqueror; and this Wrong Way came Tithes to be the Priests Right, as he calls
it.

But let this pretended Protestant answer me, if he dare. Was the Church then
degenerated or no? Was it not a Time of Popery? Did not the first Martyrs
except against her? Was it Lawful for Princes to give away other Men's Goods
upon the account and for the pretended Expiation of their Sins?

Could the giving of them atone? Is it not an acknowlegding of the Pope's
Power to absolve? Is it not a buying or bribing off the Guilt of Sin against
Almighty God, by Gifts to a Mortal Man, and those extorted from poor People
too? Is this protestant Doctrine? But above all, is this instituting Tithes
upon Inspiration? Hell her own self was the Founderess of these things. He may
remember that there is better Antiquity for that Voice, the Ancients report to
have been heard that Day Constantine conferred those large Endowments upon the
Church, Bp. Jewel on Hagg. Hodie venenum infusum in Ecclesiam.
then for the Institution of Tithes and Rich Benefices; I mean that Voice
through the Heavens, This Day is Poison poured into the Church. Since which
time it has been observed by the best Princes, Cobham, Bernard, Tindal, Frith,
Charl. V. Emp.
Wisest Counselors, and most moderate Clergymen, that the Enrichment and
Impovering of Church Officers, has been the Kanker of the Church, and the Moth
of the State.

It Is not my Business to write a History; but I recommend to the Inquisitive
Reader, Wickliff's Remonstrance, The Plow-Man's Complaint, Chaucer's Plow-Man's
Tale, walter Brute, and W. Thorpes Examination in the Martyrology; Pareus:
History of the Waldenses, and Jo. Seldom, Men that ought not to pass for, or be
reputed Phanaticks, especially by such who call themselves Protestants.

I shall only say 1st, That they were the Peoples wholly. 2ly, It is now the
Peoples Labor, more then the Priests Land, that brings the Increase: And Men
ought not to be constrained to pay those, they never hired; nor to labor for
those that profit them not. 3ly, They were given to expiate Murder and
Adultery, and uphold an Idolatrous Clergy, upon Protestant Principles, and
therefore to be removed, as were the high Places and Groves, Idololatrously
dedicated among the Jews. 4ly, Because it is most reasonable for a Man to
believe according to his own Conscience, and not according to another Man's
Conscience; It is Unrighteous to persecute a Man for not maintaining that
Religion, which in his Conscience he believes to be false, as well as that it is
the badge of a False Religion to persecute for Maintenance. 5ly, Though they
may be confirmed by some Princes, yet considering the End to which they were
given, to wit, for the Maintenance of a certain sort of Religious Order, now
exploded, whose Successors these are not (and so the ancient Constitution
broken) we cannot see any Reason why they should remain, unless any thing
commanded is to be obeyed, because Commanded, and not because in it self Lawful.

Two things I cannot but observe. First, That he affirms, The Clergy of England
have not a Tenth, much complaining that every one snips from them, cujus
contrarium verum; For they not only snip, but slice from every Body else. I
commend to his Perusal a Pamphlet, entitled, Omnia comesta a Belo, where he
will find a very particular Account of the Revenues of Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons, Deans, Canons, Prebends, Rarsons, Vicars, petti-Canons, Singing
Men, Choristers, Organists, Gospellers, Epistlers, Virgers, Chancellers and
their Attendents, Delegates, Registers and their Clarks. Gentlemen- Apparators,
Inferior Apparators, Proctors, etc. I doubt not but FIFTEEN HUNDRED THOUSAND
Pounds a Year, will be the modestest Account that Computation will admit of,
which is but double the Revenue that former Monarchs have had for the
Maintenance of their Family, Crown and Dignity, their Civil Justice, Armies,
Navies and costly Embassyes. If all this be to resemble Christ Jesus and his
Apostles, the Scripture has given us a very wrong Account of him and them.

The 2 d. thing I would observe is this, That he has the Ignorance and
Confidence to argue from the Super-excellency of Christ's Ministration to that
of Moses; That the Maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel should
proportionably exceed the Maintenance of the Priests under the Law.

Answ. But certainly he is one of the first Men, that made this wild
Interpretation of the Glory of the latter House excelling the Glory of the
former, as if Christ's House were outward, or his Glory either. Would he have
one outward Temple figure out another? as if Christ should bring in another
Levitical Law to excel that of Moses. Certainly the New Jerusalem, after this
Man's rate of Disputing, must be an outward Structure of material Sapphires,
Emraulds, Jaspers, etc. But there is a Pope and a Mahomet in his Belly, whether
he knows it or no; For these Fleshly Conceits first set them to work upon their
Pompous Worship, neglecting the Holy, Pure, Self-denying and Spiritual Religion
of Christ Jesus and his Apostles, who neither practiced nor set up any Shadowy
and Ceremonial Worship, not settling themselves in Splendid Livings, to lead
Easy, Quiet and Voluptuous Lives. Freely they received, freely they gave; not
as our Adversary ridiculously understands it, that they gave their Miracles,
but sold their Preaching: Indeed the Spirit of a Pompous Antichrist, who
pleads for State, under a Self-denying Gospel. Christ's Kingdom is not of this
World, and yet he pleads for the Grandeur of a Worldly Worship, Ministry and
Maintenance; we may allow him therefore and his Tribe to be Worldly Christians,
but not true Followers of that Jesus, who said, when he was in the World, I am
not of the World; which leads me to the next Section concerning the Ministry.

. 4. Of Ministers of the Gospel.
In Defense of the Church of England's Ministry he tells us, p. 70, 71, 73, 74.
that they have first the Testimony of their own Conscience, that they are
furnished to that Office. 2ly, the outward Call of the Church by Imposition of
Hands and Prayers.

Answ. If the Ministers of the Church of England have the Testimony of their
Conscience, it must be either a True or a False Testimony. If a False, then not
truly called, upon our Adversary's Principles: If True, then Infallibly so, and
consequently, both every Man has an Infallible Witness in his own Conscience,
and the Preparation and Call of this Witness is the Inward Call to the
Ministry; Now how this can be without Revelation and Inspiration I know not.
But it seems, Ministerial Qualification must be judged of by the Witness in the
Conscience, which is the Overthrow of the Priest's Cause and Doctrine: But I
deny, that the Priests act upon this Inward Testimony; for they are afraid of
being made manifest to the Conscience: And when we urge this Inward
Manifestation, they cry out with our Adversary, Enthusiasm, Familism,
Quakerism! But if this must be the alone Judge of Qualification, let him for
Shame give over Vilifying our public Laborers, and Incensing our Superiors
against us, who honestly plead Conscience in the Case, and us for Refusing the
National Priesthood, which we believe in the Presence of God, Angels and Men,
to be not so qualified; For Covetousness, Bargaining, Stealing their Neighbors
Words, Preaching their Experiences, not their own, not knowing experimentally
whereof they affirm, nor turning People to Righteousness, but persecuting them
that love it, and daubing Sinners with untempered Mortar, are altogether
inconsistent with it.

For their Outward Call, it is too notorious to answer. By what Flatteries,
Bribes, and Shifts some of them are said to get their Places. How basely they
back-bite, undervalue and undermine one another for Advantage, How ready to
leave them for fatter Benefices, with abundance more of this Ungodly, Anti-
Christian Stuff. The World is so well informed from their own Practice, that it
saves me the Labor of any further Discovery.

For the Laying on of Hands, it is well known to be a Jewish Ceremony; And we
read that Saul and Barnabas preached before the Apostles laid Hands upon them.
Besides it is not every Body's Hands will serve, they must be Men inspired upon
our Enemies Concessions, and not every Foul Fist: Nor did it give Authority,
but as many other Jewish Ceremonies, it was made use of to express that Mission
which had a more Inward and Spiritual Ground. They were named Apostles from one
of the meanest Offices that belonged to the Temple; not Lord Primats, Lord
Archbishops, Lord Bishops, May it please your Grace, May it please your
Lordship, Right Reverent Fathers in God, etc. These things came from the Pope,
and thither they will and must return.

To conclude; because our Adversary tells us, that the Church, from the Days
of the Apostles has had a successive Apostleship and Ministry to confer;
whether he will or no, he must imply, that there has been a true Apostolical
Church ever since, Rev.
which is to give the Lie to the Holy Ghost that prophesied of a falling away
and a great Apostasy. 2 These. 2.

2 ly. That, if the Ministry of the Church of England be lawfully descended,
and are true Successors of the Apostles, and so primitive Ministers, they must
be Apostolically qualified; but they are not so Apostolically qualified either
as to the Work of God in themselves, the Gift of the Holy Spirit, daily
Inspiration, the Effect of their Ministry, that Patience, Meekness,
plain-Dealing, Perseverance, Godly Hospitality, continual Labor, and
self-denying Conversation: consequently not lawfully descended, nor true
Successors of the Apostles and primitive Ministers.

Nor do we think it such an intolerable Presumption, for Mechanics and
Tradesmen to preach the Gospel, as he would have it; For we well remember, that
those who believed and followed the Son of God, were reproached by the Scribes
and Pharisees, the Learned and National Teachers of the Jews, for Illiterate
Persons, Joh. 7, 48.49.
crying out in that Day, Have any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on
him, but this People who knows not the Law, Mat. 11, 24, 26, 61, 71. John 9.29.
Act. 22.22. chap. 24.5. chap. 4.13.
and are cursed? It was that Generation that called him and his Disciples so
often, This Fellow, Away with this Fellow, This pestilent Fellow, after the
rate our Adversary does treat us, as we may have occasion anon to observe. In
short, Peter and John were found Unlearned. Ouzelius in his Animadversions on
Minutius Felix, says, that as the Gentiles did object to the Christians their
rude Style, Ill-bred Language, and destitute of all Address or civil
Salutation, calling them Rusticks and Clowns; so did the Christians by way of
Irony and Contempt, term them the Well-bred, the Eloquent, and the Knowing;
This he proves by ample Testimonies out of Arnobius, Lactantius, Isidorus,
Pelusiota, Theodoret, and others.

In the Constitutions of Clemens Romanus (as supposed) it is enjoined, Constable.
Clem. Romans li. 1. c. 6. Conc. Carth. did. 37. Cap. Episc.
abstain from all the Books of the Gentiles. Also the Council of Carthague had
an express Canon against Reading Heathen Authors, then Aristotle, and all that
Philosophy, which fits Priests at both Universities.

Gratian has also such like Passages as these, by way of Complaint. ^ac. Laur.
de. lib. gent. page 40, 41.
We see, that the Priests of the Lord, neglecting the Gospels and the Prophets,
read Comaedies or Play-Books and sing Love-Verses, etc.

Cardan tells us, that Gregory, though a Pope, burnt several Lascivious Latin
Authors, Card. de. Sap. l. 2.
as Caecilianus Affranius, Naevius Licinius, etc. Nor had Plautus, Martial and
Terence, now School Books, escaped him, could he have helped it. In like manner
Gregory Nazianzen the Father, suppressed several Greek Authors, as Diphiles,
Apollodenus, Philemon, Alexis, Sappho, etc.

And Petrus Bellonius, that inquisitive Traveller, Pet. Bell. Obser. l. 1. c.
^5. Ib. 40.
when at Mount Athos, where lived 6000 (...) in Monasteries, he did not so much
as find (no nor in all Greece) one Man acquainted in the Conversation of these
parts; For though they had several Manuscripts of Divinity in their Libraries,
yet not one Poet, Historian o^ Philosopher. That they Anathematized such
Priests as studied Poesy, or transcribed Books not treating of Religion.

And Dominicus a Soto, strongly pleads not only the Liberty of every Man's
Teaching any Good that he knows, Dom. Sot. in 4 Cent. did. 5 q. 1. Art. 10. p.
154.
but that it is his Duty to teach it.

Machiavel assures us, the first Promoters of Christianity, Match. disp. lib. 2.
c. 5.
commanded all Poets and Historians which treated of the Gentiles vain
Conversation and Worship to be burned.

Farther, concerning the Illiterateness, Meaness and Novelty, the Gentiles did
object against the Christians, see Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity.

By all which it appears, that the Quaker-Preachers are never the less Orthodox
for being ignorant in Human Science, since the most Orthodox Preachers have
been generally such, and that both before and after the coming of Christ.

In short, that Ministry which is Experimental and Powerful, for the Turning of
many from D^rkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, is the only
True and Evangelical Ministry; and such an one we both own, and enjoy, blessed
be the Name of our God for ever.

CHAP. V. His fourth Chapter considered: Quakery (as he calls it) no S^duceism,
as he would suggest. His Measures of us Wrong.
HIs great Ill Will to the Quakers, puts him upon flinging any thing upon them
that he thinks will stick; at least that he would have to do so. We must this
Turn be, p 75.76, 77, 78.
with all Familists, Saducees; but the fierce Will of the Man has precipitated
him into a strange Mistake: Hear him.

H.N. owns No other Immortality then the Continuance of his Doctrine, nor
Judgment Seat of Christ, nor Heaven, nor Hell but what are in this Life. The
Quakers (says he) do the like; for T. Foster says in a Book, Called, a Guide
to the Blind, that the second Appearance of Christ is in Spirit, to end Sin and
finish Transgression.

Now if this proves the Agreement, I never saw the like (taking for granted
what he represents H.N. to have held, in which I know he belyes him) Is there
no Difference between saying, that Christ's second Appearance is in Spirit, and
denying Immortality, Eternal Judgment, Heaven and Hell? O Hiddious Consequence
and Comparison! But why is it such false Doctrine to say that Christ's second
Coming is Spiritual; shall he ever come so Fleshly as before? Is not he
glorified? After what Manner was it he promised to come, when he said, some
standing here shall not taste of Death till they see the Son of Man come in his
Kingdom. Mat. 16.28.
I will not leave you Comfortless, I will come to you; yet a little while and
the World sees me no more; but ye see me, because I live ye live also. Jo.
14.17, 18, 19.
He that is with you shall be in you? And when the Apostle Paul said, Though I
have known Christ after the Flesh, yet henceforth I know him so no more; When
it pleased God to reveal his Son in me. I ask, if this was not both a Second
and a Spiritual Appearance? Certainly it must be an other Appearance from the
former, therefore a Second: and it must be a Spiritual one, because it is
Unreasonable to believe that Christ as to his Bodily Appearance could be all
this to his Disciples and Followers; therefore, His Second Appearance is
Spiritual.

And for Judgment, Immortality, Heaven and Hell in this Life, were not our
Adversary a Senseless Novice in these Matters, his own Doctors would teach him,
That there shall be no other Judgment, ^erk. Sanders.
Immortality, Heaven or Hell hereafter, then what every one has some measurable
Sense or Earnest of in this Life. From hence he is so Unjust to us and H.N.
too, as to give out to the World, We both deny all future Immortality,
Judgment, Heaven or Hell. I have declared the Utmost of the Thing, and doubt
not but Time will make him greatly ashamed of his Undertakings.

But G. Fox the Saducee (says he) holds the Soul is a Part of the Essence and
Being of God; page 82.
therefore his Conclusion is unquestionable: or to that purpose.

I am very ready to think the Devil grievously angry with that good Man, and
indeed he has Reason for it (if I may say, That the Devil can have Reason for
any thing he does) for he has s^rowdly Brow-beaten his Cause in the World, and
a Great Instrument has God made him of Noble, and Valiant, and Durable Acts
among the Sons of Men: And we shall so much the more Respect and Honor him, by
how much Untoward Spirits seek to bear him down in the Minds of People. But to
answer our Adversary: How comes it he never quotes when he cites, I mean, page
his References* Does he think we are bound to peruse a Folio to defend any
Passage from his Random-Reflections? What is he for a Man, that he treats us so
a la neglegence; with his contemptuous Neglect? Does he conceit People
beholding to him for his Slanders without Proof, or that any thing against a
Quaker is Evidence enough? But I will tell the Man, he mistakes G.F. for the
purport of his words are to show, That the Life God breathes into the Soul of
Man, by which Man comes to live to God, is something of the Divine Being; not
that the Soul as a Created Capacity, without that Inspiration, is part of God,
or of his Divine Being, and so far Candor (that keeps the Eye clear) would have
let him see, had not Prejudice, and a Desire of Misrepresenting, and running us
down, hurried him beyond the Bounds of all Moderation: Nor is he alone in the
Matter? For many learned Rabbis and modern Orthodox Divines (as they are
called and reputed) have affirmed the same. Let it be Truth for their sakes, if
not for his.

In short, Were we of the Mind he would have People to think we are, of all Men
none would be so Miserable: What! Suffer in this World, because of our Faith
and Hope, in the Life of the other, and yet deny the very (...) End of that
Hope Faith, (...) Eternal Life, which alone bear us over the Troubles of this
Temporal one? I am persuaded all moderate Persons will think better of us.

CHAP. VI. He endeavors in his Fifth Chapter, to prove us Inconsistent with
the Good of Civil Magistracy. Our Adversary's Reason too short for his Envy.
Swearing not Lawful.
HAd not this Chapter been found among the rest, I might perhaps have taken him
for some Zealous Churchman, vexed only at the Increase of the poor Quakers,
page 90, 91, 92.
on a mere Religious Score. But when I see him wilfully Mistaking, and
purposely Charactering them Enemies to Government, and that to the Insecurity
of Civil Magistrates, I perceive what he would be at, and that nothing will
serve him below our Throats. He has multiplied Words unnecessarily, these two,
HANG THEM, would have both explained and perhaps gratified his Mind better.

He delivers it as a Fundamental of the Quakers Religion, That they testify
against Proud and Lofty Magistrates, who Rule not for God, but themselves; to
which, as a dangerous Doctrine, he opposes the Apostle Peter's Exhortation;
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, whether to
the King, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
as Supreme; or unto Governors, that are sent by him for the Punishment of
Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do well; crying out, Is not this a
Doctrine fitted to stir up Sedition and Rebellion; And that such are only
Magistrates in our Account that are Righteous in our Esteem. If a Magistrate be
Wicked, Obedience, says he, is still due to him.

Answ. True, but not to that which is Wicked; for that were to open a Door to
all the Impiety a Nero could be guilty of. But what Contradiction is there
betwixt the Apostles Language and the Quakers? Can any sober Person think, the
Apostle Peter exhorted the Churches to believe Evil Magistrates to be Good
ones? or prove Lofty Magistrates who rule not for God fit to be obeyed therein?
This were to understand, as if the Apostle meant, That such as rule not for
God, Punish Evildoers, and Praise them that do well; A Contradiction. If our
Faith be Dangerous, the Scripture must be in Question. Must a Reproveing of
Evil be a Disowning of Magistracy? It seems then that Magistrates are not to be
reproved, let their Practices be never so exorbitant. Is there no Difference
between our Dislike of the Injust Act of a Julian; and our Rebellion against
Just Authority? If showing Men th^i^ Evils, be Disrespect, and a Reprehension
of them as Unchristian, be Rebellion; we must read Religion backwards. But God
deliver all Magistrates from such Counselors, and us from such Enemies.

But that which is very remarkable, is the Contradiction he gives himself, and
the Injustice he shows to us; who in one page says, we would destroy all
Magistrates, not of our own Opinion; and in the very next gives it for our
Judgment, though with great Dislike, that Magistrates ought not to impose
Opinions in matters of Religion, as if we were such Wretches, as to deny that
Power unto Magistrates, which we would tyranically use our selves.

But he thinks he has enough against us in this Expression, All Governors
ought to be accountable to the People, and to the next succeeding Rulers, for
all their Actions which may be enquired into upon occasion. This (says our
Adversary with a great Rant) borders upon Treason, respecting his Majesty, the
King of England..

Answ. But what if he was not then in England, but a sort of People that held
this very Principle, and who had sworn to God, before Angels and Men to mantain
it, and broke their solemn Oaths? Was it not, Argumentum ad hominem, to such a
Generation? And does not our Adversary know, that there are Elective
Governments in the World, and annual Choice of Officers in our own Country,
that are accountable both to the People and their Successors?

But since he has brought the King of England's Name on the Stage, upon this
Occasion, I shall briefly tell him and the World, two things, and let Men
relish them as they please. First, That it is not for the Interest, or Honor
of his Government, for any to be over officious in the enlarging his
Prerogative beyond those bounds, the excellent fundamental Laws of England have
circumscribed the whole Government with. No Princes Crown in Europe stands more
firm then his, upon English Law; The Law gives both Right and Might. It has
been the part of such as dare not trust their Lives and Actions with the Law,
to whisper unlimited Power into the Ears of Prines; but their ultimate Aim was
not their Sovereigns Greatness, but their own Protection. We are no Sycophants,
yet we fear God, and honor the King, 2 ly, It is not our Business to meddle
with Government; but to obey or suffer for Conscience sake: can our Adversary
ask more? Several of us have been the faithful Servants both of Him and his
Father, and God knows, their Kindness is not changed with their Religion,
though it admits not of their former way of showing it. And this I may truly
say in general, That not only our Principle leads to no such Nice and busy
Medlings, but we are actually unconcerned in any such things: We speak not this
out of Fear or Flattery; the Truth has placed us far above both; but knowing
the World will never be good till every one mends one; and that God's Grace has
therefore universally appeared, and yet does in the Hearts of Men, It Is both
our Desire, Duty and Practice to endeavor after that Holy, Righteous and
Innocent Life it leads to, and that as well for others as our selves.

Of Swearing.
But he says, Inasmuch as we refuse to swear before a Lawful Magistrate, we
contradict the Word of God, p. 93.
and throw away the greatest Tie any Prince has upon his Subjects,
Insinuating, as if we had been dabling with the Jesuit in this matter.

Answ. It Is strange that such an Illiterate sort of Mechanics, and Rustic
Rabbyes (as he is pleased to call us) should hold such Correspondence with one
of the most learned Classes in the World: But as there is more Difference
between us* and the Papists, then the Protestants and the Papists, by how much
the Protestants have many things that are Popish, and we have not; so have I
ever found these silly threadbare Slanders, to be the Refuge of Shallow Heads,
and Weak Causes. But I would have all know, as I have elsewhere said, The
Ground of Swearing is either through Distrust of Honesty in Him that swears, or
Weakness in Him to whom the Oath is made. The first takes in all the Swearing
that is now in the World; See Bp. Gauden of Swearing. The Foundation of
Swearing now is the Wickedness of Men. p. 36.
the last those Oaths God condescended to make to the Jews. So that it is
either an extraordinary way of Evidence to awe Witnesses into Truth, or an
extraordinary Way of Promising to work Belief in the Incredulous. Now
Incredulity and Dishonesty are both Unchristian; For as none are Christians,
but those who are buried with Christ by Baptism, and are raised up unto Newness
of Life; so in that pure Law of the Spirit of Life, Swear not at all, is
recorded. And so far is this from Contradicting the Word of God, that the great
Word of God has so enjoined us, for all our Adversary's Paraphrase upon it, to
wit, Swearing in Communication; for the Swearing prohibited, was such as the
Law allowed, as Bp. Sanderson well observes, It was not needful that Christ
should forbid, what was forbidden in it self, or was always Unlawful, which
Swearing in Communication was and is, Bp. Rob. Sanderson De Jur. Oblig. page
141.
as by the third Commandment, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God
in vain.

Christ brought forth a Righteousness that needed it not; for that Grace, Faith
and Truth, which came by Jesus Christ, take away the Necessity of an Oath.
Consequently so far as any are in that Incredulity or Dishonesty which needs
it, so far they are not the Followers and Disciples of Christ, nor qualified
with his Evangelical Righteousness. Indeed it is a shameful thing, and very
dishonorable to the Christian Religion, that they who pretend themselves to a
Christian Society, should be so un*Christ-like, to want and use the scareing
and affrighting Asseverations dispensed with in some of the weakest times of
Knowledge, by which to assure one another of their Faith and Truth. In such
Cases where is their Evangelical Link and Tie of Unity? Certainly a true
Christian's Yea should be Yea, and Nay, Nay; that is, in Answer to all
Questions, whether it relate to matter of Evidence or Promise, they should
speak the Truth, and mean and do what they say; which is enough.

This Truth is so natural, that it is familiar with some to say, I had rather
take his As the Thief in Essex, who robbing a Quaker in Company with another,
and using them fairly, desired them not to stir, till they were got clear of
the Road; upon which said the other man, I Will swear; you swear, you will swear
through an Anvil and back again; will the other promise? Thieves know Honesty,
though they do not practice it.
Word then the other's Oath; which shows, how much Honesty is more credible
then Swearing. This made the primitive Christians not only Refuse to Swear by
the Fortune of Caesar, but to swear at all, telling their Judges in their
Answers, It was Unlawful for a Christian to swear. And Bp. Gauden himself
assures us, that they were so strict and exact, that there was no need of an
Oath among them; Yea they so kept up the Sanctity and Credit of their
Profession among Unbelievers, that it was Security enough in all Cases to say,
Christianus sum, I am a Christian; And that if any urged them further, they
repeated this as the only Satisfaction they would give: The Veracity of their
Word. And that he might further show, how dishonorable and needless a thing it
was for Good and Holy Men, and true Christians to Swear, he brings in the Whole
Body of the Essaeans, several wise Heathen, and Christian Fathers; Indeed it
was a primitive maxim, Non oportet ut vir qui Evangelice vivit, juret omnino.
It behooves not that a Man of an Evangelical Life should swear in any Case. And
this Doctrine was closely followed by Crysostome, Theophylact, and several
other ancient Christian Doctors. Nor were the Heathen wholly insensible of the
Truth of this Matter, as Bp. Gauden further informs us out of Polybius That the
better and simpler Ages of the World rarely used any Oaths at all, no not so
much as in Judicature; but after Perfidy and Lies increased, Oaths increased,
as a Remedy to restrein those Mischiefs. To which let me add, That some of the
ancient Sages, Socrates and Xenocrates, knew, urged, and also practiced a Life
beyond an Oath.

So that if those who are truly discipled, redeemed and renewed by the Power
and Spirit of Christ Jesus, need no Oath (Nay, that it is a Questioning of
their Veracity, and an Affronting of their Profession to offer them one) and if
the Lying, familiar Swearing, Forswearing, and fraudulent Dealing of Wicked Men
make their Oaths of little or no Credit (as says the Bishop out of Lactantius
and Austin) certainly it will be much better to prevent Swearing, and punish
Lying with the Penalty due to Forswearing: which suggests an unanswerable
Return to that familiar Objection, But how do we know that ye are those Honest
Men? For we have not only the same Answer the ancient Christians had to give,
with this severe Rebuke, That ye are the Reproach of Christianity, who under
that good Name act those vile Impieties the nobler Heathen judged, and the
loosest have not outdone; but we have this further to offer: Dispense with our
Consciences in not-Swearing, and punish our Untruth when ye find it, as
severely as ye do their Perjury. What more can be desired, since Truth-speaking
fulfils the Law, and Punishing False-speaking satisfies it?

CHAP. VII. Of the Light Within.
IT is Matter of sad Complaint, that a Man should write of so excellent a
Subject as the Light Within, p. 99, 101, 102, 103.
and show so much Darkness in treating of it.

But lest he should say, That our uncertain and various Expressions, for such
he esteems them, put him besides all Faith in it, we shall endeavor to make
appear their Consistency, both with themselves, and the Scripture of Truth.

He quotes Tho. Foster, in his Guide to the Blind, p. 1. thus, God is the
Light. p. 7. as a Man forgetting himself, Christ Within is Man's true Light to
walk by; And in p. 9. As doubting whether that would hold Water, says, The
Spirit of Christ in Man is the true Light and Guide, and this Light enlightens
every Man that comes into the World. But (says he) if James Nayler may be
Judge, our Friend Thomas (he was so, though thou art an Enemy, and a Mocker of
his Memory) is very much mistaken; for in his Book, called, A Door opened to
the Imprisoned, p. 2, 3. he says, That the Light of the Word is God's Love to
the World; and this Light is not given to any till they come out of the World.
And that George Whitehead in The Seed of Israel's Redemption, p. 20. says,
That the Light Within, is a Measure of the Lord's Life and Light.

Answ. To the first Quotation, there can be no Cavil; for it is plain Scripture,
God is Light, 1 John 1.5. And it was the Apostolical Message so to preach, That
God is Light, John. 1.9.
and in him is no Darkness at all.

The second is also most true; for Christ is Man's true Light, that was the
true Light which enlightens every Man, etc. And that it was for Man to walk by,
both Christ and his Apostles prove, I am the Light of the World, Joh. 8.12.
he that follows me shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of
Life. Again, if ye walk in the Light, as He is in the Light, etc. God is Light,
1 John 17.
and Christ is Light; and since there is no knowing of God or Christ but by the
Manifestation of Light; and that none know the Father but those to whom Christ,
the Light, reveals him; therefore Christ is Man's true Light, without which Man
can never know either God or Christ.

For his 3 d. Quotation, I see no Contradiction in it to the two former, unless
Christ can be without his Spirit; for if the Spirit of Christ dwell in any Man,
Christ dwells in that Man. This Language the Apostle used to the Romans Chap.
8.9, 10, 11. If the Spirit of God be in you. Again, If the Spirit of Christ be
in you; yet again, If the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus dwell in you; all
which are Synonymous, or to one and the same Purpose. For Shame, thou a
Scholar, a Grecian, a Disputant, that makes such sorry Cavils; might not the
Jews and Heathens have made the same Exceptions against the Apostle? But it is
an old Devil-Trick to besaint and extol the Holy Ancients, whilst they hugg
the Spirit that murdered them, and with it persecute the Truth in this Age; so
Cunning is the Devil, and so Blind is the World. But let us see how much more
Honest he is in his next Quotation, then Rational in the three former.

That the Light of the World is God's Love to the World, I find in James
Nailer's Book; But that the Light is not given to any till they come out of the
World, is a direct Ly to our Principle, and a putting an absolute Forgery upon
his Book; For he says, That God has given his Light to the World, that therein
is his Love manifested, that such as follow it in its Leadings out of the
World, have the Nature of Sons: But Sonship is that which cannot be had whilst
in the World's Nature; therefore they are to come out of the World's Ways, to
follow the Light, which visits Man in the World's Ways, in order to bring him
out of them, and here the true Sonship is received; so that the Sonship and
not the Light, is that which cannot be had in the World. Now what Contradiction
can this be to our Dishonest Adversary's honest Friend, Thomas, who said, that
the light enlightened every Man that comes into the World? Sure I am it is a
plain Instance of our Adversary's Disingenuous and Injurious Practice.

For G. Whiteheads Words, The Substance of them is to be found in Joh. 1.14,
1^. The Word was full of Grace and Truth, and of his Fullness have all we
received, and Grace for Grace.

But he says. H.N. teaches that every Godly Man is God Incarnate, and Christ
Incarnate, and that this is the Doctrine of the Quakers (says he) I prove.
First because T. Fo^ter in his Guide to the Blind, page 13. says, The Light,
which is Christ within, is not Natural, but Sufficient to Salvation. Now I
appeal to the whole World, what Affinity there can be between H.N's Words and
Th. Fos^er's. Is God incarnate or Christ incarnate to be found in his
Assertion? Nor will I pass my Word for his right Quotation of H.N. What he
quarrels at here I know not. Would he not have Christ manifested within? Or
would he have him Natural, in Opposition to Spiritual? Or would he have his
Light and Spirit Insufficient to Salvation? If he intends any of these, he
crosses express Scripture, blasphemes, against God, and frustrates the very End
of the Gospel; If none of them, why was this Passage cited? But he thinks G.F.
has made much for his Purpose, who in his Great Mystery, p. 207, 210. says,
Christ is not distinct from the Saints, and he that eats the Flesh of Christ
has it within him. And what of all this? Is Christ divided from his Saints,
Col. 1.27. Joh. 14.17, 20.
Was he not in them of Old the Hope of Glory? He that is with you shall be in
you. And at that day ye shall know, that I am in my Father, and you in me, and
I in you. For the other Part, I wonder he cited it: John 6.53, 54.
Certain it is, That unless Men eat the Flesh of Christ, they have no Life in
them. Now how a Man can be said to eat any thing, and not have it within him,
is a Distinction past my Understanding

But Geo. Fox says, p. 206. If there be any Christ but He that was crucified
within, he is a False Christ; and He that has him not within, is a Reprobate.

Answ. Our Return to this will be very short. 1st, By Christ crucified within,
he does not deny that he was once crucified without (as the same Page proves)
*as our Adversary would insinuate. 2ly, There can be no False Doctrine in it,
unless the owning of Christ being crucified within through Wicked Works,
necessarily should imply our Denying that he was ever crucified without; from
the Danger of which Consequence the Scriptures of Truth sufficiently secure us.
Heb. 6.6. Seeing they crucified to themselves the Son of God afresh. Also Rev.
11.18. 3ly, And that such are Reprobates in whom He lives not; remember that
unanswerable Passage 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether you be in the
Faith; prove your own selves: know you not your own selves, how that Jesus
Christ is IN YOU, except you be Reprobates?

But says our Adversary, Ric. Stubbs, a Quake^* told Eliz. Wetherly; That the
Jesus who was born of the Virgin, and dyed at Jerusalem, was a False Christ and
an Antichrist. But this needs no long Answer; for it is an absolute Untruth,
raised by the Devil within, and his Envious Emissaries without, to bring us the
poor despised People of God into Infamy with all who have any Reverence for the
Name of Christ; And God will plead our Innocence in this Man's Conscience, by
that Holy Light which he blasphemously says, leads down to Hell and the Devil,
carrying Man, like an Ignis Fatuus, into Bogs and Ditches, causing him at last
to fall into the Pit of everlasting Destruction. For this I would have all the
World to know, that God, Who is the Searcher of the Heart, Psalm. 7.9. Jer.
11.20. Amos 4.13.
and Tryer of the Reins, who alone shows unto Man his Thoughts, is the great
Spiritual Light, John 1.1, ^. And it is as such, that he sets Man's Sins in
order before him, as says the Apostle, Whatsoever makes manifest is Light,
Ephesians. 5.13, And says the same Apostle, Whatsoever may be known of God is
manifest within men; for God has showed it unto them, Romans 1.19. Such as bring
their Deeds unto this Light, Jo. 3.21.
may know whether they are wrought in God or no. And for this End has the
Eternal Word enlightened every Man that comes into the World, Joh. 19.14.
that he may come to the Light, and walk and grow up in it: For as all have
given unto them out of his Fullness Grace for Grace, so from his Fullness of
Light has he given all Men Light for Light; not a mere natural Capacity or
creaturely Understanding, but that Divine Light or Grace, which is able to
teach, sanctify and govern the Soul to God's Glory, and its own Everlasting
Happiness: In the Word by whom all things were made was Life, and that Life was
the Light of Men; And as it was then, so is it now the Condemnation of the
World, that Men love Darkness rather then Light, because their Deeds are Evil.
Some, with the Pharisee prefer their Formal, Literal and Ceremonial Religion;
and Others, their Pleasures, Pastimes and Worldly Honor and Profit, before
this Inward Pure Light and Law of the Spirit of Life, the Leave^ of the
Kingdom, and Truth in the inward Parts, which frees from Sin, and brings into
the Heavenly Liberty of the Sons of God. And we do testify in the Name of God,
that it is only by this Measure of that Divine Fullness, which above One
Thousand Six Hundred Years ago was manifested in the Flesh, that any Man or
Woman can ever come to a right Sight, Sense, Relish and Enjoyment of the
Blessed End and Effects of his Gracious Appearance, Heavenly Gospel, Mighty
Miracles, Holy Life, Death and Sufferings, his Powerful Resurrection, Glorious
Ascension, and Constant Mediation and Intercession. And that all Knowledge,
Faith and Worship, not grounded upon this internal Sight, Sense and Operation
of this Divine Measure of Grace, Light and Truth in the Inward Parts, are but
Historical and Pharisaical; making up but the Jew outward, and Christian
outward, who are not Children of the Freewoman, nor Heirs according to the
Promise. And if for this blessed Testimony we must be thus abused, defamed, and
set at naught by the Black-robed-Rabbies of this World, as they did against the
Prophets and Christ, God will be our abundant Recompense, who is the Author of
that Good Reformation begun, and will, I hope, be the Finisher of it, to his
own Immortal Honor, and our Unutterable Rejoicing, World without End.

CHAP. VIII. Of some of our Adversary's Lies and Slanders.
HIs next Chapter containing a short Account of the Quakers Pretenses to
Immediate Revelations, has been already effectually considered; page 107, 108,
109, 110, 111.
only I shall take notice of two or three Particulars.

First, That he would have the Sadness and Dejection of those that turn
Quakers, and the Zeal and Fluency of those that Preach among them, to be the
Effect of the Hypochondria.

Answ. This shows what an easy Religion our Adversary lives in, who yet knows
not the Terrors of the Lord: How unfit is he to Warn Men? He that ever knew
God's Word to be as a Sword, an Hammer, an Ax, a Consuming Fire and Everlasting
Burnings against Sin and Iniquity; the Pangs of a New Birth, and how hard it is
to become a True Disciple through the d^ily Cross, he would never have made
such a frothy, dark and envious Construction of our serious Convictions: But
God's Fire will one day burn up his peaceable Habitation; and in that Day of
Alarm, he and the rest of his J^vial Crew, shall know the Meaning of these
Words, They that pierced him shall see him, and all the Kindreds of the Earth
shall wail because of him.

But whatever Disease we have his frequent and senseless Scoffs at us, and our
Holy Way, show that the Spleen is very prevalent in him.

For his Reflection on Edw. Buroughs, it will do him no Harm; his Soul is with
God, and his Memory shall outlive his Enemies Hate. And for this Ranting
Scribbler, he is not worthy to carry his Books after him.

For his Gentleman of New Castle, who affirmed, Some Quakers came to Kendal
Church, and said, They had a Commission from the Lord to pull down the
Steeple-House; And another in Sermon-time to pull down the Hourglass, I must
tell him, That we know no such thing, and if he were a fair Adversary, he would
have told us, who this Gentleman was, and who the Quakers, that we might have
informed our selves of the Truth of the Matter; though we have great Cause to
conclude it a downright Forgery. For the other, it is altogether as likely to
come of the same Stock; but if such a thing ever were, I dare say, the Priest
was in a worse Taking then the Quaker; however, it was no Theft, because they
all saw it was done for that End: And every Body knows, the Priest can tell how
to call for another Glass; for the Truth is, some of that Profession can hardly
preach without them; for they elevate them above his Quaker's Hypochondria.

That the Wife of one Williamson should call Ja. Milner the Eternal Son of God
at Apleby, is an arrant Falsehood; for we have particularly enquired, and can
find no such thing.

That a Woman at Weighton in Yorkshire of that Goatish Herd (as he is pleased
to call them) went Naked to another Woman's Husband's Bed, and bid him open his
Bed to her, for the Father had sent her, is a Slander hatched in Darkness: We
deny it in the Name of the Lord God* And I charge this disingenuous Man, if he
has any Regard to his Reputation, or those he belongs to, to prove, if he can,
the Truth of this Story.

And that he should at last call this, A Taste of the Quakers deluded Dreams,
melancholic Phancies, Impostures, Injections, everlasting Errors and Deceits,
is the top of what Impudence and Forgery, Man can well be guilty of against his
Neighbor. But why our Goatish Herd above all others? Unjust and Uncivil Man!
Look at Home for Shame. How often are Quakers brought to Ecclesiastical Courts
for Uncleanness? We know they are too often summoned thither for Tithes: It
would be almost endless to tell the Stories of both Priests and People's
Wickedness that follow them; one would think that no Church of England Man,
that knew any thing of the present Age, or that thought we did, could believe
that forging one unclean Lie against the Quakers, should invalid their
Religion, who believes his own to be true, notwithstanding those numerous
Incests, Adulteries, Fornications, Concupiscences, Murders, Lies, Perjuries,
Dissimulations, Thefts, Injuries, and such like, that have been, and daily are
committed by his Dear Fellow-Communicants, The Sons and Daughters of the Church
of England. Let him therefore draw in his Horns, and leave off pushing at us
with his Forgeries and Defamations; and Repent of this Ungodly Way of dealing
with us, that he may find Mercy to his Soul.

CHAP. IX. Of Perfection.
I Perceive, the Man would fain say something of every Controverted Head, held
by the Quakers, though as little to Purpose as may be. page 112, 113, 114, 115.
There is but one thing commendable in his whole Chapter, and that is its
Brevity. He stumbles at the very Entrance, and never recovers himself to the
End.

The Quakers talk much of Perfection from Sin, in this Life, and that they have
already attained to it. Quote, he scorns, his Word is Credit enough, at least
he would have it so; but to let him go on. This, says he, is the Pharise's
Litany, God, I thank thee, I am not as other Men are. The Antinomian Liberty,
the Doctrine of Dell, Saltmarsh, Town, and all Antinomians and Familists; And
that Malice and Railing perpetually make up the greatest part of the Quakers
Speaking to the People. But what of Argument can be found in such mere
Assertion and Reflection, I leave with sober Men to judge. He neither
understands, Antinomians, Familists, nor Quakers. And truly I am ready to think
him some raw, unfledged, ungraduate, who by this Essay aims at that Proof of
his Abilities, as may induct him to some Fat Benefice; or else One that thought
we deserved no larger Testimony of his Ability, Honesty and Discretion in his
Endeavors against us.

In short, A perfect Principle we plead for, and press the Necessity and
Benefit of Man's Conformity to it; That though it be a little Leaven, it is
able to leaven the whole Lump; That this Grace brings Salvation from Sin, by
the Power it gives them that obey it, to mortify Sin; else what a Riddle would
those Scriptures make, that speak of Sanctification throughout in Body, Soul
and Spirit. 1 These. 5.23. 1 Jo. 5.18. and c. 2.13. Mat. 5.48. Ephesians. 4.13. 2
Cor. 7.1. 1 Pet. 5.10.
That He that is born of God, sins not. Old things are done away, behold all
things are become new. I write unto you Young Men, because ye have overcome the
Wicked One. Be ye Perfect, as your Heavenly Father is Perfect. Unto a Perfect
Man. Let us cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit,
perfecting Holiness in the Fear of the Lord. The God of all Grace make you
perfect, etc. Wherein not only a Perfection from Sin, but the going forward to
a perfect Man in Christ, is exhorted to, and prayed for; therefore not
inobtainable

To conclude, We do not teach People the Perfection of our Persons, but the
Principle of God, and our Experience of its Converting and Translating Power.
Christ is stronger then the Devil; And for this was and is he manifested, To
end Sin, and destroy the Works of the Devil; a Doctrine the Church of England
teaches in her Baptism. Nor do we say, That every Man is perfect from Sin as
soon as he is convinced of Sin: No, there is a great War, a long Wilderness to
travel through, many Enemies to subdue, and Difficulties to surmount; and those
Enemies are mostly those of a Man's own House. We therefore exhort all to wait
for God's Arising, that his Enemies may be scattered, that witnessing a
Victorious State over Hell and Death, by the Power of Christ Jesus, such may
obtain the New Name, which is written in the Lamb's Book of Life, and promised
to all that Overcome: Which is far from that Ungodly Rantism he would fasten
upon us and our Principles; And I doubt not but Time, Patience and our
Blameless Conversation shall dispel those Mists, Malice and Ignorance may have
raised to darken and blemish the ^eputation of our Practice, Persons and
Principles in the World.

CHAP. X. His Ninth and Tenth Chapter of the Ways and Arts that the Quakers
use in gaining Proselytes, with the Advantage their Way has over other
Heresies, honestly considered, and briefly confuted.
THe first Artifice he says, we use, is, To come in Sheep's Clothing. page 117.
Now what is this Sheep's Clothing (says he) but only the Innocence and Purity
of the Christian Doctrine; when as their main Purpose is to devour credulous
Souls.

Answ. If we have the Sheep's Clothing, and if the Sheep's Clothing be the
Purity and Innocence of Christian Doctrine; then is our Doctrine Innocent, Pure
and Christian. And since he avers the Doctrine of the Church of England to be
so remote and opposite, this Character must necessarily imply, that her
Doctrine is Hurtful, Impure and Antichristian.

But what have we Seduced People to? Drunkenness, Whoredom, Perjury,
Wantonness, Idleness, or any such Unseemly or Irreligious Practice? Let him
tell me who of us are less Serious, less Moral, or worse Livers then we were
before. But the Truth of the Matter is this; Our Way of Devouring Peoples
Souls, as he calls it, is that which hinders the Hireling P^iests from
Devouring the Peoples Pockets, and endangering their Souls too, who teach for
Hire, and divine for Money, and make Religion but a Stalk to Preferment, who
have the Shell without the Substance, the Form without the Power: From such, in
obedience to God's Spirit, we have turned away; and because we have dared no
longer to put into their Mouths, their Covetous Spirit has swelled,
notwithstanding their Pretenses, and their Sheep-Skin burst, and an arrant
Woolf has come forth; no true Sheep, but a Sheep-Fleecer, and a Sheep-Sucker,
of their Blood, whose Innocence and Patience have plainly proved them such. But
the Wolf and the Fox's Skin have been always good enough for us; any thing to
disguise, and make the Dogs fasten and worry to Death. Our Conscience they call
Enthusiasm; and our solemn Confession, Collusion and Equivocation; our
Perseverance is reputed Obstinacy; our Plainness, Singularity; our Industry,
Worldly-mindedness; and our Retired-Living, Penuriousness* our Rebukes of Evil
they will have to be Censoriousness; and our Disregard of Company, Pride and
Sullenness. Whatever God by his Light has made Conscience to us, there are a
sort of Men, that have so little Conscience, as to construe it all backwards,
rendering us instead of Honest Conscientious Men, A Pack of Fraudulent, Cheating
Fellows: But we cannot help it, if Men will Rage, they must; Their Shame and
our Patience will the more appear.

He says, Our Second Stratagem is, to bring the People out of Love with their
Pastors, page 119.
who have the Care of them.

Answ. I know not a Quaker in the World that would not administer both Food and
Raiment, to the worst Persecutor, as a necessitous Creature: But I hope, they
would suffer, unto Death, before they would contribute either to him as a
Priest; No, God's Witness in our Consciences never said Amen to their Ministry.
They have the Scriptures, true; But the Word of Reconciliation that brings to
God, and of which they declare, they want. I know that some of them can talk
well; so can some Mountebanks And Comedians. Do they witness the Truth of what
they speak? Their Heads know, but do their Hearts feel the Operation of That
Truth they will sometimes in Words declare? Have they traveled the Way, and
traced the many anxious Steps of that new Birth, which is the only Door into
the Heavenly Kingdom? But alas! Oxford and Cambridge make them, and their
Parents and Patrons prefer them; a good round Maintenance is mostly their Aim
on all hands: Tell them of the Necessity of an Inward Work, that it is the
Spirit of God that only makes a Man a Minister of God, and that the Anointing
which true Christian-Men receive, is Sufficient to their Instruction, and
presently the Cry is, Donatism, Pelagianism, Familism, Brownism, Jesuitism,
Quakerism, or any other Name that begets Jealousy, Undervalue and Hatred. In
short; we do believe that the settled Ministers of the World, are so far from
being Beneficial to People, that on the contrary, they exercise their minds
with a sort of unexperienced, unauthoriz'd Preaching, from the secret
Strivings, Discoveries and Leadings of that Spiritual Minister of the
Everlasting Covenant, which is able to bring Man into that way of Holiness,
without which no Soul shall ever see the Lord: And this is the true reason why
we are turned unto God's Minister, Christ Jesus, who says, Learn of me: of whom
God said, this is my beloved Son, hear him; and reject the Ministry of Man.

Our Third Artifice by which he says, we gain our Proselytes, is decrying all
Human Learning, page 120, 121.
and Use of Reason: That we are the most sottish and Ignorant Sect that ever
appeared in the World; Yet for our own turn we will be nibling at it, as G.W.
in mentioning a Moth-eaten Manuscript mentioned by Beza in his Annotations.

Answ. We have already said enough to defend Christianity, from the absolute
Necessity of Human Learning, either to understand or vindicate it; and so false
is his Assertion, that since Prophecy has ceased in the Church, secular
Learning has been of greatest Use and Benefit to Religion, that there is
nothing more true then the contrary, as it is commonly understood, promoted and
practiced in the World. I would fain know, how, many Rabbis, Greek and Latin
Philosophers yielded themselves Proselytes to the Christian Religion, though
they had his Presence, Ministry, Miracles, Death and Resurrection amongst them,
who was and is the Author and Master of it? If such Learning be so great a
Friend to Truth, How comes it that the greatest things have fallen to the Share
of Poor and Illiterate Men; And that such have been most apt to receive, and
boldest to suffer for it? Why not Rabbis rather then Fishermen, which was
before the Pouring out of the Spirit of Prophecy? And for what Reason should so
many learned Academies, since the pretended * Ceasing of it, But why is it
ceast? because ceast t^ you Sons, of the Night? Did not Christ promise to be
with his to the End* Either that is not so, or his being with them endues them
not with the Spirit of Prophecy; Was it not Apostolical, and in the first
Churches? Why not now? Is it less wanted? Is Christ not that to his Church he
was? A Blind Argument indeed! because the Priests of Man's making have it not;
therefore none have it. I will pour out my Spirit upon thee and upon thy Seed,
and thy Seed's Seed unto all Generations. Isa. 5 9.
be overrun with such Foul Idolatries, Gross Superstitions and flagitious
Living, as 1200 years past will witness. Nay, on the Occasion of any
Reformation with whom is there more to do, and who harder to be brought to
yield then Universities have been? Scripture and Story give it clear against
him.

Not that I would be thought to oppose a Sort of Learning neither; It has been
Man's Erring from his Divine Guide, that has made way for those numerous
Theses, Distinctions, Books and Controversies the World for Ages, has been
infested with. Such are the Obscure, Unintelligible, and Unprofitable
Metaphysics of the Heathen, too greedily received, and mischeiveously
increased by Fathers, Councils, School Men and our modern Universities to the
corrupting of Christian Doctrine, and disputing away the Benefit of Christian
Life. An unbounded Curiosity and Fancy have been the Womb that has brought
forth so much troublesome and unprofitable matter; which began with a
Degeneration of Philosophers: True Philosophy in the beginning of it being no
more, then the Way of Holy Living, by the Mortification of Passions. But
Learning, as Religion, failing by Corruption of Men, is now degenerated into
quite another thing. Socrates taught proper Speech and good Life, and such a
Course of Learning turned to daily Practice and Profit; severely forbidding all
Curiosities and Niceties as what turned not to Good Life, which he reputed the
best Science; And Plato would have the Poets banished out of his Commonwealth,
as corrupting it with Fables: thus was Learning, as Religion once pure and
Simple. In short, These Men were only versed in their own Tongues; They were
many of them Mechanics and Tradesmen. Answering, among the Gentiles, to the
Prophets, and Apostles among the Jews and Christians (though far short of them)
So that Learning and Philosophy, like to Religion, are now so changed, the
Ancients would be at a Loss to know them: Another thing has possessed it self of
the Name of each; For to be a Philosopher, or Lover of Wisdom, which was to
eschew all Evil, and Learning, which was to unlearn every ill thing, as
Socrates said, are now turned to dark and unprofitable Contests, Elabourate and
Unserviceable Studies to stuff Men's Heads.
all right Learning is to be divided into these two, True Knowledge and proper
Language. This Knowledge relates first to God, and that is only to be received
from the Spirit of God; and 2 ly, the things of this Life; and therein the
Spirit of Man has a large field to act in, to the Enlargement of its own
Understanding, and Benefit of the whole Creation, as subject to God's Grace,
as, knowing the Nature and Order of things in the Creation, Building,
Improvement of Land, Medicine, Chyrurgery, Traffic, Navigation, History,
Government, with many other honest, useful and profitable Arts and Inventions
for the help and good of Mankind. And if Man had kept in God's Counsel, the
many superfluous and unnecessary Arts and Inventions that are in the World, had
never been brought forth by him; and time will work them out, as it brought
them in, so that what is Plain, Honest, Serviceable and of good Report, shall
be preserved for the good (...) he Creation.

As for Language, it must be granted that there is a Propriety and Decency in
Language: But as Men have followed the outside of Religion, and left the
Substance behind, so have they done with Learning; They have neglected Matter,
the most beneficial part of Learning, and devoted themselves to an Excess of
fine Speaking; of which Bp. Wilkins in his real Character complains not without
a Cause, when he says, that this grand Imposture of Phrasing, has eaten ^ut
all solid Learning.

Yet Language is very convenient for Men's converse with Books and Nations of a
different Tongue; However, we utterly deny them to be absolutely necessary to
the true Knowledge of the Mysteries of God's Kingdom. So that the true English
of the Quakers denying all Reason and Learning is this; We refuse to commend or
practice unnecessary Studies, nice Controversies, voluminous and intricate
Disputations, Obscurity of Language, Affectedness of Style, Excess of Elegancy,
beliveing, that Learning as well as Religion stands in need both of great
purging, and reducing: and that those Subjects and Employments, which are most
serviceable and beneficial to Mankind, and agreeable to God's Grace, digested
into easy and familiar Methods, and treated on in the plain and ordinary Way of
Speaking, best deserves Man's time and regard. And for his Reflection upon G.
Whitehead, It no further deserves our notice, then that he flung a greater upon
Beza, whose Learning, he makes a little to bold with. To say no more of his
Moth-eaten Manuscript then this, That the best Copies he has had for his Rule,
has been near a kin to such Moth-eaten Manuscripts; And if such a Manuscript
was the Holy Scripture, as I believe it was, he was too bold, and Irreverent,
as well as Unwary and Foolish, in calling it a Moth-eaten Scripture, thereby
implying it to be a Moth-eaten Rule; not that I take it to be his Rule, who has
so fearfully erred and strayed from the holy Precepts and Exhortations of it.

The 4 th. thing by which he reports us to proselyte People is, page 122, 123.
to deceive and associate first with Women, therein imitating the Devil.

Answ. First we deny it, as being like the rest of his idle Stories, and those
that not only in the Primitive Times by the Heathen, but in several Ages since,
and Degrees of Breaking-forth of Truth and Reformation from Apostate
Generations, have been by them fastened upon the sincere Professors thereof, as
Waldenses, Lollards, Hugonots and Protestants themselves in their first day as
well as more modern Dissenters. We must take our share, it is no new nor
strange thing.

But supposing it to be true, that our Endeavors are first directed toward
the Women, I see no Evil in our Beginning to Undeceive, where the Devil began
to Deceive. If they are so easy to be persuaded, why not to Good as well as to
Evil? But these idle Shifts and pitiful Reflections, deserve rather to be
disdained then considered.

Lastly, page 125, 126, 127,
For our pretending to higher Degrees of Holiness, and Cracks, and Boasts of
Inspirations, with Our Rainerius the Monk, and a terrible Enemy to the poor
Waldenses, made the same Complaint against them. They used, says he, to teach
first what the Disciples of Christ ought to be, and that none are his
Disciples, BUT THEY THAT IMITATE HIS LIFE And that the Popes, Cardinals. etc.
because they live in Pride, Avarice and Luxury, etc. are not the Lawful
Successors of Christ, in that they walk not up to his Commandments. Thus, says
the Monk, they win upon the People.
Bewitching Language, which is nothing but Canting, and Scripture Phrase fitted
to feminine Fancies; by which (he says) we have the Advantage of all other
Heresies, I return thus much.

Answ. It is our Faith, that God, who made Heaven and Earth, will judge the
Secrets of all Men by Jesus Christ; so that it is not only my Duty, but my
Interest to speak the Truth of my Conscience in this Matter. P.P. Per. Hist.
Wald.
We dare pretend to no higher Degree then we have attained; but we must make a
Difference between what we were whilst under the Ministry of Man, and what we
are, since our being turned to God's Powerful Word in the Heart, Christ's
Ministry: We should be False to God, Injurious to our Neighbor, and Smother
and Belie our own Convictions, if we should not say, That we have found our
Judge near us, our Guide, Lawgiver and Rule very ^igh unto us; and those
Infirmities, Temptations and Corruptions, God has, by this Heavenly Grace,
given us Power against (by which we have known that Mortification of Sin, and
Conformity to the Will of God) which the utmost of our former Profession could
never free us from. And if this Plain and Christian Confession must be called
by all those Hard Names our Adversary finds for our Honestest Intentions, we
must, as we have done, recommend our Cause to God, and his Holy Witness in all
Consciences, and him to be judged by him, to whom we desire to stand and fall
in all we say, do and take in hand; to whom alone we owe the Honor of our
Experiences and Preservations.

However, the Irreverence of the Man deserves both our Notice, and the Reproof
of all that read him; What! Is Scripture Language become a Cant; and a sober
and seasonable Use of It, Canting fitted to feminine Fancies? But we think it
not more his Folly, Contradiction and Blasphemy, to speak with that Contempt of
the Holy Scriptures, and his pretended Rule, then an Advantage he gives our
Cause to tell the World, that of all others the Quakers speak and preach the
Scripture-Dialect. But it is the Mother Tongue of such frothy Minds so to
profane; and for all their pretended Respect to the Holy Scriptures, the
Spirit and Life that belong unto them, are made but Matter of Jeer and Mockage:
They would not be thought to undervalue Christ, the Scripture, nor his
Religion, but with the hight of Formality seem to Reverence and Applaud them
all, yet Persecute to the Death those that are his Holy Offspring, by the
Spirit of Regeneration; which shows their Esteem of Christ, Scripture and
Religion, to be but a kind of blindfold Respect; and that indeed their very
Spirits turn within them against that which is truly Christ-like, Scriptural
and Religious. The Devil ever understood his Interest better then to persecute
Truth under that Name; yet for all his fair Pretenses to Saintship, he
constantly became a fierce Devourer of those that have been the Children of the
Truth: And I may truly say to this Opposer, That for all his Religion,
Learning, Church Communion, and that stir he makes against us, as a Crew of
Heretics and Impostors, he knows not what Spirit he is of, who has writ a
Book, rather to Abuse, then Inform us, and instigate the Civil Magistrate to
Destroy us, then by solid Argument to Refute or Reclaim us. He that has but
half an Eye may see his Aim was not so much our Conversion, as Disgrace, and if
possible, our utter Ruin; But till our Adversary's Labors prove as Dangerous
to us as his Design (no doubt) was Wicked, we have little Cause to dread the
Success of his Attempts.

And that he may see a little of himself, if he thinks himself worth looking
upon; Let him be pleased to take a view of some of those many Reviling,
Scoffing, Rude and Contemptible Epithetes he is pleased to bestow on us, an
entire Body of People. Heretical Generation of Quakers; Slaves to Pride,
Covetousness, Lust, possessed by the Devil and a Diabolical Spirit; Apostates,
Phanaticks, Epistle, page 6, 7, 29, 32, 33, 35, 40, 41, 53, 77, 94, 206, 111,
117, 121, 110, 109.
Spiritualists; Black, impure hearts and mouths; bewitched with their
Sorceries and Enchantments; Impertinent Cavilling Fellows; Rebellious Quakers;
Cheats and Mountebanks; A Beastly and Quaking Generation; Juglers; Quaking and
Impudent Heretics; a Sottish Sect; Illuminados, Inspirados; Their Cheats and
Impostures, Enthusiastical Heretics; A Goatish Herd.

And of our Principle thus, Their Light leads to Hell and the Devil, and
carries a Man like an Ignis Fatuus, page 103, 111, 115.
causing him to fall into the Pit of everlasting Destruction; who are led by
this, are made obnoxious to all the Impostures and Injections of the Devil, and
to lie under everlasting Errors and Deceits.

To all which I have no other Answer then what it is to itself; Bp. Sanderson
highly honors and characterizes the Light; he calls it the Eternal Law of
Righteousness, and a Rule sufficient to good Life. See his Book in Latin^
entitled, De Oblig. Jur. promiss.
for it contains that Charge against its Author, that I shall leave him to
clear himself from, both to God and the whole World; only I cannot be so
wanting of Civility to the Person he dedicated his Book to, as not to let him
know, that it is unworthy of his Quality and Repute amongst Men, to have his
Name used to the Protection of so much Rudeness, Irreligion and Abuse.

I cannot think so meanly of him, as that the Endeavors of so Scurrilous an
Author should excite him to any Severity against that poor People he has so
basely wronged: For such a thing were not only beneath that place he holds
amongst Men; but would be to entitle himself to all our Adversaries Shameful
Miscarriages, and encourage him to persist in what it greatly behovs him to
Repent of: which God grant for his Mercy sake; which is my whole Answer to his
Ill Treatment of us, and worst Wish I have for him.

A Conclusion to those to whom the Discourse is Dedicated.
SInce then it is so evidently proved by Scripture, Reason and Undoubted
Presidents, that it is no new or unwonted thing, I entreat you to read a late
Piece of Dr. Caves, called, Primitive Christianity, in which the Poverty,
Simplicity, Meanness, Manner and Place of Worship, Maintenance, Ministry,
objected Novelty, etc. of the Ancient Christians are related.
for National Churches to be deceived, notwithstanding they have been endowed
with Power, Learning, Nobility, Wealth and Worldly Glory; And that it has
pleased Almighty God in the most signal Reformations that have been wrought
upon the World, to employ a sort of Plain, Simple and Illiterate People: Let
not our Meanness, Plainness and Simplicity be any Argument with you against us,
in the Mouths of that Decimating Tribe, whose Trade it is to Oppose that
Reformation, which in Conscience can neither own nor pay them; The old Enemies
of God's Appearance in the World, who therefore dread a Free and Universal
Preaching, because the Ingrossment of it to themselves, has proved so
profitable. Be Gamaliels at least, I beseech you, and fight not their Battles:
If we are not of God, we cannot stand; And if of God* they must fall. Leave us
therefore with our Spiritual Weapons to decide this Controversy, without
interposing your Worldly Power. It Is strange that we should be such Ignorants,
and Heretics too, whilst they bless themselves with the Name of Learned and
Orthodox, and yet dread the Consequence of being left by you, to a fair Field
with us. Are not their Universities, Bishops and Dectors enough to silence such
Illiterate Whifflers, as our Adversary is pleased to call us, without the
Argument of your Carnal Sword? Certainly they ill deserve Fifteen Hundred
Thousands Pound a Year, if at last You must do the Business for Them: What less
can we expect from the worst of Persons and Causes? But as this Employment is
below the Dignity of their Office, who are public Magistrates, and much too
narrow for that Universal Influence it should have for public Good; so
remember that great Saying of the late King, to the then Prince of Wales,

Always keep up solid Piety, and those Fundamental Truths, which mend both
Hearts and Lives of Men, with impartial Favor and Justice. Your Prerogative is
best shown and exercised in remitting, rather then exacting the Rigor of Laws,
there being nothing worse then Legal Tyranny. Again, A Charitable Connivance
and Christian Toleration often dissipates what rougher Opposition fortifies*
Which had been the Saying and Counsel of King James before him. It is a sure
Rule in Divinity, That God never loves to plant his Church by Violence and
Bloodshed. And in his Expositions on Rev. 20. he says, That Persecution is the
Note of a False Church.

Heresy must be cut off with the Sword of the Spirit, Jer. Proam. lib. 4.
says Jerome. The Church does not Persecute, Hilar. contr. Auxent.
but is Persecuted, says Hillary. If you will with Blood, with Evil and with
Torments defend your Worship, it shall not thereby be defended, Lact. lib. 5.
cap. 10.
but polluted, said Lactantius. I will conclude with Chrysostom; Relig. Uris.
page 192.
It is not (says he) the Manner of the Children of God to Persecute about
their Religion, but an evident Token of Antichrist.

So let your Moderation be known unto all Men, the Lord is at hand. I am a
Friend to all Men, who would have Vice Punished, Conscience Tolerated, and
Righteousness Established, whose End is Peace and Assurance forever.

The 16th of the 5th Month, 1673. William Penn.


