A Second LETTER From a Gentleman in the COUNTRY, To his Friends in LONDON,
Upon the Subject of the Penal Laws and Tests.

Licensed, April the 11th 1687.

LONDON, Printed, for J.H. and T.S. and to be had of most Booksellers in London
and Westminster. 1687.

Gentlemen,
I Am not much lifted up, or cast down at the news you send me, for that my
Letter should be liked by some, and as ill taken by others, is but the fate of
all things offered to public censure; tho without vanity, the reasons are
unequal. But before I enter upon that, you will give me leave to observe the humor
of the Party in the Proverbs you sent me, that methinks looks so much like a
Green Ribband, that it hardly becomes the fall of the leaf, they conceit they
are under. You say, the usual answer to the Letter is this; There is a Snake in
the Grass; All is well that ends well, That a more moderate sort, allow it both
wit and truth, but ill timed, considering the Melancholy circumstances the
Church of England is under. To all this, you have here my answer, which I
beseech you to communicate with that Cander; that you know has always been the
companion of my Life. And for the Proverbs, I must say first, that a wise
Sentence, may be sillily applied; and next, I am apt to think that these are
so; for pray what is the Snake, and where does it lie. A Snake without a Sting
hurts no body, let it lie where it will; and a Snake with a Sting is dangerous
every where. Now to find out who is the Snake, let us consider what is the Sting,
The Penal Laws certainly; and you are not ignorant who is Tail they belong to.
But to be sure they Sting all that will not come to Church, and that every where.
For a man cannot walk in his own Land, mow his own Grass, enjoy his own Shop,
Barn, Chamber, Closet, Chest or Cubbard; no not his Pot, Pan or Skillet, but
the Snake will get into it, and when it has swept his Fields and House clean
with its Tail, by the Teeth it draws him to its dark Holes and Dungeons for a
further Prey. The History of this Snake out-does all the Giants of the old
World, and it had been happy it had perish't with it: Wherefore Liberty of
Conscience is so far from being the Snake in the Grass, that there is in it
neither Snake, Teeth, Sting, or Grass to hide them. On the contrary, it spies
out the Snake, cuts the Grass, ketches it, and pulls out the Sting, that it may
do no more mischief: It Is upon this Principle that one Party cannot hurt
'tother. And for the other Proverb, it is certain, All Is well that ends well,
but for that reason all will end ill that begins so, without Repentance. And
such beginnings I call Penal Laws for Religion, let who will make them, or use
them. And I beseech God to touch the Hearts of the Church of England with a
sense of this; for his Justice we cannot Corrupt. All Parties as well as private
Persons will meet with their own from him; it is a Decree as old as the World,
stamp't in our Natures, and proved by the Records of all time, and God knows
but too plainly in ours.

But since these Gentlemen are upon their Proverbs, with their leave I will
oppose a couple to them, and I hope a little better suited. Let every Tub stand
upon its own Bottom; and A Bird in the Hand is worth two in the Bush. These are
the Texts, I Will now give you the Comment. By the first, I mean, that the
Government should stand upon its own Legs, and the Church upon hers. The Legs
of the civil Government, is the civil Interest of the Government, which is that
of all the People under it, so that the Government is obleiged to secure all,
because all are for their own Interest bound to secure it: For the Church in
Question, of which all the People are not Members, nor yet the greatest part,
is a thing of another Nature, and relates to another World, and Christ has
provided her another Bottom, if she really makes his Law the rule of her
Actions and Authority. Let every one walk as he is persuaded, was divine
Doctrine in St Paul's time, and our Glo^ying was to be in our selves, and not
in another; and we were to stand and fall to our own Masters, and not Judge,
much less Persecute others, no, not Tares, for they were to grow with the
Wheat, (tho never like to change their Nature) till the Harvest, which our
Savior Interprets, the end of the World: And the Apostle tells us, Every One
must appear before God, and give an Account for the Deeds done in the Body; so
that you see the Proverb is true, that every Tub ought to stand upon its own
bottom. For the other, it is as obvious and reasonable in this case; for why
should it be taken ill that the Poor Fanatics accept the Liberty the Church of
England refused, and has driven them to such extreamities for. She would have
them to stay till she can give what she would not when she had power to do it.
Nay, she has it still, and yet will not for a reason that exposes them more
then before. But which way can she ensure it to them? First, Can they with
Honor or Conscience refuse what they have sought, or reject that by
Declaration the Church of England will not allow by Law? Secondly, How are they
assurd, while the Church of England is by Law secured, that by those very Laws
they shall not be ruined in the mean time? Is it not natural enough to expect
at the hand of the King, that they will not, shall not have Liberty of
Conscience? and that at any rate, they shall conform thoroughly, that will not at
an other time conform at all, When they do it now only to bob the Government?
But what is Faction if this be not? If conform, why just now? If now, why not
before? If not before, why then now? if things are the same, why are not they?
and if they are, that is, if their opinion of the Discipline and Ceremonies of
the Church be what it was, they cannot be honest men and conform: They may set
up for men of Art, and Managers, that have given by their own Consciences such
a proof of their skill; but I should lament extremely any Dissenter in England
should have so little wit or truth. And to be free, it would not look Candid in
the Church of England, that gives her fear of Poperies having the Power to
destroy others, for the reason of her keeping the Penal Laws on foot, if she
takes it ill, that the Dissenters are for the same reason for their repeal; for
she cannot but think that Popery actually has that Power over them, by the
Oppertunity of the Laws she will manintain to secure herself. So that light and
darkness are not more opposite then the safety of the Dissenters, and the
reason the Church of England gives for the keeping up the Penal Laws for her
own. To remove this Difficulty, and to make the methods of their security meet,
has, God knows, been my only drift, that so false Notions of Preservation might
not destroy us, when the means of our common safety are so obvious to us.

The general and deep Prejudices men entertain against Popery will hardly
suffer them to diliberate for their own benefit. If a Ship be near a Rock, I
think the danger should not frighten away the Masters wits, when he has most
need of them for a common Safety. I beg the Gentlemen of the Church of England
but to think, and I am Sure they will find me less Criminal in my other Letter
to you: For is any thing truer then that the Papists court a legal Ease? need
they this, if they design Force? or were it worth their Laboring? Again,
cannot a Law be made to fix Liberty of Conscience, that they shall as uneasily
violate, as these the Church calls her Bulwark? If the Laws in Question were
defensive only, God forbid that I should attempt to lessen her security, I
declare in the presence of God I would not; but when they are offensive and
destroying to other People, and those of the most peaceable Principles, who
have neither Interest nor Arts to defend them, she must Pardon me if I oppose
my self to their Teeth and Sting. It is also as true that her Dissenters are of
no use to her unless these Shackles are taken off; That if she does not fear
Liberty more then Popery, she must yield the point desired for their sake,
because her own. That for every Enemy she releases by it, she has an hundred
Friends to secure her against Him. That she must remember she is but a part of
the whole, and should not flatter her self with Numbers not of her Communion;
especially while they sleep with naked Swords hanging by Hairs over their
Heads, and so are made incapable to serve her.

Again, pray, can she think that force becomes a Gospel Church? that it is not
using against Popery what she accuses it for, and by it condemns her self? Is
it not taking Sanctuary in human Strength instead of divine Truth, that is
all-sufficient to its own support? That the Laws that remain, secure the State,
and if any be wanting, they may be added without keeping up the Ball of
Vengeance by partial Provisions, directed by one Party, of the same People,
against an other, under one and the same Government; for this is puzling, not
serving Government: Nor can any be great, easy or successful where the Heads
and Hands, that should make it so, are zealously disabled from that Duty and
Service. It seems a day wherein God is pleased to make use of the Necessities
of Men to effect what Virtue and Wisdom should have taught us long ago to have
done; Agree I mean upon our civil common Interest.

And now we have a King, who has so gracious a regard to Liberty, (and that
chooses to recommend himself by so honest, so tender and so equal a Principle,
and whose own Party, tho they may want it most hereafter, do least need it now,
and are the most feeble in number to make the use of it dangerous to the rest)
let us by no means loose the oppertunity of our own Happiness. Nor can the
Church of England refuse me my Petition to her, but upon this single account,
the Insincerity of the King; that must be her Snake in the Grass, that Popery's
at the Bottom; Mark the end of this Liberty; All Is well that ends well: But
this plainly implies my Arguments to be good, and that if the King holds as he
begins, we shall all be happy. Lets see then why he should not do so, tho it
looks very ill in the high Sons of the Church to blow upon that Honor they
have so often and so highly recommended for our Security. First, The King has
given her his Word to maintain her at his coming to the Crown, and has now
repeated it to her for the whole time of his Reign, in the most solemn manner
that was possible out of Parliament, Secondly, If he be willing, to turn this
Promise into a Law at the repeal of those he would abolish when they meet, and
that to be sure he is ready to do, there can be no room to doubt his Sincerity.
Thirdly, He is compelled to be sincere, for Popery without him is but a Name in
England, and Lives by him, and must otherwise expect to expire with him. So
that if it were possible for the People of his Communion to prevail with him to
force his Religion upon the Kingdom, tho I think it as impracticable, as to set
Westminster-Abby upon Bow-Steeple; he must leave them to make satisfaction for
the attempt in the next Reign; Or conclude, he never intends his Lawful Heirs
to succeed him: And they must take him for the worst of men to be guilty of an
Injustice and Irreligion he has so often and solemnly, and earnestly spoken
against. But if that were no security to us, yet the ruin of those that in all
probability must follow that attempt, for whose sakes we suppose him to
endanger us, would obliege him to the soft and obleiging methods he now takes.
So that we have his Honor, Conscience, Nature, and the Security of his own
Party for Ours. Come, it is Disingenious to call Liberty of Conscience the Snake
in the Grass, that like the Balm of Gillead cures the Gaps and Sores that Time
and private Interests have made. And since he offers to confirm it by Law, HE
ONLY CHANGES THE SECVRITY, HE DOES NOT DESTROY IT; and which is more she is a
gainer by it: For whereas she is now the National Religion by Compulsion she
will then keep her Station by Consent; both extremes yiedling a preferrence to
her, and so she is neither hated nor envied by them.

I would have her further reflect, that the keeping the Penal Laws on foot will
not answer the end she does it for, since she believes they will be suspended
during the time she fears most, and of the next Reign, she has no apprehension,
and in the mean time she and the Protestant Dissenters have the Hands. So that
the only reason for maintaining them, is the Awe they ought to give the Papists
in this Kings time, and yet if what she suggests be true, that the Papists aim
at all, pray, how far will those Laws awe them, that for that reason should
rather aim at all. I say, what good will that do her, that must be the greatest
Argument of the Force she fears they will use against her? and if they have no
such design, there is no reason to keep them in awe, but much to soften and
engage them, that we may all meet upon our common civil Bottom, and as one
People with one Heart Fear God, after our own Persuasion; Honor the King,
according to our Allegiance; and Love and Serve one another as becomes the
Members of the great civil Family of this Kingdom.

But some, you tell me, think it had been better The Laws where Repealed in a
Pro^estant King's Reign, then in this; But can any show it is not fit in this;
for that is the Question. Let us suppose ours were a Protestant, and they were
repealed accordingly. How could we assure our selves our next Heir would not
turn; Ay, the Prince in Possession? And unless the Principles of Exclusion
prevailed, it is clear the Delemma would be the same, because the security upon
that notion is uncertain. I confess it had been better for us, it had been done
before his coming to the Crown, but since he forgives us that deficiency, and
offers to supply it, in ways the most assuring, why it should not be good to do
it now I cannot imagine: It is to say, it is not fit to be done, when it is
most fit to make us best with him. We will have him trust us, but we will not
trust him, where his interest Secures us.

Well, but you add, That it is generally agreed, the Penal Laws should he
repealed, but not the Tests.

I must tell you, I do not agree with you in that Fact; for I hear there are
diverse Schisms in the Church about it: Some for their repeal, and keeping of
the Tests: Some for repealing neither: Some for their repeal to Papists only:
Some for Dissenters only; And a few for a general Repeal of both; so that the
Church is yet unresolved what to do: But I will attend the great Question.

For the Penal Laws, no matter if they go; but if the Tests be repealed too,
the Government is lost to the Romanists; for they may pack a Parliament of
their own Religion, that in all Probability will make it national; and so
Liberty of Conscience will not serve them, nor save us. You see I am fair in
the Objection, I Will give you my Answer as freely.

I cannot imagine the Councils that engage them to take a fair way, can lead
them to be foul in it; for that is giving a pail of Milk, and kicking it down
with their foot. If they had number to choose, or could be returned without it,
they must naturally search the most durable means of their safety: Now, that
connot be making their Religion national, both because they are not the two
hundred and fiftieth man, and that the attempt would eternally ruin them with
the Kingdom, whose kindness, in a future Reign, their discreeter Conduct in
this must secure. Nor could any thing be so odious, faithless and immoral, then
for them to attempt it; for if ever they should teach the Nation that
Arithmatick, that thirteen is more then three and twenty, they will make True
Prophets of those they have taken pains to prove False Witnesses. But besides
their Discretion and Interest, the Kings Faith is given us, for his whole
Reign, in his Great and Gracious Declaration, that he will not exceed the
bounds of Liberty of Conscience. By This, every Party is secured with his in
their Religion and Property; and This ties him against any concurrance with the
People representatively, contrary to this made to them universally: We may
assure our selves, he is not like to break it in either of those respects,
since we don't think that will so easily become the Religion of the Kingdom, or
that whilst the People are of another, they will choose a Representative of the
Roman Communion.

Lastly, the Law that shall repeal these Laws, may be so drawn, as to make it
impracticable to return a Parliament that is not chosen; as well as I dare say,
it is below the Glory of our King, to use ways so unlike the rest of his Open
and Generous Principles.

My former Argument was ad homenem, for, what ever the Church of England men
think, it is certain, the Answer they gave for a Popish Successor, we must trust
God and do our Duty, is still Cogent. For if Providence was strong enough to
secure us then against our fears of such a Successor, can an Act of Parliament,
be a better Defense to us now. I fear such are fallen from their Faith, and
change their Devotion, for carnal securities. Let us be all of a piece* not hot
and then cold; one while for relying on Providence, and another time jealous to
death, and beating our Brains for safety, as if there were no such thing as God
in the World. The Question is not about the King's imposing his Religion upon
us; for so I should have almost adored the Gentlemen that left their
employments; but whether we will not impose our Religion upon the Friends of
his Communion; and this shows no bigottry in the King, that he gives all
Parties Liberty to muster and exercise themselves according to their own
Principles, that he knows to be so very contrary to his: An odd way of
advancing Popery, especially by foul play. I wish any thing would satifie us.
And yet after so gracious a Declaration, both to Church and Dissenters, and
that has so decent a regard to the concurrance of a Parliament too, Who can be
displeased? Have we been Hunting, Hawking Gaming, and Marrying with Roman
Catholics these six and twenty Years! and did they engage on the same side for
the King's Father, help to support the King abroad, and labor the Restoration
of the Royal Family to their Inheritance; and are we now afraid of them for the
Religion they had then, or that they should have a few Offices with us, in the
Reign of a Prince of their own way, that were the Companions of our sufferings
and Pleasures? methinks it looks ill natured at all times, and indiscreet at
this; since it is certain we may roundly and securely tell them, You are upon
your good behavior: Be moderate at your perril: You are but a morfel of men;
and therefore as little feared as loved: It Is in your own power to be well with
the Kingdom: Know when you have enough; and let us see you aim at no more then
securing your civil Property and Interest in that of the Nation, from any
violence, on the score of Religion, and that mere matters of Faith and Worship
of God shall disable no man of his Birthright. This Bottom is broad enough for
all the interests of this Kingdom to meet upon; and till God from Heaven send
us with miracles an higher Principle of Union; let us not neglect this lower,
but sure means of our Peace and Happiness.

To Conclude, let us have a care of the Snake every where; in the Grass, in the
Square, in the Coffee-House, in the Church, ay, and in the Meeting House too;
for it is ill company at all times, and in all places. Let us remember that not
only the four, but the seven last Raigns have proved Penal Laws an Enemy to the
Peace and Wealth of the Kingdom, and the strictest Tests no Security to the
Government of it against the weight of its own miscarriages. Let us forgive one
another, and look forward. I am for having the Church of England keep the
Chair, but let the rest subsist. To fix Government upon any Mode of Religion,
convulses it as often as that changes, at least hazards it. That which takes in
all Interests is the best foundation for any Government, because it is least
exposed to State Contingencies. Let us then bend our thoughts toward such an
expedient as may secure Property to all, the first reason of civil Government,
and that which every Party for its own Interest must close with. Three things
strictly speaking make an English man Ownership, Consent in Parliament, and
Right of Juries. We all know what Laws have been made, and by whom to destroy
these several Capacities, that frame an English man; amongst which, pray let
not that against Conventicles go for the least! Let us see then what it is that
divests us of these Native Privileges, and like true English men, and
Christians, let us remove it; that in the Reign, of a King so ready to
disapoint the Enemies of his Glory, by repairing the Breaches of his People,
and of the old true civil Government of his Kingdom, we may not be wanting to
our selves and our Posterity, in another Great Charter, to bury all our
Prejudices, and Establish a lasting Civil union among the Inhabitants of this
Ancient and Famous Kingdom.

Yours more then my own.

FINIS.

