TRUTH Further Cleared from MISTAKES.

BEING Two Chapters out of the Book ENTITLED, Primitive Christianity Revived:
Plainly acknowledging the Benefit accruing by the Death and Sufferings of our
Lord Jesus Christ for the Salvation of Mankind.

TOGETHER WITH A Comparison of the Principles of the People called Quakers, and
the Perversions of their Opposers, by way of Postscript.

By W. P.

Dublin, Printed in the Year School.

Reader,
OCcasion having been given us we never sought, we continue to improve it to
the further Explanation and Defense of our so much abused Profession, that if
possible People may see, at least the more Sober and Candid, That we are not at
that distance from Truth, nor so Heterodox in our Principles, as we have been,
by too many, either hastily or interestedly Represented; but that indeed we
hold the Great Truths of Christianity according to the holy Scriptures, and
that the Realities of Religion are the Mark we press after, and to disabuse and
awaken People from their false Hopes and carnal Securities, under which they
are too apt to indulge themselves, to their Irreparable Loss, that by our
setting Christian Doctrine in a true Light, and receiving and pressing the
Necessity of a better Practice: They may see the Obligation they are under to
redeem their precious time they have lost, by a more careful Employment of that
which remains to a better purpose. This has occasioned Us to Re-print the 8th.
and 9th. Chapters of Primitive Christianity, being willing to Speak in the
Language of what has been already made Public, that it may be seen, We neither
Change (tho for the better is always commendable) nor Write otherwise now then
before to serve a present Turn; In which and a Postscript, comparing our
Principles, with our Opposers usual Perversions, the Ingenious Reader may
easily discern how Ill We have been Treated, and what Hardships We have
labored under, through the Prejudice of some, and the Unreasonable Credulity
of others; and do Us the Justice to believe that We are a People in Earnest for
Heaven, and in that way our Blessed Lord has trod for Us to Glory, For no
Cross no Crown.

CHAP. VIII.
Sect. 1. Doctrine of Satisfaction and Justification Owned and Worded according
to Scripture. Sect. 2. What Constructions we cannot believe of them, and which
is an abuse of them. Sect. 3. Christ Owned a Sacrifice and a Mediator. Sect. 4.
Justification Twofold, from the Guilt of Sin, and from the Power and Pollution
of it. Sect. 5. Exhortation to the Reader upon the whole.

Obj. 1. THough there be mamany good things said, how Christ appears and works
in a Soul, to Awaken, Convince and Convert it; yet you seem not particular
enough about the Death and Sufferings of Christ: And it is generally Rumored
and Charged upon you by your Adversaries, that you have little reverence to the
Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction to God for our Sins, and that you do not
Believe, That the Active and Passive Obedience of Christ, when He was in the
World, is the alone ground of a Sinners Justification before God.

Answ.. 1. The Doctrine of Satisfaction and Justification, truly understood,
are placed in so strict an Union, that the one is a necessary Consequence of
the other, and what we say of them, is what agrees with the suffrage of
Scripture, and for the most part in the terms of it; always believing, that in
Points where there arises any difficulty, be it from the Obscurity of
Expression, Mis-translation, or the Dust raised by the Heats of Partial
Writers, or Nice Critics, it is ever best to keep close to the Text, and
maintain Charity in the rest. I shall first speak Negatively, what we do not
own, which perhaps has given occasion to those who have been more Hasty then
Wise, to judge us defective in our Belief of the Efficacy of the Death and
Sufferings of Christ to Justification: As,

. 2. First, We cannot Believe that Christ is the Cause, but the Effect of God's
Love, according to the Testimony of the Beloved Disciple John, Chap. 3. God
has so loved the World, that he has given his only Begotten Son into the
World, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have Everlasting
Life.

Secondly, We cannot say, God could not have taken another way to have saved
Sinners, than by the Death and Sufferings of his Son, to satisfy his Justice,
or that Christ's Death and sufferings were a strict and rigid Satisfaction for
that Eternal Death and Misery due to a Man for Sin and Transgression: For such
a Notion were to make God's Mercy little concerned in Man's Salvation; and
indeed we are at too great a distance from his Infinite Wisdom and Power, to
judge of the Liberty and Necessity of his Actings.

Thirdly, We cannot say Jesus Christ was the greatest Sinner in the World,
(because he bore our Sins on his Cross, or because he was made Sin for us, who
knew no Sin) an Expression of great levity and unsoundness, yet often said by
great Preachers and Professors of Religion.

Fourthly, We cannot Believe that Christ's Death and Sufferings so satisfies
God, or justifies Men, as that they are thereby Accepted of God: They are
indeed thereby put into a state capable of being accepted of God, and through
the Obedience of Faith and Sanctification of the Spirit, are in a state of
Acceptance: For we can never think a Man justified before God, while
Self-condemned; or that any Man can be in Christ, who is not a New Creature, or
that God looks upon Men otherwise then they are. We think it a state of
Presumption, and not of Salvation, to call Jesus, Lord! and not by the Work of
the Holy Ghost. Master! And he not yet Master of our Affections: Savior! And
they not saved by him from their Sins: Redeemer! And yet they not redeemed by
him from their Passion, Pride, Covetousness, Wantonness, Vanity, Honors, vain
Friendships, and Glory of this World: Which were to deceive themselves: for God
will not be mocked, such as Men sow, such must they reap. And though Christ did
Die for us, yet we must, by the Assistance of his Grace, work out our Salvation
with fear and trembling: As he Died for Sin, so we must Die to Sin, or we
cannot be said to be saved by the Death and Sufferings of Christ, or thoroughly
justified and accepted with God. Thus far Negatively. Now, Possitively, what we
own as to Justification.

. 3. We do Believe, that Jesus Christ was our Holy Sacrifice, and Atonement,
and Prepiriation; that he bore our Iniquities, and that by his Stripes we were
healed of the Wounds Adam gave us in his Fall; and that God is just in
forgiving true Penitents upon the Credit of that Holy Offering, Christ made of
himself to God for us; and that what he did and suffered, satisfied and pleased
God, and was for the sake of fallen Man that had displeased God: And that
through the Offering up of himself once for all, through the Eternal Spirit, he
has for Ever perfected those (in all times) that are sanctified, who walk not
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. Romans 8. 1. Mark that.

. 4. In short, Justification consists of two parts, or has a twofold
Consideration, viz. Justification from the Guilt of Sin, and Justification from
the Power and Pollution of Sin, and in this Sense Justification gives Man a
full and clear Acceptance before God. For want of this latter part, it is that
so many Souls Religiously inclined, are often under Doubts, Scruples and
Despondencies, notwithstanding all that their Teachers tell them of the Extent
and Efficacy of the first part of Justification. And it is too general an
Unhappiness among the Professors of Christianity, that they are apt to cloak
their own Active and Passive Disobedience with the Active and Passive Obedience
of Christ. The first part of Justification we do reverently and humbly
acknowledge is only for the sake of the Death and Sufferings of Christ; nothing
we can do, though by the Operation of the Holy Spirit, being able to Cancel Old
Debts, or wipe out Old Scores: It is the Power and Efficacy of that
Propitiatory Offering, upon Faith and Repentance, that justifies us from the
Sins that are past; and it is the Power of Christ's Spirit in our Hearts that
purifies and makes us acceptable before God. For till the Heart of Man is
purged from Sin, God will never accept of it. He Reproves, Rebukes and Condemns
those that entertain Sin there, and therefore such cannot be said to be in a
Justified State; Condemnation and Justification being Contraries: So that they
that hold themselves in a Justified State by the Active and Passive Obedience
of Christ, while they are not Actively and Passively Obedient to the Spirit of
Christ Jusus, are under a strong and dangerous Delusion; and for crying out
against this Sin-pleasing Imagination, not to say Doctrine, we are Staged and
Reproached as Denicrs and Despisers of the Death and Sufferings of our Lord
Jesus Christ. But be it known to such, they add to Christ's Sufferings, and
Crucify to themselves afresh the Son of God, and trample the Blood of the
Covenant under their Feet, that walk unholily under a Profession of
Justification; for God will not acquit the Guilty, nor Justify the Disobedient
and Unfaithful. Such deceive themselves, and at the Great and Final Judgment
their Sentence will not be, Come ye Blessed, because it cannot be said to them,
Well done Good and Faithful, for they cannot be so esteemed that live and die
in a Reproveable and Condemnable State; but, Go ye Cursed, etc.

. 5. Wherefore, O my Reader! Rest not thy self wholly satisfied with what
Christ has done for thee in his Blessed Person without Thee, but press to know
his Power and Kingdom within thee, that the strong Man, that has too long kept
thy House, may be bound, and his Goods spoiled; his Works destroyed, and Sin
ended; according to the 1 John 3. 7. For which end, says that Beloved Disciple,
Christ was manifested, that all things may become New; New Heavens, and New
Earth, in which Righteousness dwells. Thus thou will come to glorify God in
thy Body, and in thy Spirit, which are his; and live to him, and not to thy
self. Thy Love, Joy, Worship, and Obedience; thy Life, Conversation, and
Practice; thy Study, Meditation, and Devotion, will be Spiritual: For the
Father and the Son will make their abode with thee, and Christ will manifest
himself to thee; for the Secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him. And
an holy Unction or Anointing have all those, which leads them into all truth,
and they need not the Teachings of Men: They are better Taught, being
Instructed by the Divine Oracle; no bare Hearsay, or Traditional Christians,
but fresh and living Witnesses: Those that have seen with their own Eyes, and
heard with their own Ears, and have handled with their own Hands the Word of
Life, in the diverse Operations of it, to their Souls Salvation. In this they
Meet, in this they Preach, and in this they Pray and Praise: Behold the New
Covenant fulfilled, the Church and Worship of Christ, the Great Anointed of
God, and the Great Anointing of God, in his Holy, High Priesthood and Offices
in his Church!

CHAP. IX.
Sect. 1. A Confession to Christ and his Work, both in Doing and Suffering.
Sect. 2. That ought not to make void our Belief and Testimony of his Inward and
Spiritual Appearance in the Soul. Sect. 3. What our Testimony is in the latter
respect: That it is impossible to be saved by Christ Without us, while we reject
his Work and Power Within us. Sect. 4. The Dispensation of Grace, in its Nature
and Extent. Sect. 5. A further Acknowledgment to the Death and Sufferings of
Christ. Sect. 6. The Conclusion, showing our Adversaries Unreasonableness.

. 1. AND lest any should say we are Equivocal in our Expressions, and
Allegorize away Christ's Appearance in the Flesh; meaning only thereby, our own
Flesh, and that as often as we mention him, we mean only a Mystery, or a
Mystical Sense of him, be it as to his Coming, Birth, Miracles, Sufferings,
Death, Resurection, Ascension, Mediation and Judgment; I would yet add, to
preserve the well-disposed from being staggered by such Suggestions, and to
inform and reclaim such as are under the Power and Prejudice of them, That, we
do, we Bless God, Religiously Believe and Confess, to the Glory of God the
Father, and the Honor of his Dear and Beloved Son, that, Jesus Christ took our
Nature upon him, and was like unto us in all things, Sin excepted; That he was
Born of the Virgin Mary, and Suffered under Pontius Pilate, the Roman
Governor, Crucified, Dead, and Buried in the Sepulcher of Joseph of Arimathea;
Rose again the Third Day, and Ascended into Heaven, and sits on the Right Hand
of God, in the Power and Majesty of his Father, who will one Day Judge the
World by him, even that Blessed Man, CHRIST JESUS, according to their Works.

. 2. But because we so Believe, must we not Believe what Christ said, He that
is with you shall be in you, John 14. I in them, and they in me, etc. Chap. 17.
When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, etc. Gal. 1. The Mystery hid from
Ages, is Christ in the Gentiles the hope of Glory, Col. 1. Unless Christ be in
you, ye are Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. Or must we be industriously represented
Deniers of Christ's Coming in the Flesh, and the Holy Ends of it, in all the
Parts and Branches of his Doing and Suffering, because we Believe, and press
the Necessity of Believing, Receiving and Obeying his Inward and Spiritual
Appearance and Manifestation of himself, through his Light, Grace and Spirit in
the Hearts and Consciences of Men and Women, to Reprove, Convict, Convert and
Change them? This we esteem hard and unrighteous Measure; nor would our warm
and sharp Adversaries be so dealt with by others: But to do as they would be
done to, is too often no part of their Practice, whatever it be of their
Profession.

. 3. Yet we are very ready to declare to the whole World, that we cannot think
Men and Women can be saved by their Belief of the one without the Sense and
Experience of the other; and that is what we oppose, and not his Blessed
Manifestation in the Flesh. We say that he then overcame our Common Enemy,
soiled him in the open Field, and in our Nature triumphed over him that had
overcome and triumphed over it in our Forefather Adam, and his Posterity; and
that as truly as Christ overcame him in our Nature, in his own Person, so, by
his Divine Grace being received and obeyed by us, he overcomes him in us: That
is, he detects the Enemy by his Light in the Conscience, and enables the
Creature to resist him, and all his Fiery Darts, and finally, so to Fight the
Good Fight of Faith, as to overcome him, and lay hold on Eternal Life.

. 4. And this is the Dispensation of Grace, which we declare, has appeared to
all, more or less; teaching those that will receive it, to deny ungodliness and
wordly lust, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World;
looking for (which none else can justly do) the blessed Hope, and glorious
Appearing of the Great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, etc. Tit. 2. 11, 12,
13. And as from the Teachings, and Experience, and Motion of this Grace, we
minister to others, so the very drift of our Ministry is to turn Peoples Minds
to this Grace in themselves, that they may all, up and be doing, even the good
and acceptable Will of God, and work out their Salvation with fear and
trembling, and make their High and Heavenly Calling and Election sure; which
none else can do, whatever be their Profession, Church and Character: For such
as Men sow they must reap; and his Servants we are, whom we obey. Regeneration
we must know, or we cannot be Children of God, and Heirs of Eternal Glory: And
to be Born again, an other Spirit and Principle must prevail, leaven, season,
and govern us, than either the Spirit of the World, or our own depraved
Spirits; and this can be no other Spirit than that which dwelt in Christ, for
unless that dwell in us, we can be none of his, Romans 8. 9. And this Spirit
begins in Conviction, and ends in Conversion and Perseverance: And the one
follows the other; Conversion being the Consequence of Convictions obeyed, and
Perseverance a natural Fruit of Conversion, and being Born of God; for such Sin
not, because the Seed of God abides in them, John 3. 7, 8. but through
Faithfulness, continue to the end, and obtain the Promise, even Everlasting
Life.

. 5. But let my Reader take this along with him, that we do acknowledge that
Christ, through his Holy Doing and Suffering (for being a Son he learned
Obedience) has obtained Mercy of God his Father for Mankind; and that his
Obedience has an Influence to our Salvation, in all the Parts and Branches of
it; since thereby he became a Conqueror, and led Captivity Captive, and
obtained Gifts for Men with diverse Great and Precious Promises, that thereby we
might be partakers of the Divine Nature, having (first) escaped the Corruption
that is in the World, through Lust. I say we do Believe and Confess that the
Active and Passive Obedience of Christ Jesus affects our Salvation throughout,
as well from the Power and Pollution of Sir, as from the Guilt, He being a
Conqueror as well as a Sacrifice, and both, through Suffering: Yet, they that
reject his Divine Gift, so obtained, and which he has given to them, by which
to see their Sin, and the sinfulness of it, and to repent and turn away from
it, and do so no more; and to wait upon God for daily strength to resist the
Fiery Darts of the Enemy, and to be Comforted through the Obedience of Faith in
and to this Divine Grace of the Son of God, such do not please God, believe
truly in God; nor are they in a state of true Christianity and Salvation.
Woman, said Christ, to the Samaritan, at the Well, had thou known the Gift of
God, and who it is that speaks to thee, etc. People know not Christ, and God,
whom to know is Life Eternal, John 17. because they are Ignorant of the Gift of
God, viz. a measure of the Spirit of God that is given to every one to profit
with, 1 Cor. 12. 7. which reveals Christ and God to the Soul. Flesh and Blood
cannot do it; Oxford and Cambridge cannot do it; Tongues and Philosophy cannot
do it; for they that by Wisdom knew not God, had these things for their Wisdom:
They were strong, deep and accurate in them; but alas, they were clouded, puffed
up, and set farther off from the Inward and Saving Knowledge of God, because
they sought for it in them, and thought to find God there. But the Key of David
is an other thing, which shuts and no Man opens, and opens and no Man shuts;
and this Key have all they that receive the Gift of God into their Hearts; and
it opens to them, the Knowledge of God and themselves, and gives them a quite
other Sight, Taste and Judgment of things, than their Educational or
Traditional Knowledge afforded them. This is the beginning of the New Creation
of God, and thus it is we come to be New Creatures: And we are bound to declare
there is no other way, besides this, by which People can come into Christ, or
to be true Christians, or receive the Advantage that comes by the Death and
Sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore we say, and upon good Authority,
even that of our own Experience, as well as that of the Scriptures of Truth,
Christ will prove no Saving Sacrifice for them that refuse him for their
Example. They that reject the Gift, do deny the Giver, instead of themselves
daily, for the Givers sake. O that People were wise! that they would consider
their latter End, and the things that make for the Peace thereof! Why should
they perish in a vain hope of Life, while Death Reigns? Of living with God, who
live not to him, nor walk with him? Awake, thou that sleep in thy Sin, or at
best, in thy Self-righteousness; Awake, I say, and Christ shall give thee Life!
For he is the Lord from Heaven, the quickening Spirit, that quickens us, by his
Spirit, if we do not, resist it and quench it, by our Disobedience; but
receive, love and obey it, in all the Holy Leadings and Teachings of it, Romans
8. 14, 15. To which Holy Spirit I commend my Reader, that he may the better see
where he is, and also come to the true Belief and Advantage of the Doings and
Sufferings of our Dear and Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who saves
from the Power and Pollution, as well as Guilt of Sin, all those that hear his
knocks, and open the Door of their Hearts to him, that he may come in and work
a real and through Reformation in and for them. And so the Benefit, Virtue and
Essicacy of his Doings and Sufferings without us, will come to be livingly
applied and felt, and fellowship with Christ in his Death and Sufferings known,
according to the Doctrine of the Apostle; which, those that live in that which
made him suffer, know not, though they profess to be saved by his Death and
Sufferings. Much more might be said as to this matter, but I must be brief.

. 6. To conclude this Chapter, we wonder not that we should be mistaken,
mis-construed and misrepresented, in what we believe and do to Salvation,
since our Betters have been so treated in the Primitive Times; nor indeed is it
only about Doctrines of Religion, for our Practice in Worship and Discipline
have had the same Success: But this is what I earnestly desire, that however
bold People are pleased to make with us, they would not deceive themselves in
the great things of their own Salvation: That while they would seem to own all
to Christ, they are not found disowned of Christ in the last Day. Read the 7th
of Matthew; it is, he that hears Christ, the great Word of God, and does what
he enjoins, what he commands, and by his Blessed Example, recommends, that is a
Wise Builder, that has founded his House well, and built with good Materials,
and whose House will stand the last shake and Judgment. For which cause we are
often plain, close and earnest with People, to consider, that Christ came not
to save them in, but from their Sins; and that they that think to discharge and
release themselves of his Yoke and Burden, his Cross and Example, and secure
themselves, and Complement Christ with his having done all for them, while he
has wrought little or nothing in them, nor they parted with any thing for the
love of him, will finally awake in a dreadful surprise, at the sound of the
last Trumpet, and at this sad and irrevokeable Sentence, Depart from me, ye
Workers of Iniquity, I know you not: Which terrible End, may all timely avoid,
by hearkening to Wisdom's Voice, and turning at her Reproof, that she may lead
them in the Ways of Righteousness, and in the midst of the Paths of Judgment,
that their Souls may come to inherit Substance; even durable Riches and
Righteousness in the Kingdom of the Father, World without end.

THE QUAKERS PRINCIPLES, AND THEIR Adversaries Perversions.
Quakers Principles.
I. BEcause in Honor to the Spirit of GOD (which gave forth the Scriptures) we
assert the Holy Spirit to be the First and Great Rule of Christians, as that by
which GOD is Worshipped, Conscience is Convinced, Sin Detected, Duty Manifested,
Scriptures Unfolded and Explained; and consequently a Rule for Believeing and
Understanding the Scriptures themselves: Though at the same time, we Reverently
Believe the Scriptures by the Divine Authority of that holy SPIRIT which gave
them forth; and do declare and fully believe them to be what they say of
themselves, viz. A Declaration of those things most surely believed by the
Primitive Christians, and that they came by Inspiration, holy Men of GOD
speaking as they were moved by the holy Ghost, and are profitable for Doctrine,
Reproof, Correction, Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of GOD perfect,
and thoroughly furnished to all good Works. Joh. 4. 24. John 16. 8. Ephesians. 5.
13. Joh. 14. 26. 2. Tim. 3. 16.

II. From our great Caution and Tenderness in Expressing our Selves in matters
of Faith, as particularly about the Trinity, in other Terms than those the holy
Ghost has used in Scripture, to wit, There are Three that bear Record in
Heaven, the FATHER, the WORD, and the SPIRIT, and these Three are One; which we
sincerely and reverently believe to be so. -- 1 John 5. 7.

III. Because we believe and declare the Necessity of an Inward Principle, to
Enlighten our Minds and Cure our Hearts of the Maladies that Sin has brought
upon us, in order to Salvation here, and to escape from the Wrath to come. --
Ephesians. 2. 8. Tit. 2. 11, 12. Acts 15. 11. John 1. 9. 1 John 1. 7.

IV. Because we say, That GOD is Light, and CHRIST is Light, and that GOD is in
CHRIST, and that CHRIST by his Light Lights every Man that comes into the
World; and dwells with them that obey him in his Inward and Spiritual
Manifestation, according to 1 John 1. 5. John 8. 12. and 1. 9. and 1. 1. 10.
and 1. 1. 20.

V. From our Asserting, That CHRIST lights Wicked, as well as Good Men,
because he is said to be that True Light which lights every Man that comes
into the World, according to John 1. 9.

VI. Because we say, That this Light of Christ is sufficient to Save and
Preserve all from Sin, that Walk up to the Discovery and Leadings of it, 2 Cor.
4. 6, 7. 1 John 1. 7. John 8. 12. Ephesians. 5. 13.

VII. When we speak of Christ's being glorified with the Father before the
World began; oras he is now by his Spirit in the Hearts of his People; and that
as such he was never visible to Wicked Men, John 17. 5. 1 John 3. 6.

VIII. Because the Tendency of our Ministry and Testimony is to press People to
the Guidance of that Inward and Spiritual Appearance of Christ to Men, by his
Light and Grace in their hearts, as that without which there can be no sight,
sense, or sorrow for Sin to Amendment of Life, which is absolutely requisite,
in order to a Just and Saving Application of the Benefit which God intended to
Men by the Death and Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ: And because we often
press this, in opposition to that Sin pleasing-Doctrine, of being who by
Justified by the Merits of Christ, whilst Men live in the Wickedness and
Pollutions of this World. Ephesians. 5. 13. Tit. 2. 11. 2 These. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 2. 1
Cor. 2. 11. Romans 8. 9, 14. Tit. 3. 3. to verse. 9. 2 Cor. 4. 6.

IX. From our Denying a Ridgid Satisfaction, as that GOD could not possibly
save Men any other way, than by Condemning and Punishing his Beloved Son in
whom he was wellpleased, thereby making Christ the Cause, and not the Effect of
the Father's Love, for the Sins of the World: And because we cannot believe he
has so satisfied his Father for Sins past, present and to come, as to look
upon Man to be holy in Christ, whilst unholy in himself; or to be in Christ,
while he is not a New Creature, the Dangerous Security too many are under. -- 1 John 4. 9, 10. John 3, 16, 17. 1 John 3. 8. John 3. 3. Mat. 7. 21. 2 Cor. 5.
17. Gal. 6. 15.

X. Because we say Men cannot be Justified by what Christ has done or suffered
for them, whilst condemned by his Light in themselves; or forgiven in his
Blood, whilst disobedient to his Spirit; and that to complete Justification, we
are to feel an Inward Acceptance with GOD through the Sanctification of the
Spirit of his Son, as that without which Remission of Sin cannot be obtained.
-- 1 John 3. 19, 20, 21. Romans 8. 13, 14. Joh. 3. 19, 20. Romans 8. 2, 16. Gal. 6.
8. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13.

XI. Because we make Evangelical Obedience a Condition to Salvation, and works
by the Spirit, an Evidence of Faith, and a holy Life, both Necessary and
Rewardable. -- Tit. 3. from verse. 3. to 9. Tit. 2. 14. Jam. 2. 22.

XII. When we say that in some respects Christ was not our Sacrifice but
Example, and that his Obedience to his Father does not Excuse ours; but as he
abode in his Father's Love, by Keeping his Commandments, we must follow his
Blessed Example. -- John 15. 9, 10.

XIII. From our pleading for a Purification and Perfection from Sin, (agreeable
to the Testimony of the holy Scriptures) on this side the Grave, through the
pure Workings of the Holy and Perfect Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ. -- Mat.
5. 48. Mat. 19. 21. 2 Cor. 13. 11. Col. 1. 28. Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 22, 23.

XIV. Because we say with the Apostle, That Men ought to Pray, Preach, and Sing
with the Spirit, and that no Man can Rightly worship GOD, without the
Preparation by, and Assistance of his holy Spirit, and that we ought to wait to
feel It for that end, and that other Worship is Formal and Carnal. -- Romans 8.
26. 1 Cor. 14. 15. Prove. 16. 1. Luke 24. 49. Acts 1. 4. Acts 2. 1. Psalm. 39, 2,
3.

XV. From our denying the Resurrection of the same Natural and Corruptable
Body, and declining to be Inquisitive and Critical, about what Body we shall
rise with, according to the Caution of the Apostle therein, leaving it to the
Lord to give us a Body as pleases him. 1 Cor. chap. 15. 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2.

Their Adversaries Perversions.
OUr Adversaries are pleased to make us to deny and undervalue the Scriptures,
as Not to he a Rule in any Respect, though our Books plentifully show we confess
them to be the Next and Secondary Rule to the holy SPIRIT, and that we ever
choose to express our Belief of Christian Faith and Doctrine in the Terms
thereof. They also say, We prefer our own Books before them, while we Love,
Honor and use Them above all the Books in the World, and refuse to express
matters of Faith in other Terms than what are Expressly in Scripture, or so
agreeable as to leave no just ground for any doubt of our Respect and Regard to
them.

Such as desire to lessen the Credit of our Persuasion with sober People,
Represent us to deny the Trinity at large, and in every sense, though we only
reject School-Terms, and Philosophical Definitions, as Unscriptural, if not
Unsound, and as having a Tendency to Fruitless Controversy, instead of
Edification and Holiness among Christians.

We have been Uncharitably Represented by some, as if we denied All outward
Means, or Contradicted our selves in the Use of them; which they may as well
charge against the Apostle John, in Asserting the Sufficiency of the Anointing.

People have been told by our Adversaries, That we believe every Man has Whole
GOD and Whole CHRIST in him, and consequently so many Gods and so many Christ's:
Though we Assert no more, but the very Language of the holy Ghost, in the
Scriptures of Truth, and mean no more by it, than that Christ by his Light and
Spirit dwells in the hearts of his People.

It has been inferred that we hold that Christ is in and to Wicked Men, as he
is in and to his Saints; though he is a Condemner to the One, and a Comforter to
the other.

Our Opposers will have it, That all who have this Light, must consequently be
Good Men, whether they Obey it or no, or else the Light is Insufficient.

Some are not ashamed to tell the World in our Name, That Christ was never
visible as to his Bodily Appearance, and consequently that we deny his Coming
in the Flesh above sixteen hundred years ago, though his coming then is an
Article of our Christian Belief.

We are represented to Deny or Undervalue the Coming of Christ without us, and
the Force and Efficacy of his Death and Sufferings, as a Propitiation for the
Sins of the whole World; though we only Deny the Benefit thereof to such, who by
Living in Sin, instead of Dying to Sin, and Pleasing; instead of Denying
themselves, to please GOD, Deprive Themselves thereof.

Some unworthily conclude we disown Christ as a Satisfactory Sacrifice, in his
Death and Sufferings; and as if we did not believe he died for the Sins of the
Whole World, or that he Carried away Sin, and Sealed Redemption in his Blood,
to as many as Rightly Believe; and that we expect both to be Forgiven and
Accepted of GOD, not for his sake, but our own Works: Which Suggestions we
utterly detest and disown.

It is inferred against us, That we deny Justification at all in any sense, by
the Death and Sufferings of the Propitiatory Sacrifice of Christ, for the Sins
of the whole World: Than which nothing can be more Uncharitable, Untrue, or
Unjust; Since we Never did, nor can believe the Remission of Sins in any other
Name, than that of our Lord Jesus Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit
offered himself up once for all, an Holy and Acceptable Sacrifice to GOD.

Our Opposers would make People believe, we hope to be saved by our own Works,
and not by Grace, which is the Gift of GOD, and so make them the Meritorious
Cause of our Salvation, and consequently Papists.

They will have us to mean, and venture to say for us, that we believe our Lord
Jesus Christ, to be in all things but an Example, and in no rerespect our
Sacrifice.

We are made so presumptious as to assert the FULLNESS of all Perfection and
Happiness attainable in this Life.

Ignorance or Envy suggests against us, That if GOD will not compel us by his
Spirit, he must go without his Worship.

We are made to Deny the Resurrection of any Body, however Spiritual or
Glorified, and even of Eternal Rewards too; Which if True, we are of all People
the most miserable.

THus, Sober Reader, thou have some Taste of the Usage we have received in a
more abundant manner at their hands, who have Undertaken to give an Account of
our Belief to the World, that it has been very hard for People to see us,
through those Disguises that Interest, Ignorance, or Malice has put upon us.
But it is our desire, for thy own Good, as well as our Defense, that GOD would
please, by the Light of his dear Son, to give thee a Clear and Effectual Sight
of the Dispensation of his Heavenly Truth in the Inward Parts, which he has
blessed us withal, Viz. the Revelation and Setting up of the Kingdom of CHRIST
in the Hearts and Souls of the Sons of Men, where Sin and Self have so much and
so long Prevailed, that thou may come to be a Witness of us Goodness, and
thy Soul with ours, Admire, Adore, and for ever Praise his most Glorious and
Everlasting NAME, through his dear and Well-Beloved SON, and our REDEEMER, for
He is Worthy, Worthy, Worthy, World without End.

Dublin, the 26th of the 3d Month, School. WILLIAM PENN.

THE END.

