THE SECOND PART OF THE Continued Cry OF THE OPPRESSED FOR JUSTICE. BEING An
Additional Account of the Present and Late Cruelty, Oppression and Spoil
inflicted upon the Persons and Estates of many of the Peaceable People called
Quakers, in diverse Counties, Cities and Towns in this Nation of England and
Wales (chiefly upon the late Act made against Conventicles) for the Peaceable
Exercise of their Tender Consciences toward God in Matters of Worship and
Religion

This is thank-worthy, if a Man for Conscience toward God endure Grief,
suffering wrongfully,

1 Pet. 2. 19. We shall not find any Occasion against this Daniel, except we
find it against him concerning the Law of his God,

Dan. 6. 5. Galio said unto the Jews, If it were a Matter of Wrong or Wicked
Lewdness, O ye Jews, Reason would that I should bear with you,

Acts 18. 14. Printed in the Year, 1676.

WHereas great Suffering and Oppression is still continued and infli^^ed upon
many of the People called Quakers in diverse Counties and Places in this Nation,
upon the late Act against Conventicles, for meeting together to worship God
according to their Consciences and Persuasions; and many industrous Families
much Ruined, the Fatherless and Widows greatly oppressed, and Trading in many
places much impared and decayed, and the Cry of the Poor (who have been
employed by industrous Tradesmen) very great, many wanting Bread because of the
great Discouragement occasioned by the great Spoil and Havoc that is made upon
their Goods, and Fruits of the Labors of industrous Families, only for the
Exercise of their tender Consciences toward God, as the following Narrative
will more particularly evince; which Sufferings and Oppressions have been
occasioned chiefly under Pretense of the said Act, and continued in diverse
Counties by the means of some Turbulent Malicious Priests, who themselves have
turned Informers, and encouraged others to seek out and haunt the peaceable
Meetings of the People aforesaid, and to inform the Magistrates against them;
the Men thus encouraged and employed being some idle, dissolute and extravagant
Persons, not willing to take Pains in the Creation for a Livelihood, as other
Men do, have taken upon them and been encouraged in this Unchristian as well as
Inhumane Course of informing against peaceable Subjects for their Own Ends and
Advantages, wandering from place to place to find out such peaceable Meetings,
wherein if there be either Preaching, Praying or Waiting on God in Silence,
they trouble the Magistrates, instigating such as are willing to gratify them;
and those Priests who have either themselves turned or encouraged Informers, in
order to suppress the said Meetings, and make a Prey upon the said Peoples
Estates and Livelihoods, ruining and destroying these peaceable
Protestant-Subjects in their Rights and Properties, under pretense of Doing the
King Service; which Oppression and Grievance has long continued in this
Nation, and the Cry thereof becomes louder and louder from many Distressed
Families, since that diverse Accounts and Applications have been given and made,
and yet no Redress: Our Complaint still remains, not only of Unchristian but
Inhumane Usage herein; and that God who knows our Hearts and Conscientiousness
toward him, and our Innocence toward the King and Government, he knows our
Cause and hears our Cry, and according to his Promise we expect, that for the
Oppression of the Poor and the Sighing of the Needy he will arise, etc.
however, We, the People who are the present Sufferers, do look upon our selves
obliged in Conscience, to spread before you this brief Account following,
which is but as a short Appendix in comparison of the Account that might be
given of the great and many Sufferings that have been and still are continued
upon the said Act in diverse places of this Nation (besides the great number
that were Imprisoned till Death, and others Banished from their Distressed
Families into foreign Plantations upon the Act for Banishment) as also upon
the Bishops Writs, De Excommunicato Capiendo, etc. many have been, for some
years, and still are kept in Prisons and destructive Goals in this Nation in
diverse Counties, where several are Sick, and some have lately laid down their
Lives for not paying Small Tithes, Easter-Reckonings and to the Repairation of
the Steeple Houses.

And upon the Statutes made against Recusants, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
some Hundreds of the aforesaid People are returned up into the Exchequer, and
Writs of Enquiry have been sent down to the Sheriffs, and Juries impannelled to
enquire into their Estates, who have made Returns thereof into the Exchequer,
from whence Writs are issued and sent down to the Sheriffs in many Counties, to
make seizure of Two Thirds of their Estates, and the Sheriffs Bailiffs being
Unreasonable have (in some places) taken a great deal more then what was
pretended to be the King's Right: It is too great a Work to give a particular
Account of all that are like to suffer on this Account, the Sheriffs in several
Counties having Writs of Seizure in their Hands, and threaten to put them in
Execution; Only two Instances in one County, for brevity sake you are desired
to take notice of, as follows.

The 23d day of the 11th month, 1676. the Sheriff of Cambridge-shire sent his
Bailiff John Burgani to demand of Richard Webb of West-wickham in the same
County 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. being Two Thirds of the yearly value of his Estate, as
it was returned by a Jury impanneled to make Enquiry into the Estates of Popish
Recusants; but Richard Webb being innocent, could not answer the Bailiff's
Demand, whereupon the Bailiff and his Assistants took from him four Horses, as
they were going to plow, worth 18 l. and one of the Bailiff's Men cried, We
must have 20 l. worth of Goods, for we must sell Good Penny-worths: so they
took Two Cows more, valued at 8 l. 10 s. in all to the value of 26 l. 10 s. for
13 l. 6 s. 8 d. demanded.

John Prime of Willbrom-parvo, had taken from him upon the 2d day of the 9th
month, for 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. demanded by John Curby Bailiff, for Two Thirds of
20 l. a year of his Estate, four Cows and one Horse, worth 18 l.

And the Bailiffs have Warrants in their hands to make seizure of many more in
this County.

We therefore entreat your Patience, who are in Power, to peruse the following
Account, and take it into your serious Considerations, to afford the Sufferers
some effectual and speedy Relief, by stopping these Oppressions, Unchristian
and Inhumane Proceedings for the future, that we and our Families, who are the
Sufferers herein specified, may not be utterly destroyed, but enjoy our
Liberties and Rights in the peaceable Exercise of our tender Consciences,
wherein we are accountable to God, and desire always to approve our selves in
all good Conscience and Innocence under the Government.

SUFFERERS in and about the Town of Jews, in the County of SUSSEX, only for
their Peaceable Meetings, and Exercise of their Consciences in the Worship of
God; Chiefly carried on Against them by William Snat, Priest, and Surrogat to
the Court called, Court Christian; and James Clark, Register to the same Court.
UP OR the 5th day of the 8th Month, 1675* William Sna^ priest, accompanied
with two other Priests, and one Robert Smith a Tailor, went to a peaceable
Meeting of the aforesaid People, the said William Snat and Robert Smith being
the Informers, they took the Names of several that assembled, and went to Henry
Shully called a Justice, and swore against several persons for being at the
said Meeting at the house of Thomas Mosely, which was utterly false, for it was
not T. Mosely's house, and also against a Preacher, his Name unknown, for which
Thomas Mosely was fined 20 l. and the Preacher 20 l. which Fine for the
Preacher the Justice laid upon Nicholas Beard of Rottenden 10 l. and for
himself 5 s. and 3 l. more upon Thomas Mosely, and upon Mary Akehurst Widow 7
l. 5 s. and upon Ambrose Galloway for his Wife being there 5 s. and upon
Elizabeth Shuter 5 s. and upon some other Persons five shillings apiece.

Upon the 10th day of the 8th month, 1675. James Clark seeing he could make
such Profit to himself by being an Informer, he took up the Trade, with his
Brother William Snat the Priest, who went to a Meeting of the aforesaid People,
and brought with them Ferdinando Bryant and John Delves Constables of Jews,
who took several Persons Names, and went to Richard Bridger Justice, where the
said James Clark, William Snat and Walter Jones gave Information of a Meeting
in the House of Mary Galloway (mark it was in the same House which Priest Snat
swore but five days before to be the House of Thomas Mosely, and now swear* it
to be the House of Mary Galloway, although there was no alteration concerning
the said House) for which Tho. Mosely was fined 9 l. 15 s. and Ambrose Galloway
fined 9 l. 10 s. and for himself and Wife 15 s. and Mary Akehurst 25 s. and
Samuel Baker 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. and Steven Eager 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. and several other
Persons for being at the said Meeting were fined 5 s. apiece, which said fines
J. Clark Informer levied himself, that he might the better feather his Nest,
for 10 l. 5 s. demanded of Amb. Galloway of Jews he took Goods to the value of
14 l. 15 s. and from Thomas Mosely for 9 l. 15 s. demanded he took Goods to the
value of 12 l. 6 s. 8 d. the 20 l. for the House imposed for the first Meeting
being not then levied; and from Mary Akehurst, a Widow, that has Five
Children, for two fines, being both 8 l. 10 s. took Goods to the value of 1^ l
18 s. 10 d. and from Elizabeth Shuter Widow he took two Looking-glass* for 5
s. demanded; from Samuel Baker, a Blacksmith at Newhaven, for 6 l. 18 s. 4 d.
fine, was taken half a Tun of Iron which cost 7 l. odd money.

Upon the 17th day of the 8th Month, 1675. some of the aforesaid People being
met together at the same House as aforesaid, in their usual manner in Jews,
came James Clark, William Snat and William Purser Informers, with the
aforesaid Constables, and a Lieutenant, and an Ensign; and two Sarjeants
belonging to the Militia, and also a great number of rude People of the baser
sort, who with great Violence dragged them out of the Meeting House, abusing
many, drawing them in the Streets, kicking, bruising and beating many, and from
some there was Blood drawn, and chiefly by the Hands of James Clark aforesaid,
whose Beast-like behavior caused many of the Spectators to cry Shame of him;
this being done, the aforesaid Informers went to Nisal Rivers Justice, and gave
Information against several that were there assembled; and the said Justice
imposed by his Warrant these Fines following; upon John Songhurst for preaching
20 l. upon the House 20 l. to be levied as follows; upon Ambrose Galloway for
the House 4 l. and for himself and other Persons 2 l. 5 s. all being 6 l. 5 s.
for the which James Clark took Goods from the said Ambrose to the value of 18
l. 7 s. it being chiefly Linen Cloth, never measuring any, the said Ambrose
not being at home when he thus risted his Shop, but afterward got leave from
the Man of the House where the Goods were lodged, to measure so much as he
showed him, the value of which is above expressed, never returning any thing
again. Thomas Mosely being fined 2 l. which James Clark demanded, with 3 l.
more for a former Fine, the whole being 5 l. he took Goods to the value of 12
l. 5 s. John Ellis being fined 4 l. the said Clark took Goods to the value of 7
l. 8 s. Thomas Bud, a poor Shepherd, being fined 25 s. the aforesaid Clark
forced into his House, he being not at home, and took away nine pieces of
Pewter, ten Cheeses, a Pottage-pot, a Skillat, a Drying Pan, a Bucket, with
some other things, his Bed very hardly escaping, he wanting the Tick to carry
away the Pillage in, but espying a Sack, took that, and the Bed escaped his
hands From Tho. Robason, a Peltmaker, being fined 20 s. the said Clark took
eight Hats. Mary Akehurst fined 10 s. Clark took Goods to the value of 18 s.
Maskall Picknal being fined 5 s. [mark] the said Clark without any Officer with
him (that he might the better cover his Cruelty) took four Roles of Linen
Cloth, without measuring any, and refused to let them see it measured. Steven
Manard and his Brother Nicholas Manard were fined 5 s. apiece, for the which
was Goods taken to the value of 24 s. Henry Geats for a fine of 5 s. had taken
from him a great Brass Kettle. Richard and John Scrase fined 50 s. apiece;
Edward Pain 20 s. Samuel Web 20 s. Thomas Banks 20 s. these last Fines being
not yet levied, and also several other Persons being fined, of which we can
give no Account, because Clark does refuse to let us have a Copy of the Warrant.

Upon the 24th day of the aforesaid 8th month, some of the aforesaid People
being peaceably met together, came Ja. Clark, Will. Snat and William Purser
Informers, accompanied with the Constables and about twelve Soldiers in Arms
with their Officer as aforesaid belonging to the Militia, without any Regard to
their Sabbath Day, they drew Friends out of the Meeting House, abusing many
with Blows and cruel Bunches, and set a Guard at the House door to keep them
out; then the aforesaid Clark demanded of Mary Galloway a fine of 5 s. for the
which he took seventeen new Deal Forms, that cost near 3 l. which Forms were
not the Goods of Mary Galloway, and loaded away some of the Soldiers with these
Forms, to carry them along the Town whither he did direct; and when many of the
People and Constables were gone, the said Clark commanded one of the Soldiers
to break open the Door of the House, that he might me his Will, there being
none but two Maids in the House: thus did they continue for the space of four
Weeks with Guards of Soldiers, to keep out the Meeting from their own House, in
the Street, in the Winter Season: Also the said Clark did upon one of the First
Days before mentioned, demand another Fine of 5 s. of Mary Galloway, for the
which he took a new Settle and five Deal Boards, worth 20 s. which were not the
Goods of Mary Galloway.

Upon Information given on Oath by Thomas Levet Priest, Michael Harmer Smith,
and George Shepherd, Tailor Informers, on the 5th day of the 7th Month, 1676
to Sackvil Craves, called Justice; that several Persons whom these Informers
named, were at a Meeting at the House of William Yokehurst in the Parish of
Westfurle near Jews in Sussex, upon the 23th day of the Month called July,
for which the said Justice fined Clement Picknell for preaching at the said
Meeting 40 l. and William Yokehurst for suffering the Meeting in his House 20
l. and he fined thirty one Persons, as being present hearers, some 10 s. and
some 5 s. apiece; and to be levied as follows, by reason of the poverty of
some, has expressed in the Warrant, upon Ambrose Galloway 10 l. 10 s. and upon
Mary Akehurst 10 l. upon John Ellis 10 l. upon Thomas Weeks 9 l. 10 s. and on
John Abrook 9 l. 10 s. and on John Longly 8 l. 10 s. and upon William Yokehurst
50 s. and upon Maskall Picknell 5 l. and on Samuel Baker 45 s. and upon Richard
Hudson 5 s. and for the poverty of Ten other Persons 5 s. apiece all to be
levied upon Richard Hudson, the whole fine being 2 l. 15 s. for which fine the
Constable and some other Officers took from Richard Hudson a Cow and Calfe
worth 4 l. 5 s. Richard Hudson knowing that the aforesaid Informers had Sworn
falsely, and several persons that were laid upon him were not there, brought his
appeal and prosecuted it at the Sessions, where, and before the Court, it did
appear that these Informers had Sworn falsely, four persons in the number of
Ten, for the which Richard Hudson had 20 s. returned him back again by the
Sheriff for the four persons they had sworn falsely against, One of the four
they swore to be present at the Meeting, was dead six Years before. The
aforesaid Appeal being tried before seven Justices of the Peace in open Court,
yet never a one did give any Reproof to these false Informers for these their
false Oaths.

For a Meeting at Jews the 12th day of the 7th month, 76. several of the
aforesaid People were fined by William Spence Justice, upon the Information of
Walter Jones and William Purser Informers, for two Preachers 40 l. and for
several Persons as Hearers, 5 s. apiece, to be levied as follows, Upon
Ambrose Galloway 10 l. 5 s. upon John Ellis 10 l. 5 s. upon Thomas Mosely 10 l.
5 s. and upon Henry Scrase 10 l. 5 s. and upon some other Persons 5 s. apiece.

So that the total of the Fines that have been imposed upon the aforesaid
People for their peaceable Meetings in the Worship of God, from the 5th day of
the 8th month, 1675. to the 12th day of the 7th month, 1676. does amout to
252 l. 15 s. besides the Unreasonable Havoc the aforesaid Clark has made upon
Goods as before related.

The 29th of the 9th Month, 1676. Edward Howel of Willington Constable,
accompanied with Richard Whiting, Samuel Munger, John Bet and Robert Garet of
Westfurll, did take a Marc worth 8 l., out of the Stable of Maskal Picknel of
Willington for a Fine of 5 l. 15 s. imposed on the said Maskal for being at a
Meeting at Westfurl, the 23d of the 5th Month 1676. by Sackvill Graves called
Justice; 20 s. of the said Fine being imposed on him for two others, to wit,
Thomas Banks and Sibble Pain of Bishopston, although the said Sibble Pain was
not at the Meeting.

Upon the 26th Day of the 10th Month 1676. George Ty and Thomas Turle
Constables of the Town of Jews, and James Clark Overseer for the poor, and
Edward Strudwick Steeple-house Warden, came with a Warrant given forth by
William Spence Justice, upon an Information of George Jones and William Purser
Informers, that Ambrose Galloway was at a Meeting or Conventicle in Jews,
where were two Preachers, their Names unknown therefore the said Justice did
impose upon Ambrose Galloway for the Preacher, 10 l. and for himself, 5 s. Upon
the Day aforesaid, the Officers aforesaid came into the Shop that had been the
Shop of Ambrose Galloway, but then in the Tenure and Occupation of Ambrose
Galloway the Son of Ambrose Galloway, who was not at the Meeting, as charged;
for the which Fine the Officers broke open the Counter and a Press in the Shop
of the said Ambrose, and took away Men's Coats and Breeches, and Childrens
Coats, and other Goods to the Value of 20 l. 5 s. 11 d. the said Ambrose being
by Trade a Salesman.

The Witnesses Names that saw Thomas Mosely's first Parcel of Goods distrained,
which was done the 28th of the 8th Month, 75. are,

George Shelton and Thomas Wallter.

The Names of those which saw the second Parcel distrained from Thomas Mosely,
which was done the 1 st of the 2d month, 76. are,

Mary Ford, Benjamin Mosely and Mary Galloway.

About the 9th Month, 75. Ambrose Galloway of Jews was cited to the Bishops
Court, held in Jews, to appear three days after citation; Amb. Galloway did
appear accordingly at the Time and Place, and there was no Court held that day;
some time after this Court decreed Excommunication against the said Ambrose,
never sending him any other, whereby he might certainly know when there was a
Court kept, that he might make his just Defense, but forthwith denounces him
Excommunicated, and about the 26th day of the 9th month, 76. the aforesaid
Bishop sends forth a Capiendo to carry the said Ambrose Galloway to Prison
for a Contempt.

SUFFERINGS in and about the City of HEREFORD.
ON the 20th of the 6th month, 1676. the People of God being met together at
their Meeting house, being in the Subburbs of the City of Hereford to worship
the God of Heaven according to their usual manner, in Spirit and in Truth, one
John Rea (as they heard) went and informed Henry Caldicott, then Mayor of the
City, of the Meeting, who with several other Officers came unto the Meeting,
and after some words warned them, not to meet any more, and said, if they did,
let it be at their Peril, and so went away.

Upon the 27th of the same month, they being in like manner peaceably
Assembled together again, there came unto them many Boys out of the City in a
Riotors manner, throwing Stones and Dirt into the Meeting.

On the 3d of the 7th Month next after, being also the first day of the Week,
they were peaceably met again to worship God, then came Boys, and Girls, and
Young People to a great number, in the same Riotous manner, and thronged in and
about the Meeting, and became so abusive unto them beyond all Humanity, so as
to fling their Hats at their Faces, using all the filthy deriding words toward
them they could invent to utter, and with their Staves some of them would
strike off many of their Hats off their Heads, of both Men and Women, and
sometimes striking some upon their Heads with their Staves, and sometimes
justling against them, and throwing Stones amongst them, and brake some of the
Glass-windows, and turned in Dogs into the Meeting, oftentimes bidding them
speak by the spirit, and then making a Noise with Hooping and Hollowing; and
some of them fastened Burs to some of the Men's Hair; and as they sought to
force a Pig into the Meeting amongst them, it happening to be a Pig of John
Rea's, who on that day two Weeks before was said to inform the Mayor of the
Meeting, and he seeking to drive his own Pig from them, one of the untuly Young
Men broke his Head with a Stone, which was the new-elected Mayor's Son, as
'twas said.

On the next first Day being the 10th of the 7th Month, the aforesaid People
were again assembled together in their usual religious Manner, and in a short
Space the Street before the House, became filled with People, young and old;
and many young Men and Boys came in upon them, riotusly as before, and threw
their Hats at and amongst them, and fired Squibs, and threw amongst them, and
then throwing Stones against the Glass Windows, stroke a Woman, as she was sat
within the Room, on the side of her Head with a Stone: But seeing them so
outrageous, and desperately cruel, some of the Meeting went to the Mayor to
signify their Doings unto him, who became somewhat displeased at the Matter,
and also they went to Abraham Seward an Attorney at Law, the New Elected Mayor,
whose Son was one of the Leaders of the turbulent Company in their Actings, to
acquaint him of his Son, who seemed to be ignorant of his Son's Doings, yet
somewhat threatened the Persons that went to him, with the Execution of the Law
upon them; and because some of the Lads belonged to the Free School in
Hereford, one of the Meeting went to the chief Master of the School about them,
who presently came and took Notice of as many as he could find; for many of
them dispersed at his coming, they having by that time beaten the Glass-Windows
to pieces with Stones and Staves; but it was said by some, he was forbidden to
correct them, and that the Colledge-Priests should set them on, and say, they
would bear them out in what they did; and some of the unruly Boys were
Quiresters.

On the 14th Day of the 7th Month they were peaceably met together again to
serve the living God, and as soon as they departed many rude Boys came running
to find them there, and some of them said, if they had met with them, they
would have done their work for them, and sell again upon the glass-windows
breaking them.

On the 16th Day following two Friends went to Robert Simonds and Thomas
Simonds, Justices for the City, to let them know of the several riotous
Assemblies, and the Abuses done upon them, who not at all regarded their
Complaint, but the said Robert Simonds did endeavor to force some Confession
of a Meeting from one of them, and then protested, if he had confessed, he
would immediately have fined him; then the Friend asked him, what if it should
please God to suffer another Religion to be set up with Authority in this
Nation, would he not think it an unreasonable thing to be forced from, or
punished for his Religion he now professes? He answering said, he should not,
but would be subject to the Government; and after said to some others, as we
were credibly informed, that if the Friend had but confessed a Meeting, he
would presently have arrested his Horses he had then in the Town; and also
said, the Quakers were well helped up to come with Complaints to them.

On the 17th Day after, it being the first Day of the Week, the aforesaid
People were peaceably assembled again to worship God, after some time the rude
Company of Boys and young People came unto them in the former riotous manner;
many of them having Sticks and Staves in their Hands, and they threw their
Hats, and Dirt, and Stones amongst them, and Squibs, and burned some of their
Clothes; and when Friends departed, the Door of the House being locked, they
passing away, saw the Master of the School coming hastily again to seek after
his Scholars, which many of them perceiving, hid themselves from him, and he
said unto Friends, that it was not fi^ting that Boys should be suffered to
abuse them as they did, yet soon after the rude Company became more unruly then
before; for they totally brake down the Glass-Windows that remained, and as
many of the Pillars thereof as they could, with some of the Walls of the House,
and entered in and broke the Benches and Seats they found therein; and brake
open an inner Door with other things they could meet with; and some Boys
followed after some Friends of the Country with hooping and hollowing, and
throwing of Stones after them, about a quarter of a Mile; and it was commonly
said, that the Master of the School going about to correct some of his
Scholars for their Abuses toward Friends, they made such a Resistance against
him, as violently to throw him over a Bench, and giving him threatening Words,
they being so emboldned in ill Practices; and when several sober People of the
City, that saw or heard of the Doings of the rude Company, crying out against
them, they would threaten them; and one man, because he reproved them, was
forced to take up Stones in his Hands to defend himself from them

The 18th Day of the 7th Month, 1676 there being a Meeting in Hereford of the
aforesaid People, to enquire into the Necessities of the poor, the Widows and
Fatherless Children, that they that are able to work may be employed, and
a^^isted to get their own livelihood, but if unable, then to be relieved, and
the Fatherless and Helpless Children to be set out Apprentices, which is
acceptable Service to God, and great Benefit to the whole Nation, against which
work there is no Law, nor ought to be; for it is the Command of God, To do good
unto all, but especially to the Household of Faith.

And in Obedience to God and his Truth they came together to do this especial
Good to the Household of Faith, and being peaceably met together in their
shattered Meeting House, and after some time was spent in the Service of Truth,
there came a great Company of rude tumultuous Boys, many of them in a Riotous
Manner with Staves, Sticks and long Splints of Wood in their Hands, and
surrounding the House, and one of them sounding a Horn, there came a great
Company of People of several Sorts; then the Boys began to throw their Hats,
Dirt and Stones into the Meeting, and hurt some; and uttering abominable,
filthy, reviling Words and deriding Speeches against the Spirit of God, and his
Worship; one of them came within the Door, and breaking Wind backward said, The
Spirit moved him, and so the brutish rude Company fell to laughing, and
shouting, and throwing of Stones through the broken Walls and Windows into the
House; and some threw in Excrements upon Friend, Clothes, and then got upon the
House and untiled part of the House, and seeing a Friend coming into the House,
they tumbled down some of the Stones upon his Head, and so continued breaking
the House for some time, and broke down the Pale with the young Vines about the
House.

And a Friend in the Meeting seeing their Wickedness, was constrained to bear
his Testimony against them, exhorting Friends to Patience, and the tumultuous
rude Company to Moderation (who like the Sodomites about just Lot's House,
encompassed them about in their cruel Emnity) lest, the Lord bring some
sweeping Judgment upon them and the City.

Then soon after came some of the Magistrates of the City, namely Edward King
and Robert Simonds Justices, with Abraham Seward the Elected Mayor for the Year
to come, an Attorney at Law, whose Coming was not at all to appease and scatter
the Riot and Rage of the People, but to execute their own and the Priests Envy
and Cruelty against Friends, which first appeared in the Boys and rude
Multitude, and then manifested it self in their Proceedings; The said Edward
King Justice, first entering the House, said in a vain, light, scoffing Spirit,
What be ye? Quakers, or Shakers, or Candlestick-makers? And then asked, who was
the Speaker? some of the Boys said, such a one; then Abraham Seward with the
two Justices urged him to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and did
the like to the rest of the men, taking their Names, with the Names of the
Women, and then calling for the Constables and other Officers to take the Men
to Prison, being eight in Number, and threatened to fine the Women with him that
the Boys said, spoke, and for the House also; then they took away the eight
Men to the Town Hall or Market House, and in their Passage along with the
Magistrates, Abraham Seward the Elected Mayor said, They should never meet
there, and had often spoke it before, and words to that Purpose in a
presumptuous Spirit.

And a Friend going with him said, We are a People gathered by the Power of the
Lord, and therefore the Power of Man cannot scatter us: Then he replied, and
said, I will break your Meetings.

So then they came to the Town hall, and there they tendered the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy to them, who answering, said, We are Christians,
therefore cannot break the Command of Christ to swear at all; but to render
just and lawful Allegiance to the King, do not deny nor refuse. Notwithstanding
this their Answer, they made a Mittimus, and sent them to Prison.

About the next day after they were imprisoned, one Walter Rogers a Prebend
walking by the Meeting house, and observing how it was broken and torn with the
Rude Company, said to some as he passed, That they were Very Good Boys, and
had done their Work Better then he thought they had,

On the 24th of the 7th month, being the first day of the Week, Friends were
assembled again to wait upon God, many Rude Boys came unto them, and threw
their Hats at them, one of them pulling a Woman by her Chin, and poching
Friends with their Staves through the Windows; and when Friends departed, many
of the Boys followed some of them a pretty way, throwing Stones after them,
using many Taunting and Deriding Words against God's Holy Spirit and Worship.

The Names of such men who were present at the Meeting at Hereford, and were
Eye-VVitnesses of the Riotous Doings of the Rude Multitude, and the Proceedings
of the Magistrates against the Meeting, the 18th Day of the 7th Month, 1676.
who are now Prisoners in Bysters-Gate in Hereford, are as follows:

Roger Prichard, Henry Price, William Oven,
of Amely.

Morgan Watkins, Charles Barnet, Constantine Young
of Leominster.

James Exton, Robert Woodliffe
of Hereford.

The Names of some more of the Men Friends belonging to Hereford, who were also
Eyewitnesses of the Riotous Doings and several Proceedings done against
Friends at the several Meetings beforementioned, are as follows:

John Barber, John Carver, James Eckley, Nathaniel Powles.
The 1st of the 8th Month, 1676. the aforesaid People were peaceably met to
worship the God of their Lives, many Rude Boys and Young People came about
them, and many of them fell to throwing of Stones through the Windows they had
broke before; and one of them stroke a Woman Friend on her Head with a Stone;
and some of them through a Window did cast their Urin upon the peoples Heads;
and as a Man sat somewhat high to a Window, one of the Boys reached through,
and took his Hat off his Head, and put Excrements therein, and threw it in
again amongst them; and some of them, in their vain deriding manner, with
bawling Words, would Act preaching, and oftentimes used Shouting.

The 22th of the said Month, being again assembled peaceably together to
worship God, being also the first day of the VVeck, soon after came Sergeants,
Constables and other Officers of the City, and forced Friends along with them
to come before Abraham Seward Mayor of the City, who kept them at a certain
place till the Mayor came from his Worship, and after a while caused them to be
discharged.

The 29th of the same Month they were again met together in their peaceable
usual manner, then came many of the Officers and Constables of the City, and
forced them out of the House, and kept them out, taking two Men along with
them, namely, James Exeon and John Carver, and brought them before the Mayor,
Edward King, Robert Simonds and Thomas Payner, Justices; the Mayor called to
John Jones and Christopher Jones two of his Sergeants, and Thomas Luggon a
Constable, to inform of the Meeting, when, after they had sworn them, one of
the Friends spoke unto them, To take good heed, and not to for swear
themselves, as some of the Officers did aforetime, in accusing Persons to be
present at a Meeting, when they were not; yet presently after they informed
against one Mary Carver for being at the Meeting; and as they were setting her
Name in the Warrant or Conviction, one of the Men seeing their Wilfulness
therein, told them, That Mary Carver was not then there: Therefore it is to be
seen, whose Hearts are bent to Cruelty, how little regard they have to their
Oaths. Then one of the two Friends asked the Informers, Wherein they had right
Knowledge, that it was a Meeting exercising Religion? To which they gave no
Answer; but the Mayor said, It was no matter for that; will you swear to the
contrary? and withal they tendered them the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
and because they could not (with good Conscience) swear at all, they committed
them to Prison till the next Assize; and told them, They should have but Straw
to lie on; and commanded the Jailer, To put them apart, one from the other.

The 12th of the 9th Month following, being also the first day of the Week,
the shattered Meeting House being then somewhat repaired, and an Inhabitant
dwelling therein, Friends were there met again to wait upon the Lord, there
came many Boys and Young Men again, and beset the House, and threw Stones
against it, and they were forbidden by the Inhabitant thereof, who told them,
It was his Dwelling House, yet they violently brake open a Window, being made
very fast, with Boards well nailed, and there came the Mayor's Officers, and
one of them encouraged the rude Company to Untyle the House, and one -- Holley
a Servant to John Hipps a chief Constable in the City, said, That the Mayor's
Officers, the Sergeants, told the Rude Company, That they should knock out the
Quakers Brains if they would not depart. And the Officers came, and forced
Friends out of the House, and in the Evening many Rude Boys came again, and
told the said Inhabitant, They would pull down the House upon his Head, using
many Abusive Words against them, and stroke a Girl with a Stone.

Some of those that were Eyewitnesses to the aforementioned Proceedings:

John Barber, James Exten, John Carver, Elizabeth Barber, Elizabeth Exton, Mary
Carver, Diana Thomas.
On the 3d of the 10th month, 1676. the aforesaid People were assembled
together to worship the Lord in their usual peaceable manner, at the City of
Hereford, then came the Mayor's Officers, and turned them out of the House, and
brought one John Barber before Abraham Seward Mayor, Henry Caldicot and Thomas
Payner Justices, who tendered to him the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and
because he could not in good Conscience swear at all, committed him to Prison
till the next Assizes.

And on the 7th day following, the said John Barber had taken from him Goods
worth 25 s. for 16 s. demanded for not going to the Steeple-house, and then
also the said John Barber, had Goods seized worth 26 l. for a fine of 10 l.
demanded, and imposed upon him for the House where the Meeting was, by Warrant
under the Hands of Robert Simonds and Edward King Justices.

And on the 10th of the 11th month following, then was taken from the said
John Barber, dwelling in the Parish of Nicholas, Goods worth 14 s. for the
demand of 12 s. for not going to the Steeple-house. And then also was taken
from John Carver of the City and Parish aforesaid Goods worth 7 s. for 4 s.
demanded for the same Cause.

Edward Price, Warden. Thomas Gwillim, Warden. Giles Cocks, Overseer. Evan
Thomas, Overseer. Thomas Gough, Petty-Constable. John Hipps, Chief-Constable.
Richard Phillpo^ts, Assistant.
James Exton, John Carver and John Barber do remain Prisoners in Hereford-City
Prison, upon refusing to take the Oath, being committed until the next Assizes.

John Haines and James Robbins, both of B^ddenham, are continued Prisoners by
the Writ Excommunicato Capiendo, for Contempt of the Bishops Court (as is said)
being committed to the County Goal the 23d of the seventh Month, 1676.

On the 20th of the 11th month, 1676. the aforesaid People were then met
again, in their usual manner, to worship the Lord, then came the Mayor's
Officers and forced them away, not suffering them to abide in the open Street
thereabout; and one of the Officers, a Sergeant, called John Jones, said unto
them, They would Fire tho House where they met, and broyle them therein.

Dansey Gwillim and Henry ^ulia^, with others can witness the same; these
Witnesses are no Quakers.

Thomas Holt of Wickton in the Parish of Leominster committed to Prison the
18th day of the 7th month, 1674. and still remains a Prisoner for small Tithes
and Easter-Reckonings to the value of Eight Groats demanded.

Nathaniel Smith of Leominster committed to Prison the 11th day of the 11th
month, 16^6. from the Quarter Sessions, because for Conscience sake he could
not Swear.

SUFFERERS in the County of Leicester.
THe 10th day of the 1st Month, 1673. Samuel Harper of Harborough was arrested
with a Bishops Writ, for not going to the Steeple house, and there still
remains a Prisoner at the Suit of Matthew Bent Priest.

Thomas Dash of Hincly Labouring-man, taken to Prison by a Bishop's Writ, at
the Suit of George Naylor Priest of the same, for refusing to pay small Tithes;
Anthony Wells and Leonard Gasway Bailiffs, took him to Prison from his aged
Wife the 24th of the 11th Month, 1674. where he still remains.

The 26th of the 7th Month, 1674. John Marriot Joyner, and William Parker
Carpenter of Long-claxton, alias Clanson, were taken by a Warrant from Thomas
Stavley and Thomas Beamont, called Justices, directed to Thomas Faux Constable,
and brought before them to give in sufficient Sureties to answer the Suit of
John Reay Vicar of the same Town, they refusing were sent to Prison by a
Statute made the 27th of Henry the 8th: The Priest demands of John Marriot 5 s.
6 d. per Annum, and of William Parker 3^. they both remaining Prisoners from
their Wives and small Children.

The last day of the 12th month, 1674. Thomas Follows of Whetstone committed
to Prison by the said Thomas Stavley and Thomas Beamont, upon the same Statute,
for refusing to become bound to answer the Suit of Thomas Robeson Priest, in a
Cause of Tithes, his Demand about five shillings and six pence per annum; and
yet remains a Prisoner from his Wife and Family.

The 18th of the 1 st month, 1676. George Power of Swanington in the Parish of
Whitweek, was taken by Samuel Sterkey of Ashcrdel^zo^ch at the Suit of John
Brintnal Priest, in a Case of small Tithes, part of which was demanded by a
former Priest more then one half, and since he was Prisoner this John Brintnall
has taken a Lamb out of his Fold, and he still remains a Prisoner.

The 2d Month, 1676. William Tuninges of Syleby Shepherd, was subpoened into
the Exchequer by Richard Sanders Impropriator, and for not appearing was cast
into Prison for small Tithes, to the value of 3 s. 4 d. and there continues.

The 1 st of the 5th Month, 1676. Samuel Brown of Leicester Apothecary, was
taken by a Bishop's Writ for not coming to the Steeple-House, by Anthony Wells
and Leonard Gasway of Leicester Bailiffs, about the Tenth Hour at Night in his
Bed, and still remains a Prisoner.

The 13th of the 8th month, 1676. John Johnson of Northkilworth Shepherd,
taken by a Bishop's Writ for not coming to the Steeple-house by Leonard Gasway
and Anthony Wells of Leicester Bailiffs, and John Iackson of Humberston
Bailiff, where he remains a Prisoner, being the chief Guide of his Mother's
Business, she be being aged about Eighty.

The 24th of the 8th Month, 1676. John Wilsford late of Nether-Broughton,
Jersey-Comber, taken by a Bishop's Writ for not going to the Steeple-House, by
Leonard Gasway and Anthony Wells of Leicester, John Iackson of Humberstone, and
Henry Bunnes of Melton Mowbray an old Informer, and the rest Bailiffs, took him
out of a peaceable Meeting in Long-Clanson; the before-said Henry Bunnes broke
the Meeting House Windows, tore a Woman Friend's Hood, stroke an old
Woman-Friend on the Breast, hurled Ale in John Wilsford's Face; he still
remains a Prisoner from his Wife and small Children, near 40. Miles in
Leicester County Goal, their Livelihood chiefly depending upon his Hand-Labour.

The 18th of the 11th Month, 1676. Daniel Fox of Thrusington was taken by a
Bishop's Writ for not coming to the Steeple. House by Leonard Gasway of
Liecester, and John Iackson of Humberstone, and there continues.

The 19th of the 4th Month, 1676. Sufferers for meeting to worship God.
The 22d of the 1st Month, 1675. Taken from John Swann of Little-Peatling for
being at a peaccable Meeting at William Wall's of Knighton, upon the 20th of
the 4th Month, 1675. by a Warrant from Thomas Beamont called Justice, was
fined 50 s. for which Fine he had a Cow taken from him to the Value of near 4
l. by John Marriot Constable, and Francis Pearce Informer; the Constable
confessed that he sold the Cow for 3 l. but nothing was returned again.

For the same Meeting Michael Woodcock and John Ward^n had each of them a Cow
taken from them, for 50 s. Fine a^ piece.

The 5th of the 1st Month, 1675. taken from William Wells of Knighton, by a
Warrant from Thomas Beamont called Justice, Charles Gibbins of Kimcoat, and
Francis Pearce of Armsby Informers, for having a peaceable Meeting at his
House, upon the 20th of the 4th Month, 1675. Seven Milch and Incalved Beasts,
to the Value of near 30 l. Joseph Pipin and Richard Jug Church Wardens, and
William Ward Overseer of the poor, the Fine 20 l.

Samuel Brown of Leicester Apothecary, being at a peaceable Meeting at William
Well's of Knighton, Charles Gibins of Waltharn Kimcoats, Corporal to the
Militia, and Francis Percy of Arnisby, Militia-Soldier, informed Justice
Beamont so called, of Stouten-Grange near Leicester, of the same, whose
Readiness to assist them in their Ungodly Designs was publicly manifest,
insomuch that he granted out Warrants against several for that Meeting,
directing one to John Brown Constable of the Bishop Fee, against Samuel Brown,
to distrain of his Goods to the Value of 5 l. 5 (...). 5 l. for the Poverty of
the Preacher, the rest for his own Offense, as they call it; the aforesaid
Constable wanting Opportunity to make Distress, was much threatened by the
Justice to be distrained of for neglect of his Office, receiving another
Warrant to distrain for 6 l. 5 s. for the same Meeting Now the Constable of
Gilmorton having distrained of Friends there by a Warrant from the said Justice
for the same Meeting, and the Constable, Informer and other Officers expending
part of the Money which the Warrant expressed, he aid 20 s. more upon the said
Samuel Brown (there he broke that Law, because he levied more upon Samuel
Brown, being (...) Poverty could be supposed) and the Justice to some said,
That he acted for Fear of the Penalty of 100 l. calling the Sufferers Rebbels,
and said, They deserved to be punished as such.

Notwithstanding their and his personal Resolve to distrain, he appearing and
receiving Intelligence of Disappointment, one Day he called out in great Rage
to the a oresaid S. B. saying, Brown, you have a Conventicle in your House; the
Reply was, no Persons save our own be at this time in my House, the Justice
still rageously saying, He would break open his Doors to set; then actively
riding in his own Person from Officer to Officer to get them together to fulfill
his wicked desire, at that Juncture of time Elizabeth Carr and Edeth Brown went
to him to inform him that there was no Meeting at that time, and further
exhorted him to fear God, and desist from assisting the Informers in these
destructive Designs, further declaring unto him, that if he did not, God's Hand
of Justice would soon overtake him, and reward him according to his Deeds; to
which he replied, Do you curse me? and stood up trembling and said, Get you out
of the Room, you disquiet my Spirit; so they left him, and he coming down with
the Informer and other Officers, the People on Heaps being gathered together to
see what he would do, finding the Woman of the House standing at the Door with
her little Babe, laid Hand upon her, plucking her away in an Uncivil Manner,
commanding the Informer, to go to the Smiths to borrow Hammers to break open
the doors, they being denied, still commanded them to threaten the Smiths to
lend them upon pain of Impirsonment, they still denied, saying, They should net
lend them to do their honest Neighbor any harm; so the Informer was forced to
make use of a great Stone to break open the Doors, the Justice entering first
said, They have carried away their Goods; Reply was made, No, the Informers have
twice taken them away before; Have you been so long Rebbels? said the Justice,
you shall suffer for it; so he asking who such a Person was, the Reply being,
That he was well acquainted with that Person's Husband formerly, when they
together were Officers in Oliver's Army, at which Charge, his Coat appearing so
manifestly turned, he retreated his Ground and left it in charge, that they
should take enough of the Goods away, and to be further revenged on the said
Samuel Brown, tendered him the Oath of Allegiance, to which he replied, That
active Obedience in this Case being first due to the King of Kings, who said,
swear not, and passive Obidience to the Ordinance of Man for Conscience Sake;
but through the Interest of one of the Officers freely extending to the Justice
on the behalf of Samuel Brown, was prevalent to divert his malicious Design, as
the Justice himself confesled. The Officers returning an Account of what they
had taken away, he commanded them saying, We have spent several Days about
this, and we had need have more to bear our Charges, the Constable engaged that
what Money was wanting, more then the Goods would amount to, he would make up.

Note, Charles Gibbins the first and chief Informer in this County, was found
dead off his Horse, going from Lutterworth Market, soon after his Information
about this Meeting; and the said Justice was in a few weeks after this his
wicked Act, by Death cut off. The Goods taken away was Bedding, to the Value of
about 8 l. To the Truth of these things, there are many People Witnesses.

Sufferers for Tithes in Long-Clanson, in the Vale of Belvire, in the County of
Leicester.
The 3d. Week of the 5th Month, 1676. John Reay Vicar or Priest went to the
Lands of William Hanly, and took to the value of the 5th Part of his Barley,
besides 13. Wheat-Sheaves; John Moor, Henry Hibb and Robert Wright let this
Part to the Vicar, Witnesses John Iackson, Richard Hanley.

The 21st of the 5th Month, 1676. Taken from Edward Hallam about thirty
Wheat-Sheaves, by Thomas Marriot, Thomas Hicling and George Manchester.

Taken from John Dubleday, by the same three men, to the Value of one Quarter
of Wheat and Rye.

The 24th of the 5th Month, 1676. Taken again from John Dubleday, by the said
men, Four Load of Barley.

Taken from Edward Hallam, by the said men, and upon the aforesaid Day, Three
Loads of Barley.

The 26th of the 5th Month, 1676. taken again from Edward Hallam, by George
Manchester the Elder, Two more Loads of Barley.

The 2d of the 6th Month, 1676. taken again from Edward Hallam, by George
Manchester the Elder, Thomas Marriot, John Manchester, and others, Three Loads
of Beans and Pease.

Taken from John Dubbleday the same day, by Tho. Hicling and the others
aforesaid, Three Loads of Pease and Beans.

The 30th of the 6th Month, 1676. Taken from Valentine Gregory by the Priest
his Wife and her Son, and his Man, and the Clark of the Town, who came into his
Orchard, and did get up into the Trees, and broke the Boughs, and did the Trees
much Hurt, and carried away Pears and Apples about Four Strykes.

William Willowes, a poor Man, was cast into Prison the 12th of the 1st month,
1667. from Five of his Children, by Edward Ward Priest, for small Tithes, and
there remained a Prisoner Four Years and upwards; and then, by the said Priest,
and Robert Johnson, and William Webster, had taken from him the 11th day of the
7th month, 1676. one brass Pan worth 10 s. and four Sheep worth (...) l. 12 s.

Sufferers in Derby-shire in the Year 1675.
THomas Holland in the Parish of Heanor, for having a Meeting at his House the
3d day of the 8th Month, 1675. was sined by John Low, called Justice, 5 l.
and (...) ad Goods taken from him to the value of 8 l. by Roger Cheetam
Constable, and other Officers.

George Hawley Thomas Necdam
Informers.

William Markeall of Ilson, for being at the abovesaid Meeting, was fined by
the same Justice 5 l. 5 (...). and had Goods taken from him to the value of 9
l. 10 s. by John Gregory of the same Town, Constable.

John Hanks fined for being at the said Meeting 5 s. and had Goods taken from
him to the value of seven shillings and six pence.

Richard Malthy fined for being at the said Meeting, 5 s. and had Goods taken
from him to the value of 6 s. 8 d. by Philip Swern of Shiploy Constable.

Samuel Ro^ fined 5 s. for his Wife's being at the said Meeting, and had Goods
taken from him to the value of Eight Shillings.

John Lynam and Edward Searson fined either of them 5 l. 5 s. for being at the
said Meeting, and John Lynam fined 5 s. more for his Wife, though she was not
at the Meeting, and had Goods taken from them to the value of (...) l. by John
Rowland Constable, and other Officer belonging to the Parish of Pentridge.

William Wooly and his Wife fined for being at the said Meeting 10 s. and had
Goods taken from them to the value of 1 l. 2 s.

Thomas Vallens fined 5 s. for being at the said Meeting, and had his Wages
detained by one of the Officers, he then working for him.

Daniel Bettridge fined 5 s. for his Wife being at the said Meeting, and had
Goods taken from him to the value of 8 s.

All this was done by Warrants from John Low, called Justice.

By George Hawley Thomas Necdam
Inform^^s.

Witnessed by John Wa^st ^ff, William Day, Luke Hanks.


Joseph Wats of Wadshelf, in the Parish of Brampton and County of Derby, who
could not for Conscience ^ake pay Richard Mathyman Priest of Brampton that
which he called his Dues, as Tythe-Wool and Lamb, and Easter Reckonings, which
in the whole did amount unto but about Two Shillings and Six Pence, was served
with a Suppoene to appear at London; and after some time was arrested by Joseph
Parker and William Kirk of Chesterfield Bailiffs, who would accept of no Bail,
but he must either pay what the Priest demanded or go to Prison, and because he
had not Freedom to pay, they took him to Prison to Chesterfield, the 9th day of
the 7th month, 1675. the Priest gave order to the Jailer, That he should not
have Liberty to work; he was there kept Prisoner above Twenty Two Weeks.

Witnessed by Robert Haslam, Cornelius Arnold, Henry Harvey.

An Account of the Sufferings of the People of God within the County of Derby
in the Year 1676.
Thomas Farnsworth within the Parish of Heanor in the said County, for being at
a Meeting at John Lynam's was fined 5 s. for himself, and 3 l. ^5 s. for
fifteen unknown Persons, and had Goods taken from him to the value of 6 l. by
Robert Towe Officer, by a Warrant from John ^oc called Justice, John Bradley
and John Bruckshew Informers.

John Wagstaff within the parish of Pentridge, in the said County, for the same
Meeting was fined five shillings for himself, and 15 s. for the poverty of
three Persons, by warrant from the said Justice, and had Goods taken from him
to the value of 1 l. 4 s. by John Roland Constable, and other Officers, John
Bradly and John Bruckshew informers.

John Lynam for the same Meeting was fined 10 s. for his Wife, and Edward
Searson 5 s. for his Wife, and had Goods taken from them to the value of 1 l.
15 (...). by the same Officers, by Warrant from the said Justice, and also the
same Informers.

Thomas Valens fined for the same Meeting 10 s. for himself and Wise, and had
Goods taken from him to the value of 19 s. 6 d. by the same Officers, Justice
and Informers.

Samuel Roe for Friends coming to his House to accompany him to bury his Wife,
was fined 20 l. and had Goods taken from him to the value of 30 l. by John
Willon Constable of Ilson, and other Officers, by a warrant from John Lo,
called Justice, John Wilson Priest of Ilson and John Wagg Collier Informers.

John Lynam, for being at the same Burial, was fined 5 l. 10 s. and had Goods
taken from him to the value of 6 l. 10 s. by John Roland and other Officers of
the parish of Pentridge, by Warrant from the said Justice, John Wilson Priest
of Ilson and John Wagg Collier Informers.

John Blunston of Little-Hallam in the parish of Ilson, for being at the said
Burial, was fined 5 s. for himself, and 10 l. for the poverty of the Preacher,
and had four Cows taken from him to the value of 14 l. by John Willot
Constable, and other Officers of the said parish, by Warrant from John Lo,
called Justice, John Wilson Priest and John Wagg Collier Informers.

John Hanks and Ann his Wife for being at the same Burial, were fined by the
said Justice 20 s for their second pretended Offenses, whereas his Wife was
never convicted before, and was distrained of by the abovesaid Officers, and
the same Informers Instruments.

Robert Towe and John Willott can witness the abovesaid Sufferings.

Hugh Mastin and George Ellis, both of Baslow in the parish of Bakewell in this
County, now Prisoners in the County-G^alat D^rby, where they have been kept
close Prisoner, since the 29th day of the last second month called (...), by
an Excommunicato Capiendo out of the Bishop's Court of (...), and as pretended,
for not appearing at that Court, although they were never cited thereto.

Persons fined for being at a Peaceable Meeting at Tupton the 15th day of the
last 12th Month, as follows.
John Fletcher of Tupton fined 10 l for the Meeting house, and had his Goods
seized upon for the said Fine, although the said John was not at that Meeting,
nor interested in the House more then another Friend; for the Land was sold by
John several years since.

Nicholas Swift of Brampton was fined for being at the said Meeting 5 s. and
for an unknown Preacher or Teacher, as the words were, fined 5 l. and had Goods
taken from him to that value, and 10 s. more the Officers took for distraining,
by Ralph Renshaw, William D^bb, and other Officers.

Thomas Brocksop of Little-Normanton, for being at the said Meeting, was fined
5 s. and 5 l. more for an unknown Preacher or Teacher, and had a Bullock taken
from him and sold by William Allwoed and Richard Cooper, but whether for so
much Money or no he knows not, but believes the whole fine was paid by the
Officers.

Susanna Frith of Chesterfield fined 5 l. 5 s. for the said Meeting, but the
Officers coming, and finding her Door put to, returned and made no Distress.

John Clay fined for the said Meeting 5 l. 5 s. but he being a single man, and
boarding with his Brother, and having no personal Estate that was apparent, the
Officers could make no Distress.

Richard Clayton, for being at the said Meeting, was fined 5 s. but being a
Servant to one that is called Sr. Henry ^umlock, the Officers could make no
Distress.

This was done by Warrants from Thomas Gladwin called Justice, John Coope
Thirdborough and Robert Mosely Informers, but were constrained to be so by the
said Justice.

William Allwood and Ralph Renshaw can witness these things.

Several Warrants more are forth against several Friends, for being at a
peaceable Meeting at Tupton the 29th of the last 7th Month, but not all of
them being as yet executed, there is no Account given of them at present.

Staffordshire.
IN the 10th Month, 1675. Thomas Hinks, Thomas Wall and John Dible of
Woolverhamton, were brought Prisoners to Staffood Goal upon a Writ
Excommunicate Capiendo; T. Hinks and T. Wall continued Prisoners about three
months, and John Dible remained Prisoner about six months.

1676. William Riding of Lyn was taken Prisoner by Benjamin Lant Apparritor,
about the 5th month, upon the above said Writ, and remained Prisoner Twenty
One Weeks.

Michael Nickens, a poor Man, was taken upon the abovesaid Writ, and remains
still Prisoner.

William Morgia was taken Prisoner about the 11th of the 6th month, and still
remains in prison upon the abovesaid Writ.

Thomas Hamersly was taken Prisoner by Humphry Sutton, at Litchfield
Apparritor, about the sixteenth of the seventh month, and (...) remains a
Prisoner upon the abovesaid Writ.

In the 7th month William Alcock of Fordwelly, near Leek, had taken from him
one great Kettle, a goeat Pot* a little Kettle, and two Pewter Dishes, to the
value of fifty shillings, at the Suit of George ^oods Priest of Leek, for the
value of six shillings, which he demanded of him for Easter-Reckonings, by
Thomas Hamersly Bailiff, and his men.

Prisoners upon the Account of Truth in the County of Somerset at Ivelchester
the 26th Day of the 11th Month, 1676.
JOhn Sage of Chewten, Aged about Eighty Years, has been Prisoner since the
8th month, 1666. upon an Exegi fac. for not paying Tithes to the Suit of Ann
Kingsmell Widow, Impropriator; the value of Tithes worth about 9 or 10 s.

William Liddon of Wythell, upon an Exegifac. imprisoned the 11th month, 1670.
for not paying Tithes at the suit of John Hillacri Farmer of Tithes.

Arthur Ieffrey of South-Brent, imprisoned in the 9th month, 1670 upon a
King's Bench Writ, to the Suit of (...) Plumley, Thomas Brigham and Willoughby
Leyne Spinster, for not paying Tithes to the value of about 16 s. 8 d.

Marmaduke Coat of Haucbridge, imprisoned in the 6th month 1670 upon an
Attachment out of the Exchequer, upon Contempt, as charged, to the Suit of
Robert Bambury Impropriator, for not paying Tithes.

Gregory Ce^ly of North-Curry, aged about 69 years, imprisoned in the 2d mon.
1673. in Execution for not paying Tithes to the Suit of Robert Hill Farmer of
Tithes, wherein he charge above Nineteen Times the value, and besides, has
taken his Goods in part, and yearly takes away his Corn also, contrary to Law.

Note, At one Assizes Hill's Witnesses prove the Tithes to be worth 3 l. at
another Assizes the same witnesses swear the same Tithes to be worth Twelve
Pound Fifteen Shillings, for which the Execution is One Hundred Forty Four
Pound, which is above Eleven Times more then proved, the single value for three
years being 7 l. 10 s.

James Paple of Stawell, imprisoned the 28th of the first month, 1674, in
Execution for not paying Tithes to the suit of William Bull an Impropriator,
who is since Dead.

John D^nny of Weston Loyla^d, a poor Husbandman Labourer, imprisoned in the
10th month, 1674. upon a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, for not paying small
Tithes to William owel Impropriator, the value of Tithes being about 9 d. for
three Years.

Jeremy Powel of Michael-Creech, imprisoned in the 11th month, 1674. upon a
Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, for not paying Tithes and Offerings to John
Gale Priest of Creech, to the value of about 4 d.

Thomas Browning of Lymington, imprisoned the 24th of the 1st month, 1674.
upon an Attachment out of the Exchequer, for not appearing to the suit of
Matthew Brayn Priest of Lymington, for small Tithes, the value being about 25
s. for five years, and the Priest took away his Corn by force.

William Ford of Curry-Mallett, imprisoned the second month, 1675. by an
Attachment out of the Exchequer for not paying Tithes to the Suit of Thomas
Beal, Priest of Curry-Mallett for Tythe-Apples.

Walter Hodges of Kingsbury, imprisoned on the 3d of the 1st month, 1675. upon
an attachment out of the Chancery, for not paying Tithes to the Suit of William
(...): Impropriator.

John Wride, Robert Tutton, John Brice and Robert (...) of Burnham, imprisoned
the 2d month, 1675 by a (...) from several Justices of the Peace, for
Contempt, as alleged, for not appearing at the Bishop's Court at Walls, upon a
Citation to the Suit of Rober Collier Priest of ^uarde, who lives there, and
yet demands the Tithes of (...) also, being about Twenty Miles distant; it is
for small Tithes.

Note, That this was done upon a Citation only for not appearing, without any
other Proceedings, Decrees or Sentence; and the words are conjunctively for
Contempt of Proceedings, Sentences and Decrees; see the Statute.

John Parsons of Middlezoy, imprisoned in 1675. upon a Writ de Excommunicato
Capiendo, to the suit of William Powel Impropriator; in a Case of withholding
Tithes, upon which he was removed to London, and remanded to the Cost and
Charge of the Sheriff by the promotion of one Hartrye; the said Impropriator's
Agent, who is since cast into Prison himself by his Master for his Unjust
Dealing.

John Chapple of Worle imprisoned in the 11th Month, 1675. upon a Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo, to the Suit of Samuel Willan Priest of Weston and
Kewst^ek, for not paying Tithes to the value of about 14 Groats after the
Priest's rate.

Edward Silcocks of ^eston super Mart, a poor Man and a Labourer, brought to
Goal in the 2d month, 1675. upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, fo^^om^
small Tithes of Fish, etc. which came to about 10 s. for five years, to the
Suit of the said Priest Willan, who is an Envious, Persecuting Proud-spirited
Man.

Note, This was for not answering upon Oath to the Priest's Articles in the
Bishop's Court at Wells, which to impose is contrary to the Statute 13 Car. 2d
12.

Robert Wills of Chisselborrough, imprisoned the 25th of the first month,
1676. upon an Attachment out of the Exchequer for not paying Tithes to old
Priest ^aular, who is Dead.

Thomas Powell of Greniton, imprisoned in the fifth month, 1696 upon a Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo, for not answering upon Oath to the Articles of William
Powell Impropriator, in a Case of Tithes, the value at utmost for six years
stints of Meadow six shillings nine pence, and for nine Cocks of Barley worth
about three Note, also contrary to the Statute 13 Car. 2. 12.
shillings four pence, though the Sch^dule mentioned in the Libel which begins,
In D^i nomine awen, charge 12 Acres of Wheat, 15 Acres of Barley and 1^0
Acres of Meadow

Elianor Powel Wife of the said Tho Powel, by the name of Elianor Watts (the
Suit being begun before they were married) imprisoned the 15th of the 6th
month, 1676. upon an Execution out of the Kings Bench to the Suit of Priest
Collier, for not paying Tithes, though He by Violence took them away, and got
bad Fellows to swear for him at the Assizes; one of his Witnesses called Philip
Samm, swore in the Priest's presence in the Court, That the Wheat was worth 15
l. an Acre, to make up the matter.

William Goodridge and Samuel Sayor of Banwell imprisoned the fifth day of the
7th month, 1676. by an Attachment out of the Exchequer for not paying Tithes
to the Suit of Jacob Crosman priest.

Edmund Chapple of VVorle rendered himself Prisoner the 20th of the 11th month,
1676. upon the Statute 5 Eliz. 23. within six days after Proclamation, or else
had incurred the penalty of 10 l. he being formerly Excommunicated for not
answering upon Oath to priest VVillan's Artcles and Libel in the Bishop's Court
at Wells, and the Sheriff having returned that he was not to be found upon the
Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, though he did not abscond but followed his
Occasions.

And this also in the ground was for not answering upon Oath, the Tender
whereof is contrary to the Statute 13 Car. 2d 12.

John Anderdon of Bridgewater, imprisoned upon the False Swearing of wicked
Informers, and has been Prisoner since the 3d of the 6th month, 1675. and for
refusing to swear was lest upon Calendar as Premunired by Judge Rainsford at
the Assizes at Taunton, the 21th day of the 1st month, 1675 the wicked
Accusation of the Informers coming to nothing, the chiefest of them having
stood in the Pillory for Wilful Perjury.

Note, No Jury past upon him, nor Sentence given in Court according to Law,
though the Prisoner had pleaded as to matter of fact for refusing to take the
Oath.

Sufferers in Cheshire.
SAmuel Rail meeting with Ieffery Shackerly Governor of the Castle of
Chester, and not putting off his Hat, he the said Governor threatened him, and
soon after sent a Warrant to fetch him before the Monthly Meeting, and there
tendered him the Oath of Allegiance (that insallible Snare) and because for
Conscience Sake he could not swear, committed him prisoner to the Castle, where
he has remained since the 28th Day of the 8th Month, 1676.

Joan Edge Widow, aged sixty Years, for not paying Tythe-Hay and Easter-Dues,
was sued in the Bishop's Court, and committed to prison, where she has
remained since the 15th Day of the 10th Month, 1676.

Sufferers for the Truth's Sake in Suffolk, the 9th of the 11th Mo. 1676.
WIlliam Seaman of Melton was cast into Prison upon the 28th of the 2d Month,
1668. at the suit of Priest Beest^n of the same Town, for not paying Tithes,
upon which suit he still continues a Prisonerin the said Melton-Goal.

Robert Britwel of Ufferd, because for Conscience Sake he could not pay Tithes,
was cast into Melton-Goal, upon the 14th Day of the 7th Month, 1670. at the
suit of Richard Lufkin Priest of the same Town, where he still continues upon
the Account aforesaid.

John Downam was cast into Bury-Prison, upon the 28th of the 3d Month, 74. by
a Significavit, at the suit of John Garrad Priest of Assen, where he still
continues.

Edward Higns by the same Writ, for not paying to the Steeple. House Rate (the
sum of 5 s.) was committed to Bury Goal the 7th day of the 6th Month, 1675. at
the Wardens suit of Gregory Parish, in Sudbury.

William Scarce, by a Significavit, for not marrying according to the National
way, and yet he was married before he came amongst the People called Quakers,
committed the 2^th Day of the 6th Month, 1675 to Bury Prison, at the suit of
the Priest or Parishoner of Wortham.

William Fackner and John Manning of Aldeborough, were taken Prisoners the 28th
of the 11th Month, 1675. upon a Significavit, for not going to hear Common
Prayer (so called) and committed to the County Goal in Ipswich, being 18 miles
from their own Habitations having Wive and Children Note their Emnity; for
Aldeborough is a Corporation. Town, and a Goal in it, yet notwithstanding
Ipswich being 18 miles, as above said, they were sent thither, where they
remained Prisoners this 6th Day of the 11th Month, 1676.

John Burch of Snape, upon the same Account, and in the same Goal, was
committed Prisoner the 3d Day of the 12th month, 1675. being 14 miles from his
own Habitation, from his Wife and Children, notwithstanding Bliborrough Goal
belongs to t'at Town, and is not above five or six miles from him, and does
also remain Prisoner in Ipswich Goal aforesaid this 6th Day of the 11th
Month, 1676.

George Glamdfield of Chelmondiston, was taken Prisoner the 17th Day of the 4th
Month, 1675. upon a Significavit for Tithes, at the suit of Daniel Smart of
Chelmondiston, a Priest, and was Prisoner there the 3d Day of the 11th Month
1676. upon the same Account.

John Beardmore Priest of Arrington, took from George Deen, in the 4th and 6th
Months 76 at several times, viz. One Pig, and by Estemation, as follows, two
Bushels and an half of Wheat, two Bushels and an half of Rye, one Bushel and an
half of Oats, seven Bushels and an half of Barley, one Bushel of Apples, and
ten pounds of Hops, all valued at 1 l. 18 s. 4 d. witness John Franks, George
Fenner and others.

John Britewel took from Nathaniel Keeble of Tunstal, in the 4th and 6th
Month, 1676, at several times, viz. Certain Clover valued at 8 s. Rye judged
by the Reapers to be seven Combs of it, Barley judged to be five Combs of it;
witness Joshua Points, Robert Scotsmer and others.

Edmund Stubs Priest took from the said Nathaniel Keeble, at several times in
the fifth and sixth Months, 1676. viz. Wheat judged to be eight Combs of it,
Pease judged to be six Bushels; moreover he took for one Years Tithes of about
9 l. per annum, eleven Cows and Heifers, and one Bull, which Cattle were valued
to be worth 40 l. witness Joshua Points, Thomas Keeble and others.

This Account was sent up, but there is a Report, as if some of Nathaniel
Keeble's Wife's Kindred, who are no Quakers, had compounded for the Cattle, and
that he has them again.

The said E. Stubs Priest took from Robert Davie, of Tunstal aforesaid, on the
8th Day of Note, 2 or 3 of these Cows taken from R. D were returned again.
the 6th Mo. 76. for one Years Tithes of 21 l. per an. 6 Cows and one Bull, and
7 Calves, but the Calves got away from the Bailiffs, which said Cows and Bull
were valued to be worth 22 l. witness Nathaniel Keeble and others.

Mary Pollard of Branson widow, an aged woman, was committed to Melton prison,
the nineth of the eighth Month, 1676. at the suit of William Ribands of
Crecingham, being one that hired an Impropriation of Tithes, and she remains a
prisoner there upon the same Account, the sixth Day of the eleventh Month,
1676. The same William Ribands in the eleventh Month, 1672. took from the said
Mary Pollard, without proceeding against her in due Course of Law, two Cows,
which were valued to be worth 7 l.

The sixth Day of the 5th Month, 1676. George Pippen Priest of Ringshal, by a
Warrant out of the County Court holden at Ipswich, caused to be taken away from
William Greenwood dwelling in Briset, two Cows, which were reasonably valued a^
8 l. for two Years Tithes, at ^0 s. per annum; and the Bailiffs were Ambrose
Pulford and George Pooley of Needham; and the Cows were prised, one at 50 s.
and the other at 55 s. by William Rosse and Richard^cotchmer bought by Thomas
Love of Nedeham. Market.

On the 25th Day of the 9th Month, 1676. there was taken from William
Greenwood of Briset, within seven miles of Ipswich, two Cows for Tithes, which
they pretended was 3 l. the Cows were prized at 5 l. they being reasonably
worth 7 l. this was done by Warrant out of the County Court holden at Ipswich,
upon the Account of Christopher Sherman Impropriator of the said Town of
Briset; the Bailiffs Names are John Coal, Richard Francis.

Samuel Parmiter of Otten. Belchamp in the County of Essex, was arrested for
Tithes at the suit of Oliver Raiment Impropriator, of Water. Belcham, and was
sent to prison at Chelmsford in the County of Essex, the 7th Day of the 9th
Month, 1676.

Sufferers in Nottingham-shire.
FOr being at a Peaceable Meeting at Hucknall, the 16th day of the 2d Month,
1676. Francis Clay was fined 5 s. and ten Pound for the pretended Poverty of a
Preacher. And William Clay was fined 10 s. for himself and his Wife, for which
he had Goods taken from him worth 2 l. which the Officers sold for 10 s. Robert
Thorocon, the Justice, so called, bidding them, Sell the Goods for what they
could get, if they could get for Ten Pounds worth but Thirty Shillings; and
because the Officers could not sell the Goods so soon as he would have had
them, he fined them 5 l. a man, and distrained their Goods.

Richard Bateman was fined for the same Meeting 5 s. and 10 l. for the
pretended Poverty of the Preacher; and the said Richard being but a poor man,
they took most of the Goods in his House, to the value of 2 l. and sold them
for 3 s. 6 d.

Elizabeth Clay and Anthony Tomlinson fined 5 s. apiece.

Christopher Brandreth fined 5 s. and 1 l. 5 s. for the pretended Poverty of
five others, for which they took a Mare from him to the value of 4 l. which
they sold for 30 s.

Thomas Cockram fined 5 s. for himself, and 10 l. for the pretended Poverty of
the House, for which he had two Oxen taken from him worth 10 l. 10 s.

George Cockram for the same fined 5 s. had taken from him Goods worth 11 s.

John Bullivent the Elder fined 5 s. for himself, and 10 l. for the pretended
Poverty of the House, for which he had a Mare and Goods taken from him worth 3
l. the said John Bullivent being a very poor Man and not keeping House, but
dwelling in his Shop, being a Nailor, the aforesaid Justice bid the Officers
take all he had, his Coat off his Back, and his Hat if it were on his Head, and
his Hammer he workt with.

John Bullivent the Younger fined 5 s. for the same.

The aforesaid Goods were distrained by Warrant from Rob. Thoroton called
Justice, John Smith of Remson and Tho. Sharp of Newark Informers; the said John
Smith was very Rude in his Carriage in the Meeting, using Threatening Words to
the persons assembled, saying to one, with his Faucheon drawn in his Hand, That
he would thrust it down his Throat; and to another, He would cleave him down,
and run it into his Buttock.

At another Meeting the 23d day of the 2d Month, 1676. at the House of Robert
Grace in Sutton in Ashfield, these several Persons following were taken by the
afor said John Smith and Thomas Sharp Informers, and had before Arthur Stannup
called Justice, who fined them as follows;

Robert Crace, for having the Meeting at his House fined 4 l. for which Samuel
Britain took away part of his Household Goods.

William Clay fined 10 s. for himself, and 10 l. for the pretended poverty of
the Owner of the House.

Thomas Cockram fined 10 s. for himself, and 5 s. for his Wife, and had two
young Beasts taken from him worth 3 l. which the Officers sold for 1 l. 8 s.

Elizabeth Clay fined 10 s. for her self, and 10 s. for her Daughter

Mary Leadbeater fined 10 s. for her self, and 10 s. for her Son.

William Maulson (M. L's Son aforesaid) was fined 5 s. for himself, and 1 l.
for the Poverty of two others, for which two last fines the Officers took away
a Cow and Household Goods to the value of 5 l. 4 s. which they sold 2 l. 10 s.
Officers Names are Francis Scarcliff Constable, Tho. Urdidge Thirdborrough.

The 28th day of the 3d Month, 1676. the aforesaid people were by the Officers
kept out of their Meeting at Sutton in the Street, where the aforesaid
Informers finding them, took several with them to a Justice's House, but it
being late at Night the Justice appointed them and the Officers to come the
next Day, the Officers came, but the Informers went to Robert Thoroton another
Justice, who they thought might be readier to do their Work, who fined these
persons following, and granted Warrants to make Distress on their Goods.

Robert Grace, Anthony Tomlinson, Joseph Roberts, fined 10 s. apiece, the
Distresses made by Samuel Britain Constable and other Officers.

George Cockram fined 10 s. for himself, and 1 l. for the Poverty of two
others, and had a Cow taken from him worth l. 5 s. 4 d.

John Fullwood fined 5 s. for himself, and 10 l. for the Poverty of a Woman
pretended to be the preacher, although some of the Officers present all the
Meeting time, did testify to the Justice, before whom the Sufferers were first
brought, that they did hear no words tending to either Preaching or Teaching;
yet this Thoroton, upon the Informers False Swearing, did grant a Warrant to
make Distress upon two Persons Goods for 20 l. for the Preacher that day: and
the aforesaid John Fullwood had Eleven Quarters of Malt taken from him worth
10 l. 9 s.

And William Day for the pretended Preacher was fined 10 l. and had his Goods
distrained.

George Hopkinson had Goods taken from him worth Twelve Shillings.

Robert Marriot fined 5 s. for himself, and 3 l. for the poverty of six others,
and had a Mare taken from him.

Edward Richardson of Kilverton, for being at a peaceable Meeting at Rowland
Dabey's House was fined 10 l. and they took away his Working-Tools, his Coals,
Hay and Corn, Beds and Bedding, and other Household Goods, and his Childrens
Clothes, to the value of 16 l. being almost all the poor man had, (he being a
Blacksmith by trade) to the undoing of his Wife and Children as much as lay in
the Hands of wicked Men; but great are the Mercies of the Lord.

Distrained by Warrant from Robert Thoroton of Carcouson, Tho. Girton
Constable, Christopher Dent of Bingham, and Robert Wycam Informers.

William Maultly of Orston for the same had 7. Strike of Barley taken from him
worth about 17 s. by Warrant from Robert Thoroton called Justice, Christopher
Dent, and Robert Wycam Informers, taken by William Dawson Constable, and Hugh
Lamb Officer.

Robert Bullivant of Over-Broughton, was fined 10 s. and they took away his
Household Goods by Warrant, from Justice Hows of Langer, John Hickling
Constable, John Dably and William bilkinton Officers, John Camsells of Everton
was fined 5 s. and had Goods taken from him worth about 10 s.

John Smith of Everton for the same was fined 5 s. and they took from him a
pair of Boots worth above 8 s. distrained by Warrant from Justice Sands of
Screwby, John B^ily, Thomas Rea^s, Robert Flower, and Robert Mew Officers, the
Informers not known.

John Ouidam of Calverton for being at a peaceable Meeting at the House of
Robert Bradshaw of Oxen wa^ fined 5 l. and they took away his Working Tools and
a pair of ^o^ts worth about 3 l. 9 s. and seized upon the rest of his Working
Gear (he being by Trade a weaver) since taken away; distrained by Warrant from
Robert Thoroton, William Hernsly Constable, Henry Marshall, and William Martin,
and The. Hutchinson Officers.

William Wilson of Girton for having a Meeting at his House peaceably to wait
upon God, was fined 5 l. and they took away from him two Cows that were none of
his own, but lent him by his Friends to give his Children milk, when his Goods
were taken before upon the same account and they sold the Cows which were worth
about 6 l.

Thomas Crane of North-Scarle for going to the same, had Houshold-goods taken
from him, by John Cheeswright Constable, to the value of about 5 l. for a fine
of 55 s.

Stephen Swinsco and his Wife of South-Collingham, for going to the same
Meeting was fined 5 l. 10 s. and he being a Laboring man, and not having to
answer the fine, the Constable took Goods from him worth about 2 l. 16 s. And
the Constable was fined 5 l. for not taking a Cow that this poor Man had, which
the Persecutors heard of, though she was gone out of the Lordship three days
before the Constable came to distraine or had his Warrant; so he was forced to
give the Informers 20 s. to agree with them.

Another poor Woman in the same Town having almost all she had taken from her
formerly upon this account, she having since got some Bedding, and other
Necessaries, they have now stripped her of All, and she forced to go seek lodging
in the Town; and her Land owner having a Bedsted which was left in the House as
an Earlcome, durst not let it stand, though willing of himself, their Threats
were so Cruel, being without Pity or Mercy.

Robert Carnell of North-Collingham for going to the same Meeting, was fined 10
l. and they took from him almost all his Houshold-goods, he being several times
before distrained upon for the same thing; And although formerly one that had
Plenty of such things, yet now is engaged to a Neighbor for a Bed to lie on.

Tho. Fox for going to the same Meeting was fined 5 l. 5 s. and they took from
his Brother Thomas Leevesly as ma^y Spokes and hewn Fellows as were worth
about 6 l. 6 s. 8 d. which said Spokes and Fellows were made over unto the said
Thomas Leevesly by Bill of Sale for some sum of Money the said Thomas had paid
for his Brother, and was made appear so to be before the Justice; yet the said
Justice refusing to do Right put the Constable to distraine.

Matthew Hartly, a very poor man, for going to the same Meeting was fined ^5 s.
and being gone forth of the Town to get his livelihood, spinning Woell for 2 d.
th day, the Officers broke open his Door, and took most of what he had there,
being very little.

John Trusswell for going to the same Meeting was fined 5 l. 5 s. and they took
away his Houshold-goods, not leaving Beding to cover them, but as it is lent
them by others; and some of the Family lodge in the Town for want of Bedding;
This being a man also that has had Plenty of these things for his own Family,
and also has helped to relieve others before this Act came forth, since which
he has often suffered much; and thus the Scripture is fulfilled, They that
depart from Iniquity are made a Prey.

All these Warrants granted by Robert Thoroton of Carcouson, John Smith of
Remston, and Robert Wycam of Orston Informers.

The names of the Sufferers, and the Towns where they live are as follow, of
Gerton, Richard Carter Constable, Roger Baradale Warden, Tho. Wilson Overseer;
these three were fined 5 l. apiece for turning back two Cows when owned, and
forced to take them again, and sell them. North-Collingham, Richard Longmate
Constable, John Roades, Robert Trawly Wardens, William Hall, Richard Gods^^^
Overseers. South-Collingham, John Tinsley Constable, fined 5 l. for not taking
a^ow that was gone three days before the Warrant came to his Hand, John Crane
Overseer, Robert Millnes, Bartholomew Perkins Wardens. North-S^arle, John
Cheeswrite deputie-Constable, Iarvis Partridge Warden.

Ralph Bateman and John Bateman of Fransfield, for being at a peaceable Meeting
was fined 20 l. and had Sheep taken from them worth 33 l. by Warrant from
Penistone Whaley, Robert Brown Constable, Edward Baington, John Gunthorp
Wardens, Richard Bean Third-borough, Thomas Hickbone Overseer, Christopher Dent
of Bingham, and John Warin of Westhorp In formers.

William Watson of Fransfield, for being at the same Meeting was fined 20 l and
had Goods and Cattle taken to the value of 30 l. and had Houshold-goods, with
Corn upon the Ground not ripe worth 30 l. more, yet sold all together by the
aforesaid Officers.

Andrew Hodson for his Wife and Daughter being at the same Meeting, had two
Swine taken from them, cost 1 l. 10 s.

Mary Handly of Edenly for being at the same Meeting was strained of, and the
Officers thinking they had. not taken enough, she being from Home, they brake
down the Wall and shot the Lock, and took most of her Goods to the value of 1
l. 18 s and left Goods not worth 3 s. John Horner and John Dallimor Wardens,
Charles Ward Third-borough, by VVarrant from Penistone Whaley.

John Wood, for being at the same Meeting had Goods taken to the value of 10 s.

Stephen Moor, for being at the same Meeting, had a Table taken worth about 13
s. 4 d. by the same Officers.

Edward Wood of Ekrin Wheelwright, for being at a peaceable Meeting at his own
House, was fined 20 l. and had six Cows and rwo Heifers taken from him to the
value of 19 l. 14 s. 6 d. when sold they wanted 6 l. to make up the Fine and
Charges, and a Neighbor (called William Hurt) laid down 6 l. and took away
Wheel-Timber for the same; distrained by John Holmes Constable, Richard Tomson
senior, Richard Peck sen. William Moore sen. William Johnson jun. and Thomas
Peck Officers of Ekrin, Christopher Dent and Robert Wycam Informers, by Warrant
from Robert Thoroton.

John Came of Kirsal in the parish of Kneesal, for being at the same Meeting was
fined 5 s. and for the Poverty of the Preacher, as they pretended, 10 l. and
had two Cows, one Horse and a Mare taken from him to the value of 10 l. 5 s. by
John Key Constable of Kneesal, and John Wright of Kneesal Warden.

Thomas Estwood for being at the same Meeting was fined 5 s. and had one great
Bible, one Warming-pan, one Pewter-Dish taken from him by the same Officers.

Richard Hind of Welley sen. for being at the same Meeting was fined for
himself and the pretended Poverty of Nineteen Persons more 5 l. and had taken
from him two Cows, one Yearling-Calf, worth about Six Round Ten Shillings,
Cuthbert walker Constable, Samuel Tongue and James Byllyate Overseers.

Richard Birkit of Knapthorp for the same Meeting was fined 5 s. and for the
Poverty of the Preacher aforesaid 10 l. which 10 l. 5 s. was paid by his
Brother Peter Birkit into the Sessions at Newark.

Roger Noble of Kersal for being at the same Meeting was fined 5 s. and had
Pewter and Brass taken to the value of 12 s. by John Key Constable, and John
Wright Warden.

Elizabeth Johnson for being at the same Meeting was fined 5 s. and it was paid
by her Husband George Johnson.

Robert Bradshaw of Oxen for having a peaceable Meeting at his House was fined
20 l. and had taken from him two Mares, four Beasts to the Value of 20 l.
William A^lcock Constable; Robert Bush and Robert Stox Overseers, Tho. Farnell,
Gabrid Martin Wardens, Christopher Dent and Robert Wycam Informers, by Warrant
from Robert Thoroton.

For a Meeting at Knapthorp, in the Parish of Conton, in the said County, the
11th of the 4th Month, 1676. by Warrant from Robert Thoroton senior (by
Christopher Dent of Bingham, and Robert Wycam of Orston in the County aforesaid
Informers) directed to the Constables, Churchwardens and Overseers for the
Poor of Knaptkorp, Kirsal, Kneesal and Kirton, and to every or any of them; the
Tenor whereof was on this wise, Whereas I am credibly informed, that there
will be a Meeting at some of your said Towns, or within your respective
Liberties, or thereabouts, on Pretense of Religion, otherwise then by Law is
established, these are therefore in his Majesty's Mame to will and require you,
and every or any of you to bring the said Persons so assembled before me, or
some other of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County to be dealt
withal according to Law; thereof fail not, etc. Given under my Hand and Seal,
the 13th of April, 28 Car. 3. Anno Dommini 1676. Robert Thoroton.

So there being a peaceable Meeting in Silence by the High-way-side (being kept
out of their ordinary Meeting House) was taken by Richard Tailor Constable, and
Richard Greaves and Row* and Wilson Churchwardens of Conton, and had before
William Cartwright of Osington, and were fined as follows, and Warrants
granted to distrain, John Came of Kirsal for himself, his Wife and his Brother
John Hall 15 s. and the Money was paid by his Wife's Father William Hall of
Maplebeck, who took away Goods from John Came to satisfy for the same.

John Machon of Kneesal for himself and his Wife fined 10 s. and had Goods
taken from him to the value of about 10 s. by Thomas Hay Constable of Kneesal,
and Samuel Lee Overseer.

Joseph Humphrey of Kneesal fined 5 s. and they took from his Father Richard
Humphrey three Pewter-dishes worth about 7 s. by the aforesaid Tho. Hay and
Samuel Lee.

William Kent of Kirton fined 5 s. and had 5 s. taken by John Prestwood
Constable, and Francis Roberts and John Woodcock Officers of Kirton.

Roger Noble of Kirsal fined 5 s. which was paid by his Mother in Law Mary
Wright of Kirsal.

Richard Hind of Wellow jun. fined 5 s. and a Brass-Pan, and a Pewter Flagon
worth about 6 s. 6 d. was taken from his Father Richard Hind, by Cuthbert
Walker Constable, and John Challerton and William Whitlam Wardens, and John
Bullivant and Edward Gilbert Overseers.

James Hind of Wellow fined 5 s. had a Bed-hilling and a Blanket taken to the
value of about 10 s. 6 d. by the same Officers.

For a Meeting at Kirsal in the Parish of Kneesal, in the said County of
Nottingham the 18th of the 4th Month, 1676. which Meeting was peaceable, and
in Silence, by the High-way-side on the Common, being kept out of their
ordinary Meeting House, the Informers came and took what Names they plea^ed,
and they were fined as follows, by Warrants from Robert Thoroton, Christopher
Dent and Robert Wycam being Informers.

Edward Wood of Ekrin in the County aforesaid Wheelwright fined 10 s. for
himself and his Wife, and 10 l. for the poverty of the Place (which
particularly belonged to none except the Queen, to whom they pay Common Fine)
which 10 l. 10 s. was paid into the Quarter Sessions at Newark the 12th of the
5th Mo. 1676. by the Officers of Ekrin, who took his Timber, and almost all his
Household goods to the value of the same; the Officers that distrained were John
Hollin Constable, Rich. Townsend senior, William Moor senior. Thomas Peck and
The. Machen Thirdboroughs, Martin Came Overseer, and William Moor junior and
Thomas Salmon Wardens.

Thomas Oakland of Knapthorp in the Parish of Conton fined 10 s. for himself
and his Wife, and 10 l. for the Poverty of the Place aforesaid, and had almost
all his Goods taken and sold for 5 l. by Richard Tailor of Conton Constable,
Ruhard Greaves and Rowland Wilson Wardens.

John Came of Kirsal in the Parish of Kneesal Wheelwright, fined 20 s. for
himself and his Wife, and 40 s. for the Poverty of Michael Embly, Isabel
Roberts, Esther Scrimshaw, Roger Noble and Jonathan Humphrey, and 3 l. was paid
by William Hall of Maplebeck his Wife's Fa^h^r, who took away Goods for the
same, and seized of that little he had left.

John Kent of Norlayth^s in the Parish of Rufard Husbandman for being at a
peaceable Meeting at Kne^sal the 25th of the 4th Mo. 76. was fin d 10 l. 10 s.
and had eight (...) Beasts taken from him to the value of 17 l. by John Gray
Constable of Rufard.

James Hind of VVellow Tailor for being at the same Meeting was sined 10 s. and
had the Bed-clothes taken from off their Beds, insomuch as the Boy about four
Years old, the 2d of the 11th Mon. 75. said, Now I must be fain to lie in my
Clothes; for we have nothing left to hap us) to the value of about 1 l. 13 s.
by Cuthbert Walker of VVellow Constable, John Challerton, William VVhittham
Wardens, and Edward Gilbert Overseer.

Richard Hind junior of VVellow for being at the same Meeting was fined 10 s.
and they took from his Father Richard Hind a Swine worth about 18 s. by the
aforesaid Officers.

Edward Wood of Ekrin was fined 10 l. 10 s. for the same account as they
pretended, though he was not there at that time, John Warin of Westhorp in the
parish of Suthwell and one Johnson of Bingham Informers, who came to the Town
and informed the Constable Thomas Hay of the Meeting, and went their way, and
the Constable was fined 5 l. and a Warrant granted out to distrain by Robert
Thoroton for the same, although he had set watchmen to keep Friends out of the
House where the Meeting was to have been, and himself came into the yard where
Friends were peaceable together, and the Meeting was dispersed soon after; so
he went to the Justice with the Officers that had the Warrant to distrain of
him that he might take in the Warrant, and another Townsman William Trulove
with him, and they gave in the Names or consented to the Names of Friends that
the Justice read to them. The Fines abovementioned and the Goods distrained
was by Warrant from Robert Thoroton of Carcouson, a Copy of one of the Warrants
follows.

To the Constables, Churchwardens and Overseers for the Poor of Wellow, and
every or any of them.
Forasmuch as James Hind and Rich. Hind of the said Town are lawfully convicted
before me, for having been present at a Conventicle or Unlawful Assembly, on
pretense of Religion, otherwise then by Law is established, in Kneesal, on
Sunday, the 25th of June last past; these are therefore in his Majesty's Name
to require you to levy of each of the Offenders 10 s. apiece, being formerly
convicted, by Distress and Sale of Goods; which Sams you are to deliver to me,
to be distributed according to Law; hereof fail not, as you will answer the
contrary at your Peril.

Given under my Hand and Seal the 27th day of July, 28 Car. 2. Anno Dom. 1676.
Robert Thoroton.

The 9th of the 5th Mo. 1676. the aforesaid People being met together to wait
upon the Lord at Mansfield, they being kept without the Gates to the
Street-ward, which some call Lordswaste, others the King's highway, and there
came three Informers to the Meeting, viz. John Smith of Remson, Edward Simson
of Lenton, the third not known by us, and they hearing no Declaration when they
came, they sent for the Constable and took the Names of them they knew, and
those they knew not they drew out of the Assembly, and put them to the
Constable to have them before a Justice, and one Woman when she was put to the
Constable did speak some Words to one of the Informers, which he said he would
make preaching, so having sent some to one called Justice Stanhope of Linby,
they went to Robert Thoroton of Carcouson (a fit Instrument for their purpose)
who granted Warrants, and fined them as follows, George Hopkins of Mansfield
for being at the said Meeting was sined 5 s. for his own Offense, and 10 l. for
the poverty of the Preacher or Teacher, as they pretended, which was but the
Woman that spoke to one of the Informers, as aforesaid, for which Fines the
Officers took 7 Quarter and 7 Strike of Malt, he being a Maultster, and they
came into his House, and looked into all his Rooms and said, they would have
all his Household Goods, they would not leave him a Spoon.

Robert Moor for his Wife being at the said Meeting was fined 10 s. for which
the Officers took two pair of Shoes, and one Pair of Boots, the said Robert
being a Shoemaker.

John Fulwood Maultster for being at the said Meeting was fined 10 s. for his
own Offense, and 50 s. for the Poverty of John Bullevant sen and John Bullevant
jun. Mary Leadbeater, Thomas Leadbeater and William Malson, these five lived
at S^^gby; the Officers Names James Hardy and Francis Watson Constables,
Thomas Clark and John Pumtree Thirdboroughs.

George Cockram of Scegby for his Wife being at the same Meeting was fined 10
s. for which the Officers took an Heifer worth 1 l. and they sold her, as
George did hear, for 18 s. not offering to return any overplus again to him;
The Officers Names were Francis Searcliph Constable, and Thomas Urdidge
Thirdborough.

Robert Grace of Sutton for him self and Wife being at the same Meeting was
fined 20 s. Elizabeth Brandrith for being at the same Meeting was fined 10 s.

John Blackburn, Samuel Whitworth, Elizabeth Whitworth and Elixabeth Fell, for
being at the same Meeting were fined every and each of them 5 s.

Margaret Whitworth for being at the same Meeting was fined 5 s. for her own
Offense, and 40 s. for the Poverty of Richard Bateman, Joseph-Roberts, Sarah
Clay and Francis Clay.

Richard Cooper of Mansfield-woodhouse for being at the same Meeting was fined
5 s. for his own Offense, and 10 l. for the Poverty of the Place where the
Meeting was kept, it being without the Gates to the Street-ward, as is before
mentioned.

Thomas Scoaley of Warsop for being at the same Meeting was fined 10 l. for the
Poverty of the Place aforesaid.

Here follows a Copy of one of the Warrants.

Not. To the Constables, Church Wardens, and Overseers for the Poor, and
Thirdboroughs of Sutton in Ashfield and Hurknal, and every or any of them.
Forasmuch as Robert Grace and his Wife, Eliz. Brandrith, Jo. Blackburn, Sam.
VVhitworth, Eliz. VVhitworth, Eliz. Fello and Sarah Clay, Richard Bateman,
Joseph Roberts, Fran. Clay and Margret VVhitworth of your said Towns, are
lawfully convicted before me ^^r having been present at a Conventicle or
Unlawful Assembly, on pretense of Religion, otherwise then by Law is
established, in Mansfield, on Sunday the 9th of this instant July; these are
therefore in his Majesty's Name to require you to levy of the said Rob. Grace
for his own Offense and his said Wife's Offense the sum of 1 l. being formerly
convicted; and the said Eliz. Brandrith the sum of 10 s. for her own Offense,
being formerly convicted; and the said John Blackburn, Sam. Whitworth, Eliz.
Whitworth and Eliz. Fello, of every or each of them the sum of 5 s. apiece; and
of the said Margret Whitworth the sum of 5 s. for her own Offense, and the sum
of 2 l. by reason of the poverty of Rich. Bateman, Joseph Roberts, Sarah Clay
and Francis Clay formerly convicted, by Distresses and Sale of Goods; which
said sums you are to deliver to me, to be distributed according to Law; hereof
fail not, as ye will answer the contrary at your Perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal the 25th day of July, 28 Car. 2. Anno Dom. 1676.
Robert Thoroton.

William Day of Newmenl^as Milner near Eastwood being at a Meeting at Sutton in
Ashfield, the 28th of the 3d Month, 76. was fined 5 s. for his own Offense,
and 10 l. for the poverty of a Preacher or Teacher, there being no preaching or
teaching, as the Informers pretended, as the Officers which kept us out of the
Meeting House did testify before Arthur Stanhope Justice in
Mansfieldwoodhouse, and several others affirmed the same, nevertheless the
Informers went to Robert Thoroton and he granted a Warrant against the said
William Day, and they took away from him a Mare and a Heiser, besides Pewter
and Brass, and Bedding to the value of 14 l. 10 s. 4 d. John Smith of Remson,
Thomas Sharp of Nework, Joseph Wilkinson of Nottingham Informers; Thomas
Gristed Constable, Robert Howet and Henry Winfield Wardens, Ellis England
Thridborough; and the said William Day went to Robert Thoroton called Justice
to let him know that he was wrongfully fined, and told him that there was
neither preaching nor teaching, and if he, would give him leave he could
produce several that would testify to the Truth of it, and the said John Smith
Informer standing by said. Did not widow Leadbeater go on with a Narration of
words? And William Day answered, that what words she spoke was in answer to
him, and the Justice said, If it was but one word, it was enough. Witnesses to
the Truth of this, Bartholomew Mastin, Luke Hanke, Thomas Me and Joseph Potter.

Edward Wood of Ekrin, in the County of Nottingham Wheelwright, for Contempt of
the Ecclesiastical-Court at York (as is pretended, to answer George Higgins in
a certain Cause of Tithes) was attached by a Warrant from Peniston Whal^y and
Robert Thoroton Justices, dated the 2d of March, ^5. and by Cerificate from
Henry Watkinson Official-principal of the aforesaid Court; and 37 s. was paid
by Richard Thomson junior of Ekrin, for about 12 s. in the principal demanded.

Michael Embly of Ekrin had two Lands of Pease (worth about 13 s. being all he
had) taken by George Higgins of Ekrin Impropriator, for the pretended Tithe of
an Acre of Barley, whereof four Cocks and half he pretended due to him for
Tithe.

Thomas Farnsworth of Scaftworth for being at a peaceable Meeting had taken
from him five Cows worth about 14 l.

Robert. Spauld for the same had five Cows taken from him worth about 13 l.

Robert Nicholson for the same had one Heifer, worth about 1 l. 3 s. 4 d. taken
from him. Zacharias Bower for the same had one Cow taken from him worth about
2l. 10 s. Witness John Camsal, Thomas Denton, John Birks, John Glover. The
Officers Names that distrained, William Chapman Constable of Eaverton, Edward
Chapman and John Batts Wardens, John Rayner and Francis Williamson Overseers,
George Gantley Constable and Warden for Scaftworth.

John Seaton of Blythe for being at a peaceable Meeting was fined 20 l. and had
four Oxen and one Horse takenfrom him worth 22 l.

George Greaves for the same Meeting was fined 10 l. 5 s. and had four Cows
taken from him worth 13 l.

John Wilson for the same was fined 3 l. and had a Mare taken from him worth 4
l. 10 s.

Gervase Crease for the same was fined 10 s. and had fourteen pound of pewter
taken from him worth 14 s. Distrained by Warrant from Robert Thoroton. The
Officers Names are, Robert Williamson and Richard Malken Constables, Gervase
Pie and Richard Emerson Wardens, Henry Noedin Overseer, John Brown and Thomas
Moresin Thirdboroughs. Witness Thomas Farnsworth, Joseph Hudson, John Couson.

John Torr of Scrooby for being at a peaceable Meeting was fined 5 s. for his
own Offense, and 10 l. for the poverty of a certain Blind Man unknown, for one
Meeting, and 1 l. fine for another Meeting, both Warrants amounting to 11 l. 5
s. and they took from him 4 Oxen worth about 14 l. 10 s. and another Warrant
from Justice Sands for the sum of 10 s. and 1 l. which the Officers run in
Charges about selling the Oxen, which they had taken away by Virtue of the
other two Warrants, more then they sold the Oxen for, as is pretended; so they
took an Heifer from him worth about 2 l. 10 s.

William Kirkby of Geatforth, for being at a peaceable Meeting, had taken from
him seven Beasts worth about 12 l. 10 s. By Warrant from Robert Thoroton. Adam
Hut^hinson and Charles Tollet Constables, William Br^fit and George Norman
Wardens. Witness John Raganal, Peter Ancliph.

Note, There was formerly taken on this Account, from several Innocent Persons
in this County, Goods and Cattle to the value of 695 l. and upwards; and two
Persons great Sufferers formerly, appealing to the Sessions, they ordered them
their Money again, but this great persecuting Justice, Peniston Whaley,
fraudulently detains 60 l. in his Hands, contrary to the Orders of Sessions.

John Seaton of Blythe, for having peaceable Meetings at his House to worship
the Lord, was fined 20 l. and 10 s. for himself, and 35 s. for his Wife's being
at four Meetings, and 5 s. for his Servant, in all fined 62 l. 10 s. and had
his Goods distrained, viz. All his Household Goods, Horses, Ma^es, Kine and
Swine, his Carts and other wooden ware, with old Wood, Stone and Brick, to the
Value of 100 l. and upwards.

The Officers Names that distrained, Robert Williamson, Richard Malkin,
Constables; Richard Emerson, Gervase Pie, Wardens; Henry Nodin, Overseer for
the Poor.

George Greaves of Blythe Shoemaker, for meeting peaceably at the House of John
Seaton, was fined for himself 40 s. and for the Poverty of several other
Persons, and four unknown, 4 l. 10 s. and they distrained of his Goods, as
Bedding, Pewter, Shoes and Boots, by the above said Officers, to the Value of
11 l. and upwards.

George Greaves for being at a peaceable Meeting at John Seaton's, was fined 10
s. and 3 l. by Reason of the Poverty of six other Persons, and 10 l. by Reason
of the Poverty of the Owner of the Place; and they took in Hay, Corn, Barley,
Malt, one Mare, two Swine and a Calf, and Household goods to the Value of 25 l.
and upwards.

The Officers Names that distrained, Richard Boulton and Robert B^llyet,
Constables; Gervase Pie and Richard Emerson Watdens; John Malkin and Michael
Judson, Thirdboroughs; Henry Nodin, Overseer of the poor.

Gervase Cressie of Blyth^ being one of the Overseers of the poor, for Neglect
of his Office, because he did not assist them in breaking up the Meetings of
the said People, was fined 5 l. for which Fine Christopher Snowdin High
Constable, took from him two Cows, and other Household Goods, and one Bundle of
Candle weke, in all to the Value of about 9 l. 4 s.

Henry Upton of Harworth for being at a peaceable Meeting was fined 20 s. for
himself and his Wife, and 6 l. 10 s. by Reason of the Poverty of thirteen other
Persons named in the Warrant, and had two Oxen and three Cows taken from him,
worth about 14 l.

William Kirkby for being at a peaceable Meeting in the highway, the said
People being kept out of their meeting house, was fined 10 s. for himself, and
10 l. by Reason of the Poverty of the owner of the Place. For which Fine the
Officers took from him six Beasts and five Horses and Mares, with the rest of
his Goods in the House, to the value of 25 l. and upwards and sold in the
presence of Richard Champio^, John Ridginal, John Wilson; Officers, John
Champion, Edward Tomlinson, Constables.

Joseph Hudson of Mattersey for being at a peaceable Meeting, was fined for
himself 10 s. and 6 l. 5 s. by Reason of the poverty of twenty five unknown
Persons (then and there present, as the Warrant specified) and the Officers
distrained for the said Fine, 5 Cows, 10 Swine, some Pewter and Bras^, 2 Beds
with Furniture, and other Household Stuff, and a parcel of Corn, and a parcel of
Hay, to the value of 12 l. 10 s. by Thomas Barker Constable; William Morley and
Henry Iessop Wardens. witness William Broundley, George Goodyear; All the
aforesaid Goods and Cattle were distrained by Warrants granted by Robert
Thoroton.

Thomas Farnsworth being impannelled upon a Jury at a Court Leet, and because
he could not swear, was fined 3 s. 4 d and had a pewter Dish taken from him
worth about 4 s. 6 d.

John Birks for the like had a Flaggon taken from ^im worth about 5 s. 4 d.

Zacharias Bower for the like had two pewter Dishes taken from him, worth about
6 s. These taken by Roberts Graves the Bishop's Bailiff.

John Birks of Scaftworth for being at a peaceable Meeting with several other
Friends, though kept out of the Meeting House, and driven into the Street, was
fined 10 s. for himself, and 10 l. by Reason of the poverty of the Owner of the
place, (though it was in the Street or High way) and he had taken from him five
Cows, worth about 14 l. 5 s.

Zacharias Bower for the same was fined 10 s. for himself, and 10 l. for the
poverty of the owner of the Place, and had taken from him five Cows, worth
about 15 l. by Warrant from Justice Sands. The Officers Names, William Chapman
Constable; Edward Chapman, John Bates Wardens; John Raynes and Francis
Williamson Overseers for the poor. Witnesses, Robert Spanold, Robert Nickelson,
Edward Ieptson.

Thomas Denton for being at the same Meeting fined 10 s. and had Goods taken
from him to the value of about 17 s.

Thomas Fa^nsworth of Scaftworth, for being at peaceable Meetings was fined 10
s. for himself, and 3 l. for the poverty of 12 unknown Persons; and by another
Warrant 10 s. for himself, and 10 l. by Reason of the Poverty of the Owner of
the Place, by Warrants from Peniston Whaley, and his Goods were distrained and
sold; first, three Horses, one Mare, two Cows, four Calves, one parcel of Rye
and a parcel of Barley, two parcels of Hay, his Carts, Ploughs and
Horse-Harness, and other things in the Yard, at 28 l. 6 s. 4 d. Also within the
house four Beds and several Household Goods at 12 l. 4 s. 8 d.

John Birks of the same, for 20 s. Fine, had a Fillie taken from him, worth
about 1 l. 15 s.

Zachariah Bower of the same, for the same Cause was fined 13 l and had taken
from him seven Horses and Mares, five Calves, three Carts, two Ploughs and one
Harrow, with Horse-Harness, Hay and Corn, and Wood at 20 l. 8 s. 4 d. Goods in
the House, as four Beds, Pewter and Brass, and several other Goods worth about
16 l. 4 s. 2 d. by two Warrants from Peniston Whaley. The Officers Names,
William Chapman Constable; John Raines, Francis Williamson Overseers; John
Bates, Edward Chapman Wardens; and George Gantley Constable of Scaftworth, all
of Everton. Witnesses Robert Nickelson, Edward Ieptson, Robert Spanold.

Henry Upton of Harworth, for being at a peaceable Meeting at Blythe, was fined
10 s. for himself, and 10 l. for the poverty of the Preacher (as they
pretended) and the Officers made Distress, and ^sold all his Goods and Chattels
which he had left, for the raising of the said sums, by Warrant from Robert
Thoroton. The Officers Names, John Ellis Constable; Thomas Rowood and Robert
Sissans Wardens; Robert Fetherly and John Ellis Overseers: Witnessed by
Bartholomew White senior, George Wagstaff, Charles Hopkinson.

John Birks fined 20 s. for being at two peaceable Meetings, and had a Mare
taken from him, worth about 40 s. Thomas Denton for a Fine of 5 s. had taken
from him two Calves, worth about 40 s. by VVarrant from P. Whaley; witness
Thomas Saintpall, Dorothy Gledge.

Edward Hickson of Tickhil for being at a peaceable Meeting was fined for
himself, and the Poverty of two others 30 s. and had taken from him an Heifer,
worth about 3 l. 5 s.

John Lambert of Tickhil for being at a Meeting was fined for himself and the
poverty of five more persons, 3 l. and they took from him an Heifer worth about
3 l. 10 s. by Warrant from Ralph Knight. The Officers Names that distrained,
James Houson, Samuel Scorar Constables; John Bradford, Richard Hole Overseers;
William Lee Church Warden; witness John Bradford, John Hickeon, Elizabeth Ties,
John Fairf^ot.

Gervase Lambard for being at peaceable Meetings at Blythe was fined 40 s. by
Warrants from Peniston Whaley, and they distrained his Goods, viz. Some Pewter,
Brass, his Beds and Bedding, with some Leather and his Working Tools, with all
other Goods in the House, with his Hay, to the Value of about 8 l.

John Camsal fined 30 s. for being at peaceable Meetings, and had taken from
him some Corn in the Barn, with two Beds and Bedding, with other Goods to the
value of about 10 l.

The Officers Names, William Chapman and George Gantley Constables; Edward
Chapman and John Baytes Wardens; John Raines and Francis Williamson Overseers
of the poor.

Witnesses, I seph Camsel, Thomas Saintpal, George Flecher.

The 22d of the 10th Month, 1676. an Account of Goods then taken from William
Emley of Mansfield in the County of Nottingham Mercer, for a Fine of 10 l. 5 s.
for being at a Meeting the 17th Day of the same, at Hucknal-Hoofet, in the
parish of Sutton in Ashfield, and thereof convicted the 19th of the same, by
John Smith, one Sharp and Obadiah Anthony Informers, before Robert Thoroton of
Carcouson, in the County asore-said, Justice, viz. 10 l. for the poverty of the
Preacher, and 5 s. for him elf, and by Warrant from the said Robert Thoroton
directed to Thomas Innocent and Francis Watson Constables; Richard Burbidge
Apothecary, John Garner Mercer, Ralph Croshey Dyer, Thomas Wheat Butcher,
Overseers of the poor; George Cook Malt-maker, and John Clay Tanner,
Churchwardens; John Plumtry and Thomas Clerk Thirdboroughs, all of Mansfield
in the County aforesaid; he had Shop Goods taken from him to the value of 23 l.
and upwards.

George Hopkinson for being at the same Meeting was fined 10 s. for which he
was distrained, by Thomas Innocent Constable, John Plumtry and Thomas Clerk
Thirdboroughs, as follows, one Coverlet worth 10 s. one pewter Candlestick
worth 1 s. one Chair worth 4 s.

A Relation of a Notorious Piece of Deceit, acted by the Persecutors of these
poor affl^cted People called Quakers in this County.
Upon the 26th Day of the 9th Mo. 76. some of the said People being peaceably
assembled together, in the parish of Blythe and waiting in Stilness and Silence
upon the Lord, there came in amongst them one Edward Butterworth, who sat down
a while amongst them, till the Informers came in, viz. John Smith, Obadiah
Anthony and Thomas Sharp; then Edward Butterworth stood up and said, Blessed
be the Peacemakers, with some other words that were not understood, by Reason
Tohmas Sharp one of the Informers pulled him forth, the Constable meeting them
near the Door, asked why they pulled him out? the Informer said, If another
speak I will pull him out also, so the Officers had this pretended Preacher
before Justice Sands, who upon Examination said, He lived at Broughton within
eight Miles of Lincoln; but there being some Suspicion that he was a Cheat,
ordered the Officers to secure him, and to bring him before him again next Day;
where before the said Justice Sands and Sr. Ralph Knight, being again examined
he still said, he lived at Broughton, and Thomas Sharp, one of the Informers
being asked upon his Oath, whet her he knew the said Butterworth, did affirm,
He never saw him before in all his Life; but a Certificate was produced before
the Justices to prove they both lived in Newark, a Copy of which is as follows.

This may certify whom it may concern, that we whose Names are underwritten
do testify, that Edward Butterworth and Thomas Sharp of our Town of Newark,
are very well acquainted, and very near Neighbors, living together in our
Town, and both in a Street, most of our Town well know it.

John Milnes. Thomas Merryweather.
After Examination the Justices seeing their Deceit, committed Butterworth to
Nottingham Goal, except he found Sureties to appear at Redford Sessions, and as
the Constable was conducting this pretended Quaker to the Goal, Smith and
Anthony two of the Informers being with him, he rode away from the Constable;
but about three Days after he went to Justice Sands, and Obadiah Anthony and
Thomas Sharp two of the Informers with him, who were bound for his Appearance
at Redford Sessions.

A short Relation of the Proceedings of the Justices of the Peace, at
Nottingham Quarter Sessions, the Eighth Day of the Eleventh Month, 1676.
Where many of the People of God, in Scorn called Quakers, came to appeal for
Justice from the Illegal Proceedings of the Cruel Informers, who acted by
Virtue of several Warrants granted forth by Robert Thoroton Justice of the
Peace; there being about 20 Appeals which were promised to be tried at this
Sessions, and but three of them put in, the manner of their Trials was as
follows, as near as can be remembered.

Upon the 8th day of the 11th Mo. as aforesaid, the Court being sat the
Council for the Informers spoke to the Justices and the rest of the Court, that
it would be a Dishonor to the King, and to his Honorable Justices of Peace,
that the Appeals should be tried; for if they were, it was as much as if the
Justices had not done according to Law, and if it should be brought in for the
Appellant, it would be a Dishonor to them, or Words to that Effect.

The Council for the Appellant, It is not any Dishonor to the King, or his
Justices, but whether the Informers acted according to Law or no, that is the
Question; and if any look upon themselves to be grieved contrary to Law, they
may be tried by a Jury of twelve men, which the Law does allow; and further, he
desired the Trials might be in the Informers Name, and not in the Name of the
King, but it would not be granted. So when the Justices had ordered the Appeals
should go on to Trial, a Jury was impannelled and sworn, and the Warrant of
Robert Thoroton's Conviction of the Meeting at Blythe such a Day, betwixt the
King of the one Part, and John Sayton and the other Appellants on the other
part, by which Warrant the said John Sayton was fined 20 l. for suffering a
Conventicle at his House (as they said) in the Parish of Blythe. So the
Witnesses were called and sworn.

Witness, I was there on that Day, and there were several People met, but were
all silent, and no Words spoken amongst them but did not see John Sayton there.

Council for the Appellant, Now in the first place, forasmuch as there was
neither Preaching, Praying nor Reading, as their own witness does testify,
therefore it was no Conventicle.

2dly, Being they cannot prove he was there, therefore how can it be judged,
that he did either wittingly or willingly consent to that Meeting, if they
could make it a Conventicle, with much more to that purpose.

Informers Council, Now as to the first, although there was neither Preaching,
praying nor Reading, yet it was evident enough that they met under a pretense
of a Religions Exercise, and seeing there was more then five, and not of John
Sayton's Family, therefore it must needs be a Conventicle. And as to the 2d,
seeing they cannot prove he was there, we must leave it to the Consciences of
the Jury, whether he did willingly consent to that Meeting, or no.

So when the Council had spoke on both sides, Peniston Whaley one of the
Justices, who sat in the Chair, as Judge of the Court, stood up and spoke to
the Jury to this Effect, and said, Although there was no visible Exercise that
can be proved, yet the Quakers say, they worship God in Spirit and Truth, and
we know their Manner is, to sit sighing and gr^aning, and such like dumb
Actions; and did very much labor to insense the Jury (not like an Impartial
Judge) and told them, They must find it for the King; and so the Jury went
forth in Order to bring in a Verdict.

So another Jury was impannelled, in Order to a second Trial of John Sayton's,
he being sined 20 l. more for a Meeting in the parish of Blythe as aforesaid;
so the Witnesses being sworn, their proceedings were much like the former, only
one passage is to be taken Notice of, concerning one Thomas Sharp an Informer,
who not long before did forswear himself before a Justice of Peace in the
County, and Evidence being ready in the Court upon his Oath to testify the
same, in Order to invalidate hi^ Evidence, was called to know what he could say
concerning Sharp, but the informers Council would not suffer him to speak to
that Matter, but instead thereof, asked the Witness several ensnaring
Questions, and Sharpe's Testimony was taken.

Counselor Leake being for the Appellant, asked the said Thomas Sharp,
Whether he was to have part of the Fine by the Oath he had taken? and he said,
Nay: He was then asked, What he did at Blythe that day, and what was his
Rusiness* and he answered, To look after Meetings. So this we leave to sober
People, to judge whether he was concerned or nay, he being one of the Informers.

Note also, That John Sayton was above Sixty Miles from home the ^ame day that
he was fined 20 l. as was made appear in open Court by substantial Evidence.

So the Jury went forth, and the first Jury immediately came in with a Verdict.

Then they were asked, If they were all agreed?

Jury, And they said, Yes.

Court, Who shall speak for you?

Jury, Our Foreman.

Court, Do you find it for the King or for the Appellant?

Jury, For the Appellant.

Upon this Verdict coming in, Penistone Whaley, one of the Justices (the rest
of them being pretty moderate) bid them Go forth again; but one of the Jurymen
stood up and said, They were agreed, and they had considered it very well;
whereupon he fell into a great Rage, and flung off the Bench, and said, You
deserve all to be Hanged, and said, they were as ill as Highway-men, and Cursed
them, and further said, as if He hoped the King would take away Iuries, for
this way will not do.

Then Lawyer Athrop, the Appellant's Attorney, answered and said to the Court,
You know how Judges have been reproved for threatening Iuries, and striving to
force them contrary to their Consciences, or words to this purpose.

So the second Jury came in, and was asked, If they were agreed?

They said, Yes.

Court, Do you find it for the King or the Appellant?

Jury, For the Appellant.

Which Verdict was to the great Satisfaction of most people, who had heard or
known of the Informers Cruelty and Ungodly Proceedings.

Upon the nineth day, being the next Morning, the Court sat, again, and
proceeded in order to a Trial of William Hudson's of Little-Greenley, near
Redford, for which he stood convicted by Robert Thoroton, and fined 20 l. and
William Hudson was called, and did appear, and was bidden to come up to the
Bar, but as he was coming up, one pulled off his Hat, and Penistone Whaley
seeing that, bid give the man his Hat again, so William put it upon his Head,
and for so doing P. Whaley fined him 5 l. and committed him to Prison, and
said, We need no Jury for that.

Note, That these two former Juries were impannelled by the Sheriff according
to Law, being all substantial Men, without Exception when they were sworn, and
only intended to try the Causes depending; but the judicious Care of the Jury
men not suting the Humor of some of the Justices in bringing in their Verdicts
the day before, must now all be turned off, and to work they go to impannel a
new Jury to answer their Ends; and one Billige was called and placed the
Foreman, which is or has been Bailiff to P. Whaley, and one Howett that is
his Clark, and others whom they pleased. So the Jury being sworn, and the
Witnesses also, which were two Informers, viz. Thomas Sharp and Obadiah
Anthony, and another poor man, which did say, We saw many people met together
about sixteen, but they were silent, without speaking any words; but they could
not say, they saw William Hudson there. Thomas Sharp was asked, If he knew
William Hudson? and he said, Yea, and that is he, pointing at one, of which
several took notice of him, William Hudson being then in Prison [A Notorious
Forsworn Informer.]

The Appellant's Council seeing their Illegal Proceedings in impannelling
another Jury, whom they pleased, and would not admit of any Exception, nor have
regard to Law, would plead no more, but did forthwith rise up, and said, If
this be your Law, I have done, or words to that purpose.

But the Informers Council made use of his Silence and Departure to their own
unjust Ends, and wronged him, saying to the Jury, You are upon the Matter of
Fact, and you see the Case is so clear that their Council has nothing to say;
therefore you need not stand long about it, but bring it in for the King.

So the Jury went out, but notwithstanding their illegal choice of them, in
hopes of a speedy and free Verdict to answer their Ends, yet it proved far
otherwise, as will be manifest in the sequel.

For after they had waited a long while, and the Jury came not in, they sent a
Bailiff to know if they were agreed? then he returned and said, They are not
agreed, and they think they shall not agree.

So when they had waited very long, and had done their other Business, they
sent again to them, That if they would have Information in matter of Law, they
would inform them: So the Bailiff brought them into the Court, and Penistone
Whaley said, Are you agreed? and Billidge the Foreman said, We are Eight that
would bring it in for the King, and there are Four that will not agree thereto.
Penistone Whaley, Why, what Four are these that will not agree? One of them
stood up and said, In the first place, I am not satisfied that William Hudson
did wittingly and willingly consent to the Meeting at his House; and 2dly,
there being neither preaching nor praying, nor any visible Exercise of
Religion, it cannot be a Conventicle.

The Informers Attorney said, That as concerning it being a Conventicle, the
Quakers themselves did grant, and several of them that were at that Meeting had
paid their Fine.

Note, This was false; for none that were at that Meeting had paid any Fines;
but by virtue of Robert Thoroton's Warrant the Officers and Informers had taken
their Goods, and because they did not put in their Appeals, this is called a
Confession of the Fact.

And so they went out again, but could not agree, and about Eight by the Clock
at Night one of the four being weak, and ill of a Cold, and wanting
Refreshment, something condiscended, partly through the Threats of Penistone
Whaley, threatening them, who said, If they could not agree, there they were
likely to stay until they dy^d, and as one dyed they would choose another, until
they were all Dead.

So at last they delivered in a Private Verdict against the Appellant, after
the Court was adjourned which the Justices Note, Most of the Justices at
Nottingham Sessions carried things moderately, except P. Whaley; but at Newark
Robert Thoroton and Penistone Whaley, and the rest that sats on the Bench, were
bent against the Innocent, as with one accord.
receiving, charged the Jury to appear the next day at Newark; Sessions in open
Court: So the next day the Jury appearing at Newark, some of them being
dissatisfied with what was done, desired to know of the Justices, If it was not
lawful to go out again, that they might consider better of it, in regard they
had agreed to a private Verdict, because they were threatened to be kept without
Meat Half a Year, and believing the other part of the Jury would have more
Liberty?

But the Justices told them, It was not lawful to do it, but was a Cheat to the
King, and a Dissembling with God Almighty. But the Appealant's Attorney
desiring to prove the Lawfulness of it, was threatened to be Bound to his Good
Behavior if he spoke anything before the Verdict was delivered in open Court.
So at last they were forced again to condescend, and the Verdict was given in
against the Appealant, although it was contrary to their Consciences, being
Forced thereunto, as some of them declared in open Court, and to this day some
of them remain dissatisfied.

So the Court being now sat at Newark, and a Jury impannelled in order for
another Trial of William Hudson, he being the Appealant, the Jailer gave
William Hudson leave to be there.

The Jury being now impannelled, Pen. Whaley gave his Judgment, and said,
Although that there were no words proved as Preaching, it must be found for the
King, if you believe they were met to worship God; for (said he) some worship
one way, and some another, and the Quakers Worship is dumb Worship.

And Robert Thoroton (another of the Justices) said, The Quakers Worship is
with Sighs and Groans which cannot be uttered.

Whereupon one of the Jurymen desired to be satisfied, for said he, It may be
they met not to worship God, but were sa^e Sighing and Mourning for their
Abominations.

Robert Thoroton replied, That Is the Quakers Worship, the Wickedest Thing in
the World.

But said the Man, I would gladly do Equity.

Robert Thoroton replied, YOU HAVE NOTHING TO DO WITH * EQUITY.

* How shall the Oppressed come to have Justice done them, when the Court they
appeal to told the Jury, THEY HAVE NOTHING TO DO WITH EQUITY!

So they went out, and some of the Jury being not satisfied concerning the
Meeting, being it was in Silence, did think to have found it for the Appealant,
as they have confessed; but presently they procured one Obadiah Anthony, an
Informer, who told them, That there was Preaching, and they were kn^^led down
upon their Knees: So then they concluded against the Appealant. This one of the
Jurymen confessed; and the said Obadiah Anthony was seen with the Jury by John
Sayton and Samuel Ell^z of Newark, and Francis Hawoth, and many others, and one
of the Bailiffs standing by with a Candle. So when the Jury brought it against
the Appealant, then they gave William Hudson his Liberty.

So complaint being made to the Court, That the Informer was allowed to be
amongst the Jury, which made Thirteen; their Answer was, Charge the Bailist to
look better to the next.

Also, when John Sayton's Appeal was tried at Newark, the Foreman of the Jury,
William Arnall by name of Carcouson (Robert Thorton's Neighbor) did much Rail
in the Court against the People called Quakers; and one heard him say, I will
serve the Quakers turn this time; we will be troubled with them no more.

Several that were called upon the Jury they excepted against, and showed no
Cause why, and would have none but such as were ready to answer their Cruel
Ends.

So the Appealants seeing their illegal Proceedings, and that wrong Judgment
proceeded from them that sat in the place of Justice, notwithstanding all that
was said or spoken, and although they cried for Justice, they could not be
heard; and if the Appealants Attorney (having no man else to plead for them)
did speak any thing contrary to their Wills, either by excepting against any of
the Jury (which the Law allows, if Cause be showed) or any other thing that
they did not affect, although lawful, he was threatened to the good behavior,
or some other Opprobious Terms; so that now having got their Desire upon the
Innocent, they went on without Control; and the Jury being levened by them,
what Appeals were afterward tried, were brought in against the Appealants, who
having now no other to appeal unto, but Almighty God, did wholely commit
themselves, with what they have, into his Hands, being fully satisfied it is
for his Name's sake they now suffer; and whosoever so loses either House or
Lands, or any other thing, shall in this Life receive a Reward, and in the
World to come Life Everlasting.

Justice Whaley said at Newark Sessions to the Jury, That if they did believe
that the Quakers did meet to MAKE MARRIAGES or TURN PAN-CAKES, they might find
it for the Appealant; but if to WORSHIP GOD, they might find it for the King.

Prisoners in the County of York, as follows.
JOshua Smith excommunicated for not taking the Oath of a Warden, pronounced by
Henry Watkinson Chancellor and a Capiendo sued out by Thomas Holms Procter,
committed the 13th day of the 9th, Month, 1673. where he still remains in the
Castle of York.

Christopher Stockton committed to the Castle of York, by William Rayley
Knight, and Francis Driffield, both Justices of the Peace, in the North Riding
of York shire; their Warrant grounded upon a Statute of Henry the 8th, bearing
date, the third of the nineth Month, 74. and by Certificate from the Judge of
the Consistory-Court at York, Henry Watkinson certifying his Excommunication,
and this done at the suit of Thomas Flather Priest of Lestingham, for
Substraction of Tithes.

Nicholas Raw committed to prison by him called Lord St. John's and others, by a
Significavit of his being excommunicated, at the suit of Tobias West Priest of
Grunton, their Warrant bearing date the 7th of the 9th Month, 74.

Christopher Walkinton of Hutham committed to Prison upon a Capias for
nonpayment of Steeple-house Tax, and other Contempts of the Church so called,
the 8th of the 11th Month, 74. Robert Squire Proctor.

Joseph Trevis of the parish of Owthorne arrested by William Marshal Apparitor,
with a Capias sued out by Robert Squire Procter, and committed the 20th of the
11th Month, 1674. where he yet remains.

Peter Simpson of the parish of Hampsthwaite sued in the spiritual Court, so
called, at York by Samuel Sugde Priest of the said Parish, decreed
excommunicate by Henry Watkinson Judge of the Court, and a Capias sued out by
Thomas Holms Procter, attached by George Haxby of Hampsthwaite Apparitor, and
committed the 1st day of the 12th Month, 74.

William Hudson sued in the spiritual Court, so called, for nonpayment of
Steeple-house Tax, by Richard Bolton Warden, and at his own Charge, attached by
Christopher Morley Apparitor by a Capias, and committed the 8th day of the 11th
Month, 73. where he still remains at the City Goal.

Matthew VVildman of Celside, in the parish of Horton in Craven, and County of
York Husbandman sued in the same Court by Thomas Wilson of Becrofthat, in the
parish aforesaid Impropriator, for Substraction of Tithe, and for his
Contumacy in not appearing to Citation, was decreed excommunicate by H. VV.
Chancellor, and a Writ sued out by Thomas Holms Procter, and attached by Robert
Banks of Giglesweek Yeoman and Appariter, and committed the 12th of the 3d
Month, 75. where he yet remains.

Thomas Appleton of Huttonrudsby Yeoman presented in the Bishop's Court for not
going to the Steeple-house to hear Divine-Service, so called, and not receiving
the Sacrament, and for his Contumacy in not appearing to the Citation, was
decreed excommunicate by Henry VVatkinson Judge of the Consistory-Court, and a
Capias sued forth by Francis Parker Procter in that called the Spiritual-Court,
and attached by William Stockdel Appariter, and committed to the Castle of York
the 7th day of the 5th Month, 75. where he still is a Prisoner.

Gervase Key of the parish of Kirkburton was sued in the aforesaid Court by
Joseph Brigs Priest of Kirkburton aforesaid, in a Cause of Substraction of
Tithes, and because he could not give in his Answer to his Libel upon Oath, was
by the Judge pronounced contumacious, and certified to John Armitage and John
Key Knights, and Francis White, all Justices, by Warrant committed him the 8th
of the 5th Month, 75.

Edward Geor of Thornton, near Pocklington Husbandman was presented in the
before said Court, and for not appearing to Citation was excommunicated, and by
a Capias attached and committed (though old and infirm) the 15th day of the 5th
Month, 1675.

Richard Carr of Scamston, near New-Malton Husbandman was presented in the
aforesaid Court for not receiving the Sacrament, and going to hear Divine
Service, so called, for which he was cited, and not appearing, pronounced
contumacious, and decreed excommunicate, and a Capias sued out by Arthur
Thornton Register to the Bishop, by which he was attached, and committed to
prison the 21th day of the 6th Mon. 75.

Edward Evans of Nunmoncton near York Yeeman was presented in the Bishop of
Chester's Court, by the Wardens, and cited to appear at Richmond before Thomas
Cradock Official, and for not appearing decreed excommunicate, and a Writ sued
forth by Thomas Lee Procter, and attched by James Hague and William Syres
senior Bailiffs, by Warrant dated the 9th of the 5th Month, 75. and committed
the 28th day of the 6th Mon. 75.

Honora Skipwith of Skipwith Widow presented in the Bishop's Court at York for
not receiving the Sacrament and going to hear Divine Service, so called, was
thereupon decreed excommunicate, and a Capias sued forth by Arthur Thornton the
Bishop's Register, and attached by William Saire and another, Bailiffs, and
committed to prison the 23d of the 7th Mo. 75.

John Leightfoot of the parish of Skipwith Husbandman presented upon the same
Account, and decreed excommunicate and a Capias sued out by the aforesaid
Thornton, and taken by the same Persons, and committed the 23d of the 7th
Month, 75.

John Green of Leversedge Yeoman in the parish of Birstal, presented in the
Bishop's Court at that time called Easter, in the Year 1674. by Thomas Tailor,
Robert Walker, Matthew Smith, John Mann and Isaac Brook for not going to the
Steeple ho use and receiving the Sacrament, so called, and thereupon cited, and
appearing to the Citation was decreed excommunicate, and a Writ sued forth by
Arthur Thornton, and attached by Christopher Morley and William Stockdale, and
committed to York Castle the 26th day of the 8th Month, 1675. and dyed in
prison.

Thomas Mitton of the Chapelrie of Ripandin, in the parish of Ealand
Husbandman, was presented in the Court aforesaid by Samuel White, Richard
Royd, Josiah Siddel, John Bothomley and Joseph Hoyle, for not going to the
Steeple, house and receiving Bread and Wine, and thereupon cited, and not
appearing to the Citation was excommunicate, and a Writ sued forth by Arthur
Thornton; he was committed to prison the 26th of the 8th Mon. 1675.

William Keddy of Hutham Husbandman, presented in the aforesaid Court for not
going to the Steeple house and receiving the Sacrament, so called, was
excommunicated by Henry Watkinson Judge, and a Capias sued forth by Robert
Squire Procter, and committed to prison the 3d of the 11th Month, 75.

Christopher Wharlton presented in the Bishop's Court at York and for not
appearing to Citation decreed excommunicate, and a Capias sued out by Robert
Squir, Procter the 3d of the 11th Month, 75.

William Blossom of Patrington Cooper presented in the aforesaid Court and for
not appearing to Citation decreed excommunicate by Henry Watkinson Judge of the
Court, and a Capiar sued out by Robert Squire Procter, and committed the 5th
day of the 11th Month, 75.

Thomas Billany presented in the Bishop's Court aforesaid, and for his not
appearing to Citation, decreed excommunicate by the Judge before said, and a
Capias sued out by Robert Squire Procter, committed the 5th day of the 11th
Mon. 75.

Richard Hancock presented in the before said Court, and not appearing to
Citation decreed excommunicate by the Judge of the aforesaid Court, and a
Capias sued out by the aforesaid Procter, and committed the 5th day of the 11th
Month, 75.

Samuel Wright of Nedlington Gras-man in the parish of Holden, sued in the
Bishop of Chester's Court by Lanc. Clark and John Hewson parish Clarks of
Holden, for their Sallery, which at the first was voluntary; their Demand was
4d. and not appearing to the Citation was decreed excommunicate by Joseph
Cradock Knight Official principal of that Court, and a Capias sued forth, and
committed the 9th Day of the 10th Mo. 75.

Samuel Pool of Knottingley Yeoman sued by one John Bingley, on the Behalf of
the King and himself, for a Debt of 40 l. which the said Bingley says, he owes
to the King and himself; and by a Writ attached and committed to Pontefract
Goal the 18th day of the 11th Month, 1675. where he yet remains.

Thomas Parkin of Eloughton Husbandman presented in the Bishop's Court at York,
and for not appearing to Citation decreed excommunicate, and a Capias sued
forth by Thomas Holms Procter; committed the 7th of the 12th Month, 75.

Mary Brockbanck of Farndale near Kirkby More-Side in the County of York Widow,
aged near fourscore, was sued by Thomas Hardwick Priest of Kirkby-more-side for
Substractior of Tithes, and attached by an Exchequer Writ, and committed, to
York-Castle the 29th of the 8th Month, ^4. where she yet is

Henry Iarret presented for Non payment of Steeple-house Tax, and not appearing
to Citation decreed excommunicate, and a Capias sued out by Robert Squire
Procter, and committed the 28th Day of the 12th Month, 75.

Francis Lund, Thomas Salkel, and Thomas Wilkinson, all of Dent in the County
of York, but of the Di^cess of Chester were sued in the Court at Richmond, by
Leonard Burton Priest of Sedbergh for Easter-Reckonings, which according to
their Costom is but 1 d. 1 ob. per head, and for their not appearing to
citation, were by the aforesaid Cradock Official decreed contumacious, and a
Capias sued out by John Newton Procter, and attached by Robert Banks Appariter,
and committed the 8th Day of the 2d Month, 1676. where they yet remain.

William Redshaw committed to the Castle of York by Henry Go^drick Justice of
Peace, at the Request of Henry Watkinson Judge of the Spiritual Court, for his
pretended contumacy to the Decrees of the said Court, as says the Mittimus,
committed the 15th day of the 5th Month, 76.

Isab^l Milner Widow presented for her Nonconformity, and for her not
appearing to citation, decreed excommunicate, and a Capias sued out by Thomas
Holms Procter, attached by William Stockde! Appariter, and committed the 10th
day of the 10th Month, 76.

Joseph* Denton Batchellor, near Leeds, presented for his Nonconformity, and
for his not appearing to Citation decreed Excommunicate, and a Capias sued out
by Tho. Holms Procter, attached by Will. Stockdel Apparitor, committed the 17th
of the 11th month, 1676.

David Nutbrown of Holden Linnen-Weaver, presented in the Bishop of Chester's
Court, and a Capias sued out by Th. Lee Procter, and attached by William
Marshal Apparitor, committed the 18th day of the 11th month, 76.

John Lukis of Easingwod-house Carpenter, presented in the Bishop's Court for
his Non conformity, and for not appearing to Citation was decreed
Excommunicate, and a Capias sued out by Arthur Thornton the Bishop's Register,
and committed the 21th of the 10th month, 75.

All these still continue Prisoners in the County of York.

Dyed in York-Castle since the 4th Month, 1675.
John Brockbank, Son to the before-named Mary Brockbank, and as Servant to his
Mother, yet sued with her, and cast into Prison; he Dyed the 8th of the 8th
Month, 75.

Richard Long sued for Tithes; Dyed the 25th of the 3d month, 76.

William Brockbank Dyed about the middle of the 8th mon. 1675.

John Green for Nonconformity Dyed the 11th of the 5th Month, 76.

William Doughty presented by an Informer, one Anthony Atkinson a Butcher in
Thorn, sued out a Capias, and another Writ for 20 l. a Month, both at the
Informers Suit; he Dyed the 5th of the 10th Month, 76.

Devon-shire.
RObert Welsh of Usculum sued for the Non-payment of Tithes to James Holloway
Impropriator of the same Parish, and in the 11th month last was by him cast
into Prison by a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo.

Note, And in the Year 1674. this Holloway sued Robert Welsh for Tithes, and
though he was kept close Prisoner for the same, yet that did not satisfy this
Persecutor's Cruelty, but he caused as many Pease to be taken out of Robert's
Field as were worth 2 l. and not long after removed him to London by a Habeas
Corpus, and at the Affizes following got an Execution out against him, and took
away from the said R. Welsh six Oxen, three Cows and one Horse, worth 42 l. the
value of Tithes claimed being but 7 l. and still detains him in Prison besides.

Note, They returned two of the Oxen again, so that what they kept was computed
to be worth 34 l.

On the 10th of the 9th Month, 1676. for a Fine of 7 l. 15 s. to belevyed on
James Tailor, for being at a Silent Meeting in Burliscombe, there was taken of
Tenants Goods on his Ground twenty Sheep and two Cows, worth 16 l. by Warrant
from Justice Waldrond, Justice Bear and Justice Sainthill, Edward Hurley and
Nicholas Dowdney Constables, Robert Cross and Nich. Colman Churchwardens, John
Sealey and Tristram Dune Overseers, Henry Rue a Constable and Jo. May
Informers; which Goods were fold for about 8 l. 10 s. to one Capron of
Sampford-peverel.

Also, by the same Officers there was taken from Clement Colman, for being at
the same Meeting, the value of Ten Shillings.

Also, from Gawen Tailor, for being at the same Silent Meeting, the value of 10
s.

By the Officers of Burliscomb, by Warrant from the same Justices, there is
taken from George Russel, for being at the same Silent Meeting, Household Goods
to the value of 30 s.

And many other Warrants are out from the aforesaid Justices, to distrain the
Goods of many other Persons, for being at the aforesaid Silent Meeting.

Also. their Meeting House was by Consent of the said Justices seized upon, and
kept from them by Force.

Prisoners at Exon in Thomas's Parish.
James Tailor, the same time they came for his Goods for being at the Silent
Meeting, as aforesaid, he was taken up on a Common Process, at the Suit of
Justice Bluet and Richard Peacock on the Account of Tithes, and sent to the
Sheriffs W^^d, where he is now a Prisoner.

Joan Pollixphen of Kingsbridge, who has been a Prisoner three Years the 15th
of the 11th Month last past. for the value, as is supposed, of about 4 or 5 s.
in Tithes, by Samuel Norcott a Priest, she being first served with a Subpoena
by one Christopher Batten a Bailiff, yet she not near him, but was in another
County, and for not appearance came forth a Process against her, and took her
up, and cast her into the Sheriffs Ward, where she yet remains.

Elizabeth Phillips by the same Priest was sent to the same Prison on the
Account of Tithes, where she has been a Prisoner three Years, and now the last
Week, at the turning of the Ward she was freed.

William Wilcott and Thomas Burgin Dyed in the Sheriffs Ward this year, both
sent in on the Bishop's Account, for not going to the Steeple-house.

Sufferers in Bedford-shire, 1676.
JOhn Barton of the Parish of Studham in the County of Hartford Tailor, being
rated to a Church levy, as they call it, 2 s. 2 d. it being demanded by
Nathaniel Fisher Warden of the Parish, and for refusing to pay the said Nath.
Fisher did sue out a Writ of Excommunicate Capiendo, and did him self with a
Travailer which he employed, Arrest the said John Barton in Hartford-shire, and
haled him by Force into Bedford-shire; Bridget Hall, Mary Impi^ and Ann Barton
being Eyewitnesses of the same; and carried him to Bedford Goal, where he has
remained prisoner one Year and fifteen Weeks, notwithstanding he has a Wife
and Six Children.

Henry Newman of Seawell, in the Parish of Hauton-Regi^ in the County of
Bedford, Husbandman, being rated to a Church-Levy, as they call it, 13 d. or
thereabouts, and for refusing to pay it the Wardens returned his Name to
William Foster Commisary, and was Arrested with a Writ of Excommunication, and
the 7th day of the 4th month, 1676. by Edw. Gr^^m an Apparritor, and was
carried to Bedford Goal, where he has remained a Prisoner ever since.

Thomas Ballard of Elstow, in the County of Bedford, Husbandman, being Arrested
by Robert Hawkins Bailiff, at the Suit of Thomas Hilersdon of Elstow, in the
said County, for not paying Tithes, was had to Prison, where he has been a
Prisoner seventeen Weeks.

Sufferers in Cambridge-shire.
TAken from John Prime of Willbrom quond. upon the Account of Tithes, the 18th
day of the 8th month, 1675. by Thomas Whithand Priest of the same Town, Wheat,
Rye and Barley to the value of 18 l. 7 s. 4 d.

Taken from Philip Tailor of Cottenham, by Warrant from Thomas Buck Magistrate
of Westwick, for being at a Meeting at the House of Robert Mittins at Swa^sey,
the 2d day of the 2d month; and for being at another Meeting at Oakington, at
the House of Matthew Beezley, the 14th day of the 3d Month, by Warrant from
the abovesaid Thomas Buck, for a Fine of 5 l. 10 s. Three Cows, to the value
of 10 l 10 s. the Informers were Stephen Perry of Cambridge and Thomas Gilby of
Blunsom in Huntington-shire; the Constables Will. Meadle, Thomas Smith and
Stephen Fulston: These Goods abovementioned were distrained upon the 29th of
the 7th Month, 1676.

Taken from Matthew Beezley of Oakington for a Meeting at his House upon the 2d
day of the 2d month, 1676. by Warrant from Thomas Buck of Westwick Magistrate,
for a fine of 9 l. three Cows and one Horse to the value of 11 l. 10 s. the
Goods were strained upon the 24th of the 5 th mon. by William Crosbee and
Stephen Linton Constables, Stephen Perry Informer of Camb. Thomas Gilby of
Blunsom in Huntington-shire.

Upon the 20th day of the 1st Month, 1676. George Tailor of Chesterton was
carried to Prison to Cambridge Castle by Christopher Wilson Bailiff, by a Writ
de Excommunicate Capiendo, sued out by William Linnet Priest of the same Town,
and remains Prisoner to this day for Tithes.

Upon the 13th Day of the 11th Month, 1676. John Wash Tailor of Castle-Camp,
was carried to Prison by John Bargin Bailiff, upon an Attachment by Priest
Holles of the same Town, where he remains a Prisoner to this day for Tithes.

Upon the 19th of the 5th Month, 1676. John Prime of Willbrome quond, was
carried to Prison by John Curbey Bailiff, by an attachment at the suit of
Thomas Whithand of the same Town, Priest, where he remains a Prisoner to this
day for Tithes.

Upon the 2d day of the 6th month, 1676. Gabriel Walker of Swofham Bulback,
was carried to Prison by Abraham Akerson Bailiff, by a Capias Capiendo, at the
suit of John Sowersby, Priest of the same Town, for Tithes.

Robert Rull of Rampton, a Prisoner for small Tithes.

Sufferers in Norfolk the 22d Day of the 10th Month, 1676.
WIlliam Barber of Gissing in the County of Norfolk, Prisoner upon a Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo, at the suit of John Gibbs Priest of Gissing, who was
arrested the 17th day of the 7th month, 1674. for a small matter of Tithes,
who remains a close Prisoner.

John Norris and Henry Peed of Northwalsham, Prisoners upon a Writ of
Common Pleas, at the suit of him called Esquire Beacher Impropriator, were
committed to the Castle of N^rwich the 15th day of the 3d month, called May,
1675. for Tithes. Also, they had a Writ of Excommunicate Capiendo laid upon
them the 19th day of the 4th month, called June, 1675. at the suit of Thomas
Clendon Curate, in the Name of Henry Gooch Vicar of Northwalsham, for small
Tithes and Offerings, where they now remain Prisoners.

John Heart and Matthew Bacon of Northwalsham, Prisoners upon a Writ of
Excommunicato Capiendo, arrested the 24th day of the 5th month, called July,
1675. at the suit of Tho* mas Clend^n Curate in the Name of Henry Gooch Vicar
of Northwalsham, for small Tithes and Offerings, and are there kept Prisoners.

Francis Gardener of Tivitshall in the County of Norfolk, a Prisoner by an
Attachment out of the Exchequer, was arrested the 24th day of the 6th month,
called August, 1675. at the suit of Christopher Burrel Priest of Tivitshall,
for Tithes, and brought to the Castle of Norwich, where he now remains a
Prisoner.

Bartholomew Howling of Shipdam in the County of Norfolk, committed to the
Castle of Norwich upon an Assize- Process in the 6th Month, called August,
1676. and three days after he was in custody there was brought i^ upon him a
Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, where he now remains.

Nich. Phillips has been a Prisoner about Nine Years for Tithes, at the suit
of Edward Barnard Priest of Diss, and also a Sessions Process.

Matthew King, William King and Stephen Wicks, are Prisoners for Tithes, and
have so continued Fourteen or Fifteen Years, or more.

Francis Dix of Great-Ellingham in the County of Norfolk, was arrested about
the 11th month, 1669. by a Common pleas Writ for Tithes, at the suit of Henry
Harman Farmer to the Impropriator, who lives at London, and brought to the
Castle at Norwich, who notwithstanding his Imprisonment, was sued to an Out*
lawry by the said Harman, and being stopped, he brought a Trial down to Thetford
Assizes in the year 1676. and had trebble Damages given him, which was 28 l. 16
s. for which there was taken from him by the Bailiffs of the Hundred, Cattle
and Goods to the value of 40 l.

Mary Satterthwait of Pullam Market in the County of Norfolk, Widow, was sent
to Norwich Castle the 20th day of the 3d month, 1676. at the Suit of Doctor
Starkey (so called) Priest of the same Town, upon a Writ of Excommunicato
Capiendo, who is since released.

Thomas Mathewman of East Deerham in Norfolk, was arrested the 28th day of the
5th month, 1676. for Tithes, at the suit of Richard King the Impropriator, and
brought to the Castle at Norwich a Prisoner, in which Imprisonment he was
brought to his Death the 7th of the 9th month following, whose Wife through
tending of him and watching with him, it being a Noisome Place and Cold Season,
shortly fell Sick, and Dyed the 17th of the 10th month following, whose Blood
cries against the said Rich. King Impropriator.

Taken from Samuel Pyke of Hingham in the County of Norfolk, in the Year 76.
for Tithe for the said Year, by the Servants of Robert Sippins Priest there, of
Winter Corn and Summer Corn to the value of 3 l. 10 s.

Sufferers in Norwich.
On the first of the month called March last, John Shapen jun. for being at a
peaceable Meeting to wait upon God, in Norwich, the 27th of the 12th month
last, had taken from him, by one Beak and John Stone Constables, by a Warrant
from John Manser then Mayor, John Tennyson and Charles Tennyson Informers, 5
pair of Shoes called Flyers and a Cake of Tallow.

Ditto John Fedman, for being at the same Meeting, had taken from him by
William Poole Constable, goods worth 8s. 6d.

John Dilerance, for the same Cause, had Goods taken worth 10 s. for a Fine of
5 s. by Edward Trull Constable, William Chessen Overseer, and Tho. Leman
Church warden.

Ditto, Anthony Alexander, for being at the same Meeting, was fined for
himself, and the third part of 20 l. for the House, and had as many Splightings
or Hides taken out of his Fats as were worth 8 l. 17 s.

Note, Erasmus Cooper entering Anthony's House, in a sudden surprising manner,
said to the Man's Wife, who was big with Child, He came to seize all she had
for the King. She said, That was hard, to seize all for 7 l. fine. He replied,
He would not leave her a Bed to lie on. And he went to the Shop Door, and
finding it lock, he fetched a Pickax, and broke it open, and he and the rest of
his Companions were so Cruel and Unneighbourly, that it caused Tears to trickle
down the Cheeks of some of the Neighbors, who be held them; the Names of his
Assistants are Nic. Becket Constable, Rob. Clark Warden. Edward Cullier
Overseer, Edw. Makins and Richard Pie.

In the 3d month last, the same Officers, accompanied with two others (viz.)
Isaac Wolfill and Nath. Po^der Overseers, went into the Yard of the said Anth.
Alexander privately by the Crick side in a Boat with a Warrant from I. Manser
Mayor and Francis Bacon Steward, for the third part of 20 l. being a Fine
imposed on him for the Cause aforesaid, for which they took 7 dozen of
Calf-Skins worth 8 l. 8 s. and commanded his Man to assist them to pull the
Ware out of the Fats, which he refusing to do, they gave him abusive words;
Anthony said, It was unreasonable to require the Man to assist in taking his
Master's Goods from him; Rob. Clark answered, They were their Goods.

Robert Hutchison, on the 4th of the 5th month last, for being at a Meeting,
had Houshold-Goods taken away to the value of about 7 s. by Warrant from Tho.
Checkering Mayor, by Rich. Lusbrook and John Allen Constables, and John Freeman
Warden, and Christopher Hastead Overseer.

Samuel Duncon, in the 5th month last, had taken from him for meeting to
worship God, Household goods and Wares to the value of 42 l. 19 s. 5 d. by
Warrants signed by Francis Bacon and John Manser Mayor; and John Crow and
Gamaliel Sugden Wardens, Tho. Southgate jun. Edw. Mayhew Overseers, William
Poole pretended Constable, Charles Tennyson Informer, Tho. Giddens Carter, Tho.
Woods, John Brown and Robert Phebee Helpers, together with the Hang man.

Note, The aforesaid Officers took Possession of Samuel Duncon's House, and
there kept Night and Day, from 7th day in the afternoon till 2d day in the
afternoon, loading away his Goods, as if they had been their own, and breaking
up Locks at their Pleasure, keeping Samuel's Wife, who was big with Child, as a
Prisoner in her own House the first Night, not suffering her to speak with any
so much as at the Door, nor any to come to her till some of the Magistrates
being spoken to to abate it (for' Shame and Cry of the People) ordered it.

And the Reader may take notice of the Insolency and Vileness of one of the
aforesaid Informers, who boastingly said, He would make the Mayor wait upon him
as often as he would at his Pleasure: Oh a sad Age! that such ungodly, vile,
idle, profane Men should be encouraged thus to vaunt themselves against, or
rather over the Magistrates of this Nation, whose Sword in Justice ought to be
a Terror unto them, they being Evildoers in the Sight of the just God, who
hates Oppression, and in the Sight of just Men; and its to be lamented, that
under Officers are forced to proceed in making Havoc of their peaceable
Neighbors Goods against their Consciences, to satisfy those greedy Informers;
as witness the aforesaid Pool Constable, when he went with the Informer to the
Meeting in Norwich the 16th of the 5th month, and hearing the Truth declared,
he cried with Tears in his Eyes, What shall I do? I know the Power of God is
among you; and told the Informer, That if there were a Curse hung over any
people upon Earth, it was over the Informers; and said to S. D. afterward,
That he confessed he had sinned against his Conscience in doing what he did.

And Note further, That since the taking of the said Samuel Duncon's Goods,
John Tennyson, one of the said Informers is laid up in Prison upon an Execution
for Debt; and he has confessed, He never prosper'd since he took in hand that
Work; and said, He knew not what to do; and said, If he were at Liberty, he
would never meddle more. So people may see how badly his Ill-gotten Goods
prosper with him.

Note, John Crow would not suffer an Account to be taken of the Goods he and
the rest of them took away of Sam. Duncon's, but when a Man was taking an
Account, he scatched it from him, and put it in his Pocket; and the said Crow
finding Sam. Duncon's Shop set open the Second Day in the Morning, shut it up
again himself; thus acting like Plunderers in Time of War, which is a Shame
Magistrates, that they should suffer such things in Times of Peace.

Since the other Account, Nich. Becket Constable, Rob. Clark and Robert Sellers
Wardens, Nathanael Ponder Overseer, by Warrant from Tho. Chickering Mayor (for
a Fine of 10 l. imposed upon Anthony Alexander for the Meeting house) did with
the Help of Andrew Cooper and William Drayton, carry away from the said Anthony
15 Splitings, worth 9 l. 15 s. four Horse-Hides 1 l. 10 s. and 11 couple of
Wombs worth 14 s. 8 d. in all to the value of 11 l. 19 s. 8 d.

Sufferers in Westmoreland.
DOrothy Middleton of Lupton, within the Parish of Kirbylonsdale and County of
VVestmoreland, an ancient Widow of the Age of Sixty four Years, was sued in the
Bishop's Court of Chester, by Henry Hoyle Priest of Kirbylonsdale before said,
for Easter Reckonings demanded by him to the value of 3 s. by the year for
three years; and upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, was for the same
arrested, and carried to Prison at Appleby in the said County, the 24th day of
the 12th month, called February, in the year 1675. and has there remained
Prisoners ever since, which is about eleven Months.

Thomas Moor of Newbiging, in the aforesaid Parish of Kirbylonsdale, was also
sued in the same Bishop's Court, by the same Henry Hoyle Priest aforesaid, for
Easter Reckonings, demanded by him to the value of 1 s. 6 d. and upon an
Excommunicato Capiendo Writ was for the same arrested, and carried to Prison to
Appleby aforesaid, upon the 29th day of the 12th month, called February, in
the year 1675. and has remained Prisoner there ever since, which is about
eleven Months.

Note, Although the aforesaid Henry Hoyle Priest is about four Months since
Dead, yet nevertheless the aforesaid Dorothy Middleton and Thomas Moor are upon
the same Suit and by the same Writ yet detained Prisoners in the Goal of
Appleby aforesaid.

Thomas Gamm of Camsgil, within the Parish of Burton and County aforesaid, was
sued in the Bishop's Court of Chester by John Ormred Priest of Burton, for
Easter Reckonings and Midsummer-Dues (so called) by him demanded to the value
of about 6 s. by the year for two years, and upon an Excommuni^ato Capiendo
Writ was arrested, and carried to Prison at Kendal in the said County the 27th
day of the 11th month in the year 1674. where he remained about three months;
and being but about Four Miles from his own House, his Wife and Children, and
Friends had the convenience often to visit him; but there with this Priest
Ormrod was so Vexed and Troubled, being filled with Envy and Cruelty, that he
prevailed with the under Sheriff, one Allan Prickatt, to remove him to the
Common Goal at Appleby, being about Sixteen Miles from his own House, where he
has remained Prisoner these Two Years.

Sufferers in the County of Berks, the 27th of the 11th Month, 1676.
RObert Pain of Sunning, and John Pain of the same, arrested for Tithe at the
suit of Samuel Christopher Priest of Sunning abovesaid, and carried to Reading
Goal the 13th of the 4th month, 1674. where they remain still Prisoners.

William Dobson of Brightwell arrested for Tithe at the suit of Ralph
VVhistler, and carried to Reading Goal the beginning of the seventh Month,
1675. and remains still a Prisoner.

Thomas Davie, George Ball, Richard Nash, Thomas Pretty, Thomas Draper, William
Ward, John VVyron, all of New-VVindsore, arrested by Walter Condry under
Jailer the 13th day of the 11th month, 1675. by a Writ of Excommunicate
Capiendo, for not going to the Steeple house, and not paying to the Repair of
it, and not receiving the Sacrament, being rated as follows, viz. Thomas
Davie, 3 s. Geroge Ball, 2 s. 3 d. Richard, Nash 4 d. Thomas Pretty, 3 d.
Thomas Draper, 2 s. 7 d. William Ward, 4 d. John VVyson, 3 s. 4 d. all
carried to Reading Goal, and remain still Prisoners.

Taken from Samuel Burgis of Brimton, for 4 l. 18 s. 4 d. demanded for Tithe by
Thomas VVorral Priest, a Mare worth Ten Pounds, the 26th day of the 3d month,
1676. by Richard Smith Bailiff.

Sufferers in Lanca-shire.
UPon the 14th of the 11th Month, 1675. John Backhouse, Robert Hubbersty and
Francis Fleeming, all of them of Y^lland, within the County of Lancaster
Husbandmen; and William Waithman and James Waithman both of Lyndeth within the
said County Husbandmen, and all five within the parish of Warton, were served
with a Writ out of the Exchequer, at the suit of Hugh Phillips of London Farmer
of the Tithes of the Rectory of Warton aforesaid, under the Deacon of
Worcester) by Gawen Hewtson, Samuel Fisher, Robert Watson and Hugh Read
Bailiffs, who required their Bond for Appearance, but they being not free to
give Bond, were returned to the Common Goal at Lancaster, where they remain
Prisoners yet; Witnesses to the Truth of this are, John Smith, John Hubbersty,
Edward Rawlinson and William Huginson.

Roger Hairsnep of Aughton Husbandman was sued in the Bishop of Chester's Court
for Tithe, by Alexander Bagerly Priest of Aughton, and for not appearing
according to the Order of the Court, was apprehended upon Contempt, by Order
from John Entwistle of Ormskirk and William Holme of Keirsley Justices, and
carried to Lancaster Goal the 17th day of the 7th Month, 1675. where he
remains Prisoner this 10th of the 11th Mon. 1676.

Upon the 15th day of the 7th Mon. Roger Haydock of Coppel within the parish of
Standish Husbandman, was sued by Ralph Briddock Bishop of Chichester for
Tithes, and by Warrant from Roger Bradshaw called Justice, and Nicholas
Penington Mayor of Wiggan, committed to the Common Goal at Lancaster, where he
remains Prisoner, the said Bishop having writ to the Jailer, as also to the
Judge of the Assizes, called Francis North, who strictly Charged the Jailer, he
should not let the said Roger Haddock, nor any of the Quakers have Liberty, so
that not only the said Roger Haddock, but several other Brethren were debarred
of Liberty through the Instigation of the Bishop.

Upon the 6th Day of the 3d Mon. 1675. Heskin Fell of Coppel was at the suit of
Ralph Briddock Bishop of Chichester, for Easter Reckonings, upon his Denial to
take an Oath called Juramentum Militia, apprehended by Warrant under the Hands
and Seals of Roger Bradshaw called Justice, and Nicholas Penington Mayor of
Wiggan, and committed to the Common Goal at Lancaster, where he remains
Prisoner.

Upon the 13th of the 9th Mon. 1676. Robert Walker of Boulk Woolen Weaver was
apprehended and imprisoned at the fuit of Edward Garthforth Priest of
Lancaster, by a Significavit from the Court of Richmond, for small Tithes,
where he now remains a Prisoner, for his Testimony against that Priesthood that
takes Tithes.

Sufferers for Meeting to worship God.
Upon the 14th day of the last 12th Month Thomas Tomlinson of Crossmore had
taken from him for a Fine of 5 s. for himself being at Freckleton, and 6 l. 13
s. 4 d. for the pretended Poverty of another, Three Beasts worth 11 l. 10 s. by
Man Kerkham Constable of Freckleton, George Nickson Warden, and some other
Officers, who after they had drove the Beasts about 2 Miles, sold them one to
the other for 8 l. 10 s. This was by Warrant from Edward Riggby of Preston,
called a Justice, a great Persecutor, who threatened, He would root out the
Quakers out of the Hundred wherein he dwelt, and said, All the Laws as yet made
against the Quakers were too short, he would have a Law that they should be
tied and dragged, either at a horse or cart tail, and that he would be one of
the first that would move for it in Parliament.

Henry Tomlinson of Crossmore White-Smith, by the same VVarrant, for being at
the same Meeting, had distrained from him Goods worth above 5 l. 10 s. by the
same Officers, the Priest of Kirkham being Informer.

John Townson of Racliffe, by VVarrant from the before said Edward Riggby and
another Justice, had two Cows taken from him worth 5 l. 10 s. for being at the
same Meeting, by John Bernard Constable of Racliffe, Henry Carter Overseer of
the poer, Thomas Hankinson and others, Officers.

Alexander Salsbury of Leagram, the 19th Day of the 9th Month 1676. for being
at a peaceable Meeting of the Lord's people at Thomas Garner's, Alexander
Powel, called a Justice, granted a VVarrant to make Distress of his Goods for a
Fine of 20 l. being informed against by Adam Knowel and John Burton Informers,
and that he was teaching or preaching at the said Meeting. whereupon the
Officers, viz. Nicholas Walbank Constable, and Hugh Dobson Overseer of the
poor, took from him. Four Oxen worth 17 l. 10 s. and another time the same
Officers took from him Seven Beasts worth 21 l. 10 s. And the 20th of the 10th
Month the same Officers took from the said Alexander Salsbury Four Cows worth
21 l. VVitnesses hereof, William VValbanck, Richard Birlow, James Hamber.

Charles Lee of Clitheroe Labourer, had taken from him (for a Meeting at his
House the 1st Day of the 8th Month, 76.) Four Horses, with Load-Saddles,
Collars, Wanties and Overlaies, worth 14 l. One Cow and a Calf, worth 5 l. 6 s.
8d. One Yearling Heifer and Three Calves, worth 7 l. 5 s. The Constables Names
that took them were John Dugdale and Edmund Rogerson, Edmund Robinson
Apothecary Churchwarden, John Page Husbandman Overfeer of the poor.

An Account of such as are Imprisoned for the Truth's sake in Huntington-Goal
the 6th of the 12 Mo. 1676.
THomas Ashton of Brampton in the County of Huntington, was attached the first
of the 2d Month, 1675. for the Non-payment of Tithe [that grand Oppression] at
the suit of William Swepson Impropriator, and was had to Huntington Goal, where
he still remains Prisoner. It is supposed the value of what he is charged with
by the said Impropriator is about 50 s. or 3 l. for Lamb and Wool some years
past.

William Newberry of the said Town of Brampton, in the County of Huntington,
was attached at the fuit of the said William Swepson Impropriator, and was had
to Prison about the 27th Day of the 7th Month, 1675. where he still remains
Prisoner for the value of 4 s. 4 d. per a^n. for some years past.

Note, Both of them abovementioned were imprisoned for Contempt, for not
answering the Bill exhibited against them; and their Corn and Hay have been
forcibly taken away in this the time of their Imprisonment.

Robert Spalton of Chatterice in the Isle of Ely, was arrested at the suit of
William Strong (Priest of the said Town of Chatterice) about the 1st of the 2d
Month, 1675. for small Tithes, and being arrested in the County of Huntington
was had to Huntington Goal, where he remains Prisoner to this day.

John Beadles (within the Liberty of Ramsey and County of Huntington) was
arrested the 20th day of the 7th month, 76. at the suit of Silvester Titus)
(commonly called Colonel Titus) Lord of the Manor of Ramsey and Impropriator
(for Tithe supposed not to be above 25 s. according to the usual Rate) and was
had to Huntington Goal, where he remains a Prisoner to this day.

George Clapham of Brampton, in the said County of Huntington, was had to
Prison upon a Bishop's Writ for not appearing at the Court, and non payment of
Tithes, by Ol. Pocklington Priest.

Nathaniel Nicholl of Wool^y in the said County of Huntington, was carried to
Prison the same time for Contempt of the Court, i^ not appearing (by the same
Writ) and for not going to the Steeple-house, they were both had to Huntington
Goal the 7th of the 12th month, 76. where they continue.

And there are several other Bishop's Writs out against several more in this
County, but not as yet executed, etc.

At a Meeting of the People of the Lord, at the House of Amy Peacock of Erith,
in the County of Huntington, upon the 23d of the 2d Month, called April, 1676.
a Person being there that was moved by God's Eternal Power to preach the
Everlasting Gospel, with wholesome Exhortations to the Fear of the Lord, there
came into the same Meeting these Informers, viz. Stephen Perry of Cambridge,
Thomas Gilbie of Bluntsham, and John Pott^ of Somersham, who having been a long
Season in an Alehouse, came into the said Meeting like madmen threatening and
pulling People, not regarding either Age or Sex to the Hurt of some Women there
present, and being demanded of a Friend (Jasper Robins by Name) what Authority
they had for their so doing? They replied, They had a Commission from the King
to break up the Meeting. The aforesaid Jasper speaking to the Constables, that
came with the Informers, to keep the Peace, and if any of them had a Warrant
from any Justice, Friends would obey; and the said Informers pretended they had
one, but it appeared they had not, but came in their own Wills, in that violent
drunken Spirit: So they going away in a Rage, especially against the aforesaid
Jasper, because he desired the Constables to set them in the Stocks for their
drunken Behavior; and some Weeks after went to one John Tryce of Godmanchester
(a Justice) and made a Complaint that the aforesaid Jasper had spoke certain
Evil Words against the King (Yet) invented only in their own Evil Hearts, and
then also informed of the said Meeting, so that the said Jasper Robins and
others were fined, and he the said Jasper bound to answer their Complaint at
the next Quarter Sessions; and he knowing his own Innocence therein, and that
the Constables and others were present when they pretended he spoke these
Words, offered his Traverse to the Court, which upon the third Quarter Sessions
was obtained, and the Matter being heard, their Wickedness was manifested, and
the Jury gave in their Verdict, that the said Jasper was not Guilty.

Tobias Hardmeat of Fenstanton for the same Meeting for himself, and the
pretended poverty of the Preacher, was fined 10 l.

Thomas Parnel of Ripton-Regis for the same Meeting, for himself and the
pretended poverty of the Preacher, was fined 10 l.

Benjamin Thornley of Erith for the same Meeting was fined 5 s. Goods taken
away worth 5 s.

Edward Christenwheat of the same, fined 5 s. Goods taken worth 5 s.

Thomas Cook of the same, fined 5 s. Good taken worth 5 s.

Richard Basse of Erith for the same fined 5 s. Goods taken worth 4 s. The
Officers that distrained were Thomas Bull, Richard Ferilis Constables, Thomas
Skeiles Overseer.

William Prior of Somersham (being a young man, and newly come out of his
Apprentiship, and very poor as to the outward, insomuch that he had very little
but his wearing Clothes) was fined for the said Meeting 5 s. for which William
Wingrave, Edward Ratford Constables, John Goule senior, Stephen Darwood
Vardens, Thomas Smith and William Bonnum Overseers Officers of the said Town
manifested their Cruelty in taking away his Clothes, and leaving him nothing of
his mean Apparel, but one Hose, he being in Bed, insomuch as he was
necessitated to borrow Clothes to cover his Nakedness till he had wrought for
more: His Clothes taken were valued at 10 s.

William Bavin of Bluntsham for the same Meeting fined 5 s three Swine taken
from him to the value of 34 s.

At a Meeting at Erith the 3d of the 10th Month, called December, 76. Friends
were kept out of their Meeting house by the Constables and Officers of the said
Town, and by men they had appointed for that work that Day; and Friends
standing in the Street, about the middle of the Meeting came Stephen Perrey of
Cambridge, and Thomas Gilbie of Blunisham, two of the aforesaid Informers, who
although they stand guilty of Perjury in the Sight of God and Good Men, yet
upon Information upon Oath to Nicholas Johnson a Justice (so called) that there
was a Meeting in the Gate House of Amy Peacock of Erith aforesaid, though in
Truth no Persons were in the Gate House, but their own Family, yet the said
Nicholas Johnson being one by whom they are (and have been) encouraged, issued
out his Warrants upon the Oaths of these insufficient Witnesses, viz. these two
Informers.

Whereby one Thomas Cook of Erith that had but one Cow left him, had her taken
away, by Warrant from the abovesaid Nicholas Johnson: And the said Thomas Cook
knowing the said Witness had sworn falsely against him, went with an Appeal to
the said Justice Johnson his Place of Residence at Somersham in the said County
of Huntington, but he having sold his Habitation is sometimes a Sojourner at
Cambridge, sometimes at a public House at Somersham aforesaid, so no Appeal
could be had, and the said Thomas Cook making his Appeal to the Bench at the
next Quarter Sessions, his Paper of Appeal was taken, but no Answer was given
to it, but he lies under the said Suffering without Redress.

Samuel Nottingham of Ramsey for the said meeting, for himself was fined 10 s.
and for the pretended Poverty of Amy Peacock Owner of the Gate House, wherein
they falsely swore the Meeting was, was fined 4 l. 10 s.

For which Fines, by Warrant from the said Nicholas Johnson, Lawrence Farmer
alias Beard, Henry Adray Constables, William Boeth and John Evans Wardens,
Robert Burrowes, William Hanes and James Sharp Overseers of the poor for the
said Town of Ramsey, for the Fines of 5 l. took away Four Cows, worth 10 l. or
more, notwithstanding he told them that it was a false thing by which he was
prosecuted, or to that Purpose, and further, that he was kept out of Amy
Peacock's Gate House expressed in their Warrant, by Constables and Officers,
and that the Informers were forsworn, and the Street was the Place in which the
Meeting was kept that Day; and on the 19th of the 10th Mon 76. being the next
Day after they had distrained, he went with one of the Constables to the said
Nich. Johnson, where he was at an Alehouse in Somersham upon that Occasion, and
one of the Informers (viz. Thomas Gilbie) with him, waiting for their Prey; and
the said Samuel told the said Justice how foully and falsely they had proceeded
against him, and that the Informers were forsworn, and the Informer being then
present could hardly deny the Truth of what he said; but the said Nicholas
being forward and ready in the Execution of that Work, the said Samuel telling
him, he was by a Rail in Erith Town Street, betwixt which and the Gate House
above mentioned there is a broad passage for people to go along, then said the
said Nicholas Johnson, being (as is said before) willing to keep up the
Informer for Unjust Gainto them both I (said he) dare swear you were in the
Gate House: and it is probable the said Nicholas was Seven or Eight Miles
distant at that time, and therefore very unable to swear any such thing.

And upon the Testimony of the aforesaid false Witnesses many other Warrants
are issued forth from the said Nicholas Johnson, for levying Fines for the said
Meeting, and the Constables and Officers pressed upon by him to make Service
thereof, but they at present forbear, as being sensible of the false Witness
given in by those wicked Informers abovesaid.

Sufferers in Surrey.
AMbrose Rigg was committed to Prison from the Sessions at Croyden by Stephen
Harvy, the Judge there, the eleventh day of the eleventh month; 1676. because
for Conscience sake he could not pay 11 s. 6 d. for Fees.

William Bowman; Henry Franklin, Joan Stringer Widow and Rebecca Almond, were
taken from their Dwellings by John Fisher John Blatt and John Hatcher were
brought to Sessions by Richard Bonnick Bailiff.
Bailiff, and committed to Prison, and from thence carried to the Sessions held
at Croyden the day and year above said, because for Conscience sake they could
not pay 3 s. apiece, imposed upon them there by Stephen Harvy Judge, for three
first days Absence from the Steeple-house, and were committed close Prisoners
in the M^^shalses, where they remain to this day.

Richard Stubbs committed the same time for the same thing, who remains a close
Prisoner to this day.

Thomas Seaman Was committed to Prison upon a Writ of Capias about the middle
of the 6th month, 1676. being presented by the Wardens of the Parish of Sheer,
because he could not go to hear Thomas Duncomb Priest there, where he still
remains to this day.

Thomas Woods and John Woods were committed to Prison upon a Writ of Capias
about the middle of the 7th month, in the year aforesaid, being presented by
John Chandler and John Tuersly Wardens of the Parish of Wittly in Surrey,
because for Conscience sake they could not pay to the Repair of the Steeple
house.

Stephen Smith and Richard Baker were committed to Prison at the Suit of
Gabriel Offley Priest of VVorplesdon, because they could not pay him Tithes,
about the 20th of the 9th Month, 1676.

All these were committed to the Marshalses Prison in the Borough of
Southwark, where they remain this day, being the 25th of the 11th month, 1676.

Lincoln County.
UPon the 24th day of the 1st month, 1675. Allice Bunby Widow of
Potter-Hanworth, for suffering a Meeting of the people of God called Quakers,
was (by a Warrant under the Hand of Christopher Nevill of Harmston, in the
County aforesaid (called Knight) fined 20 l. and had four Oxen, one Horse and
one Mare taken from her, with Yoaks and Teams, as they were going to plow, and
(she being but a Friendly Woman) was forced to pay the 20 l. The Names of the
Constables were Thomas Hutchinson and Will. Almond, Thomas Breston and Thomas
Sumpter called Churchwardens, John Makender and Will. Almond Informers, who
informed the Justices, that they heard a Young man speak Lord and Christ, or
such like words.

Edward Bunbed, for the same Meeting, had a Mare taken from him (by the
Constables, Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of Hanworth aforesaid)
worth 5 l. sold at 4 l. and returned back again 30s. for a 4 l. Fine.

Nicholas Johnson of Hanworth aforesaid, had for a 4 l. fine four Cows taken
from him worth 9 l. and were sold for 4 l. and had 30s. returned; both these
were taken by the same Officers that took the Widow Bunby's Cattle.

Lincoln City.
Abraham Morris of the City of Lincoln, Mercer, being at the said Meeting, had
a Fine imposed upon him by the said Justice of 10 l. for the Speaker unknown,
and 5s. for himself, which the said Christopher Nevill certified to Joseph
Ledington then Mayor of Lincoln, who forthwith issued his Warrant to Benjamin
Harinson Constable, William Hodghkinson Churchwarden, and Robert Copy
Collector, who upon the first day of the second month, 1676, came into Abraham
Morrice's Shop, and took as many pieces of Stuff as cost him 19 l 7s. 8d. upon
which the said Abraham entered his Appeal, which was tried at Sleford Sessions
the 4th day of the said Month, but no Justice could be had; for some of the
Tenants and the Constables of Auber and Harmston were put upon the Jury, which
two Towns at times Chr. Nevil does dwell in, who put one John Coddington (who
many years had been his Hired Servant, and now his Tenant) the Fore man of the
Jury; there was but one Informer at the Sessions, which Nevill perceiving did
not answer his Desire, came off the Bench, and took his Oath, The Information
which he there showed upon the Bench was true; upon which the Jury gave it
against the Appellant; But since that time, the said John Coddington Foreman
coming from Newark, fell from his Horse, and Dyed in a day or two after.

Witness Nicholas Mitchel and William Morris.

Prisoners in Lincoln Goal.
James Dixon of Crowle imprisoned by a Writ de Excommunicatio Capiendo, bearing
date the 13th Day of the Month, called July, 1674. for not appearing at the
Bishop's Court at Lincoln.

Thomas Everat alias Everard and Robert Berryer of Crowl, both imprisoned for
the same cause by the same Writ, bearing the same date.

William Edlington of Crosland imprisoned for the same Cause, the 3d of the
Month called April, 1674.

Katherine Cliffe imprisoned by an Attachment out of the Court of Exchequer,
bearing date the 21th day of the month called February, 1675.

John Baldock of Wainfleet imprisoned by a Writ of Excom. Capiend. for not
paying to the Repair of the Steeple-house, the 20th day of December, 1675.

Henry Wilson committed to Prison for Non-payment of Tithes to Perrigry Moor
Priest, by a Warrant dated the 21th of the month called March, 1672.

Thomas Wresle imprisoned upon an Attachment out of the Exchequer for
Non-payment of Tithes, the Attachment dated the 3d of the 6th Month, called
August, 1674.

Robert Reeder imprisoned for Non payment of Tithes at the suit of Robert
Bernard, the Warrant dated the 15th day of the 2d month, called April, 1674.

Thomas Brown imprisoned by an Attachment out of the Exchequer for not paying
Tithes, the Attachment dated the 29th of the 3d month, called May, 1676.

Sufferers in Cumberland, the 5th of the 12th Month, 1676.
THomas Rewly of Halicliff Hall, of the Age of Seventy Eight Years and upwards,
imprisoned by an Attachment out of the Exchequer for Nonappearance at the suit
of Arthur Savage of Caldbeck Priest, for Tithe Wool, Lamb, White Book, and some
Prescription; for his Ground pays no Tithe in kind: The said Thomas sustained
Seven Years and Four Months Imprisonment, at the suit of the said Priest, for
the same pretended Tithe abovementioned; and when the said Thomas was at
Liberty, the said Priest sued him for the Prescription-Money, as healledgeth, 3
l. and caused the Bailiff (Robert Priestman) to distrain his Feather-bed, that
he and his Wife lay on, with all Clothes thereunto belonging, and a Cupboard,
worth 5 l. and when the Bailiff could not get these things sold, he sued the
Bailiff, and forced him to pay the Money and Costs. The said Thomas was
committed to prison this secind time the 21th of the 9th month, 1674. and has
continued more then Two Years, having had no Real nor Personal Estate in his
Hand this Five Years.

George Bewly, eldest Son of the said Thomas Bewly, by virtue of an Attachment
and Proclamation out of the Court of Exchequer, at the suit of the said Priest
for Tithes, Wool, Lamb, White Book, Presciption-Money, only for the Tenement,
late his said Father's, not being Tithe in kind of Corn nor Hay, he has been
prisoner Two Years, and yet remains.

John Striket of Branthwhait, William Scot of Greenrigg and Isabel Peacock of
Whelpoe Widow, having Six Fatherless Chridren, all Prisoners by Attachments out
of the Exchequer for Non-payment of Tithes of Wool, Lamb, White-book and
Prescription; for none of them are liable to pay Tythe-Corn or Hay; and were
committed to Goal the 23d of the 9th Month, 1676. and yet remain.

Thomas Bewly the younger Son of Thomas Bewly aforesaid, (Alice Nicholson of
Woodhall, having Six Fatherless Children her Husband being kept in Prison by
the said Priest for Non-payment of Tithe till he Dyed in Goal) by an Attachment
out of the Exchequer, for not putting their Answer in upon Oath, being sued for
Non-payment of Tithes of Wool, Lamb, White Book and Prescription, the said
Priest taking the Tithe Corn upon their Ground yearly, were committed to Goal
the 20th of the 11th Month, 1676. and yet remain.

Grace Stalker of Whalpey in Caldbeck by an Attachment out of Chancery, at the
suit of John Munkhouse of the same Town and Parish, was apprehended the 30th of
the 3d month, 1676. for not putting in her Answer in the said Court upon Oath,
was committed to Goal the day and year above said and yet remains.

Sufferers in Cumberland in the year 1676. for Meeting together to worship God.
John Howes of New-Town for having a Meeting at his House the 22th Day of the
1st Month, was fined 20 l. and and had three Steers and two Cows taken from
him worth 16 l. distrained by Richard Graham Constable, and others.

Thomas Stordy of Moorehouse fined 9 l. 5 s. for being at the said Meeting, for
which they took from him two Oxen and one Cow worth 10 l. 10 s. distrained by
Robert Watson of Thurstonfield, Robert Hodgson of Dikesfield and John Hutton of
Brough Constables.

Robert Huntington of Bowstedhill fined 7 l. for the Speaker and 10 s. for
himself and his Wife being present at the said Meeting, for which he had three
Heifers taken from him worth 6 l. 10 s.

Christopher Whitlock for being at the same Meeting, had taken from him a Cow
worth 40 s. by the Constables of Orton Parish

John Iveson of Iarriston fined for being at the same Meeting 7 l. 5 s. and had
a Mare and 2 Cows taken from him worth 8 l.

All the aforesaid Distresses were by VVarrant from William Musgrave of
Carlisle, called a Justice.

Christopher Tailor of Hetherside, for having a Meeting at his House was fined
20 l. by the said William Musgrave, and the 22th day of the 3d month, 1676.
Gilbert Atkinson Informer, Alexander Porter, George Story, Richard Hethrington
and Walter Key took from the said Christopher five Beasts worth 14 l.

John Iackson of Angerton for himself and his Brother being at a Meeting fined
2 l, for which the same Officers, by the same Justice's VVarrant, took one Mare
from him worth 1 l. 6 s.

Sufferers for Meeting at Pardsay-Cragg and at Cleater in the the year 1676. by
VVarrant from Richard Patrickson of Calder-Abbey, called a Justice, George
Richardson of St. Bees and others Informers.
John Steel of Graythwait had two Cows taken from him worth six pounds (the
31th of the 3d month, 1676.) by Richard Allason of Bramby and John Fletcher of
Hill in Blinboshett Constables.

Luke Steel the same day had taken from him for the same Cause one Ke^tle
worth 12 s.

The 11th day of the 5th month, 1676. Richard Allason Constable and George
Richardson Informer took from John Steel aforesaid, two more Cows worth 8 l.

James Bragg and the said Geo. Richardson Informer took from John Nelson of
Hightrees one Cow worth 3 l. 10 s. for meeting.

The same day and year, the same persons, for the same Cause, took from John
Dickenson of Hightrees one Cow worth 3 l. 10 s.

John Jackson of Felldyke for the same Cause the same time had taken from him
two Kettles worth 14 s.

Michael Williamson of Gillgaran had taken from him by William Peile and Joseph
Dixon Constables of Distington for the same Cause, one Cow worth 1 l. 10 s.

William Carter of Crissfield, the 13th of the 5th month, 1676. for the same
Cause, had taken from him one Mare worth 1 l. 5 s.

Middlesex.
RIchard Ashfield and Abraham Bonefield, both of Stains, are Prisoners in
Newgate upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo for not paying a Parish Rate.

Sufferers in Hamp-shire.
NIcholas Ede of Froyle, sued by Richard Farrer Priest of the said place for
petty Tithes in the Exchequer, and carried to Winchester Goal the 19th day of
the 11th month, 1674, where he yet remains a Prisoner.

John Bishop of Gatcomb in the Isle of Weight, arrested at the suit of John
Woodnutt Priest, because for Conscience sake he could not pay him Tithes, he
was committed to the Sergeants Ward in Newport the seventeenth day of the
seventh month, 1675. where he still remains a Prisoner, kept in very close.

Worcestershire.
ALice Booker of Wickamford imprisoned in the County-Goal by a Writ of
Excommunicato Capiendo, at the suit of William White and Richard Clark Wardens,
for not paying to the Repair of the Steeple-house, 1676.

Newcastle.
THe 26th and 27th of the 11th month, 1676. the Wardens and Officers of
Gateside, by Warrant from Sr. Francis Anderson, so called, Justice of the Peace
in the County of Durham, made Distress of the Goods of Richard Stockton, and
took away to the value of Six Pounds Ten Shillings, for being at a Meeting in
Gateside the 27th of the 11th month aforesaid.

By Warrant from the same Justice the same Officers took away from Christopher
Bickers Goods to the value of 13 l. the Warrant was grounded upon the Act made
in the year 1670.

Wilt-shire.
WIlliam Moxham cited to the Bishop's Court at Sarum for not paying small
Tithes and Offerings to Priest Gunn, who, when he appeared, because he did not
put off his Hat, they called him Coxcomb, and told him, He was Bewitched, and
bid him come again next Court-day; and when he came again, because for
Conscience sake he could not Swear to his Answer to their Libel, they proceeded
to Excommunication, and thereupon he is since committed to the County Goal in
Fisherton, where he still remains a Prisoner, this 15th day of the 12th month,
1676.

Oxfordshire.
A Relation of the Unchristian-like Dealing of Justice Gregory of Cooksome with
his Poor Neighbor and Tenant Rich. Holliman of the same Place, Miller.
THe said Richard Holliman and his Wife being lately convinced of the Truth,
Robert Cripps the Priest and the Justice their Landlord were greatly in Rage
against them, and the Priest meeting with them accidentally in a Neighbor's
House, after some words past, told them, He would provide. a Task for them, The
poor Woman said, I pray thee, let it not be Pharaoh's Task But shortly after
Ju. Gregory sent his Warrant for R. Holliman to come before him, and when he
came, the Justice was very VVrathful against him that he was turned a Quaker,
and said, It was the Confoundedst Religion of all, and threatened to turn him
out of his Mill, and asked him; Whether he was at Church last Sunday* He
replied, No: Then the Justice said, He must pay 1 s. and soon after sent the
Officers with a Warrant to distrain, who took away a Pewter-Platter worth 3 s.
and so proceeded several times, till he took away Goods to the value of 24 s. a
small sum in value, yet it was more then the poor Man was worth if his Debts
were all paid, he having a Wise and Six Children, most of them small: And this
Cruel Justice was not satisfied to cause this poor Man's Goods to be so taken
away, but He Turned him out of the Mill, which he and his Friends had lived in
many years; and this was done near the Winter, a hard time for a Man to be put
to shift with such a Family, when he knew not what course to take to subsist,
nor hardly where to put their Heads for shelter, and for no other Cause but for
being a Quaker.

North Wales.
The late Severe and Illegal Proceedings against the People called Quakers, for
Conscience sake, in MERIONIDD-SHIRE.
CAdwallader Thomas, Rowland Ellis, Lewys Robert, Hugh Robert, Evan Rees,
Edward Rees, Griffith John, Gainor David, Elizabeth Williams; these Nine being
taken Prisoners upon an Indictment for not resorting to their Parish Churches,
so called, were all at the Assizes held for the said County in the Town of
Bala, upon the 11th day of the 6th month last past, brought to the Bar to
answer their Indictments, Kemick Eyton and Thomas Wallcott Judges, and upon
their refusal of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, then tendered unto them
(and as we conceive unjustifiable, the Prisoners being but private Persons, and
the J^dges declaring no special Commission, they had, to Warrant and Authorize
the same) The said Judges delivered in open Court, That in case the Prisoners
would refuse the Oaths the second time, they should be proceeded against as
Traitors, the Men to be HANGED and QUARTERED, and the Women to be BURNED. And
upon the 1st day of the 7th month, their Circuit then returning, they offered
to them the Oaths again* and upon their not taking of the same in Form, though
they solemnly acknowledged All g^ance to the King as (...) Magistrate, were
remanded to close Imprisonment, and were strictly kept as Fellons or Traitors,
though without Rule of Court or Commitment upon them for Eleven Weeks time from
the Sessions, and in the last great Frost were kept from the Benefit of a
Fireplace or Fire, which the Jailer had granted them, had not one Maurice
Jones, who is the Priest of the Parish of Dolgelle (where the County-Prison is)
and generally known to be a very sottish Parson, threatened to Complain of him
to the Judges.

Edward Rees, one of the Prisoners, being above Sixty Years of Age, and as was
generally concluded, being not of Strength to bear so great a Cold, patiently
resigned up his Life to the Hands of our Righteous Judge, Dying about the
height of the Frost, the 17th day of the 10th month, commonly called December.
One of the Women, being a Wife, and big with Child, was very Weak and Sick
lately, and the rest not likely to be otherwise, if the Prisoners be so
continued, unless some speedy Course be taken for their Relief.

Further Sufferings.
Griffith Robert and Hugh Rees were by the vexatious Prosecution of the before
named Priest, Maurice Jones of Dolgelle imprisoned upon a Writ de Excom.
Capiend. the 30th day of the 3d mon. 1676. where they continue Prisoners; the
last of them for not paying a Mortuary, where he was no further concerned then
by his Tenderness and Compassion, in supervising and taking Care of the Orphans
of the deceased Parent.

Robert Richard, a poor Labourer, of the Parish of Bettus in the said County,
upon the Instigation of Owen Edwards, the Priest of the Place, and Complaint,
was committed lately to the County Goal for twelve days Absence from the
Steeple-house, by William Salisbury, one of the Justices of the Peace for the
said County. The same Priest vexatiously troubled the Master of the said
Labourer a little while before.

Mountgomery-shire.
An Account of the Sufferings of the People called Quakers, upon the late Act
against Conventicles, by the Prosecution of one David Maurice of Pen-y-bont,
who was principal Informer and sole Justice of the Peace therein concerned, his
Clerk and Servants the Drivers.
UPon the 7th day of the 1st month, in the latter-end of the year 1674. the
said David Maurice of Pen-y-bont in Denbigh shire, but in the Commission of
Peace for this County, came with some 14 or 15 Persons, most if not all of them
armed, to a House called Cleddian Cechion, within the Corporation of Pool,
which has proper Justices of its own, where a small Number of our Friends were
peaceably met with the Doors open and all silent, he requiring us to depart,
Thomas Lloyd requested of the before named Justice a quarter of an Hours time
before our being dispersed, which he readily granting, and with his Followers
sat amongst us, the beforementioned Thomas Lloyd uttered a few Words, by Way
of defining the true Religion, and what the true Worship was, all which the
said David Maurice approved of, as sound, and according to the Doctrine of the
Church of England, yet notwithstanding he fined him the said Thomas Lloyd in ^0
l. for preaching, though he was no Magistrate of the Corporation, (neither
certified he the Conviction at the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace, for the
Borough, according to the Statute, where the supposed Offense was committed,
but at the Quarter Sessions for the County, to whom the Cognizance did not
properly belong) and upon this Conviction caused to be driven, upon the 16th of
the 4th Month, 1675. from the said Thomas Lloyd 4 Cows and a Mare, all worth
about 16 l. by two of his Servants, one of them being his Clark, and a third
his Tenant, and no Officer of the Corporation, nor of the Parish, nor of that
Allotment of the Hundred in place with them; which Drivers were lurking near
the Ground some two Hours before day, and drive the Cattle before Sunrise, and
were brought out of the County into his own Demense, one of the Cows he
returned till required.

The same day about the dawning thereof, the said Drivers, by a Varrant from
the beforenamed David Maurice of Pen-y-bont brake rudely through Neighbors
Fields, to the Ground of Thomas Lewys of Cloddian Cochion, within the said
Borough of Pool, with no Officer, neither of the Corporation, Parish, nor of
that Division of the Hundred, and drive from him six Cows, two Oxen, and two
Heifers; alleging for his Offense, that the before mentioned Thomas Lewys
suffered a Meeting to be at his House, that very Day the before-named David
Maurice was there himself, who not only allowed of the Time, but approved what
was spoken there; though the Right of the House and the Use thereof lay
properly in the Mother, who was a Widow; and this Meeting chanced to be in her
Quarenteni, viz. Her forty Days.

And further, the said David Maurice took by his Clerk, without a Warrant, two
Horses, one of them being Charles Lloyd's, and the other Thomas Lewys's, though
they were at that time out of the County, where the supposed Offense was
committed.

Charles Lloyd of Dolobran had Ten young Beasts taken from him the 18th of the
3d Mon. 1675. by John Jones of Keel Over cer of the poor of the Parish of
Myvod, John Morgans Petty Constable, William Samuel Servant to the
Churchwarden upon a Warrant from the said David Maurice, the only Informer,
and busy Justice upon this Mercenary Act, in our Borders, for preaching at
Cloddiau Cochion, within the Liberties of Pool, the 14th day of the 1st month
last past, though the said Charles Lloyd was not at the Place that day, nor of
many days before or after at a Meeting, as many can testify.

David Jones of Branyarth for being a Hearer at the two aforesaid Meetings at
Cloddiau Cochion, and though distrained of a Brass-Pan for his proper Fines,
had four Cows and two Oxen drive from him by a Warrant from the said David
Maurice of Pen-y-bont, for the pretended Inability of others convicted; the two
Oxen and one of the Cows were since returned.

Thomas Hamond of the Parish of Mountgomery was committed to the County-Goal
about seven Months ago, by a Warrant from Matthew Morgans and one -- Stedman
two Justices of the Peace for the County of Mountgomery, upon the Statute of
the 27th Hen. 8. c. 20. in a suit of Tithes, in the Bishop's Court of Hereford,
upon the Prose^^^ion of Edward Herbert Baron of Cherbury and Roger Jones Priest
of the Parishes of Berrine and Mountgomery, which Prisoner notwithstanding
several Applications to them and their Agents made, without any Redress,
deceased the 28th Day of the last ^^th Month, called January, leaving his
Widow and four Daughters destitute of a Tender Husband, and a Careful Father,
by this hard Usage; the was denied Liberty of once visiting his Family since
his Confinement. The sum upon which he was molested, was inconsiderable.

Prisoners in Shrop-shire.
OWen Roberts of Sallop Baker, and Ann his Wife, and Thomas Oliver of Condover
Blacksmith committed to prison the 11th day of the month called January,
1675. by a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo, for not appearing at the Bishop's
Court.

Note, There have Dyed Prisoners, in several Goals in England and Wales, since
the King came into England, who suffered for Good C^^science sake, above Two
Hundred Persons of the aforesaid People, by reason of their Close Confinement.

And they cried with a loud Voice, saying, How long, O Lord, Holy and True,
do not thou Judge and Avenge our, Blood on them that dwell on the Earth?

Revelat. 6. 10. THE END.

