REASONS WHY THE OATHS Should not be made A Part of the Test TO Protestant
Dissenters.
1. WE do humbly conceive, that because these Oaths were Anciently made upon
Occasion of the Conspiracies of Papists against the Government, and are now
revived upon the score of the late Discovery of their Horrid Plot; and that
since they only ought at any time to be administered in Case of Just Jealousy
or Suspicion had of any Person or Persons: We, who are no Papists, but by our
Faith and Doctrine Repugnant to all Popery; And We, who have never shown the
least Disallegiance or Unfaithfulness, but on the Contrary have been patient
and peaceable under all that Excess of Severity, that in several parts of this
Nation has been inflicted upon us, ought not to be brought under the same
Jealousies with the Papists: It is suspecting an Integrity, that was never
Tainted. For with submission, what is it but to say, The Papists have plotted
against the King, Government and Protestant Religion; therefore the Quakers and
such like Dissenters that have not plotted, shall take the Oaths, to try and
bind them, as if they had plotted? This makes no Distinction, where really
there is a great one. The Oaths were not revived upon the Papists till the Plot
was discovered; pray why should you effect us, or question the Integrity of
Protestant-Dissenters? Let the known Papists be proved and tested as Papists;
but that can be no Reason why the known Anti-Papists or Protestant-Dissenters
should be so tested that are Unconcerned in the Occasion of it.

II. We are not yet preferred by the Government to such Charge, Trust or
Employment, for which such Security is commonly required, and since we ever
lived a Sober and Peaceable Life under the King and Government, being neither
Papists, Plotters nor Men in Power, we do not see the Reason or Equity, as to
us, why the Oaths should be made a part of the Test.

III. We conceive, we need not Swear to deny a Supremacy or to pay an
Obedience, where our Faith and Religion teaches us both; which are a stronger
Tie upon our Consciences, than all the Oaths in the World. And of the Truth of
this we may appeal to your own Knowledge of our Conversations.

IV. We apprehend, that the Oaths answer not the Reason of their Imposition,
and therefore Useless; for the Papists we see, take them: and consequently
there is no Discrimination of Papists from Protestants by them. ^o that they
serve rather to Distinguish, what Prote^^ant-Dissenters are Tender in taking
these Oaths, than to discover who are Papists. But since the Declaration is of
more weight to the Papists than the Oaths, because that denies their Religion,
whereas the Oaths only deny the Popes Supremacy (which is not owned by the
Gallican or French Church, that they now mostly pretend to adhere to) it will
evidently follow, that all those Protestant-Dissenters, who can subscribe the
Declaration, are not Papists, nor of the Romish Communion. In short; Because
the Papists will sooner take the Oaths than subscribe the Declaration; and that
the Quakers and other Dissenters will sooner subscribe the Declaration than
take the Oaths: And forasmuch as the point in hand is to discriminate Papists,
and not such Dissenters; the adding of the Oaths, when the Declaration will
most Effectually do, may serve to ensnare the said Protestant-Dissenters, but
not to discover the Papists, or secure the Government from them, which ought to
be the only end of the Test.

Object. But it is objected, That some Papists will not take the Oaths, and
therefore they ought to be a part of the Test.

To which we Answer, First, That the Concealed Papists, or those who are
suspected to be such, are observed to swallow all, both Oaths and Declaration
too, rather than bring themselves under Notice at this time of the Day. And
Next, It is plain Fact, that the Generality of the Known Papists also take
them. So that still these Oaths being made a part of the Test, rather shows
that Papists will take the Oaths, than that they discriminate who are Papists:
And here it may be worth your Consideration, how much securer you are from
those Papists, that do take the Oaths, than from those that refuse them. But
admitting it to be a real Discrimination respecting a few Papists, yet we
entreat you weigh, If the Number of the Protestant-Dissenters, who may scruple
taking these Oaths, is not far greater, than of those Papists that may refuse
to take them: and if so, you will lose much more than you will get by taking
the Oaths into the Test.

V. Be pleased to consider, that if you are not very Careful in this matter, by
exposing such Protestant-Dissenters to be reputed Papists, because of not
taking the Oaths, you may be said, in a sort, to make more Papists by one Act,
than the Popes and their Emissaries have done these Six score Years; though
they abhor Popery as much as you your selves can do. We hope, the Wisdom of the
Government will not thus suffer a great part of the Industrious people of the
Nation to be vexed and ruined for that which they are not; and at a time too,
when it is your Interest to lend a hand to the Weakest Protestant-Separatist
you have, against the Church of Rome; That so the Numbers of that Society may
not be augmented, by enlarging that Scandalous Character to other Persuasions
through the Prejudice, False Policy or Ill Designs of any.

VI. Your making the Oaths a part of the Test, will be very particularly
Injurious to such Dissenters; for you will punish them by Laws made upon
Occasion of Popish Plots, who are unconcerned in the Guilt of them. This is in
Show to charge your Canon against Papists, but they will ('it is to be feared) be
discharged upon Protestant-Dissenters, as has already been done: which is
adding another misery to them, whom you should relieve, and making them lose by
the Discovery of the Plot, that would have been exposed as well as your selves,
if it had taken Effect: So that those who would have suffered by the Plot, must
suffer as of the Party of the Plotters. In short, this is punishing one Party
for the Fault of another, and extending the Penalty, where there is no
Transgression.

VII. Let it be considered, that such Dissenters will be of all People the most
Miserable: For being exposed to the Punishment of Papists and the Punishment of
Protestant-Dissenters too, they must needs be in a worse Condition, than the
Papists; for they will be at this rate ground between two Millstones. And this
will rather deter Papists from embracing the Communion of any
Protestant-Dissenters, then excite them to approach so near to the Church, as
to become Protestant in any Sense: because they will be exposed to more
Suffering, unless absolute Churchmen, then now they are, as Papists. For both
the Laws made against Protestant-Dissenters, and the Laws made against Popish
Recusants have been executed upon Protestant-Dissenters; but the particular
Laws made against Protestant-Dissenters were never infflicted upon the Papists.

VIII. But it is Objected by some, that we are disguised Papists, or that
Papists are concealed amongst us. To which we say, the Declaration will
determine that; since (as was said) the Oaths only deny the Pope's Supremacy,
which some of themselves pretend to disown: But our Declaration denies both the
Pope's Supremacy and their Religion too. Besides, those Dissenters that scruple
the Oaths, do it not upon the same Terms with the Papists; for they own no
foreign Supremacy, which the Papists do. And to prove evidently, that it is no
Trick or Ill design against the Government, they refuse to Swear in their own
Right, having-frequently lost their Just Debts, and been greatly injured by
other men's Unjust Claims, because of not taking an Oath: which is not the
Practice of Papists.

IX. But there is one Reason never to be answered, why we can neither be
Papists, nor Popishly affected, as we must needs be, if we seek to Conceal the
Papists at so much hazard to our selves; and it is this, You have been pleased
in Parliament to Complain of the growth of Popery, of the Non-executing of Laws
made against Papists, and that some of the Ministers of State were Popishly
affected, and that things have generally been Transacted by them in favor of
the Papists: On the contrary we have been great Sufferers, our Houses broke
open, our Goods riffled, and our Estates seized, and Treble values taken away
from us by Laws made against Papists, under their Ministry. So that either we
are no Papists, or such State-Ministers and Councils, whom you have reputed
Popish, must not be such; for none can think that they should Exercise such
Severities upon People of the same Inclinations, when they were so indulgent to
Persons notoriously of that Profession; but because you believe they were so,
you must needs interpret from their being more severe to us than any other
People, that they reputed us most remote from Popery. What greater
Demonstration can we give, that we believe our selves, and are Sincere in this
matter, than the Hazards and Losses we are daily exposed to?

X. We have always shown a good and steady Affection to the Just, Civil and
Protestant Interest of this Nation; and among other things, it may evidently
appear in the late Election of the present Parliament, having generally adhered
to, and through all Difficulties given our Voices for those Persons, that have
been of the best Reputation in their Country for Protestants and English men.
And indeed, there has been no such Discovery made these many years of the
Inclinations of all Parties: which being well observed, it will perhaps appear,
that We and the Papists have as little joined in the same Choice of Members, as
some High Churchmen (our great Prosecutors) have done, who would
notwithstanding have us accounted Papists. And we may further add, that since
our giving our Voices in the said late Election for those Persons, which are
known to be hearty for the Protestant Religion and Civil Interest of the
Nation, we have been afresh severely persecuted in several places, and that as
well by Laws made against Papists as Protestant Dissenters.

Lastly, We do here humbly offer a DECLARATION, and pray, that it may be
received as a Testimony of our good Affection to the Protestant Cause, and as
our Assurance to live a sober and peaceable Life under the present Government.
And in case any among us shall be found false to our Declaration and
Engagement, let such be punished as Perjured Persons.

These are the Reasons we render, why the Oaths should not be made part of the
Test.

A Protestation or Declaration to Distinguish Protestant-Dissenters from
Popish-Recusants.
I A. B. do in the Presence of Almighty God solemnly profess, and in good
Conscience declare, It is my real Judgment, That the Church of Rome is not the
Church of Christ, nor the Pope or Bishop of Rome Christ's Vicar; and that his
or her Doctrines Of Deposing Heretical Princes, and Absolving their Subjects of
their Obedience; Of Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead; Of Indulgences and
Worshipping of Images; Of Adoring and Praying to the Virgin Mary and other
Saints deceased; And of Transubstantiation, or changing the Elements of Bread
and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ at or after the Consecration thereof
by any Person whatsoever, are False, Erroneous and Contrary to the Truth of God
declared in the Holy Scriptures: And therefore the Communion of the said Church
is Superstitious and Idolatrous.

And I do likewise sincerely testify and declare, that I do from the bottom of
my Heart detest and abhor all Plots and Conspiracies, that are or may be
contrived against the King, Parliament or People of this Realm: And I do hereby
Faithfully Promise, with God's Help, to live a Sober and Peaceable Life, as
becomes a good Christian and Protestant to do. And all this I do Acknowledge,
Intend, Declare and Subscribe without any Equivocation or mental R^servation,
according to the true Plainness, Simplicity and usual signification of the
words.

Witness my Hand.


