A COLLECTION OF Some Passages (Touching those called QVAKERS) Which were Writ
by several that were, or still are, amongst that People: WHEREBY The Reader may
plainly see and perceive what Spirit it is that Acts their Preachers and
Leaders; and how they have been foretold and faithfully Warned of the Day of
Perplexity, Reproach, and Ignominy, that is come and coming upon Them.

The Second Edition. To which is added, a Preface, Postscriptand Appendix, etc.
by J. P.

O thou Sword of the LORD, how long will it be e're thou be quiet? Put up thy
self into thy Scabbard, rest, and be still. How can it be quiet, seeing the
LORD has given it a Charge?

I cannot hold my Peace, because thou have heard, O my Soul, the Sound of the
Trumpet, the Alarm of War.

London, Sold by A. Baldwin. 1700.

PREFACE.
OH People! my Bowels yearn, my Bowels yearn toward you, whose desires in any
measure are after the LORD: O that you would now (I say, that you would now)
Return with all your Hearts unto HIM, and obey the Voice of HIS Power in you;
then should you be made able to stand and endure the Fiery Trial which is come
and coming. Oh! the Day hastens wherein all Profession, that is not grounded in
the Life and Power of the LORD JESUS CHRIST (whatever the show of it be) will
be so Shaken, that an utter (I say, an utter) Blasting and Withering shall come
upon it; and for that cause the LORD does, and will yet Suffer great Trials
(yea, I say, great Trials) to come, both upon the Professors and Possessors of
HIS Name; that so HIS Children [the Possessors] may be manifested unto all, and
discerned from all that are but Professors, though never so fair and seemingly
Covered; for all Coverings, but what is of the Power and Spirit it self, shall
be too Narrow; and all that are not covered with the Spirit and Power of
Emmanuel, their Shame and Nakedness shall Appear more and more.

THIS is the Testimony which the Spirit and Word of Truth gives; therefore he
that has an Ear to hear, let him hear, before the Day of his Visitation be
wholly past, and the things belonging to his Peace be hid from his Eyes.

READ this who can; and he that can Receive it, let him; for the Time draws
nigh that these Sayings must be Fulfilled.

Printed 1670, 1671, and 1696.

J. P.

A Collection, etc.
I HAVE long seen (says R. R.) the Abomination that makes Desolate, standing
amongst the Quakers: Wherefore hear the Word of the LORD, ye Rulers of Sodom,
and People of Gomorrah, it is this Spirit that has encompassed your Jerusalem
about, as with Armies, by which we know the Destruction thereof draws nigh.
Finally, it is that Spirit of Wickedness in the form of Righteousness, that has
already torn your Crown from off your Head, and discovered your Secret Parts;
so that the Scab of Contention and Strife is seen, that will never leave nor
cease to Divide you, till the Name of Quaker become an Hiss and a Scorn amongst
the Nations. This Witness is true.

AND You that, for the vast number of your Tribes, have seemed to magnify your
selves in your increase of Children; Woe be to You that now give Suck, (and take
so much pains to add to your Sect) for behold in one Day, loss of Children and
Widowhood shall come upon you. This Witness is true.

OF this I am most certain, that a Bitter, Lying, and Persecuting, Proud Spirit
inhabits your Tents; which Babylonish Garment has long been seen to lie hid
amongst that Tribe, called the Ministry, the Teachers and Leaders of the
Quakers; even such Spiritual Wickedness, which if practiced amongst
Presbyterians, Independents, or others, (whom ye disown, and can see nothing in
them that is good) they would abhor themselves therein; which You, as with a
Whore's Forehead, boldly maintain and defend. You are, in truth, those that
justify your selves before Men, but GOD knows your Hearts; and the Day is at
Hand, even at your very Door, which will Discover, Reveal, and Preach as upon
the House-tops, many and great Abominations which yet lie hid amongst You, that
so you may be judged according to your Deeds. This Witness is true, as St. Paul
said, Tit. 1.12, 13.

I am constrained (contrary to my Nature) to plead like a Man of Contention
against this Proud, Pharisaical and Perverse Generation; this Leviathan and
Crooked Serpent, in whose Nostrils (unless a Hook be put) would swallow not
only the Rivers, but also the very Sea into himself, viz. Receive all (though
never so unclean in Heart and Spirit, if outwardly they will but own him,
receive his Mark Of Thee, and Thou, and the Hat.
and walk in outward Observation and Show conformable to Them; who while they
profess themselves free from Sin, and being the [only] Children of GOD, are
notwithstanding found bitter Persecutors of the Truth, and Enemies to the
Unction the Anointed One, in whomsoever HE does appear; thereby rendering
themselves guilty of all the Innocent Blood which has been spilt, from the
Blood of Righteous Abel, even to this Day: All which Blood cries aloud for
Vengeance upon the well-favoured Harlot (Mystery Babylon) who in the Golden
Cups, and goodly Show of an outward Profession, has inwardly (with a bitter,
ravening and devouring Spirit) made her self Drunk with the Blood of the Saints
and Martyrs of JESUS. This Witness is true.

I have observed, that those that forsake Father and Mother, (the Sect that
nourished and brought them forth) to follow the Lord fully and wholly (as did
Caleb, Joshua, and JESUS, etc.) not minding their own Reputations, or Fame, nor
loving their Lives to the Death; such, I say, have been accounted, as in all
Ages, so by this Hypocritical, Proud, Self-righteous Generation, as the worst
of Men; calling them Ranters, Atheists, Blasphemers, Devils, any thing, even
all manner of Evil, so they may wound the Truth, and slay the Innocent
Defenders thereof; whose harmless Souls I see lying under the Altar of Truth,
sorely oppressed for their Testimony thereunto; and crying out, How long, LORD
GOD, Holy and True, (will it be) e're thou do Judge and Revenge our Blood?
For whose Elect sake, the GOD of my Salvation will suddenly arise, and behold
Enmity, Lies, and Falsehood, etc. (even all that Spirit of Wickedness) will
surely fly, hide it self, and sink again into the bottomless Pit from whence it
came.

THEY care not whom they slander, or what Lies they tell, so they may Advance,
Strengthen, and Increase their Party and Sect. By all which it evidently
appears, that the Spirit of Deceit and Falsehood is crept in, and does inhabit
amongst this People.

YOU are now like that Evil Spirit cast out, running to and fro, walking in the
dry places of your Elders Traditions, those You call good Old Friends; seeking
rest, but never shall find any, so long as Balack and Balaam, that bitter
Spirit, leads to Curse whom GOD will surely Bless, and bring over You; for YE
MUST FALL and (with Haman, Saul, and Herod) be ensnared and taken, even in the
same Pit of cruel Deceit, which you have dug for your Innocent Brethren; and
herein (for some time) will the Faith and Patience of the Saints be exercised.

THUS am I clear from the Blood of all Men, in that I have not ceased, both by
Words and Writing, to forewarn of the coming of this Antichrist among the
Quakers, who for more than Ten Years last past, have been that poor Ass,
speaking as with Man's Voice, reproving and withstanding the Madness of this
Lying, Wrathful, Bitter, Persecuting Spirit, knowing right well when it entered,
and You thereby came to reject the LORD, that He should not Reign over You by
His Spirit of Light and Love; but rather chose to your selves a King for to
Judge and Rule You, who was not the Unction nor the Anointed of the LORD; nor
yet the Olive, Fig, nor Vine, that could heal, rejoice, or bind you up; but the
Bramble, and King of the bottomless Pit, that shall so Rend, Tear and Devour
you, till not one Stone shall be left upon another, which thing tell G.F. that
Fox, your King.

BY what is written, you may see how this high and Luciferian People the
Quakers, who for their Show and Numbers have been as the Stars of Heaven, and
who for their Pride and Enmity are to be cast down, WHOSE FALL IS THE RICHES OF
THE WORLD. So that the first in Profession, are now become the last in
Possession of the Kingdom, which stands, not in Words, nor yet in Outward
Appearances, but in Humility, and Love unfeigned, yea, in Righteousness, Peace,
and Joy, etc.

The foregoing Passages are taken out of Robert Riche's Letters, which were
Printed 1669, and Reprinted 1676. He was a Merchant, and was one of the
Eminentest and Ancientest Quaker that Lived in London.

I know (says R. R.) George Fox is raised up of GOD for this very end, to Try,
Refine, and Purify many, as Pharaoh was; and though many fall in the Trial under
his Power, yet many will be delivered into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of
GOD.

I likewise see, that daily more and more will fall off from that BODY, and
that some that separate from them, will with Daniel stand in their Lot, and
follow the LORD in the Spirit of the LAMB more fully than they have done.

These two last Paragraphs was Printed in 1680. in Abstracts of R. R 's Let.
etc. P. 19.

II. HOW low and humble were they (i.e. Quakers) in their Spirits (in the
beginning)? How few were they in Words? Their Yea, was Yea, and their Nay, Nay.
Ah! let me take up a Lamentation! How are the Mighty fallen? How have the Stars
ceased to give their Light? How are the Poor distressed, and the Young Ones
bruised, by the high Mountains and lofty Cedars, whose Habitations were once in
Heaven, but now upon the high Places of the Earth, to impose upon the
Conscience, and to establish an Arbitrary Power by a Law: These are the Armed
Beasts, and the many Antichrists, which break the Unity in Spirit, and the Bond
of Peace. P. 10.

THE Foxonian-Unity is to yield Subjection to the Order of the BODY (so called)
though no manifestation within. And this Unity they glory in, by this is their
Kingdom upheld, from this they are able to boast, Who is able to make War with
us? Who can stand before us? Do not all fall that are risen up against us? Are
not these the high-swelling words of Proud Babel, whose towering Thoughts must
be abased? Whose practice has been to crush the tender Ones in their Bodies,
Souls and Spirits. This Language has mine Ears heard, this Practice has mine
Eyes seen, to the grief and wounding of my Soul. P. 11, 12.

THIS Spirit of Antichrist in G. Fox, etc. would wrest from me what I am not
willing to part withal, to wit, my Conscience, under no less Penalty than
Excommunication, etc. P. 16.

THESE ill Ministers (i. e. G. Fox, etc.) conjoin together to subvert our Laws
and Liberties given by the Great JEHOVAH -- And assuredly, though they are
lifted up as it were into Heaven, in their Proud Imaginations, the Righteous
GOD will Blast all their Exalted Expectations, and they shall Die and Perish in
the General Dissolution, because they have not regarded the Fatherless, nor
pitied the poor in Spirit, nor compassionated the tender Conscience which
feared to Sin against the LORD, but Crushed, Spoiled, and Oppressed (without
Bowels of Mercy) those that had little strength to help themselves; invaded
their Rights, violated their Liberties, and endeavored to take the Meat from
the Children, and give it unto Dogs. P. 26. This Witness is true.

AND although they daily exercise the Oppressions beforementioned, yet by
their deceitful Flatteries they make People believe that they are a Harmless,
Innocent, and Peaceable People, suffering and bearing wrong, but not doing any:
Or if any Persons write or speak their Grief, that the Public take notice of,
they will represent them under such terms as may render them Odious; and the
more effectually to weaken their Testimonies, they will fix upon them
scurrilous and contemptible Appellations, as Scotch-men, Welch-men, Tinker,
Tailor, etc. some of them utterly untrue; and to prevent an Inquisition into
the Truth of the matter, they would make People believe that they are Envious,
Malicious, and Discomposed Spirits, Bad, Dirty, Factious, and Ranting Spirits,
who are gone from Truth, and are out of Truth. This Witness is true.

SUCH is the Portion of those that appear in the least against their Imperious,
Tyrannical, and Lascivious Actions: And whatever Man detected the Fallacies and
destructive Cheats of Imperious and Disdainful Men, but was thus reproached?
Must it be Justice in Them to complain of their Oppressions, and Envy, and
Malice, etc. in Us to complain of Ours? Their Years are but few, yet verily
they have been exceeding expert in learning the Papists Subtilties, P. 36, 37.
This Witness is true.

IT appears plainly unto the Just and Righteous Man, that G. Fox, and the rest
of his Counsel, have endeavored to subvert the Royal Law of Liberty, and to
introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government over the Consciences of the
Flock of GOD.

THESE are the Ravening Wolves which Prey upon the little Ones in a Lordly
Spirit. This is that envenomed Spirit which has tainted their Judgments,
poisoned their Hearts, and blinded their Eyes. P. 38.

AND I affirm the LORD did not raise them up to bring us off from the Barren
Mountains, to feed upon them who are now become a Desert; nor from under our
Oppressors, to turn Oppressors themselves. Let them remember the Army, it is
their Figure
; And if the LORD's Anger waxed hot against them for their Unfaithfulness, what
will be the Portion of These who have so deeply Apostatized from clearer
Manifestations? P. 41.

DEAR Friend, It has pleased the LORD to raise thee up, to bear a Testimony
against an Adulterous, Tyrannical, and an Hypocritical Generation, etc. P. 44.

W. Mucklowe, (an Eminent and Ingenious Quaker) in a large Letter (with much
more to the same effect) Printed 1673. Entitled, The Spirit of the Hat, etc.
and is Reprinted this Year 1700. Titled, A Bemoaning Letter, etc.

III. HE (i. e. S. Cater, a great Preacher) has written more than is true
concerning me, -- he is very Bold, and the most Confident Liar that ever I met
with; I laid the Record against J. Ainsloe before him, -- also G. Whitebead's
False Certificate about the (said) Record, (in his Book, Judgment Fixed, etc.)
it is an abuseful Forgery; for some of those whose Names are to the
Certificate, absolutely disowns it, and say, they set their Hands to none; it
is very sad (said she) that Men should be so Bold in their Wickedness. A.
Docwra 's Letter to Mr. Crisp, March 25. 1684.

I know it is common (says she) with some of them in their Books of
Controversy, to put the Names of such Persons as they account their Vassals,
both to Certificates and Books, sometimes without the Consent of the Parties
whose Names are inserted, and sometimes with their Consent, through slavish
Fear of having their Trades obstructed, and thereby Ruined. ( See A. D 's
Printed Broadside, i. e. The New Projecting Formalist Uncharacterized, etc.) This
Witness is true.

WHICH Impious Practice of Theirs is confirmed in their shameful Forgery in R.
S's Book, Righteous Judgment, etc. at at large in a Letter of his to me,
printed in my Modest Defense, etc. p. 20. may be seen.

F. B.

IV. THE Day is come, that as They have laid open the Deceit, Wickedness and
Hypocrisy of other Professors that went before Them, so must their Deceit,
Wickedness and Hypocrisy be also laid open; for the LORD whom I serve is no
respecter of Persons. This Witness is true.

Printed 1671. in a Letter to G.F. by J. P.

V. YOUR Day into Darkness is turned, the Sun is gone down over You: You have
had a large Day and Power given You to have done the Will of GOD, but you have
abused the Power, and slighted your Day, and have refused to do the LORD's
Work, and have sought your selves, and not the LORD; Therefore in Justice and
Righteousness is the Day wherein you might have wrought for GOD taken from You,
and the thick Dark Night of Confusion is come upon You, wherein You are
groping, and stumbling, and cannot Work: The Decree is gone out and sealed
against You, and it cannot be recalled; You are not the Men (as ye stand) in
whom GOD will appear to work deliverance for HIS People; (and yet deliverance
shall come) but as for You, Ye have rejected the Counsel of the LORD, and
grieved HIS Spirit; and HE has long born You; yea, You are departed from the
LORD, and HIS presence is departed from You: Indeed HE has Hewed with You,
(and if You had been faithful to the End, HE would have honored and prospered
You, and have been your sufficient Reward) Ye were HIS Ax, but Ye have boasted
Your selves against HIM; therefore as You have Hewed and Broken others, even so
must You be Hewed and Broken.

This was Printed 1673. and Reprinted 1677, 1692, and 1696. directed for the
Preachers and Leaders of the People called Quakers. By J. P.

VI. WHAT will you do? You Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites; you that have been
long making clean the outside of the Cup and Platter, but inwardly are as
Ravening Wolves; your Fruits will make you manifest: You Hypocrites, your Name
will be a stink among the Heathen, for the LORD will find you out, whose Glory
HE will not give to any other, nor HIS Honor to any of your Graven Images; my
Soul loathes all your false Covers, I cannot but declare against all your false
Ways.

M.D. an Ancient Quaker, and is Printed in a Letter to G. F. 1682.

VII. I Being engaged as well as some others to manifest and lay open deceitful
Workers and Hypocrites, I am farther to appear to manifest Thee to be one of
the greatest Hypocrites and Deceivers in this Nation; and until Thou own Thy
Condemnation, and leave off Deceiving the People, assuredly the Sword that is
now drawn, is not to be, nor must not be sheathed, till Thou, and such
Deceivers as Thou art, be brought down. This Witness is true.

In a large Letter to G. F. by J. P. 1674, and Printed 1682, 1691, and 1696.

VIII. THE Day is come, and now is, that the hidden things of Esau's Nature are
to be, and must be brought to Light.

See Quakers Unmasked, etc. Title Page, writ to G. Fox, G. Whitehead, etc.
1677. and Printed 1682, and 1691.

IX. AND let G. Fox, and Those that uphold him, remember that it was Jeroboam
the Son of Nebat that caused Israel to Sin; and as his Name was Branded to
Posterity, so shall Theirs be. This Witness is true.

Printed 1678. in the Book, A Sensible Cry, etc. p. 6. A. M.

X. BEHOLD, you Great Goliahs! Your strength is in an Arm of Flesh, but mine is
only in the Living GOD; before whom all Your deceitful covers are manifest,
which will stand You in little stead in the Day of Distress that is coming upon
You: For HE will certainly plead with You for all Your Abominations: You are
full of Designs to keep up Your Esteem among the People, but the LORD (by whose
POWER I am raised up against You) will bring You low, and utter Disgrace will
come upon You, because You have not sought HIS Glory so much as Your own.

Quakers Unmasked, etc. Preface by J. P. Printed 1682, and 1691.

XI. A Day of Trouble, Anguish, and Disappointment, is come and coming upon
You, which you can neither escape, nor prevent: You must reap the Fruit of your
own doings; for as you have sowed the Wind, you must expect to reap the
Whirlwind, wherein is nothing but Confusion, Darkness, Blackness, and Tempest:
And this is the Portion of all the Builders of Babel, or Babylonish Builders.
And though You may think that you have built the highest and fairest Structure of
any, yet know, and that for a truth, that not one Stone thereof shall be left
upon another; and all your Buildings, your Inventions, your Imaginations, and
Conceivings about your Forms, your Proud Self-conceited Modes, your
Impositions, your Prescriptions, Laws, and Comely Orders, (as you in your
fallen Wisdom call them) must all be thrown down, laid Waste, and become as a
Byword or Proverb of Reproach to the very Heathen, and not only to Them, but
also to Those whom you have defamed and stigmatized with the blackest of Names;
and for no other Cause, but only for their Faithfulness in Discharging a good
Conscience toward their GOD, toward You, and toward all Men. These are
faithful and true Sayings, if thou can receive them thou may.

Printed 1680, in a Letter to George Fox, by J. P. who is a Person well known,
and of an unspotted Reputation.

F. B.

BEHOLD that which You have Built must be Broken down, and that which You have
Planted must be Plucked up.

IT may be They will present their Supplications before the LORD, and will turn
every one from his Evil Way: For great is the Anger and Fury that the LORD has
pronounced against THIS PEOPLE.


POSTSCRIPT.
HE that reads the Books of Controversy against G. Fox, G. Whitehead, and that
Party, writ by several that had been (some 20, 30, or 40 Years) of the Society
of the Quakers Viz. F. Bugg, T. Crisp, W. Rogers, Jo. Hog, N. Coleman, J.
Rance, G. Keith, D. Leeds, W. Mather, and no less than 67 Writ against them at
one time, with diverse others that might be named, besides the Author of the
Snake, etc.
, will plainly see much of the foregoing Collections already fulfilled, and so
must the rest be in the appointed Season; and then 'twill more fully and
evidently appear, that the same Infallible and Unerring SPIRIT, by which the
Holy Men of Old were Guided, some have been made living and true Witnesses of
in this our Age and Generation: Though it is sad to consider how the Quakers [vain
Boasts and false Pretenses thereto] have caused the very Name of the LORD and
His Inspirations to be Derided and Blasphemed, yea, and that in a greater and
higher degree, than any other Sect whatsoever; this is Matter of Sorrow, and
ought to be laid to Heart by every one concerned.

J. P.

O THOU Great and Infinite BEING, before Whom all Nations are but as the drop
of a Bucket in comparison of THEE, Bless, Preserve, and Keep me, and all that
truly fear THEE, from all, and all manner of Evil, [whether of Flesh or Spirit]
from henceforth and for ever, is the Desire, Humble and Hearty Prayer of one of
the Unlearnedst, Weakest and Unworthiest of all THY Servants, yet am one that
have been made willing (and that with gladness of Heart) to follow THY
Leadings, whether into Good or Evil Report; Praised and Glorified be THY Name
for evermore, says THY Servant; and let all the Upright-hearted say, Amen.

An APPENDIX.
IT is impossible (says W. Mather) that the Pens now in Controversy, against
Us Quakers, should be put a stop to, before there is a Reformation of our
numerous Preachers. And also a Retractation of all the Errors of our Friends
Books, be published. P. 1.

CONSIDER this, you fierce Despisers of all Those who desire Your Reformation
in Doctrine and Practice. You know where this cursed thing is, that causes all
this Disturbance; you still hide it, but out it must come, and be beaten to
Powder. P. 9.

The above is taken out of W. Mather's Book, printed this Year 1700. He has
been a Quaker these 40 Years.

WHEREIN you have erred, be not ashamed to confess and return; for however you
are filled with Confidence of your selves, you are [fully] seen to others.

FRET not at Instruments, neither look so much at Them, as at that Righteous
HAND that is turned against You.

YOU have lost your Glory, it cannot be hid; the Substance is departed, though
the Shadows remain; Therefore let Humility and unfeigned Repentance be found
amongst You; that Glory may be given to HIM, who is the Searcher of all Hearts.

This was Printed 1675, and 1696.

BEHOLD, They -- say, The Vision that he sees isfor many days to come, and he
prophesies of the Times that are afar off.

THEREFORE say unto them, Thus says the LORD, There shall none of my Words be
prolonged any more, but the Word which I have spoken, shall be done, says the
LORD GOD.

These following Words were spoken at several of the Quakers Meetings, 1699.

WHERE any Form, without the POWER; and where an Image, without LIFE, is set up
and exalted; There, and by such a People, the Worshippers in Spirit and in
Truth, are Despised and Rejected. This is a most Certain and True Testimony; He
or She that can receive it, let 'em.

AND though the Words of the Prophets were Read every Sabbath Day in the Jews
Synagogues; vet their Rulers neither knew the True SHEPHERDS Voice, nor the
Voices of the Prophets; as says the Scriptures of Truth Acts 13.27.
. And though the Words of the Prophets, and also of the Apostles, are frequently
Declared, and Spoken in Your Assemblies; yet, most that pretend themselves to
be Ministers of CHRIST, neither know HIS Voice, nor the Voices of the Prophets,
nor of the Apostles.

THIS is the Message I have been made, of late, to deliver at most of Your
Meetings, in, and about this City. And though the Words, are the Words of Truth
and Soberness; yet some (of your Preachers) have not ceased (as the Jews of old
did) to Contradict, and Blaspheme the Good SPIRIT of the Ever-blessed GOD, by
which it was Declared, and Spoken: And therefore I was made to come hither
White-Hart-Court, and at Devonshire-House.
at this Time, to Warn and Caution You, to Beware lest that come upon You,
which is Spoken of in the Prophets (and which Paul also Spoke to the Jews,)
viz. BEHOLD, ye Despisers, and Wonder, and Perish; for I will work a Work in
this Your Day (I say, in this Your Day) which You will not Believe, although it
should be Declared unto You.

AND thus having Faithfully Performed what is Required of Me, at this Time, I
am to leave You, and to Depart in Peace.



The Conclusion.
AND now I shall Conclude with a few words of Counsel and Advice (not only to
my nearest and dearest Relations, (of what kind soever) but also to Those who
have been more particularly concerned and engaged, in Discovering and laying
open the Immoralities and Miscarriages of the highest pretenders to Religion),
viz.

OH! that every one of You, who have seen the Evils and Miscarriages of others,
might make a deep search into your own Hearts; and see if you are not guilty
[before the Invisible and All-seeing EYE] of some Iniquity or other, that
offends His Divine MAJESTY; which, if (upon a diligent search) you find your
selves Guilty, my Desire, my Request, yea, my Hearty Prayer both for you, and
my self, is; That we may never let HIM rest, till HE has Cleansed, Purged and
Purified us from all Secret and Hidden Sins; and from all Filthiness of Flesh
and Spirit: And this I beg, in the Name, and for the alone and only sake of our
for Ever Blessed LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST, who gave himself for us [who
truly Love, Fear, and Obey HIM] that HE might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and
Purify into Himself a Peculiar People Zealous of good Works. This is that
happy State, and blessed Condition, which my self, with some others, for these
many Years have been laboring and pressing after, and which (through the
Infinite Mercy of the great GOD) after much Waiting, Stilness, and Retir'dness,
we have, in some measure attained; And therefore cannot but in true Love advise
you all, my Dear Friends, to be like minded, in laboring for, and pressing
after the Same; that so you may reap the Benefit, and I the Comfort, of all the
Desires and Prayers, which have been made, either for you, or my self.

J. P.

BEHOLD the Goodness, and Severity of GOD: On THEM which are fallen,Severity;
but toward US, Goodness, if we continue in HIS Goodness; otherwise WE also
shall be cut off.

And THEY also, if THEY abide not still in Unbelief, shall be Grafted in: for
GOD is able to Graft THEM in again.

BLESSED, and Happy, yea, for Ever Happy, will they be, who hears the Word of
GOD near or in their Hearts, that keeps it, and is in all saithfulness obedient
to it; such will stand as fixed and unmovable [in the midst of all the
Concussions, Dividings, and Shakings, that at present are, or are to be; in
Church, or State] as a firm Rock, in the midst of a rough and tempestuous Sea.
This is a certain, sure, and true Testimony; he that can receive it, let 'em.

HE shall not be afraid of Evil Tidings: His Heart is fixed, trusting in the
LORD.

The END.

