Upon the 28th day of the Month called July, 1670. I being required by the
Lord, to pack up all the Books, of what kind or sort soever that I had, with an
intention to have had them carried to a Friends of mine in Cornhill, near the
Exchange; it was so ordered, That as I was going through the said Exchange, it
was with me to sit down and rest me, and accordingly ordered the two Porters to
rest themselves; the one of them had two great Bags full of Books, and the
other had one Bag filled much with old News-Books, especially at the top; for I
saw no other in it, when I opened it; which I did there, having ordered one of
the said Porters to carry a little parcel to my said Friends, (where I purposed
to have carried the said Books) and desired him to bring me a Candle; against
which time I had taken out two or three waste papers in my hand, and withal bid
one of the Porters bring that Bag after me; so going to the middle of the
Exchange, (I bid the Porter pour out the Books) and having put fire to the
papers in my hand, with two or three of those News-Books, the man that was
sweeping the Exchange was ordered to put it out, there being (so near as I
could judge) not the quantity of a quarter of a sheet of paper burnt. Now
whereas it is imagined, and said, that I would have burned all those Books, I
have this to say, That if they would have given me a Candle to have burned all,
or any one of them there more then what was already done, I would not; I say, I
should not have done it to have gained the Treasures of the whole World.

This is a faithful and true Saying; He that can receive it, let him.
This following being a Copy of a Letter, which I writ to a Kinsman, who I
heard had been the occasion of putting one in Prison for the Testimony of his
Conscience toward God, I am willing it should be thus published for the
satisfaction of all such that desire to know the truth in this matter.

Cozen,
I Understand that thou have been instrumental to put one Abraham Bonnyfield in
Prison, for the testimony of his Conscience toward God; the which if he should
violate, yea, I say, if he should violate in the least, it had been better for
him he had never been born: Now if the case be so, what will become of thee,
and all such as thou art, who as much as in you lies, endeavor to force men to
violate the Law of the Living God, written and implanted in the heart? O take
heed, and turn to the Lord before it be too late, and the things belonging to
thy everlasting peace be bid from thy eyes; for yet a little while, and the
Voice shall be, He that is filthy, let him be filthy still. O! whilst it is
called to day, take heed, for the day of visitation (from the Lord) is come;
blessed and happy, yea for ever happy will they be that can receive it. Yea,
the day is come, that many that have been first, shall be last; and many that
are last, shall be first.

I am now a Prisoner in the Prison at Bishops-gate; and the rumor is, That I
would have burned the Bible, etc. Concerning which, I have this to say, That
rather than I would burn that Book, (or the least Leaf thereof that might be
serviceable) I should rather choose, had I as many lives to lose as I have hairs
on my head, yea, and every life to be taken from me by the exquisite torment
that the wit (and wickedness) of man could invent; I say, rather than wilfully
(or by the command of any mortal) burn that Book, I should rather choose to be
sacrificed in the said torments.

To the testimony and truth of which, I do here subscribe my self, J. PENNYMAN,
Who am thy Real and True Friend.
The 30th of the month, called July, 1670.

