Imprimatur, Hic Liber cui Titulus, The Portugal History, etc.

Ab. Campion, Reverendissimo Domino Gilb. Arch. Cant. a Sac. Domest.
Ex Aedibus Lambeth. Nov. 8. 1676.
THE Portugal History: OR, A RELATION of the TROUBLES that happened in the
COURT of PORTUGAL.

In the Years 1667 and 1668.

In which is to be seen that great Transaction of the Renunciation of the Crown
by Alphonso the Sixth, the Dissolution of his Marriage with the Princess Maria
Frances Isabella of Savoy: The Marriage of the same Princess to the Prince Don
Pedro Regent of the Realm of Portugal, and the Reasons alleged at Rome for the
Dispensation thereof.

By S. P. Esquire

LONDON: Printed for Richard Tonson at his Shop under Grays-Inn-Gate, next
Grays-Inn-Lane. 1677.

THE Introduction To the Ensuing HISTORY.
HISTORY, or the true Relation of the Actions of Public Persons, the great
Business and Affairs of Kingdoms, Cities and Commonwealths has been evermore
accounted not only Delightful but Profitable, and indeed to be preferred
before all other Humane Learning, it giving men a true knowledge of themselves.

Among the many Remarkable Stories, Revolutions and Tr^nsactions which this Age
or former has produced in the World, I think this which sh^^l be related to
you in the following Pages, to be none of the least Notable and Remarkable, and
worthy your Note and Observation, and the more being of so late a date, and
among those whom we may call our Neighbors. The Fame of it no doubt has
formerly come to your Ears, if you are not a Recluse, and quite banished from
Converse in the World, you cannot but have heard something of the Story from
Reports or public Gazets, but here is more amply and ruly made known the whole
Transaction of it, even to the least Circumstances, wherein is seen a great
part of the Wisdom and Policy of the Portugal Nation. But for the sake of
those who are not well acquainted with the History of the Portuguise, I thought
it not amiss, as an Introduction to the following History to give you some
little Description of that Country, and also a short Cronicle of their Kings
from their Original, to King John the 4th, the Father of Alphonso the 6th. the
Subject of this present History, and that with all the brevity that can be,
being only to prepare the way for the History of King Alphonso's Resignation of
his Crown, and the Advancement of the Prince Don Pedro to the Regency of the
Kingdom; being never till now published, or made known among our Country men.

Portugal then is part of the Continent of Europe, being the most Westerly part
of it, washed with the Atlantic or Western-Ocean: The atmost Bounds of the
known World till the famous Discoveries of the West Indies. It was formerly
accounted a third part of Spain, and called Lusitania, as the Ancients would
have it, from Luso and Lysa, the fabulous Companions of Bacchus: now called
Portugal, from Portus Gallorum, a great Fishing place of the Gauls, called
Cale, now Caja, being situate at the Mouth of the River Durius. It is in
Length, from North to South, four hundred miles: The Breadth, from East to
West, is, in the broadest place, not exceeding one hundred miles, and in the
narrowest about eighty. The whole Circumference about eight hundred seventy
nine miles; containing about fourteen hundred and sixty odd Parishes.

It is Bounded on the North with the Rivers Antinio and Avia, which part it
from Galicia: On the South with the Kingdom of Algarve: On the West with the
Atlantic Ocean, and on the East, with the two Castiles, and Estramadura.

As for the Country it self, it is Hilly and not very Fruitful, yet what Corn
and other things of the growth thereof they have, are very excellent and good,
especially Fruits, which they have in abundance, and those very delicious. It
has enough to maintain it self, and to supply others with Honey, Salt, Wine,
Oil, Alumn, Fish, Fruits, Marble. It has also several Mines. The Air is
wholesome, subject to Heats, yet tolerable, especially to the Natives, who are
of a plain and simple behavior to the rest of the Spaniards, and have a great
Antipathy to them for their Oppression, but have of late years bore up bravely.
They have been and still are great Navigators by reason of their Vicinity to
the Sea, and have thereby increased the Dominion and Riches of the Nation by
Conquest and Traffic abroad exceeding much; being famous for their Discoveries
and Acquists in the East and West Indies.

Its chief Rivers are the Tagus, famous for its Golden Sands. Minius full of
Red-Lead, whence it had the Name of Minium, Lethes or Lavada, Muliadas or
Mundego: The Duero and Anas. None of them Navigable but for a little space,
being generally Swift and Narrow.

The chief Cities are Lisbon, the Kings Chamber, a great Mart, of Old called
Osisippo, or Ulisippo; Built, as they then held, by Ulysses in his
Peregrinations. It is in 10 Degrees of Longitude, 38 Latitude North, about
seven miles Compass, and contains about 20000 Houses, divided into 30 odd
Parishes. Santaren or Sancta Irene, situate also on the Tagus. Conimbra,
seated on the River Mondeso, a Bishops See and University. Braga, an
Archbishops See. Porto, or Portaport, at the mouth of the Duero. Miranda, a
Bishops Sea. Braganza, whose Dukes are now Kings of Portugal. Eubora, an
Archbishops See. Portolegre, a Bishops See. Olivenza, a City seated on the
Guadiana. Beja, anciently Paxtulia now Mean, an ancient Colony of the Romans.

As for the Language it is a Subdialect of the Latin mixed with Morisco; the
Moors having settled in Spain, 700 Years: A time sufficient to implant their
Language: But more immediately a Dialect of the Spanish Tongue: Being Spanish
more curtly and quicker pronounced: The Castilians affecting long trained
words, agreeing with their superb Gravity.

But besides this Dominion, there belongs to the Kings of Portugal many other
large Territories, won to the Crown by Warlike and renowned Princes of that
Nation, both in Asia, Africa, and America. But South of Portugal lies the
Kingdom of Algarve, won from the Moors, and annexed to the Crown by Alphonso
the Third. This Regnum Algarbiorum had its Name as its supposed from its
Westerly situation; for so Algarve signifies in the Arabic. It reaches as far
as St. Vincents Cape, or the Southern Cape, as the Mariners call it. The
chiefest places in it are Niebla, once the Seat of their Kings. Sylvia, an
Inland City, a Bishops Seat. Villa Maona, situate beyond the Cape. Tavila,
Faro, Lagos, all Haven Towns.

Besides this there belongs to the Dominions of the Kings of Portugal certain
Islands called the Azores, seated in the Atlantic Ocean, directly opposite to
Portugal and distant from the Land about 250 Leagues, found out and subdued by
Prince Henry, Son of King John the first From hence they reckon the first
Longitude, as formerly from the Canaries, being accounted more exact. They are
called Azores, from the multitude of Gosh-hawks found in them when they were
first discovered: Azor signifying a Gosh hawk in the Spanish Tongue They are
Nine in Number, the chief of them is the Tercera, the place of Residence of
Alphonso the sixth, since his Resignation of the Crown. The rest are St.
Mary's, St. Michaels, Fayal. Gratiosa, St. Georges, Duo, Flores, Corvo, from
the abundance of Crows therein. In Asia the Kings of Portugal have very large
Possessions, with many Forts and Places of Strength. The chief and richest is
the City of Goa in the Kingdom of Decan, one of the Keys of the East Indies.
Here the Portugals have their Arsenals, with an Harbor for their Fleet. Then
they have Diu a Peninsula in the Province of Guzarate in the Kingdom of
Cambaia; Here they have an impregnable Citadel. Over against this Place, upon
the Seaside they are possessed of Daman, a beautiful and a pleasant Town. Also
Chial a Sea-Town. Solsette with a Peninsula of twenty miles in Compass
containing about thirty Villages, and 80000 Inhabitants, with many other
considerable places.

In Africa they have many large Possessions in the Kingdoms of Gongo and Angola
till dispossessed thereof by the Hollandar. But they are still in the
Possession of the Islands of Cape Verd, so called because situated opposite to
that Promontory, of which there are nine of them, the chief of which is St.
Jago. In the West Indies, they are possessed of Brazile, from whence we have
plenty of Wood and Sugars, at least every year 150000 Arrobes, every Arrobe
containing 25 Bushels of our measure.

They have here thirteen Captainships or Governments, the Chief of which is St.
Vincents. The rest are Rio de Janeiro, del Spiritu Sancto, or of the Holy
Ghost; Porto Sepurio, des Ileos, or the Isles; Todos les Sanctos, or All
Saints; Penambuccio; Tamaraca; Paraiba; Riogrande Siarra; Maragnon and Para.

Having thus given you an account of the Dominion of the Kings of Portugal, I
shall succinctly give you a Relation of their Kings even to Alphonso the sixth,
the Subject of the following Discourse, but little more than naming them, it
being not my Intention to write their History, but only as a preparative to
what I shall more fully relate, that you may not be altogether in the Dark as
to the Succession of that Kingdom.

Lusitan a being under the Empire of the Romans followed the Fortune of the
rest of Spain, and was subject to the various turns and changes which often
happened in those days till the declining of the Roman Greatness, when the Alans
were the first that preyed upon it, and endeavored to Plant it, but they were
soon driven out by the Swemans, and sent to seek for other places of
Habitation: These made Braga their Imperial City, and enjoyed it for so he time
till the great inundation of the Goths and Vandals, who overrunning the whole
Continent of Spain, made all become Vassals to them, and put this under their
Power and Dominion. These continued here for a lorg time, and at last embraced
the Christian Religion, till the Moors again like an irresistible Flood coming
out of Africa, fell in upon them and possessed themselves both of it and the
greatest part of Spain. But at last after much Struggling, many Battles, and
much Bloodshed, this Kingdom was in part Recovered from them by the Kings of
Castile, and by them enjoyed till they got a King of their own.

Henry the Second, Duke of Lorraine, whom some affirm to be Nephew to Godfry
Duke of Bolloigne, flying from the fu^^y of the Emperor Henry the Fifth, came
into Spain; where moved by the generous Emulation of his Uncle Godfry, who was
gone to the Conquest of Jerusalem, be offered his service against the Moors,
and by his many valourous Achievements against the Enemies of the Christian
Religion, he in a short time arrived at so great and consider able Repute with
Alphonso the Sixth King of Castile, that he gave him his Base Daughter Teresa
to Wife, with all those Lands he had Conquered from the Moors in Lusitania for
her Dower, the chief of which being the Country about Portus Gallorum,
mentioned in the Description before, called then Porto; he gave him the the
Title of Count or Earl of Portugal. And so he called the Lands he had Conquered
from the Moors in Lusitania, by that Name, as did also his Successors and from
thence proceeded the Name Portugal.

This Henry Earl of Portugal, having been a Terror to the Moors, and having
enlarged his Territories, being 77 years old, lied, leaving behind him, by his
Wife Teresa a Son, who was born in the Year ^094, being 18 years Old at the
Death of ^is Father, and succeeded him in his Earl^om, and came to be.

The Frst King of Portugal, called Alphonso the First, after his Grandfathers
Name. For being bred up in Military Discipline by his Father, he prosecuted his
(...) against the Moors, and all the Kings his Neighbors. The Count of
Trastamarense despising his Youth, Married his Mother Teresia, upon which there
fell Wars between them, but Alphonso behaved himself so well that he forced the
Count to give him his Sister Uracca to Wife, with an addition of Lands for her
Dower. He then made War with his Grandfather Alphonso the Sixth, King of
Castile, and took him Prisoner, but upon his Release he had conferred on him
the Title of Duke of Portugal. After that he turned his Forces against the
Saracens, and took from them Leirida and Torre da Ova, and several other
places. Whereupon Ismaurus King of the Moors, with four other Kings ^^s
Neighbors, invaded Duke Alphonso with 400000 Men, but were by him utterly
Overthrown and Discomfited, up on which memorable Battle, he placed the five
Escutchions which are now born in the Arms of Portugal, in remembrance of the
Overthorow of those five Moorish Kings. His Soldiers grown proud with this
Success, thinking the Title of Duke too low for his great Merit, saluted him by
the Name of King, which he accepting of, the Estates of the People, and all the
Nobility and Gentry being Convocated in the City of Lamego, and in the Church
of Saint Almacave, they conferred on him the Grown and Scepter, and other
Ensigns of Royalty by the hands of the Archbishop of Braga, and confirmed by
the Popes Letters, they with joint consent made him then King. And at the same
time they made several Fundamental Laws, as a mutual Obligation between the
King and his People. Among the rest were

1. That Alphonso should be their King and his Children and Childrens Children
after him, for ever.

2. That the Eldest Son should succeed, but if he dye before his Father, the
next Brother should succeed.

3. That if the King should dye without Issue, having a Brother, he should
succeed, but not his Sons, without the consent of the Estates.

4. That if the King should have only Daughters, the Eldest should succeed
after her Father, upon condition she be Married to a Native of the Kingdom, and
that he be a Nobleman, who should not have the Power to take the Name of King,
till he had a Son Born, nor should wear a Crown on his Head, nor take the
Right Hand of his Wife.

5. That it should be a binding Law for ever among the Portugals, That the
Crown might not descend to Foreigners, if the Kings Eldest Daughter should
Marry a Foreign Prince, she should be be excluded from her right of
Succession, for that they would not have the Kingdom which they had obtained by
their own Valor, go out of the Race of the Portugals.

First, Thus Alphonso the First obtained the Crown of the Kingdom of Porugal,
and within a while he added to his rown by Conquest after a five months iege,
the Rich and Populous City of Lisbon, which ever since became the Capital City
of his Kingdom, and Place of Residence for him and his Successors. He made
diverse other Acquists to the enlargment of his Dominions, and being 90 years of
Age in the year 1185 he Died, leaving behind him Sancho his Son, who succeeded
in his Kingdom, and two Daughters; Uracca married to Ferdinand King of Leon,
and Therasia, by some called Matiida, Married to Philip the first Earl of
Flanders. These he had (with Henry, who dyed young) by a second Wife (for he
had no Issue by Uracca the Daughter of Count Trastamarense) Mafalda, Sister to
Amadeo Earl of Morenna.

Secondly, Sancho the First, and Second King of Portugal, Son of Alphonso, (his
only Legitimate Son that he had living) born at Conimbra, the 12th of November
1154, Succeeded his Father, being Crowned the 12th of December, 1185, three
days after his Fathers Death. He applied himself much to the Settling of his
Kingdom, and to Tillage, and Planting his Country, therefore called the King of
Husbandmen. He by help of some Christian Soldiers put into Lisbon, in their
Voyage to the Holy Land, Invaded Algarve, and took the Chief City Sylva;
although he did not very long enjoy his Conquest, but was driven thence by the
Moors and had like to have lost his Kingdom of Portugal, being furiously
assaulted by the Moors.

He took to Wife the Daughter of Raymond Berengurio, Count of Brachinona called
Aldonsa, by her he had 8 Children, 3 Sons and 5 Daughters. The Sons were
Alphonso, who succeeded in his Kingdom; Ferdinand, a Man of great Virtue and
Parts, Married to Joanna Countess of Flanders, and Pietro Count of Irgelense.
The Daughters were Therasia, Married to Alphonso King of Leon; Mafalda, to
Henry the first King of Castile, both after their Marriages turning Nuns.
Sancha became a Nun of the Order of Saint Francis, who lived about this time.
Biancha and Beringilla, who dyed young. This King at 57 years of Age, and in
the 26th of his Reign dyed, being accounted for his Virtue and Goodness among
the best of the Portugal Kings.

Thirdly, His Son Alphonso the second succeeded, Born at Conimbra, 1185, was
about 27 years Old when Crowned King; between whom and his Brothers and Sisters
there were great Jarrs. He was a Man of an high and very willful Spirit, and in
his latter days grew so unweldy and fat that he could not prosecute the Wars.
He Married Uracca the Daughter of Alphonso the Eighth King of Castile and
Elenor Daughter of Henry King of England, by her he had diverse Children. First
Sancho, who succe^ed him in his Kingdom. Alphonso by Right of his Wife Duke of
Bologna, afterward also King of Portugal. Ferdin and Count of Serpia. Vincenzo
dyed young. Leonora a Daughter, Married to the King of Dacia. Alphonso in the
48 year of his Age, and 21th of his Reign dyed, Anno 1233.

Fourthly, Sancho the Second succeeded his Father, and was Born in Conimbra the
first of September 1207, being very sickly and unlikely to live, but came to
the Crown at twenty six years of Age, spending most of his time in Baths and
Hot-houses for the recovery of his Health. He Married with Messa Lopez, the
Widow of Alvaro de Castro: She was accounted but an inferior Match, tho of
Blood Royal, being made by his Favorites, who with the Assistance of the Queen
by reason of the Kings weakness and indisposition made a Prey of the People,
and mightily oppressed them, so that they were enforced to call to their
Assistance Alphonsus, the Kings Brother, who coming from Bologna, possessed
himself of the Kingdom; Sancho being forced to retire to Toledo; where
addicting himself wholly to Devotion, he dyed in the Year, 1245, at 39 Years of
his Age, having reigned 13 Years.

Fifthly, Alphonso the Third, who succeeded his Brother, was Born in Conimbra,
May 5. 1210, Educated with great Care and Diligence by his Father, because of
his Brothers Sickness. He married Matilda, Countess of Bologne, Widow of
Philipo Crispo, and Daughter of Philipo Augustino. He was a Man of great Parts,
but they were over shadowed by his Lusts; For after he was settled in the
Kingdom, he repudiated his Wife, and contracted a wicked Marriage with
Beatrice, the illegitimate Daughter of Alphonso, the King of Castile, and his
Concubine Maria Villenia. And notwithstanding the Threats of the Pope Alexander
the 4th. at the Tears and Complaints of the Duchess of Bologne, he caused her
to be Crowned Queen; and confirmed his Succession by the Birth of three
Children, Dionysio his eldest Son succeeded in the Kingdom; Alphonso, who
married the Daughter of Prince Emanuel, Son of Ferdinand, King of Castile; and
Ferdinand, who dyed young. He very much infested the Moors, increasing his
Kingdom with the full Conquest of Algarve, with much Glory and Reputation. He
died at Lisbon, Anno 1279, at 69 Years of Age, and 32 of his Reign, accompting
from his Brothers Death.

Sixthly, Dionysius or Dennys his Son succeeded his Father. He was born on the
day of the Great Areopagite, for whose sake they imposed that Name, Anno 1260.
He was a great and famous Poet. He was about 20 Years of Age, when he came to
the Crown, and would by no means admit his Mother to the Administration of the
Government. He never oppressed his Subjects, neither with Tribute or Taxes; yet
left to his Heir a full Exchequer. He made many good Laws, which are to this
day observed. The Order of the Templers was extinct in his Time, and he first
instituted the University at Conimbra. He took to Wife Elizabeth, Daughter to
Peter King of Arragon, who was most remarkable for her Sanctity; by her he had
Alphonso, who succeeded him, and Constance, who was married to Ferdinand King
of Castile. After he had reigned 46 Years, he dyed at the Age of 84 Years, Anno
1235.

Seventhly, Alphonso the Fourth, and the Seventh King of Portugal, succeeded
his Father, and was born in Conimbria, Anno 1290. He married with Beatrice,
Daughter to Sancho the Fourth King of Castile. A Man given to hunting, and
disports, to the neglect of his People, but being at last made sensible of it,
he took the Reins into his hands, and proved a good King. About the Year 1340,
Alboacen, the potent Miramamolin of Morocco, and Granada, set himself against
all Spain, with an Army of 470000 Men, but was overthrown at the River Saledo,
by the Kings of Castile and Portugal, where they obtained a great Victory, with
much Treasure and many Ensigns of Glory. He had by his Queen Beatrice six
Children: Three Sons dyed in their Infancy, the Fourth Don Pedro succeeded his
Father in the Throne, the other two were Daughters, Mary, who was Married to
Alphonso King of Castile, and Elenora, espoused to Piedro the fourth King of
Arragon. King Alphonso, being overloaded with the Burden of 77 Years, departed
this Life, Anno 1356, and was buried at Lisbon.

Eighthly, Pedro, the First of that Name, the Eighth King of Portugal,
succeeded his Father Alphonso. He was born at Lisbon, Anno 1325, and was aabout
33 Years of Age, when he came to the Government. He was married to Constance,
Daughter to D. Juan Emanuel, Son to Prince Emanuel, Nephew to Ferdinand
surnamed the Holy, by whom he had one only Son named Ferdinand, who succeeded
him in his Kingdom. After the death of his Wife, he fell in Love with Agnesa de
Castro, a most beautiful Woman descended of the Blood Royal, by whom he had
many Children, among whom ^^ is John, who was afterward King of Portugal. This
Lady was put to death by his Father very unjustly, but he brought those to
condign Punishment, who had wrongfully accused her, as soon as he came to the
Crown; It having caused long Wars between him and his Father. But in the tenth
Year of his Reign, and about the 43d of his Age, Anno 1367, he paid his Debt to
Nature, and was buried between the Bodies of his Wife and his Beloved Agnesia.

Ninthly, Ferdinand, the First of that Name, and the ninth King of Portugal,
succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of Portugal and Algarve. He was born at
Lisbon, Anno 1347, the only Son of Constance the Daughter of D. Emanuel; he
came to the Crown at the Age of 22 Years, in the Year 1369. He wholly drove the
Moors from the Confines of Algarve, and addicted himself much to the planting
the Wast Lands; he erected a Monastery for Franciscan Friars in Sylva, the
chief City of that Territory. About his time it was that Pedro King of Castile,
being thrust out of his Kingdom by his Bastard Brother Henry, for his many
tyrannical Outrages done upon his Subjects, sued in vain to Ferdinand, not
being willing to assist him; but was reestablished in his Throne by the Valiant
Prince Edward, commonly called the Black Prince. Ferdinand had but one Daughter
only that survived him, who was married to Henry, King of Castile, and thereby
excluded from the Right of Succession, according to that Law made at Samego, by
the General Assembly of the Estates; so that in this King ended the Legitimate
Line of Henry Duke of Lorrain. This King having now reigned 18 Years, and lived
40, being seized by a violent Sickness gave up the Ghost, Anno 1387, and was
buried in the Cathedral Church of Lisbon.

Tenthly, John the First, Bastard Son to Pedro the First, after the death of
Ferdinand his Brother, and Niece Beatrice incapable of Succession by reason of
her Marriage with a foreign Prince, claimed the Crown, as next of Blood, but
was for a while debarred by reason of his Illegitimation; when afterward
considering that they might choose one less deserving, they conferred the Crown
upon him, yet so as he should receive it, not as his indubitable Right by
Birth, but as given him by Election. Thus he obtained the Crown by the Name of
John the First, and was the Tenth King of Portugal: He was born in Lisbon, in
the Year 1356, and entered into the Government in the 32 Year of his Age, in
the Year 1388, with very great Applause of the whole Kingdom. Soon after his
Coronation he married Philippa, Daughter to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster,
which he did to oppose Henry of Castile, who claimed Portugal in Right of his
Wife Beatrice, by matching into that Family, which had an equal, if not greater
Right to the Kingdom of Castile; for that John Duke of Lancaster married the
Eldest Daughter of Peter, the murdered King of Castile and Leon. By Philippa
he had a numerous Issue; First, Edward, (so named of his Godfather Edward th
Third of England) who succeeded his Father in the Kingdom; Ferdinand, a Man of
great Abstinency and Devotion; John, Pedro, and the most Renowned Henry, who
was the First of the Portugal Nation that made any foreign Voyages; he
discovered the Azores, Anno 1425, also the Islands of the Madera; and sailing
along the Coasts of Africa found the Way to Guiana. King John reigned 47 Years,
being made Knight of the Garter, as also his Sons, the Infants Edward and
Henry; and dyed in the Year 1436, leaving the World full of his Glory.

Eleventhly, Edward, the First of that Name, the Eleventh King of Portugal,
succeeded his Father, he was Born at Braga, Anno 1392, and came to the Crown
about the Age of 44 Years or thereabouts. He was married long before he came to
the Crown, and had four Children; Ferdinand who dyed young, Alphonso who
succeeded him in the Kingdom, Joane married to the King of Castile and Leon,
and Leonora married to the Emperor Ferdinand, and was the Mother of the Emperor
Maximilian. He had but a short Reign of 5 Years, and those with bad Success.

Twelfthly, Alphonso the Fifth, and the Twelfth King of Portugal, succeeded his
Father. He was born at Lisbon, about the Year 1420, and came to the Crown at
the One and Twentieth Year of his Age, in the Year 1441. He made Wars against
the Moors in Barbary, and took from them Tangier, Alcazar, and Arzilla, which
he fortified and kept. He made Traffic famous, encouraging Navigation, which
began to flourish with them exceedingly. He left behind him several Children,
two of which succeeded him in the Kingdom, John his eldest Son, and Emanuel who
reigned after his Brother. He was a very affable and courteous Prince, of a
mild and gentle Disposition. He dyed at Lisbon, in the 43 Year of his Reign,
and 64 of his Life, in the Year 1484.

Thirteenthly, John tho Second, and Thirteenth King of Portugal, succeeded his
Father: He was born about the Year 1456, and entered into the Government of the
Kingdom at the Age of about 28 Years. He made an Expedition into Barbary
against the Moors with Success. He sent out two Fleets for Discoveries, one of
which steered its Course along the Coast of Africa, as far as Guinny, where
they made a Conquest of the Kingdom of Congo. After he had reigned 14 Years
with happy Success in all his Enterprises, he dyed by a Fall from his Horse in
Hunting, leaving no Legitimate Issue.

Fourteenthly, Emanuel the First, and Fourteenth King of Portugal, Brother to
King John, and Son to Alphonso, succeeded. He was born about the Year 1462, and
took possession of the Crown about the Age of 32 Years: He was bred up in all
Sorts ^f Learning, and was very Pious and Religious. He was also a Lover of
Navigation, and set out three great Fleets for Discoveries, in the year 1500;
one steered its Course to the East, and was the first Christian Fleet that ever
passed the Cape of Good Hope; he found out the Passage by Sea to the
East Indies. After which he sent another, and possessed himself of the Island
Ormus, in the Persian Gulf. The second Fleet went Southwards, adding to their
former Conquests of Congo and Angelo. The third Fleet steered Westward, and
made Discovery, and took possession of Brazile in America, which they yet
possess. He was a brave Prince, endued with many Virtues and Excellencys, as
well of body as of mind, ruling in great Prosperity and Peace. He dyed at
Lisbon, in the 73 year of his Life, and 41 of his Reign, in the year 1535, and
left behind him a numerous Issue, six Sons, and two Daughters: The Sons were
John, who succeeded him, D. Lewis, D. Alphonso who was Cardinal and Archbishop
of Lisbon, D. Henry Cardinal and Archbishop of Braga, who came afterward to
be King, Don Ferdinand, Don Edward, whose Daughter Katherine marrying into the
House of Braganza, brought the Right of the Crown to that House: The Daughters
were Isabella, married to the Emperor Charles the Fifth and King of Spain; and
Beatrice, married to Emanuel Duke of Savoy.

Fifteenthly, John the Third, the Fifteenth King of Portugal, succeeded his
father in the Kingdom. He was born in the year 1504, and arrived at the Crown,
at the age of one and thirty years. He prosecuted those Discoveries made by the
Fleets of his Father in the East and West Indies, where he took many Islands
and Towns; he overthrew the Potent Kingdom of Bengala, Pegu, and Siam, and also
obtained many signal Victories over the Moors of Malacca, Sumatra, and Molucco.
He married Catherine, Sister to the Emperor Charles the fifth, and King of
Spain, by whom he had Issue Prince John, who dyed during the Reign of his
Father, but left behind him a Son named Sebastian, who succeeded his
Grandfather in the Throne. King John having reigned with great Glory the space
of 38. years, and having made many excellent Laws for the Increasing and
Encouragement of Traffic and Navigation, he dyed in the 69th year of his Age,
Anno Dom. 1573, and was buried in the Cathedral Church at Lisbon.

Sixteenthly, Sebastian the first, and the sixteenth King of Portugal,
succeeded his Grandfather King John the Third in the Throne, which he entered
upon about the 23 year of his Age. Upon the Entreaty of Muly Mahomet, and great
Promises of settling on him the Kingdom of Morocco, he went over in Person with
an Army against Abdemelech, to restore Muly Mahomet to the Throne: where with
the Assistance of one ^tewkly, an English Man, whom he had persuaded to help
him in this Voyage, with some Soldiers he was going with into Ireland from the
Pope, to assist the Rebels there against Queen Elizabeth, he arrived at Tangier
with their forces, and joining with Muly Mahomet, in the Plains of Alcazar,
they fought with Abdemelech in August, 1578, where they were discomfited and
utterly overthrown, both Sebastian, Muly Mahomet and Stewkly were all slain,
and also Abdemelech: So that he thus ended his Life and Reign, after he had sat
in the Thr^^ scarce a year and a half; he left behind his no Issue. There went
a Report, that he esc^ped from the Bat^el, and was found a^ known in Venice,
and thence was carried (...) Naples, and so into Spain, where he misrably dyed
in Prison; but it is an uncertainty, though believed among the Portugals.

Seventeenthly, Henry the Cardinal Third Son of Emanuel the first, succeeded
Sebastian in the Kingdom; but being age^ 67 years, and a Churchman, they had
n^ hopes of Issue, and his Reign not likely to be long, there were many
Pretenders to the Crown, and it was all the Discourse, wh^ ought of Right to
succeed: It will not therefore be amiss that I give you here a Soheme, which
will show clearly the several Titles to your View.

Emanuel the First had 8 Children; 1. John King of Portugal, who had Issue,
John Prince of Portugal, who had Issue, Sebastian King of Portugal.

2. Jews, Infant, who had Issue, Don Alphonso Bastard, who had Issue,
Christopher, and others.

3. D. Alphonso, who died without Issue. 4. Henry Cardinal, King of Portugal,
died without Issue. 5. Ferdinand, who died without Issue. 6. The Infant Edward,
who had Issue, 1. Mary, wedded to Alexan. Farnest Prince of Parma, a
forreigner, had Issue, Reinuce Prince of Parma.
2. Katherine, married to John Duke of Bragance.
7. Mary, married to Charles, the 5 King of Castile, and Emperor, had Issue,
Philip the 2d. King of Spain.
8. Beatrix, married to Charles Duke of Savoy, who had Issue, Philibert Duke of
Savoy.



There were 8 several Pretenders to the Crown: The first were the people, who
jure Regni pretended a Privilege to elect their own Kings; but that was soon
answered, for that they could claim no Right of Election, till the Royal Line
were wholly extinct. The next was the Pope, who challenged jure divino to be
Arbitrator, if not Donor in all Controversies of Crowns, but that was slighted.
The Third was of Antonio, Bastard Son to Don Lewis the Infant; but he could not
clear his Illegitimation, though he made some struggling for the Crown, he would
not be admitted. The fourth Pretender was Katherine de Medices, Widow of Henry
the second, King of France, as being descended legitimately from Alphonso the
third King of Portugal, but that would not be admitted; about 300 years
prescription being against her. The fifth that pretended was Philibert Duke of
Savoy, as Son to Beatrice, the younger Daughter of Emanuel, but he had little
hopes though he laid claim with the rest. The sixth was Reinuce the young
Prince of Parma, who demanded it in right of his Mother: the eldest Daughter to
the Infant Don Edward, alleging jure primo-geniturae, the Male Line is to be
served before the Female, but foreign marriage lay against him; as also
against the seventh Pretender, and the most potent Philip the second, King of
Spain, who employed the best wits in Christendom to make his pretenses good,
saying, That the Infant Don Edward being deceased before his Brother Henry was
King, he could have no Right in himself, and therefore could derive none to his
posterity, for Nemo dat quod in se non habet: With these and many other
niceties the Lawyers troubled themselves to give a color able Right to Philip,
who was resolved to carry it against them all, and against the last and
indubitable pretender, Katherine Duchess of Braganza, the youngest Daughter to
the Infant Don Edward, who besides jure haereditatis, being of the better Line,
had the fundamental Law on her side, which excluded the other Daughters, and
was formerly put in execution against Beatrice Daughter of Ferdinand the ninth;
and indeed no Arguments could confute or annull her indubitable Right, which
was clear to the whole world: both by her descent and the fundamental Laws of
the Nation. But however upon the death of Henry, which was in the year 1510,
and in whom ended the male Line of the House of Lorrain.

Eighteenthly, Philip the 2d, K. of Spain, obtained the Kingdom of Portugal,
and was the eighteenth King thereof. For he had no sooner heard the news of
Henry's death, but he sent an Army, having one ready for that purpose, under
Ferdinand de Toledo, Duke D' Alva, who were at the Walls of Lisbon before they
were aware, and so surprised them that they were not able to make any great
resistance: But they were forced to receive him for their King: who coming
hither himself in person was sworn to several Articles, which seemed pleasing
and beneficial to the Portugals, and which it is thought he never intended to
keep, neither did he.

First, That he should observe all Laws, Liberties, Privileges, and Customs,
granted to the People by the former Kings of Portugal.

Secondly, That the Vice-King should be either a Son, Brother, Uncle, or Nephew
of the King, or else a Native of Portugal.

Thirdly, That all Offices of the Church and State, and the Government of Towns
and Places should be conferred on the Natives of Portugal, and not upon
Strangers.

Fourthly, That all Countries now belonging to Portugal, should so continue to
the Commodity and Benefit of the Nation.

Fifthly, That the Portugals should be admitted to the Offices of the Kings
House, as well as the Castilians.

Sixthly, That he should send the Prince always to be bred up amongst them.

And thus he obtained the Crown of Portugal, making the Emperors Son Albertus,
Archduke of Austria, and his Nephew Viceroy, keeping it in quiet possession
till he dyed.

Nineteenthly, Philip the 3d, K. of Spain, succeeded his Father to that Crown,
and also to this of Portugal, being the 18th King of Portugal. In his Reign
Antonio the Bastard being entertained by Q. Elizabeth of England, and
bountifully releived, acknowledging him her Kinsman, descended of the Blood
Royal of England, and House of Lancaster, he remained here till the Wars broke
out between King Philip, and Q. Elizabeth, when she sent Antonio with a Fleet
under the Command of Sir John Norris, and Sir Francis Drake (with whom also
went the Earl of Essex) into Portugal, where they landed, and came before
Lisbon, but finding none ready to join with them, as Antonio had made them
believe, after some exploits they were forced to return, re infecta. Thus he
kept his Grown, making the Portugals, for fear and awe of his Power more than
out of good will, to subject and submit themselves to his yoke, which they of
tentimes discovered by their murmurings and repinings. As soon as he was dead,

Twentiethly, Philip the 4th, his Son, K. of Spain succeeded, and was the 20th
King of Portugal; he committing all to the Government of his great Favorite
Olivares, by his way of policy different from his Father; by seeking to
establish the yoke more firm by tyranny and oppression, at last lost the whole:
for the Portugals were very sensible of their slavery and hated the Spanish
yoke to the death, they perceived that the Kings of Spain had broke their words
with them in all things, and had now set over them a Woman to be their
Governess, Margaret di Mantona, who had no relation at all to the Kings of
Castile, and though she of her self was a prudent woman, yet she was swayed too
much by the Secretary of State, Vasconsellos, a Spaniard, one of mean
extraction, a proud fellow, and one who sought by all ways the utter ruin of
the Portugals, and wholly to enslave them, that the Portugals conspired
together and were resolved to have a King of their own; they were also
encouraged to this by the revolt of the Catalonians from the Spaniard. At last
therefore, finding the Government insufferable, and their Grievances no longer
to be born, the smothered fire broke forth into a flame, upon the 1 of Feb. An.
1640, and all on a sudden the chief of the Nobility and Gentry, and a world of
the Commonalty, led on by the Marquess of Ferrer, and the Count of Vimiosa,
took Arms, and coming to the Castle of Lisbon, surprised the Guards, being two
Companies of Spaniards, and two of Germans, who affrighted at the suddenness of
the Tumult, and the Multitude, made no resistance. They soon entered, securing
the Governess, and killing the Secretary Vasconsellos, with some few more that
made resistance, showing a great despite to the Secretary, whom the common
people cut all to pieces, using his body in a most vile manner, to satisfy
their implacable rage. This done, they proclaim the Duke of Braganza King. And
thus the Kings of Spain lost the whole Dominion of Portugal; all the rest of
the Territories, both abroad and at home, in a few months returned wholly into
the King of Portugal's hands, and so have continued to this day, the Spaniards
keeping only the Town of Cexta in Africa of all that justly belonged to the
Portugal; so great, so full, and so quick a change was hardly to be paralleld
in past Ages, and all through the natural hatred the Portuguize bore to the
Spaniards.

Twenty one, John the 4th Duke of Braganza, thus came to the Crown, who was the
Grandson of John Duke of Bragance, and Katherine, the right and indubitable
Heir of the House of Lorrain. He was married to Lonysa, Sister to the Duke of
Medina Sidonia, a Woman of a noble, heroic and masculine Spirit, and whose
prudence and courage was no small furtherance of the Dukes obtaining his Right,
saying, That 'twas better nobly to die in adventuring for the Crown, than to be
made a slave by the Spanish Tyranny, and to live always in fear of his Enemies.
They were both Crowned at Lisbon, with great pomp and splendour; and as they had
obtained the Crown with much prudence and magnanimity, so they kept it with
courage and policy, God blessing their Armies with victory and success all their
days.

Thus I have given you a brief Account of the History of Portugal from the
beginning, to make way for the better understanding the following Relation of
the Actions of the Son of King John, Alphonso the sixth, being the 22d King of
that Nation; and as they were remarkable and notorious, I have given you a full
and ample Relation thereof, which you may find in the following Narrative.

A RELATION OF THE Troubles, that happened in the Court OF PORTUGAL, In the
Years, 1667, and 1668.
AFTER the Re-establishment of Don John the 1640.
Eighth, Duke of Bragansa, in the Throne of his Ancestors, which the Castilians
had taken from them, the Portugals being glad that they had shaken off the yoke
of their Dominion, began to find the sweetness, which they used to have when
they lived under the Power of their own natural Princes.

This new King had then by his Wife, Aug. 28. 1643.
Donna Lonysa Frances de Gusman, but three Children; the Prince Theodosius, and
the Infantas Joan and Catherine. Three April 26. 1648.
years after he increased his Family with the Infant Don Alphonso. Five years
after it was further augmented by the birth of Infant Don Pedro. The Birth of
these two Infants filled the whole Court and all the Realm with Joy; but this
Joy was soon troubled, for the Infant Don Alphonso, who had been taken at the
age of three years with a malignant Fever, and with a Palsy, which had caused
a weakness on his right side, in spite of all Remedies, even that of the Baths
themselves, having made use of them twice at Obidos, had hardly attained to the
age of 7 years, but they perceived his Malady had not only 1650.
taken away the Vigor of his Body, but also of his Mind: The King who was
sensibly touched with this Accident, believing that there was no Remedy better
than that of a good Education, gave him to the Tutelage of Nicholas Monteyro, a
person endued with all the qualities requisite for that Employment. May 15.
1653.


A little time after the Prince Theodosius falling sick dies: His good
Inclinations made him be lamented by all the Portugals, Don Alphonso was the
only person, who was not touched with this loss, which was the less wondered at,
because he was heard to say the first day of his Brothers falling sick, That he
should not be much troubled for his Death, if it should happen, since he should
thereby get a Crown; Ambition having already filled his young heart with
Sentiments of that Nature. Having, according to the Laws of the Realm, called
together the States General, to declare the Infant Don Alphonso Prince, some
of them had thoughts of preferring to him Don Pedro, but that motion was not
followed, either because they feared lest they might fall into the like
disorders as happened in the time of the Infante's Don Alphonso and Don Dennis,
or else that the Custom of the Realm carried it against all other reason. Don
Alphonso was no sooner declared Prince, and presumptive Heir to the Realm of
the King his Father, but he began to regard no more the advice of his Tutor,
nor the Remonstrances of the King and the Queen.

The death of Theodosius was followed a little time after with that of of the
Infanta Jane. Those tears which they had poured out for them were not yet dry,
when there happened a new occasion to shed them, through the sickness of the
King; who dyed in November, a Month fatal to the House of Bragansa. As in Nov.
6. 1656.
the Minority of the Alphonso's they had always had troubles in Portugal, this
happening augmented the public Consternation. In this Conjuncture they reflect
on the death of Theodosius with regret, as one capable to have filled the
Throne: They consider that the Prince Don Alphonso was without experience,
without understanding, and incapable to govern the State. But the King in these
last moments of his Life, made appear his Piety by his religious thoughts, and
his Wisdom, by the good Order which he took in the Affairs of the Realm, in
choosing the Queen Tutoress of her Children, and Regent of the State; for he
persuaded himself with very much reason, that she who had excited him with so
much courage to take the Scepter, would be capable to maintain it, during the
minority of the Prince.

The Ceremonies of the Funeral being over, and the Royal Escutchions being
broken in a thousand public places, according to the ancient Custom; the
Prince Don Alphonso was shown to the People, and declared King in the ordinary
forms. The same day the Queen took the quality Nov. 15. 1656.
of Regent. She had no sooner ordered the Affairs of the State (which she did
with so much prudence, as if she had all her life time governed Kingdoms) but
she named (according to the will of the late King) for Governor of Alphonso,
Don Francisco de Faro, Count of Odemira. But this Prince, abusing the authority
which the Crown gave him, quickly scorned the advice of his Governor, as he
had also before that of his Tutor; since when no Remonstrance, no Address was
able to restrain the Impetuosity of his Desires.

The King having always the most Liberty in the Time of the That is, in the
time of repose after dinner, which they all use in those Countries.
Siesta, used to pass his time in the Galleries, whose Windows looked into the
Court of the Chapel, where according to the custom certain little Boys
assembled to fight together with boughs: He took a very great pleasure in
seeing this Exercise, especially when the party he favored had the better.
Among these petty Merchants, who were lodged in the Porches, there was one
whose name was Antony de Conti Vintimiglia, a Native of Lisbon, and originally
of Vintimiglia, a Town in the Country of Gennes: The King perceiving this Youth
ordinarily to take the party for which he had the most Inclination, he let him
know how much it pleased him, so that oftentimes he came down to the Door to
entertain him; This favor rendered Conti hardy enough to make presents to the
King of silken Slings, gilded Knives, and other Toys proportionable to his Age.
The Queen seeing that this familiarity passed too far, and that there might
follow some trouble therefrom, ordered Conti to come no more to the Palace;
however he did not obey, but did it more cautiously.

The King vexed at this, endeavored to see Conti with more earnestness than
ever, so that they were fain to permit him to see him, thinking that their
endeavors to hinder it did but the more provoke him to desire it, and that
this permission would weaken his desire. But this Condescension cost the Realm
of Portugal very dear, and was a Spark which afterward produced a great Flame.

The King being now of Age to ride the 1657.
Great Horse, the weakness of his Arm not being so much, as to hinder him from
managing the Bridle, nor that of his Leg but that he could stay himself in his
Stirrops; they resolved then to put the Reins into his hands, which they did
with the aid of Don Francisco de Sousa, Count de Prado, Master of the Horse,
and of Antony Galvao D' Andrade, the chief Querry; but this exercise instead of
putting him off from Conti, did but tie him closer to him.

There was in the Court of Lion, which they had chosen for him to ride the
great Horse in, a Gate in a low Gallery, through which they brought the Horses
for him to ride. The King was accustomed that way to let in at those
extraordinary hours not only Antony de Conti, but also John de Conti his
Brother, with other young Boys, both Moors and Negroes, who in his presence
used all sorts of violent exercises. He was not content with this, but he
mingled himself among them, sometimes among those who flung the Bar, and
sometimes among those who flung Dirt, and sometimes among those who fell to
fisty Cuffs, without considering that Princes ought not to receive for
Companions in their sports any, but such persons, who are illustrious either by
their Birth, or by their Merit.

These Testimonies which the King gave of a mean spirit, and of a violent
nature, gave to the Queen an excessive trouble. The Count D' Odemira was
sensibly touched, knowing that they ordinarily impute the faults of Princes to
their Governors, as it happened to Don John Alphonso D' Albuquerque, who was
charged with the cruel Actions of Don Pedro, King of Castile; The Count
resolved then to withdraw the King, at what price soever he did it, from this
shameful conversation. Having one day found in the Court of Lion, the King
environed by Conti, and all that Gang, he chased them away, he forbad entrance
to Conti, with menaces to chastise him if ever he durst return thither again:
The King more troubled than Conti at this Prohibition and Menace, retired
himself into his Appartment with excessive trouble.

Some of those who were about him had no sooner known that he was discontented
with his Governor, and that he had an Affection for Conti, but they let him
understand, that to subject his own Inclinations to the Sentiments of another,
was to consent to the ruin of his Authority. This had such power on the mind
of the King, that after this he rejected whatever advice they would give him;
he grew obstinate, even to rage, that he would learn no Lesson, nor eat, nor
drink, till they had brought back Conti to him, so that they were obliged to
bring him to him.

In the Court of Lion, they oftentimes for his diversion had Dog-fighting,
which Combats were at first private, but at last they became public. These
Mastiffs were kept in the great Court of the Palace, where being all sorts of
Dogs, and untied, they very often fell upon those they found in their way. The
diversion of Bough-fighting was brought also from the Court of the Chapel to
the same place, and at last became so common in the Suburbs, that what was
formerly the sport only of little children, became in a short space to be a
bloody Combat. In all these Diversions, those wherein the most Blood was shed,
pleased the Kingmost.

These Disorders being come to that excess, his Governor thought that it was
best for him to find out diversions conformable to his humor, but that they
might not be so public, so that if any thing should happen that might be any
blemish, it might be the less taken notice of. They resolved then to teach him
the use of Weapons, and they gave him for his Master therein Diego Gomes de
Figueredo; but they found it impossible to make him follow any Method; for he
would not learn to do any thing skilfully, as he should do, but was all for
downright blows. This exercise, handsome and innocent enough, became however
very deadly and criminal, through the ill use that he made of it.

That they might cause an emulation in the King, they permitted to enter the
Palace certain young men, who under pretext of making a flourish in his
presence, brought with them all sorts of Weapons, every one having a design to
let him see his force and skill. But in these exercises there happened almost
every day one or other ill accident, especially when they darted certain Knives
purposely made, which many times slipping from their hands, wounded some or
other in the throng of Spectators. John ^e Conti was in all these Exercises,
and though his skill was not very great, he was still recompensed by the King,
so that he became his Favorite, insomuch that whatever violences he committed
in the Palace, were suffered unpunished. This Example was the cause that those
Crimes, from which they had abstained before for fear of Justice, were now
committed with Assurance; so that the King hereby drew upon himself the
ill will of all the People, not only by his own Actions, but also by those of
others.

They had lodged the Infant Don Pedro in the Queens Apartment, that his Union
with the King might thereby become the more strong, and easy to be compassed,
and therefore they had given to them both one Tutor, that they might likewise
learn together: But this did no good to the King, and was a notable prejudice
to the Infant; for when they should have followed their Books, the King would
disturb them, and often interrupt his Tutor, in reciting his shameful
Divertisements.

The King and the Infant had oftentimes differences between them, which being
grounded but on slight matters quickly ceased: However the malice of his
Favorites fomented these petty misunderstandings, in such sort that the King
put himself to oppose the Infant on every occasion.

It was at this time, that the Favor of Conti with the King, who was now
sixteen, began to spread abroad; certain Courtiers persuading themselves that
he had perfectly established himself in the Heart of the Prince, for that he
had wholly destroyed his Governor, they grew so shameless, as to make him the
object of their respects. After which he had the boldness to vaunt himself to
be descended from a Branch of Vintimiglia, an Illustrious Family in the Realm
of Sicily, and this was maintained by the testimony of some Flatterers.

For the most part the persons that came near the King were debauched in their
speeches, and it was no wonder to hear him speak dishonest words even before
the Ladies.

Some of his Counselors offended thereat, advised the Queen that he might be
removed into the new Apartment, called the Fort, where those Persons who
Corrupted his Manners, should not have so much liberty to come. To this end,
the Queen ordered he should be served there by Don John de Silva, Marquess de
Govea, grand Master of the House, Garcia de Mello, grand Chamberlain, the Count
de Padro,, Master of the Horse, Don John de Almeida, Master of the Wardrobe,
and by Lewis de Mello, Captain of his Guards. The Count de Padro, being gone to
Command the Army; in his absence, the Charge of first Gentleman of his Chamber,
and that of Master of the Horse, were given to Don Diego de Lima, Vicount de
Villanova de Cerveira; they gave also the Charge of Chief Gentleman of the
Chamber, to Lewis de Vasconcelos, and Sousa Count de Castlemelhor.

All these Officers were to serve Weekly, and to lie in the Palace, and to the
end that some of them might always be about the King; those before mentioned,
were to be Relieved in the Daytime by Don Vasco Mascarenhas, Count of Obidos,
Nuno de Mendosa, Count de Valdereis, Lewis de Silva Tello, Count de Aveiras,
and Francisco de Sonsa Coutinho, Councellor of State. All these Lords having
Keys, to enter in at all times when they pleased.

The Queen ordered this Project to be kept secret, and that they should keep
open the Door, which gave way for a Communication between her Apartment, and
that of the King's. But he soon frustrated all these Designs. The Count de
Odemira, his Governor, having told him, That the quarter through which he
should go out, was made up: He answered him briskly, that he would then go
through the Hall of the Almane Guards. The Count having told him that there was
a great many People in that Hall: He replied, it was no matter, since it could
be no better.

By these Answers of the King, they judged, that all things would be well, and
they councelled him to pass by the Antichamber of the Queen, to show himself to
the Nobles, and by the Hall of the Almane Guards, to be seen by the People.
This unusual thing made them believe, that he would soon have the Government;
and every one conceived either hope or fear, according to the state of their
Fortunes.

And now, since there were none near the King but those Persons, whose Merits
begat them Respect, he for some time abstained from seeing Conti, and those of
his Cabal; but this did not last long, for he quickly found ways to bring them
to him. The King continued his Exercises, but without any Progress, because he
neglected the Lessons of his Masters. He used his Weapons with so much fury, as
if he had been in Combat, and he forced his Horse in such a manner, as if he
would kill him, or make him break his Neck; choosing always the most furious,
and that which had the hardest Mouth.

One Day when he was at Alcantara, a A Palace Royal, a League from Lisbon.
place which he had chosen for his Debauches, believing that they would be
there less in view than in the City of Lisbon, whilst the Gentlemen who waited
on him were at Dinner, he went to go A House of the Duke d' A^ei^o's 4 Leagues
from Lisbon, on this side of the Tagus.
to Azeytaon, followed by a small Company of Officers. He Encountered upon the
way a Bull, which he irritated in such sort, that his Horse having been wounded
by that Animal, fell into that fury and violence, that he flung him to the
Ground without sense. His Servants running to his succor, found him cold. He
was five times let Blood for that fall. They made him diverse Remonstrances upon
that Accident, but it was with very much Modesty, because those they had
formerly made him were received with Importment. Those who had the most Zeal
for the Service of the King, contented themselves not to approve of those
Disorders which they had not power to hinder.

He did not only let Beasts feel his Fury, but he also would essay it upon Men.
One Night as he was returning from Palhavam, where he had been, he got loose
from those who followed him, to take up his stand. And having perceived two Men
of a good Presence, he put on his Horse with might and main to Ride over them,
but his Stirrup being entangled in the Belt of one of them, he could not bring
about his Design. Being vexed he was not known, he turned about and drew his
Sword to kill him. When this Man saw his Sword in his Hand, he also drew his,
so that he was ready to Repulse the King; when the Grand Master of the Game
came in, and putting himself between them, he told the King it was not
reasonable that his Majesty should kill his Subjects. At the word Majesty, this
Man understanding he had drawn his Sword against his King, with a Respect
mingled with Confusion and Fear, withdrew himself behind a Wall, whither the
King had pursued him, if that Obstacle had not hindered him. After this, he
stopped in the middle of the Field to Recount this Action, which he praised as
one most Heroic.

This Adventure was followed with another, much more dangerous. The King
passing before the Noviciat of the Jesuits, they put him in mind that over
against it there were some lusty brave Coursers, which he presently alighted to
see. In the mean time while he waited for some Torches, somebody told him that
there were great Mastiffs in the Close of the Noviciate; upon this, forgetting
the Horses, he Commanded they should open the Gate. But when he saw it was not
very readily done, he fell into a Passion, and gave Order that they should
break it open. But as they began to do it, they opened it; and the King
negligently entering, got from those that followed him with one Footman, only
on Foot.

He had not gone many Paces, but he Encountered with three Men, and he very
briskly took his Sword into his Hand, they did the like. The King who was
Booted, had entangled himself in such a manner, that at the first Thrust he
fell backwards with a Blow he received at the same time. His Gentlemen being
come in at the clashing of Swords, and at the Cry of the King, who at first,
cried out, I am Killed; and a little after, I am Wounded. He was presently
carried to his Palace in a Coach, but his Wound was not very dangerous. Two of
the Men fled, the third was taken, but the Master of the Game hindered them
from killing him. When the King had Recovered it, and was something better, the
Council of State Ordered (with the Queens consent) that they should go in a
Body together, to make him a Remonstrance for the preservation of his Person.
Don Nuno Alvares Pereira, Duke de Cadaval, speaking for the rest, told him:

That the Council of State, who were all there present, to satisfy their Zeal,
and the Order that they had received from the Queen his Mother, from the
Infant his Brother, and from the Infanta his Sister, and generally from the
whole Realm; they were come to Supplicate his Majesty, that he would change
that manner of Living, which every day exposed his Life to Danger, and put the
State into hazard of a deplorable Ruin. That it was not Reasonable that his
Majesty should be so careless of his Life, nor Just, that without Cause he
should take away the Life of his Subjects, which would Alienate the Love they
have for him, in which principally consists the Art of Reigning. That his
Majesty would be pleased now to think of himself, and of all his Subjects, who
were ready to pour forth their Blood for his Service. That this was the only
way to establish Tranquillity in the Realm.

The King was Diverted from this Remonstrance, by those who foresaw that the
Face of their Fortune would be changed, if he should change his Life. They had
so well Confirmed him in the Opinion, that there was nothing like the Liberty
of doing what one would; that the Counsel of these Great and Illustrious
Ministers, was unprofitable.

His Favorites were not contented to have rendered his Humor violent, but
would further, that he should give himself to naughty Women, hoping that that
Passion would render him the more capable to Resist stoutly all those who
should go about to Condemn his Licentiousness. And indeed, they had ti'd him to
it in such sort, that he observed no measure, insomuch that he would not so
much as be thought Chaste. He had a Gentleman that always lay in his
Antichamber, who never went to Supper until he was in Bed. In the mean time
this Gentleman was absent, the King often times arose, and Arming himself as if
to fight a Battle, he went out of his Chamber by a Ladder of Ropes, followed by
Antony, and John de Conti, and some other Braves, all Armed as well as he, who
seemed to breath nothing but Blood, and Slaughter. These Braves, the King named
Stout n^er^y Companions.
the one Fixos, the other Porradas, words invented in favor of this new
Militia. With these People he ran through the Streets, and entered those
scandalous Places, where they did a thousand Violences to Women. There was
never a Night that they went out thus, but on the Morning were recounted a
hundred Tragic Stories: In fine, he was feared every where, as a Wild Beast.
Although he saw these Prostitute Women at their Houses, yet they did not
forbear to bring them into the Palace to him. He vaunted himself to have to do
with them in such Excess, that as it was above all likelihood, so, no Body
believed any thing of it.

One Day being put in mind, that he was to meet with a certain fair Gossip, in
the Church of our Lady de Rocher; about one a Clock he went into his Litter,
with John de Conti, and Francis de Sequeira, the Groom of his Wardrobe, to see
for her there, but missing of her, she being gone to the Church of our Savior,
he Commanded them to carry him thither; passing through the narrow Street of
St. Peter de Alfama, they met the Coach of Martin Correa de Sa Vicout de Asseca.

The King being in great have, the Conductors of his Litter cried out to the
Vicounts People, to get out of the way with such Injurious words, that they not
being able to take it, drew, the others doing the like; and the Combat grew so
hot, that the Vicount was forced to leave his Coach to help his People, also
Francis de Sequeira did the like from that of the Kings, to help the others.
The King might with one word, have made all this Disorder have ceased, but
however he would not; but on the contrary, being himself come forth of his
Litter with John Conti, he set a Pistol to the Throat of the Vicount, who was
already Wounded, and had certainly killed him, if the Pistol had taken fire. So
soon as the Vicount knew the King, he kissed his Sword, and falling upon his
knees demanded Pardon; but neither this Submission, nor the Innocence of this
Gentleman, could hinder the King from giving him many outrageous Speeches. All
the People were surprised to see the King was come abroad with so small a
Company, and that he would have killed one of his Subjects without any Cause,
and a Gentleman brought up with him in the Palace, at Noonday, and in a
public place, so that they perceived he took Pleasure to intermingle with
these Quarrels, and to Foment them; which made every Body to fear the Danger to
be general, and every one to begin to be afraid for himself.

As the King increased in Age, the more he was corrupted, and the disorder came
to that pass, that by his example the more virtuous began to grow loose, they
began to quit virtue, to embrace vice, by example and emulation. The Queen was
obliged to have recourse to the Protection of Heaven, having no other Remedy,
she was capable of, for these misfortunes with which the Realm was threatened:
However she would try one human way more, persuading her self, if she could
bring the King to the public Audiences, which she gave twice a week to the
Subjects, to the Council, and to Business, he might be brought to be capable of
governing the Realm; but all was in vain, for he was not able to apply himself
to it for his pleasures.

They had persuaded him, that he was not truly a King, who parted with the
Government to another, and so long as the Queen hindered his Liberalities to
those he loved, the people believed that it was she who reigned and not he;
that he was now of age enough to govern the State himself, for King Dennis had
done it at the age of sixteen years, and the Kings, Alphonso at fifteen, and
Sebastian at fourteen; and that it was insupportable they should refuse the
King a thing that he had power to take himself. By such discourses they filled
the mind of the King with troublesome suspicions against the Queen.

The King was no sooner out of the Apartment they had given him, but he let
them know, by what he did, the kindness he had for Conti; for he was not
contented to have given him a Command, a House in the Country, and a right of
Peerage, but he also made him Gentleman of his House, Knight of Christ, and
Groom of the Wardrobe, Honors that were never granted but to persons that were
illustrious, by Birth, and Merit.

He added at the same time to all these Favors, an Apartment in the Palace,
that he might have communication with himself, and the Arch-deaconry de
Sobredello, for John de Conti his Brother.

After this, the Courtiers ran in heaps to render homage to Conti, as a new
Favorite; and every one began to seek his Protection, and to commend their
most important Affairs to him. The Queen her self was obliged to have recourse
to his Credit in some Businesses, which she was not able to effect of her self,
which was the only way to maintain him in that height, to which Fortune had
exalted him, for this way he was able to manage the mind of that person, who
gave him most jealousy.

As the King was every day sensible of those infirmities, which his sicknesses
had caused, the Physicians were of opinion that he should go again to the Baths
of Obidus; But he instead of bathing himself there, did nothing but divert
himself, causing so much trouble and damage to all the Country about, and
committing himself such cruel actions, that the people were fain to shut
themselves up in their houses, or else to fly and leave them, that they might
shun meeting him; so much horror had they for him.

In the mean time the Queen falling sick, and the Favorites and the King by
some discourses having caused a suspicion that he would take the Government,
they were afraid that this sickness would serve for a pretext to that design;
but instead of that he applied himself to combat a Lion against a Bull, but the
Lion being so obstinate as not to be forced out of his Cage, he made them bring
so much wood and fire, that they choked him with the smoke.

In the beginning of the Year 1661, the 1661.
Count of Odemira, his Governor dyed, who was very much bewailed by all the
people, for the King after his death abandoned himself to all manner of evil
Inclinations more than before; although he was not Master of the Kings Spirit,
yet his Merit, and his Address made those to stand in aw of him, who had the
most power over him.

They had about this time begun to treat of the Marriage of the most serene
Infanta Catherine, with his Majesty, Charles the Second, King of England, not
long before established in the Throne of his Ancestors. Francisco de Mello de
Torres, Ambassador Extraordinary in England, was charged with this
Negotiation, which the Spaniards endeavored to hinder what they could.

The Queen desired ardently to see this Marriage accomplished, the Infant
declared Prince, and the Government of the State in the hands of the King, to
the end, that she might loose her self from all Affairs of the World, and to
retire her self to a Covent, that she might there be at leisure to give her
self up to Prayer and Contemplation. For this end she wrote with her own hand
in her Natural Language, the Reasons which made her take this Resolution. This
she showed to one of her Ministers, to know his Opinion of her Design.

And for that, this Writing refutes the Calumnies which the Enemies of that
Princess made use of to sullie her Reputation, in publishing she would have
taken away the Crown from the King, to have given it to the Infant; I have
judged it necessary to Report it here.

By reason of the Uncertainty of Life, every one being Obliged to endeavor his
Health, I have wished I might be able to find out a way to overcome the great
Difficulties, which have hindered me from Acquitting my self of that Duty, and
have filled my Mind with trouble. There is nothing more troublesome, nor hard,
than this Life of mine, in which I may say there is something Extraordinary,
since contrary to the Order and Nature of Monarchy, we are two that Reign. But
to say better, I do not Reign but in Appearance, whilst the King Reigns in
Effect; for I am Obliged to consent to all his Desires, because he is more than
an Infant, and the Kingdom is his. Besides this, I am persuaded, he would loose
the Respects which he owes to me, if ^ should contradict his Desires. So though
I would have Justice rendered to every one, it is not done because the King does
oppose it, or they who Govern him. After this, what can I do to defend my self
from such an Unhappiness, but to withdraw my self from his presence, and demand
that after having made a serious Reflection on my Design, they would give me
such Council as is most proper in the Condition I am in? My Inclination carrys
me to enter into a Religious House, not out of Design (because I can bear it no
longer) to free my self from a Slavery, so long and troublesome as my Regency
has been. I would have nothing to do, and while I should be there, I would not
desire many Attendants, only some few necessary, and I would the Abbess should
take care of my Revenue, and she her self should Sign all things for me, though
I have no design to dismiss my Officers, nor my Domestics. The Reason that
makes me desire that the Abbess should have the Administration of my Revenue
without my Officers intermedling, proceeds from the great desire that I have to
live in great Retiredness. If I would not at first become a Religious, it is
because I fear to be engaged to follow the Rules of a Superior in all
Obedience, though they are more sweet than those I have prescribed to my self.
And if it happen that the King would write to me, or desire to see me, though
it would Combat the Resolution of my Retreat, what should I then do that I
might not offend on this occasion against Decency? I well know the Inclination
that I have for a Covent of the Order of St. Teresa, but Donna Maria is an
Obstacle to my entering This Dona Maria is a natural Daughter of the late King
Don John.
into that of Carnide: It is not that I could not live in the House where she
is, without any Repugnancy, but as the manner of Life I would choose, will not
suffer me to have Communication with any Body; if I should be in the House
where she is, I could not civily dispense with my self from answering the
Respects which she would pay me. If by chance I should be Melancholy, as it may
very well happen, she might be persuaded she was the cause of it, at least I
should do to my self some Violence to dissemble it, which would render me
unhappy. So that it is easy to judge by this, I should not live in this House
with all the Freedom I would. As to that of the Carmelites of St. Albert, I
there find this difficulty, the fewness of the Lodgings which they have; for it
seems to me, to make a good choice of a Retreat in which one intends to end
their days, or wholly to shut themselves up within the Walls of the Palace,
according to the Custom of the Country, one should make Election of a spacious
and pleasant Place, and one that had a Prospect toward the Sea, would please
me extremely. If instead of St. Teresa, I should have recourse to St. Dominie,
whom I revere as an unfortunate Relation, I find the Covent of Good Success of
that Order; which is most Commodious, both because of its fair Situation, and
large Extent. Nevertheless it has an Inconvenience, for as it stands at the
Mouth of a River, it will be the first Covent, that will be exposed to the
Violences of War. All things well considered, I think, that I had better be at
Lisborn, than in any other place, because it is a City in which there is no
want of any Commodity, without speaking of the great number of the Religious,
Virtuous, and Learned Men, which are there to be found for the ease of ones
Conscience. In the Lands of my Apanage, there is no Place proper for my Design:
And as for my Building a Covent, I have not patience enough for such an
Enterprise; besides, as I hope that my Retreat will be happy, and finding my
strength decaying, I would very suddenly execute my Resolution. Having
therefore no further care, than about the manner of executing my Design: I ask
not Counsel about it, because I am assured that it will not be Approved, and
that very many will desire me not to Abandon the State and the King; though the
most part of them will wish the contrary in their Souls. Being certain that
they are capable of such Disguisements, I may fear every day lest they should
order me to withdraw; and in this fear, I think it would be much better for me
to do it by my own Motion. There is nothing but the Infancy of my Children
could have kept me in the World, which now will be well enough; my Daughter
being Married, it remains that I see the Infant declared Prince, which is a
thing I have long desired, it being necessary to Assemble the States for that
Cause. But I must yet wait nevertheless, maugre my Impatience till the
departure of the Queen of England; then I shall give Order about it. As for the
Peace with Spain, I have no hope I shall be able to conclude it before my
Retirement; however I shall do all my endeavors to bring it to pass. Besides,
after the departure of the Queen of England, there will be Speech of nothing
but War, the report of which, will not penetrate my Retirement; but if I should
defer any long time to quit the World, they would have Reason to reproach me,
for leaving the State embroiled. They may perhaps Object to me, That I ought to
stay, that I may have the Pleasure of having ended all these Affairs of which I
speak: But I answer to that, That I shall relish them more sweetly in my
Retreat. And if they should pretend, that I may be necessary to the State, and
that whatsoever Inquietude, and whatsoever Pain it should cost me, I ought not
to Abandon it. I further answer, If all the People were resolved to Die to
benefit the State, I would willingly Die with them, but that I should only bear
the whole Burden of all Affairs for the Ease of others, is the thing that I
would not do. Would they could find another Remedy, or that God would provide
one; and as I have all my Confidence in him, I am sure he will be favorable to
my Intentions. It seems to me that they will have hence-forward sufficient
Abatements. For want of Time, and through abundance of Affairs, I have not Time
to declare my self so fully by word of Mouth; Therefore I have wrote these
lines, to the end they may be the more leisurely Examined, that I may receive
good Counsel, in order to my Retreat. If I should Retire secretly, they would
believe that I fly away; if I should do it openly, they would imagine,
perhaps, that I endeavor to be hindered, and there will be enough found, who
will think they are obliged to hinder me. Once again I demand of you sincere
Counsel of all these things, and I pray Heaven, he will inlighten the Mind of
those who are to give it to me.

In the mean time, while they were considering of these things, all things were
disposed for the Embarquement of the new Queen; and on the 23d of April, 1662.
those Vessels in which she was to go into England, set Sail under the Conduct
of Francisco de Melle de Torres, since made Marquess of Sand.

As Soon as she was gone, the Queen Regent resolved to separate the Infant from
the King, it not being reasonable he should be without Education, especially in
a Time in which the King appeared incapable of Governing the Realm. And as it
was the Custom to give to the Princes, and to the Infantes, a House fit for
their Quality, she had a mind the Infant Don Pedro should have one of his own.

When the Queen had begun to prescribe what Officers she would have chosen for
him, the Order they should keep, and that she had sought out for him a
Governor; they persuaded the King she had grand Designs against him, and that
the Governor she would give to his Brother, was a sign she intended to make him
King, since they used to be given only to Kings: They endeavored farther to
insinuate into him, he had the Right of choosing those who were to serve the
Infant, and not the Queen.

Notwithstanding this, they prepared for him the House of Christopher de Moura,
Morquess of Castlerodrigo, situate in a place called Cortreul; and nominated
for Gentlemen of his Chamber, Martin Alfonse de Mello, Count of St. Laurence,
Don John de Acosta, Count de Sour, Ruy de Moura Tells, Don Rodrigo de
Menesses, George de Mello, John Nunes de Achuna, Count of St. Vincent; for his
Almoner, Rodrigo D' Acunha de Saldanha, Chaunter of the Cathedral Church in
Lisbon, and ^or Secretary, Antony de Tavares.

This Change gave a Jealousy to the King, as if his Mother and his Brother had
a Design to have taken away his Crown. For they made him believe, that never
any Infant of Portugal had had so great a House, nor had ever been served by
Officers so considerable. The distrust of the King was increased the more, by
the number of those who continually rendered their respects to the Infant, he
found to himself very few, and his Palace almost a Desert. But the Infant for
all that, was not wanting in his Duty, but on the contrary, waited on the King
with more diligence than before, in all public places, and into the Country
when he went thither to Divert himself: As he did not imitate his Debauches,
his Modesty passed for a Crime in the minds of those who feared that all his
good qualities were but reproaches against the King. They endeavored to
persuade him, that the Infant covered much Pride under that seeming Modesty;
and all he did was but to make believe, he was more worthy of the Crown than he.

The King becoming every day more disordered, the Queen resolved to execute the
Design which she had to quit the Government, ordering for that end Pedro Vieira
de Silva, Secretary of State, to finish all those Dispaches necessary for it.
But that Minister full of Zeal, did remonstrate to her, that this Affair did
very well merit a serious Reflection, and that he ought to propose it to the
Council of State; which being done, they answered.

That it was true, the Age of the King gave him a Right to the Government of
the State, but the Malady which he had received when young, had rendered him
incapable. That he did no ways bridle himself at these Years, but showed only
the evil qualities of his Mind, and those Maxims so contrary to those which are
necessary for Princes, who will Rule well. That to leave to him the Rule of the
Kingdom, would be to Abandon all to the imprudence of his Favorites, for he
would infallibly discharge it by them. That if she should execute her
resolution, and leave her Son in the midst of the Tempest, she would render
unprofitable all the Precautions of the late King, and would not answer that
which all the World expected from her Prudence, and her Zeal. When the King
himself should be of more Age, and have more Experience, and more noble
Inclinations, than he has, at last, when he shall be capable of reigning, he
would still have need of her Council; and more especialiy then, when he wants
all these things, she should not quit the Government, if she would not have
that Curse fall upon the Realm, which the Scripture mentions of a young King.

These Reasons were far from shaking the Queens Resolutions, and did the rather
confirm them, for they did not a little contribute to the fear she had, to see
her Credit diminished; so she thought this Retreat, which would save her from a
Discontent, from giving offense to the King, and a scandal to the State, could
not be blamed by Persons of good sense. Upon this the Ministers conjure her,

That since she would not change her Resolution, yet at least to defer the
Execution of it, until they had taken away from about the King, those who
corrupted his Mind, and fomented his Debauches, because so long as he should
hearken to the Discourses of those People, his Irregularities would never
cease. That she should consider, if they troubled the Government of a Queen,
the Mother and Tutress of the King, and Regent of the Realm, she had much
reason to believe, they would oppose the Conduct of those Ministers, who should
be obliged to obey the King as Subjects. If her Majesty should retire, for fear
best the King should fail to pay that respect which he ows her, how could the
Ministers hope to maintain their Authority? That her Majesty should before hand
remove from the King those that were about him, and fill up their places with
others more capable; that this was the only Remedy to correct his evil
Inclinations. But if this should not produce the wished for Effect, and Heaven
should not second her good Intentions, her Majesty having (at least) let all
the World see, it was not her fault that things would be no better, she might
after this execute, with more honor, the Resolution, which her Piety, and
those other Considerations had made her to undertake.

The Queen approved of this Council, as profitable to the King, and to the
State, and her Resolution gave place to that which they had taken of calling
the States, to see what Remedy they could find for these present Disorders,
which might have a very ill Sequel; for the Remonstrances of the Ministers of
State, the Advice of a Governor, and of a Tutor, had not made any Impression
on the mind of the King, and those cruel mischances, the disgraces which had
happened to him at the running at the Bulls, the Perils that he had escaped in
a thousand Rencounters, had not rendered him more circumspect.

In sine, That this was not to be wanting in any part of Duty to the King,
since it was the only means to bring him to himself; that in extreme and
desperate evils violent Remedies are necessary to be used; and as they had
heretofore labored with so much success for the recovery of the public
Liberty, they ought still to go on with the same vigor, to save the State from
the Ruin, with which it was threatened. But as the Convocation of the Estates
General would require a long time, and their Assembling would be retarded by
those who feared it, they judged, instead of that it might be supplied by the
Assembly of the Council of State, and Courts of Justice, and by a Convocation
of the Gentry, and of the Commonalty of Lisbon, as had been accustomed to be
done in pressing necessities.

It was then resolved, that they should have recourse to this Remedy, and
whilst the King should be busy in dispatches with the Queeen, they should
arrest those whom they should think fit, and all the Assembly should presently
go to render an Account of it to the King, and to conjure him to approve of the
thing, as done for the Service of his Majesty, and the Good of his Realm.

This Project was communicated to the Duke de Cadaval, to the Marquess of
Govea, to Don Antony de Meneses, Marquess de Marialva, to Don Francisco soto
Mayor, Bishop de Targa, to the Count of St. Laurence, to the Count of Sour,
Don Rodrigue de Meneses, George de Mello, Doctor Nioholas Monteiro, to the
Secretary Pedro Vieira de Sylva, to Father Antony Vieira, the Jesuit, and to
many other Persons of the Court.

Antony de Conti was altogether Master of the Kings Mind, and in such sort,
that he meddled with the greatest Affairs. Gaspar de Faria, private Secretary,
by order of the King, put into his hands oftentimes papers of: greatest
Concerns; and they attributed to his direction the Preparatives, that were made
for the Marriage of the Queen of England, which Edward Montague, Earl of
Sandwich, Ambassador for his Majesty of Great Britain, and Admiral of the Fleet
which was to convey the Queen, seeing, he made no difficulty to communicate to
him Affairs of the greatest Importance, as to a Minister of State, and to treat
him magnificently aboard his Vessel.

But whether that Conti had received any advice of what they were contriving
against him, or that he mistrusted it, he began never to leave the Palace,
unless it were with the King, or with those of whom he was very well assured.
This way he sometime averted the design they had upon his person: For to arrest
him in the City, they could not find the opportunity, neither was that very
easy; and to arrest him in the Palace, there it was yet much more difficult,
for besides that good manners would not permit it, they knew it would too much
provoke the King. Nevertheless they passed over all these scruples, and it was
resolved, that he should be arrested in the Palace.

To facilitate the Execution of this Enterprise, the Queen kept the King with
her in the Chamber of Dispatches, one Saturday Morning, being the 16th of June,
1662. and whilst they were there together, the Duke de Cadaval, Lewis de Mello,
Captain of the Port, and his Son Emanuel de Mello, followed by Edward Vas de
Orta Osorio, one of the Grand Provests of the Court, came into the lower
Apartment of the King.

Whilst the Duke stayed there to put Guards at the Door, and gave Orders that
none might go either in or out, Lewis de Mello, and his Son went up stairs.
As Soon as they were come to the Door, by which they entered into the two
Anti-Chambers of the King, they perceived Conti in that next to them. But Lewis
de Mello seeing the Duke de Cadaval was not with those that followed him, he
asked aloud where he was. Conti having by this, discovered what he before had
suspected, flung himself into the second Antichamber, where he shut himself
in. At the same instant the Duke arrived, and would have opened the Door with
his seoret key, but he could not do it; for Conti had on his side put his into
the keyhole: So that the Duke and Lewis de Mello having pushed softly, called
to him to open the Door, but he would not answer.

As they were afraid lest Conti should gain the Queens Appartment, by the Door
which gave Communication between the two Apartments, Emanuel de Mello ran with
all speed and possessed himself of that. In the mean time the Duke was got into
the Tarrass, which overlookt the Chamber of the Indies, for fear Conti should
save himself that way, where finding him putting forth his head between the
Bars of the Window, he seized him by the Hair. Conti seeing himself laid hold
on, asked, Wherefore they did that violence to him? The Duke answered him, That
the King had given him order to Arrest him, and that he would do well to open
the Door. Conti demanded, if he would kill him? To which the Duke replied, No.
Whereupon Conti prayed him to let him go, and he would open the Door; to which
the Duke yielded.

But so soon as he saw himself at Liberty, he changed his mind: The Duke and
Lewis de Mello, knowing the least Retardment was capable of ruining their,
Project, they ordered Andrea de Leiria, the keeper of the Kings Tapestry, to
fetch an Ax.

In the mean time the Count de Castlemelhor having had an inkling of it, either
out of design to acquire the Friendship of Conti, or to flatter the King, he
would have entered into the Chamber of Dispatches to have given him notice of
what had passed.

But that Door according to custom being fast, he went by the Clock-House,
which was upon the Tarrass; where having found the Duke, he highly condemned
his Enterprise, telling him he had lost all respect to the King, whose Palace
ought to be a sacred and inviolable Sanctuary; and went so far, as to give the
Duke very outrageous words. But seeing they had seized on both Passages, he
returned the same way he came, and went to try if he could get in through the
Queens Apartment, but he found that also fast; so that with all the diligence
he had, it was impossible for him to speak with the King.

An Ax being brought, the Duke told Conti, that if they were compelled to break
open the Kings Doors, there was no hopes of Life for him; but if he would open
them, they would do him no hurt; at this Threat he rendered himself, and as he
came out of the Chamber, with a grave Countenance, the Grand Provost arrested
him, who also presently after took Baltasar Rodrigue de Matos, Groom of the
Wardrobe, who exercised the Charge of Lieutenant of the Guard, for his Father
in Law, Diego Botelho de Sand, and led them both through the Tarass, to the
place where they build Ships, and there they made them enter a Shallop, to be
carried aboard a Ship, that was ready to set sail for Brasil.

John de Matos, and Francisco Bernardo Taveira, were also arrested; the first
had been a Groom in the Kings Stable, the second a Clerk to the Covent of
Hermites of St. Augustine, both of them having gotten into the favor of the
King, the one as a brave and skilful Runner at the Bulls, the other for serving
him in his secret pleasures. John de Conti was also arrested. Of these five
Prisoners, who, according to the order they had given, should have been carried
to Brazile, only Antony de Conti, John de Conti, and John de Mattos went; for
Baltasar Rodrigue de Matos, was brought again to Shore, because they found he
was not so guilty; and as for Francisco Bernardo Taviera, he flung himself from
his Prison upon the Rocks, where he was taken up so very much bruised, that it
was impossible to Embarque him.

The Queen, who waited with great Impatience the news of this Execution, which
she had no sooner heard, but sent word to the Counselors of State, to the
Tribunals, to the Council of the City, and the Chamber of the Four and Twenty,
to the Grandees and Gentry, who were before Assembled, that they should come
into the Chamber where the King and she were, to understand what follows; which
Speech was made to them by the Secretary of State.

The Obedience, the Queen our Princess owed to the Orders of the deceased This
Discourse was addressed to the Assembly.
King, the kindness she had for the King her Son, and the desire she had to be
a Comfort to her Subjects, in acknowledging those great Services which she had
received from them, were the Motives that obliged her, maugre the great need
she had of Repose, to take upon her the Government. If she has not acquitted
her self to the content of all, it is not that she has spared her self, nor
that she has shunned any Cares, or Troubles. This Princess extremely touched
with the Disorders which trouble this Monarchy, and with the Complaints of the
People, did believe it was most fitting to call together to this Place, in this
absence of the States General, all those Tribunals which represent them, to the
end she might declare to the King in their presence, the Remedy which she has
endeavored to bring to them, and to receive from them what Counsel she shall
need therein; if what she has done for the good of the State be not
sufficient, assuring them that she has no other intention then to follow their
Counsels. All the People complain that Justice, which is a thing that Kings
ought to love more than their Eyes, is not Administered: As the Queen does not
alone Administer it, but there are Judges who take Cognizance of Affairs, Civil
and Criminal; she has resolved to Examine all the Tribunals, to the end if any
one among them, has given Cause of Complaint to the People, they might receive
the Chastisement their Fault merits, and the People the Satisfaction they ought
to have. It is a very great Regret to the Queen our Sovereign, that there is
heard murmuring among the People, who complain that the King our Lord, although
he be of Age to take into his own Hand the Government of the State, of which
the Queen so vehemently desires to Discharge her self, does not apply himself
however to any Affairs necessary thereto; but on the contrary, lets himself be
carried away by his Courage, in which Exercises of Violence, he has Exposed
his Life so many times to evident Dangers, hazarding to leave the Kingdom
without a Successor; instead of giving himself wholly to other Exercises, which
should draw upon him the Blessings of Heaven, the Love of his Subjects, and the
Esteem of Strangers. And since we are all here present, the Queen would have
us, that we Conjure the King to think of himself, and of us; which is the true
way to render a King as commendable by his Merits, as he was before by his
Birth: He owes this Consolation to his Subjects, who are assuredly the best
Subjects that ever King had, since without thinking of the loss of their
Children, which are for the most part Dead in the War; nor of their Goods,
which are almost all consumed, they yet expose continually all that remains
with their Lives, to conserve the name of Faithful Subjects to his Majesty.
Sir,
By the the acknowledgment which This to the King.
your Majesty owes to God, who has made you so Great, by that which you owe to
the comfort of so good a Mother, and to the services of your good Subjects, who
cast themselves at your feet, with Hearts full of Grief, to see your Soul
subjected to so many Passions, and burning with desire to see it delivered from
that Tyranny; they do Conjure you to quit the way you are in, and deliver us by
your Royal Bounty, from those extreme Fears, into which the Love that we have
for your Person, does continually cast us. Your Majesty, Sir, might better
employ your Courage, your Generosity, and your other Virtues, in imitating, as
it is with great Passion desired, the Example of that Great King the Author of
our Liberty, whose Remembrance will be eternally engraven in our Hearts. May
then your Majesty suffer us to make you these Remonstrances, which we hope may
be no ways offensive, although they may not be altogether conformable to your
Thoughts, since there may be occasions in which it is to be unfaithful to
Princes, to have Complacency for them: Besides, our Nation, as you know, is
naturally an Enemy to Flattery; although we have already Sworn, Sir, we Swear
again, and we shall Swear a Thousand times humbly prostrate at the Feet of your
Majesty, to render you a true Obedience, and to Die for your Service.


The Queen as well as the People, is astonished This to the Assembly.
to see that they have introduced into the Palace near the Person of the King,
People of no Account; who, to maintain themselves in the Favor they have
acquired by pernicious Artificers, make no scruple to sow Division between the
Grandees, and to Corrupt the good Nature of the King. They endeavor by all
manner of ways to persuade him that he has need of their Succor, to gain the
Hearts of his Subjects, and to make them respect Authority, for which they
would Sacrifice, as they say, a thousand Lives; in the mean time under this
false Zeal, they abuse this Authority, trouble the Order of Government, and of
Justice, and committing Night and Day those Crimes, which no Body is ignorant
of; they cause so much Scandal, that if our Lord the King should have a true
knowledge thereof, he would without doubt Chastise them most rigorously; for
without any respect for Religion, they are so Audacious, to make Attempts and
Quarrels, even in Sacred Places, and to maintain thereupon discourses so
Insolent, that one cannot think on them without Horror. As this Complaint is
the greatest of all, so it is that from which all our evils take their
Original; so it is no wonder that People without Religion, should hinder the
Administration of Justice, and should help forward the Emportments of the King:
This is it that does trouble, and may yet in time to come, trouble the Public
Tranquillity. All these things have been represented oftentimes to the Queen, by
many of the Ministers who are here present, and by others who had not the power
to help it; and also by several Persons very zealous for Religion, and for the
good of the Realm, that it was necessary to appease the Anger of God, which
seemed to have prepared for us so grievous a Chastisement, and to turn away the
Danger which threatened us, in taking from about the King the Enemies of the
State, who are more to be feared than those on our Frontiers. The Queen to
follow the Counsel of her Ministers and her Subjects, has willed these things
should be so executed, to the end that all the Realm might see the Esteem that
she had and should always have, of the zeal with which they had counseled her
so well, and the desire she has to bring Comfort to the State, so long as she
shall be Regent. Sir,
the substance of this Discourse, as To the King.
well as the words of which it is Composed, are not only mine, but every one of
your Ministers, and every one of the Subjects, who find themselves obliged by
their Conscience, by their Honor, and by the Ardour of their Zeal, to
represent to the Queen for the Public Good, all that this contains. This
Discourse is conformable to Reason, and to Justice, which your Majesty will not
oppose. It is on the Esteem that you have for Virtue, on the Integrity of your
Ministers, and upon the Aversion you have for Flattery, the Liberty of this
Remonstrance is founded; so that we hope, your Majesty will not only approve
that which has been done by so strong Considerations, but that you will
acknowledge the just Intention of those, who gave this Counsel, and of those who
Executed it. This is that which we desire of your Majesty, prostrate before you
with a profound Respect, and the greatest Humility.


When this Discourse was finished, all those who were present according to the
Custom of the Country, kissed the Hand of the King and Queen, and then went
forth of the Chamber; but before their Majesty's were withdrawn, Lewis de
Mello, having acquainted the Secretary it was convenient to hinder the Count of
Castlemelhor, and the Duke of Cadaval from encountering, because of the words
they had had between them; he advertised the Queen, who reconciled them. It
being the Counts Week, he continued in the Palace, and came in the instant that
the Grand Venere had opened the Door to the King, of whom he demanded as if he
had understood nothing of all which had been said, if that Concourse of the
People was an Assembly of the States? The Grand Veneur answered him, that so
soon as his Majesty was alone, he would inform him of all things, and being
entered his Chamber, he told him,

For to satisfy the Complaints, that all the People had made against Antony de
Conti, and all those who had diminished his Authority in exposing every day his
Life; the Queen had ordered they should seize on their Persons, and should be
carried away far from his Majesty, which thing had been executed by the Council
of his most zealous Subjects, and that she had rendered him an account of it by
that Writing, which he had heard read in the presence of the Tribunals.

The King had no sooner comprehended the sense of this Discourse, but he arose
from his Seat, wholly transported with Choler, and went to search for Conti in
the withdrawing Chamber, and not finding him there, swore he would find him, in
what place soever he were: Whereupon the Grand Veneur told him, That his
Majesty ought not to be angry for what was done, and so far from thinking ill
of the Queen, and his Ministers, that he ought them thanks, since with so
commendable a zeal, they had taken from about his person those men, who were
not tied to him, but for their own Interest, and that their nearness would make
him lose the Love of all his other Subjects; that if he would be beloved, and
revered as Father of his Children, there was an indispensable Necessity, this
Separation should be made; it was for that end they had embarked Conti in a
Vessel, that had set Sail for Brazil.

Upon this the King, stopping for some time as if he had been forbid, sent to
find out Emanuel Autunes, an intimate Friend, and Confident of Conti's: At the
same time he entered the Kings Chamber at the backdoor, the Count de
Castlemelhor entered at the other, as if it had been by Agreement and not by
Chance. As Soon as the Grand Veneur saw them with the King, he withdrew, after
which they had a grand Conference, which lasted till Dinner. And though he
dissembled his Discontent, as much as he could, all the while he was at the
Table, yet they could not but perceive it in his Countenance, which was more
clowdy than usual, nevertheless at night he failed not to go into the Garden,
to ride his Horses.

After this Conference, he had another the same day with a Lady about the
Queen, in which they condemned, as they had done in the former, that which the
Queen had acted, and counseled the King to be revenged for that affront,
whatever came of it. The next day he appeared more calm, so that it was
believed he had forgot all that had passed. Almost every one praised what the
Queen had done, and even some of Conti's Partisans also, accomodating
themselves to the Time, seemed to approve it, and there one was heard to say,
That he should have been of the same mind with others, if they had asked his
Advice, but since they had no Confidence in him, he should not approve of this
Novelty.

This day, being the last of Count Castelmelhors waiting Week, the King ordered
him to wait another. On Monday the King went (as he was wont) to Alcantara, but
with more Pomp, and Attendants than ordinary, being accompanied with the
Infant, and the greatest part of the nobility; this day every one stood upon
his Guard at the Palace, for they saw the Count to wait two Weeks one after
another, and because he Wrote to the Secretary of State in impeperious terms,
the King would know if they had given order that Conti should be put to Death
as soon as he was out of the Haven, or that Emanuel Autunes should be
Imprisoned. The King was no sooner returned, but he went to see the Queen,
without showing any discontent either in word or actions. Tuesday passed
without any extraordinary thing happening. On Wednesday about Noon, the King in
his Litter with the Count de Castlemelhor, went together secretly to Alcantara,
without letting any Body know of it but Don Hieronimo de Ataide, Count de
Arouguia, whom they found there; from whence all three sent to find out
Sebastine Caesar de Meneses, Councellor of State, not long since released out of
Prison, where he had been put by King John, and to fetch the Guard of Archers.
The King Wrote at the same time to those Persons in whom he had the most
Confidence, to call together the Nobility, and to give Advice to the Governors
of Places and Provinces, that he had taken the Possession of the Government of
the State.

The Queen being advertised of what had passed, called her Ministers of State
for their Counsel, where it was resolved she should write to the King to pray
him to return to Lisbon, to the end she might put the Government into his
Hands, and the Bishop of Targu should carry this Letter; but before it was
sent, it was Ordered for some particular Reasons, that Emanuel Pacheco de
Mello, Lieutenant to the Camp-Master General, should go and Post himself near
to La Croix, by which place they must pass, who would go to the King at
Alcantara, to tell them from the Queen, that for the good of the State, they
should come first to receive her Orders. All they who were advertised of it
exactly obeyed her, except Alvaro Pires de Castro,, Marquess of Cascaes, and
Antony de Sonsa de Macedo. The first said he would go thither to give the Queen
an account of all things that passed there, which he did; the oath stayed with
the King, in recompense of which, he held him in the Quality of Minister.

When Night approached, and the King saw he was less Accompanied than his
Favorites thought, having no other Militia but the Guard of Archers, some of
them were of opinion the King should retire to the Fortress of St. Julian,
Situate at the Mouth of the Tagus, where he might be in Security; but this
Counsel was not followed, because there came a great many Gentlemen to wait on
the King, besides those who attended him, which reassured the Favorites.

The Queen judging, if she should go in this condition she was in without
Troops to the King, she should expose her Authority; and if she should carry
them with her, they would accuse her that she had a mind to Retain the
Government. She considered of it, and Wrote to the King this Letter, which was
carried by the Bishop of Targu.

Most High and most Puissant Prince, I the Queen send to Salute your Majesty,
as one whom I Love and Esteem above all my Children: I understand you are gone
to Alcantara, with a Design to continue there, and that you have Commanded the
Gentlemen and Officers of your House to come to you thither. As you have done
this without Advertising me, some do believe, that you have a desire to
Separate your self from me; but I not having failed even to this present time
of doing the Devoirs of a Mother, cannot be persuaded, you will fail of those
of a Son: I then Conjure you, to put an end to these Reports which run among
the People; that you will presently return to me, assuring you, that not one of
those who follow you, has so tender a Love for you as I, nor desire more your
Conservation and Aggrandisement than I do: If you have no other Design but to
take the Government of the Realm, God is my Witness, I desire it as much, or
more than you. As for those things that are past, and of which you have had a
Resentment; it is with me, that you should Treat of them, without Bustle, or
Noise; it is with me, that you should be plain and clear, at least if you would
testify the Obedience which you owe to God, and to your Father and Mother. The
Kingdom is yours, and I Govern not but in your Name, if it were mine, it should
be only for you that I would keep it: Let us then call together the Realm as we
ought to do, to the end they may put the Government into your Hands, as they
put it into mine, before any Disunion put us into the Power of our Enemies, who
have on foot three puissant Armies; which if there be any Insurrection in the
Realm, a thing much more to be feared than the Enemy, will infallibly destroy
it. Be pleased then, in the Name of God, for the Love you bear your People, and
which I ought to hope from you. Consider this Affair which merits it so much,
and take care to recommend it to God, whom I pray to Conserve your Majesty,
most High and most Puissant Prince, and above all my Children the most beloved,
and most esteemed Son, and Conduct you according to my wishes.

From Lisbon, June 21. 1662. Your Loving Mother the Queen.


The Bishop of Targu presenting to the King this Letter, assured him in few
words, that the Resolution of the Queen was to give him full Satisfaction. The
King told him he would return Answer the next Day; at which time he sent Thomas
de Noronha, Count de Areos, with a Letter conceived in these Terms.

Most High and most Puissant Princess, Queen of Portugal, and Algarves, on this
side and beyond the Sea in Africa, Sovereign of Guinny, and of the Conquests
made by Navigations and Commerce in Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and the Indies,
whom I Esteem above all others. Most beloved, and most dear Lady and Mother, I
the King salute your Majesty; Having regard to the Condition in which the Realm
now is by the Neighborhood of the Enemies Armies, and having a design to bring
a Remedy thereunto, as an obedient Son to your Majesty, being touched with the
continual Trouble which since the Death of my Lord and Father, you have had in
Governing the Realm, which owes its Conservation to the Cares and to the
Prudence of your Majesty, I have resolved to give you ease: As according to the
Laws of the Realm, I have passed much beyond the Time which renders Princes
subject to Tutors; I hope with the Divine Assistance, the Approbation of your
Majesty, and the Union which is between me and the Serene Infant Don Pedro, my
Brother, I shall satisfy my People, and Triumph over the Enemies of the Crown
of Portugal. Most High, and most Puissant Princess, Queen of Portugal, and the
Algarves, etc. Who is to me above all others most beloved and most dear Mother
and Lady, our Lord have your Majesty in his keeping*

From Aleancantara, the 21st of June 1662. Your most Obedient Son, kisses the
Royal Hands of your Majesty. The King.


The King Wrote also to the Infant, in Terms of the same nature, which Letter
was carried by Antony de Miranda Henriques; the Infant made Answer thereunto
by Rodrigue de Menesses, in which, after he had given him thanks for the Honor
his Majesty had done him, in giving him notice of that Affair, he endeavored
to persuade him by very strong Reasons, that he should return to the Queen,
where he should with Honor obtain his desire; he hoped his Majesty would grant
him permission to wait on him the next Day, to Accompany him in his Return.

The Queen seeing the King was not about to Return, tried a new to persuade him
to it; but all her endeavors were maliciously interpreted: For they said the
Queen would not bring him back to the Palace, but with a design to continue her
Regency. They who had stirred the King up to this, feared his Reaccommodation
with the Queen, and therefore increased his mistrust, the better to resist her
persuasions. The Count de Arces, who brought the Kings Letter, returned with
this Answer from the Queen.

Most High and most Puissant Prince, etc. I Wrote to you Yesterday, which was
presented to you by the Bishop of Targu; all that which you demand of me in
your Letter, I am disposed to do; to remit into your Hands the Government of
the Realm, so soon as you have taken away those Obstacles which hinder that
Design: God is my Witness, I never had, nor now have, any other intent. In the
mean time, my Son, suffer these things to be done with all necessary Decency,
and return to your Apartment, after which you may be assured, I will give you
full satisfaction. Do it for a Mothers sake, who has brought you up with much
Affection; and who desires nothing so much as to see you Govern the State
happily, which I hope to see by the Mercy of God: And to the end that God may
assist your Majesty, you ought to be persuaded, that what I have said in my
other Letter, and what I say in this, is that which is most convenient for you.
Most High and most Puissant Prince, etc.

The King returned no Answer to this Letter, but sent to the Secretary of State
to come to him the next Day; of which he advertised the Queen, believing it was
his duty not to obey the King in this occasion, without advising with her; she
approved of his going to present himself to the King, to receive his Orders.

The Infant went also the same Day to see the Queen, who thought it fit he
should go to the King, although he had not sent him Permission, to Entreat him
that he would submit to her will. But although the King was very Civil to him,
and they Dined together, and went together to the Council; his Prayers were of
no effect. The Secretary was no sooner presented to the King, but he told him
he had created six Counselors of State, and ordered him presently to Expedite
all Provisions thereunto, for he would have their Advice in Council that Day:
Upon which the Secretary beseeched him, he would surcease that Creation of
Counselors of State, because, although all the Gentlemen he had Chosen were
worthy of that Employment, the time was not proper for it; besides, the number
would make them be the less esteemed. That whereas his Father, the late King,
had employed six years in choosing one Councellor of State, his Majesty had
Created six in one Night; the thing being done with precipitation, without his
Majesty's conferring with the Queen, in whose Hands the Government yet was, and
by consequence the Nomination of these Ministers, they would say, it was but an
unhappy Choice. It was to be feared, the Honor that his Majesty would do those
Gentlemen, would draw upon them Derision, by a Circumstance which would render
the thing Ridiculous, which was Reasonable of it self: That it would then
please his Majesty to return to his Mother, who would Remit into his Hands with
the ordinary Ceremonies, that which he went about to obtain, by unjust and
violent means. It was not Congruous or fit for his Majesty to take that as it
were by Force, which was his own by Legitimate Succession. This manner of
Acting would make People see, that this Precipitation was by the Council given
him, and cause a Suspicion, as if the Queen through Ambition, had no mind to
part with the Government, although she desired nothing more, of which his
Majesty ought to be assured, since she had Wrote so to him. For as the Word of
a Sovereign is sacred, she could no ways fail in that, without doing wrong to
her self.

The King was as little touched with this Remonstrance, as if he had never
heard it. One of the new Counselors of State seeing he answered nothing,
undertook to speak for him, and endeavored to answer all which the Secretary
had touched upon, and as the King had more trust in that Councellor, than in
the Secretary, he followed his Opinion, ordering the Secretary to make all
things ready thereto, according to his place. He had hardly taken the Pen into
his hand, when there entered into the Kings Chamber another Minister of State,
who asked the Secretary, What he thought of that Affair? Who answered him, He
thought very ill of it, to which he replied, He was of the same opinion. But
what Remedy can you give for it? said the Minister of State: Upon which the
Secretary gave him a Recital, after what manner the Government ought to be
remittted to the King, adding, He would maintain it true in full Council, if
called thereunto, That what the King was about to do, was contrary to the
Custom, always observed in Portugal. Upon this, the ancient and new Counselors
of State being met, this Minister told the King, His Majesty should hearken to
the advice of the Secretary of State, before others delivered theirs, because
after he had instructed them in the ordinary Usage, they would be able to speak
with more Solidity. He followed the Council of this Minister, and the Secretary
said,

However Kings claim their Realms by Right of Succession, they do not take upon
themselves the Government, but according to the ancient Laws and Ceremonies of
each Nation, by a public Act: For the Power is not communicated to the
Successor, until that Act be performed, which gives equally a Title, both in
regard of the Present, and of Posterity. That by Virtue of the Testament of the
King, the States had given the Government to the Queen, and had put into her
hands the Seals, to which is tied the Royal Power, which if his Majesty should
exercise without them, he would do Violence to the Laws, and Justice. That
those who should yield him Obedience, would do it rather for fear, than by
reason, because although the Crown did belong unto his Majesty, the Queen his
Mother, nevertheless, as Regent, had the Royal Power in her hands, so that if
they owe an equal respect to both their Majesty's, they owed only their
Obedience to the Queen. That he would not chang a Custom, which had been always
inviolably observed. It was not reasonable his Majesty should take the
Government by force, since the Queen desired with so much passion to surrender
it to him; that besides the Violence, so contrary to the good hopes they had
conceived of his Reign, it would lessen his Reputation; not only in his own
Kingdom, but with Strangers. If his Majesty doubted of the Sincerity of the
Queen, he should send one of his Gentlemen, to look in the Cabinet belonging to
the Secretary, where he might see all the Orders, necessary for the formalities
of that Ceremony. And since these Orders did manifestly make known the Queeens
Intention, his Majesty ought to follow his Council, and to return to the
Palace, where the Business should be done, not only with all necessary
Congruity, but also with an universal Applause. That that manner of acting will
be beneficial to all the people, and especially to those who are nearest to his
Majesty's Royal Person, who were obliged above all the rest to give good
Council to his Majesty, which he hoped from all those who were present. The
Ministers of State, touched with the force of these Reasons, all of them became
of the Secretaries Opinion, and omitting what they had before said to the
contrary, thought of another thing, That the King should send to demand the
Seals by the Secretary himself, and having them once in his hands, he might
continue his Government, and no body be able to say any thing against it. Upon
this the Secretary replied,

That he had not Authority enough to demand them, and the Queen ought not to
render them, unless it should be to the King himself, without the interposition
of any Minister. That his Majesty ought not to undertake any thing against
Justice, and good Order, he should not (at least) do it, if he would follow his
Council.

As it was not the King, who did decide these things, he would not determine
for either side, but told the Secretary, he should attend, and within a while
he should receive an Answer, upon which the Council broke up. But after that,
the King asked the Secretary in private, If he would assure him, that the Queen
would in good earnest resign up the Government? To which the Secretary
answered, That indeed it was impossible for him to make such a Promise, since
he was not able to answer, but for his own proper Actions, however he was
persuaded, the Queen would execute what she had promised, provided his Majesty
would return to the Palace.

The Favorites did not hold themselves satisfied with what the Secretary had
said. The King once again sent for him back, and ordered him, he should go to
the Palace, and as soon as he should come thither, he should write a Letter,
signed by the Queen, which should in express terms signify, That she would, the
first day he arrived, remit to him the Government, promising, so soon as he had
received that Letter, he would return to the Palace, as the Queen did desire.

So soon as the Assembly was finished, the Infant took leave of the King, and
went to the Queen, to whom he rendered an Account of that which passed in his
presence. The Secretary also having told her the order he had received from the
King, she was resolved to execute it: After which he retired home, to take
order in some Affairs, and did not return to his Office till night, to write
that Letter which was demanded; He had hardly begun to write, when the Count de
Pombeiro arrived from Alcantara, with order to know the Queens mind from her
own mouth: Being entered into the Secretaries Room, he told him, That the King
and Council doubted the success of that Affair, because of the delay of the
Letter, which he had made them hope for, and which they had waited for with
much impatience, that all that which he had said was but an Artifice, to engage
the King, by his return to the Palace, to perpetuate the Regency of the Queen:
That it was absolutely necessary, speedily to carry a Remedy to that Suspicion,
to put some stop to the Violence of the King, which was almost upon breaking
forth. But the Secretary having told him the Reasons, which caused the delay of
the Letter, which he complained of, he made an end of writing it, which being
signed by the Queen, he put it into the hands of the Count, who carried it to
Alcantara, where being opened, they found these Words.

Most high, and most puissant Prince, etc.
To morrow at ten a clock, the Tribunals shall be advertised to assemble, to
the end that in their presence I may remit to you the Seals, and the Government
of all your States, in the accustomed manner. I pray you earnestly, that you
will be there, Most High and Mighty Prince, etc.


So soon as this Letter was sent, the Queen gave order for all Preparatives
necessary, and sent to advertise all those who ought to assist at this
Ceremony, to the end she might do it with all the Authority, and Demonstration
of Content, that so considerable an Action required. The Reading of that Letter
calmed the Spirits a little at Alcantara, and it was resolved by the King, that
he would be with the Queen at the time appointed.

The 23d of June, 1662. the King being within a Month of Nineteen Years of Age,
came from Alcantara to Lisbon, accompanied with all the Nobles, and followed by
a great Concourse of People. The Infant was yet in his Palace, for he had not
got ready his Coach soon enough, which obliged him to send to tell the King as
he passed by, that his People were he cause he could not come sooner to him;
which he prayed him to excuse, and not stay, for he would follow him. The King
having consulted thereupon those who were about him, ordered that they should
pass before the Infante's Palace; which he seeing from the Window, immediately
went down to the King, and going into his Coach, they went strait to the Palace
by the New-Street, that they might make their entry by the great Place; where
being arrived, they went up into the Chamber where the Queen was, and and then
being placed, the King at her right, and the Infant at her left Hand; all the
Tribunals assembled, with the These were the Lords of the Realm.
Ministers of State, the Titulares, Counselors, Governors of Castles, the
Lords of the Realm, Gentlemen, the Ecclesiastics, and the chief of the Orders;
which being done, the Grand Master of the Wardrobe placed before the King, a
little Table of Crimson Velvet with a Cushion of the same; and the Secretary of
State put upon the Cushion a Purse, in which were the Seals; some time after,
having taken them up, he put them into the Queens Hands, and she into the
Kings, saying to him these Words.

See here the Seals with which I have been Charged by the States of the Realm,
by virtue of the Testament of the King my Lord, who is now with God; I remit
them into the Hands of your Majesty, and at the same time the Government, which
I have received with them of the same States. God grant that all things may be
Prosperous under the Government, as I desire.

The King taking them, put them at the same time into the hands of the
Secretary; after which, all the People came to kiss the Hands of these three
Royal Persons, and so the Assembly broke up.

The Queen seeing her self Discharged of the Burden of the Monarchy, had now
no other thought, but to execute the Resolution she had taken to Retire, and
her self to found a Religious Covent, of the Order of St. Augustine. Being
willing to begin to Build, she ordered Doctor Belchoir de Andrade, in the time
he was her Secretary, to visit diverse Places, but they raised a thousand
difficulties to hinder her, so that she found no fit Place: Whereupon her
Enemies published, she had hidden Designs, and feigning to seek for a place to
Build a Covent, she had no mind the leave the Palace. She had no sooner begun
to make a passage of Communication from the Quinte to the Houses of Pleasure
are called Quintes in Portugal.
Covent of Religious, of the Order of St. Dominic, being situated near it; but
they said, the Queen had chosen this House, that she might fly away when she
pleased. These malicious Reports, pressed the Queen to execute her Enterprise.
Having remembered her self one day, that the Marquess of Sandy had offered her
a^ House which he had at Grillo; she spoke That is one of the Extremest
Quarters of Lisbon.
of it to Garcia de Mello, Son to the Marquess, who having also offered it to
her, she accepted it, and presently began to Build there.

When the Queen had rendered the Government to the King, the Courtiers began to
change their Discourse, and many of them, who before were still speaking o^ the
Incapacity of the King, now extolled the quickness of his Wit, and made him
seem more worthy of a greater Kingdom than his own. To hide their
Incon^^^stancy, they protested the King was become another Man, and spoke of
his Change as of a Miracle; but this added nothing of belief in the Case, for
his Reason being hurt by his Maladies, it rendered him incapable to conceive
either that which they made him say, or that which they said to him. When he
was to say something in Public, they instructed him before hand as well as
they were able, what he should say; but as they could not instruct him to
answer to things that would be spoke on the sudden, he was then mute, or else
answered far from the purpose; and if on these occasions it happened that he
spoke something of good sense, these Flatterers would say more by half than the
King had said. But in his good Intervals, if he had made some liberal
Discourse, his Favorites Because of the Palsy that had enfeebled one side.
would be sure to Preach on it; but this did but serve to render him
Ridiculous, for they would render those things which came from him by chance to
appear otherwise, and that his ordinary Discourse was not the same.

Before the King had taken Possession of the Government, the Earls of Atouguia,
and Castlemelhor, and Sebastian Caesar de Menesses, had taken possession of him.
As in policy these three Favorites did praise one another before the King, he
was persuaded they were filled with rare Qualities, so that he Reposed on them
all the Affairs of State. But at the first, they judged it best for the King,
to assist in all Public Affairs; and though there was nothing more contrary to
his Inclinations, yet they so brought it about, that he gave Audience, went to
Council, dispatched Businesses, but this Application lasted not long; whether
it were that the King was weary of it, or some of them had persuaded him
otherwise by the Counsel of those who Governed him. But it is thus, that
Favorites inspiring Idleness into Princes, invade their Authority under the
pretext of discharging them of the Care of their Affairs.

There is yet another ordinary Artifice of such Favorites to maintain their
Credit, and to hinder any from doing any thing against them, to Banish from
Court all those who were not tied to their Interests, and to introduce in their
places, either their Creatures or their Friends. The Count de Castlemelhor, and
his two favored Companions very admirably practiced this Maxim, as we shall
see in a little time.

Henry Auriquez de Miranda began about this time to put himself near the King,
by the Services which he had rendered him in his Pleasures, and within a while
entered into so much Trust, and had so great a share in his most secret
Thoughts, that if the Count de Castlemelhor had more of Authority about the
King than Don Henry Auriquez, yet it might be said, that Don Henry Auriquez de
Miranda had more of his Heart, than the Count Castlemelhor.

This new Favorite according to appearances, ought to have given some trouble
to the favor of the Count, however it happened quite contrary, and he so well
^anaged the Spirit of that Gentleman, and of the Kings, that he made that a
support to his Fortune, which it was thought might have ruined him. And indeed,
after this he became the most Puissant of the three Favorites, by the consent
of his Competitors, having more Facility than the Count de Atouguia, who did
not profit by the occasion which was presented him either by Moderation, or
otherwise.

The Count de Castlemelhor being in Italy, whither he had withdrawn himself
because of the death of Don Lewis of Portugal, Count de Vimioso, who was there;
vaunted, that one Day he would return into that Realm, as its Governor. From
these happy beginnings he conceived so much hope, that his Prophecy should not
be in vain, he was therefore resolved to push on his Fortune as far as he was
able.

So soon as he had found he was Master of the Kings Affections, he took the
liberty to Lodge in the Apartment of the late Prince Theodosius; as he
enterprised to have himself the whole Favor, this was not ill aimed at, to
find a means to render himself inseparable to the Person of the King; But it
was not enough to establish himself near the King, he must have some Charge
which might serve to make his Credit seen and valued. There was then nothing at
Court with which he could Accomodate himself, but that of Escrivaon de
Puridade, which had not been exercised by any Persons of Quality, since Pedro
de Alcacova Carneiro, Count de Idayna. He then would have this Office, and
having gotten a grant of it, persuading the King it was necessary for his Ease,
and to maintain his Authority, and all things ready to the sealing of his
Patent, the King ordered the Secretary to Expedite those Letters for that
Charge to the Count; but the Secretary seeing the thing regarded the Public
Interest more than his own particular, he represented to his Majesty.

That the King his Father had united that Charge to that of the Secretary of
State, and that he had the Letters Patents for it. That his Majesty ought not
at the entrance into his Government, destroy that which the late King his
Father had done, a most Wise and most Experienced Prince, but rather should
follow his Examples and Ways, that he might not fall into those Wanderings and
Novelties which ordinarily fling down young Princes, and particularly such who
deceive through their fair appearances; and that his Majesty ought not with
Justice to augment the Fortune of one particular Man to the prejudice of
another.

The King having none of his Council about him, answered nothing to the
Secretary. On the Morrow, he ordered him again to hasten the Counts Patent,
which was made ready according to his Command, and therein all those Emoluments
and Prerogatives he would have. Some time after, they publicly discoursed on
this Charge, and would have it thought, that in this was comprised all others,
and it was ever possessed by Favorites.

There yet was wanting to the Count, the Title of Councellor of State, but so
soon as they had told the King it was Essential to his new Employment, he gave
it him. Almost at the same time, the King gave to Henry Auriquez de Miranda,
the Charge of Lieutenant General of the Artillery, vacant by the Death of Ruy
This Charge answers to that of Master of the Ordnance.
Correa Lucas, his Father in Law, to which he united that of Intendant of the
Magazine of the Realm, which Lewis Caesar de Meneses possessed.

The King granted, besides many other This Charge answers to that of
Superintendant of the Sea Affairs.
Graces, to the Friends of these three Favorites; to Christopher de Mello, who
was Governor and Captain General of the Magazine in Africa, the Reversion of
Captain of the Port, and to Emanuel de Mello, his Brother, the Reversion of
Captain of the Guards, which was then possessed by Lewis de Mello their Father.

As it was for their Interest, that none but their Creatures should come near
the King, they cast out, and banished from his Person, the Gentlemen of his
Chamber: They were dispensed with at first from the Service of their Charge,
without being hindered the entrance into the Palace, which they did the better
to hide their Design, which they insensibly brought about. They ordered it in
such a manner, that they could not entertain the King, nor give him any Advice.
Also by little and little, they took away the Communication which the King had
with the Officers of his House, bringing him to Eat in his Chamber; he was
served by those whom they met with by chance, wholly Abrogating those Ancient
Ceremonies with which the King of Portugal used to be served, and confounded
the Order they used to keep in all things; for no Body exercised his Charge,
but every Body exercised all Charges.

The Favorites persuaded themselves, it was for their Interest, that those who
were not their Friends should be Banished the Court; so when they wanted a
pretext, they made no scruple to awaken those things which should not have been
spoken of; imputing Crimes to those People on whom the King bestowed any
Favors; they accounting it nothing to have taken the Government from the
Queen, if they did not give the King an Aversion to all those who had been of
her Party. For this end, they maintained that the Remonstrance which they had
made was Insolent, and brought it under a sentence of Condemnation; as if it
had not been the Custom of all Nations to make Remonstrances to Kings, when
they let themselves be carried away with their Passions. As it was done to Don
Alphonso, the Fourth King of Portugal, because he loved Hunting with so great
Ardor, that he quite neglected all Affairs of State: He at first grew into
Choler, but being come to himself, afterward praised that for Zeal, which he
would have punished as a Crime, and moderated thereupon the Passion that he had
for the Chase.

They began the Exilement with that of Father Antony Vicira, which was followed
by that of the Secretary of State, the Duke of Cadaval, the Grand Veneur,
Emanuel de Mello, the Count de Sour, and the Count de Pomlerio; and they sent
word to the Captain of the Port, that he should abstain from coming to the
Palace. See the Crimes they imputed to them, That Father Antony Vieria had
wrote that Remonstrance that had offended the King; that the Secretary had
promoted it, and that the rest had Dictated it and Executed it. These only were
Banished as Culpable, though there were many others besides them. Some of them
did avoid their Exilement, by Reconciling themselves to the Favorites; and
none durst speak to another, because they were afraid one of another.

Sometime after, the Marquess de Gouvea, Grand Master of the Kings House,
demanded Leave to retire himself to Gouvea; the Reason was, because they had
made him lose a great part of the Rights and Preheminences belonging to his
Charge, as much by the Revocations they had made therein, as by the too great
Authority of these Favorites. But when inspite of all the Oppositions of the
Court, he would Prosecute his design; they ordered him to keep himself at
Gouvea, with a Prohibition not to return to Court, without an especial Order
from the King; so his Retreat which he would have made voluntary, became forced.

Nicholas Monteiro, Tutor to the King, retired himself also to his Priory of
Cedofeila, under pretext of the Indisposition of his great Age, but in truth,
it was because he was not able to endure their manner of Acting at Court. A
little after the Count de Castlemelhor, proposed for Confessor to the King and
the Infant, Don Pedro de Sousa, his Uncle by the Fathers side, a Religious of
St. Bennet, nominated Bishop of Angra; which was agreed to.

They named for Secretary of State in the place of Pedro Vieira de Silva, who
was Banished, Antony de Sousa de Macedo. So soon as the King had got the
Government into his own Hands, he showed to the Queen, an unequal and
capricious Air in all his Actings. Every time he came from Alcantara, he went
to render her a Visit, and acquitted himself of all other Devoires which
consisted in appearance; he did also the like to the Prince, but he
Communicated no part of his Affairs neither to the one, nor the other.

These Favorites having it in their Heads, to bring the Prince to the Palace,
they alleged for Reasons, that the King and the presumptive Heir to the Crown,
should not live apart: That there was nothing more proper to cause their Amity,
a thing so necessary for the State, than the Union of their Persons: That if he
Lived in his Palace with little Satisfaction, he would have much Content in the
King. Besides, That it was too great a Charge to the State, which wanted Money
to maintain the War.

As this Motion was opposite to those which they had made formerly to appear,
it was not very difficult to penetrate into the thoughts of the Favorites,
which was, that by this means they might render themselves Masters of the mind
of the Infant, as well as they had of the Kings; but the Infant, who
discovered their Cunning, answered, That he was well enough in his Palace, as
deserted as it was. So that despairing to be able to make him change his
Lodging, they treated the Prince ruggedly, and accused him, that he did not
love the King as he ought. But that which troubled them most, was, That he
would not be loosed from the Queens Interests, who was every day preparing her
self to retire, and that she would prevent their Disunion, which these
Favorites so passionately desired.

Although they had received several repulses from the Infant, they did not
leave to continue their endeavors to draw him to their Party, hoping they
should be able to do that by Importunity, which they could not do with their
Reasons. Whilst they were at Alcantara, the freedom of the Country served them
to make some progress on his Spirit, chiefly by Henry Auriques. But as much as
they gained the Favor of the Infant, they took away from the King the evil
Impressions they had given him concerning him, in so much, that the King began
to make him dine with him, and to take him abroad with him in his Coach, and to
give him the divertisement of Fishing in his Pleasure-Boat, which they made by
night with lighted Torches; they went together to Alcantara, to see the
Coursing of the Bulls, and the King obliged him to lie at his Country House, to
see these Divertisements. All these things gave birth to a Hope in the Breasts
of the Favorites; that he should not be able to escape them any more for the
time to come: They vaunting already, that they had made peace between the two
Brothers, every one of them attributing to himself the Glory to have been the
Mediator, particularly, Henry Anriques de Miranda, for which Consideration, he
pretended to have the greatest part in his Favor, and testified the most zeal
for his Service, above all others.

At this Time, most of the Officers which the Queen had given him, had left
him: The Count of St. Laurence had quitted him, to exercise his Charge of
Superintendant of the Finances; The Count de Sour was banished to the
Algarves; Ruy de Moura Tells had retired himself; John Nunes de Acuna was with
the Army in the Province between Douro and Minho, whither he was sent the
handsomer to hide his Exilement. In the place of these Officers, they had put,
Don Fernando de Meneses, Count de Ericeira, Pedro Gesar de Meneses, Ruy
Fernando de Almada, Ruy de Figueredo D' Alarcaon, Antonio de Miranda Anriquez,
and Don Diego de Meneses.

As all these new Officers about the Infant were of Kin to the three
Favorites, this Change was a very grand help to them; but this would not
suffice, unless they could be able to break the Union, which was between the
Infant and the Queen, which was very difficult for them to do. They were
willing the Queen should have retired of her self, and after that manner the
Separation should have been, because then none could have imputed it to them;
but their impatience was too great to stay for that. But among the Artifices
which they used to advance this Separation, there was one, which would scarce
be credited, if the Writing had not been found in the hands of one of those
Ministers at that time, of which this is a most faithful Copy. It showed,

That there were two ways to oblige the Queen to quit the Court. The First is
to cause her Displeasure in all those things, of which she would be most
sensible; As to order Donna Isabella de Castro, to go into her Covent The Queen
loved these two Persons.
of the Incarnation, and to cause Donna Maria Francisca to go home to the
Countess her Mother, and to prohibit all those Officers of her House, in whom
she had most Confidence, to enter the Palace. The Discontent she will receive
thereby, will oblige her to retire of her self, or else cause her to make her
Complaints to our Master with more heat; this will oblige him to declare to
her, that a voluntary Retreat will be most handsome for her, to the end she
might not be constrained to do it after another manner. This way has more than
one Step, because if she shall show her self obstinate, and shall not be
willing to follow the Council of the King, she then will render her self worthy
of Chastisement. The Second way is to have it told her, by her Confessor, or by
some other Person of Authority, That it is necessary for her Glory, she should
retire her self to the Town of Allenquer, or into that of Cintra, because of
the Report she had caused to be spread abroad of her Retiring, and for other
Reasons that may be made known to her, and they judged that our Master desired
the thing might be executed with all possible sweetness, that other ways might
be avoided, which might any ways give him a Vexation. That if she should
answer, as I believe she will, that she had changed her Mind, and would know
the Reasons which had obliged the King to take that Resolution; they should in
that case put presently into her hands a Billet, which should let her
understand, that it was to revenge himself of that insolent Remonstrance, which
she had caused to be made to him, in which we may under a Color bring some
Reasons, for our particular Justification. Below this Memorial, there was the
Billet for the Queen, wrote in the same hand, in which were these Words.

You shall say to the Queen my Mother, This is the manner of writing such
Billets.
that having regard to the Intention, she has had of retiring into a Covent,
and to the Reasons she has given for it, I find my self obliged to tell her,
(maugre the satisfaction which I have to see you near me in the Palace) that
for the Interest of her Repose, and of her Piety, she ought to execute that
Design. If she will then follow the Example of many other Princesses, who have
done the same thing, she might choose what Covent she pleased out of the City,
where she may live only for her self, and for the memory of the late King, my
Lord and Father, who is with God. I do promise my self from her great Wisdom,
that she will take care that the World believe this Resolution comes from
herself, and not from me.

This Discourse filled with such hard and inhumane Sentiments, was conformable
to those which they always had of the Queen, even in presence of the King; for
he suffered them not only to attribute to Fortune all the good Success, but
they imputed to her, all the evils which had happened in her Government; and
they took pleasure to speak of all her Actions before her, with little respect.

These Indignities which they made the Queen to suffer, either by the Order of
the King, or by his Consent, went much farther. For some Persons assembling
themselves in the Night below under her Windows, at what time they were
informed she used to go to her Prayers, broke her Windows, and said so many
bitter and injurious Speeches, that no Pen is able to Write them.

To these Misusages which the obscurity of the Night hid in some sort, they
added others more openly, and more scandalous. The Day of the Conception of the
Virgin, the King according to his Custom, being descended into the Chapel of
the Palace, where the Solemnity of the Feast had drawn all the Court, passed
before the Queen who was in her Seat, without giving her the ordinary Civility;
this Action which surprised every Body, let them know very well how much the
King was displeased with his Mother, since he failed of the Respect publicly,
which he owed her; so that her Maternal Love made her resolve, to take away the
Occasions that he might not commit the like Fault, not to return any more into
that Seat, but to make use of another.

Upon this, she formed a Design to go and pass away some Days in the Palace of
Xabregas, and there to cause a Gallery to be made, to enter the Covent of the
Mother of God, in the same place where formerly Queen Catherine had made one
when she stayed there. To this end she sent her Secretary to tell the Count de
Castlemelhor, that for very just Causes she would no more assist at the Service
in the Chapel of the Palace, and that she had demanded of Donna Francisca de
Tavora, Countess of Ungnaon, the Palace of Xabregas, where she had resolved to
stay, until that which she was Building should be in a condition for her to
Lodge in, and that he should take care to let the King her Son, understand her
Intentions. Two Days after, the Count de Antouguia, the Count de Castlemelhor,
Sebastian Caesar de Meneses, came to the Secretary's House, to whom they told
for Answer, That the King thought it strange, the Queen would leave his House
to go into that of another; and that she should be very welcome in the Palace,
till that which she was Building was finished. It was not three Days since they
had a mind to chase the Queen from the Palace, and now they seem as if they
would not have her go forth, so that none could divine the Reason of this
Inconstancy.

The Day which the King had accustomed every Year to go to Salvaterre, being
come, he carried thither the Infant with him. During that Journey, the
Favorites took occasion to tell him, that the Queen had a mind to make him
King: He answered, That if she had such an intention, he should not consent to
it. The Favorites ravished to have some occasion to Calumniate the Queen,
extolled the Infant for that answer.

He was as yet at that time under the Tutelage of the Queen, Henry Auriquez de
Miranda told him, That he was now of Age enough to Govern his own House, and
that he should make Antony Cavide his Secretary, in the place of Antony de
Sousa de Taveres; so that he came back Emancipated from Salvaterre. After this,
they went about to exalt the refusal which he had made, and to speak of what
Advantages the State received by his Emancipation. As they had taken the
Government from the King to Reign with him, they had Emancipated the Infant to
Govern him the more easily, looking upon it to be for their Interest, that he
should not depend at all upon the Queen.

The return of the King from Salvaterre, was in the beginning of Lent, and
according to his Custom, he continued his Communication with his Mother, but
not so regularly as formerly. For so soon as he had made his Complements, he
Treated her with much indifference, according to the humors of his Favorites.
It happened at that time, that the King was let Blood, for a fall from his
Horse, and the Queen going to visit him, without his being advertised thereof,
so as to have time to be instructed in the Civility which he should show, one
might perceive how Nature would carry it away from the Artificers of his
Favorites, and those evil Impressions they had given him against her, gave
place to the strength of Blood; for he received her with so much tenderness,
that when she was about to go away, and to take leave of him, he prayed her to
stay, to hear some Musicians Sing: She would at first have excused her self,
but the King sitting down Embraced her, and Detained her.

So soon as the Favorites had understood the King had received his Mother
after that sort, they concluded absolutely to separate them, to hinder their
Reunion. The same Persons, whose Counsel a little before, had caused him to
send word to the Queen, that she should not go forth of the Palace; seeing that
she obeyed, obliged him now to send her word, that she should leave it within a
few Days.

The Queen without the least Resistance in the World to the Kings Order, sent
on the Morning of the Vigil of Palm Sunday, to tell the Count of Castlemelhor
by her Secretary, that she would depart after Dinner, that the King should let
her know in what manner, provided it was in her Mourning Coach. It was answered
her on the part of the King, That he would go in his own Coach, she in any she
would desire, and the Infant in that of the Kings.

On the 17th of March, 1663. The Queen waited for the King and the Infant in
her Chamber, where they being arrived, the King putting himself on her
Right Hand, and the Infant on her Left, they accompanied her after that manner
to the Court of the Chapel, where they went into their Coaches as it had been
agreed. It is from the Palace to the Quinte, about a Quarter of a League, all
which space was filled with an extraordinary Concourse of People of all sorts,
who were Assembled to see this Spectacle worthy of Compassion; they being
persuaded this Retreat was to a Prison, where the King would secure his Mother.
But yet the Serenity in the Countenance of that Princess, testified the
contrary, and the Joy which they saw in that of the Kings, made it believed so
also.

Being arrived at the Quinte, they went up Stairs in the same order they had
come from the Palace, the King and the Infant leaving the Queen at the Door of
the first Chamber, in which all the Nobility attended; returned without
rendering her any Civility, or testifying any Tenderness toward her, which did
extraordinarily surprise every Body: Nevertheless the Infant is not to be
accused of it, but the King only, or rather his Favorites.

After that the Queen had taken her place under a Canopy, all those about her
came to kiss her Hand; some of them being sensibly touched with her Retreat,
and the other feigning to be so. As for the King, he returned that Night on
Horseback, with a great deal of Gaity, approaching the Litters and Coaches
which he met, speaking to the Ladies dishonest and licentious Speeches; which
let the People know, that he had accompanied the Queen rather to Secure her
Person, than to do her Honor; and that his Favorites had taken these
Precautions, for fear the People should Mutiny. And indeed, although she had
Retired voluntarily, yet every one was persuaded she was a Prisoner; for Sir
Richard Fanshaw, the English Ambassador, before he returned for London, the
Marquess of Sand, who was going to conclude the Marriage between the King and
the most Serene Marie Frances Isabelle de Savoy, Duchess de Aumel, and
Princess de Nemoars, and Mounsieur Fouche, Envoy of the Duke of Vendosme, did
not dare to go see her, without the permission of the King.

As the Presence of the Queen did a little restrain the King, as soon as she was
Retired, he took no more regard to his Carriage. He had first made two Troops,
one of Foot, the other of Horse, which he called his high and low Watchmen,
which were composed of the most wicked Persons of the Realm, which passed with
him for the most brave.

With these Troops he went out every Night, and set upon indifferently all
those they met; the Peril being equal for the King as for them, because they
would not have him to be known amongst them, he very freely exposed himself
with the rest. Those who accompanied him ordinarily carried their Swords
without Scabbards, that they might be the more ready to execute his Orders, and
that they might the better Surprise the People they found in the Dark, they
blacked them, lest their Glittering should discover their Intentions. Those who
brought theirs back the most Bloody, received the greatest praises from the
King.

The Watch which made the Round in the City, were not exempt from the Assaults
of these People, which troubled the whole Tranquillity of the City; and the
more, for the Judges durst not make Search after those who were Culpable. Nay,
they were forced, having for this Business drawn so much Hatred on themselves,
not only to abstain for a long time from the Execution of their Charges, but
also to hide the very Marks of their Magistracy.

The King being persuaded one Day, that the Marquess de Fontes, his great
Chamberlain, had offended him, he sought all about to kill him; but not finding
him any where, he gave order to his Braves to do it. They having met him in his
Litter, shot through it in several places with their Muskets; the marks they
found in diverse places, showed the danger he had been in.

Another time he made them fall upon the Coach of the Count of Ericeira, where
were with him his Wife, his Daughter, and his Brother, but it was without
effect, because they, to whom he had given the execution of that Commission,
had no mind to execute it.

One of his Diversions was to go in the Night to the Gibbet, to see those that
were executed, and having taken them down, to observe what wry mouths they made
when they expired.

The Night on which every year they made a solemn Procession from our Lady de
Grace, to Saint Roch, and in which they represented the Passion, the King was
resolved to go thither in his Coach with his Braves: Some of his Gentlemen
endeavored to divert him from it, telling him, the Place and the Ceremony
would render the Action too remarkable, but he despised this Advice. He went
thither, and ordered two of his Braves to box some of the men as they passed
along with their Wives, but they did but justle them, the King observing they
did not follow his Orders, commanded them so often, that one of them drew his
Sword to fall upon them, they did the like to defend themselves: As Soon as the
King saw that, desiring no better, he went out of his Coach, his presence put
all into disorder, and so much troubled the Procession, that it was broken, and
the sacred Images, which represented the Passion, flung down.

This Hurly burly being appeased, the King perceiving that he wanted a pair of
his Pistols, and thinking it a point of dishonor, to leave his Arms behind
him, gave order they should search among the Crowd for them, and in the
Confusion of the people, but his Braves demanding briskly the news of them of
the first they incountred, the Combat was renewed, and the people were driven
tumultuously, as far as the Gate of the Court, belonging to the Marquess de
Nisa, and even into his Hall, if the Noblemen who were within had not opposed
them, because the King was present, who at last retired himself, leaving very
many wounded. This Action, which was against all Humane and Divine Laws, cast
all the Court into an extraordinary consternation.

The night following, Pedro Severim Norogna, Secretary of the Grants, passing
under the Vaut, called the Golden Arch, incountring the Kings Litter, which was
environed with his low Patrovils, he prayed them to make him way a little, but
these people being thereat offended, they fell upon him, and beat him off his
horse, in such a manner that they left him mortally wounded: As this was not
far from the Palace, the Count de Castlemelhor hearing the noise, ran thither,
where he found him wounded, and in so ill a condition, that he was not able to
be carried to his House, so that he was fain to be put into one of the Chambers
of the Kings Apartment, where he died within a few days after. The King was so
little concerned at it, that instead of chastising these murderers, he hindered
any from informing against them.

About this time there appeared a Comet, the King having heard say, that it
presaged the death of Kings, or a change in their States, he got above in his
Tarrass, and there used to it a thousand injurious speeches, and called it a
thousand infamous names, and shot off his Pistols at it, His Favorites knew
not any better Remedy for this passion of his, than to assure him, he was a
greater King than his Father, or any of his Predecessors.

His Debauches kept the same pace with his Emportments, for he did not only
haunt the Houses of Women of ill Life, but they brought them also to an House
in the Country, near to Alcantara, and his Favorites humoured this Inclination
in him, thereby to endeavor to dissipate the Report which ran of his
inability. But when they saw this would not sufficiently convince the people,
they thought of a thing in the mean time, which deceived very many persons.
They bred up in the Palace a little Girl, under the name of Infanta, publishing
the King to be her Father. And to render the thing more likely, they made the
Mother of the Child to be cruelly whipped, under pretext of infidelity, and a man
to be assassinated as one that had caused a Jealousy in the King. He did not
leave in the mean time going to her house, or else causing her to be brought to
the Palace, and carried her into public Assemblies, and indeed in appearance
he seemed to be desperately in love with her. This Intrigue had deceived the
most wary, if the Woman, who knew the Truth better than any body, had not
spoiled all by Confessing; That all that which the King showed toward her was
but feigned, and that he was not the Father of that Infant.

He began also to make his Gallantries to the Religious, and to bring about
more easily his wicked Design, he made them open their Churches that he might
represent Comedies in them, making the Quire serve for the Theater, and the
Vestry the place for the Tyring Room; but when he saw all these Attempts were
in vain, he Scandalized them in his Discourses. He had so little respect for
Religion, that when there was no need for it, she made Mass to be said at the
ordinary times in his Chamber, whilst that he was in Bed, or all Undressed. He
would never go likewise on Feastival Days into his Seat in the Chapel till
after Dinner, which was the cause that Mass was not finished there, till the
Hour that Vespers were said in other Churches. Since he was not able absolutely
to forbear hearing of Sermons, he ordered the Preachers that they should
shorten their Sermons; and some of them were Banished, because they did not
obey this Order, and others forbore to Preach at all. There were nevertheless,
some who had the boldness to Cry out against these Disorders, but without any
effect; for others by the Flatteries with which they composed their Sermons,
rendered their Zeal unprofitable.

Hitherto the three Favorites, by the means of the Subordination between them,
had Lived with good Intelligence; but the Count Castlemelhor perceiving that it
was easy for him to Ruin the Favor of the two others, he sought for an
occasion to facilitate his Enterprise, he employed against them the same
Artificers, which all three had used against those they had in Suspicion: He
chased first all their Friends from the Palace, and afterward themselves: For
they had no sooner lost his Amity, than they had lost the Favor of the King.

It happened one Day, that the Count de Atouguya drew his Sword at the back
Stairs of the Palace, for which the Count de Castlemelhor sought with all
diligence possible to Arrest him, and to have made him suffer the Punishment
that is ordained in that Case.

Some time after the same Count de Atouguya, went to answer a Challenge that
was sent him, which the Count of Castlemelhor made a matter of very ill
Consequence; although it was in a time wherein if Duels were not permitted, at
least they were not Punished.

The King at the persuasion of some Body, or of his own mind (for it was
sometimes very difficult to penetrate into the secret of his Heart) wrote a
Letter to Conti, with an Order for his being brought back from Brazile; the
Count de Castlemelhor quickly suspected Sebastine Caesar de Meneses to have writ
it. Upon this, he revived against him the ancient Businesses, and stirred up
new ones, insomuch that he received Orders to withdraw himself two Leagues from
the Court.

As none knew the true Causes of these Disgraces, the Public Good and Justice
being made only the pretext, these things rendered the Count extremely odious,
especially that of the Count de Atouguya, by whom he had made his Fortune: But
at Court the sentiment of Ambition, easily blots out those of Acknowledgment.

A little time after, Antony and John de Conti, arrived from Brazile, and were
received with the Noise of the Artillery, and the Sound of Trumpets. But they
had Order sent them to retire to a House they had in the Country, at the Mouth
of the Tagus, with a Prohibition not to go from thence. There was something
surprising in this Order, for at the same time there was sent them Presents
from the King; to the one a very considerable Charge in his House, and five and
twenty hundred Livers of Rent; and to the other the Treasureship of St. Michael
de Freixo.

It was not without Reason that the Count, who knew the first impressions of
Friendship as well as those of Love, are never to be altogether Effaced,
neither by Time nor Absence, should be afraid of the Interview of the King and
Conti, and that he should oppose it as much as possibly he could; but in spite
of all his care, he could not hinder him from doing it. If Conti did not come
to the King, the King did not fail to go to find him out. He saw him one Day in
an Hermitage, and at another time in the middle of a Field. Some would have
persuaded Conti to have followed the King, and to have come back to Court, but
he would not, or else he durst not do it.

These secret Interviews gave a suspicion to the Count, that they were Hatching
something against him; and as it is the custom of Favorites to interest their
Masters in their Conservation, he made the King believe, they went about to
take from him his Crown: And at the same time there went a Report, that he had
discovered this Conspiracy by a Divine Revelation. He accused the Queen, who
was in her Retirement, the Duke de Cadaval, who was at Tentugal, the Count de
Atouguia, who was disgraced; Sebastine Caesar de Meneses, who was absent, and
Antony de Conti, who was Banished.

It was then resolved, that they should take the Informations of this pretended
Conspiracy, and a Commission was given to John Gabriel de Barros, and to the
Register Francisco de Fonseca Sinel, Councellor of the Chamber Criminal; it was
Lewis Correa de Torres, who gave in the first Deposition, being Interrogated by
the King, who had his naked Sword in his Hand: After this, they extended it to
very many other Persons of great Quality.

The Register was charged with a private Consultation to give to the Secretary
Belchior de Andrade, with a Superscription to the Queen (...) King to carry
(...) her Answer, the (...) the Queen would not see the Consentration, and the
(...) brought it, to carry it back to those who sent can, (...)out taking any
other notice of (...) then ordered (...) ^^^ther to the Duke o^ (...) should
retire (...) from (...) Court; and that (...) ^^^^neses, should go into the
(...) ^^^taile, until he (...) to go to the Algarves, and an Order from to
(...) Conti, to go to (...). After (...) went to kiss the Kings Hand, (...)
Deliverance (...).

This Inquest laste^ a long (...) because they would (...) in Passion, or else
(...) the Terror of the Accused, in (...) that which they feigned to discover
(...) They named (...) it, and for Judges John (...) Grand Chancellor of the
(...). George de Silva (...) Montiero, Rodrig^^ (...) Counselors of Parliament
(...) de Basto, Judge of the Crown, and (...) to the Count, that they were
Hatching something against him; and as it is the custom of Favorites to
interest their Masters in their Conservation, he made the King believe, they
went about to take from him his Crown: And at the same time there went a
Report, that he had discovered this Conspiracy by a Divine Revelation. He
accused the Queen, who was in her Retirement, the Duke de Cadaval, who was at
Tentugal, the Count de Atouguia, who was disgraced; Sebastine Caesar de Meneses,
who was absent, and Antony de Conti, who was Banished.

It was then resolved, that they should take the Informations of this pretended
Conspiracy, and a Commission was given to John Gabriel de Barros, and to the
Register Francisco de Fonseca Sinel, Councellor of the Chamber Criminal; it was
Lewis Correa de Torres, who gave in the first Deposition, being Interrogated by
the King, who had his naked Sword in his Hand: After this, they extended it to
very many other Persons of great Quality.

The Register was charged with a private Consultation to give to the Secretary
Belchior de Andrade, with a Superscription to the Queen, with an Order from the
King to carry it to her, and to let him know her Answer; the Secretary obeyed,
but the Queen would not see the Consultation, and she bid them who brought it,
to carry it back to those who sent him, without taking any other notice of it.
They then ordered Don Theodosius Mello, Brother to the Duke of Cadaval, that he
should retire fifty Leagues from the Court; and that Sebastian Caesar de
Meneses, should go into the Covent of Battle, until he should be ready to go
to the Algarves, and an Order sent to Antony de Conti, to go to Porto. After
this they went to kiss the Kings Hand, for his happy Deliverance and Success.

This Inquest lasted a long time, either because they would be thought to do
nothing in Passion, or else to augment the Terror of the Accused, in
Exaggerating that which they feigned to discover every day. They named Gabriel
de Barros to Report it, and for Judges John Velho Barreto, Grand Chancellor of
the Realm, George de Silva Mascarenhas, Pedro Fernandes Montiero, Rodrigue
Rodriguez de Lemos, Counselors of Parliament; Lewis Gomes de Basto, Judge of
the Crown, and Finances Duarte Vas d'Ossorio, one of the Four grand Provests of
the Court; Domingo Autunes, John Lamprea de Vargus, Counselors of Parliament;
George Privado de Faria, Procurator of the Crown, was also with them. All these
Judges met diverse times in the Criminal Chamber: Although the Informations did
not Charge the Accused, some would nevertheless persuade that they were not
Innocent, but the Integrity of the Judges was not to be shaken; and almost all
of them concluded in the favor of the Innocent. The Accused often demanded to
see what they were accused of; but they would never deliver them any Copy of
their Charges. And that Information which ought to have been Cancelled, because
it contained nothing of Proof against the Accused, was Conserved by the credit
of the Favorites, as an armed Hand ready to discharge its Blow on some other
Occasion, on the Heads of the Accused.

After this success, which let all the World see, that the Credit of the Court
was not to be Limited; he was not afraid to leave the Apartment he had in the
Palace, and to take one more Splendid, and answerable to the glory of his
Fortune: his Antichamber being thronged with Courtiers, whilst the King's was
naked and empty.

By these ways, and by others yet less Legitimate, the Count de Castlemelhor
had acquired so much power in the Realm, that he lived no longer as a Subject;
so that the King who had formerly complained during the Regency of the Queen,
He was but a Statue, of which she was the Organ; might with much more Reason
say the same thing of the Count.

About this time, Simon de Vasconcellos, and Sousa, the Favorites Brother,
carried himself so well about the Infant, that when the Prince fell Sick in
the Autumn following, he performed about his Person the Functions of all the
Gentlemen of his Chamber, which made them, seeing him respected before them, to
Retire under diverse pretexts; but the Count de Castlemelhor, made the King
recall them all, except the Count de Ericeira; although he was the most worthy
to have been recalled, because of his high Virtues, and the greatness of his
Wit. After this Re-establishment, Simon de Vasconcellos was also made Gentleman
of the Chamber to the Infant, and had also besides that, a Brief for
Superintendant of the House of the same Infant.

Sometime after, Pedro Caesar de Meneses, George de Mello, Ruy de Figueredo de
Alarcon, and Antony de Miranda Anriquez, retired themselves, As for Don Diego
de Meneses, he took leave publicly, which was thought so strange of by the
Favorite, that he menaced him with a Chastisement, although he had for his
excuse the Count de Ericeira, who a little before had taken leave after the
same manner. And the Chastisement had soon followed the Menace, had not an
Affair happened, which suspended the Resolution he had taken thereupon.

Ruy Fernandes de Almada, was retired to execute his Charge of President of the
Court in the City, leaving in his place his Son Christopher de Almada, Antony
Cavide, Secretary, having also left the Service of the Infant; John de Roxas
de Azevedo, who was at that time Councellor of the Inquests, exercised his
Charge.

Things being at this pass, the Marquess de Sand, arrived from France, the
17th of March, 1665. where he had been, having passed out of England thither
with the Articles of the Marriage of the King, with the most Serene Princess de
Nemours, and an Order to Treat of a Marriage between the Infant and
Mademoisselle de Bouillen, Daughter to the Duke of Bouillen. As this last was
but as it were in Agitation, upon a Letter which that Prince had wrote to the
Marquess of Sand, by the Importunity of the Favorites; he declared he did not
desire that Negotiation should be continued, which did extremely surprise them.
To make him consent to the Marriage they told him, that this Rupture would
trouble the Repose of the Public; and that the Treaty which had been begun by
virtue of his procuration, could not be left off, without breaking off the
Kings also, which would be a great prejudice to the State. But the Prince in
his own behalf, told them, That the Essence of Marriage consisted in the
Consent of the Parties, and that he had never given his to that: And moreover,
he had not given his positive Word, as they had made People believe; but if it
had been so, before the Treaty should be concluded, he should have the power to
break it off. Since there was not any Realm in the World, but could show
Examples of the same thing. That in Portugal the King Emanuel had Espoused
Madam Leonora, whom his Son John had thought to have Married; that the Infanta
Donna Beatrice, Daughter to the King Don Fernand, after she had agreed with
Frederick, Duke de Benevent, as also with Duarte, son of D' Aimond, Count de
Cambridg, and promised to the Infanta John her Uncle: after that to Ferdinand,
Son of John the First, King of Castile, was notwithstanding all this Espoused
to the last. That all the World knew that Mary Duchess of Bourgoyn, who had
been promised to John, and to Nicholas, Father and Son, Dukes of Anjou; to
Charles Duke of Guinne, to the Duke of Savoy, to Frederick, Prince of Tarente,
Espoused Maximilian, Archduke of Austria, and Emperor: That they could not
after all, maintain with any Reason, that to Consummate the Marriage of the
King, he must necessarily be Espoused to Madomoiselle de Bouillen. But the
Favorites seeing they were not able to change the mind of the Prince, they
made him be spoken to about it by the King, determining with him the time and
place for him to do it. They two being together in their Seat, on Good Friday,
though it was no place convenient, nor which they had pitched on; the King
after he had entertained the Infant of many Indifferent things, spoke to him
of this Marriage, and reproached him, that he had been willing the King should
make the Match, and that the Queen also had used her endeavors for it; but the
Infant looked upon this Accusation but as a Calumny, and justified both himself
and the Queen. As to that of his Marriage, since it was not pleasing to God he
should Marry contrary to his Affection, his Majesty could not constrain him to
it, without offending him; but the King not being able to suffer this
resistance of the Prince, told him, that he would put him in the Tower: To
which he told him, As he was King, he might do it, but yet although he had an
absolute power over him, ought not to make use of it, to force his will, or to
do him outrage.

On the next morning, the Infant being returned to the Seat, the King made new
Efforts to persuade him: But seeing he endeavored it in vain, he made the
Secretary of State to tell Rodrigue de Meneses, Simon de Vasconsellos, and
Rodrigue de Acunha, that their Services should be no longer acceptable to him,
if they did not make his Brother change his Mind. Rodrigue de Meneses would
have made a Trial on the Infant, and rendered him an Account of what had
passed, but instead of hearing him, he told him, That the King might cut off
his Head, as well as of the meanest of his Subjects; but he had not power
enough to change his Heart. That they should never make him to resolve upon
that Marriage, that not being the way to do it; for in matters of Love, the
whole Soul becomes firm against Violence, and the most sweet Spirits are
provoked, when they go about to force their Inclinations.

The Marquess de Sand, before he went back into France to conclude the
Marriage of the King, spoke to the Count de Castlemelhor, about the report of
his Inability, but the Count told him it was an Imposture, whether he was so
persuaded indeed, or whether he spoke for his Interest against his Conscience,
is uncertain.

Whilst every one expected the good success of this Marriage, that was
negotiated, and began before hand to taste the Joy of it, there chanced a
Subject of Affliction, which troubled that Joy, by the death of the Queen.
Every one was preparing their Habits, to celebrate the Reception of the new
Queen, but were forced to turn them into mourning, to honor the Funerals of
the old. She fell sick the 25th of February, 1666, of a Disease, that at first
put her into extreme Danger, taking from her the liberty of Breathing. She no
sooner knew the estate she was in, but she disposed, like a most Christian, and
most Pious Princess, of all things that concerned her: after which she wrote to
her two Children, who were at Salvater, in these Terms.

For the King,
My Son,
I am in such a Condition, the Physicians doubt of my Life, and I my self am
very sensible, that I have not long to live. I have therefore resolved to give
advice to your Majesty, (not knowing that time will permit me to do any thing
else) in a moment, in which I ought to think on nothing, but the health of my
Soul; and because I find it almost impossible, to discharge it of that which
presses it, it is from you alone I expect this Comfort. I believe I shall say
all in saying I am your Mother, and I hope all things of you, if you would but
remember your self of the duties of your Birth. I attend Death amidst the Tears
of those who have always followed me; and as the loss which they will have by
it is one of my greatest Greifs, I demand of you, that after you have acquitted
your self of that which you owe to my Soul, you will for my sake recompense the
good Services which they rendered me, and that you finish those Foundations
which I have begun, for God would have it so, If I die without seeing you, I
leave you my Blessing, which is the only thing I have left me to give you,
assuring you, that God will not require an Account of me for not at all times
treating your Majesty, as my Son.

From Xabregas, the 26 of Feb. 1666

For the Infant.
My Son,
the Time I have to live is so short, that every moment I am ready to expire; I
am your Mother, and seeing I am upon the point of appearing before God, I would
not leave you without my Blessing. I recommend to you always the Fear of God,
and the Obedience which you owe to your Brother, in whom are all your hopes;
and in the end, after my death be mindful of my Soul, since you ow all things
to my Love.

From Xabregas, etc.

When the Infant heard these sad tidings, he could not but by tears express
his Grief, but the King was very far from being touched with it, and rallied
his Brother for his tenderness, and opposed his design of going away post. Both
of them answered the Letters of the Queen, and sent her Word that they would
come speedily to kiss her hand. The Grand Master of the Kings House, and the
Super-Intendant of the Infante's, carried their Answers.

The King made this Voyage with a great deal of delay, going in his Brigantine,
he made many turns and returns upon the Water, to speak words of Railery to the
Boats and Barques he met with, so that he arrived at the Quinte, not till
Saturday, the 28th of February, 1666, about eight a clock, and it was not to be
doubted, but that this delay was a thing designed.

The King and the Infant, accompanied with the Favorite and his Brother,
found the Queen upon the point of rendering her last Breath. The King asked her
Benediction, but the Infant was not able to say any thing, having both his
Heart and his Voice seized, and all he could do was to burst into tears. Isabel
de Castro uncovered the Queens Hand; which the King and the Infant kissed, and
the Favorite having told the King, it was enough, he went out, saying, Adieu,
Adieu, and an hour after the Queen expired.

On the Monday was her Funeral, the King and the Infant casting the holy Water
upon her Corpse, which they accompanied to her Litter, in which they carried her
to a Covent of Barefoot White-Friars, to be there Deposited, till that of
Religious Women of the same Order, of which she was the Foundress, was
finished, where she had a mind to be Buried.

As this Princess had been in her Lifetime, so she will be after her Death, a
perfect Model for all Princesses. She was no sooner Duchess of Bragansa, but
her Address, and her Resolution, put the Crown upon the Head of her Husband;
who had such Confidence in her, that he Communicated the most Important (...)
of the State to her, which had such great Success, that the greatest Politians
admired her Conduct. When she was Regent, she yet better manifested the Geni^^
she had to Manage the State; for as she was assisted by no Body, and that the
Burden of the Kingdom lay upon her, she expressed an Indefatigable strength
both of Body and Mind, and conserved by her Prudence, what she had Conquered by
her Co^^age. So soon as she was undeceived of the Vanity of the things of this
World, she had a mind to Discharge her self of the Care of those Affairs: If
she did not do it, it was because of the difficulty which she found in the
executing of her Design; besides, some made it to her a scruple of Conscience.
Moreover, as she had always a great deal of Moderation in her Prosperity, so
she supported all those Disgraces which Heaven sent her with much Constancy.

They remarked (as a thing rare in either Sex, when they have the sovereign
Authority in their Hands) that she had so little Resentment for the
Persecutions they had made her suffer, she seemed to take a pleasure in them,
so much she feared to oppose Religion.

But the Infant had not so much Moderation, for he would not Pardon the
Favorites, whom he accused to be the Authors of them, which irritated them in
such sort that they confounded all things with the King. They again raised up
the ancient Reports, which they had before spread abroad; That he had no
affection for the King, and that he aspired to the Crown. They enquired into
his Discourses, into his Exercises, and into the Persons that came to him, to
endeavor to gain some pretext to censure his Conduct. The King witnessed his
hatred against those who Complemented him, and an affection for them who
Estranged themselves from him, and forbid at the same time very many from
coming into his Palace, and testified to many others, that their Affairs were
not Expedited, because they went thither. What did they not do to take off Don
Rodrigue de Meneses first President of the Parliament, from the Infant? How
often did they try to enforce on him Impressions against him? How often by
offers enough to have shaken any Man, but he, did they attempt it? All the
Presidents of the other Tribunals These Imploys are Triennial in Portugal.
were continued in their Charges, but he ^^ly was refused that Grace: They
would then have sent him in Quality of Vice^^y to the East Indies, but he found
too many Charms in the Person of the Infant to go to exercise that Charge,
which was given to John Nunes de Acuntia, who was also tied to the Prince.

Don Rodrigue de Meneses, Simon de Vasconcellos, and Sousa, and Christopher de
Abnada, were all the Gentlemen that remained to him: But as he had not enough
to appear at the Entry of the Queen, he went and demanded of the King
permission to augment their Number; to which he yielded, and told him by Henry
Anriquez de Miranda, that he gave him power to name them himself. The Infant
presently named Lewis de Silveira, Count de Sarsedas, Don Vasco Labo Baron de
Alvito, Michael Carlos de Tavora, General of the Artillery in the Province Tras
os Montes, and Lawrence de Lencastre; but going to the Palace to thank the
King, he found he had changed his mind. In the mean time he heard the Queen had
left France, and he thought to serve himself with the occasion of the good
News, to ask of the King these Gentlemen which he had chosen by his permission;
but the King would not yield to it. Upon this, the Infant having said, That he
he was astonished to see his Majesty would not approve of the Choice which he
had made by his Permission. The King replied, That his Ancient Officers had
abandoned him, because they were not able to endure his ill Humor. So the
Infant finding himself Obliged to let the King see, that they did not Retire
for any Cause, but for their own particular Affairs: He would have shown the
King a Billet left by Antony de Miranda Anriquez, when he retired, but he would
not see it. It is one of the Injustices of those who are in Authority over
others, that they would not have the Truth made manifest to them, when it is
not for their Advantage, for fear their Falsity should not continue with them.

But it was supposed, that the King did this because he was constant to his
Favorites, who would have the Infant to have taken again his Ancient
Gentlemen, who had quitted him because they were their Creatures, nor would
they yield to let him have the other, because they were suspected. At this time
the Infant came very feldom to Council, the Favorite however failed not to
give him an account of the Affairs of the Realm, but not in truth to ask his
Advice, but only to tell him what had been resolved on in Council: But he had
oftentimes that from common Report, which they come to communicate to him from
the King as a Secret.

The King and the Infant lived together after this manner, when they had
advice that that Navy which brought the Queen, appeared at the Cape Rogue, in
the Morning, the 2d of Aug. 1666. The Admiral on which she was aboard, cast
Anchor a little above Betlehem, and in the Evening she came to Land in the
presence of all the People, who were ravished with her Beauty, and her good
Grace. The King was the only Person who was not in have to see her, and in lieu
of going to receive her from on Board, he stayed to do his ordinary Exercises.

The Marquess de Ruvigny, General of the Naval Forces which had conveyed the
Queen, went to salute the Infant, whom he found accompanied with none but Don
Rodrigue de Meneses, for Simon de Vasconcellos, Sousa, and Christopher de
Almada, were at Lisbon. The Prince took an occasion thereupon, to demand again
those Gentlemen which they had refused him, and sent to let the Favorite know
by his Secretary, that he should advertise the King, it was for his Honor,
whilst the Court was full of Strangers, he should have a Train answerable to
his Birth and Quality. The Favorite returned an answer so drily to the
Infante's Secretary, that he was obliged to tell him, it would be well for him
to pacify him; but he despised that advice.

Before the Infant had known the Kings Answer, they met by chance in the great
Place, called Campo Grandee, the King abourding him said, Since he had been
wilful, he would take his turn to be so to, The Infant answered him. That his
Majesty ought to be as good as his Word, and if he had any reason, wherefore he
should not grant him those Gentlemen he had demanded, he ought not to hide it
from him, since they were all worthy of the approbation of his Majesty: he had
reason to believe, that he had a design to deprive him of the stisfaction of
being near him. After this, seeing things look so scurvily at the Court, he
demanded permission of the King to retire. The King told him, That he might do
it of his own proper motion, if he pleased, but he should not order it.

The Infant took leave of the King, and kissing his Hand, he added to what he
had said, That from that moment he should retire himself from the Court, but he
believed he ought in good Manners to attend the King, until he had made his
entrance into Lisbon with the Queen. He went notwithstanding every Day to the
Court, where the King Rallying with him, asked him why he was not yet gone from
Court? He answered, That he stayed only to accompany his Majesty in his Entry,
and after that he would finally retire. Among these Rudenesses which the King
showed to his Brother, he mingled some Sweetnesses and Caresses; some were
persuaded that this Refusal came but from some Counsel, that had been given the
King.

The Infant one Day, said to Don Rodrigue de Meneses, and to Simon de
Vasconcellos, that he knew well enough, some Body did render him ill Offices
about the King, and had diverted him from the Design he had to have kept his
word: He added, That he suspected the Count of Castlemelhor, and if he should
find it to be so, he should have a Chastisement as rigorous as his Crime was
enormous. Simon de Vasconcellos answered, That if he continued to do such
Injustice to his Brother, he should retire himself from his Service: And he
spoke it with so much Passion, the Infant was obliged to tell him, That he
should have a care of what he said, for he would not always find him disposed
to receive his Excuses, as he had often done; since he had carried things to
that Extremity, and put him besides all Patience, he would make him think of
what he had to do, and that he should leave the Palace. Simon de Vasconcellos,
not being to be found about the Infant when he was going forth, and that by
his Order they had searched for him on all sides without finding him, he came
just as the Infant went into his Coach, who commanded him to take his Place,
but he denied it; and the more he was pressed, the more obstinately he refused
it, so that the Infant was fain to go without him. This Obstinacy at one blow,
broke the Line which tied him to the Prince, and since that time, he could
never obtain the Grace he had refused.

The Count de Castlemelhor having understood that the Infant was angry with
him, and his Brother had lost his favor, endeavored to get for him those
Gentlemen he desired, but he could not bring it about. But having a mind to
justify himself however with the Infant, he came to his Palace, to make him
great Protestations of his Service, and represented to him the great Endeavors
he had used with the King to render him Service, exaggerating the trouble he
had had to have a particular Audience of the King, and that he could not obtain
it, but under pretext of letting him see some papers of other Concernment. But
the Infant answered him, That he had no faith in those Words, if they were not
followed by Effects, and he should by that best judge of them; adding that the
evil Treatment he had received from the King came from the Counsels that were
given him; that as he knew not certainly who they were that gave it him, he had
not taken from them their Lives; that for his own particular, if he would
justify himself to him, he had nothing to do but to procure him the good favor
of the King, upon whose Spirit he had an absolute power, and that would be the
only mark he could give him of his innocence. The Favorite returned worse
satisfied than before with this Discourse; for he was persuaded that this
Contempt, which the Prince showed he had for him, if he should not revenge
himself for it, would draw on him that of all the people.

The Infant disposed himself every day to retire, and great quantity of the
most considerable Gentlemen of the Kingdom kept themselves about his Person,
which gave great Terror to the Favorite, and forced him to stand upon his
Guard; for he was not ignorant that they imputed the Discontents of the Infant
to none but him, and that they had said publicly, he would not retire, but
because they two were incompatible. This was easily believed by the Interest,
that Favorites have to estrange from the Court those, whose birth might give
them Authority, or for the Hatred they bear to Favorites, which interprets all
they do in an evil sense.

After the King had made his En^^ into Lisbon, on the 29th of August 1666, the
Infant, who stayed (...) for the end of that Ceremony to (...) himself, went
out of the City that night without any noise, followed only by Don Rodrigue de
Meneses, (Simon de Vasconcellos not being in his service, and Christopher d'
Almada being indisposed) and the Nobless who were accustomed to be with him,
and went to dye at the Quinte de Quelas, one of his Houses of Pleasure, which
is a (...) and a half from Lisbon.

(...) did not approve of this (...), as if the Infant had done what (...)
Favorite desired; saying he had better to have taken some great and
magnanimous Resolution, and that to evil Extremes they ought to use the same
Remedies. Others praised it, as a thing necessary and prudent, that after he
had unprofitably employed all the moderation one could be capable of, he had no
other way to take; if by his first absence he had shunned great persecutions, he
would by this secure himself from those which they prepared for him, which
according to appearance would become much more violent.

The trouble which this Retreat of the Infant caused in the Court, gave great
hopes to the Spaniards to reconquer the Realm of Portugal. Fame always adding
to the Truth, made simple appearances pass for realities, and published in
Countries at a distance, that the Infant had taken Arms against the King. That
which gave a jealousy to the Favorites chiefly, was their understanding the
Infant had ordered to prepare for him a House at Almada, to pass away the
Winter A Town on the other side the Tagus, over against Lisbon.
in. The Favorites seeing the Love of the People to increase for the Infant,
through the compassion which they had for his disgraces, went about to solicit
his return.

At this time the Queen found her self indisposed, and the Prince who who came
often to enquire after her health, gave her visits by night; but by the
persuasions of the Favorites she was removed to Lisbon during her illness, it
being a place better accommodated it may be to her contentment, for remedy for
her grief. The Infant let himself be persuaded by the prayers of the Queen,
and returned to his Palace, yet without bringing his Equipage from Quelus,
because his design was to return thither again, in case he were not satisfied,
and to pass from thence to Almada. The greatest favor they could force from
the King was, that he would consent he should take some Gentlemen; but as for
those he had chosen, the more they urged, the more he denied it, and they could
never soften a heart which had so hardened it self; so that all they could
obtain of the King was, that he should renounce his first election, and choose
any whom he would, one only excepted.

As they had failed of the first promise they had given to the Infant, he
would not trouble himself again: Nevertheless, after he had made reflection
thereon, that his Complaint would be the more legitimate, and more talked on,
if the King should break it a second time, as he believed he would, he accepted
of this offer, and named Lewis de Silva Tello Count d' Aveiras, Dou John
Mascarenhas Count de la Torc, Lewis Alvares de Tavora Count de St. John, and
Emanuel Tells de Silva Count de Vilarmayor.

When the Favorites had heard this news, they deliberated at first if they
should approve of the choice; all these Gentlemen being suspected to be too
considerable; but yet in the end they feigned to think well of it. After this
the Infant came back to Court, when Christopher d'Almada demanded leave of the
King to retire, which was granted him, with some demonstration of
acknowledgment for his Services.

The King every moment exercised so much the Patience of his Brother, that all
the world believed his hate was implacable; insomuch that it was not in the
power of those who seemed to be Master of his Spirit to sweeten him in the
least; at least it was so thought by some, who were persuaded that it was the
interest of the Favorites rather to oblige the Prince than to irritate him.
But others judged to the contrary, that all this was but feigned by the
Favorites, who despairing ever to be truly reconciled to the Infant, fomented
the hatred that the King bore him.

The aversion of the King to the Infant running thus into excess, he did
nothing but what rendered him Criminal in the mind of the King. One day there
happening a difference between the Marchioness of Castlemelhor, Lady of Honor to
the Queen, and Don John Mascorenhas Count de St. Croix, Grand Master of his
House, about the Functions of their Charges, the King said, he would
accommodate the business, and govern his House himself; the Infant thinking to
Court him, added, that he ought not only to govern his House, but also the
Realm, which would give joy to all the people, and make all the Complaints of
his Subjects cease. But the King imagining the Infant said this in hatred to
the Marchioness, answered in fury, that he should not meddle with giving him
Council; and his passion passed so far, that he had struck him if the Queen had
not diverted him. Another time the King, Queen, and the Infant being together
in a Caroch, seeing the Tilting This is one kind of the Carouses.
in the which the Marquess of Marialva and the Count de Castlemelhor were the
Chiefs of the Squadrons; the Infant praised the good Grace of the Marquis and
his Brother, to Don Rodrigue de Meneses, who rod by him; the King imagining
that these praises which he had given to the Marquess de Marialva, did wrong to
the Count de Castlemelhor, he told him, if that the Queen had not been present,
he would have thrust his Sword into his Guts. The Infant answered, they
merited those praises, and that his Majesty ought to have equal satisfaction
for them all, since they had no other design but to divert him. Besides, he was
persuaded that his Majesty would not shed that Blood which he was willing to
pour forth for his service. The Queen tried to appease the wrath of the one,
and the resentment of the other; but the first she could not effect. But that
which was most surprising in this was, because this Marquess was one of those
who had most contributed to the re-establishment of the State, and one of those
who did yet maintain it. And although he had won Battles, Which were Monte
Claros and Evota.
and had recovered places of importance, and that the Count had not done any
services like these; yet he be so well persuaded the King, that it was he that
did all things in the State, and that others did but execute his Resolutions,
that he carried away all the Rewards; and the better to cover this ingratitude,
he robbed them of a part of their Glory, and debased their fair Actions. So that
whilst the great Captains vanquished their Enemies in the Field and on the
Frontiers, the Count triumphed for it in the Court and in the Cabinet.

The King was also so persuaded, his Brother did not love him, and he believed
he saw marks of his aversion in all his Discourses and in all his Actions, so
much that he took all the Respects he rendered him for Offenses. So that it was
enough to make the King mortally hate any man, if the Infant testified to him
any amity; as it happened to Joseph de Fonseca, Chaplain to the King, and
Almoner to the Infant, who had order to withdraw himself; for which the
Infant was sensibly touched, but dissembled his resentment.

The Infant having named Don Verissimo de Lancastre to fulfill the charge of
drawing the Screen before the King, by a permission granted him by the King, it
being vacant by the Death of Don Rodrigue de Acuntia; they made him acquainted
with that choice by the Favorite; but the answer was returned, that the King
had already himself chosen one to serve in that employment. The Infant seeing
he would not cease from giving of him these disgusts, he knew now better remedy
to shun them, than to withdraw himself from the Court. To effect this, he sent
the King word by his Secretary, that being Constable of the Realm, he ought to
permit him to go into the Province of Alentejo, to exercise there the Functions
of his Charge, which obliged him to defend the State; that his Mother, the
Queen, had given him where he was under Age, the Charge of Captain General, and
made the Marquess of Marialva his Lieutenant; that he did not desire that
employment, but to shun the Reproaches of Foreign Princes, who might accuse
him of being unprofitable to the State in a time when he might render it good
services, and to draw him out of that languishing idleness in which he lived.
This Proposition made those who Governed the King to tremble, and obliged them
more than ever to look after their security. They persuaded the King, that the
Charge of Constable was the step whereby the Infant would mount the Throne;
that to put Arms into his Hand, was to put all things under his Discretion; and
under the pretense of using them to defend the State against the Spaniards, he
would serve himself with them to conquer Portugal for himself. For this cause
they resolved, the King should not yield the Infant this request; yet however
not declaring it so soon, that they might weary his patience. It was also
resolved, the King should consult upon that subject with every one of his
Counselors in particular; which was done with so much leisure, that the
Infant taking this retardment for a denial, was sensibly touched; for they had
promised him at another time what they refused him now, so that he could not
resolve to stand with his Arms across, whilst he heard everywhere the rumor
of War.

In this time two of the Infante's Gentlemen were gone from him, the Count de
la Torre and the Count de St. John, under pretense of exercising their Charges
they had in the Army; but indeed it was because they were feared by the
Favorite. Order was given to the first, to go levy Soldiers in the Province of
Estremadura, and the other to command the Army in Tras os Montes. As this Order
was given in the heart of Winter, the Infant knew it was done to cross him;
however he sent the King word, that he was very joyful these two Officers were
employed in his service. These two Counts parting, the Infant stayed with the
King, continuing to render him an extraordinary submission.

The time came in which the King was accustomed to go every year to Salvaterre,
and the Infant demanded of him permission to take with him thither some
Gentlemen besides his own; but the King would not grant it. As in the time of
the late King the Prince Theodosius had the same liberty, this refusal was very
plain, and had almost made him to show his resentment.

The Count de la Torre, who was executing his Orders at Santarem, seeing
himself so near to Salvaterre, believed it was his duty to go thither, as well
to render an account of his Commission, as to kiss the hand of the King and the
Infant. Those who had removed him from the Court, under the pretense
aforesaid, were surprised to see him there, and quickly sent him an Order to
return to his Employment, etc. to say better, to his Exile; although that day,
by reason of ill weather, the River was difficult and dangerous to be passed.

The Levies being made at Santarem, he did not receive any Orders to return to
Court; but on the contrary* was stayed there, that he might be sent to the
Algarves to govern that Realm; and if he would not accept A little Village at
the mouth of the Guadi, and in the uttermost parts of Algarves.
that Employ, they had ordered him to be sent into Exile to Castromarins. The
King would they should have given him this Employ as a Punishment, but the
Favorites remonstrated to him, that it were better to give it him under the
color of a Recompense; but the Count d' Aveiras did avert this project, at the
entreaty of the Infant. So that the Count de la Torre was permitted to return
to Lisbon. So soon as he came thither, he went to kiss the Kings Hand; and in
their Discourse it chanced that in speaking of the Infant, he named him
Prince; the King told him, that his Brother was not Prince, only Infant; the
Count having The younger Sons of the Kings of Portugal are not Princes but by
Declaration.
alleged some reason to excuse himself, could not however satisfy him. As it
was put into his Head, that his Brother aspired to the Crown, he imagined that
this quality was too near approaching his own, and that it was in some sort to
proclaim him King to name him Prince. This apprehension, although it were ill
grounded, was the reason the Infant was not so soon declared as he ought. For
with less reason they had done it to the Infant Ferdinand in the time of King
Alphonso the Fifth, and they had done the like to Don Jamie Duke of Braganza in
the time of the King Don Emanuel and the Queen Isabella, when they went for
Spain to be declared Princes and Heirs of that Crown.

The Queen going some days after the King to Salvaterre, found his humor more
fierce than formerly; as if the rudeness and savageness of that Country had
conttibuted to it. He treated her with so much inhumanity, that he made not
only her burst forth into tears, but also all those that were present. All the
time the King was at Salvaterre, he went but one time to the Chase; which was
the more taken notice of, because of the great preparation that was made for
that design. His ordinary occupation, or to say better continual, was to go to
the Quarters of his Patrovilles, where he passed the most part of the days and
nights, in Music, Collations, and other divertisements according to his humor.

These Excesses which he committed in this place, and the evil treatments the
Queen there received from him, caused such a general dislike with all the
people, that there was no body that would take the pains to justify him. But
that which most of all alarmed the Favorites at this time was, that very many
people began to render their services to the Queen and to the Infant, and to
take their parts. To prevent beforehand the mischiefs they saw to menace them,
according to the Maxim they had so well practiced, they ordered Lewis de Souza
to go into the Bishopric of Porto, of which he was Governor, and Don Lewis de
Meneses to go raise Troops in the Country of Feira. He having demanded what had
been appointed for him, for his Charge of General of the Artillery, which he
had exercised, they refused it him, and he could not touch five and twenty
hundred Livres which they had consigned him for that end.

The evil intelligence which they saw between the King and the Queen The true
cause which they dared not yet to speak of, was the Impuissance of the King.
made them lose all hope of seeing Successors, and made them very pressingly
demand, that without any delay they should endeavor to marry the Infant,
which could not but be most profitable for the State. The Marquesses de Nizu
and Sand represented so well the importance of this marriage, that the
Favorites pressed with the force of their Reasons, persuaded the King that it
was necessary; whereupon it followed, that the Confessor of these two Princes
went to the Infant, and told him as from the King, that although God might
give him Children, yet it was most profitable to increase as much as was
possible the Royal Family, that for this reason he would act with him as a
Father and as a King, and desired ardently therefore to see him married. That
if he had not hitherto been able to accomplish that desire, he believed that
from his prudence and his inclination to the good of the Kingdom, this
proposition would be very agreeable to him; that therefore he should inform
himself of the Princesses of Europe, and fix his choice upon her for whom he
found the greatest inclination; and also that he should cast his eyes upon
those persons which he should judge most capable of that Negotiation; and as for
his part, that all which depended upon him to advance the Conclusion of such a
Treaty, should be performed.

The Infant having considered this Affair according to the importance of it,
sent his answer in writing by the same Confessor to the King; in which he
thanked him for the proposition his Goodness had made unto him; submitting
himself entirely to his will; to follow the order which his Majesty had
thereupon made known to him, he should declare his mind, not as a Rule that he
should follow, but only as a mark of that Obedience which he would testify on
all occasions. He then made mention of all the Princesses of Europe,
representing to him all the circumstances both of Alliance and Love; telling
him also, that the Confidence and Veneration which had united his Majesty with
the King and Queen of England, required, that first of all he should send to
their Majesty's some person to ask their Advice and Consent thereupon; and
(having received all necessary instructions) he should pass into France or
Italy, to negotiate that Affair; adding, since his Majesty among the cares of
his public Affairs, would be pleased to think of his own particular, he was
obliged to let him know, it was impossible after a proposition of that nature,
but he would appoint him some Revenues, whereby he might be able to maintain
the Expenses which that condition would charge him with; hoping his Majesty,
without prejudicing the Public, which ought to be preferred to all things,
would act with him according to his ordinary Generosity, which he had made
proof of so often: In the end proposing John de Roxas d' Azevedo his Secretary,
as a person who was most capable of managing that affair: the King approved of
all these sentiments of the Infant, giving him hope that he would satisfy all
his desires. But the day being appointed for his Majesty's Secretary, and that
of the Infant to confer about this business, there happened in the mean time
accidents which hindered this Conference, and embroiled all the Court.

A Frenchman, an Officer of the Queens, returning from the Province of
Alemtejo, was killed by a Carrier, who was pursued and taken in the City of
Canimbre, and carried to the Limoriro That is the public Prison.
in Lisbon; but being he was taken out of a Church, (which are Sanctuaries in
Portugal for all Criminals,) it was for a while disputed whether it should be a
Sanctuary for his life, which was the occasion that his Process was delayed;
and the solitude of the place where the Murder was committed, rendered the
proofs difficult. At the same time there happened between the Count de St. Croix
grand Master of the Queen's House, and Pedro d' Almeyda her Secretary, a
difference about their Charges: both of them wrote their Reasons, and put them
into the hands of the Queen, who ordered the Secretary of State to have them
examined by two Masters of Requests; but he waving that order, after he had
showed them to all the Parliament, carried them to the Council of State,
without rendering any account of it to her. Some time after the Queen asked the
Secretary what was done in those two Affairs? he replied, that as to the first,
there must be some clearer proof before the accused could be condemned; and to
the other, it was before the Council of State, advising her to speak with the
Count de Castlemelhor about it. The Queen surprised with this answer, told him
he had not executed her Orders, and that she did not approve of his council to
speak to the Count de Castle-melhor, having made a resolution, by Oath, never
in her life to speak to him about any Affair. That he was always against her,
and had reduced her to so miserable a condition, that it might be called
poverty; that for this eight months past she had not so much as to give an
Alms; and notwithstanding all this, he had the credit of acting for her
Interests. That they had not consigned to her the fifty thousand Livres which
the King had granted her. That besides, being she was not willing, by reason of
the necessity of the Realm, to require presently all those things which she
might lay claim to by the Contract of Marriage; they ought not at least to fail
of paying her that Sum. That this Refusal would not so sensibly move her, if it
were done for the good of the State, and the ease of the People; it not being
just, that whilst many persons at the Court overflowed with Riches, they should
refuse her the Money of that Consignation; and yet they paid not the Soldiers,
retaining unjustly from the Religious, the Orphans, the Widows, and the Nobles,
their dues, feoadal Rents, and Pensions; hiding from her all that passed in the
State, as if she had not the most interest next the King: adding further, that
they could not but know very well she should have had joy in the
Re-establishment of the Duke of Cadaval at the Court, since they had seen her
solicit it; but they acted in secret, so that her speaking in the favor of any
(although it were with the greatest Justice in the World,) was sufficient cause
to beget obstacles, and oppositions against them: That if she testified a
desire to any thing, they made it presently seem a thing impossible to be
obtained, though before that it had been very easy: that likewise it seemed as
if they endeavored to let all the World know she had no part in the
Government. That, although good manners should teach them otherwise, they had
neither respect or regard as they ought to have for her; and that it was so far
from being so, that some persons were so forgetful of themselves, as not to
forbear the giving her affronts, and treating her with so much contempt, as she
could not but think, by their actions, they would have her to understand she
came to Portugal rather to be their Slave than Queen.

The Secretary (to excuse his boldness for showing the Consultation to the
Grand Chamber, and carrying it to the Council of State) urged that the Count of
Castlemelhor and his Friends had no other design than to serve her Majesty. As
to the poverty which she complained of, he was not at all the cause, that
business not concerning him: that her Majesty had a Revenue, and according to
that she should regulate her Expenses: that, being the method of Consigning was
a new thing, they would in the beginning find some difficulty. He being netled
at what the Queen said about the Consignation, and of the Opulency and great
Riches of some Persons, he very imprudently said aloud, that She was deceived
by some about her, who should communicate to her things of Importance; but
having none; they tell her nothing but trifles, which they ought not to do; and
for that the Court was full of unreasonable Pretenders, they might fear they
would implore the protection of her Majesty. As for the Return of the Duke, he
was not able to render any account, because that was an Affair that the King
himself had the Conduct of: That though they had not the art of Pleasing, they
had that which was sufficient to make them render to the utmost all those
Respects and Services they were capable of: That they had treated her with so
much Veneration, as no Queen ever had the Authority that she had, and she was
abused by whoever told her the contrary: and that she ought to be so far from
believing such discourses, as rather to punish those who should make them. But
when he answered to the Queen's Complaint, that they had reduced her to
slavery, leaving speaking French, which he had done hitherto; he said in
passion, in his own natural Language, That he was assured her Majesty had
Flatterers about her, by whom she was deceived; she having no cause to complain
of the Portugals, by whom she was respected even to Veneration.

The Queen replied, that she knew very well how to distinguish the Portugals;
for as there were some of whom she had cause to complain, so there were others
from whom she received great Consolation, and that there were not above three
or four with whom she was dissatisfied. That she should willingly take
direction about her Revenue, without considering that some persons who possess
a part of the Apanage of the Queens of Portugal, and who at present draw more
profit from their Charges, did not do this in the preceding time of other
Queens; and that of late it was a crime to speak to her, her esteem being the
cause of persecutions: That by this she did best know the intentions of those
who treated her ill. That she knew how to discern between the good and the ill;
that even as she never requested any thing contrary to Justice, so she never
opposed those favors which they had a mind to obtain for any. After this the
Queen commanding the Secretary to speak softly, he answered, that if he spoke
aloud, it was that all the World might hear; upon which the Queen bid him hold
his peace, and retire; which he not doing, the Queen saw it was not for her
Dignity to hearken to him any longer, and arose up to go away, but he took her
by the Robe to stay her; upon which she (turning toward her Ladies and Maids
of Honor, and to many other persons who were in the Antichamber) sent forth a
Cry with all her force, and said that this was an unknown thing, and without
Example, no King ever treating his Subjects after such a sort: the King coming,
she spoke to him of it, who promised that for her satisfaction the Secretary
should be punished.

Although the Queen, as we have said, had commanded the Secretary of State to
show those Papers concerning the Count de St. Croix to two of the Counselors
of the Parliament only, they were seen by the whole Parliament, and afterward
carried to the Council of State: not contented with this, they would have
persuaded her to have spoken of it to the Favorite; but she thought that a
baseness unworthy of her self. Besides, it was not for want of that they
refused her the Consignation which she demanded, for these Favorites were
absolute Masters of all Affairs.

The Queen seeing that the King broke his word which he had given her to
chastise the Secretary, was troubled at it to as high a degree as such
injustice did deserve. The Common Council of the City of Lisbon had a Custom
every year to Celebrate the Feast of St. Anthony, their Patron, by giving the
People the divertisement of running at the Bulls. The Queen desiring to
dissemble that trouble, which she could not hinder from appearing if she should
assist at that Spectacle, thought it better to deprive her self of that
divertisement. The first Courses were already past, and they were preparing to
bring forth other Bulls when word was brought that the Queen would not come.
For this cause they feigned an indisposition in the King to put off the Course
till the morrow. The next day, and the third day, the Queen not being willing
to be there, they were fain to continue the Kings feigned indisposition. The
next day the Queen not being able any longer to endure that her ill treatment
by the Secretary should pass unpunished, asked of the King that he might absent
himself from Court, with so much briskness that he was not able to refuse her.
This Business being canvassed in the Council of State, it was there resolved
the Secretary should absent himself the Court for some days, after which he
should be recalled. By this means things were in Peace for a little time, they
flattering themselves with sweet hopes for the time to come, if Heaven had not
changed these seeming fair dispositions.

For on the second of September, 1667, the Count de Castelmelhor doubled the
Guards within and without the Palace, ordering the Cavalry to be lodged near,
and placing the Braves or Foot Patrovils in the Royal Garden, making all the
Officers who were there that night arm themselves, and attend near the Person
of the King, and posting his Friends from the King's Apartment even to the
Court of the Chapel, he so well ordered and disposed all things that the Count
de Villa Flor, and Lewis de Mendoca should no sooner alight to enter the
Palace, but they might be fallen upon, and destroyed. The King had consented to
all this, upon the account they had given him that (...) Infant had resolved
to massacre the Count de Castelmelhor in the midst of the Palace.

The Infant having heard this news about nine of the Clock that morning,
^^dged himself lost if he destroyed not the Count. To seek for an occasion of
complaining to the King, he found it ^^o difficult to be done, the Gates of the
Palace being all fast; but if he should come to speak with the King, what
assurance had he that the King would not use violence to his person? or that he
would have his ears open to his complaints? He considered on the other side, if
he should any longer endure the injustice of these Favorites, his Honor was
likely to suffer thereby; and it might be thought the effect rather of his
cowardice than modesty; for they already began to murmur against him, as if he
were not touched either with the public Interest, the Kings, or his own, since
he suffered every one to groan under the tyranny of the Favorites, who had
usurped the Sovereign Authority.

In this perplexity the Infant knew not which way to take, but being desirous
to try all fair means, he was contented to put himself upon his guard somewhat
more than he was accustomed, having had advice a little before that they would
imprison him; besides, the Count de Castelmelhors Partisans had said publicly,
that if they believed any thing that was violent would be acted against the
person of the Count, it would do well to prevent it, on any one that should
entertain such a design.

The day following the Count went forth in his Coach accompanied with some
Gentlemen to a Garden which he had at the Calcada de Gloria, a place where he
often recreated himself from the fatigues which were already very great upon
him, by reason he charged himself with all affairs. This assurance of the
Count's confirmed the Infant in that resolution which he had taken of writing
to the King this Letter which he sent to him by his Secretary John de Roxas
about ten of the Clock.

It is not without extreme regret, that (prostrate at the feet of the Majesty,
whom I revere as my King and Lord,) I find my self obliged to inform you of the
Count de Castelmelhor's endeavoring for some time since, all manner of ways to
destroy me. I cannot doubt of his intention, because I have advised of it by
the Ministers of the first Rank, and those who are the most zealous for your
service, and the public good; nor can I say that I should have escaped the
dangers of those violent enterprises which they cast me into, but by my own
foresight, and that of my friends. His insolence is gone so far as to put the
Palace of your Majesty into Arms, under a pretense of my violating a place so
sacred. As by his actions past, it cannot but be judged that he is capable to
attempt upon my person; so I hope that your Majesty's Justice will chastise a
person so audacious, by removing from about your person so dangerous a subject;
that I may not be reduced to the necessity of seeking in the Realms of
Strangers for a security which I cannot find in yours, I shall prove without
doubt on this occasion, the love which I have always found, and which I shall
eternally deserve from your Majesty in whatever place I shall go. God preserve
your Royal Person, as I have always desired, and as I have ever taken my care.

From Lisbon Sept. 2. 1667.

The Secretary had no sooner put this Letter into the King's hands, but it was
by him put into those of the Count, who upon reading it put all the Palace once
again into Arms; not only enforcing the ordinary Guard, adding to them some of
the Citizens, causing all those in whom he had most confidence, to repair to
him.

The Council of State was likewise assembled by the King's Order, who assisted
there himself: and after the Infante's Letter had been read, the Counselors of
State were of two contrary opinions how to find out an expedient to satisfy
both the Princes, but they were not able to do it, Justice being altogether on
the one side, and Authority on the other.

The Infante's Gentlemen whom he had sent home to their Houses, being
advertised of what passed at the Palace, came back in haste to him, just as he
had understood that the Council of State were separated without having
concluded any thing: but he had so much confidence in the justice of his Cause,
and Courage, that he dismissed them home again, except the Count de Vilarmayor,
whose week it was. In the mean time the Favorite wrote to the King, desiring
his permission to retire; but afterward, having made reflection on the
greatness of his Credit, and on the number of his Friends, and considered that
this Affair might be decided by his advice, he changed his mind, and resolved
to try all ways to maintain himself with the King.

The Tuesday following past without any answer from the King, only at night he
sent the Marquess de Marialva to tell his Brother, that for very just reasons
he had caused the Guards of the Palace to be redoubled, with order to ask him,
(as from himself,) if it would please him that the Count should come to cast
himself at his feet, and kiss his hands.

As the Infant made no answer all that day, his remisness raised in the
Favorite a belief that he was satisfied: diverse reflections were made on this
Business. Some said, that upon the King's avowing the action of the Favorite,
the Infant was obliged not to take notice of the offense he had received: that
nothing was more true than that the King made but little reckoning of the Life
of his Brother; since he would have him contented to take for satisfaction only
a simple disowning and slight submission from him who would have quite
destroyed him: but notwithstanding this, he ought to content himself with that
accommodation the King had proposed to him, since it would disengage him from a
perplexity, out of which he could never get, without putting the Kingdom into a
combustion. Others were of the opinion that the Infant could not forego his
pretention, which seemed lawful to all the World, that is the Retreat of the
Favorite: it being the Proposition he had first made, he should stand to it to
the end; lest otherwise the Favorite should draw an advantage from such an
impunity, and all the people an evil consequence of his little stoutness
against him, and that they might perhaps believe he himself had complained
without cause, which would much diminish his Reputation and Honor.

The Infant then not being able to resist the motion of his Courage, sent word
to the King that the Count had put in Arms all the Palace, under a seigned
pretense of his coming to kill him in his Apartment, which he hoped from his
justice he would not let himself be persuaded that he ever had such a thought,
that he would proceed against the Count; as an Impostor of that Quality
deserved, and would repair the injury he had done to his Honor. They took time
to answer this second Complaint as they had done the former.

The Favorite grown Insolent to see the King took his part so highly against
the Infant, resolved in a Conference which he had with his Friends, to oblige
the King to go in Person at the Head of all his Counselors of State,
Gentlemen, and Officers of the Army to Arrest him in his Palace, with all those
of his House; and to declare that they were more guilty than he was; that upon
this pretense they might make the Process against them, to the end that the
Infant seeing himself without Followers, might quickly leave off his pursuit.

The day following the Marquess returned, with an Order in Writing from the
King, which contained the same thing with the former, only he had added, that
he hoped by this second satisfaction things would be accommodated, and that the
Infant would find he most passionately desired it. But this Billet did not yet
satisfy the Infant, because it let him understand that they would bury his
Complaint in silence; which obliged him to answer the next day by another
Billet, which the same Marquess rendered to the King; the substance of which
was;

That as nothing was more evident than that those Arms wherewith he had filled
the Palace, were not introduced but upon some secret design of the Count's, he
was content however to believe this was done by order of his Majesty, since he
would have it so; that however he could not pardon the Count, for having called
all his Friends to secure the Person of his Majesty, he had forgot him,
although he well knew he was every way more interessed than they were in his
conservation. That to see the Count prostrate at his Feet, was not a
satisfaction proportionate to his Complaint, since at other times the Count
caused to be made most exact search, and had exiled thereupon very Illustrious
Persons, upon the only suspicion that they had conspired against his favor. It
was not just, that for the offense had been done against him, there should not
be the same Inquisitions, and the same Punishments; and that an Infant,
against whose life they had conspired, should be worse treated than the Count,
who had only had a simple thought that they would have opposed his favor. That
to give liberty to those that would inform of the Count's Crime, they ought to
interdict him from the Functions of his Charges, and remove him from Court,
with all the security possible for his Person and Family, against whom he had
no design, but only to secure himself. Besides, that he was not able to go to
the Palace to cast himself at the Feet of his Majesty as he had desired, to see
that the tie of Blood which he had in the quality of his Brother, had less
power over his Spirit than the Amity which he had for a simple Subject who was
his Minister.

When this Billet was sent, the City of Lisbon was in a great trouble, and
alarm, to see the Regiments embattell'd in the Grand place of the Palace, the
Guards redoubled, the Rounds reenforc'd, and the rest of the Troops in such an
estate, that it seemed a War was already begun. The Infant in the mean time
not knowing whether all these preparations were made to affright the people, or
make an assault upon him, under the pretext of hindering him from executing his
pretended Resolution, was in his own Palace with as much tranquillity, as if
there had been nothing exrraordinary in that of the King's, trusting to his own
Innocence, and the Affection of the people.

But fearing nevertheless that his Complaint should be ill interpreted by any,
he resolved to communicate it to all the Tribunals; to the Court of the City,
and that of the Four and Twenty; writing to them upon this subject, and sending
them a Copy of his Letter and Billet which he had sent to the King. At the same
time he sent to the Counselors of State, to the Grandees, and Gentlemen of the
Realm, that they should repair to him; after all which he so well instructed
them in the Causes of his Complaints, that even the Partisans of the Count
said, they would themselves be the Executioners of the Counts Chastisement,
should he happen to forget that respect which he owed to his Highness.

The justice of the Infante's Complaints by this means became so public, that
there was not one who did not blame the Favorite, in not being willing to
justify himself; and the King for hindering any from informing against him. At
last the King answered the Infante's Billet with another, and sent it him by
the Marquess de Marialva, the Marquess de Sand, and Ruy de Monra Tilles; the
substance of which Answer was:

That he desired to know the person by whom he was informed of the Counts
intention to kill him; to the end that the Count might be punished, if they
were able to prove he had failed in his duty; if not, that the Informer might.
Desiring also, that he would have the Infant understand, it was necessary for
the conservation of the State and People, that they two should live together in
good correspondence.

To which the Infant answered:

That it had pleased his Majesty to order him to name the person from whom he
had understood the design of the Count against him; but that he was not able to
do that, or to go about to make it clear, until he should be interdicted of his
Charges, and removed from the Court so long as it should be judged fit, because
whilst he should exercise them, and be at Court, it was impossible they should
be able freely to do any thing against him.

This Billet having been read, the King assembled the Counselors of State, the
Great Chancellor, the Counselors of Parliament, two Ministers of each of of
the other Tribunals, The Judges of the Crown, the Procurator of the Crown, and
that of the Finances, to the end that he might examine with them all the
proposition of the Infant; but the night before they assembled, they made most
powerful solicitations for the Count, and he himself entertained the Judges
before they entered into the Council; at which the Ministers were offended,
insomuch that they would not deliberate before him of his business, but only in
the presence of the King, where this Proposition was read:

My Lord, the Infant having wrote to his Majesty a Letter, in which he
complained, that he had not been advertised of the redoublement of the Guards
which they had made in the Palace, and that the Count de Castlemelhor had
conspired against his Life, although ineffectually; whereupon he had demanded
of his Majesty, that he would remove the Count from his person and service. His
Majesty had declared to my Lord the Infant, upon his first Complaint, that it
was by his Order they had armed the Palace. And as to the second, that he was
ready to cause the Count to be chastised as he deserved for so detestable a
Crime, a greater than which none could imagine; but nevertheless it was first
necessary to have proofs against the accused, and for that end he should name
the person from whom he had received that advice. The Lord the Infant did rest
satisfied with what his Majesty had said in reference to his first Complaint;
but that did not hinder him from maintaining what he had urged before in
reference to the other; that it was absolutely necessary the Count should be
interdicted his Charge, because of the power it gives him, and that he ought to
be removed from Court so long as it should be judged fit, to the end that all
the people might have liberty to examine that affair.

His Majesty desired that they would tell him upon his Complaint, if he may
with Justice exile the Count, and suspend him from his Charge, and not rather
consider a more honest part of satisfaction, which may be more convenient for
my Lord the Infant from a subject of that consequence: On the other side, if
there be any likelihood in the accusation against the Count, examining his
services, his fidelity, his zeal, and the injury that this may do to his
Honor, and to the Honor of his Family, to the end that no man might say his
Majesty has neglected that Justice and Prudence with which he ought to act in
such affairs. Besides, they should consider, if the public affairs have
received any damage, as well as the Authority of the King; and also of what
consequence this Novelty might be to Strangers, and especially to the Enemies
of the Crown. And in fine, if this be not enough to take away the fear that the
presence of the Count might give to the Witnesses, that this affair be examined
in the presence of his Majtsty, who hoped from the zeal of his Ministers, who
ought to consider on this business, that they would do it with such care as
they owed to his Service, to the public Repose, to the administration of his
Justice, and to his Glory.

The great regard that this Proposition showed for the Count, in exaggerating
the particular inconveniences of his Banishment, without speaking of those
which attended the Refusal of that satisfaction demanded by the Infant, let
them see plain enough, that this Proposition was devised by the Counts Friends.
But that which was stranger was, that the King who should have at least been
indifferent in this affair, appeared too much interested for the Count against
his Brother. In an affair which concerns the Life of a Prince, one ought to
proceed against the accused upon his Complaint only, especially when he is a
Prince of known integrity; and they ought to banish a Minister, how,
considerable soever he should be, when without it they cannot be able to
manifest the Truth; As it has been always used in every Realm: So in our time,
for much less cause, some Ecclesiastics in Portugal were ordered to retire
themselves into certain places, before that any thing could be verified against
them, not regarding any thing that might exempt them from exile. Besides, it
was not the intention of the Infant, to have the Favorite exiled, but only
absent for some days.

They then gave their opinions upon this Proposition; some of the Ministers
said, that the Infant was not a Sovereign Prince, and that therefore by
consequence his Affirmation was not sufficient Proof. That the Retreat and the
Suspension which he demanded, was not only a shameful Chastisement to the Count
and his Kindred, but unjust, since his Crime was not yet proved. That it ought
not to be suffered it should be said in the World, that the Chief Minister of
the Realm should conspire against the person of the Infant, and by that give
our Enemies and Stranger-Nations abroad, cause to think there is a division
among the Portugals. That the King ought himself in person to enquire into this
affair, and according to that Inquest proceed against the Count. Others judged
it could never fall into their imagina^^^^ that there should be any Portugal
capable of a Crime so heinous as that was of which the Count was questioned.
That the Complaint of the Infant was assuredly made on a distrust ill
grounded, which might be remedied by admitting him to the Government and to
Council.

But Martin Alfonso de Mello, Deputy of the Inquisition, Pedro Fernandes
Monteiro Councellor of Parliament, and John de Roxas d'Asevedo, were of
opinion, the Favorite ought to be removed; by reason that so long as he should
have the Authority of a Favorite, no one could have the free liberty of acting
against him. If he should be found guilty of the Crime of which he was accused,
he ought to be chastised; and if he should be innocent, be forthwith sent for,
and re-established into his Charges with reparation. But the King leaned to the
other opinion, under color that it had the greatest number of Voices.

The Conclusion was drawn in writing, that it might be signed by the Ministers,
but some of them refused it, this not being such an affair wherein all the
Judges ought to sign the Conclusion; so that there ought to be another
Assembly, in which every one should separately give his opinion in writing,
Those who did this, were Pantaleon Rodrigues Pacheco, nominated to the
Bishopric of Elvas; Francisco de Miranda Anriquez, Councellor Ecclesiastic of
the Grand Chamber, Pedro Fernandes Monteiro, Martin Alphonso Mello, Matheus
Melinho, Procurator of the Crown, and John Roxas d'Asevedo, who were followed
by Duarte Vas d' Osorio, Councellor of the Finances. Domingo Autunes Portugal,
and Joseph de Sousa de Castelbrancha, all three Counselors of the Inquests.

The King sent this Conclusion to the Infant by the same Counselors of State,
with order to tell him, That to conform himself thereunto, he ought not to
banish the Count from his person.

At the same time he made the Gentlemen about the Infant be sent for, with all
the Nobles, and Chiefs of the Religious Orders, to whom he said, that the
Ministers of State, and the highest of them, had given him Council not to
remove the Count, as the Infant demanded of him, and that this affair was not
the Counts, but his own; and in order to this which had been determined in
Council, he expressly forbid some Gentlemen's going to the Palace of the Infant
without his leave; and to others in covert words, fearing left they should say
he would not permit the Noblemen to frequent his House. By which he left them
in doubt what to do; if they went to the Infante's Palace, he had wherewitnall
to accuse them, if they went not, he would deny he had forbid them. Some of
them desired of the King to know the cause of this prohibition, but he not
having been instructed for such a question, made no direct answer, only saying
he would have them near his person. The Gentlemen of the Infant, and some
others who were present, answered, they knew very well, that the business in
which they acted, was truly the affair of his Majesty, in being that of the
Infante's, and that the zeal which they both had for the public, made no
difference in their interests; but the King said, that was not the reason which
made that affair to be his own.

Upon these differences the King had sent for the Judge and Recorder of the
People, and although they had already wrote in favor of the Favorite, he again
commanded them to use their interests, with menaces in case they contradicted
his Order. After which he sent Couriers into all the Provinces, advertising the
Governors, that the business of the Infant was not so much for his advantage
as they might perhaps publish in their Quarters: To the Navies, an Order to
withdraw from Lisbon, and wrote to the Count St. John, that neither he nor any
other whatsoever should go out of his Province without order. This persuaded
the Infant, that the design was laid to make war upon him both by Land and
Sea; so that having known by all these signs there was no more hopes for him of
Justice against the Count: He presented a new Request to the King, supplicating
him, that he would once more give order to examine this Affair, which was
expressed in these Terms.

It has pleased your Majesty to let me know by the Counselors of State, the
Marquess de Marialva, the Marquess de Sand, and Ruy de Moura Tells; that you
have resolved never to consent to the removal of the Count de Castelmelhor,
which I demanded to facilitate the justification of my Complaint; and this
Resolution is grounded upon the advice of Noble persons, whom it has pleased
your Majesty to consult. Your Majesty desires, that I determine and make my
Answer presently, because the State may not continue in the trouble it is.
Although I ought to conform my self to whatever it has pleased your Majesty to
resolve upon (as I have not been wanting to do in all my actions), there
remains nevertheless Liberty to demand of your Majesty, that it will please you
to examine my request a second time for good and all, since this has been done
in affairs of less importance, there is more reason it should be permitted in
this, the consequence of which is the loss of an Infant, only Brother to your
Majesty, and your Majesty's most faithful Servant.

I infer Sir, from this Resolution, that the Count will not clear himself but
with Arms in his hand, and without depriving himself of that Authority which
your Majesty has given him leave to take, appearing to day with greater luster
than ever he had done before, designing by it to cast a terror on the spirits
of the people, and to decide by violence a civil affair; for he caused an
assembly to be where they might collect their opinions by the noise of Drums,
and so little attention, that some did not so much as understand the
Proposition that was made to them, as it is easy to be remarked in the
declarations that they made. Those also who gave their opinion in favor of the
Count, did it on foundations contrary to the end and motive of my Request,
because I did not demand that the Count should either retreat or be exiled
without security; but only a suspension from his great power, to the end, that
if during that time he be found guilty, he might lose both his Honor and Life;
and on the contrary, if he justifies himself, he may conserve both the one and
the other, with all his Charges. This proceeding, Sir, lets us see with what
precipitancy they have acted, who examined the grounds of this affair; there
having been more of solidity in the opinions of Martin Alfonsas de Mello, John
de Roxas d'Asevedo, and Pedro Ferdinand Monteiro; these last named having seen
by the experience of twenty-seven years, a great many Crimes which they have
examined of high Treason, being thereby very intelligent in that matter. Does
not Francisco de Lucena furnish us with an example, against whom the complaint
only of some particular Gentlemen was found sufficient to put him into Prison;
and yet they will not allow mine to be sufficient to gain an Order for the
Count to retire for some days, although he should leave for his defense his
Kindred, his Friends, his Creatures, and your Majesty himself. He thinking it
better to suffer this blot upon his Honor and Reputation, than to expose
himself to the danger of the Issue, and engage you to declare that the cause
was your own, than to stand to the trial of the truth. By this resolution your
Majesty has let us see the Interests of the Count are inseparable to the
Crown, to the prejudice of the only Infant, and the only Successor your
Majesty has at this day, or that you shall have until those shall be born
which I expect shall break that order. As if the Interests of an Infant should
be different from those of the Crown, when he meddles with those of a
Favorite, whose boldness is gone so far, as to persuade your Majesty to order
all those Gentlemen whom I use to see at my Palace, to come there no more,
because there runs a report, that I have made my complaint to the people. But
this pretense which he has taken, the better to hide his pernicious
intentions, is taken away, and ceases by the obedience of these Gentlemen. He
would have it believed, that your Majesty cannot be a King, if he should be at
any time removed from about your Majesty, although it were but for some days;
believing this the best way to lessen my Glory, and that of all the Nobles of
the Realm; Arming against me, as he at present does, Horse and Foot, does it
not justify my former complaint? And although your Majesty believes, that what
has passed was for another cause, the event will let you know, that it was
only a pretense by which he abuses your Majesty. For in fine, it must needs be,
that I am the object of all this Tumult, or they have not distinguished me from
those against whom they Arm. If it be the first, is there any thing more
offensive? If the other, it must be, that they have not counted me in the
number of those whom they meant to defend; else wherefore did they not
advertise me to think of my security? wherefore did they send none to defend my
Palace? wherefore never did they impart to me the cause for which they took up
Arms? And lastly, why this precaution of redoubling the Guards? It is against
the Infant, Sir, it is against the Infant that the Count de Castelmelhor
takes Arms in the eyes of all the Nobles, and of all the people of the Realm;
raising trouble in the State, and terror in every spirit, so that none may have
liberty to do any thing against him. But however it is not Arms that can dismay
the Infant Don Pedro; for if they should have the power to affright him, he
would tear open his Veins to let out that Blood which was not answering to his
Birth, and the Example of the Kings his Predecessors. I say this, Sir, for fear
that any should believe, if I should retire, I go to look for succor. The
Count has put this business in such terms, that both of us cannot be safe; and
it must be, that I perish, or he be removed. That which gives me a most mortal
grief is, I too plainly see your Majesty would rather consent to the loss of me
than the withdrawing of the Count; sacrificing to his Violence, my Life, my
Officers, and all those that take my part; enforcing me by this pressing
necessity (which I have forseen without being able to shun) to go seek for a
Retreat, seeing well that this is the only means to restore tranquillity to the
public; for which I would sacrifice all my Interests, and my own Life if need
be; this way the State will be delivered from the noise of War, and the Count
enjoy in repose, without apprehending the disturbance of that felicity which
makes him so insolent.

The Infant had no sooner sent this Letter to the King, but he began to think
he should execute the design of his Retreat, and being desirous to serve the
State and the Realm in giving proof of his Courage, even when he was
constrained to abandon it wholly, he disposed himself to depart for the
Province of Tras os montes, which he judged most proper to his design; because
the Count de St. John, first Gentleman of his Chamber was Governor there, and
his two brothers Michael Carlo de Tavora, and Francisco de Tavora, were the one
of them General of the Artillery, and the other Sergeant Major of the Field.
But fearing equally least the violence of the King, and the zeal of the People
should bring any obstacle to his Voyage, he resolved to go away secretly.

The King let pass two days without making any answer to the Infant, and then
sent him this.

My most honored and most beloved Brother, I the King send to salute you, as
him whom I very much love and esteem; I have seen the Letter which which you
have wrought to me the 9th of this Month, which lets me know, that I am obliged
to you for confirming your sentiments to mine; this informs me, that you are
not ignorant that all the Resolutions I take are advantageous, both for me and
you. I love you as my son: and if I should have no other reason, that were
enough to oblige me to a thousand good wishes for you; as to the particular
business concerning which you wrote, I have already sent to let you know, that
I was ready to do you Justice, so soon as I shall be instructed which way to do
it; as to your design of retiring, I would have you change it, and come to me;
I shall always have my Arms open to receive you with that love which I ought to
have for a Brother, upon whom I look as upon my Friend, my Son, and my
Successor in the Realm, so long as it shall please God to give me no other; in
which case I shall take much Consolation if God permit you to succeed to my
Crown, and that whenever it shall please his Divine Majesty. This Letter as
full of dissimulation as of tenderness increased the Infante's distrust, and
the more, because it was not the Kings manner to act thus with him, and obliged
him to make this Answer:

Not having the power to obtain of your Majesty, that they should examine my
complaint anew, and that upon better informations than the former; although it
be of such consequence, that it is not unknown to your Majesty, or to any in
the Realm; I conclude from that Resolution of your Majesty, that you would bury
in forgetfulness the demand which I have made to you; taking from me, by this
means, the liberty of ever parting from it. Therefore I render my most humble
thanks to your Majesty, for the Goodness which you have expressed toward me in
the last Letter which you were pleased to write me. If I do not go in person to
do it, I have for it an excuse so lawful, that I hope your Majesty does judge it
so, since your Majesty has given such Authority in your Palace to a man who is
not only accused to have endeavored the taking away my Life, but who has made
himself guilty in opposing the clearing himself from that accusation. After
this, can there be any security for me, although I am the only Infant, and
your Majesty's Brother? But I conjure your Majesty, to give credit to the
sincerity of my heart, when I assure you, that in whatever place I go, I shall
always respect your Majesty as my Father, and serve you as my King and Lord.
God conserve your Royal Person, and give to you long and happy years. Many of
the Ministers, among whom some were Friends to the Favorite, resolved to try
all their force to keep the Infant. The Queen desiring the same thing, sent to
know of him by her Confessor, Father Francis de Ville, if he desired she should
be a Mediatrix between the King and him; and if he thought good to defer his
departure, whilst they should labor for some accommodation. The Infant
accepted her offer, and sent to thank her for the Favor she had done him;
saying, he would not depart, since she had ordered it so. After this answer of
the Infant, which was but by word of mouth, the Queen sent a Billet by Pedro
Fernandes Monteiro, which was:

That she was very much obliged to him for accepting her Mediation, and
deferring his Voyage. In case the King yielded the Count should go away from
the Court, after what manner his Higeness would have it done, what place of
retreat, and what security should be given to him. And as the Infant said,
that after the retreat of the Count, he would remit his interests into their
hands, she desired that he would better explain himself upon that point. To
which the Infant answered:

That he hoped by the respect was due to Royal Authority, she would obtain what
he had so often aimed at that he asked to come only to that point she was
arrived at. That his Majesty might choose a place for retreat of the Count where
he pleased, provided it were at a distance, as it ought to be on such
occasions; and that he was wholly ready to execute all that which her Majesty
should ordain, in respect of assuring to them the person of the Count,
submitting himself also so soon as he shall be gone from the Court, to all that
it shall please her Majesty. As the Queen desired to accommodate this business,
she had no sooner received the Answer of the Infant, but she wrote to him.

That the Resolution of his conforming himself to h^^ sentiments, was very
agreeable to her; that she demanded of him an assurance signed by him for the
person, and for the honor of the Count, so soon as he shall be removed from
Court; and that he would never more speak of his complaint. They promising him
on their side, that the Count should go away as soon as they should have this
assurance; for he desired nothing more than his Favor. And besides, that he
might quit the Court with the less embroilemen the would of himself lay down
the charge of Escrivaon de Puridade. To this Billet, which they judged to be
dictated by the Favorite, the Infant made this Answer:

That prostrate at the feet of her Majesty, he rendered her a Thousand most
humble Thanks for the Honor and the Favor which she had done him, in
employing her Royal Authority for the accommodating that affair; that he had
sent her the Assurance in the form it had pleased her Majesty to ordain him:
That in respect to what her Majesty had declared to him in her last Billet, he
hoped she would act after that manner she should judge most fit for the service
of the King her Lord, the conservation of the State, and the repose of his
Subjects. This Billet was accompanied with that of the Assurance, which was
addressed to the Queen in these terms:

So soon as your Majesty was pleased to take notice of this affair, you engaged
me straightly to execute all that you should be pleased to prescribe; and to
satisfy you of that which your Majesty demands of me, as to the Assurance for
the Person and the Honor of the Count, I do engage my Faith to your Majesty
that I will enterprise nothing neither against the one or the other. And to the
end the Count may know what the Mediation of your Majesty is able to do, I am
willing to bury my Complaint in perpetual silence, as if it had never been
thought on. God preserve your Majesty, and grant you many happy years. In the
mean time the Favorite made an attempr to carry the King into Alemtejo, where
the Army was; this proposition pleased him at first, but when it came to the
execution, he found the King changed, he not being able to resolve to his
divertisements, which tied him to Lisbon.

It was very late at night when the Infant sent to the Queen the Billet with
the Assurance for the Count, which he no sooner had received, but he retired,
accompanied with the Cavalry, into a Religious Covent in the Province of
Arabida, seven Leagues from Lisbon. After this Retreat it seemed that all
things would be at peace; but it it did not happen so, because the Favorite
did still govern the King; which appeared chiefly in that the King did not
receive the Infant as he had hoped he would, and as he had made him believe,
for he did not so much as answer one word to all his civilities, nor to all his
acknowledgments. It was agreed, they should not speak of that which was passed,
the King did something more, he would not so much as speak of any other thing.

The Infant having demanded of him permission to render his Duty to the Queen,
he was contented only to make him a sign with his Head.

As the Infant proposed to himself the going often to the Palace, endeavoring
to get by his assiduity the favor of the King. Those whose interest it was he
should not come there at all, broke his measures; so that the Queen (knowing
the aversion which the King had for the Infant) sent him word, that he should
not present himself before the King, fearing lest there should happen any broil
between them.

After this the Infant was easily persuaded, that they had framed some dedly
design against him, especially when he saw that the Soldiers which they had
made to come to the Palace, were not sent away, and that they had posted some
Companies of Foot near his Palace. The Company of the Patrovils belonging to
the King also saying, that one morning they should see the Heads of those cut
off, whom they should arrest over night; made him judge they intended to do so
to those who were of his Party, and tied to his Interests.

There ran also at that time a report, that there had happened a very unlucky
Accident to Henry Anriquez de Miranda, of which he was very ill. Some said he
himself had caused this report to be spread; however whether this sickness was
true or feigned, for some days the King went every night to consult with him of
all things, as with him that had taken the place of the Count; this made them
believe it was he who did ill offices betwixt the King and the Infant, making
the King so bitter against him; and being told, some persons were so
transported with choler against him, that they were gone to search for him,
intending his death. The King would have had him come to the Palace, but he
thought it better to retire himself and quit the Court, leaving the King in the
hands of Antonio de Sousa de Macedo, and of Emanuel Autunes.

These two Favorites finding it fit for their purpose to cause the Infant to
come to the Palace, made their intentions known to all the Court, without
letting the King be seen in it. To this end they sent to tell him, as from the
Queen, by the Count de St. Croix, Grand Master of her House, that the Council
was to assemble at such a day, and the Queen would be very glad if he would be
there. But as he thought upon the Advice which the Queen had given him, this
Order which was brought to him in her behalf by the Count, was suspected; he
therefore thought best to write to the Queen a Billet, which was carried by the
same Count de St. Croix; of which this was the substance:

That on the 22th of the same Month of September she had sent to him by the
Count de St. Croix, an Order to abstain from coming to the Palace, to the end
that there might not arrive anything to displease the King, which might cause
an unhappy difference betwixt the King and him. That this Order which was not
brought to him but with the Kings consent, had most sensibly touched him,
seeing that presently after he had granted him the honor to come and cast
himself at his feet, he had forbid him to present himself before his Majesty,
which was to him a most rigorous punishment, not having committed any fault
that should merit it, except the incertitude wherein he was, not knowing after
what manner he should act to please the King, might be called one. That things
being in these terms, he did supplicate her, that she would please, whilst
there was yet time to examine the danger to which he exposed himself, if he
should not give satisfaction to the King, since that the last Order which she
had sent him did not disengage him from the former, which was general, and of
which the cause was not yet ceased; at least that he had no intention to treat
him as a Councellor of State, which he could not comprehend, since that a
Councellor of State could not give Council to a King, he having an aversion for
him that gives it. That he hoped she would seriously consider the two Orders of
their Majesty's, and that she would not blame his irresolution, which arose
from the profound respect he had for them; and that in the end she would know
it was necessary the King should give him liberty of going to the Palace, to
the end he might be always near their Majesty's, which was the only thing that
he desired, to be ever in a condition of serving them, as his Duty engaged him.

Whilst they waited for the Infante's answer, they sent to him several times
some of the Pages of the Chamber, to let him know that he should come to the
Council; but as they came not from the King, nor with the ordinary Formalities,
he would not go. The Favorites seeing this Artifice was unprofitable to them,
they made use of another; they made the King write a Letter to the Infant,
which they sent him by Antony de Mendosa Archbishop of Lisbon; containing these
words:

Most honored Infant, my most beloved and most esteemed Brother; I the King
wish you health, etc. I have judged it convenient to order you by this Letter
to come to speak with me this day; and I shall be glad that it be presently,
because I would testify to you publicly (as being a thing that is but just
that all the world should know) that I have your person in that esteem which I
ought, as your King, your Brother, and your Father, whose place I hold. Also
you may act near me, after the manner that you have demanded by the
intercession of the Queen, whom I honor above all Queens, as my most beloved
and most esteemed Wife. The Infant having reflected on this Letter, doubted
yet whether he should go to the Palace, although the King had so ordered him;
but having conder'd, that after he had declared he did not go to the Council
because he was forbid, if he should not now go at this time when he was
recalled with honor, they would say it was his mind to be separated from the
King. To hinder this, he went thither, but was received with the same coldness
as formerly.

But even in the middle of the Tempest that was raised against the Infant,
there was stirred up another more furious against the Queen. Antoniy de Sousa
de Macedo, Secretary of State, solicited his re-establishment, demanding at
least that he might be permitted to appear in the Palace, where all the world
knew he was hid. The King having already made for that some instances, the
Queen let him know that it stood not with her Honor he should return so soon;
upon this they would not at this time press the matter any further.

Sometime after he spoke again of it to the Queen, which made her to answer
him, that he might by his absolute power cause him to return, but it should
never be by her consent; so that they were obliged to approve of the Repeal of
the Secretary by the same Council of State who had ordered his Exile. This was
no sooner done, but they sent this Conclusion to the Queen, which seemed to
have been dictated by the Secretary, the discourse being the same with that of
the contestation he had with her. And as all that which happened afterward in
the State, drew its original from the Complaint of the Queen, it is very
convenient to render public the Conclusion; which was in these terms:

The contestation that the Secretary Antony de Sousa de Macedo has had with
the Queen our Sovereign; having been proposed to the undersubscribing
Ministers, conforming to that which he has represented, and the Princess
remonstiated to us, in that he did forget the Respect he owed to her, it has
seemed to us (although the Secretary has justified himself that he had no ill
intention to the Queen our Sovereign, and that his intention was but to
persuade her Majesty, that the Portugal Nation had no other intention than to
honor her Majesty, and not to treat her as she had complained) that the King
our Lord, ought to order the Secretary of State to retire himself from Court
for ten or twelve days, and that during that time Antonio de Cavide exercise
his charge, and remonstrate to the Queen our Sovereign that he does this only
to content her, on condition however that she henceforward never engage her
self in the like contestations, because of the evil sequels which may happen
thereupon in the State, as affairs stand; and that this advice may serve as
well for the present as for the time to come. At Lisbon, Aug. 31. 1667.

This Decree was no sooner seen by the Queen, but for answer she sent this
Letter to the King, who was at the Council, by Emanuel de Sousa de Silva,
Superintendant of her House.

I have not been able to represent to your Majesty and the Council of State,
the just subject of my resentment, no more than the strange motive of my
complaint, because that even to this present they have maliciously concealed
from me the Conclusion that had been made upon this subject; but having in the
end seen it, that which it contains has cast me into an extraordinary
astonishment; had I had sooner notice of it, I had at first represented to your
Majesty the injury my Honor has thereby received in remonstrating the justice
of my Complaint. But as soon as I knew what the Council has determined,
notwithstanding all the assurance that I may have as Queen, I complain to your
Majesty with all the humility of a Subject; demanding of you that Justice which
might be expected by any particular person, against the temerity which Anthony
de Sousa de Macedo has calumniated me with, in assuring most maliciously the
Counselors of State, that in the Contestation which he had with me, I should
speak against the whole. Nation of the Portugues; although he knows very well,
as I do also declare unto your Majesty, who ought to believe the Faith and Word
of a Queen, that I did never speak to him but most obligeingly of the
Sentiments and Interests of the Nation: and that it was only against the
proceeding of Anthony de Sousa and two or three of his Friends, who had treated
me unworthily, that I showed any resentment: For, in fine, can any one behold a
thing more astonishing, than the boldness of this man, who dares upon a
supposition that has not the least likelihood of Truth; and upon a gross lie,
filled with Calumny, solicit and obtain secretly a conclusion of the Council of
State so injurious to a Queen; since it is manifest that my Heart has not been
touched with any thing more, than with the marks of Love, Respect, and
Compassion, which on all occasions have been paid to me by all the Portugals,
whom I esteem and love as my Children; and that it is only the malice and
cruelty of two or three who oblige me by their Insolences to treat them as my
Capital Enemies. After all this, my Lord, after I have declared, and protested,
as I do again, that I shall never for the time to come, be able to see a man
who has by artifice, and under color of a false report, obtained against me a
determination so odious, and from which they have framed an Act so scandalous,
full of reprehensions and menaces, humbly prostrate at the feet of your
Majesty, I do demand of you reparation and satisfaction upon my Complaint, and
that you will be pleased to ordain Anthony de Sousa de Macedo adjudg'd and
punished according to the Rigor of the Laws established against those guilty
of High Treason; and that above all things, that he declare, that what he has
remonstrated to the Council, is false, and demand pardon; since he has therein
offended God, your Majesty, and Me, and the Counselors, whom he has also
deceived, as well as Justice, which he has abused with diverse lies, and
malicious suppositions; and that there may be an Act made of this beginning of
Satisfaction, and that it be inserted in the place of that detestable
Conclusion in the Registry of the Council of State. My Lord,
May it please your Majesty to order that this Crime and my Complaint may be
examined, since that there ought to be satisfaction given to an offended Queen
to repair her Honor, which is inseparable with that of your Majesty's, as well
as of your Sovereign Authority. I demand Justice, my Lord, against this Decree;
which were unjust, had it been given against the least of your Subjects without
being heard; and therefore with more reason, being given against a Queen
oppressed with the Artifices, the Violence, and the great Credit of her
Enemies.

The King put this Letter into his Pocket without reading it, and very
unbecoming his State, publicly solicited the Secretaries Return, which the
Queen not being able to consent to, shut her self up in her Apartment, without
seeing any one but the King, who gave her nothing but cross and unbecoming
words. In the mean time the Secretary appears in the Palace with all his
Accou^rements, and there went a Report that the King was resolved to leave the
City, and to carry with him all the Cavalry, with an order to all the Gentlemen
who were about the Infant, to follow him: to which they added, that in case
they did not obey that Order, he would come back into the City to cut off the
Heads of some of whom he had a List.

Upon this, the same thought, which formerly the Queen had to chase away
Anthony de Conti, came into the mind of the Infant, to demand from the King,
that he should oblige the Secretary to retire from about his Person; so that on
the 5th. of October 1667 the Infant went to the Palace, followed by the most
part of the Nobility, and by a grand concourse of the People.

The King was yet in his Chamber, which obliged the Infant to attend with some
Counselors of State, with whom being entered, he spoke to the King with very
much vehemence; nevertheless without losing the Respect which he owed him; but
the King falling into a rage, cried out in a fury that they should give him his
Sword; the Infant had no sooner heard that, but he drew his half way out of
his Belt, and presenting the Guard to him said, my Lord, if it is against me
that your Majesty asks for a Sword, dispose of mine; if it be against any
other, suffer me to defend your Majesty. But the King would not take it, only
continued his cries.

The Queen, who knew nothing of this enterprise, ran to the Chamber of the King
trying to appease him, by reasons and prayers; but she was not able to gain any
thing upon him, being persuaded they had killed the Secretary, (although they
did assure him he was not slain) saying he would not believe it unless he saw
him, which obliged the Duke de Cadaval to go fetch him from the Chamber where
he had shut himself up, that he himself might satisfy the King that they had
done him no violence; but however they had much a-do to keep him safe, for
bringing him to the Kings Chamber through the crowd of people, they had killed
him, if the Duke turning himself about to those who had that design, had not
said to them with an angry countenance and imperious tone, that he was his
Conductor.

The presence of the Secretary having a little appeased the King, the Queen
retired, and also the Infant. Upon this there was heard a Voice that cried
oftentimes, that all would be well. The same Voice having called on the Queen
and the Infant, the King went out of his Antichamber with them, having the
Secretary by his side, going to a window which looks into the grand Place of
the Palace, where the people seeing him, cried out oftentimes, God save the
King. After this the King withdrew through the people, who had filled the
Antichambers, those who went before him saying, he pardoned all the people,
which offended them so much (thinking that they had committed no fault) that
John Mascarenhas Count of Sabugal was fain to tell the King, that they would
not have a Pardon but Thanks. The King who did not well hear those last words,
repented he granted them Pardon; but having at last comprehended that the Count
refused it, and that he asked of him only his Thanks, he replied, he granted
both the one and the other. But that which most of all astonished the people
was, to see him in the midst of this trouble and importment fall to playing
upon a Flagelet, it very ill becoming so grave a person to do so. This boyish
divertisement and his crying out were remarked as an unbecoming thing in the
mind of a King, and imputed to the default of his Organs.

This success, so different from what they had imagined, made them conceive
such an indignation against the King, that they said aloud, they ought to take
from him the Crown, and give it to the Infant: insomuch that one pronounced
these words, Either take it your self, or we will take it for you; but the
Infant growing angry, made him hold his tongue with his look. As it was the
design of the Infant to make the Secretary leave the Palace, he resolved to
lie there that night to finish the Work he had begun; but the Secretary fearing
it would be fatal for him, sent to tell the Infant, that if he did not leave
the Palace that very moment, it was because he could not do it in security, and
that he would not fail to depart as soon as it was night; for which Laurence de
Sousa de Meneses, Count de Santiago and Don Pedro D'Almeida Admiral of the
Realm, became Sureties. Emanuel Autunes sent at that time to demand the same
Grace, which was likewise granted him, although he had merited a more severe
Chastisement. This man, who had been the Son of a Sexton to the Church of
Miserecorde de Vilaviciosa, had passed from the Charge of the Repostery to that
of Groom of the Chamber; besides that, the King had granted him the Order of
St. Jaques, and several other Favors; it was he that made the secret dispense,
but the (...), and the profusion of it, had rendered this private expense too
public. The near access that he had with the King, came from the service that
he rendered him in his secret pleasures, his boldness was such, that at all
times he intermedled with the Affairs of the Infant and the King. Upon these
assurances the Infant withdrew to his own Palace, followed by the greatest
part of the Nobility, and an innumerable concourse of People.

The King the next day seeing neither the Secretary nor Emanuel Autunes, judged
well that they were gone away; upon which he demanded to have them chastised,
for going away without his consent; sending an Order to all the Superiors of
the Covents in the City, to let him know, if they were retired into any of
them, and making all the places near to be searched by Gonsalo de Costa de
Menose, and Joseph de Sousa Cid, but they could be no where found. But at last,
having heard that Emanuel Autunes was gone into Alemtejo, he sent Diego Lewis
Ribeira Soars with an Order to Dennis de Mello de Castro, Master of the Camp,
General of that Province, that he should find him out, and having found him, to
remit him into his hands. So soon as Soars was returned, the King briskly
ordered him back again to search again, saying he was resolved to put off the
Feast of the Bulls until he returned; so that those Animals staid many days,
and the Barridos stood many Months in the great Place of the Palace, not
without considerable loss: the Soldiers that Emcamp'd there either burning or
breaking them as they had need of them, or as their fancy took them.

The King was not only in a rage against the Secretary and Emanuel Autunes for
going away, but also against all those who contributed to their retreat, and
particularly against the Infant; upon which, having advice, he abstained from
going to the Palace. In the mean time the Infant, and the most zealous for the
public good, seeing the King's Exchequer emptied by so many profusions, and
excessive expenses; and that the raising of Contributions were very difficult,
and that through all this expedition of the Wat was hindered, they were afraid
the return of these Favorites, which the King so obstinately desired, would
expose the Realm a Prey to their Enemies. To avoid this therefore, they
resolved to call together the three Estates of the Realm. The Winter-season
being best for this purpose, because of the ceasing of the War, they judged it
not amiss forthwith to cause the Councels of the Cities to act it. That of
Lisbon, as it was the most considerable of all others, presented to the King
the first Remonstrance; in which, after they had most amply shown their Reasons
for assembling the States, they demanded of him their Convocation. As the Name
of the States gave an offense to the King, he took this Remonstrance without
communicating it to the Council, publishing that he would not have them called
together; for he knew very well wherefore they would have them called, for all
along they had persuaded him that the Assembly of the People was some lessening
the Authority of Kings: and if the three Estates should join with his Brother
against him, how could he be able to help himself? And if they should
enterprise any thing against his person, how could he avoid it? Foreseeing
this, he would give no answer to the Common Council of the City, however
pressing they were; and for the most part he would not so much as hear them.
And if he had appointed them a time to come to receive his resolution, he would
very unhandsomly hold his peace. Sometimes he would have the States called, and
sometimes he would not; so that the Common Council of the City of Lisbon
dispairing to obtain any answer from the King, wrote to all the others, and to
all the Chapters of the Realm, to give them an account of that which had
passed; and represented to them, that it was very convenient for the public
good, to demand from the King the Convocation of the States: But they could do
no more with him than they, and the more pressing they were in persuading, the
more inflexible he became.

The Council of State being assembled, the King, Queen, and Infant being
there, it was unanimously agreed, that without assembling the States General,
the disorders of the Kingdom could not be remedied. But the King took this for
a Conspiracy against him, and would not yield to a Remedy that should give him
so much fear; and gave ill words and injurious speeches to those who would have
given him that Council, which diminished very much of his Authority.

The Marquess of Sand presented a Memorial to the Council of State, in which
he did remonstrate to the King, that he ought to treat with more love and
respect than he had hitherto done so illustrious a Princess as his Queen was;
and the Infant with that civility and regard, which the Quality of an only
Brother to a King required. That he should suffer them to be near him, who
might jointly govern the State with him, and not as he had hitherto done, put
it into the hands of a Favorite. That it would be more glorious for him and
all the Portugals, that he govern with the help of Royal Persons, who had as
well as his Majesty all qualities necessary for it, than to suffer a Subject to
do it, who had not only raised himself above all other Subjects, but who would
yet raise himself above him. That by consequence there was an indispensable
necessity the Estates of the Realm be Convocated, since they were obliged to
give some remedy, how violent soever it might be, being he would not give them
any other.

The Counselors of State approved this Remonstrance, and having signed it to
authorize it, they carried it to the King; but he instead of taking notice of
their good will, condemned it as criminal, and conceived a mortal hate against
the Author. But the Ministers of the State sacrificing all their resentments to
their Countries good, they had so much patience that they brought it about
notwithstanding the wilfulness of the King, who consented at last to assemble
the States, on condition it should not be till his return from Salvaterre,
whither he was resolved to go according to custom, on the 19th of January the
year following, and to return on the 14th of February. Without this they had
lost the opportunity of remedying an evil that would admit of no delay. At the
same time it was reported the King designed to leave the City with his Braves
of his Pratroville, and to join himself with his Favorites and their
Partisans. This was confirmed by the advice they had, that he had distributed
Horses to his Querries, and stopped many Barques which were in the Harbor
before the great place of the Palace, and at a place called Grilo; which gave a
suspicion that he had a design to pass into the Province of Alemteijo. But all
these projects vanished, either through the care of the Infant, or by the
negligence of the King.

As they had been forced to come to a kind of Battle with the King, to make him
consent to the Convocation of the States, so it was not without much trouble
the Ministers had obtained from him it should begin on the first of January
1668. But then when the Commissioners were expedited for the Council of the
City, he would not sign them, although he had solemnly promised it.

In the mean time the Queen seeing they took no consideration of her
Complaints, took a generous resolution not to suffer any longer such contempt.
So long as they did not lose the respect they owed to her person, she knew how
to dissemble; but so soon as she was persuaded the King did not love her as his
Spouse, nor consider her as a Queen, and by his Example the Pavourites despised
her; she then had so much resentment, that she resolved to let all the world
know that which hitherto she had hid with prudence and moderation.

The Queen used oftentimes to visit the Nunneries in the City, and particularly
that of Esperance of the Order of St. Francis, in which were many Ladies of
great Quality. The 21th of November 1667, she left the Palace with her ordinary
Train to go to this Covent. So soon as she was entered there the first thing she
did, was to write this following Billet to the King, which was carried to him
by the Count of S. Croix.

I have left my Country, my House, and my Parents, selling all my Goods, that I
might be your Majesty's Companion; not without a great desire of contributing
as much as I was able to your satisfaction. But whatever my endeavors have
been, I have not been able to compass it, which has given me a mortal
displeasure. I will not therefore hide from you, that I have resolved (pressed
by my Conscience) to return to France, in those Vessel^ of War which are here.
I desire o^ your Majesty, that you will do m^ the favor to grant me permission
to execute this design, and to ordain that my portion be returned, since your
Majesty knows very well I am no^ your Wife. I hope from the Greatness of your
Majesty, that you will no only not refuse me any of these Favors, but that you
will add yet a^ those which a Princess and a Strange^ may merit, one that is
abandoned by all in this Realm, and one who has com^ so far to find your
Majesty.

So soon as the Queen had sent thi^ Billet to the King, she sent for the Lad^
of her Attire, and her Maids of Honor, and those Ladies that accompanied her,
to tell them her resolution o^ staying in that Covent; she declared to them,
that since she was not married to the King, she was not Queen of Portugal, and
that they might retire themselves to their own Houses; and sinc^ Fortune did
separate them, she would all her life time remember the obligation she had to
them, and the passion they had testified for her, in being Companions of her
misfortune. This resolution extremely surpised these Ladies, and they could by
no means be made to leave her, staying there all that night, and a good part of
the next day. At last there stayed none in the Covent to wait on her but Dona
Antonia de Silva, her Lady of Honor, and Dona Antonia Mauricia de Silva, and
Dona Isabella Francisca de Silva, her Maids of Honor. The Ladies however
visited her in the Covent, with the same exactness and assiduity as they had
done when she was at the Palace.

The King had no sooner heard the Billet read which was sent by the Queen, but
he descended from the Palace, and mounting briskly into his Coach, caused them
to carry him immediately to the Covent, accompanied with all those who were to
go with him on hunting, for he was going to the Chase when he received this
Letter from the Queen. He made them knock at the Gate with fury, when the
Infant came thither with some Gentlemen to hinder any disorder. The Queen was
mightily surpised at the innumerable crowd of all sorts of people who were got
together; and when she heard that he called for Harchets to break open the
Gates, she fell into a swound. And the King had without doubt broke them open,
if the Infant, with some Counselors of State and some Gentlemen, had not
diverted Him.

The King was so little concerned at all this, that he forgot it when it was
night; for in the morning when he arose, he asked as if there had not happened
any thing extraordinary, whether they had given Provendor to the Bulls, which
he always kept in the grand place of the Palace for sport. The Queen the next
day after her retreat, sent to desire the Infant to come to her, which he did
with the Kings permission. Having her self told him her resolution, he answered
her with all the tenderness that her Quality and the deplorable Condition which
she was reduced to, required: After finding the King, he saw he was extremely
angered at the motion of her retreat, and he would maintain with much passion,
and in very dishonest terms, that he was more a man than they thought for.

The Queen having at the same time caused the Counselors of State, and the
most considerable Officers of the Crown to be called, she declared to them the
cause of her retreat into that Covent, and the resolution she had taken to
return into France, after that she had made her Marriage to be declared null by
the care of the Duke de Cadaval her Procurator; then she wrote to the Chapter of
the Cathedral Church in Lisbon this, which follows.

I am removed from the Company of King, whom God preserve, because that the
Marriage which we have contracted together has not had any effect. I have
dissembled hitherto the scruples which have troubled my Conscience, because of
the kindness I have for the State, which is most worthy of it. But I cannot
longer support it. I hope that the King, as an irreproachable testimony of that
which I have affirmed, will confirm it, to the end that I may be able to retire
into France with freedom: and I pray the Cahpter, to whom it belongs to judge of
this matter, that they will do it with all the diligence possible, and to
favor in all that shall be just, a stranger sensibly touched with the
unhappiness of not being able to stay in a Country which she had come so far
to seek with an extraordinary contentment; for which the Chapter may assure it
self with all imaginable confidence, that in whatever prrt I shall go, I shall
show my Acknowledgments.

Maria Frances Isabella of Savoy.


This Letter having been read in the Assembly of the Chapter, they made to it
this Answer.

Your Majesty's Letter of the 22th of this month has been read in this Chapter
with very much grief, because by it we understand the resolution that your
Majesty has taken of retiring your self into a Nunnery, and from thence to
return into France, abandoning Portugal where your Majesty is so much loved and
revered: and that your Majosty has demanded from us an Ecclesiastic Judgment
for the dissolving the Marriage contracted between our Lord the King and your
Majesty. Madam, the ordinary proceedings of Justice which are granted to
private persons may not be refused to your Majesty, when things are come to a
certain point. Nevertheless there are so many circumstances in this business
worthy of examination, that we demand permission of your Majesty before we
enter upon this examination, to recommend it, and to cause it to be recommended
to God, that he may be pleased to guide us according to those pious intentions
which shall be for the universal good of the State, and for the conservation of
your Majesty, whom we pray the same God to keep, and to whom we all wish long
and happy Years.

The Queen sent into France to give notice of the estate of Affairs by Monsicur
Verjus Envoy in the Court of Portugal on the part of the Princes of the House
of Vendosme, a Gentleman very much esteemed for his Worth, and for his rare
Accomplishments. So soon as this Process was begun to be framed, and the King's
inability became to be publicly talked on, and of which no body doubted, the
people began to wish that the Infant might Espouse the Queen. And this desire
was grounded upon very many Reasons, but chiefly on the Virtue and the prudent
Conduct of this Princess, which had gained her the Esteem of all the People.
And moreover this Marriage was not without example, since that in Poland, John
Casimir had succeeded to the Crown, and to the Wife of Sigismond Casimir his
Brother, Lewisa Marie de Gonzague.
and the City of Lisbon heretofore desired that the Queen Dona Eleanor Widow
of the King Don Emanuel should be Married to King Joh. the 13th his Son: so
that after the dissolution of the Marriage of the King and Queen, there might
be a Marriage between the Infant and the same Queen.

Monsieur Verjus having made known the Estate of this Affair to Monsieur the
Cardinal of Vendosm ^ogat in France for Clement the 9th; he obtained a
Dispensation for the Prince Don Pedro and the Queen, in case the first Marriage
was adjudged null.

Although the King had knowledge of all these Negotiations, they were not able
to make him consider with himself: But on the contrary, he acted, and spoke
with so much indiscretion, that there was no body who did not believe they
ought to employ these last remedies against his ill Conduct.

This so urgent a necessity obliged the Counselors of Estate, the Nobility and
People of Lisbon to conjure the Infant that he would take upon him the
Regency, because the Kingdom was in War, and full of Troubles, the King
incapable to govern, and the Queen retired into a Nunnery; and therefore there
was great reason to substitute the Infant in the place of the King.

The Common Council of the City and of the Four and twenty, having sent their
Deputies to the Infant to demand of him permission to proclaim him Regent in
the Palace; and if he would not yield to it, they would do it against his mind;
he answered them, that they should deliberate whether it would be convenient
they should accompany him to the Palace.

The Marquess of Cascars thrust on by his Zeal and his Age, went the next
morning to the King; when he was in his Antichamber, the Grooms of the Wardrobe
told him he was yet in Bed; but approaching to him, told him it was time for
him to awake, and if he didnot leave that Lethargy, out of which he had awaked
him, he would in a very little time lose a Kingdom which he had already ruined
by his negligence and incapacity: that it were better to do that of his own
motion, which he would be made to do by force. That he should send to seek for
the Infant his Brother, and to put into his hands the Government, which was
the only way he had to conserve the Crown.

This Remonstrance was immediately followed by that of the Counselors of
State, who made theirs publicly to him, and represented to him, that after he
had left the Government of the State to his Favorites who had ruined it, he at
present had abandoned it altogether, there being none that would intermeddle
with it, unless he himself would act in it. But he was nothing moved neither
with the one nor the other: which obliged the Duke de Cadaval to press the
Infant on the part of the Counselors of State, to go to the Palace to begin
his Regency.

November. 23. 1667, the Infant accompanied with the Common Council of the City,
the Chamber of the Four and Twenty, the Nobility, and an innumerable company of
people, entered into the Gallery of the Palace; and from thence he entered with
the Counselors of State into the Antichamber of the King; where, after a short
Conference had together, they Arrested the King in his Chamber, by making fast
the doors, without touching him any other way.

The Infant presently named for Secretary of State Dr. Pedro Vieira de Sylva,
who had been Secretary to the King Don John, and to the Queen Mother; who
having taken his place, the Motives of this change were read, and approved of
in the first Assembly of the Council of State. The next thing agitated was, in
what place they should put the King, and after what manner he should be served:
It was then concluded he should be kept in his Apartment, and served by those
persons who should be most agreeable to him; and that he should want nothing
either for his necessity or pleasure, or the Dignity of his Character. But he
treated with so much cruelty those who served him, that diverse Gentlemen came
to excuse themselves from the Employment.

But whilst the Infant was yet in the Council of State, Antonio Cavide brought
to him this, which was wrote in his own hand, and signed by the King.

Our Lord the King having regard to the Estate in which now the Kingdom is, and
to what has been represented to him by his Ministers, and also to diverse other
things, and reasons of his own proper motion, and by his Absolute and Royal
Authority, and for the advantage of his Realm, does dismiss himself, and resign
in favor of the Infant; that he may possess the Realms in the same manner as
he did, and his Legitimate Descendants after him; declaring, that of all the
Revenue belonging to his Crown, he reserves to himself two hundred and seventy
thousand Livres of yearly Rent, of which he may also dispose for ten years
after his death: and moreover he does reserve to himself the House at Bragansa,
with all its dependances. In the Faith of which, and in assurance that what his
Majesty has Ordained shall be executed and observed, he has enjoined me to
draw up this present Act, which he has signed. Antony Cavide,
done at Lisbon this 23d November, 1667. The King.


The Infant having granted to the King all that he demanded, they expedited the
Dispatches necessary for it; but he would not accept the Crown, of which the
King would have made a Cession. As they had judged it convenient that the King
should not go out of the Palace, the Infant resolved to stay there also, with
those Counselors of State, and a great part of the Nobility and People, who
would not leave him. The King as he lay in his Bed, sent to John dos Caes to
have a care of his Dogs, which was his ordinary employ, and which grieved him
in such sort, that he could not refrain from Tears. We have reported this,
though but little considerable, that you may thereby judge the better of the
Spirit of the King, and whether he was capable to govern the State.

When the Infant had made known to all the Realm that which had happened, he
signed the Letters which were writ in the King's Name, to call together the
States on the first of January. And because the Act which the King, since he
was arrested, had sent to the Infant, gave him power to take upon him the
Quality of King, which the greatest part of the Nobles and of the People
ardently wished he would do; he ordered by this Decree, that they should
examine the Cession which the King had made.

Don Rodrigo de Meneses Gentleman of my Chamber and Master of my Horse, Makes
known upon my part to Pedro Fernandes Monteiro Councellor of Parliament, to
Martin Alphonso de Mello Deputy of the Council of Conscience, to Joseph Pinhero
Councellor of the Finances, to Lewis Fernandes Teixeira Judge of the Pleas of
the Crown, to John Lamprea de Vargas one of the Quarter Provosts, and to John
de Roxas de Osevedo my Secretary, That I desire that they will assemble
themselves in the Chamber which Don Rodrique possesses in the Palace, to the
end that they may let me know, after they have made serious reflections upon the
Estate in which they find the King my Lord, and the Affairs of these Realms, if
I ought to demand the Convocation of the States: and if that after their
Assemblies shall be ended, I should continue the Government, with the Title of
Curator of his Majesty, and that of Regent of this Realm, which are those which
I have taken at this present; or whether I ought to consent, that they give me
that of King, with all the Prerogatives that accompany it. And I also desire to
know, if I shall make use of the Renunciation that his Majesty has made in my
favor, a little after he was arrested, of the Right which he has to the
Crown; or of that which they have given me, through his incapacity of Governing
himself. Considering, that though I have accepted the Government of these
Realms, it is not through any Ambition, nor Covetousness, nor for any End which
respects my self; but only for the Conservation of the State, and to satisfy
the desires which the Portugals have incessantly made to me. Let them put their
Opinions in this Business in writing, and I declare to them, that I shall
follow the greatest number. From Lisbon 10 Jan. 1668. The Infant.


These Ministers assembled themselves according to the Infante's Order, and
some days after they wrote their Conclusion. When it was read in the Presence
of the Infant, of his Gentlemen, and some other Persons of Quality, whom he
had most Confidence in, they found that the greatest part of the Voices were,
That he should not make use of the Renunciation, and that he should not take
upon him the Title nor the Quality of King; which gave him a very great
Contentment, because this Conclusion was according to his Desires; and
moreover, this delivered him from the Importunities, which he suffered under
every day, upon this Subject.

The Procurators of the Chapters, and those of the Greater and Lesser Cities of
the Realm being arrived, the three Estates assembled themselves in the Great
Hall of the Guards, where the Infant was solemnly declared Prince, by a
public and Authentic Act, conceived in these Terms:

We Swear, and Declare upon the Holy Evangelists, which we touch with our
Hands, That we do acknowledge and receive for our true and natural Prince and
Lord, the most High and most Excellent Prince Don Pedro, the Legitimate Son of
the King Don John the Fourth, and the Queen Dona Louysa his Wife, and Brother
to the most Great and most Puissant King Don Alphonso the sixth our Lord, his
True and Natural Successor to these Realms; and as his true and natural
Subjects, and Vassals as we are, we render him Faith and Homage, and promise
him, That his Majesty happening to die without Legitimate Children, we will
acknowledge and receive him for our True and Natural King and Sovereign of the
Realms of Portugal, and the Algarves on this side, and beyond the Sea, Lord of
Guinny, and of the Countries conquered by our Navigations, through the Commerce
of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and the Indies, etc. And that we will obey
thoroughly and wholly all his Orders and Judgments, Sovereign and others, making
for him War, and entertaining Peace with his Allies; and that we will not obey
any other King, nor acknowledge any other than Him. And all this which is above
said, we swear and protest to God, and to this Holy Cross, and to the Holy
Evangelists, upon which we lay our hands, we will observe and keep fully and
wholly; and in sign of our Obedience, and of our Acknowledgement of this Royal
Sovereignty, we Kiss the Hand of his Highness here present.

After this Oath had been made to the Prince, every one of the three Estates
began to assemble themselves in particular: That of the Nobles, in the College
of St. Roch; that of the Commons, in the Covent of the Religious of the Order
of St. Francis; and that of the Clergy, in the Covent of St. Dominick. The
first day of their Assembling, the Prince sent to each of the States the
substance of this Act, with the Dismission of the King.

I desire that you may see in the Assembly of the People, the dismission of the
King, where'tis inserted, and that it should be examined by you, as well what
has been passed, when I took upon me the Government, as the Reasons that moved
me to do it, and to take upon me the Quality of Curator of my Lord the King,
and that of Regent of these Realms, by virtue of which I have caused his Royal
Person to be arrested. And because these two things might be justified by this
Act, I pray this Assembly to approve them, and to Declare whether I shall
continue the Government with this Title, or whether you think good that I
should take any other; and in that Case what it ought to be. If your Conclusion
be found conformable to that of the other Assemblies, as I hope it will, I
shall after that swear to maintain the Laws and the Privileges of the Realm,
in the accustomed manner; after which also you shall make to me an Oath of
Fidelity and Obedience, during the time I shall have the Government.

The Body of the Nobless is composed of Thirty Great Lords, Counselors of the
King, Lords of Castles, Lands and Territories, the chiefest of their Rank. That
of the People, is of Two Procurators or Burgesses, from every City of the
Realm, who have a deliberative Voice, which they call definitive; and that of
the Ecclesiastics, of the Bishops, and Prelates of the Realm: And in default
of those who fail at such a time, of the Procurators or Deputies of their
Chapters.

The Decree of the Prince was read in all the Chambers of the States. In that
of the People, almost all the Deputies declared him King; in that of the
Nobility, and that of the Ecclesiastics, there was nothing Concluded. But when
these two last were assembled a second time, after they had examined the
Conclusion of the People, which had been carried to them by the Marquess of
Marialva, and Pedro Monteiro Fernandes, Proctors for the City of Lisbon, they
approved of the Regency in the Chamber Ecclesiastic, conformable to the
Decree; and they demurred upon it in that of the Nobility, for that they would
consider it, and it being not only an Affair of State, but also a Matter of
Right, they would first of all hear the Opinion of those that were better
versed in the Law, before they should be capable to resolve. That which was
carried to the other two Chambers, by the Duke of Cadaval, and the Count de
Prado, were both cast out; but it being done at first tumultuarily by that of
the People, they presently proclaimed Don Pedro King.

The Prince having understood the Conclusion of the Assembly of the Nobles, and
that the Learned Persons who were to be Consulted with about it, were Father
Nuno de Acunha the Jesuit, Father Valerius de St. Raymond, of the Order of the
Preaching Friars, Father Francis Ferdinand Sueiro, of the same Order, Friar
John de Mello, of the Order of the Hermites of St. Augustine, Provincial of that
Order, John Vello Baretto, Grand Chancellor of the Realm, Emanuel Delgado de
Matos, Doctor in Law, Lewis Gomes de Basto, and Duarte vas a'orta Osorio,
Counselors of the Finances, and Christopher Pinto de Paira: He sent to tell
them by Francisco Correa de la Cerda, his Tutor, That it was not his Intention
to be King, but only that he might give some Comfort to the Realm, which he did
believe he might do with the Title only of Regent; that they should give their
Opinions upon that Question, with all the Liberty that an Affair of that
Consequence demanded.

All but Emanuel de Matos, and Duarte d'Osorio, who could not be there to give
their Opinions, because they were sick; and the Great Chancellor, whose Opinion
was, that Don Pedro should be declared King, gave their Opinions, that he
should let alone the Title of King to Don Alphonso, so long as he should Live.

After that these Learned Persons had declared their Opinions, the three
Estates deliberated apart; and it was Concluded in the Assembly of the
Ecclesiastics, and in that of the Nobility, that the Prince should not take
the Quality of King: But that of the People Concluded, that he should take it,
not only for the Honor of it, but also for the Security of the State.

The Prince was equally satisfied with them Both, and witnessed to them his
Acknowledgments. But the Answer of the Prince was not enough to make them
silent, who adjudg'd to him the Crown; and they maintained their Sentiments so
much, and opposed that of the others, with so strong Reasons, that the Question
became very difficult to be decided, by those who should Judge of it without
passion. The Contestation passed so far, that the Prince fearing lest they
should Declare him King by a public Proclamation, was forced to hinder the
acclamations of the People when he went abroad, to employ all the Persons of
Authority, who accompanied him. Most Princes use to solicit the People to be
Kings, but this Prince on the contrary solicits them that he may not be one;
which is a moderation, which made him be yet more worthy of that Title.

In the beginning of the Summer, 1667. there was made a League offensive and
defensive, between France and Portugal, against Spain. The French by their
means assuring them of a diversion in their Favor, enterprising a War against
Spain in Flanders, whose progress was very surprising; and it had been very
advantageous, if the Prince's Allies to either Crown, had not put a stop to the
swiftness of their Arms. Monsieur de St. Romain, Abbot of Corbigny, who had
been Envoy in Portugal, for the negotiating that League, having had Order to
let the Prince Regent know of the Accommodation that was proposed, and that he
should send some one to assist therein, he consulted his Ministers of State
what was best to be done in this Business.

They were ready to name for that purpose a Plenipotentiary, when the Count
d'Olivares, who had been Prisoner ever since the Battle of Canal in the Castle
of St. George, gave notice, That he had power from the Queen of Spain, to
accommodate the differences between Spain and Portugal. This was a great
Obstacle to that Negotiation of the League, which was concluded betwixt
Portugal and France. If Monsieur de St. Romain turned all his thoughts to
endeavor to persuade the Portugals to entertain a new Alliance against Spain;
the Ministers of Spain on the other side forgot nothing that might hinder it,
to the end not to lose so fair an occasion of making one Peace that might
produce another, and render the Conditions more advantageous. So that having
obtained by their Importunities, and the new Advantages which they offered the
Portugals, so much, that they brought it about, that the King of England
offered his Mediation, and Edward Montague Earl of Sandwich his Ambassador
Extraordinary in the Court of Spain, passed thence into Portugal.

But as in this Encounter there was a necessity of one of these two things,
either to content France at the Charge of Portugal, or to manage the Interests
of Portugal to the prejudice of France; the Portugals chose the last. The
consideration of their repose was more strongly pressing on their minds, than
any other thing; and the more, for that the Realm had need of rest after a
disturbance of five and twenty years. The Three States, the Common Council of
the City of Lisbon, and that of the Four and Twenty, made their Remonstrances
to the Prince so pressing, that he could not resist them. He named then for to
act in this Negotiation the Duke of Cadaval, Vasco Lewis de Gama Marquis de
Nisa, the Marquesses of Gonrea and Marialva, Henry de Sousa de Tavares de Sylva
Count de Miranda, all of them Councillors of State, and Pedro Vieira de Sylva
Secretary of State. All these Plenipotentiaries, being assembled with the
Marquess d'Eliche, and the Earl of Sandwich, who had power, one of them to make
the Treaty, and the other to be the Mediator; after many Conferences, it was at
last concluded, the 13 Febr. 1668, and published the 10th of March following.

Although this Peace, so glorious for the Prince, had increased the love that
the Portugals had for him, yet he was not seen to grow proud with these
Advantages, nor would use this occasion to get the Kingdom, as he might have
done. But on the contrary, it was at this time that his modesty more apparently
showed it self; for seeing that the People redoubled their importunity to make
him accept of the Scepter, he redoubled his resolution to refuse it. And
indeed, if under the Reign of the King Alphonso the Portugals had gained a
Battle at Elvas, another at Mount Elaros, a third at Canal, and a fourth at
Castle Rodrigo, all the part that he had in it, was under the Fortune of his
Generals; for the Marquess of Marialva, the Count de Villaflor, and Pedro
Jaques de Magellanes had all that Glory. But the Peace which was better than
all these Victories, since that it rendered to the Realm that Calm it had so
long breathed after, was the work of the Prince Don Pedro, more than of any of
his Ministers.

In the mean time they went about to make the Marriage void before Francisco de
Soto Major Bishop of Targa Coadjutor of the Archbishopric of Lisbon, the
Doctors Valentine Fejo de Motta Vicar General of the same Archbishopric,
Pantaleon Rodrigue Pacheco, nominated to the Bishopric of Elvas, in whose
place, after his decease, they subrogated Antanio de Faria de Sylva, Canon of
the same Metropolitain, Sebastian Denis Velho being Register to this Assembly.
After that upon the Report of the Coadjutor, they had examined this Business
according to the Laws, they took the Voices of those we have named publicly,
with those of Emanuel de Saldunha, nominated to the Bishopric of Visen,
Francisco Baretto, nominated to that of the Algarves, Pedro de Alaide de Castro
Inquisitor of Conimbra, Nuno de Acunha d'Eca, Canon of the Metropolitan of
Lisbon, Gonzalo Peixoto de Sylva, Canon of the said Cathedral, Gaspar Barata de
Mendosa, Prior of the Church of St. Gracia, John de Pasos Magelhans, Prior of
that of St. Julian, and John Seraon Prior of that of St. Thomas, all of them
Judges named by the Chapter: the Affair having been examined before them in
private, with much care, and mature deliberation, they pronounced this Sentence
the 24th of Morch 1668.

Upon the Report which has been made in the presence of the Chapter, in which
there assisted besides the ordinary Ministers who compose it, the Judges named
by them to deliberate of the cause etc. Having viewed the Acts, and the Request
of the Queen our Sovereign Mary Frances of Savoy, which has been here
received, and the Contestation by the Negotiation of the Promotor in default of
the party in Form and style, the proofs having been verified, the said
Princess, has let us know that she was Contracted in Marriage in the Face of
the Church, with the most SerenePrince Don Alphonso the Sixth, King of
Portugal, on the 27th of June 1668. in the City of Rochel, in the Kingdom of
France, from whence the said Princess being come into this City, she has here
lived in the Palace Royal with the King her Spouse, for the space of six
Months, leading with him a Conjugal life; but dureing this time it appeared
they two having tried to Consummate the Marriage, they could not effect it,
although they had used all their Care and diligence requisite thereto; and this
because of the Inability of the Prince, which proceeded from an Infirmity which
he had in his Infancy, and which is at present altogether incurable. Which does
more than sufficiently justify them, by those means approved of by the Canon
Law, so that the Impediment is held at least to be morally assured, after which
there is no need of Inspection, nor of greater proofs, as that of three years,
or of any other Arbitrary Term. All this having been examined, by all the Acts
Conformable to the Laws it is Judged, That the Marriage between the said most
Serene Prince and Princess was Contracted in Fact, and not in Law, and that it
is declared Null; and that the said Prince and Princess may dispose of their
persons as to them shall seem good, and make a division of their goods
according to the form of their Contracts.

This Sentence having been pronounced the Saturday before Palm Sunday, the
Queen sent to declare to the 3 States the Resolution she had taken to return
into France, demanding at the same time that they would restore to her the
dowry she had brought with her. The 3 States having understood this News with
much trouble, and considered that this Princess for the Rare perfections of
Mind and Body, which Heaven had bestowed upon her, and for other considerations
was most worthy of the Prince Don Pedro, each of the States made a Memorial,
which they sent to him representing the Reasons which made them desire this
Marriage. The Common Council of the City of Lisbon having done the same thing
the Prince answered to them all, That, he was ready to do what should be Judged
best for the Interest of the Realm.

After that the ThreeStates had received this Answer, they and the Common
Council of the City went to make the same Petition to the Queen, that since the
Nullity of her Marriage, the Portugals did desire she would espouse the Prince,
and they hoped the felicity of this second Marriage would repair the misfortune
of the first, in giving them Successors to the Crown. This Princess being
touched with the violent passion of the People of the Realm, and not being able
to resist their pressing desires, was willing to Content them by renouncing her
own Country. After this the Prince gave Notice of this Proposition to the
Council of State, who not only approved of the Marriage, but they besought him
that he would instantly accomplish it. For this end the Marquess of Nisa and
Don Rodrigo de Meneses were named Proctors for the Prince, and the Duke of
Cadaval and the Marquis of Marialva for the Princess, who drew up the Articles
of Contract between them.

But when this Marriage was divulged, there began to arise a doubt, if with
Reputation this Contract might be lawfully and effectually made and consummated
without a dispensation. But as they had chosen a great many Learned persons, to
resolve this Question, Monsieur Verjus arrived from France with the Brief of
Dispense, which took away all doubt and scruple that they might have about it.
So that the Marquess de Marialva as Proctor for the Prince, and the Duke de
Cadaval as Proctor for the Princess, were by virtue of the Brief, and their
Procurations espoused by the Bishop of Targa in the Oratory of the Palace; and
on the second of April, which was the next day after Easter, a little after
Noon the Prince accompanied with his Grandees, and all the Lords and Noblemen
of the Court, went to the Queen in the Covent of Esperance, from whence they
went to the Quinte of Alcantara followed by innumerable multitude of People,
who witnessed their good Will to this Marriage, where they received the Nuptial
Benediction by the hand of the same Bishop.

After this, those who had been of the Opinion for the Crowning the Prince,
made once more an attempt upon him; but he was no more to be shaken now than he
was at other times, he only let the Three States know, that on the 9th of June
1668, He would take his Oath to maintain the Laws of the Realm, and he would
then receive from them theirs of Fidelity. This day being come, they all
Assembled in the Great Hall of the Guards, where that Ceremony was done with
all the Pomp requisite thereunto, and the Prince took his Oath in these Terms.

I do swear and promise, the Grace of God assisting, to rule and govern well
and Equitably, and to administer to you Justice in all Cases, as far as the
frailty of Humane Nature will permit, and to keep and preserve your good
Customs, Privileges, Graces, Recompenses, Liberties, and Franchises which
has been given, granted, and Confirmed by the Kings my Predecessors.

And the Three States of the Realm took theirs in these Terms.

We swear upon the holy Evangelists which we touch with our hands, that we do
acknowledge and receive for our Governor and Regent of these Realms because of
the perpetual Impuissance of his Majesty, as we have adjudg'd, the most High
and most Excellent Prince, Don Pedro, Legitimate Son of the King Don John the
Fourth, and of the Queen Dona Lewysa his Wife, Brother and Curator of the most
high and most excellent King Don Alphonso the sixth, and his True and Natural
Successor to these Realms. And as the True and Natural Subjects as we are of
the Prince Don Pedro we make to him Faith and Homage in the same manner as we
have made to the King Don John the Fourth his Father, and to the King Don
Alphonso the Sixth his Brother, (whom we do at this present deprive of his
Government because of his Incapacity) with the same Jurisdiction, Power and
Authority, that any of the Kings and Lords of this Crown have ever had: and we
will obey fully and wholly all his Orders and Judgments be they high or be they
low Jurisdictions, and we will make War with his Enemies for him, and entertain
Peace with his Allies as it shall please him, without obeying any other King
but him. All this abovesaid we swear to before God, by this Cross, and by the
Holy Evangelists which we touch with our Hands to observe on our parts fully,
and wholly. And as a Mark of our Submission and Obedience; and of our
acknowledging his Royal, and Sovereign Jurisdiction, we kiss the Hand of his
Highness here present.

These Oaths being made, all the Dispatches began to be expedited in the Name
of the Prince as Governor and Regent of the Realm, in the same form as had
been formerly done when the Infant Don Alphonso Count de Bologn was made
Governor of this same Realm because of the Incapacity of his Brother, having
been acknowledged for such by the Kings of France, Spain and England, at whose
Courts his Ambassadors and Envoys had been received with all the prerogatives
which they had given to Kings.

After this Act the Three States continued to deliberate about the Affairs of
the Realm until the First day of August, 1668. when they separated.

This change was approved of by all the People, excepting some persons who had
no reason to approve of it, because of their Interest. In truth, the deposing
the King Don Alphonso was maintained not only by those Reasons which have been
rehearsed, but for many others which they were willing to have Concealed;
besides, the same thing has happened heretofore in Portugal in the Person of
Don Sanche the Second. In France, in that of Childerick, Philip and Theoderick.
In England, in that of King Edward. In Germany in that of Charles le Gross. In
Denmark, in that of Christian. In the Realm of Naples, in that of Charles, and
in many other Kingdoms.

As soon as the Prince and the Princess had Consummated their Marriage in good
earnest, which they had made by Virtue of the Dispensation which they had
obtained of Monsieur the Cardinal of Vendosme Legate a Latere in France, to the
end that there might remain no scruple, they sent Father Francis de Ville
Jesuit to Clement the 9th, to supplicate on their part, that he would Confirm
this Dispensation. His Holiness having received this Request as a Testimony of
respect rendered to the Holy Sea, he ordained with his Paternal Love, That they
should expedite this Brief with this Superscription.

To Our Well-Beloved Sons Deigo de Sousa, Chief Inquisitor in the Inquisition
against the Heretics in the Realms of Portugal and Algarves, Antony de Mendosa
Commissary-General of the Bull of the Croisaide, and Deputy of the Inquisition.
Martin Alphonso de Mello, Dean of the Metropolitan Church of Evora, also Deputy
of the Inquisition. Lewis de Sousa Dean of the Church of Porto, and Emanuel de
Meneses Archdeacon of the Metropolitan of Evora.

Clement the 9th Pope,
Sends Health and Apostolic Benediction to Our Well-beloved Sons. The Charge
of Pastor which God has given to us, Commands us, that according to the
understanding which he has granted us, we should provide according to the Laws
of Justice and Prudence, repose to all the faithful Servants of Jesus Christ,
and chiefly to the Great Ones. And because we have understood by the tenor of
a Request which has been presented to us a little while since, on the part of
our Son in Jesus Christ, the most Beloved, and most Noble Don Pedro Prince of
Portugal, and of our Daughter in Jesus Christ, the most Beloved, and most Noble
Maria Isabella de Savoy, Duchess of Nemours, That the said Princess after she
had contracted a Marriage with our most Dear Son in Jesus Christ, Alphonso the
Illustrious King of Portugal and Algarves, and lived with him about the space
of six months as his Wife, during which time she perceived his perpetual
inability to consumm^^ the said Marriage being pressed in her Conscience, she
has been obliged to cause the said Marriage to be adjudged Null, beginning her
Process (the Sea of the Archbishopric being vacant) before our Well beloved
Sons, the Vicar of the Chapter of the Metropolitan Church of Lisbon, lawfully
deputed, and the Chapter and the Cannons of the same Church; who hold, by
reason of the said vacancy, an ordinary Jurisdiction; and before several other
Judges named by the same Chapter, jointly with the said Grand Vicar of the
Chapter, to the end that they might be the better instructed in that Affair,
and that they might deliberate thereon more maturely: by whom there was given a
Sentence that declared the said Marriage Null, because of the aforesaid
Impotence; which Sentence having been read and showed to the King Alphonso, was
approved by him by word of Mouth, and by Writing. Moreover, the aforesaid
Princes Mary Isabel, and the aforesaid Don Pedro, Brother of the aforesaid King
Alphonso, being willing to Contract a Marriage together at the Requests of the
States of the Realm, who were at that time assembled at Lisbon, to the end that
they might give Repose and Tranquillity to the Realm; and being in doubt, if
from the first Marriage there might not arise some hinderance to it, because of
the public Honesty, they had recourse to our Well beloved Son Lewis de
Vendosm Cardinal of the Holy Roman Church, who at that time was our legate a
Latere, and of the Holy Apostolic See, with our most dear Son in Jesus Christ,
the most Christian King of France, who granted to them a Brief of Dispense
which they demanded of him upon that Impediment, and it being addressed to the
Grand Vicar, and to the Official at Lisbon to either of them or both together,
the said Prince and the said Princess, were by Virtue of the said Dispensation
Contracted, in Good earnest in the Face of the Church in Marriage, after the
manner that was ordained by the Sacred Council of Trent, and after they
Consummated the said Marriage in hope of having soon Successors. But because in
the same request it has been remonstrated to us, that the said Prince and the
said Princess as our most respectful, and most devout Children, and of the Holy
Apostolic See, do most ardently desire that we should provide for the security
of their Conscience, and for the tranquillity of the Realm: After having
maturely considered and Examined all things with some of our Venerable Brothers
the Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, and with other great prudent Persons
and most knowing and Skilful in the Sacred Canons, and in Theology, and very
well versed in these Affairs, and being also willing as far as God shall enable
as, to be benignly favorable to the said Prince Don Pedro, and the said
Princess Maria Isabella, we do absolve them, and hold them absolved by Virtue
of these present Letters from all Excommunications, Interdicts, Suspensions,
and all Ecclesiastic Sentences, Censures, and pains, a jure vel ab homine,
that they may have incurred, upon any occasion or cause whatsoever, (and so
often as by it they shall have incurred any) to the end that by Virtue of these
presents only they may obtain what they desire.

And being desirous to satisfy the Request, which has been humbly presented
in their Name, upon the Confidence that God has given us of you, and of your
Fidelity toward us and the Apostolic See, of your Learning, Prudence and
Integrity: And besides, for that we have no certain Knowledge, of all that
which has been declared to us thereupon, we do Ordain and Command you by these
presents, to make, with all possible discretion, all together, or at least
three of you, (if that some of you cannot be there to assist, by any lawful
Impediment) a diligent research, and an exact Information, of all that which
has been averred thereupon. And if by this search, and this Information, you
find the truth of those things, which have been represented to us, to hold
good, and particularly, that the first Marriage Contracted, as has been said,
between the King Alphonso, and the aforesaid Princess Maria Isabella, was never
Consummated, (with which we very strongly charge the Conscience of every one of
you) that you break asunder, and dissolve, by and under our Apostolic
Authority, in all that shall be necessary, even against the Will of the said
King Don Alphonso, the tie of the said first Marriage, Contracted, as
aforesaid, between the said Princess, and the said King Don Alphonso, and which
has been declared null and not Consummated, notwithstanding that which has
pass d from the beginning, and what might have now passed for good, and
notwithstanding, if in time yet to come, it should appear good and firm, and
that it is, has been, and should be good and valuable. And further, we do
order you to dispense with under the same Authority the said Prince Don Pedro,
and the said Princess Maria Isabella, as to the Impediment of public Honesty
in such sort that they may freely and lawfully continue the aforesaid second
Marriage notwithstanding the said Impediment, and all that has been reported
thereupon, and from any other Impediment that they may have therein of what
Nature soever it be, that may arise or appear, at what time soever:
notwithstanding also all Apostolic Constitutions of General Councels,
Provincials and Synods, or any other whatsoever. We will also, that you declare
under, and by the same Authority, that you make, grant and devise by virtue of
these present Letters, that all what has been abovesaid may profit and serve
in all and in every part fully and wholly to the said Prince Don Pedro, and to
the said Princess, even from the day of the second Marriage, which has been
Contracted by them, as if these present Letters had been granted before the
Contract of Marriage, and put in execution by you according to their form and
tenure: Declaring, Pronouncing, and assuring for Successors lawful those
Infants born, and to be born of the said Second Marriage, as has been said,
Contracted in good earnest in the Face of the Church; because by the plenitude
of our Apostolic Power, we give and grant you the power by Virtue of these
present Letters, to do all these things enjoined. Moreover, we decree farther,
That neither the aforesaid King Alphonso, nor any other persons which ought to
be expressed, and especially and particularly nominated, to have any Interest
in the things herein above expressed, or to pretend to have any, in any manner
whatsoever, not having consented, or having been appealed Cited or heard; and
that the causes for which these present Letters have been granted, were not
sufficiently verified, and justified, or for any other legitimate cause, Right
or Privilege, either under any Color or pretense whatsoever, or also any
Clause of Right, shall never at any time blame, retract, violate, our Counsel
as surreptitious, or attained by fraud nor make Null, neither for any fault of
our Intention, or by the consent of those who have, or ought to have interest
therein, or for any other default how great or Essential soever it be, or that
might be in a particular Declaration, these our present Letters: And that no
body may be able to obtain or Commence any thing of Right, of Fact or of Grace,
nor to get nor prevail in Judicio vel extra illud against these Letters had,
obtained, and granted of our own proper motion, and with the same plenitude of
Apostolic Power. Further we will and declare, that these present Letters
continue for ever firm, valid and Efficacious, and that they have and obtain
their full and entire Effect: And lastly, that they serve fully and wholly
without any Limitation to the aforesaid Prince Don Pedro, and to the aforesaid
Princess Maria Isabella, and to all others either at present or to come, to
whom they may any ways appertain. And also that after this manner only, and no
otherwise we will that it be judged and decreed in this Affair by all the
Judges in Ordinary, or Delegates; be they either Auditors in causes of the
Apostolic Courts, or Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, or also Legates a
Latere, Nuncio's of the Apostolic See, or others who have or may have any
pre-eminence or power, from all and every one of whom we take away all power
and Authority to Judge and Interpret after any other sort. And we declare Null
and Void, all that shall be enterprised against what has been here above
reported. The Rule of our Chancery Apostolic de jure quaesito non tollendo,
and that of Boniface the Eighth of Happy Memory our Predecessor de una dicta,
and that of the General Council de duabus dictis, and all other Constitutions
and Ordinances Apostolic Special or General, made in general Councels,
Provincials, or Synods, or any other thing whatsoever to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Given at Rome from St. Mary Major, under the Seal of the Fisher, the 10th of
December. 1668. in the 2d year of our Papacy. Signed, J. G. Slusius.


The Judges to whom this Brief was directed, having approved the Deeds
contained in the Request, gave Sentence, which follows:

Christi Nomine Invocato.
Having seen the Brief of his Holiness, which has committed to us the Judgment
of the Impediment publicae honestatis, upon the Dispensation which it makes
mention of, and the Articles of Justification, and the proofs which has been
given thereto, as well as all the Instructions and Certificates which have been
jointly made thereupon, it appears That, the most Serene Lord, Don Alphonso the
Sixth, King of Portugal and Algarves, being married to Maria Frances Isabella
de Savoy, the said Princess pressed in Conscience, to pursue in Justice the
Nullity of the said Marriage which she had contracted in Fact with the said
most Serene King, because of the perpetual Inabibility which was in his Person
to consummate the said Marriage, and that indeed he had not consummated it
during the Sixteen Months that they had lived together as Man and Wife. Which
Cause was pleaded before the Vicar General of the Archbishopric of Lisbon, and
other Judges nominated by the Chapter of the said Archbishopric, before whom
it in right lay, in the vacancy of the said Sea. It appears, that the Cause was
prosecuted, even to a definitive Sentence, by which the said Marriage
contracted between the said King and the said Princess was declared Null,
because of the aforesaid perpetual Inability of the said Lord and King Don
Alphonso, to consummate the said Marriage with the said most Serene Princess
Maria Frances Isabella de Savoy. It appears, that this Sentence was published,
and judiciously signified to the said Lord the King Don Alphonso, who declared
in Terms, reported by the Register of those Acts, That he was willing it should
be executed, and that he did not at all desire to appeal; which Declaration
has been signed by the King himself. It appears, that the three Estates of the
Realms of Portugal and the Algarves, who were at that time assembled at Lisbon,
did propose to the most Serene Prince Don Pedro Regent of the Realm, and did
supplicate him to Espouse the most Serene Princess Maria Frances Isabella de
Savoy, to give repose to the State, and to secure the Royal Succession; and
that also they did make the same Proposition and the same Prayer to the said
most Serene Princess. It appears, that for the Impediment publicae Honestatis,
the most Serene Prince Don Pedro not bebeing able to Contract this Marriage
with the said Princess, they had recourse to the most eminent Cardinal de
Vendosme, Legate a Latere to his Holiness, and of the Holy Apostolic Sea with
the most Christian King of France, to the end that he might dispense with that
Impediment publicae Honestatis. It appears, that this Brief of Dispense was
directed to the Vicar General, or to the Official of the Archbishopric of
Lisbon, and that it was presented to the Bishop of Targa, who at that time
officiated the Functions of the said Archbishopric; who conformable to the
Power therein given him, and with all the accustomed Formalities, did dispense
with the said Impediment publicae Honestatis of the said Prince and of the said
Princess. It appears, that by virtue of this Dispensation, and with the Trust
and Confidence thereof, the Lord Prince Don Pedro was married, according to the
Rule of the Holy Council of Trent, to the said most Serene Princess Mary
Frances Isabel of Savoy, and that they did Consummate the Marriage, of which
there already is born one Daughter. It appears, that the said Prince and the
said Princess being married in good earnest, and in the face of the Church, and
living together in a Conjugal Life, for the greater security of their
Conscience, to the end to deliver it from scruple, and the State from trouble,
they had recourse to his Holiness, that he might approve, confirm and ratify
the said Marriage, and take from them all Scruples that might arise; which
Grace his Holiness afforded them, by the Brief above reported, recommending
this Affair to Judges, who are therein named, to the end that they finding just
the Request of the said Prince and Princess, they might, after they had made
full inquest, and all necessary Informations, to discover the Truth of the
Facts, upon which it was founded, dispense with the said Impediment publicae
Honestatis, of the said Prince and Princess, and of all other Impediments that
might happen, cancelling, abrogating, and declaring null the Tie and Bond of
the former Marriage, Contracted between the most Serene Lord, the King Don
Alphonso, and the said most Serene Princess, Dona Maria Frances Isabella de
Savoy. The whole being seen and considered, and chiefly in consideration of the
Brief hereunto annexed, by the Apostolic Authority to us committed, we do hold
our selves bound faithfully, at the Request of the said Prince and Princess, to
justify them. So that conformable to the said Brief, we do dispense with the
said Prince, and most Serene Princess, to the end that they may continue and
abide in the said Marriage, which they have well and lawfully Contracted,
without having regard to the said Impediment publicae Honestatis, which
resulted from the first annulled Marriage. And we Declare for Legitimate, and
born in lawful Marriage, the Infanta, which through the Will of our Lord God,
has been born of this second Marriage, and for Legitimate, and born in lawful
Marriage, all other Children, which shall hereafter be born, without any let
or trouble from any Ordinances, and Apostolic Constitutions to the contrary.
From Lisbon, 18 Feb. 1669. Diego de Sousa, Antonie de Mendosa, Martin Alphonso
de Mello, Lewis de Sousa, Emanuel de Magalhans de Meneses.



The Prince having rendered Thanks to his Holiness, for his Benignity and
Paternal Love, which he had witnessed both to him and the Kingdom, some time
after he received this Brief,

To our dearly beloved Son in Jesus Christ, the Prince Don Pedro, Brother to
the King of Portugal and Algarves.
Clement the IX.
OUR dearly beloved Son in Jesus Christ, Health and Apostolic Benediction,
etc.
We having diligently traveled in your Affair, with all the Favor the Sacred
Canons would permit, we have received from you a Letter, wherein you very much
acknowledge this Pontifical Grace. This Testimony which we receive from you,
gives us a very great Satisfaction; nevertheless, this Favor for which you
thank us, with as much piety as affection, according as the importance of the
thing deserves, we do demand of you with Justice, that as you do chiefly owe it
to the Goodness of the Holy See, you would acknowledge, that it is from her that
you have received it; which if you testify, as in truth you ought to do, it is
by having always more and more care and affection, for those things which
respect the Holy See and the Catholic Religion, imitating in that the ancient
Devotion of the Princes of Portugal, who made it their Glory to obey the same
See: For if heretofore it has been necessary in your State, to endeavor the
re-establishment of the things, which concern the Church and Divine Worship,
and to reduce them to their Primitive Splendour, at this present there is more
reason, through the want of the Pastors, and the length of the War, to do the
same thing. But we hope all these Mischiefs will be soon repaired, by your
Zeal, and by your Prudence, in joining your Cares to ours, as well in the
choice of the Bishops, as for all other things. As to that of your Ambassador
of Obedience, which you propose to us; when he shall arrive, we shall willingly
receive him, and yield him all the Honors that are justly due to him. In the
mean time, our most beloved Son we do give you, with the most sincere
Affection, that we are capable of, our Apostolic Benediction.

From Rome, near Saint Peter's, under the Seal of the Fisher, 2 April, 1669. the
Second Year of our Popedom. R. Florentin.


As they had searched for a Retreat for the King Alphonso, where he might live
in some sort at liberty, without troubling the Repose of the Realm, they made
him many Propositions; but it was a long time before he would resolve, not
knowing what place to choose; till at last he pitched upon the Isle of Tercera,
which was very easily granted him, for that he might there find all
Conveniences, and all sort of Divertisements, according to his humor. He
departed then, being accompanied with all the Magnificence, that was requisite
on such an occasion, and of which the present Condition of the Realm was
capable. The Count de Prado, with the Royal Navy, carried him into that Island,
where he remains to this day.

The Dispensation granted by the Cardinal de Vendosm, Legate a Latere for
Clement the 9th in France.
For the Marriage of the Prince Don Pedro of Portugal with the Princess Maria
Frances Isabella of Savoy.
LEwis Cardinal-Deacon of St. Mary in Porticu, named of Vendosme Legate a Latere
of his Holiness, Clement by the Providence of God Pope, the Ninth of that Name,
and of the Holy Sea Apostolic, with Lewis the most Serene, and most Christian
King of France and Navar, in all his Realms, Provinces, Seignories, Cities and
Lands, and in all places dependant on him, or that are adjacent thereunto, and
in all other places whither we shall go: To our Well-beloved in Jesus Christ,
the Official, or the Vicars Generals of the Church of Lisbon, Deputies of its
Chapter during the vacancy of the Archiepiscopal Sea, and to every one of you
in particular, Eternal Health in our Lord. Having received a Request which has
been presented to us on the part of the most Serene Prince Don Pedro Infant of
Portugal, Regent of the Realm, and of the most Serene Princess Mary Frances
Isabella of Savoy, by which they have shown us, that it being necessary for the
Public Good of the Realm of Portugal, and the satisfaction of all the People,
who passionately desire it also, that the said most Serene Prince and Princess
should marry together; and that doubting they may not be able to do it without
an Apostolic Dispensation, because the said Princess has been before
Contracted in Marriage with the most Serene and Puissant Prince Alphonso King
of Portugal, Brother to the said most Serene Prince Don Pedro; and that it was
Solemnized in the Face of the Church; but that it never had at any time been
consummated, because of the Inability of the said King, for which cause it had
been declared Null by course of Law; from which Marriage, lest there might arise
some Impediment to this, because of the public Honesty, they have humbly
supplicated us to provide for it, according to our Benignity. And as we are
furnished sufficiently with Power, to do what is desired, by the Letters of the
Holy See, which we are not obliged to insert here; and that we are able, by
virtue of the Apostolic Legation committed to us, to provide for the
Necessities of all those, who shall address themselves to us, from what part
soever they shall come, or where soever they shall dwell, or from what place
soever they shall send, being willing to give them all, the Marks of our Favor
and Benignity; and particularly to those who are of Royal Blood, we do absolve
them, and hold them, both and each of them apart, absolved from all
Excommunications, Suspensions, Interdicts, and other Sentences, Ecclesiastic
Censures and pains of Law, either Divine or Humane, which they may have
incurred for any Occasion or Cause whatsoever, if so be they may have incurred
them; and not having a certain knowledge of that which is abovesaid, being
willing nevertheless to satisfy their Supplications, by virtue of the
Apostolic Authority which we have here, we commit to your discretion, of
which we have in our Lord a particular confidence in this Point: And we ordain
you by these Presents, That without hope of any Present or Salary, though it
should be given you freely, from which we do enjoin you wholly to abstain; you
do inform your selves exactly of all that is above affirmed, and if by that
Information you find that these Requests are founded upon the Truth, with which
we charge your Consciences, provided that they be not forced thereto, that you
dispense with them by the same Authority for the Impediment of Public
Honesty, in such sort that they may be publicly married according to the Form
of the Council of Trent and Solemnly make it in the Face of the Church, and
that it may stay, be, and continue thenceforth Free and Legitimate,
notwithstanding the said Impediment, and all Apostolic Constitutions of
Councils, General, Provincial, or Synodical, or any other thing whatsoever:
Declaring and pronouncing those Legitimate Children that shall therein be born.
And we will, and intend, if that despising this Admonition, you shall have the
boldness to take any Salary, Present, or Recompense, for, or concernining this
matter, although the same should be offered you, that you incur the pains of
Excommunication, from which you shall not be absolved but by the Pope, or by
us, or by some other, who have a particular Power thereto from the Holy Sea.
Given at Paris in the Year of our Lord 1667, the 17th of the Calends of April,
in the First Year of the Papacy of our Father the Pope.

Lewis Cardinal de Vendosm, Legate.

De Lione Protonotary and Datary Apostolic.

The Reasons of the Nullity of the Marriage of Don Alphonso the VI. King of
Portugal, and the Validity of that of Don Pedro's Prince of the Realm,
presented to Pope Clement the IX.
THere are Three things to be Considered in this Business of the King and the
Queen of Portugal.

I. That which passed in the first Marriage with the King Alphonso.

II. The Nullity of that Marriage.

III. The Queens second Marriage with the Prince Don Pedro.

In the First it is to be Considered as follows.

1. That the Marquess of Sand, who was sent Ambassador into France, to Treat
of the Marriage of the King Don Alphonso, his Master; having before he went
from Portugal, told the Count de Castlemelhor, the Chief Minister of State, the
scruple of his Conscience, and the Politic Consideration that he had, to go
Treat of a Marriage for a Prince, who was commonly said through all the
Kingdom, not to be capable ever of having any Children; unless that he should
have beforehand some assurance to the contrary, that he might deceive, said
he, neither his own Conscience, nor the Kingdom, nor the Princess, who should
take his word. The Count answered him rudely, in these Terms, as the Marquess
declared since, and as it appears by the Depositions. I am astonished, Sir,
said he, at the Doubt that you make, and I am surprised that you do not know,
that the Girl which is bred up at my House, is the Natural Daughter of the
King. Which the Marquess believed, but it was found to be false since, by the
Deposition of the Mother of the Girl, who being called to declare upon Oath in
Court; though the same Count had done all that he could possibly, to oblige her
to say, that she had that Child by the King: Yet moved by the Truth, and by the
remorse of Conscience, she declared that it was false, and that the Girl was
one of his Cousins, whom she named to the Judges. And besides, in all the
Conversation she had with the King, she never found that he was capable of
doing the Venereal Act; and that by Consequence, he was unable for Marriage,
and incapable ever of having Children.

2. That seeing the Incapacity and Inability of the King Alphonso, the Queen
his Mother, who knew the thing well enough, having made a secret Consultation
with his Physicians, (as may be seen by the Papers and Depositions) was
resolved to let the Scepter fall into the hands of the Infant her second Son,
at this time Prince Regent; to the end, lest in default of a Successor, it
should fall again a second time into the power of the Spaniards; but this she
had not been able to Execute.

3. That the King Alphonso himself, when they went about to Treat secretly of
his Marriage, and to send for that end an Ambassador into France, he was very
hardly brought to resolve upon it, and avowed to his most intimate Friends,
that he never had any intention to Marry, and should never consent to it; but
because the Count and his Friends had represented to him, that the People
seeing themselves deprived of the Hope of seeing him ever to have any Lawful
Successor, would not suffer him any long time upon the Throne; and that they
would soon make the Prince his Brother, to Marry and to Reign in his Place. But
although they might attribute this Aversion which the King had for Marriage, to
the Liberty in which he had been brought up, and to the continual Practices
which he had with the most loose and debauched Women, from whom one might say,
he would not be obliged to separate, by Espousing so Chaste and Honest a
Princess, as the Queen. It is however much more probable, that it should be
attributed to the knowledge he had of his own Impuissance and Inability for
Marriage, which would make him pass the rest of his Days in a continual
Repentance, as he has since said to one of his Domestics; blaming the Count
and his Friends, for having forced him contrary to his Will to Marry, and by
consequence to be exposed to the Affront which he has received, by the
Sentence of the Nullity of his Marriage.

4. That the first time the King lay with the Queen, which was three or four
Days after she arrived in Portugal, his Impotence was well known to that
Princess; notwithstanding her Innocence, and although she was Ignorant of
things of that nature, so that her Confessor who saw her extremly Melancholy,
and who feared with reason, the truth of that which they had talked of, having
taken the liberty to ask her in the time of Confession with all the Modesty,
and Honesty, and Trust, which his Charge permitted him, if that which had been
reported had any Ground or Appearance of truth; or if she had any hopes to see
soon any Fruits of her Marriage. She gave him such an Answer, as may be seen in
those Papers, but it was after such a manner, that she let him know, she judged
already of the Condition of her Marriage, and of the Inability of the King, to
get Children.

5. That although the Queen, since her Arrival in Portugal, had been
continually Reproached by the King, and his chief Ministers, and that she had
always received very ill Treatments, as all the World knows, and which is not
necessary to be put here in Writing, Her Majesty nevertheless had never made
any Complaint, and had never witnessed any Resentment, being on the contrary
resolved to Live with the King her Spouse, as if he had been the most
Accomplished, and the best Husband in the World; if that she had not believed,
for three sorts of indispensible Necessities, that she ought to make a
Declaration of it, and to separate her self from his Company. To wit,

1. For her Conscience sake, which without ceasing, strongly persuaded her
Majesty, and urged her, that after an Experience of Sixteen Months, which was
long enough, and troublesome enough, she might separate from the King, without
making any greater Trial; her self knowing very well in this time, his
incurable Inability. And having diverse times consulted with her Confessor, that
she might Act with the more security in an Affair of so great Importance: The
same Confessor, after he had maturely thought upon it, and considered what she
should do to satisfy her Duty, declared before God, That he knew nothing more,
but that her Majesty seeing that which had passed, should no longer do Violence
to her Consclence, in Inhabiting any longer time with the King.

2. For the necessity of the State, and safety of the Realm, which otherways
was absolutely Lost; and which her Conscience, as well as the Affection that
the Kingdom bore to her, and which she ought to have for the Kingdom, obliged
her to provide for, as much as possibly she could; since that on the one side,
she was most strongly persuaded of the Impuissance of the King, and that he
never could have any Children: And on the other side, she knew for certain, by
the Kings own Confession, and also by the Count of Castlemelhor, who had
entrusted her with it, that although they did seem as if they would Marry the
Prince to content him and the Realm, who very earnestly desired it, and they
did feign to find out ways the most fit thereto, the King nevertheless was
resolved to hinder it by all ways imaginable, being far from permitting it;
Because, as they said, and as it was true enough, it would be his Ruin, and
the Power of the Prince would infinitely increase, by the consideration of his
Marriage, and of the Children that should proceed therefrom, despairing to see
any from the King, so that he would get the Love of all the People, and have
all the Realm at his Devotion, to render him Master of all, when he had a mind
to Revenge himself of the Count, without running any Risque.

3. For the necessity of her Repose, and of her Honor. Of her Repose, because
she had never in all those Sixteen Months found it, neither in her Conscience,
nor in her Mind, nor in her Body, neither Day nor Night, although she had tried
by her Patience, and by her prudent Dissimulation, to do all she could possible
to get it; and though she saw things to go from bad to worse every day, by the
ill Government of the Count, and by the evil Impressions that he and his
Friends had given, and continually did give the King against her, which would
infallibly draw upon her a more rude Oppression, than that which she had
hitherto undergone. And that she should put into danger her Honor for the time
to come, which was ever infinitely more dear to her than the Crown, or her own
Life, and that she saw it exposed to great Dangers, upon great and lawful
Grounds; of which what ever necessity there is to speak, yet honesty and
modesty will not permit it here; but by this only, which cannot be absolutely
passed over in silence, you may judge.

One is, That the King knowing very well that he was never able to get any
Children, he notwithstanding testified an extreme passion to have them, by the
means of that Opinion to establish himself upon the Throne, and to make
forceless the contrary Opinion, which was commonly talked of and known to all
the World of his Inability, which tormented him more than the Inability it
self. So that the more sensible he was of his Inability, the more eager he was
to show the contrary, abandoning himself to all sorts of Women, and believing
by that means to maintain the Crown upon his Head, and to kill with Grief the
Prince his Brother, whom he hated to the death, because he said, and knew for
certain, that his Majesty should never have Children because of his Inability.

The other is, That the Queen was not ignorant of that which was done
privately, and which the Judges knew since by the declaration of the interested
Persons, which was, That when the King had a mind to sport himself with a
certain Maid, and not being able to do it by reason of his Inability, he made
her lie in his Chamber, with one of his Favorites in his presence, to provoke
him thereto, though in vain, as appeared by the Depositions which were made by
those Persons that were present, and which they had sworn to upon the Holy
Evangelists.

And what yet gave to the Queen a greater fear was, That the King, who had no
Government over himself, but through his own licentiousness, and that vain
thought of feigning himself able, without regard either to his Honor or his
Conscience, seemed to have some design upon her, by the continual
Solicitations which he made her, about the end of April, 1667, by his most
intimate Favorites, Henry Anriquez de Miranda, and the Count de Castelmelhor,
with the Marchioness his Mother, Lady of Honor to the Queen, that she would go
pass a night in his Apartment, when there was no difficulty for the King to
come to hers to lie with her there, and which was contrary to the ancient and
ordinary Customs of the Palace, and without any necessity, or the least
appearance thereof; And because the Queen excused her self diverse times, and
the most sweetly that possibly she could, alleging for reasons, not that which
gave her so much apprehension in her mind, for she was willing to sacrifice
this new Trouble to the will of the King, by an effect of that submission which
that Princess always had for him, but that the apprehension of modesty it self
was capable enough to hinder all Women of Honor, and more especially a Queen,
as she was, to make without any necessity so extraordinary a Change, which
would without doubt make them discourse of her Reputation, and also of his
Majesty's. The King fell into so much passion, and with so much Violence, that
the very same night he would have made her gone out of her Bed, to have
followed him into his Apartment; but after very many menaces and rude words,
holding a Poniyard in his hand, he said that he gave her 24 Hours to consider
of it, which passed, if she did not the night after what he would have her do,
he swore he would draw her by force, or make her be drawn by four of his
Grooms. This gave the Queen a most sensible Grief. Of this she made most just
complaints to the Count on the morrow, by the mouth of her Confessor, that he
might pray him to remedy it, protesting that she would sooner die, than do that
which the King would have her do, or any thing else that was unworthy of her.

This joined with the fear, which was besides very strongly impressed on the
mind of the Queen, was the cause, that since that time she did not believe her
self in any security, neither should she be, so long as she should stay there
exposed as she had been, and should be more for the time to come, to a danger
that she had once so much trouble to get out of so happily as she had done, and
seeing also, that she whom her Majesty should most trust on such occasions, to
wit her Lady of Honor, was she whom she had the most reason to distrust,
because of the Counsel she had given her, because she was Mother to the Count,
the Favorite of the King, and who had declared openly, that she was very
passionatly desirous, that the King should have Children by the Queen, after
what manner soever it might be, by that means to establish the Fortune of her
Son, having said expressly to her Confessor, in a Conference they had together
about this Matter, to endeavor to induce him on the Kings part and her own, to
make the Queen consent to the change of her Bed and Apartment, that it should
be but for five or six nights, after which she promised, that she would cause
the King to return to the Queen, after the same manner as before.

Things being in these terms, and the Queen seeing no Remedy for these evils,
and dangers, to which she exposed her self more and more every day, believed,
that she could no ways save her Conscience, her Estate, her Repose, nor her
Honor, but by declaring this, which she had so carefully hid hitherto, for the
making null her Marriage. And this is the Second Point, which I have said is to
be considered in the Dissolving of this Marriage, being the manner in which
they proceeded, which we shall clearly and faithfully make known by these
following Articles.

I. The Queen, that she might withdraw her self out of the fear of those
dangers which I have already spoken of, and which were inevitable, so long as
she should continue in the Palace, and being willing to make her Declaration
with the security of her Liberty and her Life, was resolved to leave it, and to
retire her self into the Covent of St. Claire, called Esperance, which is the
most considerable, and the best regulated in Lisbon, and indeed she did as
secretly retire her self thither as she could, the 22 d of November, 1667.

2. This Retreat of the Queen, and the Declaration, which she made the next
Morning, of the Motives she had thereto, both to the Clergy, Nobles and People,
which her Majesty had made to be called together for that purpose, instead of
surprising them, as one might have imagined, made them to make all at the same
time one Answer, believing very much that she had stayed there long enough, and
that they had long expected such a Resolution, and they were not less informed
than surprised at what her Majesty had so long suffered, and had so long
deferred, that they approved of all she had done, and entreated her, that she
would declare the Nullity of her Marriage, which was so important and so
necessary to the Health of the State; but they would never approve of that
which her Majesty spoke of at the same time of returning into France, because
her Person and her Assistance would now be more necessary to them, and more
profitable than ever for the Realm, and to save it from the dangers which
threatened it, when she was at Liberty: And that all the City of Lisbon would
testify the same general Approbation, which they had given of her Retreat.

3. The Queen, the same day of her Retreat, sent to the King by the Count de
St. Croix, Master of her House, and a little after by the Bishop of Targa, a
solemn Declaration of that which she was obliged in her Conscience to say,
which was of the Nullity of her Marriage, and most humbly to entreat his
Majesty, to permit that Affair, so necessary to the Health of their Souls, and
to that of the Realm, to be judged according to the Forms and Canons
Ecclesiastique, to the end, that being free, she might return into France, with
the good will of his Majesty, and without losing his Favor. To which the King
answered by Writing, signed with his own Hand, and confirmed by Oath upon the
Evangelists, as may be seen in the Papers of the Process, after he had
consulted the Doctors and Divines, whom he had called together for that
purpose, that he would Acquiess; that by the sole motive of his Will, and by
the duty of his Conscience, he declared by the Advice of the Theologists, which
were two Dominicans, and one Jesuit, that he did believe his Marriage with the
Queen was Null; because she being a Virgin, he had never been able to
Consummate the Marriage with her.

It is very true that the King was Arrested, before he had made his Answer and
Declaration to that of the Queens; but it ought to be taken notice of,

First, That he had before done it Verbally, some time before his Detention, in
talking familiarly to one of his Domestics, who Deposed it afterward.

Secondly, That his Majesty was not yet Arrested, when the Queen demanded that
Declaration; but after he had received that of the Queens, he took two or three
Days time to consult with the Doctors and Divines, about what he should be
obliged by his Conscience to answer: It happened that the Night following he
was Arrested, by an Arrest from his own Council.

Thirdly, That this Detention was neither Resolved, nor made upon the Queens
Retreat, nor upon her Declaration, no otherwise than if that had never been,
but for a necessity far different and more urgent than that; so that the
Declaration the King made, some Days after that of the Queens, and after he had
taken time enough to think thereon, and to satisfy his Conscience, and to know
the Thoughts and Resolutions of those Divines, ought not to be reputed Invalid
for want of Liberty, or that he was Arrested for that Cause.

Fourthly, That these Divines which his Majesty had Assembled, did declare
after they had heard him, that he was obliged in Conscience, to Answer as if he
were at full Liberty; and that there was nothing that should oblige him to
conceal the truth, as may be seen by their Depopositions.

Fifthly, That since that, when they had demanded of the King in diverse
Meetings, if he Approved, or Disapproved the Declaration he had made: He always
roundly affirmed it, and with an Oath, he Approved and Ratified it, both for
the discharge of his own Conscience, and of the Queens.

And Lastly, When the Judges Deputed by the Chapter to go to his Majesty, to
signify the Sentence which they had given, and which was pronounced for the
Nullity of his Marriage, did demand of him if he would Acquiess therein, or
whether he would Appeal. He answered without Hesitation, that he would
Acquiess, acknowledging they acted according to Justice; as may be seen by the
Acts of the Process.

4. After so universal an Approbation given to the Retreat of the Queen, the
Council of State attending for the Assembly of the States of the Realm, which
should have been called together a Month before, contrary to the mind of the
King, to remedy the Disorders of the Realm, and of his Government; seeing they
were not able to Assemble so soon as those Affairs required, and foreseeing
otherwise all Portugal would be lost, it they did not apply some speedy Remedy.
It was secretly resolved, that the King should be Locked up in his Apartment,
with all the Civility that could be, and to put the Regency and the Government
of the Realm into the hands of the Prince, until they should see what the
States General would resolve of, which was Executed without any Noise at Night,
on the 22d, or 23d; and the end of this Detention, was to hinder the King from
Flying away with the Count to the Fronteirs, or elsewhere out of the Realm, as
they had understood he had Premeditated to do a Month before: Or else, seeing
for the space of several Years, the Misgovernment of his Majesty, and since he
was Incapable of holding the Reins, being Married to so fair and virtuous a
Princess, he was not Capable of giving them Successors to the Crown, as he had
evidently himself acknowledged by his own Declaration, and by that of the
Queens. And seeing him fit neither for the one, or the other, and by
Consequence, it was necessary very suddenly to give a Remedy to these Evils.
They had permitted it, giving way by the means of this Detention, to make the
Proofs as to the preparation of the Process, upon the Nullity of his Marriage,
which else could not have been done.

5. If the Queen at that time, and in that condition, had been able to have had
Recourse to the holy See, to have judged of the Nullity of her Marriage, she
had undoubtedly done it; she having at diverse times declared the same thing;
And does yet declare it, that it was her Intention, as much for the grand
Importance of the Business, as for the great Respect and infinite Reverence,
which she always has had for the holy See: And also, because she is fully
persuaded of the Equity and Justice of one of the best and most worthy Popes,
who has ever sat in the Chair of St. Peter; but not then being able to do it,
to her great Regret, not having so easily Recourse thither, for those Causes
which all the World knows of, and which have made all the Realm of Portugal to
Groan, for the space of Thirty Years continually, without having the power to
be able to cast themselves at the Feet of the Popes, nor to be heard in their
greatest Spiritual Necessities; the Peace with Spain not being as yet finished,
from whence all these Obstacles came. Her Majesty was obliged to have Recourse
to the Ordinary, and to the nearest Judge, which was the Chapter of Lisbon,
when the Episcopal See was vacant.

6. That in the choice of the Judges, which were Eleven in Number, the Chapter
had had all the Liberty, and all the Regard possible, to name for that
Business, the most considerable of that Illustrious Body, as well for their
Quality and their Learning, as their Virtue and their Honesty.

7. That in the Judgment, which lasted more than Four Months, there was
observed all the necessary Forms, even as if it had been done for Persons of
ordinary, or the meanest Condition.

8. That as to the Proofs in Law, upon which they had declared the King
Incapable, and his Marriage Null, they were so strong and evidently manifest,
and so very certain, that the Judges, after they had a long time, and most
maturely Examined all, declared in their Sentence, that they were not only
sufficient, but more than enough; and there was no need either of Inspection,
nor of the Experience of Three Years.

9. Then when it was made known to the King, the Sentence that the Eleven
Judges had pronounced, as abovesaid, before all the Chapter of Lisbon, upon the
Nullity of the Marriage; and one of the Judges, to wit, the Grand Vicar,
signified it to him by the Secretary, of the Relation, being Interrogaeed,
whether he would Acquiess therein, or whether he would Appeal? He Answered of
his own good will, that he was willing to Acquiess, and that he would not
Appeal; and his Majesty signed the same Declaration.

This is in truth, and in few words, what has passed about the Nullity of the
first Marriage of the Queen; so that there only remains the Third Consideration
to be Examined, which is concerning the manner in which she has made the
Second, with the most Serene Prince Don Pedro; which we shall clearly show in
few words, in these following Articles.

1. The Queen having received the Sentence of the nullity of her Marriage, and
seeing her self free, she thought of nothing but of returning into France; and
for that end, she would take the Opportunity of the Fleet, which the most
Christian King had sent into Portugal, to carry back his Troops. Therefore she
quickly let the Three States know her Resolution, praying them very earnestly
to Approve of it, and to Order it so, that she might carry back with her the
Portion she brought, that she returning for France, might have wherewithal to
maintain her according to her Quality. But the States who had so highly
Approved of her Retreat, and witnessed infinite Joy for the Sentence of the
Nullity of the Marriage, did strongly oppose themselves to the Resolution which
she had taken of going away; and came all of them in a Body to the Covent, to
Supplicate her with Tears in their Eyes, not to abandon the Realm: And having
already found some ease by her Declaration, that she would once more yield to
their Wishes, in consenting to the Marriage which they would propose to her
with their Prince; and the rather, because they were neither able nor willing,
to return her Portion. To which, the Queen having Answered what her Modesty,
and the Quality of her Birth would permit her on that Occasion, without
engaging her self, or denying it. They went at the same instant in a Body to
the Prince, to entreat him to save the Realm, by Espousing the Queen;
protesting to him, that they would never suffer him (as they said) to think on
any other Marriage.

The Prince who ever had a particular Esteem for the Queen, because of her rare
qualities, and ever since they had designed to have espoused her to him
formerly, when they designed to have married the King Alphonso to Mademoiselle
de Nemours, at this time the Duchess Royal of Savoy, did receive this Petition
of the States with very great satisfaction, saying, That he most willingly
consented to to it, provided, they could bring it about that the Queen would
consent to it likewise. Being returned for this end to her Majesty, they
supplicated her diverse times, that she would give her consent thereto, so that
in the end, being vanquished by the powerful Reasons, which they alleged
concerning the necessity of the State, and by those Motives which they urged to
make this Marriage speedily, she gave them the Liberty, to do that which they
should think most convenient for the Public Good. So that this Marriage was
solemnly concluded, and all things disposed to consummate it very soon, to
prevent and dissipate the practices, which some of the Enemies of the public
Repose were making with the Ministers of Spain to hinder it, and to conclude
another with the Princess of Austria and the same Prince, by which they would
make him hope for great advantages, to make him consent.

2. The principal Divines and Doctors of the University of Portugal, as well
Regulars as Seculars, having consulted upon the necessity of a Dispensation,
for the first degree of public Honesty, to effect this Marriage; they were all
of the same Opinion, and of the same Sentiment, saying unanimously that there
was no need of having it in the Case in Question, and they made diverse Writings
thereupon: There was also more than thirty, who signed a Treatise, which was
expressly made by one of them, to take away from her Majesty and the Prince all
those scruples of Conscience, that they might have in marrying without
demanding it. Besides, they had considered the time, and the difficulty, which
would be in obtaining it from the Court of Rome, although contrary to the Will
of his Holiness, which might endanger the Repose and Health of the State, which
could not be able to get out of its forepast miseries, but in putting it self
in a Condition to give Successors to the Crown, which was the only way to do it.

3. Notwithstanding all these Resolutions of these Doctors, and the politic
Instances given them by the most considerable Persons of the Realm, to oblige
the Queen and the Prince to consent to their will; yet they had nevertheless so
much Respect, so much Reverence, and so much Submission to the Authority of the
Holy See, that they believed their Marriage would neither be fully blessed, nor
approved of by God, if first it were not so by him who was in his stead and
place upon Earth; and in this Consideration they employed all their Care, and
all their Diligence possible, to get with speed a Dispensation.

4. It is most certain that as the Queen had not recourse to the Holy See the
first time, that it might judge of the Nullity of the Marriage, for no other
reason, but that aforesaid, doubting the way would not be found so easily open
as the Case required: So the second time also the way seemed open, since the
peace made between Portugal and Spain, the Prince and she had a passionate
Desire, and full of sincerity, and they would not have failed to have had
recourse then for right, if it might have been so easily had as the urgent
necessity required, and the length of the Voyage and the unavoidable Factions
of those Persons, who would not have failed to have opposed it at Rome, as they
had tried to do at Lisbon, had not made them fear, that it would be too great a
Delay, and that the least ill that attended it, would be the putting into
danger the Quiet and Safety of the State, which depended upon the sudden and
speedy Consummation of this Marriage.

5. This is the Reason wherefore they had Recourse to Mounsieur the Cardinal de
Vendosm, Legate a Latere in France: believing also, besides the nearness of
Places, and the facility of Access that in addressing themselves to his
Eminency, they had Recourse to the Pope himself; and not being able to go to
Drink at the Fountain Head, it would suffice that they Drank at a Stream which
they saw, to proceed immediately from its Source.

6. And seeing that the Legate gave them the Dispensation which they required,
believing he had Power so to do. The Queen and the Prince received it, as not
being able to imagine (as they ought not to do) that a Cardinal so Illustrious
and so Wise, in whom the Pope had so much Confidence, and whom he Esteemed so
much, and who was his Legate a Latere, did not know how far his Power extended,
or what he did in granting their Request.

7. It followed then, that from this Dispensation sought for, Received,
Examined, Approved, and Registered by the Official of Lisbon, to whom it was
Directed, that the Marriage was Made and was Celebrated in the face of the holy
Church with all the Formalities requisite, by the Bishop of Targa, in presence
of the Curate of the Palace where it was done, and of Four Gentlemen of the
Chamber of the Prince, commonly called Chamberlains; the Duke de Cadaval's
Proctor Espousing for the Queen, and the Marquess de Marialva for the Prince.

8. All the People also Approved of it, by the most extraordinary marks of
Contentment that ever were seen; and the King Alphonso would show that which he
had in particular, by the Complements which he sent to the Prince his Brother.
And Heaven was not backward, to let us plainly see, that God did give his
Blessing to this Royal Marriage, by the happy Pregnancy of the Queen, which was
perceived within a Month after; and is now at this time gone half her Time. So
that all the People hope, his Holiness will not refuse them his; and that he
will have the goodness to have regard

First, To the most humble Petitions of these two Great and Religious Princes,
which they make with other Crowned Heads.

Secondly, To the particular Respect, and to the sincerity of the Reverence
which they have had, and which they still have to the holy See, in having
Recourse to it.

Thirdly, To the great Submission which the Realm of Portugal, has Witnessed
at all times to the Will of the Popes, and particularly within this Thirty
Years, whilst it has Labored under very great Calamities, and which has
Labored so much as all the World knows, for the Propagation of the Faith,
without so much as Estranging it self so much as in one Point, notwithstanding
all the Disgraces it had suffered under the Papacy, of his Predecessors, with
so much Patience.

Fourthly, To the perfect and respectful Confidence which it still at present
has for him, who has so worthily Succeeded, and who does surpass them all in
Bounty, Justice, and Wisdom; that he will repair all its past Losses, and will,
to render them entirely happy, do them the favor to Establish the Repose, and
the Spiritual and Temporal Peace of these poor People, who have Groaned so many
Years; which depends absolutely on the Approbation and Benediction, which he
shall have the goodness to give to this Marriage.

Fifthly, And lastly, To the Immortal glory that his Holiness, and the holy See
shall receive, after they have by their Applications, and their Paternal Cares,
so happily extinguished the Fire of a War, that Consumed all Europe, by the
means of the Peace made between the two Crowns, who are as it were the two
Poles of it: It shall yet please them to take away the Subject, and the
Occasion, which may be soon able to Rekindle it, and to render it more Hot than
ever.

FINIS.
Books lately Published.
The Courtiers Calling, showing the Art of Living at Court, according to the
Maxims of Policy and Morality. By a Person of Honor, in 12s. price bound 1 s.
6 d.

The Art of Making Love, or Rules for the Conduct of Ladies and Gallants in
their Amors, in 12s. price bound 1 s.

Don Carlos Prince of Spain, a Tragedy as it is Acted at the Dukes Theater,
Written by Thomas Otway, in 4. price 1 s.

Newly Published this Term, Titus and Berenice, with a Farce, called the Cheats
of Scapin. As it was Acted at the Dukes Theater, Written by Thomas Otway, in 4.
price 1 s.

All Sold by Richard Tonson, under Gray's Inn Gate, next Gray's Inn Lane.


