THE Sandy Foundation SHAKEN: OR, Those so generally believed and applauded
DOCTRINES, Of One God, subsisting in three distinct and separate Persons,
Refuted. Of The impossibility of God's pardoning sinners, without a ple^^^^
satisfaction, Refuted. Of The justification o^ (...) ^ersons by an imputative
(...) Refuted.


From the Authority of Scripture Testimonies, and right Reason.

By W.P. j. A Builder on that Foundation which cannot be moved.

But to us there is but one God the Father of all things,

1 Cor. 8.6. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity? He retains
not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy,

Mic. 7.18. For I will not justify the wicked, etc.

Exodus 23.7. London, Printed in the Year, 1668.

To the Unprejudiced Reader.
IT was the fault of some in ancient times, that they made void God's Law by
men's Traditions; and certainly I may now assume the same complaint: for whilst
I take a serious prospect of the Spiritual Nature, and tendency of the Second
Covenant, which God Almighty, in the fullness of time, by his Prophets,
prophesied to make and perfect; and also the accomplishment thereof by Jesus
Christ, and what was brought to pass amongst those Primitive Believers;
methinks I do not only see an utter abolishment of Ceremonial Worship, but the
inscribing that Spiritual Law on the Heart, and infusion of Holy Fear to the
inward Parts, whereby each person became capacitated to know so much of God, as
suited with his present state, from an infallible demonstration in himself, and
not on the slender grounds of men's Lo-here-Interpretations, or Lo-there; for
the Kingdom of God is within, where himself must be the Teacher of his People:
But on the other hand, when from the noise of every parties pretentions to, and
contentions for their own way, as most infallible, I am induced to an impartial
examination of them; Alas! how have all adulterated from the purity both of
Scripture Record, and Primitive Example? receiving for unquestionable
Doctrines, the fallible apprehensions, and uncertain determinations of such
Councils, whose Faction, Prejudice, and Cruelty soon paralleled the foregoing
heathenish Persecutions; and yet that the results of persons so incompetently
qualified, should at this day in their authority remain unquestioned by the
Nations, is matter both of astonishment and pity; but an implicit Faith has
ever been the consequence of ignorance, idleness and fear, being strong
impediments to a judicious inquiry, how far professed and imposed Opinions have
their consistency with Reason, and the true Religion. But that which most of
all deserves a lamentation, is, that Protestants, whose better Arguments have
confuted the Plea of such as made Tradition, and men's Prescriptions
unquestionable in Circumstantials, should themselves by Print and Practice so
openly declare and contend for its Authority in Essentials; as must be obvious
to any that observe their zealous Anathema's against whomsoever refuse a
compliance with them in Doctrines, manifestly bottomed upon men's nice
Inventions.

This is the right state of the Controversy that is maintained by us
(contemptibly called Quakers) against the World, and the undoubted reason of
our severe Treatment at its hands, the end of God Almighties raising us, being
for no other purpose than to declare that which our eyes have seen, our ears
heard, and which our hands have handled of the Eternal Word, in opposition to
the private Opinions, Conjectures, and Interpretations of men concerning God
and Religion, that all people might thereby be reduced to Faith in, and
obedience of the Universal Grace which brings Salvation; which as it only can
restore sound Judgment concerning God, and effect Redemption from Iniquity, so
its being relinquished by men, was the very ground both of their division in
Judgment, and corruption in Manners.

That this has been, and is our case, I shall produce an instance, which is
indeed the occasion of this Treatise.

Two Persons lately of Tho. Vincent's Auditory in Spittle-Yard, (who goes under
the notion of a Presbyter) being desirous to prove all things, and hold fast
the best, visited our Meetings, to understand if we were as really deserving
blame, as represented by our Enemies; where it then pleased Divine Goodness to
visit them with the Call of his Light, from the Inventions, carnal
Observations, Will Worship, and vain Conversation of those to whom they
formerly were related, that they might be made Children of the day; and though
its appearance might be small, yet sufficient to discover them to have been
Inhabitants of the Night, and can never be rejected, but it shall bring that
condemnation which will further testify it to be of God.

But their relinquishing his Congregation, so incenc'd this Presbyterian
Preacher, as that his peevish Zeal transported him beyond, not only the
moderation of Christianity, but the civility of education, venting his folly
and prejudice much to this purpose, That he had as lieve they should go to a
Bawdy House, as to frequent the Quakers Meeting, because of their erroneous and
damnable Doctrines: And pointing to the Window, said, If there should stand a
Cup of Poison, I would rather drink it, than suck in their damnable Doctrines.
He further expressed himself in this manner to one of them; If ever you go again,
I will give you up, and God will give you up, that you may believe a lie, and
be damned. Which storms of foul and railing accusations, proving ineffectual to
shipwreck that little grain of Faith, his Hearers, as forgetting they hold
their preaching by connivance, and the many appeals made by their
nonconforming Brethren, for an Indulgence, came with this Caution to the
Pater-Familias, (or he that was both Husband and Father to the concerned
Parties) that he would exercise his Authority, as well to refuse them to all
Quaker-Visitants, as prohibit them the liberty of their Consciences in
frequenting our Meetings.

All which we could not for the Truth-sake let pass in silence, and therefore
did require him to let us have a public meeting, in which we might have
liberty to answer on the behalf both of our selves and Principles; which after
some demur, was granted, the day he appointed, and at the second hour in the
afternoon. But that he might not want the applause of many voices, and
doubtless to prevent our Friends, (as I am informed) bespoke his usual Auditory
to be there at one; and as a man that would not over-spend himself, or incur a
nonplus for want of Seconds, he had his Third and Fourth, two wit, Tho.
Danson, Tho. Doolittel, and -- Maddocks, who at their times (and often out of
them) did interpose, to whom Geo. Whitehead mostly answered; nor had there any
thing been spoken by another, but from their own example.

The matter in controversy will be related in the beginning of this Treatise,
as a necessary Preludium, or Introduction to the following Discourse; The
manner of it was so gross, that I know not how to represent it better, than by
the levity and rudeness of some Prize; Laughing, Hissing, Shooving, Striking,
and stigmatizing us with the opprobrious terms of Confident Fellow, impudent
Villain, Blasphemer, etc. And, as the usual refuge of shallow Persons (when
they have little else to say, to prepossess their Hearers with prejudice
against the Principles of such as do oppose them) he questioned much whether I
was not some Jesuit; Not remembering, or at least unwilling to let the people
know, that none have been, nor are more instant in the vindication of that
Doctrine he and his Brethren did assert, (to wit, God subsisting in three
distinct persons) than the Jesuits; So that, if I should not as well reflect a
scandal upon their learning by a comparison, as he did upon my Principle, I
could more truly invert Jesuitism upon himself: In short, they neither would
keep to Scripture terms themselves, nor suffer it in others; but looking upon
G. Whitehead's explanation of their Terms, and reduction of their Matter (if
possible) to a Scripture sense (thereby fitting it to the Auditories
apprehension) to be an indirect way of answering (as that which nakedly did
expose their tradition all folly to the vulgar) T.V. in an abrubt manner fell
to his prayer in which he falsely, and with many strangly affected whines,
accused us for Blasphemers unto God; and that he might prevent the clearing of
our selves, he desired the people, when he had finished, to be gone, giving
them an example by his and three Brethrens retreat: But we being desirous
further to inform the people of our innocence, they did not only (as before)
endeavor to pull us down, but put the Candles out, though several persons of
good esteem, continued, whilst we spoke in vindication of our selves, from the
invectives of our Adversaries.

The people still remaining undispersed, T.V. came very palely down the Stairs
(having a Candle in his hand) requiring their dismiss, at which time he
promised us, at our request, another meeting; but as one that knew not well
what he said, or never purposed to perform what he promised, has given us since
to understand, he cannot in Conscience spare us so much time; yet to satisfy
G.W. and my self, in private, he could agree; which surely cannot be termed
another meeting, since then it must relate to the proceeding one; But how near
the relation is betwixt an accusation before hundreds, and a satisfaction
before none, must needs be obvious to every unbyas'd person: -- Our Right
should have been altogether as public as our Wrong: -- For which cause we were
necessitated to visit his Meeting; where on a Lecture day (after a continued
silence during all his Worship) we modestly entreated we might be cleared from
those unjust reflections before his Congregation, leaving a Disputation (if he
could not then attend it) to some more seasonable opportunity: But as one, who
resolved injustice to men's reputation, as well as cowardice, in baulking a
defense of his own Principles, he slunck most shamefully away; nor would any
there, though urged to it, assume his place to vindicate his practice toward
us, or his Doctrine then delivered.

Reader, What Is thy Opinion of this savage entertainment? Would Socrates, Cato,
or Seneca have treated us with such unseemly carriage, whom they call Heathens?
I suppose not: And well is it for the truly sober and conscientious, they are
not liable to those severe lashes, and that peevish usage, which are the
inseparable Appendixes to a Scotch Directory, whose cold and cutting gales ever
have designed to nip and blast the fairest Blossoms of greater Reformation. So
much for History.

And what remains, is to inform the Reader, that with great brevity I have
discust and endeavored a total enervation of those Cardinal Points, and chief
Doctrines so firmly believed, and continually imposed for Articles of Christian
Faith; 1. The Trinity of separate Persons, in the Unity of Essence. 2. God's
incapacity to forgive without the fullest satisfaction paid him by another. 3.
A justification of impure persons, from an imputative Righteousness. Which
Principles, let me tell thee, Reader, are not more repugnant to Scriptures,
Reason, and Souls-Security, than most destructive to Gods Honor, in his Unity,
Mercy, and Purity.

Therefore I beseech thee to exterminate passion from her predominacy, in the
perusal of this abridg'd Discourse, since it was writ in love to thee; that
whilst it is thy desire to know Love, and fear God Almighty above men's Precepts,
thou may not miss so good an end, by the blind embraces of Tradition for
Truth. But in the nobility of a true Berean, search and inquire; letting the
good old Verity, not a pretended Antiquity, (whilst a mere novelty;) and solid
Reason, not an over-fond credulity, sway the balance of thy Judgment, that
both stability and certainty may accompany thy determinations. Farewell.

A short Confutation, by way of Recapitulation, of what was objected against us
at Thomas Vincent his Meeting.
IF Disputations prove at any time ineffectual, it is either to be imputed to
the ignorance and ambiguity of the Disputants, or to the rudeness and prejudice
of the Auditory; all which may truly be affirmed of T.V. with his three
Brethren, and Congregation.

The Accusation being general, viz. That the Quakers held damnable Doctrines:
George Whitehead on their behalf stood up, and as it was his place, willingly
would have given the people an information of our Principles, which if objected
against, he was as ready to attest them by the authority of Scripture and
Reason: but instead of this better Method, T.V. as one that is often employed in
Cathechistical Lectures, falls to Interrogatories, begging that himself, he in
his slander had taken for granted, to wit, the knowledge of our Principles.

The Question was this, Whether we owned one Godhead, subsisting in three
distinct and separate Persons, as the result of various revises and amendments;
which being denied by us, as a Doctrine no where Scriptural, T.V. frames this
Sylogism from the beloved Disciples words.

There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, John 5.7.
and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one.

These are either three Manifestations, three Operations, three Substances, or
three somethings else besides Subsistances:

But they are not three Manifestations, three Operations, three Substances, nor
three anythings else besides Subsistences:

Ergo, Three Subsistences.

G.VV. utterly rejected his terms, as not to be found in Scripture, or
deduceable from the place he instanced; wherefore he desires their explanation
of their Terms, inasmuch as God did not use to wrap his Truths up in
Heathenish Metaphisicks, but in plain Language: Notwithstanding we could not
obtain a better explication then Person, nor of Person, than the mode of a
Substance; to all which G.VV. and my self urged several Scriptures, proving
Gods complete unity: And when we queried how God was to be understood, if in an
abstractive sense from his Substance: They concluded it a point more fit for
Admiration than Disputation. But a little to review his Syllogysm; the manner
of it shows him as little a Scholar, as its matter does a Christian; but I
shall overlook the first, and so much of the second as might deserve my
Objection to his Major, and give in short my Reason, why I flatly deny his
Minor Proposition. No one Substance can have three distinct Subsistances, and
preserve its own Unity, for granting them the most favorable definition, every
subsistence will have its own Substance; so that three distinct Subsistances,
or manner of beings, will require three distinct Substances of Beings;
consequently three Gods: for if the infinite Godhead subsists in three
separate manners or forms, then is not any one of them a perfect and complete
subsistence without the other two; so parts, and some thing finite is in God:
or if infinite, then three distinct infinite Subsistances; and what is this but
to assert three Gods, since none is infinite but God? And on the contrary,
there being an inseparability betwixt the Substance and its subsistence, the
Unity of Substance will not admit a Trinity of incommunicable or distinct
Subsistances.

T.D. being asked of whom was Christ the express Image, from his alleging
that Scripture in the Hebrews? answered, of Gods Subsistence, or manner of
being; from whence two things in short follow as my Reply, It makes God a
Father only by subsistence, and Christ a Son without a Substance. Besides its
falsely rendered in the Hebrews, Heb. 1.3.
since the Greek does not say (...), but (...), the Character of Substance.

And if he will peruse a farther discovery of his Error, and explanation of the
Matter, let him read Col. 1.15. Who is the Image of the Invisible God.

And because G.W. willing to bring this strange Doctrine to the capacity of the
People, compared their three Persons to three Apostles, saying, he did not
understand how Paul, Peter, and John could be three Persons, and one Apostle,
(a most apt comparison to detect the ridicule of their Doctrine) one --
Maddocks, whose Zeal outstript his knowledge, busling hard, as one that had
some necessary matter for the decision of our Controversy, instead thereof
(perhaps to save his Brethren, or show himself) silences our farther
controverting of the Principle, by a Syllogistical, but false and impertinent
reflection upon G.W. his person. It runs thus, He that scornfully and
reproachfully compares our Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity of Father, Son and
Spirit, one in Essence, but three in Persons, to three finite men, as Paul,
Peter, and John, is a Blasphemer. But you G.W. have so done. Ergo. --

A strange way of Argumentation, to beg what cannot be granted him, and take for
granted what still remains a Question, viz. That there are three distinct and
separate Persons in one Essence: Let them first prove their Trinity, and then
charge their Blasphemy; but I must not forget this persons self-confutation,
who to be plainer, called them three He Is; and if he can find a He without a
Substance, or prove that a subsistence is any other than the form of a He, he
would do well to justify himself from the imputation of Ignorance.

And till their Hipothesis be of better Authority, G.W. neither did, nor does
by that Comparison design men's Inventions so much honor.

For it is to be remarked, that G.W. is no otherwise a Blasphemer, than by
drawing direct consequences from their own Principles, and recharging them upon
themselves; so that he did not speak his own apprehensions by his Comparison,
but the sense of their Assertion, therefore Blasphemer and Blasphemy are their
own.

The Trinity of Distinct and Separate Persons in the Unity of Essence, refuted
from Scripture.
1 King. 8.23. Isa. 40 25 c. 45.5, 6. c. 48.17. Ps. 71.22 (...)
AND he said, Lord God, there is no God like unto THEE: To whom then will ye
liken ME? Or shall I be equal, says the Holy ONE? -- I am the Lord, and there
is NONE else, there is no GOD besides ME. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, the
Holy ONE of Israel. I will also praise THEE, O my God; unto THEE will I sing, O
Holy ONE of Israel. (...) Zac. 14.9
Jehovah is ONE, and his Name ONE. Which with the Cloud of other Testimonies
that might be urged, evidently demonstrate, that in the days of the first
Covenant, and Prophets, but ONE was the Holy God, and God but that Holy ONE.
Mat. 19.17. Joh. 17.8. Romans 3.30. 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 4.6. 1 Timothy 2.5 Jude 25.
-- Again, And Jesus said unto him, Why call thou me good? there is none
good but ONE, and that is God. And this is Life Eternal, that they might know
THEE (Father) the ONLY true God. Seeing it is ONE God that shall justify;
There be gods many, but unto us there is but ONE God, the Father, of whom are
all things. ONE God and Father who is above all things. For there is ONE God.
To the ONLY Wise God be glory now and ever. From all which I shall lay down
this one Assertion, that the Testimonies of Scripture, both under the Law, and
since the Gospel Dispensation, declare ONE to be God, and God to be ONE, on
which I shall raise this Argument;

If God, as the Scriptures testify, has never been declared or believed, but
as the Holy ONE, then will it follow, that God is not a Holy THREE, nor does
subsist in THREE distinct and separate Holy ONES; but the before-cited
Scriptures undeniably prove that ONE is God, and God only is that Holy ONE;
therefore he cannot be divided into, or subsist in a Holy THREE, or THREE
distinct and separate Holy ONES. -- Neither can this receive the least
prejudice from that frequent but impertinent distinction, that he is ONE in
Substance, but THREE in Persons or Subsistences; since God was not declared or
believed incompleatly, or without his subsistence; Nor did he require homage
from his Creatures, as an incomplete or abstracted Being, but as God the Holy
ONE; For so he should be manifested and worshipped without that which was
absolutely necessary to himself; A most absurd Blasphemy. -- So that either the
Testimonies of the aforementioned Scriptures are to be believed concerning God,
that he is entirely and completely, not abstractly and distinctly, the Holy
ONE, or else their Authority to be denied by these Trinitarians; and on the
contrary, if they pretend to credit their Holy Testimonies, they must
necessarily conclude their kind of Trinity a Fiction.

Refuted from right Reason.
1. If there be three distinct and separate Persons, then three distinct and
separate Substances, because every person is inseparable from its own
Substance; and as there is no person that is not a Substance in common
acceptance among men, so do the Scriptures plentifully agree herein; and since
the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Spirit is God (which their Opinion
necessitates them to confess) then unless the Father, Son, and Spirit, are
three distinct Nothings, they must be three distinct Substances, and
consequently three distinct Gods.

2. It Is farther proved, if it be considered, that either the Divine Persons
are finite or infinite; if the first, then something finite is inseparable to
the infinite Substance, whereby something finite is in God; If the last, then
three distinct Infinites, three Omnipotents, three Eternals, and so three Gods.

3. If each Person be God, and that God subsists in three Persons, then in each
Person are three Persons or Gods, and from three, they will increase to nine,
and so ad infinitum.

4. But if they shall deny the three Persons, or Subsistencies to be infinite,
(for so there would unavoidably be three Gods); it will follow that they must
be finite, and so the absurdity is not abated from what it was; for that of one
substance having three subsistences, is not greater, then that an infinite
Being should have three finite modes of subsisting. But though that mode which
is finite cannot answer to a substance that is infinite, yet to try if we can make
their Principle to approach common sense; Let Us conceive that three persons,
which may be finite separately, make up an infinite conjunctly; however this
will follow, that they are no more incommunicable or separate, nor properly
subsistences, but a subsistence; for the infinite Substance cannot find a bottom
or substance in any one or two, therefore jointly. And here I am also willing
to overlook finiteness in the Father, Son, and Spirit, which this Doctrine
must suppose.

5. Again, if these three distinct Persons are one, with some one thing, as
they say they are with the Godhead, then are not they incommunicable among
themselves; but so much the contrary, as to be one in the place of another; for
if that the only God is the Father, and Christ be that only God, then is Christ
the Father. So if that one God be the Son, and the Spirit that one God, then is
the Spirit the Son, and so round. Nor is it possible to stop, or that it should
be other wise, since if the Divine Nature be inseparable from the three
Persons, or communicated to each, and each Person have the whole Divine Nature,
then is the Son in the Father, and the Spirit in the Son, unless that the
Godhead be as incommunicable to the Persons, as they are reported to be
amongst themselves; or that the three Persons have distinctly allotted them
such a proportion of the Divine Nature, as is not communicable to each other;
which is a like ridiculous and shameful. Much more might be said to manifest
the gross contradiction of this Trinitarian Doctrine, as vulgarly received; but
I must be brief.

Information and Caution.
Before I shall conclude this Head, it is requisite I should inform the Reader
concerning it is Original; thou may assure thy self, it is not from the
Scriptures, nor Reason, since so expressly repugnant; although all Broachers of
their own Inventions strongly endeavor to reconcile them with their Holy
Record. Know then, my Friend, 'twas born above three hundred years after the
Ancient Gospel was declared; and that through the nice distinctions, and too
daring curiosity of the Bishop of Alexandria, who being opposed by Arius, their
Zeal so reciprocally blew the fire of Contention, Animosity, and Persecution,
till at last they sacrificed each other to their mutual revenge.

Thus it was conceived in ignorance, brought forth and maintained by cruelty;
for though he that was strongest, imposed his Opinion, persecuting the
contrary, yet the Scale turning on the Trinitarian side, it has there continued
through all the Romish Generations; and notwithstanding it has obtained the
name of Athanatian from Athanatius, an opiniated man, (witness his carriage
toward Constantine the Emperor) because supposed to have been most concerned
in the framing that Creed in which this Doctrine is asserted; yet have I never
seen one Copy void of a suspicion, rather to have been the results of Popish
Schoolmen, which I could render more perspicuous, did not brevity necessitate
me to an omission.

Be therefore cautioned, Reader, not to embrace the determinations of
prejudiced Councils, for Evangelical Doctrine; to whom the Scriptures bear no
certain testimony, neither was believed by the Primitive Saints, or thus stated
by any I have read in the first, second, or third Centuries, particularly
Ireneus, Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Origin, Theophilact, with many others who
appear wholly foreign to the matter in controversy. -- But seeing that
private Spirits, and those none of the most ingenious, have been the Parents
and Guardians of this so generally received Doctrine; let the time pass
suffice, and be admonished to apply thy mind unto that Light and Grace which
brings Salvation; that by obedience thereunto, those mists Tradition has cast
before thy eyes, may be expelled, and thou receive a certain knowledge of that
God, whom to know is Life Eternal, not to be a divided, but ONE pure entire and
eternal Being; who in the fullness of time sent forth his Son, as the true Light
which enlightneth every man; that whosoever followed him (the Light) might be
translated from the dark Notions, and vain Conversations of men, to this Holy
Light, in which only sound Judgment and eternal Life are obtainable; who so
many hundred years since, in Person testified the virtue of it, and has
communicated unto all, such a proportion, as may enable them to follow his
Example.

The Vulgar Doctrine of Satisfaction, being dependent on the Second Person of
the imagined Trinity, refuted from Scripture.
Doctr.
THat man having transgressed the Righteous Law of God, and so exposed to the
penalty of eternal Wrath, it is altogether impossible for God to remit or
forgive without a Plenary satisfaction; and that there was no other way by
which God could obtain satisfaction, or save men, than by inflicting the
penalty of infinite wrath and vengeance on Jesus Christ the Second Person of
the Trinity, who for sins past, present, and to come, has wholly born and paid
it, (whether for all or* but some) to the offended infinite justice of his
Father.

Exodus 34.6, 7.
1. And the Lord passed by before him, (Moses) and proclaimed, The Lord, the
Lord God merciful and gracious, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sin. [From whence I shall draw this Position, that
since God has proclaimed himself a Gracious, Merciful, and forgiving God, it is
not inconsistent with his Nature to remit, without any other consideration than
his own Love; otherwise he could not justly come under the imputation of so
many gracious Attributes, with whom it is impossible to pardon, and necessary
to exact the payment of the utmost farthing.] --

2. Chron. 3^.^.
2. For if ye turn again to the Lord, the Lord your God is gracious and
merciful, and will not turn away his face from you. [Where how natural is it to
observe that God's remission is grounded on their repentance; and not that it is
impossible for God to pardon, without a Plenary satisfaction, since the
possibility, nay, certainty of the contrary, viz. his Grace and Mercy, is the
great Motive or Reason of that loving invitation to return.] --

Neh. 1^.17.
3. They hardened their Necks, and hearkened not to thy Commandments, but thou
art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful. [Can the honest hearted
Reader conceive that God should be thus mercifully quallified, whilst executing
the rigor of the Law transgrest, or not acquitting without the Debt be paid him
by another? I suppose not.

4. Let the wicked forsake his way, Isa. 55.7.
and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. [Come
let the unprejudiced judge, if this Scripture-Doctrine is not very remote from
saying his Nature cannot forgive sin, therefore let Christ pay him full
satisfaction, or he will certainly be avenged; which is the substance of that
strange Opinion.]

5. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, Jer. 31.31, 33, 34.
that I will make a New Covenant with the House of Israel; I will put my Law in
their inward Parts; I will forgive their iniquity, I will remember their sin no
more. [Here is God's mere Grace asserted, against the pretended necessity of a
satisfaction to procure his Remission: And this Paul acknowledges to be the
dispensation of the Gospel, in his eight Chapter to the Hebrews: So that this
New Doctrine does not only contradict the Nature and Design of the second
Covenant, but seems in short to discharge God both from his Mercy and
Omnipotence.]

6. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, Mich. 7.18.
and passes by the transgression of the Remnant of his Heritage? He retains
not his Anger for ever, because he delights in Mercy. [Can there be a more
express passage to clear, not only the possibility, but real inclinations in
God to pardon sin, and not retain his anger for ever; since the Prophet seems
to challenge all other Gods to try their excellency by his God, herein
describing the supremacy of his Power, and superexcellency of his Nature, that
he pardons iniquity, and retains not his anger for ever: so that if the
Satisfactionists should ask the Question, Who is a God like unto ours, that
cannot pardon iniquity, nor pass by transgression, but retain his anger until
somebody make him satisfaction? I answer, Many amongst the harsh and severe
Rulers of the Nations; but as for my God, he is exalted above them all, upon
the Throne of his Mercy, who pardons iniquity, and retains not his anger
for ever, but will have compassion upon us.]

Mat. 6.12.
7. And forgive us our Debts, as we forgive our Debtors. [Where nothing can be
more obvious than that which is forgiven, is not paid: And if it is our duty to
forgive without a satisfaction received, and that God is to forgive us as we
forgive them, then is a satisfaction totally excluded: Christ further
paraphrases upon that part of his Prayer, v. 14. For if ye forgive their
trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive you. Where he as well argues
the equity of Gods forgiving them, from their forgiving others, as he
encourages them to forgive others, from the example of God's Mercy in forgiving
them; which is more amply expressed in chap. 18. where the Kingdom of Heaven
(that consists in Righteousness) is represented by a King; Who upon his Debtors
Petition, had compassion, and forgave him; but the same treating his fellow
Servant without the least forbearance, the King condemned his unrighteousness,
and delivered him over to the Tormentors. But how had this been a fault in the
Servant, if his Kings Mercy had not been proposed for his Example? How most
unworthy therefore is it of God, and blasphemous, may I justly term it, to be
in any's daring to assert that forgiveness impossible to God, which is not only
possible, but enjoined to men.]

John 3.16.
8. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believed in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life. [By
which it appears, that God's Love is not the effect of Christ's satisfaction,
but Christ is the proper Gift and Effect of Gods Love.]

Act. 10.34.
9. To him gave all the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever
believes in him, shall receive Remission of sins. [So that Remission came by
believing his Testimony, and obeying his Precepts, and not by a pretended
satisfaction.]

Romans 8.31, 32.
10. If God be for us, who can be against us? He that spared not his own Son,
but delivered him up for us all. [Which evidently declares it to be God's Act
of free Love, otherwise if he must be paid; he should be at the charge of his
own satisfaction, for he delivered up the Son.]

2 Cor. 11.5.18, 19.
11. And all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus
Christ, and has given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation, to wit, that God
was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them. [How undeniably apparent is it that God is so far from
standing off in high displeasure, and upon his terms, contracting with his Son
for a satisfaction, as being otherwise incapable to be reconciled, that he
became himself the Reconciler by Christ, and afterward by the Apostles, his
Ambassadors, to whom was committed the Ministry of Reconciliation.]

12. In whom we have redemption through his Blood, Ephesians. 1.7.
the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. [Now what
relation, satisfaction has to forgiveness of sins, or how any can construe
Grace to be Justice, the meanest understanding may determine.]

13. But the God of all Grace, 1. Pet. 5.10.
who has called us unto his eternal Glory, by Christ Jesus. [He does not say
that God's Justice, in consideration of Christ's Satisfaction, acquitted us
from sins past, present, and to come, and therefore has called us to his
eternal Glory, but from his Grace.]

14. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, 1. John 4.9.
because that God sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we might
live through him. [Which plainly attributes Christ in his Doctrine, Life,
Miracles, Death, and Sufferings to God, as the Gift and Expression of his
Eternal Love, for the Salvation of men.]

1. In abolishing that other Covenant, which consisted in External and shadowy
Ordinances, and that made none clean as concerning the Conscience.

2. In promulgating his message of a most free and universal tender of Life and
Salvation unto all that believed and followed him, (the Light) in all his
Righteousness, the very end of his appearance being to destroy the works of the
Devil, and which every man only comes to experiment, as he walks in a holy
subjection to that measure of Light and Grace, wherewith the fullness has
enlightened him.

3. In seconding his Doctrines with Signs, Miracles, and a most
innocent-self-denying-life.

4. In ratifying and confirming all (with great love, and holy resignation) by
the offering up of his Body to be crucified by wicked hands; who is now
ascended far above all Heavens, and is thereby become a most complete Captain,
and perfect Example.

So that I can by no means conclude, but openly declare that the Scriptures of
Truth are not only silent in reference to this Doctrine of Satisfaction, but
that it is altogether inconsistent with the Dignity of God, and very repugnant
to the Conditions, Nature, and Tendency of the second Covenant, concerning
which their Testimony is so clear.

The Absurdities that unavoidably follow the Comparison of this Doctrine, with
the sense of Scripture.
1. THat God is gracious to forgive, and yet impossible for him, unless the
Debt be fully satisfied.

2. That the finite and impotent Creature, is more capable of extending Mercy
and Forgiveness, than the Infinite and Omnipotent Creator.

3. That God so loved the World, he gave his only Son to save it; and yet that
God stood off in high displeasure, and Christ gave himself to God as a complete
satisfaction to his offended Justice; with many more such like gross
Consequences that might be drawn.

Refuted from right Reason.
But if we should grant a Scripture-silence as to the necessity of Christ's
satisfying his Fathers Justice, yet so manifest would be the Contradictions,
and foul the Repugnances to right Reason, that who had not veiled his
understanding with the dark suggestions of unwarrantable. Tradition, or
contracted his Judgment to the implicit apprehensions of some over-valued
acquaintance, might with great facility discriminate to a full resolve in this
point; for admitting God to be a Creditor, or he to whom the Debt should be
paid, and Christ he that satisfies or pays it on the behalf of man, the
Debtor, this question will arise, Whether he paid Debt, as God, Man, or both
(to use their own terms.)

Not as God.
1. In that it divides the Unity of the Godhead by two distinct Acts, of being
Offended, and not Offended; of condemning Justice, and redee^^^^ Mercy of
requiring a satisfaction, and then paying of it.

2. Because if Christ pays the Debt as God, then the Father and the Spirit
being God, they also pay the Debt.

3. Since God is to be satisfied, and that Christ is God, he consequently is to
be satisfied; and who shall satisfy his infinite Justice?

4. But if Christ has satisfied God the Father, Christ being also God, 'twill
follow then that he has satisfied himself, (which cannot be.)

5. But since God the Father was once to be satisfied, and that it is impossible
he should do it himself, nor yet the Son or Spirit, because the same God; it
naturally follows that the Debt remains unpaid, and these Satisfactionists thus
far are still at a loss.

Not as Man.
6. The Justice offended, being infinite, his satisfaction ought to bear a
proportion therewith, which Jesus Christ, as Man, could never pay, he being
finite, and from a finite cause could not proceed an infinite effect; for so
man may be said to bring forth God, since nothing below the Divinity it self
can rightly be styled Infinite.

Not as God and Man.
7. For where two mediums, or middle Propositions, are singly inconsistent with
the nature of the end for which they were at first propounded, their
conjunction rather does augment than lessen the difficulty of its
accomplishment; and this I am persuaded must be obvious to every unbyas'd
understanding.

But admitting one of these three mediums possible for the payment of an
infinite Debt; yet, pray observe the most unworthy, and ridiculous consequences
that unavoidably will attend the impossibility of Gods pardoning sinners
without a satisfaction.

Consequences Irreligious and Irrational.
1. That it is unlawful and impossible for God Almighty to be Gracious and
Merciful, or to pardon Transgressors; then which, what is more unworthy of God?

2. That God was inevitably compelled to this way of saving men; the highest
affront to his incontroleable Nature.

3. That it was unworthy of God to pardon, but not to inflict punishment on the
Innocent, or require a satisfaction where there was nothing due.

4. It does not only disacknowledge the true Virtue, and real Intent of
Christ's life and death, but entirely deprives God of that praise which is
owing to his greatest love and goodness.

5. It represents the Son more kind and compassionate than the Father; whereas
if both be the same God, then either the Father is as loving as the Son, or the
Son* as angry as the Father.

6. It robs God of the gift of his Son for our Redemption (which the Scriptures
attribute to the unmerited love he had for the World) in affirming the Son
purchased that Redemption from the Father, by the gift of himself to God as our
complete satisfaction.

7. Since Christ could not pay what was not his own, it follows that in the
payment of his own, the case still remains equally grievous; Since the Debt is
not hereby absolved or forgiven, but transferred only; and by consequence we are
no better provided for Salvation than before, owing that now to the Son, which
was once owing to the Father.

8. It no way renders men beholding, or in the least oblieg'd to God, since by
their Doctrine he would not have abated us, nor did he Christ the last
farthing, so that the acknowledgments are peculiarly the Sons: which destroys
the whole current of Scripture-Testimony, for his good will toward men. -- O
the infamous portraiture this Doctrine draws of the infinite Goodness: Is this
your retribution, O injurious Satisfactionists?

9. That God's Justice is satisfied for sins past, present, and to come,
whereby God and Christ have lost both their power of injoyning Godliness, and
prerogative of punishing Disobedience; for what is once paid, is not
revokeable; and if punishment should arrest any for their Debts, it either
argues a breach on God or Christ's part, or else that it has not been
sufficiently solved, and the penalty completely sustained by an other; Romans 14
12. 2 Cor. 15.10.
forgetting that every one must appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to
receive according to things done in the body: Yea, every one must give an
account of himself to God. But many more are the gross Absurdities and
Blasphemies that are the genuine Fruits of this so confidently believed
Doctrine of Satisfaction.

A Caution.
Let me advise, nay warn thee, Reader, by no means to admit an entertainment of
this Principle, by whomsoever recommended; since it does not only divest the
glorious God of his sovereign Power, both to pardon and punish, but as
certainly insinuates a licentiousness, at least a liberty that unbecomes the
nature of that ancient Gospel once preached among the Primitive Saints, and
that from an apprehension of a satisfaction once paid for all. Whereas I must
tell thee, That unless thou seriously repent, and no more grieve God's Holy
Spirit, placed in thy inmost Parts, but art thereby taught to deny all
ungodliness, and lead into all Righteousness; At the Tribunal of the Great
Judge thy Plea shall prove invalid, and thou receive they reward without
respect to any other thing than the Deeds done in the Body. Be not deceived,
God will not be mocked; Gal. 6.7.
such as thou sowest, such shall thou reap: which leads me to the consideration
of my third Head, viz. Justification by an Imputative Righteousness.

The Justification of impure Persons, by an imputative Righteousness, refuted
from Scripture.
Doctr.
THat there is no other way for sinners to be justified in the sight of God,
than by the imputation of that Righteousness Christ long since performed
Personally, and that Sanctification is consequential, not antecedent.

Exodus 23.1.
1. Keep thee far from a false matter; and the Innocent and Righteous slay thou
not; for I will not justify the wicked. Whereon I ground this Argument, That
since God has prescribed an inoffensive life, as that which only can give
acceptance with him, and on the contrary has determined never to justify the
wicked, then will it necessarily follow, that unless this so much believed
imputative Righteousness had that effectual influence, as to regenerate and
redeem the Soul from sin, on which the malidiction lies, he is as far to seek
for justification as before; for whilst a person is really guilty of a false
matter, I positively assert from the authority and force of this Scripture,
they cannot be in a state of Justification; and as God will not justify the
Wicked, so by the acknowledged reason of contraries, the Just he will never
condemn, but they, and they only are the justified of God.

Prove. 17 15.
2. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they
both are an abomination to the Lord. [It would very opportunely be observed,
that if its so great an abomination in men to justify the Wicked, and condemn
the Just, how much greater would it be in God, which this Doctrine of
Imputative Righteousness necessarily does imply, that so far disengages God from
the person justified, as that his guilt shall not condemn him, nor his
innocence justify him? but will not the abomination appear greatest of all,
when God shall be found condemning of the Just, on purpose to justify the
Wicked, and that he is there to compel, or else no Salvation: which is the
tendency of their Doctrine, Who imagine the Righteous and Merciful God, to
condemn and punish his Innocent Son, that he having satisfied for our sins, we
might be justified (whilst unsanctified) by the imputation of his perfect
Righteousness. O why should this horrible thing be contended for by Christians?

3. The Son shall not bear the iniquity of his Father; Ezekiel. 18.20, 26, 27, 28.
the Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of
the wicked shall be upon him. When a righteous man turns away from his
righteousness, for his iniquity that he has done shall he die; again when the
wicked man turns away from his wickedness, and does that which is lawful and
right, he shall save his Soul alive; yet says the House of Israel, The Ways of
the Lord are not equal; Are not my Ways equal? If this was once equal, it is so
still, for Gods unchangeable; and therefore I shall draw this Argument, That
the condemnation or justification of persons is not from the imputation of an
others Righteousness, but the actual performance and keeping of God's Righteous
Statutes or Commandments, otherwise God should forget to be equal: Therefore
how wickedly unequal are those, who not from Scripture evidences, but their
dark conjectures and interpretations of obscure passages, would frame a
Doctrine so manifestly inconsistent with God's most pure and equal Nature;
making him to condemn the Righteous to death, and justify the wicked to life,
from the imputation of an others Righteousness: -- a most unequal way indeed.

4. Not every one that says unto me Lord Lord, Mat. 7.21, 24, 25.
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my
Father. Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken
him unto a wise man which built his house upon a Rock, etc. [How very fruitful
are the Scriptures of Truth in Testimonies against this absurd and dangerous
Doctrine; these words seem to import a twofold Righteousness, the first
consists in Sacrifice, the last in Obedience; the one makes a talking, the
other a doing Christian. I in short argue thus, If none can enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but they that do the Fathers Will; then none are justified,
but they who do the Fathers Will, because none can enter into the Kingdom, but
such as are justified; since therefore there can be no admittance had without
performing that Righteous Will, and doing those Holy and perfect Sayings. Alas,
to what value will an Imputative Righteousness amount when a poor Soul shall
awake polluted in his sin, by the hasty calls of death, to make its appearance
before the Judgment Seat, where it is impossible to justify the wicked, or that
any should escape uncondemned, but such as do the Will of God.]

John 15.10.
5. If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept
my Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love. [From whence this Argument does
naturally arise; If none are truly justified that abide not in Christ's love,
and that none abide in his love who keep not his Commandments, then
consequently none are justified but such as keep his Commandments. Besides,
here is the most palpable opposition to an Imputative Righteousness that may
be; for Christ is so far from telling them of such a way of being justified, as
that he informs them the reason why he abode in his Fathers love, was his
obedience; and is so far from telling them of their being justified, whilst not
abiding in his love, by virtue of his obedience imputed unto them, that unless
they keep his Commands, and obey for themselves, they shall be so remote from
an acceptance, as wholly to be cast out; in all which Christ is but our
Example.]

Joh. 15.14.
6. Ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. [We have almost here
the very words, but altogether the same matter, which affords us thus much,
without being Christ's Friend, there is no being justified, but unless we keep
his Commandments, it is impossible we should be his Friends; it therefore
necessarily follows, that except we keep his Commandments, there is no being
justified: or in short thus, If the way to be a Friend, is to keep the
Commandments, then the way to be justified is to keep the Commandments, because
none can obtain the quality of a Friend, and remain unjustified, or be truly
justified, whilst an Enemy, which he certainly is, that keeps not his
Commandments.]

Romans 2.13.
7. For not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the doers of the Law
shall be justified. [From whence how unanswerably may I observe, Unless we
become doers of that Law, which Christ came not to destroy, but as our Example,
to fulfill, we can never be justified before God; wherefore obedience is so
absolutely necessary, that short of it there can be no acceptance; nor let any
fancy that Christ has so fulfilled it for them, as to exclude their obedience
from being requisite to their acceptance, but only as their Pattern, For unless
ye follow me, says Christ, ye cannot be my Disciples; and it is not only
repugnant to Reason, but in this place particularly refuted; for if Christ had
fulfilled it on our behalf, and we not enabled to follow his Example, there
would not be doers, but one doer only of the Law justified before God. In
short, if without obedience to the Righteous Law none can be justified, then
all the hearing of the Law, with but the mere imputation of another
Righteousness, whilst actually a breaker of it, is excluded as not justifying
before God. If you fulfill the Royal Law, ye do well; so speak ye, and so do, as
they that shall be judged thereby.]

8. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; Romans 8.13.
but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live.
[No man can be dead and justified before God, for so He may be justified that
lives after the flesh; therefore they only can be justified that are alive;
from whence this follows, If the living are justified and not the dead, and
that none can live to God, but such as have mortified the deeds of the Body
through the Spirit, then none can be justified but they who have mortified the
deeds of the Body through the Spirit; so that Justification does not go before,
but is subsequential to the mortification of lusts, and sanctification of the
Soul through the Spirits operation.]

9. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, Romans 8.14.
are the Sons of God. [How clearly will it appear to any but a cavelling and
tenatious Spirit; that man can be no farther justified, then as he becomes
obedient to the Spirits leadings; for if none can be a Son of God, but he
that is lead by the Spirit of God, then none can be justified without being led
by the Spirit of God, because none can be justified but he that is a Son of
God: so that the way to Justification and Sonship, is through obedience to the
Spirits leadings, that is, manifesting the holy Fruits thereof by an innocent
life and conversation.]

10. But let every man prove his own work, Gal. 6.7
and then shall he have rejoyceing in himself alone, and not in another. Be not
deceived, for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he reap. [If rejoicing and
acceptance with God, or the contrary, are to be reaped from the work that a man
sows, either to the Flesh or to the Spirit, then is the Doctrine of
Acceptance, and ground of Rejoicing from the works of another utterly excluded,
every man reaping according to what he has sown, and bearing his own burden.

Jam. 2.21, 24.
11. Was not Abraham our Father justified by works, when he had offered Isaac
his Son upon the Altar? Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and
not by Faith only. [He that will seriously peruse this Chapter, shall doubtless
find some, to whom this Epistle was wrote, of the same Spirit with the
Satisfactionists and Imputarians of our time, they fain would have found out a
Justification from Faith in, and the Imputation of another Righteousness; but
James an Apostle of the most high God, who experimentally knew what true Faith
and Justification meant, gave them to understand from Abraham's self-denying
Example, that unless their Faith in the purity and power of God's Grace, had
that effectual Operation to subdue every beloved lust, wean from every Dallila,
and entirely to resign and sacrifice Isaac himself, their Faith was a Fable, or
as a Body without a Spirit; and as Righteousness therefore in one person cannot
justify another from unrighteousness, so whoever now pretends to be justified
by Faith, whilst not led and guided by the Spirit into all the Ways of Truth,
and Works of Righteouness, their Faith they will find at last Fiction.]

1 John 3.7, 8.
12. Little Children, let no man deceive you, he that does Righteousness, is
Righteous, as God is Righteous, (but) he that commits sin is of the Devil.
[From whence it may be very clearly argued, that none can be in a state of
Justification from the Righteousness performed by an other imputed unto them,
but as they are actually redeemed from the commision of sin: For if he that
commits sin is of the Devil, then cannot any be justified completely before
God, who is so incompleatly redeemed, as yet, to be under the captivity of
lust; since then the Devil's Seed or Offspring may be justified, but that is
impossible; It there follows, that as he who does Righteousness, is Righteous,
as God is Righteous; so no farther is he like God, or justifiable; for in
whatsoever he derrogates from the works of that Faith, which is held in a pure
Conscience, he is no longer Righteous or justified, but under condemnation as a
Transgressor, or dissobedient person to the Righteous Commandment; and if any
would obtain the true state of Justification, let them circumspectly observe
the Holy Guidings and Instructions of that Unction, to which the Apostle
recommended the Ancient Churches, that thereby they may be led out of all
ungodliness into Truth and Holiness; so shall they find acceptance with the
Lord, who has determined never to justify the wicked.]

Refuted from right Reason.
1. Because it is impossible for God to justify that which is both opposite and
destructive to the purity of his own Nature, as this Doctrine necessarily
obliges him to do in accepting the wicked, as not such from the imputation of
another Righteousness.

2. Since man was justified before God, whilst in his native Innocence, and
never condemned till he had erred from that pure state; he never can be
justified, whilst in the frequent Commission of that for which the Condemnation
came; therefore to be justified, his Redemption must be as entire as his fall.

3. Because sin came not by Imputation, but actual Transgression; for God did
not condemn his Creature for what he did not, but what he did, therefore must
the Righteousness be as personal for acceptance, otherwise these two things
will necessarily follow, first, that he may be actually a sinner, and yet not
under the curse; secondly, That the power of the first Adam to death, was more
prevalent then the power of the second Adam unto life.

4. Its therefore contrary to sound reason, that if actual sinning brought
death and condemnation, any thing besides actual obedience unto Righteousness,
should bring Life and Justification; for Death and Life, Condemnation and
Justification, being vastly opposite, no man can be actually dead and
imputatively alive: therefore this Doctrine so much contended for, carries this
gross absurdity with it, that a man may be actually sinful, yet imputatively
righteous; actually judged and condemned, yet imputatively justified and
glorified. In short, he may be actually damned, and yet imputatively saved;
otherwise it must be acknowledged that obedience to Justification ought to be
as personally extensive as was disobedience to condemnation: In which real, not
imputative sense, those various terms of Sanctification, Righteousness,
Resurrection, Life, Redemption, Justification, etc. are most infallibly to be
understood?

5. Nor are their words, Impute, Imputed, Imputes, Imputing, used in Scripture
by way of application, to that which is actual and inherent, as the Asserters
of an Imputative Righteousness do by their Doctrine plainly intimate, but so
much the contrary, as that they are never mentioned but to express men really
and personally to be that which is imputed to them, whether as guilty, as
remitted, or as righteous: Lev. 17 4. 2 Samuel 19.18, 19, 20.
for instance; What man soever of the house of Israel that kills an Ox, and
brings it not to the door of the Tabernacle, to offer unto the Lord, Blood
shall be imputed unto that man, or charged upon him as guilty thereof. And
Sh^mei said unto the King, Let not my Lord impute Iniquity unto me, for thy
servant does know that I have sinned.

Romans 5.13.
6. But sin is not imputed where there is no Law. From whence it is apparent
that there could be no imputation or charging of guilt upon any but such as
really were guilty. Next, it is used about Remission: Psalm. 32 2.
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity; or as the
foregoing words have it, Whose transgression is forgiven. Where the
non-imputation does not argue a non-reality of sin, but the reality of God's
pardon; for otherwise there would be nothing to forgive, nor yet a real pardon,
but only imputative, which according to the sense of this Doctrine I call
Imaginary. Again, 2 Cor. 5.19.
God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them. Where also non-imputation, being a real discharge for
actual trespasses, argues an imputation by the reason of contraries, to be a
real charging of actual guilt. Lastly, it is used in relation to Righteousness;
Was not Abraham justified by works when he offered Isaac? Jam. 2.21, 22, 23.
and by Works was Faith made perfect, and the Scripture was fulfilled, which
says, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for Righteousness. By
which we must not conceive, as do the dark Imputarians of this age, that
Abraham's offering personally was not a justifying righteousness, but that God
was pleased to account it so; since God never accounts a thing that which it is
not; nor was there an imputation of another righteouss to Abraham, but on the
contrary, his personal obedience was the ground of that just imputation; and
therefore that any should be justified from the imputation of another
righteousness, not inherent, or actually possessed by them, is both ridiculous
and dangerous: -- Ridiculous, since it is to say a man is rich to the value of
a thousand pounds, whilst he is not really or personally worth a groat, from
the imputation of another who has it all in his possession: Dangerous, because
it begets a confident persuasion in many people of their being justified,
whilst in captivity to those lusts, whose reward is condemnation; whence came
that usual saying amongst many Professors of Religion, That God looks not on
them as they are in themselves, but as they are in Christ; not considering that
none can be in Christ, who are not new Creatures, which those cannot be reputed,
who have not disrobed themselves of their old Garments, but are still inmantled
with the corruptions of the old man.

Consequences Irreligious and Irrational.
1. It makes God guilty of what the ^criptures say is an abomination, to wit,
that he justifies the wicked.

2. It makes him look upon persons as they are not, or with respect, which is
unworthy of his most equal Nature.

3. He is hereby at peace with the wicked, (if justified whilst sinners) who
said, There is no peace to the wicked.

4. It does only imply communion with them here, in an imperfect state, but so
to all eternity, for whom he justified, Romans 8.30.
them he also glorified. Therefore whom he justified, whilst sinners, them he
also glorified whilst sinners.

5. It only secures from the wages, not the dominion of sin, whereby something
that is sinful becomes justified, and that which defiles, to enter God's
Kingdom.

6. It renders a man justified and condemned, dead and alive, redeemed and not
redeemed at the same time, the one by an imputative Righteousness, the last by
a personal unrighteousness.

7. It flatters men, whilst subject to the Worlds lusts, with a state of
Justification, and thereby invallids the very ^^d of Christ's appearance, which
was to destroy the works of the Devil and take away the sins of the World; a
quite contrary purpose then what the Satisfastionists, and Imputarians of our
Times have imagined, viz. to satisfy for their sins, and by his Imputed
Righteousness, to represent them holy in him, whilst unholy in themselves:
Therefore since it was to take away sin, and destroy the Devils works, which
were not in himself, for that Holy One saw no corruption, consequently in
mankind; what can therefore be concluded more evidently true, then that such
in whom sin is untaken away, and the Devils works undestroyed, are strangers
(notwithstanding their conceits) to the very end and purpose of Christ's
manifestation.

Conclusion by way of Caution.
THus Reader have I lead thee through those three so generally applauded
Doctrines, whose confutation, I hope, though thou have run, thou have read; and
now I call the Righteous God of Heaven to bear me Record, that I have herein
sought nothing below the defense of his Unity, Mercy, and Purity against the
rude and impetuous assaults of Tradition, Press and Pulpit, from whence I daily
hear, what rationally induces me to believe a conspiracy is hold by
Counter-plots, to obstruct the exaltation of Truth, and to betray Evangelical
Doctrines, to Idle Traditions: But God will rebuke the Winds, and destruction
shall attend the Enemies of his Anointed. -- Mistake me not, we never have
disowned a Father, Word, and Spirit, which are ONE, but men's Inventions; for,
1. Their Trinity has not so much as a Foundation in the Scriptures. 2. That its
Original was three hundred years after Christianity was in the World. 3. It
having cost much blood, in the Council of Sirmium, Socrat. Schol. an. 355.
Conc. Sirm. cap. 25. p. 275.
Anno 355. it was Decreed, That thenceforth the controversy should not once be
remembered, because the Scriptures of God made no mention thereof. Why then
should it be mentioned now with a Maranatha, on all that will not bow to this
abstruse Opinion. 4. And it doubtless has occasioned Idolatry, witness the
Popish Images of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 5. It scandalizeth Turks, Jews,
and Infidels, and palpably obstructs their reception of the Christian Doctrine.
-- Nor is there more to be said on the behalf of the other two; for I can
boldly challenge any person to give me one Scripture Phrase which does approach
the Doctrine of Satisfaction, (much less the Name) considering to what degree
it is stretched; not that we do deny, but really confess that Jesus Christ, in
Life, Doctrine, and Death, fulfilled his Fathers Will, and offered up a most
satisfactory Sacrifice, but not to pay God, or help him (as otherwise being
unable) to save men, and for a Justification: by an Imputative Righteousness,
whilst not real, it is merely an imagination, not a reality, and therefore
rejected; otherwise confessed and known to be justifying before God, because
there is no abiding in Christ's Love, without keeping his Commandments. I
therefore caution thee in love, of whatsoever Tribe or Family of Religion thou
may be, not longer to deceive thy self by the overfond embraces of humane
apprehensions, for Divine Mysteries; but rather be informed that God has
bestowed a measure of his Grace on thee and me, to show us what is good, that
we may obey and do it; which if thou diligently wilt observe, thou shall be led
out of all unrighteousness, and in thy obedience shall thou receive power to
become a Son of God; in which happy estate God only can be known by men, and
they know themselves to be justified before him, whom experimentally to know,
by Jesus Christ, is life Eternal.

A Postscript of Animadversions upon T.V's Contradictions, delivered in his
Sermon from 1. John 5.4. at his evening Lecture in Spittle-Yard; For whatsoever
is born of God, overcomes the World.
Whatsoever Person is born of God, overcomes the World.

There is a twofold Victory, Doctr.
the first Complete, the second Incomplete.



This is as well a contradiction to his Text and Doctrine, Animad
as common sense; for besides that they neither of them say, He that is born of
God, cannot perfectly overcome the World, but much the contrary; I fain would
understand his intention by an incomplete victory: If he means not such a one
as is obtained by the slaughter of every individual, but that which only does
subdue the force and lead captive their enemies, yet will the Victory prove
complete; for if they be so far overcome as to be disarmed of farther power to
mischieve, the dispute is properly determined: but whatsoever is incomplete, is
but overcoming, or in the way to victory, and victory is the completing of
what was before imperfect.

Cont.
Such overcome as are born again, who are in Christ, that have cast off the old
Man, and known a change altogether new.

Worldly lusts cannot be extirpated out of God's People in this World.



Anim.
If sin must have a place in them, how can they be born of God, and have a place
in Christ, or cast off the old man, and know a change altogether new?

Cont.
Gods Children are the greatest Conquerors; Alexander and Caesar were
Conquerors, but these overcome their lusts.

God's Children cannot perfectly overcome the lusts of the World, they sometimes
take them captive.



Anim.
What strange Divinity is this! that God's People should be Conquerors, and yet
Captives; overcome the World, and yet be overcome thereby.

Cont.
Sin may tyrannize over Believers.

But not have dominion; it is in captivity, it is in chains.



Anim.
Who is so absolutely injurious and incontrolable, as a Tyrant? and
notwithstanding that he should have no dominion, but be in captivity, and in
chains, at best are Bedlam distinctions, and consequently unworthy of any man's
mouth that has a share of common sense.

Cont.
You must kill or be killed; either you must overcome the World, or the World
you.

If ye fight, ye shall overcome.

2. Incompleatly; he overcomes, when he breaks their force, leads them captive,
and puts them into chains; but they are not at all slain, they sometimes take
him captive.



To kill or be killed, admits no middle way to escape; Anim.
yet that both Sin and Gods Children should lead one another captive; and that
he which fights shall overcome, and yet in danger of being led captive, because
incompleatly a Conqueror; to me seems very strange Doctrine.

However he goes on to tell them, Whosoever is born of God, overcomes the lusts
of the World, and he that overcomes the lusts of the World, overcomes the
Devils of Hell; God's Children have to do with a conquered Enemy. Yet he would
all this while be understood in an incomplete sense; and to excite all to fight
for this incomplete Victory, he recommended to their consideration the
excellent rewards of Conquerors, that is, To him that overcomes, will I give
to eat of the Tree of Life, the hidden Mann^ I will give him a white Stone, a
new Name, Power over Natons, while Raiment; yea, I will make him a Pillar in
the Temple of my God; he shall go no more out, and I will grant him to sit with
me in my Throne. Admirable privileges, I acknowledge! but are they promised to
incomplete Conquerors? I judge not. Reader, by this thou may be able to give
a probable conjecture of the rest; and ^s I have begun with him and his
Co-disputants, with them I Will (...) who notwithstanding all their boasts and
calumnies against us, have so evaded those many opportunities we have offered
them by Letters, Verbal Messages, and Personal Visits, that had they any Zeal
for their Principles, love for their Reputation, or Conscience in their
Promises, they would have been induced to a more direct and candid Treaty.

But as it has occasioned the publication of this little Treatise, so am I
credibly informed, through the too busy and malicious inquisition of some
concerning it, (which have amounted to no less than positive Reports) its
currantly discoursed, How that a certain Quaker has lately espoused the
controversy against R.F. and therein has perverted the Christian Religion, to
that degree, as plainly to deny Christ's coming in the flesh; with much more
then was fit to be said, or is fit to be answered.

But Reader, I shall ask no other Judge to clear me from that most uncharitable
accusation, since first I am altogether unacquainted with R.F. nor never did
design directly such a thing, being unwilling to seek more Adversaries than
what more nearly seek the overthrow of Truth, although I doubt not but this
plain and simple Treatise may prove some confutation of his Sentiments.

And lastly, as concerning Christ; although the slander is not new, yet never
the less false: for I declare, on the behalf of that despised People, vulgarly
called Quakers, the Grace of which we testify has never taught us to
acknowledge another God then he that is the Father of all things, who fills
Heaven and Earth; Neither to confess another Lord Jesus Christ, than he that
appeared so many hundred years ago, made of a Virgin like unto us in all
things, sin excepted; or any other Doctrine than was by him declared and
practiced: therefore let weary mouth be stopped for ever opening more, in
blasphemy against God's Innocent Heritage, who in Principle, Life and Death,
bea^ an unanimous Testimony for the only True God, True Christ, and Heavenly
Doctrine, which in their Vindication is openly attested by

William Penn, jun.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. line 1. read, traditional. p. 14. l. 6. r. or subsistence. p. 15. l.
20. r. Theophilus. p. 20. f. necessity, r. impossibility. p. 24. l. last, r.
compelled. p. 29. l. 31. f. their, r. those. l. 32. f. application, r.
opposition.


