A Winding Sheet FOR Controversy Ended.
SO Unpleasant are the Dead among the Living, and so Unfit for any thing
besides a Grave, that to remove this Deceast Controversy out of sight, who was
both Troublesome Living, and by her Numerous Corruptions, Noisome, now Dead; I
the least of all Men concerned to be Kind, contribute a Winding Sheet toward
her Funeral; unless in this I am remembered above others, whatever may be
Peevish, Rude, Revengeful, and Impiously Unjust to Man, she has without all
Consideration, besides her own Free Will, left me for a Legacy.

That I may not be False to the Truth, Cruel to my own Name, nor Unjust to the
World, resolved I am to declare how I came thus in her Books, and to take a
Serious View of this Last Will and Testament, and see if I can Vindicate the
Truth, Defend my Self, and Detect her Villainy to all People; which Her must be
an HE sometimes, I mean, Henry Hedworth by Name.

I shall be very brief, yet Defend my self, Vindicate G. F. consider the
Doctrines touched on, of Light, Rule, Divinity, Humanity of Christ, Scriptures
Perverted, and his Contradictions, Lies and Revenge.

Sect. I. William Penn Defended.
. 1. Page 1. Controversy Ended. Too Big Words, and Happy; but Unhappily
applied: Proud and Arrogant; not The, or A Controversy, but Controversy
Ended; a Lie in the Front of it, while Civil and Religious Wars remain. But
certainly, a Lie with a Witness, if It should in this respect not be Ended. An
Ill-guarded Expression, and dangerous to H. H. Again,

Page 1.. 2. William Penn, their Ablest Advocate. Why Ablest, but because his
Ambition Scorned to Engage a Mean One. Self-Pride, and not Justice to W. Penn.
But to proceed,

Page 4.. 3. I looked upon him as a Man of some Learning, Judgment and
Conscience; but I find my self Mistaken, in reference to his Judgment and
Conscience. How can he choose, who denies Infallibility? But if Mistaken
before, why not in the Quakers now? and so, ad infinitum, being so fallible.
Because then we did not utterly Reject him, in hopes of Good from him; but
since slighted, with his Dark Imaginations, he is like Satan from Heaven fallen
among the Anabaptists, who indeed Glean but our Leavings, though they
Foolishly, yet Gladly turn his Busy Agents. But let it be observed, that he
not only charges my Judgment, but Conscience; which none can do, that has not
Inward Inspection; if so; does he not censure that as Arrogant in the Quakers,
which he does himself? What is it, but to make me a very Rogue, to Write
against my Judgment and Conscience? and why, but because I answered; he invited
me to it: and had I not done it I had been vanquished; and now I have done it,
it is against my Judgment and Conscience; Is this the Meek and Impartial
Socinian, or Arrogance it self? I appeal to the Unprejudiced in this
Particular. His Failing or Foulness here, should Antidote all Sober Minds
against his other Impostures. Again,

Page 5.. 4. If they set their Names to their Books, to have Praise of Men, I
seek it not. Mere Deceit and Hypocrisy! Controversy Ended never yet durst set
her Name to any Public Thing I ever saw from her. A very Night-Bird and
Wanderer; one, that looks and creeps about like a Vagrant. It is Honesty in us
to own our Books, and an high Self-denial to suffer our Names to be subjected
to the Reviling of every such Detractor. But take notice, that Paul, who so
often begins with his Name, and every other Author extant, is reproved by this
Angry Momus, But hear him.

Page 5.. 5. Next, He is much offended at a Quondam Friend of his, who was so
Kind as to give away some Six-Penny Books to those he knew would not buy them.
A Notable Charge! And who was this Quondam Friend? that Little Great
Pragmatical Thomas Firmin: A Monster, all Tongue, and no Ears; it seems he is
now become an Enemy then, but for what? because I abhor his Folly, Lightness
and Foul Mouth. Who bid him buy the Books? Was he begged to do it? or did I sell
them him? or was he Angry he could not sell them himself? What! Would he have
added the Stationer, without License, to his many other little Trades? It seems
he took Money of as many as would buy them: and if he gave them to those that
would not, let him look to that. But Disingenuous Men? Christians? No, I would
detest to fasten such Dirty Scandals upon a Turk. Away with your
Socinian-Agency. Is this the End of all your Creeping Daubs, Dissimulated
Praise, and Hypocritical Address? But indeed, what other could there be?

Page 6.. 6. He proceeds, Measure his Book by the Title, The Spirit of Truth
Vindicated against that of Error and Envy Unseasonably Manifested (as if there
were a Season for the Manifestation of Error and Envy) in a late Malicious
Libel. My Title is Serious: I did not say, The Spirit of the Socinians Tried,
according to that Discovery it has made of it self, in their (Lamentable, yet
Conceited Agent) Henry Hedworth; as he did of the Quakers and G. Fox, much
less, affirm them to be Impostors, Liars and False Prophet: No, God forbid,
though Provoked thereto, by an Envious Libel, which Controversy Ended begun
with us upon. Nor is there any Time or Season, in which to manifest Error and
Envy justifiably, yet for all this Carping Zoilus, every thing has its Time,
and even Wicked Men may, as to the Prosperity of their own Concerns,
Unseasonably Time their Projects, as did the Author of that Discourse. For his
Collection of my Expressions, with respect to his Epistle, let the Reader
peruse my Book, and see the Occasion: There is nothing so Detestable and Hard
as Impostor, Liar, False Prophet; nor so Foul as Puppy, Fool, Cheat, Knave,
etc. But no more after this time of the Latter, as fresh Accusation, because
Recanted, which is the first time I ever heard of it: only, that Free Way, as
H. Hedworth mincingly calls it, of so speaking, and that not privately, as he
pretends; but in the Hearing of many, in a Public Place, much better deserves
a Bridewell, than an Exchange.

. 7. But W. P. (like a Man that will Rob his Neighbor for Praise, rather then
go without it) says thus, Sect 2. If we Excel in All Things; I said, Whilst
some of you Excel in Many Things. Here W. P. has committed a Double Falsity. 1.
He puts All for Many. 2. Quakers indefinitely, for Some of Them. I have looked
among the Printers Errata's, whether he had not Corrected ALL for MANY, but I
find no such thing: If I should grant him that Error (without good Reason) yet
the other piece of Falsity, viz. Putting We, the Quakers in general, for Some
of them, will abide by him, to the Gross Injury of Me, and Shame of Himself.

This, Reader, which he lays so great a Stress upon, I will manifest to be
deep Ignorance or Malice. It Is true, ALL is put for MANY in the place cited,
and has been by me Corrected with a Pen, and never was in my Copy. But what
then? do I answer it as All or Many? If as the First, then I Err; yet perhaps
not designedly neither: but if as the Last, MANY; what Hurt have I done. Sober
Reader, hear my Book.

If we excel in ALL Things, as he confesses (there is the Cavil) which is to
say, there are but Few Things wherein we do not transcend all others: how
possibly can we be Dangerous and Dishonorable to the Christian Religion? Is
the Christian Religion among the Few Things, wherein we are supposed wanting,
which is the main Thing of all? If so, what are the MANY?

Judge O Impartial People! How Dis-ingenuously, and with what Envy he has
aggravated, that All for Many, when my own Answer makes no Advantage by it, but
runs as it would have done had Many been instead of All: Is it true then, that
to esteem it an Error in Printing is without Good Reason, for which there is so
evident a Reason? Does this Man make Conscience of a Lie? An Idle Shifter. To
his Second, He is here as False as in the Former; for the Paragraph immediately
foregoing, to which this has reference, speaks thus, He is pleased to allow
us, at least, a great many of us to be Honest-Hearted, etc. If this takes in
the Quakers in General, or if any such word as Quakers in General be mentioned,
or by me made to be the Consequence of his words, and not rather some of them,
I will confess to have wronged him: In the mean time, he has kept to his old
wont of most Ungodly Defamations, and fastening upon Men's Writings Plain
Untruths, but of his own making. God the Righteous Judge will Reward him.

Page 9.. 8. Lastly, But he tells us again, that in Sect. 8. which is Page 13.
of my Spirit of Truth Vindicated, I say, I will not give him the Lie, and that
in Page 92. I tell him, he has broke his Word with us, which in plainer English
is, He has told a Lie, and would therefore fix the Lie on me; saying, I am
Unchristian and Uncivil. But if this be an Answer to my Just Objection against
his Twice Breach of Promise with us, not to Reflect, yet immediately to do it,
not to use Scripture or Reason, counting us Unworthy, yet endeavor at both;
let us forever give off Writing. What? tell me I Lie, because more then Seventy
Pages of the Former Passage, in quite another case, I say, that breaking a
Man's word, is, in Plainer English, telling a Liar: If I did forbear it at
first, it was mere Courtesy. The Author's Countenance in Lies, might well
justify my saying what I did; however, Lie and Contradict he did, and he
denies it not, whatever I did: but it seems his Proud Spirit cannot abide to be
spoken plainly to; and to tell Truth of him, or reprove his Lies, must cost a
Man as much Implacable Scurrility, as may be expected in case of Real Wrong,
from the most Dissolute of Men. This is H. H. with his Grim Socinian Cavils
burson'd with Folly and Revenge.

For my Nonsense, or Ignorance in my Mother Tongue, we will venture that with
the World; but the Press has injured me not a little. I deny that ever
Nonsense went to it, whatever came from it. However, H. Hedworth is not my
Judge.

Sect. II. of G. Fox.
. 1. P. 15. NOw let us hear what he says of G. F. He that is not Infallible, is
a Deluder: but G. F. is not Infallible, therefore G. F. is a Deluder. The first
proved from G. F's Book, How can ye be Ministers of the Spirit, and not be
Infallible? And how can they but Delude People, who are not Infallible? I
Answer,

G. F's words stand Immovable forever: He that is a Minister of the Spirit, is
Infallibly so; and in that Ministry, is Infallible; otherwise, the Spirit's
Ministry is Fallible, which is the Consequence of this Anti-spiritual Socinian,
and not of G. F's Doctrine. Next, They who are not Infallible, as to the Things
of God, they Teach, are not taught of God, nor of his Spirit of Grace, which
gives Certain Unerring Understanding, and so Deluders. But G. F. never said,
That every one that is not Infallible, is a Deluder in all things; for a Man
may be Fallible or Mistaken in some Matters wherein he is not a Deluder: But
the Drift of G. F's words is this, That such Preachers who deny the Spirit's
Teachings, and Infallible Knowledge, as necessary to a Qualification of a
Gospel Ministry, are Deluders; and in this Sense, who pretend to Teach, and
know not the Certainty, but the Incertainty rather of what they Teach, such are
Deluders; and by this will I stand, against this Vain Syllogizer, in Defense of
that Defamed, yet Worthy Man, G. F. But he endeavors to prove G. F. himself
not Infallible.

Page 15, 16.. 2. Next, he that renders the Pronoun YE, where it is to be
understood, or renders the Greek Preposition (...), BY, WITH, or AMONG, or TO;
or puts HE for WE, or what is equivalent, is a Perverter or Corrupter of
Scripture, and not infallible, as says G. F. of his Adversaries: but G. F.
does so himself, Ergo a Perverter and Corrupter: the same about his being a
Blasphemer; since who corrupts Scripture, preaches what he has not from Heaven,
therefore a Blasphemer. O the Logic, O the Ethics, but O the Metaphisicks of
this Under-Graduat in Philosophy!

What! Is this any more then Bumbast Repetition? It was time for Controversy
to End indeed. I say, that G. F. had to do with such as believed every
Particle, yea the very Hebrew Points themselves to be part of the Scriptures,
divinely given forth, as an unalterable and only Rule. He denies it, but
asserts the Spirit of Truth that gave them forth to be the Rule, especially
since Christ's Manifestation in the Flesh. The Priests therefore are Perverters
and Corrupters if they leave out one Jot or Tittle; but G. F. not so: for if
the Sense be rendered, God never tied People to the express words, says he;
therefore G. F. his not oblieging himself to that exactness, makes him no
Perverter, unless he should be judged by the untrue Notion, other men have of a
Rule that he submits not to, which were Injustice it self. This shows then how
unwarrantably our Adversary uses my words against G. F. which are only due to
himself; and the Priests he defends, unless he could make their Case one, which
he can never do: and therefore what I say to them, cannot be ascribed to G. F.
but with manifest wrong. For the Doctrinal Mistakes, they shall be considered
anon; only thus far G. F. is no Perverter or Corrupter, and consequently no
Blasphemer, if he put With for Among; but the Priests are, who so grievously
transgress their own Rule; for they esteem it no less by their Opinion of it.

Page 17.. 3. But Sol. Eccles's Testimony makes G. F, little other then a God,
therefore G. F. a Blasphemer; which is the meaning of his quoting it; but this
Lie is for the Lake. Neither G. F. nor S. E. nor the Quakers own any such
Inference; neither was the Resemblance in that of the Worlds being made by him.
Good Men may be resembled to Christ in one thing, not in another; Methinks he
that believes him only to be an Example, should not deny such Doctrine: but he
is angry it should be thought, Christ made the World be came into; he cannot
abide that Verse should meet him any where. Neither should he refuse S. E. a
mystical Defense for himself, had he thought great things of G. F. when he
himself believes it was not the Visible Creation: No; he thinks, Christ no more
made this World, then T. Firman did. What then! Will he call Men Blasphemers
from other men's Principles? But let him take World which way he pleases, the
Comparison lay not there; And if it was esteemed Dis-ingenuous in me to mention
two Letters of a Man's Name, by way of Reproof, for open Slanders against a man
by name at Length, after he had retracted, though I knew it not: certainly it
is dishonest with great Aggravation, to question that which has been so often
explained and denied, as taken by the World, and that in Print too. But what
would not H. Hedworth do, to dirt the Quakers: but we are not to be Hanged by
his Straws, nor Fettered by his Cobwebs -- Now let sober Persons judge, whether
the Beginner of this Controversy knew well how to employ his time, who thought
to run down a Folio Book of near 400. Pages, the Author, and with him the
Quakers, as Impostors, Liars, and False Prophets, with five or six Sheets,
stuffed with dull Ignorance, and Cavils, at G. F's putting Within for In, In
for Among, etc. O shallow Head! O Envious Heart! The Spoils in thy Triumph will
scarcely cover the Brow-beats, thy own Weakness has given thee, in the sight of
the World.

Sect. III. Of the Rule.
. 1. BE it known to the World, that this Socinian Agent, who in the Dark
Hectors every Persuasion, has shown himself unworthy the Name of a Man, who has
turned his Book upon 25 Scripture Arguments, 6 Reasons, 2 Answers to 2
Objections about the Quakers denying the Scriptures, 15 most clear Authorities,
from Papists, Protestants and Socinians Page 12, 13, 58, 59, 60, 61.
themselves, to prove the Infallible Spirit of God to be the true Christian
Rule of Faith, without so much as taking them into any other Consideration,
then to fasten downright Lies upon us in general, and me in particular;
affirming, that I say Men are to be guided by immediate Inspiration, in
opposition to Scriptures, etc. a Lie as Black as Hell, such words are not to be
found in my Book. And the very next Paragraph, Now, if this be his Meaning,
then tell me if Tollet. Mald. Dr Ham. Hutch. Soc. Sclith. Crel. were of his
Mind? Here he doubts what before he asserted: Rare Confutation to 31 pages of
serious Christian Argumentation! Well, I will suppose those men never
understood it so; nor did ever any Quaker in England, to his great Dishonesty
and Shame I assert it: for we say, that the true Knowledge of the Scriptures,
is most Heavenly and Divine Knowledge; but the holy Spirit that brought those
holy Men out of that they reprove, and into that blessed State they Exhort to,
is only able to make that Condition Ours, by its secret Strivings,
Discoveries, and Operations. We know God may, and does by his Spirit reach to
the Conscience, by Scripture and Preaching; but then it is the holy Spirit that
makes it efficacious, by fresh and living Touches, and we cannot call it our
Faith or Knowledge, till quickened to it by that Eternal Spirit, be it
mediately, or be it immediately See p. 60, 61.
; and this shall Break the Serpents Head, Maugre the Force of these Lattern and
Mungril Socinians; which roundly checks his saying, That I bestowed 32 Pages to
prove G. F's Spirit to be Infallible; for that belongs simply to God's alone,
and then those that are led by it, which was my Question, and in which sense he
is, and See Spir. of Tr. Vind. Page 16.
all such Persons are Infallible, as he himself confesses page 27. and if he
fooled himself by any other Belief of us before, let him look to that. But he
quarrels at my Use of the Word Spirit, and thinks it Erroneous, that God should
be intended by it. God is a Spirit, nor can he be without his Spirit: But H.
H's Notion of a Spirit, is a created third Person, and so God is separated from
his own Spirit indeed; A Doctrine of late standing.

Page 10. 11.. 2. But perhaps I should not have been so free with him: To
conclude, He allows G. F. to have a Conscience, that to be an Infallible Rule,
that God is the Author of it, that the Spirit may be said to have taught G. F.
that God did work upon him by it etc. therefore I infer, G. F. to have an
Infallible Rule in him; and that both Conscience, and the Spirit of God are
said by him to be this Infallible Rule; which, Reader, is more then any Quaker
in England ever said, unless Conscience be taken for Christ's Light within, or
God's Light within; for H. H. abhors to think Christ should be God enough to
illuminate any Man in that sense. But let it be observed, that this Person, who
calls the Light of God in the Conscience an Infallible Rule, called it
Imperfect in his Letter, contradicting his Dialogue-Man, J. Faldo, and himself
too; For then must every Man have a Rule in himself.

Sect. IV. Of the Light of Christ Within.
. 1. THis gravel'd him sorely: his beloved Socinianism is shaken by it; this
will have him that was, and is called Christ, to be the only Wise God, whether
H. Hedworth will or no. But that he might avoid discovering of himself, and his
Judgment of the first 10 Verses of John's History, he would not say a word; the
Design had been known, and Plot broken, with which he hopes to blow up some
Independants, and abundance of poor Anabaptists: therefore does he willingly
pass over my Eight Arguments for the Divinity of Christ, and his Light within,
and the Testimonies of Ancient and Modern Writers in their Defense. O notable
Champion! He needs a better Prayer to excuse his Weakness, then that in
Controversie-Ended.

Page 23. But he says, that I am mistaken about (...), or Coming; that the
Arabic and Aethiopick, the three French and Low Dutch Translations are for
him; that I wrong Erasmus, by putting too ambiguous, for ambiguous (a Triffler)
that Maldonat says, my Sense is neither false nor absurd: Grotius much approves
of the Exposition which is extant in Cyr. and Aug. Dr Hammond reads it so.

. 2. But I will prove him an Ignorant, or malicious Liar.

The Arabic has it thus; Quod erat Lumen verum illuminans omnem hominem.
Venturus in mundum; That was the true Light which inlightens all Mankind. Here
I acknowledge is a full stop, What then? therefore is not the Whole Adam or All
Mankind enlightened that ever came into the World by this Light? Yes surely; the
place proves it to be before, and distinct from that Coming: Nor does he prove
the Contrary. He that was about to come into the World; this begins the next
Verse in the Arabic, and must have relation to Word, unless he would have it
quod Lumen venturus, which can never agree any more, then his Lux venientem;
yet this Man of Accidence will have it so: But still the place will have it,
that Christ was before he came; though he and his Abominate all such Doctrine,
for which alone, they deny his pre-illumination.

. 3. The Aethiopick has it, Et is est Lux Justitiae, quae illuminat omnem
hominem venientem in mundum, and he is the Light of Righteousness, who
inlightens all Mankind coming into the World. Nothing can be plainer then that
Coming is joined to Man, not to Light. Had we an Imprimatur in our Budget like
H. H. (the Fruits of T. Firman's Treats to the Licensary Chaplins) I would have
had it in the Original Characters; but Difficulty in Printing, and
Unskilfulness in Compositors hindered: However, he has grossly belied these two
Translations, and unworthily reflected on the Learned Interpretors, whose shoes
his utmost Skill cannot prefer him to the Carriage of.

. 4. The Three French and Dutch Languages (he is not Master of any more then of
the other) he also wrongs. Let him give to the World, but under the hands of
any learned and Serious French Men, or Dutch Men, that Venant, or Komende, or
Coming, was so intended, or is so received, as this great Master of Ignorance
impudently avers to the World, and the Controversy, as to that part, shall end
with me too. Reader, he has obtruded a very Lie upon thee.

. 5. But is it so Criminal to put too Ambiguous for Ambiguous? It belongs to
him to think I wrong Erasmus; but none else can have so little Wit or Honesty.
I am content with it so.

. 6. But he brings in my Maldonat, as he terms him, my sense is neither false
nor absurd. He wrongs his words: but suppose them so; If Maldonat be for us,
then our sense is neither false nor absurd: very well; suppose against us, it
implies they may be taken also for us; which way soever, we have an Interest in
them. But hear Mald. Christ illuminates all, that is, offers Light unto all:
the other (not my) sense is neither false nor absurd, but in my Judgment not
proper. I am better pleased, says he, with the concurrent Interpretation of
the Greeks, that Christ tenders his Light to all mankind; if they are not
effectually enlightened, it is, because they refuse to embrace it. Now let this
gross Abuser of his Reader appear, if he dare, in Defense of his Quotation; his
own Lies obtruded upon the Simple, will clip his Wings.

. 7. Grotius and Dr. Hammond run the Socinian strain, but not with their end;
they refer coming to Light, as discovering the Excellency of that Dispensation
to all former Illumination; and the Socinians, to cut off all pre-exsistence of
him who in time was called Christ, antecedent to that Appearance: We deny the
latter, and the former I largely own in my Spirit of Truth Vindicated: for
Lights and Inlightneth, they are one, with respect to the Soul, that being in
man; therefore in and within is the same: but Inlighteth, stricktly taken, I
did confess, to signify a State of belief in the Light.

Sect. V. Of Christ's Divinity.
. 1. IT is denied by the Socinians, and owned by us. To say as Controversy
Ended does, that we make Christ one with God in Nature, proves it for us; their
Personality, which we deny, and he objects, is no part of the Essential Unity;
therefore it hurts us not. But whether it becomes Independents and Baptist's to
please themselves in their Labors, See Page 54, 55, 56.
who say Abraham was before Christ, and deny him to have made this World more
then H. Hedworth, or T. Firman, etc. let the more Sober of them judge.

Sect. VI. Of Christ's Manhood.
. 1. THe Manhood, or Humanity of Christ, so called by Controversy Ended, is
equivocally taken by the Author; for the Humanity of Christ implies something
else proper to Christ, which he denies; as one Passage ill-guarded by him,
discovers, when he slights and scorns this Conscientious Expression in my Book,
We dare not say the entire Christ was that Visible Body which died at
Jerusalem: then, that Body was the Christ, and not the Body of Christ: For know
Reader, they hold no other Word (Scriptures excepted) then that which became
Flesh, by a kind of Transubstantiation, and that the Soul as well died as the
Body; which is their Meaning of those Words, He poured out his Soul unto Death,
thus far agreeing with Noetus of old, more gross then Sabellius, his Scholar;
and with Muggleton the Sorcerer of our days: So that whilst he suggests we
deny the Manhood, and equivocate about the Divinity; he truly, denies the
Divinity, and equivocates as to Christ's present Humanity, so called. See into
what, but too many Independents and Anabaptists are Running: Let them do as
they will; for us, We own Christ's Manhood, as firmly as the Scriptures
testify to it, but we cannot say, the Manhood was the entire Christ, though
Christ took that Manhood upon him, in which to do the Will of God; and it was
(we confess) instrumentally a Savior to the World, and our Faith herein we
leave with God.

Sect. VII. Of the Scriptures pretendedly Perverted by G. F.
. 1. AS these Scriptures about Fifty in number, most of them consisting in,
them for him, with for among, in for within, etc. and G. F. have been
irrefutably defended in my Spir. of Tr. Vind. from his utmost reflection, nor
does he say any thing in his Controversy Ended, more Forceable, if any thing
at all; so truly have we got Page 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43.
thus far the Weather of him, that in Answering the Scriptures Socinianiz'd,
and his Account of the Unitarians, alias Socinians Faith, he has fully declared
himself Socinian; for he calls it perverse Doctrine, to call God the Word,
though if the Word be God, it is most reasonable: Also, that Christ should be
named Father, though the Prophet style him, the Mighty God, and everlasting
Father; but we will be more perverse in his sense: he boldly affirms that he
Glory Christ prayed for, was a Glory in Decree, for which he quotes Grot. and
Aug. they meant, with respect to Christ's Manhood, as having a rational Soul,
like other Men; not that he, Christ, who took that Manhood, had not actual
Glory before the World began, he who was before Abraham. In short, who
ascended, first descended, and who was to be glorified, first humbled himself;
which I pressed, and aptly proved, but he meddl'd not with it, nor the main
strength of my Book at all. Let it suffice, that his sense of these words,
makes Christ more equivocating, then he has represented any Quaker.

Page 45.. 2. Of the word Humane, he is very cheary, and derides G. F's refusal
of it; making us to deny Christ's Manhood, which never entered into our Hearts
to do; vindicating J. Newman's Book against us, and endeavoring to prove, that
we deny the Flesh, Blood and Bones to be the Christ: quoting G. Whiteheads
Book, called Christ Ascended; and J. Penington's Question to Professors etc.
But does not this man walk self condemned, who himself believes no such thing,
and equivocates about the word humane: for whilst the Independants and
Anabaptist's understand a rational Soul in a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, H.
Hedworth means, a rational Soul in a spiritual glorified Body, void of Flesh,
Blood and Bones, which gives the Socinians such advantage over the Papist's
about transubstantiation; or else he varys from his Brethren. Is he not then
detestably unjust, who would render the Quakers odious, for not believing that
common Doctrine, which he himself by his principle rejects?

Page 62.. 3. About Swearing he thinks he has caught me fast. G. F. says there
is nothing for I protest 1 Cor. 15. 31. and I say that (...) is used sometimes
to express an Oath. O poor shift! is thy Game come so low? Yes, and it must
come lower yet: But I say, there is nothing in that place respecting the Sense,
for I protest; therefore G. F. said right.

. 4. Again, he is Angry that I say, Oaths were made from a Dis-Trust of Honesty
in the Takers, to give true Evidence without them; and answers, As if God had
distrusted his own Honesty in Swearing unto Christ, etc. But what is this to my
Confutation? I say again, That God therefore Swore as Distrusting their Faith,
and as being privy to their Weakness, that all Doubt might be removed out of
their Minds. Oaths, therefore came through Weakness, not in God, but Men, which
is removed by the Evangelical Righteousness, that says, SWEAR NOT AT ALL.

Page 65.. 5. About Women's Speaking he tosses me off, for an Equivocator.
Behold his Answer; this ends the Controversy in this Point.

. 6. Of my Argument against Titles, he asks Questions, Why main't I do this,
and that, and the other? he may answer them if he please. Let him Enervate what I
have Page 63, 64, 65
said, and say something he has not said, If Contr. End. will permit, and I am
for him. However, he will supply his want of Reason with Lies gross enough, to
prove we Receive and Give Divine Honor to Persons among us, That a Man should
come many miles to see M. Fell, fall down on his Knees, his Hat in his Hand
before her, making his Humble Address, and by the Compellation of My Dear
Mother, and Beseecht her to Pray for him. It is either True or False; if True,
he should have done the World Right in proving it, for fear it should be taken
for a Lie in the Crowd of those which many Professors tell of us: and if False,
Let the Heavens and the Earth, and his own Book bear witness against him in the
Terrible Day of God. But we know of no such thing.

That John Stubs did so, calling M. Fell Everlasting Mother, is a Downright
Falsehood; but being to go beyond the Seas, He, and she, with many more, fell
down upon their Knees to Pray to Almighty God, that his Presence might
accompany him. What an Infamous Construction has this Ishmaelite put upon a
Most Holy Duty?

. 7. What Judas soever H. Hedworth associates with, or holds in hand, that
informs him against us, I neither know, nor care: but let it not be Criminal,
that I should say, Every Chaste Marriage or Coupling with Fear, as says the
Apostle Peter, is an Emblem of the Holy Covenant, and Marriage relation betwixt
Christ and his Church. Shall that which Professors often illustrate Christ's
Oneness with his People by, and think it no small Piece of Eloquence too, be
reputed Pride or Blasphemy in G. Fox? O partial Man!

. 8. But G. Fox absolves Men, they kneeling; and many in the Ministry were wont
to pull off his Shoes aboard of Ship. Prove the first if thou can: and for
being assisted, if so it was, to help a Man of a gross Body, full of Aches,
through many tedious, and uncomfortable Imprisonments, where he has seen no
Fire in the could Seasons, but been wetted in his very Bed, and his Chamber
a small kind of a Pond, with the like Severities, cannot be esteemed Pride,
much less receiving Divine Honor in the Judgment of any, but one as Malicious
as H. Hedworth, bent implacably, to seek our Ruin, by all the Slanders he can
collect from Men or Devils.

Sect. VIII. Of his Contradictions.
. 1. TAke this small Parcel of Contradictions, which must needs touch Contr.
End. P. 10, Sp. Qu. Tr. P. 40. Contr. End. p. 58, 56, 10, 11. p. 6. S. Q. T. p.
1, 2.
his proud Heart, as his very Words, or the result of them. The Light is
Infallible: the Light is not Infallible: The Light is a Rule: the Light is not
a Rule: The Leading Quakers are Impostors; Now we shall see, whether there he
any Prudent and Honest Men among the Governing Quakers; G. Fox may have the
Spirit of God who is an Impostor; yet God is not wont to give his Spirit but to
his humble Servants and Friends, or those whom he will employ: G. F. has an
Infallible Rule in him; G. F. has not an Infallible Spirit in him. Thus is the
Light rendered by him an Infallible, Fallible, Rule, and no Rule, and G. F.
what this Guiddy-headed Socinian is pleased to have him.

Sect. IX. Of several Frothy, Lying and Reproachful Passages.
. 1. WHether my Book of 17 Sheets of Paper, or his Pamphlet of 4 and an half be
most weighty and argumentative, which clear'st of contumely, Lightness,
Reproach, and a spirit of Revenge I leave with such as impartially read both;
only I will sum up a few of the many bitter sayings and untruths he casts upon
us, that all may see how notably he has improved his time in this little
compass. W. P. his huffing Book -- they do but equivocatly confess the
Divinity, and plainly deny the Humanity of Christ, Billingsgate Language! The
Nature of his Argument required him to call G. F. and the Quakers, Impostors,
Liars, False Prophets, Uncivil, Unchristian, Censors of the World; that the
Scriptures to an uninspir'd Man, are like a Gazzet to a Privy-Councellor (O
irreverent Comparison) That W. P. charges G. F. with Folly, Malice, Weakness (a
Lie) as if some Poetic Deity inspired him: Pride and Idleness; Inspiration
that is Fancy; His Prophet George; it is such as God's Infallible Spirit in G.
F. writes. (O Blasphemous Expression! It seems then that God's Spirit can write
Nonsense by H. Hedworth's irreverent saying; for it is that he Charges upon G.
F.) The Quakers detest to think of Christ's being remote from their own dear
Hearts (Is that so criminal as that it should be mocked) C. l. 3. 16. J. 17 15.
abused to serve that Godly (he means wicked) Doctrine of the Father, Son and
Spirit, their not being distinct, but all one (what Derision is this at the
Holy Unity) Learned Nonsense! G. Fox 's Spirit did never elevate to such a
degree of Jargon. our Polyglettist W. P. The Family of Light called Quakers
(Mockage) want of all Honesty and Conscience: Rage, Passion, Revenge, Odious,
Detestable, etc. Profound and vehement Prattle. Enough, enough H. H.

Sect. X. Of his Prayer, and my Conclusion.
1. REader, it is after a Pamphlet so Stuffed with Wrath and ill-Language, that
the Author of it darts to address himself to Jesus Christ by way of Prayer. I
matter not his Prayer, but shall make this sober advantage of it; (1) that he
minds God no more, then if he believed Christ to be him, which he poor Man
abhors; (2) That he commits Idolatry, and makes God himself an Page 68, 69, 70.
Accessory, in both praying to another then God, one they repute but purely a
Man, and sa^, God requires them so to do; (3) That I affirm, it is impossible
for one that is but purely a Man, as they say Christ is, to wield all Power in
Heaven and Earth, the alone office and capacity of a God by Nature; and more
beyond the best of Men, then they are the most stupid of Beasts; if Beasts then
would be no more such, could they be changed into such excellent Men; neither
could that excellent Man be longer Man, but the most high God, which is
impossible, could he be changed into that capacity of Rule, which is alone
exerciseable by, and peculiarly demonstrative of him that is the only wise God.

. 2. But indeed, his Margin proves to us, he takes him for a Man, and none of
the best Linguists neither: for least he should not well understand the English
word Delivered, he refers him to TRADITA in the Margin, though both
Translations, and one as good as the other, for the Original Word is Greek;
which either H. Hedworth does not know, or he doubted the skill of him he
prayed to, or else he did foolishly to correct by a Translation, the Original
Word being ready. But after all his Prayer (and a little Mercy he seems to show
us in it, though if we never have any, till that forced Piece of Business
procure it, we are never like to have it) behold the Man is at Revenge as fast
as he can. Now it will appear, whether there be any Prudent and honest Men
among the Governing Quakers (yet just now he more then once judged them for
Impostors, Liars, Equivocators, and what not) by their Dealing with Will am
Penn. Very well; Is this the Man that writ Queries for Liberty of Conscience
1670. (but no more of that) who would put the Quakers upon Persecution, now the
Powers are for The Anabaptists came to the Bull and Mouth to demand Judgment
against W. P. about ALL for MANY, already answered. Were they not well employed?
liberty. Here Is your Meek, Suffering Socinian: but does he own our (...), then
his Appeal is something; if not, he Appeals idly and unjustly: but since he
does seem to appeal to them, and supposes them to have right to deal with me,
it is apparent, that he owns it so far as concerns a Judgment betwixt us. For I
affirm, against what he says, p. 25. That Paul therefore appealed to (aesar,
because of his ability both to know his Case, and do him Fight: and therefore
in the Case of this Man's Appeal, both the Light, and our Friends, are thereby
judged Able, and himself to be concluded by their judgment; which is this, That
H. Hedworth, first, Author of the Spirit of the Quakers Tried, then of
Controversy Ended, is a Busie-Body, Cavilling, Conceited, Proud, Wrathful,
Equivocating, Slandring, yet Cowardly Man, that loves Debate; but is both
unable to maintain what he begins, and afraid to own it when he has done: But
since he is withdrawn, and his opposition seems to have given up the Ghost in
CONTROVERSY ENDED, we bestow this SHEET to bury her out of the World, that the
Noisome Errors, Slanders, and Reveng, which broke out upon her, living, and make
her yet stink, though Dead, may be buried in the Grave of perpetual silence.

^^th day 12th Month 1672. So wishes a Lover of the Person of H. Hedworth, and
a Friend to Peace and all Righteousness. William Penn.


