A Third LETTER From a Gentleman in the COUNTRY, To his Friends in LONDON, Upon
the Subject of the Penal Laws and Tests.

Licensed,

May the 16th 1687.


LONDON, Printed, for J. H. and T. S. and to be had of most Booksellers in
London and Westminster, 1687.

My Honored Friends,
SInce my last Letter was so happy as to please more of the Party than my first
Offended, and that even those are somewhat softened by it, I prevailed with my
self, once more, to give you my thoughts upon the same Subject: And though I
think the Objections you have sent me, are come too far for an Answer, yet I
will give you mine, with all the plainness, brevity and temper I can; for they
that seek the public good, are not to be nice in their endeavors for it; and
such who go upon Principles, have the advantage of being secured by their
Sincerity, even where their mistakes cannot be defended. But as I think I am
not in the wrong, so I sincerely profess, if I knew I were, no temporal
consideration should engage me against my Opinion; for though I am for the
Liberty of persuing ones own Judgment, I abhor the Latitude of Dissembling it.
But to the point before us.

You tell me, that the generality of the Soberest and Wisest of those, that
would be esteemed Members of the Church of England, of your Acquaintance, do
declare, They have no Aversion for Liberty of Conscience, and that they always
liked an Indulgence to Dissenters, but they are angry at the present manner of
it, and with the Addresses of Thanks the Dissenters have made to the King for
It.

To say nothing then of who they were that made the Penal Laws, or by whom they
were Executed, or upon what Motives; and less, what Prejudices thereby have
followed to the Persons and Estates of Thousands of the Kings Subjects (because
that History might look harsh, and I resolve to be as healing as I can) Let me
ask, why these Gentlemen should be offended at the way of the Ease the King has
graciously given? It Is certain, that some of them reproached the severe Conduct
he has changed, and thought it ill in the Government to expose so many useful
Men in their Persons and Estates to a pack of lewd Informers, that yet now
quarrel the stop he has given to those severities. They will, I hope, pardon me
if I say; Christ's Answer to the Pharisees about the breach of the Sabbath came
in my mind upon reading their Objection, What man among you that should have a
Sheep fall into a Pit on the Sabbath day, will, not lay hold on it and lift it
out? He excused David and the Priests in a Case of the like nature, and thought
a good deed was to be done at any time, when he healed the poor man. This was
he that preferred Mercy before Sacrifice, and exalted the good Nature of the
Samaritan above the strict Priest and Levite, that with all their Reverence to
the Law, left the Rifled and Wounded unregarded. But to turn the style of the
Discourse: Why should any of the Church of England be offended, when it is a
less Power than has been publicly maintained by the most venerable of their
own Clergy, in all times since the Reformation? You will find Archbishop
Whitgift, in his Letter to Q. Elizabeth, asserting her Power in Ecclesiastical
Matters to rest wholly and absolutely in the Queen, and that he advises her, by
no means to allow the Parliament to have the fingering of those things; and
that what Cannons were made by the Clergy in Convocation, by her Majesty's
Authority, might be OBSERVED or ALTERED at HER PLEASURE.

And in another Letter to the Lords of the Council, he tells them, that the
Queen her own self, had in express Words, immediately committed Causes
Ecclesiastical to him, as to one, who was to make Answer to God and her Majesty
in that behalf, and not to their Lordships, wherein, as he supposed, he had no
Judge but her self. Archbishop Laud, and Bishop Sanderson, Dr Heylin, Dr Hicks
and several other dignified Divines of the Church of England, all grave and
learned Authors, follow the same Sentiments touching Regal Power, in a more
extended manner, as you may shortly see by an Ingenious hand, who has exactly
Transcribed their own Writings in this great Point. But in general, it is
resolved by Dr Starky, in his Assise Sermon at St Edmonds-Bury, concerning the
divine obgation of human Ordinances, Printed by John Field, Printer to the
University of Cambridge, 1668. That Constitutions, as they had their Original
and Establishment from the Reason of the supreme Magistrate, consulting for the
convenience and good of the Society, so the condition of things and State
altering, upon their Burden and Inconvenience, may, by the Authority that
established them, be altered, suspended, abrogated, and taken quite away. Thus
a Divine of the Church of England; but to proceed on that Lesson, argumentum ad
hominem.

For what greater Injury (says he) can thou put upon thy careful Governor,
then when his Contrivances and Determinations are published for public good,
that his Directions should be Contemned, and by thy Rebellion that thou
should suggest to others (what our disorderly nature is too ready to suspect)
that their Rules are the Results of erroneous and corrupt men, which ought to
be looked upon as the determinations of sacred Authority derived from a most
wise and just God.

But if this were not so, is it the same thing to dispense with a Temporary, as
a fundamental Law? With that which says, thou shall not go to a Conventicle, as
with that which says, thou shall not Kill or Steal? are there not some Laws
that are of that moral and enduring nature, no time or accident of State can
Dispense with? and such Laws as are so specially accommodated, that the reason
of them may not live three Years to an end? The Penal Laws about Religion were
made for fear that diverse Opinions in one Country might endanger the
Government, and time shows us that nothing hazards it more then their
execution. It Is plain it puts us in a state of force, and that therefore People
fly the Kingdom, and Trade dwindles to nothing: And since all Countries are
greater by their People and foreign Commerce, than by their Soil and
Domestic Labor and Consumption, whatever lessens them, impoverishes and
weakens the Kingdom. Who will Trade where his gettings are none of his own? or
live, where he is not sure of his Principle? Which is the Case of Dissenters in
a Country using coertion for Religion. And when all this is said, the King is
pleased to refer the matter to the concurrence of a Parliament, and such Power
for the good of the Public, was never denied by any man of sense, any where,
to the wisdom and necessity of Government, and It must ever rest with that part
of it, which is by the Constitution always in the way, which, we all know, our
Parliaments are not.

This Declaration seems to me no more than a Royal Bill without Doors,
informing the Kingdom of his Majesty's mind, and preparing both Houses to make
it the Subject of their next Session: And I don't think I shall ever see a
Parliament in England break with a King of his Justice and Valor, upon so
reasonable and popular a Point.

But to be free, it looks ill in any of the Sons of the Church of England, to
Scandal this ease with the irregularity of the way of it, when nothing is more
evident than that they cannot do it without flying in the face of that Loyalty,
which made that Church so famous in 41. For as then the Distinction of the
Natural and Political capacity of the King, was the great Doctrine of the
Parliament against several Acts of State, which in part, gave rise to the
misunderstandings and Wars that followed. So it is certain, that the Generality
of the Church of England opposed it as a pernicious Principle to the Monarchy,
and rather than suffer so Plebean a notion to take place in the Government,
drew their Swords for the Sovereignty of the Crown; and we all know what
endeavors have been used, and by whom, since the late Kings Restoration, to
Damn that distinction as the very seed of Rebellion.

This Reflection makes me beseech the dissatisfied Sons of the Church to
Consider, how much wiser it were to approach the King with all possible Candor
and Decency, and by assuring him, that their concern looks no further, than
such a Legal and uncoercive security for themselves, as at the same time that
others are safe from them, by the repeal of the Penal Laws, the Church may be
secure that no one of those interests shall invade her Rights and Possessions,
he may be induced to embrace the Mediums that in such an occasion it were the
easiest thing in the World to find, as well as that they might be the most
agreeable and honorable in themselves for all our happinesses. Let her then
betake her self to think of some happy expedients, and rebuke those Members of
her Communion, that run up and down with the falsest, as well as angriest
aggravations; that we may all yet meet in some general and national Principle
to adjust our several Interests upon.

For can she take it ill of the King, that he receives the Dissenters as near
him for his interest, as it is plain she would take them to her for her
security? the Objection she makes against their former Disloyalty, vanishes
with their present Adherence and her Dissent; for it both shows they are for
the Government when that is for them, and that even she her self is for it no
longer; nay, it will be said by some, nor so long; for she is (say they) not
satisfied to be safe, nor yet to keep the Chair, nor will she thank the King
for that, unless others may be confounded that cannot offer at her Altar; who,
as bad as they are, for this Gracious Reprieve, think him not only worthy of
their thanks, but of their Estates and Lives when he wants them on so glorious
an occasion: And it is not the foolishest thought that may come in her head,
that having once lost the King to the side against which she could not maintain
his Father, her case must be desperate upon the Contest, which God forbid.

I confess, when I consider the Idea we have been taught to have of a Popish
King, and what Persecuting, Massacring Murdering work was necessarily to attend
his Reign, I cannot but say, I think the Church of England securer, in this
Reign, upon the Kings Declaration, than any other worldly support she can
flatter her self with; and not to thank him, for an assurance she desired, and
that is so generously given for a King of his circumstances, from whom, we were
told worse things would have followed, and then too, when too many of her
Children would indiscreetly have provoked other resolutions, shows her less
Christian and civil then I believe she desires to be thought, and I hope, upon
the main, she deserves.

But you tell me, that this liberty is by diverse persons rendered dangerous to
the Monarchy, in that it strengthens the hands of those People that have always
been for a Commonwealth: This looks very kind and dutiful to the Royal Family:
But tho no body more affectionately wishes the preservation and just succession
of it than my self, I cannot forbear to charge the Objection wit extreme
weakness, for it is removed with a word; the King has an Army, Is that the way
to set it up? And what he leaves, his Children will find. Is the love of Power
first objected, and then a design to make a Commonwealth with it? But they
will say, tho it ben't his design, it is consequent upon his measures. But I
must tell them, no story shows us, that ever any Government was changed, making
the People of it easy; but often the other way: Nor is it to be thought, that
folks will Plot to loose, what they might be driven to Plot to get. Let the
Church think as hardly of Dissenters as she will; they cannot be any longer in
pain when they are made easy. Besides, what have they further to seek, or
which way can they possibly agree it? While their Conscience and Property are
safe, they have no more to ask, and no body was ever against that, which is for
them; nor any Government endangered by the People it seeks to preserve. The
King has begun to show his inclinations to make us all easy and safe, and it
will be her fault if we are not so, quickly and entirely. This is the way to
prevent the mischiefs she fears; and what she would have done in their case, to
have proved her self a better Christian or a better Subject I cannot tell. But
it is certain that the Church, by the power of the Monarchy, endeavored their
ruin: That they fell in with that side that favored their releif, is as true:
Were it not better that 'twere out of the power of both to do the same thing
over again? one to engage the Crown, and the other to oppose it, for the other
Worlds matters? Doubtless it were, and this Liberty must be the way.

Those times, I am sure, have a double instruction to the present Church of
England; One, that she be not too stiff against a reasonable Accommodation; the
Other, that to support her self in it, she falls not into the inconveniences
she has objected against the Dissenters, whilst under far less provocation, if
any at all. Let her remember, 'twas her cause that first engaged the Kings
Father, and by consequence, banished his Brother, and nothing else but this
Kings tenderness, least he should be too early with her in Declaring for
Liberty of Conscience, when he came to the Crown, gave opportunity for the late
Western Rebellion: For as he has well observed in his Speech to the Council,
how much the want of it went to promote our civil Wars, so it is certain, that
had he declared for Liberty of Conscience, when he told us of his Religion,
there had been no Rebellion in the West: But the mis-guided Duke of Monmouth
might have had his share at Buda, and the unhappy People of his train been
alive at their Vocations. And if this delay was not for want of an Opinion that
Liberty of Conscience was a just, necessary and popular thing, but his regard
to the Church of England, that had served him well, and might not presently
take it the right way, or be prepared to fall in with him upon that interest,
it is certainly the highest proof how greatly he valued her concurrance, and
desired to rely upon her Duty, Service and Friendship, and consequently, how
much she is obliged to his goodness, and those of her Sons are in the wrong,
that carry a present distance and coldness to his Administration. And when all
is done, the King in this very point has but persued the sense of a Parliament
very freely chosen; for in that last Westminster Parliament, when the House of
Commons apprehended their Dissolution, and that the black Rod was near the door
to that purpose, they came to several Dying Votes, as a Legacy of their
Aversion to the Court, and their Court to the King, dom, among which, this was
not the least.

Resolved,

That it is the Opinion of this House, that the Prosecution of Protestant
Dissenters, upon the Penal Laws, is at this time grievous to the Subject, a
weaking of the Protestant Interest, an Encouragement to Popery, and dangerous
to the Peace of the Kingdom.

If the heat of those times could have left those two angry words out, it had
carried the general Liberty now desired, and nothing would have hindered it in a
time like this, with such a Parliament as that. For in the Reign of a King of a
Popish Religion, that we labored so much to Disappoint, to desire no more at
our hands, after our fears of so much more than a mere Liberty of Conscience,
indifferently fixed to all Dissenters, is such a Cure of our Fears, and an
Assurance of all we can wish, that, we must be wanting to our selves in Wit, as
well as to the King in Gratitude, if we reject the motion. Let her therefore be
confident nothing excluded the Papists then, but our Apprehentions that they
strove for all at our Cost; and if we are offered to be secured against such
Jealousies, a Parliament so Chosen, would naturally comprise them.

But you tell me, that two things stick yet with Diverse persons of that Church:
One, That it is not reasonable the Dissenters should expect that they should
pluck the Thorn out of their foot to put it in their own. The other, That in
case the Penal Laws and Tests were removed by this Church-Parliament, another
might be packt that might turn both Laws and Test upon the present Church.

In the first place, it is granted then, that the Laws are a Thorn in the Foot of
the Dissenters. Is it not as just to think it ought to be plucked out, and if
the Church of England will do nothing toward it, are they not excusable that
endeavor it themselves? Tho when one enquires, first, who put the Thorn in,
and next, that there is no necessity that she must put it into her own Foot,
because she plucks it out of theirs; it should not be so hard to persuade her
to pluck it out, and in my Opinion, it should be as easy to fling it away,
that it may trouble no body else for the future. But that perhaps she thinks is
not possible to be done, and that impossibility is given for the reason, why
she chooses to leave it where it is; which naturally introduces my Answer to the
second Objection viz. That if the Penal Laws and Tests were removed by this
Church Parliament, another might be packt which might turn both Laws and Tests
upon the present Church.

In my last Letter, said something, that ought in my Opinion, to satisfy the
most jealous in this particular: For first, all agree it is impossible to
Repeal the Laws and Tests without a Parliament. Secondly, it is not to be
thought that the present Parliament will do it, without such a Provision as
will secure us in the Point feared. To say there is none, is ridiculous; for
who can tell, what they may think upon, or from other heads, what may occur to
them? If they will not Repeal them, let us suppose an other Parliament, as freely
Chosen at least; can we imagine that such a Representative will be less careful
to secure us against our fears, tho they were more inclinable to abolish those
Laws? If then both are like to go together, be it by the present, or another
Parliament, I see no insecurity that is like to follow, either to the Church of
England, or her Protestant Dissenters, who in that respect, are equally
concerned, with her self.

And for packing of a Parliament, if that were the business and Design at last;
why is it not attempted at first? Certainly it is so easy to be done, that if
the King did not seek a more agreeable, and lasting security to his Friends, to
wit, a National one, there are men enough of no Religion to be packt to morrow,
that would first conform to the Laws and Tests, and then mercenarily take them
away. I know there are silly People of all Parties, for whom no body can
answer; but, it is astonishing, that such a jealousy should have so much room
with men of any share of sense, that if this Parliament should Repeal the Laws
and Tests, the Papists in the next, would come into Parliament, and then make
their Religion National at our charges. For, First, it supposes no other
expedient, which is easy to be found and obtained, or let the other remain.
Secondly, it supposes that Roman Catholics will be chosen, or returned, tho
they are not chosen; The one it is certain we don't fear, and methinks they only
should be afraid of the other; for since they cannot be their own security, and
this they declare, by seeking a National one; If the first would do, why don't
they begin upon it, and pack a Parliament presently, and Repeal the Laws and
Tests without any more to do? And if they don't do this, not because they cannot
think upon it, but because they don't think it worth trying, why should they
attempt by such a way an harder thing? for no body would take it so ill of them
to Repeal the Laws that vex them by an Indirect way, as they would if they went
about to make their Religion National by it, and if they think it not assuring
enough for the lesser, can they be tempted to embrace it for effecting of the
greater point.

Some of them have read the Histories of their own Country, and cannot but
remember, that in times, even of their own Religion, Parliaments ill Chosen
came to ill Ends.

That the twenty first of Richard the second Repealed the Acts of the
Parliament of the eleven of the same King; and that the first of Henry the
fourth, Repealed the twenty first of Richard the second: And that the thirty
ninth of Henry the sixth, Repealed the Laws of the 38th of the same King, and
Damned that Parliament, because UNDULY Elected; which is the packing meant in
the Objection: So that it is not worth while to attempt it. If such a Parliament
could be Immortal, or were able to Charm successive Raigns, or were not a
violation of the Constitution of Parliaments, and of one of the tenderest
points in our Government, or did not break faith with mankind, when most
obliged to make a straight step, and by all this, treasure up wrath against the
day of wrath upon the whole Party, which must dawn at the setting of our
present King, it were something: but when all this will follow, as certain as
the Night does the Day, To break all bounds of Law, and go by open Force, were
an honest and wise thing to such a wooden Invention of Law, as this would be to
all men living of common sense, and to the Ages that shall follow us, who of
right, will have the censuring of our Actions. What then is left us, but to
embrace this Gracious tender, and all Parties to meet the King in those
methods, that are most likely to establish it with the greatest, satisfaction
and certainty?

If no other security can be had, I say then, let this that is, remain, if
there may be such a thing, why should we not embrace it? The Church of England
disclaims Severity and Partiality, then let her part with those Instruments of
both, and not suspect the shaking of the Laws of Property, for stopping the
execution of the Laws that undermine it. I leave one Consideration with her,
and so shall leave you at this time* Let nothing that is Vnfair, or Indirect
lie at her Door, I beg her, for Gods sake. Ought she to differ thus with any
body? and less with such a King, upon a point she cannot maintain, and that is
better left then kept, take the Question, either as to Right or Prudence? I
will not be very particular, but enough to make way for a fuller discourse on
the Subject.

The Tests, the chief, if not the only thing in debate, have they any
Foundation in our Constitution? Should a Man's being of any Religion, hinder him
from serving the Country of his Birth? Does his going to a Conventicle
naturally unqualifie him for a Constables Staff? or believing
Transubstantiation, render him incapable of being a good Clark? It were as
reasonable to say, that it is impossible for a Phanatick to be a good Shoemaker,
or a Papist a good Tailor. The very Notion is Comical, And that must ever be
the Consequence of going out of the way, and serving the Public with such a
Bias to a Party, for that is the softest way of speaking of the Error.

But when we consider the Test in Relation to the Parliament, where the
Objection lies strongest against the Repeal, it appears not one jot less
unreasonable to continue it: For an Opinion of Religion is made to deprive a
Peer of the highest Right of his Peerage: True, he is not totally Destroyed,
but he is Gelt of his chiefest Privilege. For tho he looses not his Title, he
has little else left him, Can the Peers of England to serve a turn, so mutely
suffer a President to continue, that shakes their hereditary share in the
Government, and so essential a part of our ancient and celebrate Constitution,
and by which it is made impossible to have an unconcerned House in Judgment? Let
us but look back to Seventy Five, and see what was done then, by diverse Lords,
in a case of this nature; I will but repeat the Test and their Protest.

I A. B. do declare, That it is not Lawful, upon any pretense whatsoever, to
take up Arms against the King, and that I do abhor that Traiterous Position of
taking Arms by His Authority against His Person, or against those that are
commissioned by Him in pursuance of such Commission; And I do swear that I will
not at any time endeavor the Alteration of the Government, either in Church or
State, so help me God.

The debate lasted Five several days before it was committed to a Committee of
the whole House, which hardly ever happened to any Bill before: The Debates,
were managed chiefly by the Lords, whole Names you will find to the following
Protestation.

We whose Names are under Written being Peers of this Realm, do according to
our Rights and the ancient Usage of Parliaments, declare that the Question
having been put, whether the Bill (entitled an Act to prevent the danger which
may arise from Persons disafftected to the Government) does so far entrench
upon the Privileges of This House; that it ought therefore to be cast out. It
being resolved in the Negative, We do humbly conceive that any Bill which
imposes an Oath upon the Peers with a Penalty, as this does that upon the
refusal of that Oath, They shall be made incapable of Sitting and Voting in
this House, as it is a thing unpresidented in former Times, so is it, in Our.
humble Opinion, THE HIGHEST INVASION OF THE LIBERTIES AND PRIVILEGES OF THE
PEERAGE, that possibly may be, and most destructive of the Freedom, which they
ought to enjoy as Members of Parliament, because the Privilege of Sitting and
Voting in Parliament, is an Honor they have BY BIRTH, and a Right so INHERANT
IN THEM, AND INSEPARABLE FROM THEM, AS THAT NOTHING CAN TAKE IT AWAY, but what
by the Law of the Land, must withal, take away their Lives, and corrupt their
Blood; upon which ground we do here enter our Dissent from that Vote, and our
Protestation against it.

Buckingham Bridgwater Winchester Salisbury Bedford Dorset Aylisbury Bristol
Denbigh Pagitt Holles Peter Howard E. of Berks Mohun Stamford Hallifax Delamer
Eure Shaftsbury Clarendon Gray Roll. Say and Seal Wharton
To say nothing here of the matter of the Test, it is plain from the extent of
their Argument, they were against all Tests that deprived Peers of this
fundamental Right of Peerage, and that nothing could, in their opinion, do it,
but such crimes as tainted their Blood and took away their lives. I know not if
those living are still of that mind, but the honor I have for their
Understanding and Integrity forbid me to doubt it.

Now pray Suffer me to turn the Tables, and ask our Churchmen one Question in
the Language of their Fears; Can the King makes Lords, and pack an House of
Commons, that shall first take, and then abolish the Test? Why then, it is not
so great a security as they imagine; and it is hardly worth while to be so stiff
to support it. But by the same reason that they can Repeal this, they may Enact
another, and if so, may not the House of Peers be quickly another set of Men?
For that Fire that Rosts a Goose can Roast a Gander. What Tides are these in
Government? and what State is safe, or happy, whose Foundations float upon such
movable measures? Besides, the Lords intended to be made the example of our
Power in this affair, were generally observed to be some of the steadiest and
best Voters upon all Questions that concerned our Public Right.

I have done with this. The Other part of my Consideration is the other part of
our Parliament, the House of Commons I mean.

And here we are taught to believe, the Peoples choice is the Representatives
Authority; and if that be true, it is somewhat hard to imagine which way they
can hinder a man from Session that the People have freely chosen. I grant, that
where Competitors have made an Election disputable, the final Judgment is in
the Representative Body; but I cannot comprehend how that House can ever make
void an undisputed Election, and such is a free choice of the People, of any
County or Borrough; and yet that is the very business of the Test of Seventy
Eight. For if I believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, I cannot possibly
fit in Parliament, let my Election, Ability, Integrity be what they will. In
this matter, let us lay aside Prejudice, and look beyond Transubstantiation,
like Englishmen, jealous of our Rights; for here seems to be the Snake in the
Grass; what! shall Opinion give rule to our Properties, and (like Daniels King)
change Times and Laws at Pleasure?

There is nothing more miserable in Government then that it must alter with
Religious Opinion, which yet we are not assured men shall not change, and that
often in an Age. I say, this does not Rest at Transubstantiation (tho if it
did, and it were not just, 'twere no argument to a good man) The same Power
that is assumed in that case, may make a Test of what it pleases, and a Man's
Dissent, a reason of Exclusion from Session in Parliament, let not this be.

We usually say, no Stream rises higher then its Fountain, and whether this
sort of Testing be not an Inversion of the natural Current of Power, may not be
amiss for Englishmen to deliberate: Nay, if it be not a breach of that part of
the Constitution of the Government: For if those whom the People choose, the
Representatives may reject, for a reason of their own, that in the nature of
Civil Government can be none, the Electors and Elected must needs be Divided,
in that the one makes void the Power of the other, tho it be that by which the
first House of Commons sat, and is the natural Authority of every House of
Commons in this Kingdom.

Nothing, in my Opinion, can cure this mischief better than a due consideration
of the true nature of things: What properly falls under our Cognizance, and
what not; and then to adapt proper and suitable means to the just ends we aim
at: For if the major vote in things not to be voted, could give any weight or
Sanction, it is to be feared the Jews were too much in the right, when they
cried, we have a Law, and by our Law he ought to Dye, however, upon these
Principles, nothing is plainer than that every Martyr was felo de se, and Dyed
a Malefactor instead of a Saint.

Let us then be delivered of all Tests that run not on the side of the old
Government of England; and if we must have a Test, I shall pray that it may be
translated from TRANSUBSTANTIATION to PERSECUTION. That is to say, that no Man
shall propose or consent to any thing in Government within this Kingdom, that
may infringe the Conscience or Property of any man in it; for upon that ancient
Policy our Government began; and let the Excommunication and Anathama of the
Government pass upon that Offender, to his perpetual civil Damnation.

I shall say no more to you now, what ever I may do at another time, but that
you use the utmost of your endeavors, to promote Piety and Charity: And as on
the one hand, with all imaginable softness, you strive to oblige the Members of
the Church of England to an impartial Consideration of these things, so on the
other hand, you advise all Dissenters to Govern themselves toward those
Gentlemen, in the use of this Liberty, with a decent and friendly Behavior:
Who knows, but that Conduct, with a little Time, may give them that sight of
their Interest, and dispose them to those Compliances, which may end this
present misunderstanding in the happiest civil Union, that any King and
Kingdom were ever blessed with. God of his Infinite Mercy grant us this great
Blessing, and his Grace to use it, Amen.

Once more, yours, with all my Heart,

FINIS.

