Imprimatur.

Geo. Royse.
March 6. 1691/4.
Advertisement.
THE Pages of the Guardian's Instruction, and the Apparatus ad Theologiam,
which are so often referred to in this Book, are according to the first and
best Impression, sold by Walter Kettilby, and Sam. Smith in St. Paul's
Churchyard. and Henry Clements in Oxford.

New Instructions TO THE GUARDIAN: SHOWING That the last Remedy to Prevent the
Ruin, Advance the Interest, and Recover the Honor of this Nation is, I. A more
Serious and Strict Education of the Nobility and Gentry. II. To breed up all
their younger Sons to some Calling and Employment. III. More of them to Holy
Orders.


WITH A Method of Institution from Three Years of Age, to Twenty One.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1694.

TO CHARLES Lord BRVCE, Son and Heir to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Ailesbury.
My LORD,
I Am very willing it should be known how great a share of the Guardian's
Instruction was Influenced by the Prospect of your good Lordship's Education;
and also the just Regard these Second Thoughts have both to your Lordship, and
the Splendid Families of Saresden, Barton, and Glympton.

I looked on my self your Debtor in the Result of all my Experience and
Observation, from the time when Sickliness made me Retire from Business, and
that Retirement made Reflection the main use of my Being, and Notions of
Education so familiar as to become the very Property of my thinking Faculty.

This I intend for an Excuse to those Persons who are so kind as to think that
I am able to deal with a greater Subject. They think Letters, Syllables, and
Spelling beneath the venturous Pretension of the Title Page: They are beneath
it indeed, but no otherwise than the Foundation is beneath the Building, which,
though it be low and unregarded, dirty and less Polished, yet the least neglect
and slightness in that is fatal to the Pomp and Pride of what looks higher.

Some are so kind as to wish that it were not so short; whereas it seems I
mistook when I thought that a Civility and Bribe to the Reader. There are those
who know that a while since it was much larger; and why it is not so now, among
several Reasons I will name but one: If I should have written all that I could
have said on the Subject, I am satisfied it would never have made a Fool a
Wiser Man; and what wrong is it to the Tutor to presume him able to Improve and
Practice upon a few plain general Directions. I am not tempted to think the
Directions I give the best and wisest in their kind: But to justify my Choice,
(whatever becomes of my Judgment) I must own that they are such as I would use
my self in hopes of Success, as thinking them most plain and easy, and most
agreeable to the Infancy of Thought; which ought mainly to be considered in the
business of Institution.

That the Knowledge I wish your Lordship, may more effectually serve this Life
and a better, I pray God to Water with Dew from above the Seeds of Virtue and
Religion in you: For Knowledge in a Person of great Quality without Grace and
good Manners, is a sight rather Ominous than Delighting; it is like the mighty
Blazing Comet, the more Glorious the more Terrible, and the Influence of the
former on the Ruin of this Kingdom is much more certain than the Prediction of
it from the latter can reasonably be pretended.

My Lord, I speak not this out of any distrust, I know the just Temperament of
Authority and Affection, which cannot but turn to Account so sweet a
Disposition: For though I will not stand by all the suppositions which have
been made, yet I think it is safe to believe that God will not Deny Grace where
Parents and Tutors do their Duty.

And now, (my Lord) the great Prejudice of a long Preface to a Book which has
nothing in it to command a Reader's Favor, makes me short in mine own Defense,
and conceal many things which the World would willingly know concerning your
Illustrious Ancestors, and must depend upon the experienced Goodnature of your
Noble Family, to accept of a general Acknowledgment how much I am,

Your most Obliged, and Affectionate, STEPHEN PENTON.

THE CONTENTS.
The First Part.
A Word to the Wise, lamenting the great Degeneracy of Manners from the
Gallantry of our Ancestors, page 1, 2 Caused by too much Indulgence and
Fondness in the Education of Persons born to Greatness and Places of Trust, p.
3, 4 Frugality recommended, p. 5, 6 Prodigality condemned, p. 7 Covetousness
censured, p. 8 Some Calling and Profession absolutely necessary for the younger
Sons of Nobility and Gentry, p. 10 The reason why so few of them undertake any
Calling is an Error in their Breeding, p. 10, 11 A Reason for a distinction in
the Breeding the Eldest Son from the Younger, p. 11, 12 Divinity recommended to
the Younger Sons of Nobility and Gentry, p. 13 A Catalogue of Nobles who have
been Churchmen, p. 14 The damage the Public suffers for want of the Service
young Gentlemen's Parts might do in some Profession or other, p. 18 The great
Advantage their own Private Families might reap thereby as to the Riches of
this World, p. 20 And as to the Happiness of the next in the Salvation of their
Souls, p. 23 The looseness of Manners in the Sons of the Gentry, is to be
ascribed to the carelessness of the Fathers when they grow up, p. 24 The
Advantages which Parents have above Strangers in Breeding up their own
Children, p. 25 Good Education would fortify them against Temptations by the
help of God's Grace, p. 28 And prevent the Horror of a guilty Conscience, p. 29
The Earl of Marleborough's Pious Letter before he was killed at Sea, p. 33 The
famous Earl of Rochester's conversion, the Restections on his Life, and Mr.
Robert Parson's very useful Sermon at his Funeral; recommended to young
Gentlemen, p. 35, 36, etc.
The Second Part. A Method of Teaching from Three Years of Age to Twenty One.
A Vindication of the Guardian's Instructions in an answer to a Letter, p. 44
First Stage for learning English, p. 52 Lord's Prayer, Creed, and Ten
Commandments, p. 57 Second Stage from Six to Fourteen, p. 63 A Method proposed
to exercise the Child's Memory, so that at the same time he may have a general
View by the Division of the Old Testament History, p. 63 A familiar way of
feeding his thinking Faculty with variety of Matter, p. 67 Solomon's Proverbs
digested under several Heads, with the Addition of the Proverbs of all
civilized Countries, recommended as a good Foundation for Prudence and
Goodness, p. 70 Learning to Write early, proposed, p. 71 Placing Children of
much differing Ages and Capacities in the same Class at School discommended, p.
72 The Admirable effect of constantly accustoming a Child to read a Chapter
Morning and Evening in the Bible, p. 73, and also p. 36 What sort of Chapters
most useful for the Child's reading more particularly, p. 74 Directions for
learning Latin and Greek, p. 74 Reasons considered why Children beyond Sea
learn Latin sooner than here, p. 75 The common Grammar and Accidence to be
used, though objected against by learned and judicious Men, p. 77 Great Leisure
and Patience advised to treat a Child with at the beginning, p. 79 Directions
for the next Eight Years, Year after Year; how to teach a Child Latin and
Greek, and fit him for the University by Fourteen, not omitting between whiles
the forementioned English Exercises, p. 80 Dancing between whiles advised, p.
91
The Third Stage.
From Fourteen to Twenty One, p. 93 Short Directions for a Tutor to treat a
young Gentleman newly brought to the University, p. 93. The Practice of some
Persons in sending their Sons to an Academy first, and afterward to the
University discommended, p. 100 To place him with a Country Minister instead of
sending him to the University also discommended, p. 100 As also sending him to
some Protestant University with a foreign Tutor, p. 101 The several Courses of
Life, young Gentlemen are to be grounded in, according to their respective
Talents and Conditions, p. 102 Travailing, with some Directions, p. 102 Settling
in the Country, and acting there, p. 108 Study of Physic, p. 108, 109
Civil-Law, p. 110 Common Law, p. 111 Directions for a complete Course in the
Study of Divinity, by the help of the Apparatus ad Theologiam, written for that
purpose, p. 113 A Tutor to direct a young Nobleman or Gentleman in the study of
Divinity advised, as greatly useful, p. 118
The Third Part. The Conclusion, in behalf of Holy Orders.
ENcouragement for Persons of Quality to study Divinity, p. 123 Objections,
(why they do not study it) answered, p. 125 The Rural Clergy in many places
neither beloved nor kindly used, p. 126 Going to Law not a convenient Remedy,
p. 128 A Description of a Purs-proud Clown who oppresses his Minister, p. 130,
131 Cheating the Parson thought no sin, and the danger of it, p. 133 Objection
that many Clergymen have much more than they deserve, p. 134, 135 That the
Clergy live to high, p. 136 That many of the Clergy are too Great, p. 137 That
the Inferior Clergy are many of them Idle, Ignorant, Quarrel. some, and Loose,
p. 138 The Pattern of St. Ambrose and Theodosius, p. 139 More Respect paid the
Sacred Function all the World over than is here, p. 140 If Noblemen's Sons were
Clergymen, their Interest would support the Function, p. 142 Without some
Amendment we must be ruined, p. 143
A Word to the Wise.
THose English Gentlemen I mean, whose Great Souls are grieved, when they
consider how this Gallant Nation has fooled away that Honor which our
Ancestors so dearly purchased: We once made a greater noise in the World, our
Arms were Formidable where ever they came, Conquest of whole Nations was easy:
We fed in Prison the Kings of those Countries we are afraid of: Our assistance
was often Courted, and always Successful: Happy were the People who could get
the English on their side, to Relieve distrested States, and six tottering
Crowns: We rode in Pleasure-Boats on the Sea, and knew no other Dangers but
what were under Water: In one Battle could make the Enemy send a Blank, and
give a Peace he was neither able to Force or Purchase.

Now, what less than a Stoical Senseless Patience can bear a Reflection on the
unhappy Change? That in few Years (I am ashamed to say how few) from so great a
steddiness of Gravity, Honesty, and Courage, we were softened into Foppishness,
Dissembling, and almost Cowardice: To see Wisdom sold for Wit, Veracity lost in
Swearing: To see Vice impudent, and Virtue despised for singularity, and almost
as much Courage required to be a Good Man, as would Take or Defend a Town.

To trace this Calamity through all its Causes, is a subject too Melancholy for
a thoughtful Man to be trusted with.

It must be confessed, the Hardships of the Civil War ruined the Fathers, the
Luxury following the Restoration spoiled the Sons; and if a stricter
Discipline does not mend the Grandchildren, we will resolve to be a Byword,
and an Hissing to French, Dutch, Scotch, and all Mankind.

But perhaps, Arguments from Honor may be too speculative; I will try one
taken from Interest and Force: Self-Preservation at this time is very costly,
Wars thicken upon us, and our Silver Mines run low; A strict Education of
Children is a good way to save and pay Taxes, for Virtue is cheaper than Vice:
Tenderness and Indulgence feeds the Inclination to Gaiety, which tends to
Debauchery, and ruin of a Family: When you shall see the unsatiable Curiosity
of a Child's wanton Appetite everlastingly gratified with whatsoever it craves
(and so craving thereby made infinite:) When Father and Mother shall fear to
displease him, as if the Child were wisest of all the three, and were in good
truth my Little Master, without any Complement: At Ten Years of Age, when he
should be formed to Wisdom, he must once every day Hunt, making his Horses and
Dogs Companions, instead of Servants, and venture his Neek four or five hours
at a time for Health's sake: When perhaps this is a Person whom Providence
designs for a Trustee in the Government of six Millions of People: And what
care can be enough for his Accomplishment? What Wisdom, History, and Politics,
what Integrity, Oratory, and Courage is required to understand and debate the
true Interest of the Kingdom, to discover and baffle the Fallacies of a
designing Speecher, to give the King seasonable and useful Counsel, so
serviceably to manage Foreign Ministers of State, as to redeem us from the
Scandal of that old true Jest, of losing in a Treaty all we got in a Fight.

There are great Places of Trust and Profit in the Kingdom to be aimed at,
which Kings are many times forced to fill up with Persons of meaner Birth,
because, forsooth, Great Ones will not condescend to be Wise enough to manage
them: So that in conclusion, besides the Service of the Public, the best way
to keep up and increase a Patrimony, is to breed up Children Severely, and fit
them with Improvements suitable to their Quality: This will make them able to
live Wisely, and within compass, and bear the great Burthe^s, the Public
Exigencies of our Affairs lay upon us: And it will be worth all the Charges we
are at for our present Defense; if that Frugality and Wisdom which neither
Morality nor Religion could teach, Necessity at last should force us to.

And here I cannot pass by the Censure of an Humor too frequent among young
Gentlemen; mistaking Vanity and Profuseness for Generosity; they despise and
laugh at Parsimony and Thrift, as qualities Sullen, Sordid, and Ungenteel,
those Qualities which are valued in other Countries, and which made the Romans
masters of the World; and which have made the Venetians and the Dutch in
Greatness equal to most Kingdoms in Europe. And is not this a much more
reputable disposition in a Nation, than to feed an heedless humor of Wasting:
And instead of true and solid Honor, (which nothing but Wisdom and Virtue has
any Title to) vain-gloriously to aim at Popularity, and sacrifice an Estate to
purchase the Admiration of the Rabble; but the Hatred of all who are Good, and
Contempt of all who are Wise. Care therefore in time should be taken in the
Education of Youth, to prevent this Temper.

1. It seldom goes alone; it is seen in very had Company most times, and the
Vices which attend it are none of the cheapest.

2. It brings the Honor and Credit of a Family into great suspicion of Danger,
and leaves Younger Children too much at the Mercy of the Eldest Brother's
Virtue.

3. It makes the Man despised by those who feed most upon his Looseness: He
that Cheats you, though he be Damned for it, laughs at you. When a Person of
Quality lands at Calice, and the People flock about, and cry out, Here comes
Money, it seems a greater Complement to the plenty of our Nation, than to the
wisdom of the Travelers.

4. A Prodigal Temper makes a Man less able to bear any Calamitous Change of
his Condition, which by Providence or secular Casualties may befall him: He
has been too Free of the Money which should have been laid up to prevent
Necessity, and of the Wisdom which should support it.

Therefore when a Child is carefully taught good sentiments of Justice, and
Charity, which is the greatest piece of Justice in the World, let him be taught
to live as savingly as may comport with Decency and the circumstances of his
Condition. Prudence will go a great way in keeping a Man from being Base or Mad.

And now least the Reader should think I am setting up for Usury, I must
declare that I am no greater friend to the sin of Covetousness, than I am to
Idolatry, the Root of all Evil, and E^^^ity with God (...) and where (...)
Prodigality meet (for such a Monster now and then to Born) When a Man shall
spend a Thousand Pound for Vainglory, and at the same time break the Laws of
God and Man to get one Groat; I am so far from favoring him, that I think in
the worst sense of the word Reprobate, without fear of mistake, he may put
himself down for one.

There are a great many more Cautions in the Education of young Gentlemen, as
to Morality, which might come in here, but I mention this in particular, as
being big with most inconveniences, and being very catching as soon as a Child
thinks himself something. Now to prevent the other many ill Habits in Youth,
was the subject of a late Book, called the Guardian's Instruction; the design
of which appears in the Preface before it, and the Index in the end: The
Usefulness of which, to that end is Explained and Improved in the Second Part
of this Book; which is a Method to teach a Child from three years of age to
twenty one, etc. For the use of Gentlemen who have Wit enough to be Advised,
and know how to be Civil to their own Interest, that is, who are wise enough to
consider, that there is an Archbishopric, a Lord-Chancellorship, and a
Lord-Chief-Justice-ship in the Kingdom worth studying for; of which more in
another place.

And I must here rid my self of some Thoughts which have often run in mine
Head, that, whatever be the Occasion, certainly Foolish is the conceit, That
Law, Physic, or Divinity is beneath the Son of a Person of Quality, though the
Fourth, Fifth, or Sixth Son. It were worth the while to show the reasons of it,
I cannot be so hard-hearted to the Gentry and Nobility as to think that this
Humor always proceeds from Pride: But I rather imagine that it proceeds from
an Aversion (to the confinement of a Profession) in the Children themselves,
occasioned by an Unwary promiscuous way of their Education, which I have
touched upon in the forementioned Book, Page 35. Guardian's Instructions.

I will exemplify this in a Case: A Person of Quality, worth several Thousands
a year, has four or five Sons, but the Eldest is to carry the Estate and
Title, upon the decease of the Father; nay, perhaps beforehand, is to be Master
of a good share, and the Younger Children to depend on the Father's Prudence
for a moderate Provision: In the mean time they are all bred up in one Common
manner, enjoy the same Fondness, wear the same Clothes, go to the same School,
Hunt and Hawk at the same Idle rate: This must needs plump up the sensual Soul
of the Youth, make him reckon himself as good as his eldest Brother, and of as
good parts too, never considering that the other is to be Wiser by Five
Thousand Pounds a year.

How will such a Child be able to bear the Ungrateful Distinction which must
shortly be made? The eldest Son must be taken from School, Treated like a Man,
Habited for Quality, and have a Man and an half to wait upon him, and a brace
of Geldings; and after he has slam'd for a year or two in the University,
retire to be settled in the Country, and share the Greatness of his Father. Now
in the sight of all this, who shall undertake to persuade the other Children to
go up to Oxford, and live thriftily there, and study hard to make out their
Fortunes by some Calling. The Quality of their Birth, and Gaity of their
Brother, will still be running in their Minds; this will breed Discontent;
Discontent will make them Idle; and Idleness will make them even what they
please.

It may perhaps be objected, that this distinction in Education of Elder and
Younger Sons, may be apt to beget Pride in the one, and to discourage the
other: As for the first, a Sober and Pious education may prevent that, and as
for the second, the younger Children ought to be discouraged from thinking too
well of themselves: They must be told, and be taught the difference of their
Relation to the Patrimony, and that more knowledge and learning, will vie with
what they Envy in their elder Brother; and that Industry in an honorable
Profession, may entitle them to as comfortable, if not as great a Fortune. And
having mentioned the undertaking a Profession, I cannot think but the study of
Divinity a very Genteel and Agreeable employment to exercise the Talent of a
young Person of Quality: There is one Melancholy Objection which I am afraid
makes so few of them undertake it: They see the dignified Clergy Envied, and
the inferior Clergy treated with Contempt and Hardships in many places, by the
great Enemies of Religion and the Church. I have not room here to give an
Answer, but the Function shall have Justice done it, and the Clergy be
Vindicated from its Enemies, whom Malice, Atheism or Pride, Avarice or
Dissension make so. In the mean time, because it is not impossible but some
Gentleman or other of Parts and Learning, may be inclined to hearken to these
Good Wishes. In the Second Part, I will prescribe him such a Method from the
very beginning of his Adventure, as by God's Blessing upon his Abilities, shall
give him very great Insight, if he can take Pains enough.

A Catalogue of several Great Families whose Relations have been Church Men.
AGelnothus, Bishop of Canterbury, Son of Earl Agelmare. Athelmarus, Bishop of
Winton, Son to Hugh, Earl of March. Henry de Bloys, Bishop of Winchester,
Brother to King Stephen. Hugh de Pudsey, Bishop of Durham, Earl of
Northumberland. Boniface of Savoy, Bishop of Cant. Uncle to Queen Eleanor, Wife
to Henry III. Richard Talbot, Bishop of London, Allied to the Talbot's, after,
Earls of Shrewsbury. Henry Beaufort, Bishop of Lincoln and Winton, Son to John
of Gaunt. William Courtney, Bishop of Canterb. Son of Hugh Courtney, Earl of
Devon. Giles de Bruce, Bishop of Hereford, Son of William, Lord de Bruce.
George Nevil, Bishop of Exon and York, Brother to Richard Nevil, Earl of
Warwick. Thomas Piercy, Bishop of Norwich, Allied to the Piercy's, Earls of
Northumberland. Lionel Woodvil, Bishop of Sarum, Son to Earl Rivers. Thomas
Vipont, Bishop of Carirsle, Allied to Viponts, then Earls of Westmorland.
Marmaduke Lumley, Bishop of Carlisle, Allied to the House of Lumley's. Walter,
Bishop of Durham, Earl of Northumberland. Julius de Medices, Bishop of
Worcester, Allied to the House of Medices in Italy. Nicholas de Longespee,
Bishop of Sarum, Son to William, Earl of Salisbury. William Dudley, Bishop of
Durham, Son of John Lord Dudley. Walter de Cantilupo, Bishop of Worcester, of a
Great House in Normandy. Jews Beaumont, Bishop of Durham, of the Blood Royal
of France. Thomas Arundel, Bishop of Canterb. Son to Robert, Earl of Arundel
and Warren. James Berkley, Bishop of Exon, Son to the Lord Berkley. Richard
Scroope, Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, Brother to William Scroope, Earl of
Wiltshire. Thomas Bourchier, Bishop of Cant. Son to Henry Bourchler, Earl of
Essex. Roger de Clinton, Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, of the same Family
with Geofry de Clinton. John Stafford, Bishop of Canterbury, Son to the Earl of
Stafford. William de Vere, Bishop of Hereford, Richard Beauchamp, Bishop of
Hereford, and Sarum. John Orandison, Bishop of Exon, of the House of Grandison,
Dukes of Burgundy. Edmund Audley, Bishop of Hereford. Allied to the Lord
Audley. Henry (...) Bishop of Lincoln, (...) Baron of Lords. John Zou^h, Bishop
of Landaff, Brother to the Lord Zouch. Fulco Basset, Bishop of London, Lord
Basset. James Stanley, Bishop of Ely, Brother to the Eacl of Derby. Simon
Montacute, Bishop of Ely, Allied to the Montacutes, then Earls Salisbury.
What Clergy have sprung from the Gentry, Lawyers, and Merchants, you may see
in a very large Catalogue annexed to the Charter of the Corporation for Widows
and Children of Clergymen, Printed July 1. 1678. for John Playford in
Little-Britain.

To speak my mind more plainly,

1. A strict Education of the young Nobility and Gentry would be a great
Advantage to the Public. It is a great Wrong to the National Concerns that we
lose the Service and Assistance which the Parts of so many excellent Persons
might afford: What great variety would the King have to fill up all void Places
of Trust and Honor? What choice of Privy-Councellors, Ambassadors, Judges, and
Justices of the Peace? What a glorious show of Military Officers at Land and
Sea?

We may learn from an Enemy: How mightily does the French King serve himself of
the Nobility there? What an Emulation makes them contend to deserve best? And
though God be thanked the Arbitrary Command of our Service is not so great as
theirs, yet the Love of our Country ought to be: And what a noble Resolution
would it be for all Persons of Quality to Consecrate the several Inclinations
of their Children to the respective Services of the Kingdom Civil,
Ecclesiastical, or Military, according as Sedentariness and Books, or Activity
and Business is their Talent.

How many Honorable Conditions does great skill in the Law prepare a Man for?
How many Lives does a good Physician save? And what a Calamitous want is there
in many places? where many a Gentleman miscarries, because the Quack cannot
write a good Bill, or because the Apothecary cannot read a bad Hand. There are
great Dignities in the Church which no doubt the King had rather bestow on a
Man of Birth: If his Temper be for Action in the Field, he will scarce ever
want an opportunity to be as Stout as he pleases: And he must have a care of
mistaking the Employment: It is not now as in the time of Peace, when being
good for little was Qualification enough for a Soldiers Life, which is often
chosen, because it is most like to Idleness: Now, Industry, Hardiness,
Vigilance, Skill, and Conduct is required, and Courage to venture the Lottery
of Death or Honor.

2. A strict Education of the Nobility and Gentry, would be of great Advantage
to their own Private Families. The Eldest Son would keep up the Honor, and
wisely manage the Estate of his Ancestors, and be likely to add to both: But on
the contrary, if he value himself by the customary liberty of Heirs, to be
Loose and Idle, he may Hunt, Hoop, and Hallow for some Years, but in a little
time thou shall look and behold he is not, thou shall seek him, but he shall no
where be found: And besides the danger of running out an Estate, a loose and
fond Education of a Son and Heir, is the ready way to make him self-willed,
Humoursome and Proud: For having been gratifyed in all he desired when young,
he expects the same Fondness from all People when he grows up, and for want of
it grows Peevish, Sour, and Unconversable: And I believe many Mothers, Wives,
Sisters, and Servants have often found such a Man prove the most imperious Son,
Husband, Brother, Master and Neighbor in all the Kingdom.

As for the Younger Sons, if they are not bred up to some Profession, their
case is not indifferent. They are left to the dieting of a moderate Condition:
Their Parentage makes them aim at Great Fortunes, but the hard word Jointure
spoils all. Sobriety in such Persons is a great Virtue, and it must be a great
share of preventing. Grace that can keep them within bounds, it being a very
hard matter not to do ill, when a Man has nothing else to do: Whereas, were
they bred good Scholars, what might not they promise themselves. I would have
every younger Son dream as Joseph did, That Father, Mother, and eldest Brother,
should bow to his Wealth and Power: There have been Honorable Families in this
Kingdom, which have made this good. By undertaking one of the forementioned
Professions, as they may do great service to the Nation, so in the end they may
be very well paid. The Kingdom is not niggardly to such as deserve, if they are
not wanting to themselves by Modesty. No Nation in Europe has better rewards
for Industry; and I verily believe they are generally as well bestowed: So that
if the Gentry and Nobility will not be encouraged to take such seasonable
advice as this, it is because they resolve to go on in the ancient Road of
Carelessness.

3. Besides the secular inducements, there is one advantage more of an higher
Consideration; The everlasting Condition of the Soul in the life to come, which
nothing but a Virtuous and Holy education can secure. I know Abraham, says God,
Genesis 18.19. that he will command his Children and his Household, to keep the way
of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, that I may bring upon him all that I
have spoken. Old Eli paid dear for miscarrying in this point; because his Sons
made themselves Vile, and he restrained them not. It cost him the Life of his
two Sons, his own Neck, and such a Curse upon his Posterity as made both the
Ears of every one that heard it tingle. 1 Samuel 3.11. So true is it what God
said to Ezekiel 3.18. When I say to the Wicked, thou shall surely die, and thou
give him not warning, from his wicked way that he may save his Life, he shall
die in his Iniquity, but his Blood will I require at thine Hands. And when God
shall bring the Young Man into Judgment for walking in the ways of his Heart,
and the sight of his own Eyes, with what confusion shall the Father hear the
poor Creature plead for his excuse; He was bred to nothing, and knew no better.
He was a good Moralist though no Courtier, who with the sarcasm of a Blow,
reproved the Father for the Crime of the Son. And in truth Children are Talents
to be accounted for. Read mihi Liberos meos. There is no returning as you
found them: They must be improved.

Most Men think they have done their Duty when they have gotten Children and an
Estate, leaving their Souls to God and their Wives. And it is observable, That
many Ladies are very industrious, and begin betimes with Prayers and
Catechisms; but after a little time the Child grows up to be a Boy, and the Boy
grows too wise for his Mother, and then the Father undertakes the Management;
and here it is that Time and Chance happens to his Morals and Religion. The
Father he is careless, concludes that Virtue will come to him some way or
another, as it did to himself (supposing him a good Man) but if himself be not
so, then the insluence it is likely to have upon the Child, must needs be
obvious, beyond the Power of all the Prayers and Tears of the best Wife,
Mother, or Sister in the World.

Infinite is the force of Example and Instruction from Parents on the tender
Soul of a Child, and the encouragements to do their duty are great.

2. From that Reverence and Love (which earliest of any thing appears in the
Child's looks and actions) the constant care, presence, and fondness they show,
begets from the Infant. It is notorious that a Person learns the same thing
much more speedily and more effectually from a Man he loves, than from a
stranger, or one he fears and hates. Whose Commands are received and obeyed
with more reluctance than from Parents.

2. It is a great advantage the Parents have to deal with a Child who knows
nothing already, and yet desires and longs to know any thing: To teach him is
to write upon Clean and Smooth Paper; and if you make not a good stroke, a
plain Letter and a straight Line, it is the Pen, or the Hand that holds it, but
not the Paper to be blamed.

3. The Child as yet has contracted no Ill Habits, which are a great hindrance
to Instruction of Persons in years, especially as to Morals.

4. The Devil is at a loss to deal with a Child (who knows neither good nor
evil) by all his Temptations.

5. God's Blessing may reasonably be hoped for, to succeed their careful
performance of the Duty he commands: It is God's business they do, they are his
Children they breed up, as Jacob told Rachel, Genesis 3.2. and He never fails to
reward those that serve Him faithfully in it.

6. Those Children who are most Virtuously bred up, prove most Dutiful and
Comfortable to their Parents for ever after; whereas a Child bred up without
the Fear of God, will never reverence Man: And how will all the Immoralities of
his life, the great dangers he runs into in this World, and the greater dangers
he ventures in the next, afflict the Souls of his Parents, hasten their old
Age, equal the Pangs of his Birth, and make them sorry that a Man Child was
ever born into the World.

7. One infinite advantage Parents have above a stranger in Education of their
Children; they knowing their own natural Infirmities, and foreseeing the danger
that a share of them may be born with their Children, ought to be Jealous of
the mischief, watch the first motions, and more seasonably obviate the Disease,
than others can.

And from hence it is easy to account for that infamous Atheism and Immorality,
which for many years have disgraced Reason and Humane shape: It must be charged
upon this Fundamental misearriage in Education. For though Nero and some others
may be alleged as Insiances, how much Institution may be foiled by Nature; yet
Socrates ingeniously confessed, what power Philosophy had in such a case; And
why should not Christian instruction do the same? The knowledge of his Duty and
God's Grace, would make Vice looked upon as an Enemy, and its Temptations
suspected: It would supply the young Man with an answer to the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil: How can I do this great wickedness, and Sin against God?
Genesis 39.9. Joseph was young enough, and private enough to have played a
Courtier, but his Heart was brim full of Gratitude, and made him as great a
Master of his own little Family, within his Breast, as he was in Potiphar's
House, all at his Command, no Passion stirs: What? Sin against the good Master
I live upon, and the merciful God who by Miracles brought me hither? I may not,
I dare not break in upon my Conscience with such a Guilt: With what Horror
shall I live, and how can I dare to die.

And here having mentioned Dying, I cannot avoid offering a serious
Consideration of the most dismal Apprehensions which must needs confound the
Soul of a notorious Sinner, when a Desperate Sickness shall set him beyond any
Relief from Pleasure or Delight in Life, when Pain increasing, Strength
failing, Time shortning, he fears a few Minutes may put him upon the woeful
Experiment of the Grand Perhaps: When Conscience let loose shall prevent
Stupidity, what Painter is able to draw the Horror and Amazement of his Looks?
He stares as if his Eyelids were never to meet; his Groans make the standers
by tremble as much as the Bed that he lies upon; he knows not how or where to
begin Repentance; he is ashamed to think of Mercy, and at last angry at the
Immortality of his Soul, he seems willing to die, because Damnation cannot be
worse. Hear this o you who laugh at Virtue, contemn Religion, and yet must Dye,
whatever be your Wealth, your Wit, or your Honor!

Sometime after this was written, coming to Oxford, I showed these Papers to a
very Worthy Person of my Acquaintance, who hearing this read, told me, there
was a case now fresh upon the Stage, like this, and showed me the Book called,
the Second Spira, where I saw dreadfully exemplisi'ed what I had been
describing, whether the matter be true or no.

It does please God sometimes to glorisie the Power of his Grace, by snatching
a Brand out of the Fire, and showing wicked Men a possibility of Salvation:
That though the Path be narrow, the Gate straight and he must strive, yet he
may enter, and be received, if he will but knock hard enough.

I have here subscribed a Letter to my Purpose of the Earl of Marlborough, a
little before his Death in the Sea Fight, 1665.

To the Honorable Sir Hugh Pollard, Comptroler of His Majesty's Household.
SIR,
I Believe the Goodness of your Nature, and the Friendship you have always born
me, will receive with kindness the last office of your Friend. I am in Health
enough of Body and (through the Mercy of God in Jesus Christ) well disposed in
mind. This I premise, that you may be satisfied, that what I write proceeds not
from any Fantastic Terror of Mind, but from a sober Resolution of what
concerns my self, and earnest desire to do you more Good after my Death, than
mine Example (God of his Mercy pardon the Badness of it) in my Lifetime may do
you harm.

I will not speak ought of the Vanity of this World, your own Age and
Experience will save that Labor. But there is a certain thing that goes up
and down the World, called Religion, dressed and pretended Fantastically, and
to Purposes bad enough, which yet, by such evil Dealing loses not its Being.

The Great Good God has not left it without Witness, more or less, sooner or
later in every Man's Bosom, to direct us in the pursuit of it; and has given
us His Holy Word, in which, as there are many things hard to be understood, so
there is enough plain and easy to quiet our Minds, and direct us concerning
our future Being.

I confess to God and you, I have been a great Neglecter, and (I fear) Despiser
of it: God of His Infinite Mercy pardon me the dreadful Fault.

But when I retired my self from the noise and deceitful vanity of the World, I
found no true Comfort in any other Resolution than what I had from thence.

I commend, from the bottom of my Heart, the same to your (I hope) happy use.
Dear, Sir Hugh, let us be more Generous than to believe we die as the Beasts
that Perish; but with a Christian Manly Brave Resolution look to what is
Eternal. I will not trouble you further. The only Great God, and Holy God,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, direct you to an happy end of your Life, and send
us a joyful Resurrection, so prays

Your true Friend, Marleborough.
From the Old James, near the Coast of Holland, Apr. 24. 1665.

The Quality of the Person, the seriousness, the Piety, and designed usefulness
of the Letter, together with the remarkable circumstance of the Time in which
it was written tacks it very well to the Subject I am upon.

It is Printed at the beginning of a small Tract, called Fair Warning to a
Careless World, Published by Dr. Lloyd, Printed for John Amery over against St.
Clement's-Church in the Strand, 1673.

The Author has Collected Instances of all Conditions, Emperors, Kings,
Philosophers, Statesmen, etc. of all Religions, Jews, Mahometans, Heathens,
Christians, and of Good and Bad Men in each, to show the opinion they had of a
Life to come; and especially how warmly that Opinion worked when they came to
die: The Souls of young Gentlemen would feed upon such Instances, gather
Strength, and grow able to call Carelessness, Vice, and Atheism the greatest
Folly in the World.

And I think it were a good expedient to confirm the Good in their Love of
Virtue, to read the late Disquisition of the Law of Nature, and the Confutation
of Hobbs, Published by Mr. Tyrrel. And to convince the Bad of the danger of
their Folly, I wish every Gentleman would Command his Children seriously and
frequently to read over the Reflections on the Life, and the genteel and very
useful Discourse at the Funeral of the late Famous Earl of Rochester, a Man
always wonderful whether Good or Bad: I hope I shall not offend by Naming him,
since it is for the Glory of God's Mercy to Him and His; and also since it was
his own especial Command to the Orator to make the Best of him in the Pulpit at
any Rate that Posterity might look upon him and learn to be Wise, and all the
Kingdom grow better by his Uncommon Example.

There are very good Reasons to believe that his Education in his Youth was as
carefully managed, as the Calamitous time he was Born in would permit; and to
show the power of Education, some of his most Intimate Companions, in the
looser part of his Life, have declared, That before he slept, he would continue
the Custom he had been bred up in of reading a Chapter in the Bible.

But to say the truth, His Eyes were too tender to bear the mighty Sunshine he
went out so early abroad into: He was too too Young to be trusted with the
sight of Vice and Atheisin Dressed up with Wit, Beauty, and Honor: To see the
Gantlet thrown against Heaven, and the Philistine traversing the Ground to
desie the Host of the living God: His Youthful Curiosity gazed too long, and
went too near, and at last he was taken Prisoner, led away Captive, And for a
while made Slave to the Cruel Tyranny of Custom, Fashion, and Example.

But the great Shepherd of Israel would not suffer the Lamb to perish in the
Paw of the Lion or the Bear, or the Devil to wear away a Jewel so rich as this.
God had great things to do by him, and therefore darts a Ray from above into
his Breast, softens and Refines the Metal, and purges the Dross, and like
Saint Paul, makes him Preacher of the Cause he had so often assaulted, though
with more violence to his own reason than theirs whom he Thought to Baffle. He
now tells the World that the time must come, when Mirth and Laughter shall say
it is not in me, Honor it is not in me, and the greatest Wit in the Kingdom,
it is not in me: That the King of Terrors must make Atheisin shrink and give
back at Last, even at that time, when (if there were any thing in it) it ought
to be more Daring, and most Bold of all.

It was not Pain and Weakness, or Faintness of Spirits, which made him Good,
for then it would have made him Dull too, but his Wit continued to the last; he
had more than there was strength to show; and his dying sharpness was as great,
as when the greatest mixture of Madness composed the best Verse he ever wrote.

Therefore let his Memory be precious, let the Wicked take the Ptatern, and let
the Spirit of God have the Praises of a sound and sincere Conversion, which the
mournful Courses of his Life set off as shades do the Picture, and as the Dark
side of the Cloud in Egypt, without which the bright side had been no Miracle.

And now it is full time to take my leave of the Gentry, asking Pardon for
becoming their Adviser; and begging that a good Intention may atone for what
ever is eagerly and weakly spoken: I am sure they would forgive me, did they
but know how much I think an English Gentleman, Religiously, Virtuously, and
Wisely bred, the finest sight in the World.

New Instructions TO THE GUARDIAN, The Second Part.

Containing an Easy METHOD FOR TEACHING A Young Gentleman FROM Three Years Old
to Twenty One.

London, Printed in the Year 1694.

An Answer to a Letter from a Person of Quality.
Madam,
I Received your Censure of the Guardian's Instructions, with a Duty becoming
the Favor, and would have Printed it before this Second Part, but that this
Performance will not endure such Neighborhood.

I am sorry that your Ladyship (who is the One only great Exception to all I
have written) should fancy that You and your Son were in my Thoughts when my
Pen dropped the Vinegar Part of the Book, as you Phrase whatever Intrencheth on
the Jurisdiction of the Women's Court. I am very willing to own that your
Ladyship is often in my Thoughts, but I take care that it be when I am disposed
to think wisest, which I fear the Ladies will never say was, when I wrote such
a Book as that.

However, being neither Old nor Rich enough to set up for an Humor, and
pretend to despise what Gentlewomen think of me, I do but beg the reasonable
liberty of a common Criminal, to explain my own meaning, and then it shall be
found, that the worst of my Design is, to save fine shaped Gentlemen from
having their Backs broken by too much Hugging.

Your Ladyship Indicts me in the name of all your Sex, for Insinuating that the
Fondness of the Mother spoils the Son, as much as the Fondness of the Father
spoils the Mother; or which is all one, where the Husband dotes, that is,
thinks every one wise who is handsome, and leaves his Wife to do what she will
with the Son, the Wife leaves the Son to do what he will with himself, and so
prepares the young Man to set up his Horse at the Stews or a Tavern.

To get rid of this Objection as well as I can, it is too late to repent of
having discovered an Opinion which Scripture and Reason enclines me to, That
the Man should guide the Woman, he is Head, and a Man would think the
Understanding should be there. It Is true, Men in England have parted with this
Prerogative, for you Ladies have Compounded for it with so much Beauty, that
you have gotten an Empire over Husbands here, unheard of in other Nations. I do
not envy you this Power, or think it unjustly gotten, for I wish I were under
the Dominion of it my self. But since this Monarchy Occonomical is a mixed
Monarchy, I would have due Limits adjusted, and proper Shares allotted: I would
not have the Husband be carefully looking after the roasting of Eggs in the
Kitchen, while the Wife is reading Lectures of Politics in the Parlor, to the
Son; neither would I have the Son sent for three times in the Week from School,
to do nothing else but make Babies in his Mother's Eyes for two hours together.

I shall not here describe all the various Shapes in which this Fondship
appears; alas! that is the mortal Sin in the Guardian's Instructions, which
has offered so much violence to the Chaste Eyes of the Fair Sex, that this
Sheet is the Penance for. And though I cannot, with a safe Conscience, allow
Mothers so much liberty to spoil their Children as I would, yet I will make
them amends for it with an Aequivalent; I will bring the best Reasons they can
have to plead for their Breeding up their Children, and show that they cannot
help being too Fond; and the more there is of Necessity, the less they are
culpable; and if this does not make my Peace, then I must conclude to live and
die a Batchellor. Thus then I will suppose you to argue.

The Tenderness of our Sex, the great pain in Breeding, and Torments of our
Travail, the delight of being eased of those Pains, and seeing the Fruit of our
Labor, the infinite Care and Trouble, necestitous Infancy requires from the
Mother, whilst the Father walks about and Whistles, with his hands in his
Pockets, the Pleasure of seeing the growing little Actions and first Essays of
Knowledge, these things cannot but heighten our Affection, and make it too loud
for Reason; and we may claim as the Mother's due, the comfort of his Tatling,
for the trouble of his Crying, and unanswerably conclude, that no Person can be
sitter to manage the Child when he can speak, than she which taught him first
to do so.

I confess, How an Husband who is as fond of his Lady as he ought to be, can
deal with such Logic as this, is beyond my Experience: And to make you amends
once for all, I will frankly confess that Women's natural Wit is as brisk as
ours. I will not say Brisker: The sharpness of a Daughter is beyond that of a
Son of more Years: Indeed afterward the greater freedom of Conversation,
Hearding in Societies, and Feeding one another with Observation and Experience
in the World, give our Sex those Advantages which Women want: But since the Law
of the Creation does not think you fit to be trusted with this Improvement, for
fear you should manage your Knowledge as ill as you first obtained it: You must
excuse me, if I cannot force my self to believe, that the Husband ought not to
be wiser than the Wife.

My Service to Mr. William, and tell him I hope to see him prove a more
material Objection to the Guardian's Instructions, than I have met withal yet.

And now, Madam, I know the length of that Apology which ought to be made for
treating so much Excellency with a Style thus Familiar: But that I am confident
it is impossible for your Ladyship to be discovered without your own Consent:
For I have compelled my self to a Vow of foregoing the satisfaction which I
could easily make my self envied for, by Publishing the Honor of Corresponding
with so much Worth, and subscribing,

Your Ladiship's, most Affectionately Devoted.

The First Stage.
New Instructions to the Guardian.
1. THE Two things to be practiced upon in the Breeding up a Gentleman, are,
Good Manners, and Knowledge: It is not my design in this small Tract to meddle
with Morality, and the Dutiful or Advisable Practices of the Respective
Behavior of Childhood, Youth, and Riper Years, either at Home, or in the
University or Country, and that in Private or Public Conditions; for this was
the business of The Guardian's Instructions, the Method, Management and Parts
of which may be known by the Preface before the Book, or the Index at the end
of it.

2. My concern therefore at present is, with the Knowledge of a Child, and to
reduce my own Observation (with just Deference to others) into some Rules to
help at first, and afterward to improve the Natural desire of Knowledge, which
discovers it self with the first exercise of Reason.

The Rules are Few and Easy, because the eager Appetite after Novelty is
heightened by the Pleasure which attends it; so that if it be burdened with the
Number, or stifled with the Difficulty of Instructions, Distrust will make the
Defire more indifferent, and the Progress more moderate.

3. For Method sake I have measured out One and Twenty Years, by such distinct
Stages as I thought convenient, with Directions agreeable to each Interval.

How to treat a Child from his beginning to Read 'till Six Years old, from Six
to Fourteen, from Fourteen to One and Twenty: These Distances are calculated
for the common Capacity of Human Nature, not for the Gigantick reaches of some
singular Prodigies of Parts, who do Wonders from the Cradle, and early stride
over one of these Stages in a Breath; and if they did not hasten as fast to
Die, would want Matter to know before they come of Age. He who will undertake
to prescribe just Rules for such Abilities as these, were best first to take
good care to be somewhat like them himself.

The First Stage.
For English.
AS soon as ever the Child is able to speak several Words plain, let him be
taught his Letters.

1. By this means he will grow able much sooner, and with much more ease, to
Apprehend and Pronounce all manner of Words, than he would otherwise do, from
the confusion of a bare Family-Noise: Wherein the frequent difference of Tones,
and the hasty Abbreviations of Words, in the common rambling Talk, make the
Child apt to mistake one Word or Syllable for another, and so make it much
longer before he come to speak perfectly well, than it will be after he be thus
somewhat prepared, to observe, apprehend, and catch at the Pronunciation of the
Syllables he hears.

2. This will be a means to put some stop to the perpetual Motion and Hurry a
Child is in all the Day long, which is good for nothing but to make the Nurse
sleep well. For though it looks somewhat diverting to see a Child brisk, yet if
his Motion be too Violent, or too Frequent, it will keep his Brains in an
everlasting Tumult, and put him so many degrees back from thinking. Whereas if
he did but breath now and then on the Horn Book, this would help to fix the
Mercury of his Idle Soul, give the Spirits time to settle, and insensibly make
preparation for as much resemblance of some kind of Seriousness as every degree
of Tameness in Childhood can promise. And the Pauses at first between every
Letter, and afterward the distinctive Points in Sentences, which the Child
ought to be carefully taught to observe, will bridle the Infant-Eartlestness,
make him look as if he did consider, and in time make him really do so; and I
cannot but blame the common Practice. It is thought a kind of Perfection in
Reading, if the Child read loud and fast; beside the indecency of each, one
begets an illbecoming Tone, and the other hinders the minding the Sense and
Truth of what is read.

3. When you begin with a Child, do not clog him with too much; let him come to
his Book as to his Recreation: That the frequent exercise of Memory in Persons
of Discretion helps it, cannot be denied; but burdening a tender memory does
not so: the delight which is taken in Performances will strengthen the Faculty;
but tireing of it weakens the same. The Mind of a Child is to be dieted like
his Stomach, little and often; for fullness creates heaviness, and that is but
another name for dullness; nay sometimes a Surfeit follows it; now a Surfeit in
the beginning of Learning is fatal. If he dread and loath his Book, if ever you
intend to make him a great Man, you must be sure to provide him a good Clark.

4. Forasmuch as the unexperienced Apprehension of a Child is weak and tardy,
the Elements of Instruction ought to be very simple and easy: For Difficulty
and Discouragement begin with the same Letter. And therefore though I were sure
to have my Eyes scratcht out the next Moment, I cannot forbear speaking
irreverently of the Grave Horn-Book in use, which brings in the Country
School-Dames so many Groats a Week: For the mixing the Great and Small Letters
at first teaching, and putting down the same Letter in different Figures, as R.
S. and V, etc. must needs distract an Infant, and make him keep the Straw much
longer in his Fingers than he need to do.

One Caution I cannot fail of putting in here: There are certain Letters which
some Children cannot so soon learn to pronounce as they do the others,
especially R. and L. if you find that this is not out of heedlesness only, but
some kind of unusual Difficulty, go on at present without them (they will come
in time) and do not stop the Child's progress, 'till he get the Pronunciation
of these two Letters also, for you know not how much time you may hinder him of.

After he is perfect in his Letters, let him Spell as follows:

Lord's Prayer.
OUR Fa-ther Father, which art in Hea-ven Heaven; Hallow-ed Hallowed be thy
Name: Thy King-dom Kingdom come; Thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Hea-ven
Heaven: Give us this Day our Day-ly Daily Bread; and for-give forgive us our
Tres-pas-ses Trespasses, as we for-give forgive them that Tres-pass Trespass
a-gainst against us; and lead us not in-to into Temp-ta-ti-on Temptation: But
de-li-ver deliver us from E-vil Evil. A-men Amen.

The Creed.
I Be-lieve Believe in God the Father Father Al-migh-ty Almighty, Ma-ker Maker
of Hea-ven Heaven and Earth; and in Je-sus Jesus Christ his on-ly only Son our
Lord; who was con-cei-ved conceived by the Ho-ly Holy Ghost, born of the
Vir-gin Virgin Ma-ry Mary; suf-fer-red suffered un-der under Pon-ti-us Pontius
Pi-late Pilate, was Cru-ci-si-ed Crucified dead and bu-ri-ed buried; he
deseen-ded descended in-to into Hell, the third Day he rose a-gain again from
the dead; he a-seen-ded ascended in-to into Hea-ven Heaven, and sit-teth
sits on the Right Hand of God the Fa-ther Father Al-migh-ty Almighty, from
thence he shall come to judge both the Quick and the Dead; I believe believe in
the Ho-ly Holy Ghost, the Ho-ly Holy Ca-tho-lick Catholic Church, the
Com-mu-ni-on Communion of Saints, the for-give-ness forgiveness of Sins, the
Re-sur-re-ction Resurrection of the Bo-dy Body, and the Life everla-sting,
everlasting, A-men Amen.

The Ten Com-mand-ments Co mmand ments.
I. THou shall have no o-ther other Gods be-fore before me.

II. Thou shall not make un-to unto thy self a-ny any Graven Graven I-mage
Image, or the like-ness likeness of a-ny any thing that is in Hea-ven Heaven
a-bove above, or that is in the Earth be-neath beneath, or that is in the
Wa-ter Water un-der under the Earth; thou shall not bow down thy self to them,
nor serve them; for I the Lord thy God am a jea-lous jealous God, vi-si-ting
visiting the I-ni-qui-ty Iniquity of the Fa-thers Fathers, up-on upon the
Chil-dren Children un-to unto the Third and Fourth Ge-ne-ra-ti-on Generation of
them that hate me, and shew-ing showing Me^cy Mercy un-to unto Thou^s^nds
Thorsands of them that love me and keep my Com-mand-ments Commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord
will not hold him guilt-less guiltless that ta-keth taeth his Name in vain.

IV. Re-mem-ber Remember the Sab-bath Sabbath day to keep it Ho-ly Holy, Six
Days shall thou la-bour labor and do all thy Work, but the Se-venth Seventh
Day is the Sab-bath Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it thou shall not do a-ny
any Work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daugh-ter Daughter, thy Man-Ser-vant
Manservant, nor thy Maid-ser-vant Maidservant, nor thy Cat-tel Cattle, nor
the Stran-ger Stranger that is with-in within thy Gates; for in Six Days the
Lord made Hea-ven Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and
re-sted rested the Seventh Seventh Day; where-fore wherefore the Lord bles-sed
blessed the Se-venth Seventh Day, and Hal-low-ed it.

V. Ho-nour Honor thy Fa-ther Father and thy Mo-ther Mother, that thy Days may
be long up-on upon the Land which the Lord thy God gi-veth gives thee.

VI. Thou shall not kill.

VII. Thou shall not com-mit commit A-dul-te-ry Adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not Steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false Wit-ness Witness a-gainst against thy Neigh-bour
Neighbor.

X. Thou shall not co-vet covet thy Neigh-bour's Neighbor's House, thou shall
not co-vet covet thy Neigh-bour's Neighbor's Wife, nor his Man-ser-vant
Manservant, nor his Maid-ser-vant Maidservant, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
a-ny any thing that is thy Neigh-bours Neighbors.

Glo-ry Glory be to the Fa-ther Father, and to the Son, and to the Ho-ly Holy
Ghost.

As it was in the be-gin-ning beginning is now, and e-ver ever shall be, World
without without end. A-men Amen.

The Grace of our Lord Je-sus Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the
Fel-low-ship Fellowship of the Ho-ly Holy Ghost be with us all e-ver-more
evermore A-men Amen.

The Church Catechism after this.
This is a method, the easiest I could think of, for a Child at first to be
taught in. And here I leave him to be farther perfected in this Language, by
useful Books to this purpose.

If any Man complain that I might have spent my time on bigger and louder
Subjects; let him read the Catalogues of Famous Men, collected by Elzevir,
Crenius, Morhofus and others: And then he will pardon a Man of my Size.

The second Stage.
From Six to Fourteen.
AFter the Child can read the Bible, (which may be presumed about six Years of
Age) let him immediately fall to Latin: And because Latin cannot go down so
easily as English, which is the familiar Language of the whole Family, and
which the Child's Necessities make him earnest to understand; I therefore think
it convenient that this dry and tough Diet be larded now and then with some
English Exercises, which may be diverting and useful also; which I thought fit
to prefix before the Rules for learning Latin and Greek.

1. It will be fit now to fix his Memory by some such like Method as this which
follows, repeating the things over once every day.

From the Creation of the World, to the great Flood of Noah. The First Chapter
of Genesis to the Seventh.

From Noah's Flood, to Abraham's going into the promised Land. Genesis the
seventh Chapter to the twelfth.

From Abraham's going into the promised Land, to Jacob's going into Egypt, to
Joseph his Son. Genesis the Twelfth Chapter, to the Forty sixth.

From Jacob's going down into Egypt, to the deliverance of the Israelites from
Egypt by Moses. Genesis the forty sixth Chapter, to the thirteenth Chapter of
Exodus.

From Moses carrying the Israelites out of Egypt, to Joshua's bringing them
into the promised Land, over the River Jordan. The thirteenth Chapter of
Exodus, to the fourth Chapter of the Book of Joshua.

From Joshua's carrying the Israclites into the promised Land, to Saul the
first King of the Israelites anointed by Samuel. The fourth Chapter of the Book
of Joshua, to the first Book of Samuel and the tenth Chapter.

From Readiness being anointed King of Isnael, to the Dividing of the Kingdom by
the Ten Tribes running away to Jeroboam: the first Book of Samuel and the tenth
Chapter, to the first Book of Kings and the twelfth Chapter.

From the Division of the Kingdom under Jeroboam, to the Destruction of the
Israelites and Samaria by the King of Assyria. The first Book of Kings, the
twelfth Chapter, to the second Book of Kings, and the eighteenth Chapter.

From the Destruction of the Israelites, to the the Destruction of Jerusalem
and the Jews. The second Book of Kings, the eightteenth Chapter, to the second
of Kings, the twenty fifth Chapter.

From the Destruction of Jerusalem and the Jews, to Cyrus delivering the Jews
from Captivity. The second Book of the Kings, the twenty fifth Chapter, to the
first Chapter of the Book of Ezra.

From the Deliverance of the Jews from Captivity by Cyrus King of the Persians,
to the Destruction of the Persian Empire by Alexander the Great. The first
Chapter of the Book of Ezra, to the first Chapter of the first Book of Maccabes.

From the Destruction of the Persian Empire by Alexander the Great, to Judas
Maccabaeus. The first Chapter of the first Book of Maccabes, to the first Book
of Maccabes and the third Chapter.

From Judas Maccabaeus to Jesus Christ. The first of Maccabees the third, to
the first Chapter of St. Mattew.

As the Child grows up, and Memory ripens, you may add the Years from time to
time, and fill up these distances with more or fewer Particulars; according to
the Method of the Apparatus ad Theologiam, page 102. And practice him in the
Years after Christ by Centuries only, from one Emperor to another.

2. Because nothing more contributes to the enlarging of a Child's Capacity than
variety of Matter, though in things at first not fully understood, it may be
useful between whiles to pratle with him at such a rate as this.

Take the Figures from 1, 2, 3, etc. to 12. and place under each Figure such
things promiscuously, as fall under every Number. As for Example

I.

One World.

One God.

One Mediator, etc.

II.

Two Testaments.

Two Tables in the Commandments.

Two Sacraments in the New Testament.

III.

Three Persons in the Blessed Trinity.

Three Creeds or Sums of Faith in the Trinity.

Three Offices of Christ; King, Priest, Prophet.

IV.

Four Parts of the World.

Four Great Monarchies of the World.

Four Elements.

V.

Five Books of Moses

Five Senses.

Five Declensions of Nouns.

VI.

Six Days for the Creation.

Six Days in the Week for Labor.

VII.

Seven Churches of Asia.

Seven Wise Men of Greece.

Seven Kings of Rome.

VIII.

Eight Persons saved in Noah's Ark.

Eight Days for Circumcision.

Eight Parts of Speech in Latin.

IX.

Nine Muses.

X.

Ten Commandments.

XI.

XII

Twelve Patriarchs.

Twelve Tribes of Israel.

Twelve Apostles.

More under each Figure you may add, and occasionally explain the Particulars:
As for instance, under the Figure (1) One World; because some pleaded for
infinite Worlds. One God because the Heathen worshipped many false Gods. One
Mediator because the Papists have many.

3. Because of all instruction, there is nothing so much to be considered as
the Morals of a Child both for true Happiness here, and hereafter; besides the
Directions every where in the Guardians Instructions. As soon as ever the Child
seems to stare about, that is, as soon as ever he is capable of Observation and
Reflection, I would have the Tutor take Solomon's Proverbs, especially such as
respect God, Religion, Good Manners, Civil Breeding and Duty in all Relations,
and Enlarge on, and explain them (according to the Lord Bacon's method in his
Advancement) on the Sundays and Holydays: Perhaps it may be wondered at, why I
distinguish this Exercise by the particular time of performing it: Truly it is
to beget an early veneration for the Sabbath and holy Festivals

For when a Child is accustomed to a more Solemn and Religious Instruction upon
some days than others, he will in time begin to consider why so; and being
taught the Occasion and the Reason, perhaps may love and observe such times the
better for it as long as he lives.

4. Another diverting exercise for a Child is that of Writing, which will
profitably fill up some idle Hours; a Muscular Motion, the sooner the better it
is begun.

Though it be almost Proverbial, That Scholars Write ill, yet three Parts of
the Kingdom take a good Hand to be some degree of Learning; and it is no
disparagement to good Sense to be written in a fair Character, and read with
pleasure; especially if he prove an Author, and write Books, it will save many
a curse from the Compositor.

These and the following Directions may serve private Schools as well as
Families; especially if true care be taken to place Children of near the same
Age, and the same Capacities in one Class, wherein the Instructions being
equally intelligible may beget a laudable Aemulation, and brisk the Spirits,
which by carelessness would stagnat, and lie unactive. And on the other side,
when a Youth of less Age (though perhaps as good Natural Parts) shall be forced
every Hour to do the penance of Admiring the great Performances and
Commendations of the Scholar who sits next him: The first effect of this is, he
often wishes he could do the same, but afterward sighs because he cannot; this
begets a kind of shame and discontent, which makes his little Soul retire and
hide it self; he acts what he could do with less of Spirit, and quarrels the
Stars for not being born as wise as he who is Five Years older.

I would have the Immoralities and Negligence of Youth punished severely; but
as to their Mere Parts and Natural Abilities, all the kindness and
encouragement in the World is but enough.

There are many more particulars very proper to have been Added here, but I
referr the Tutor to the general directions for the better breeding a Child of
great Quality in the Guardian's Instruction, page 65.

One Advice I must conclude the Child's English Exercises with. After he has
paid his Devotion in the Morning, and before he does it at Night, let him
constantly read a Chapter: Great is the Influence of such a Practice. I have
been told of Persons noted for extravagance of Atheism and Immorality, who have
yielded to the Impressions of such a Custom, retired to say their Prayers and
read a Chapter, whenas before and after this, they would dispute God's Being
and Providence, and return with the Dog to their Vomit, and with the Sow to
their wallowing in the Mire.

It is expedient that those Chapters be frequently read, which may fix in the
Memory such great Examples as make God's Providence illustrious, either for
miraculous Deliverances of good Men, such as are Joseph, Moses, Hezechiah,
Daniel; or for Punishing notorious Sins, as the Rebellion of Corah, Oppression
of Ahab, Pride of Nebuchadnezzar, Sacrilege of Belshazzar, Cruelty of Haman,
Lying of Ananias and Saphira, etc. The Pleasure of such kind of Readings will
make a Child mind the Sense, and perhaps may render the Remembrance very
instructive.

Directions for Learning Latin and Greek.
THE Rules of Grammar for learning Latin, and the Explication of those Rules
have been performed well already, and it is not for me to pretend to that Art;
I shall Master my Design if I can but suggest any thing that may be useful to
make the Practice of those Rules easier for the Gentry.

For I have often heard from Gentlemen who have travailed, that Children in the
Schools abroad come sooner much to understand Latin than here in England: I
know better than to question the truth of what comes well attested; I only wish
to be able to prevent some of those Impediments which make the difference.

1. Some allege for an occasion of it the Foggyness of our Air, and foul
Feeding, as if (forsooth) the Soul of an English Child were mired, and so stuck
(as it were) in a Muddy Carcass as to move more heavily. But this I will never
endure for a reason of the thing, because our Youths would then never be able
to overtake these hasty Sparks, which it is certain they do when they grow; and
if I were not an Englishman, I would assert that they out-go them generally in
that Language. And what Nation in Europe need we envy the Professors in all
Arts and Sciences, Divinity, Mathematics, Civil Law, Physic, Critical and
Philological Learning: So that let not our good Beef and Mutton be thought ill
of, or the Air impregnated with our Ignorance and Dullness: Unless in favor of
Music an Italian should put in a Cavent against all Tramontanes, and with a
keener Judgment split our gross Sounds, and seem to want the delicate touch
upon the Drum which beats in his Climate.

2. Others therefore ascribe it to the differing Method in teaching, (as is
said in the Apparatus de Grantmatica, page 28.) which if true, (us there seems
more sense in it) then it were to be wished, that whosoever is hereafter so
Piously and Publicly inclined, as to Build and Endow a School, before he tie
up the School and Schoolmaster by strict and unalterable Statutes of Method, he
would scan the courses that are taken beyond Sea, and fashion his own
Institution to the Advantage and Honor of our Nation: For the common Rules of
Teaching here, either by Custom or particular Injunction of Benefactors, are so
established, that an attempt of change is extravagant.

There is a great outcry against the customary usage of the common Accidence
and Grammar; and though I could wish that every one who rails at them understood
them, yet I must own that the Objections which the Learned in the Art of
Grammar have made, are very considerable, but will hardly be able to prevail
with public Authority to establish a new Method upon the Ruin of Lilly, 'till
manifest Experience of much greater and speedier Effects shall prepare the
whole Nation to embrace it. But it must be confessed that they deserve a great
many thanks who by their Objections endeavor to promote a more beneficial use
of the common Grammar. For though the Laws permit not private Persons to shorten
Journeys by making a new Highway, yet it is something like an equivalent to
pick out the Stones, and remove the Rubbs which lengthen the old one. And every
man is a Benefactor to the Public who sets up a Mercurial Statue, which though
it be fixed, and cannot turn and point to every By-Path, yet it saves many a
Travellor from being lost in the common Road.

I come now to such directions as Year after Year may forward the Understanding
the Latin Tongue: They are not the largest or the most learned that I have
read, but they are most easy, and most likely to be practiced of any I have
met with: And hereby will be avoided the great Inconvenience which both Master
and Scholar would find by changing the Accidence and Grammar: Extraordinary
success must not be expected without extraordinary pains: But because it will
seem tedious to dwell long upon little things, there is great danger that the
Master may make too much have with the Child, especially since Parents are
impatient for the taking out New Lessons: This, I conceive, is one great reason
why Children afterward prove imperfect, because they leave things behind them
not well understood.

Therefore in what follows, I will set down the easiest Method I could extract
out of the Rules which Lilly, Ascham, and later Schoolmasters give compared
with foreign Advices of the same kind.

First Year.
IET the Child be made perfect in Declining Nouns through all Cases, and forming
Verbs through all Tenses and Persons when required, and the flower it is in
doing, the effect will be the more sure, and Progress greater. Foreign Writers
allot but few Months for this; but I should be glad if the first whole Year
could do it. When he comes to the Declension of Nouns, and Conjugation of
Verbs, let him have many several Examples of each; First the easiest Examples,
and by general Rules, (without the Exceptions, which will puzzle at the
beginning) afterward such Examples as are harder, and with the Exceptions also.

Daily Declining a Noun, and Forming a Verb, and turning it into all Fashions,
will fit him for Concords, and framing Sentences, by showing him how single
Nouns and Verbs are joined. Take some easy Sentence wherein all the Eight
Parts of Speech are contained, and let every single Word be declined and formed
and afterward construed, as they depend upon each other.

When the Cases of Nouns, and Persons of Verbs and Concords are well known,
then let not the Child drudge to learn the Rules orderly by roat, as they lie
in the Syntax, but rather learn some easy Book, containing good plain Latin;
and as there falls out any necessary Rule of Syntax to be known, show it, and
let him learn it, as the Sentence gives occasion; thus th Grammar will be
taught by the by.

And I could wish that the Forming Verbs were made more easy by lengthening
all the Abbreviations which baffle a tender Understanding: For Instance,
Amabam, as, at; it were better to write it at length, Amabam, Amabas, Amabat:
And let the Persons be also set down; Ego Amabam, Tu Amabas, Ille Amabat; for
it disturbs the Child's Memory to be made add them of himself.

Second Year.
WHen he comes to make Latin, the easiest Method, I think, is what Mr. Lewis
sets down in his Vestibulum Technicum, whereby the Child is eased of the
difficulty of finding out proper Larin Words, and has nothing to do but to
alter Tense and Case, as the Sense requires, and be careful that he never go
upon a new Sentence 'till he be perfectly Master of what he did last. Turning
English into Latin will fix the Rules in his Head, and help him sooner to speak
Latin, than turning Latin into English: For many Persons can more easily
Construe Latin than Speak it. If between while you show him the use of Brinly's
Posing the Accidence, and Hooll's Accidence examined, it will add to his
knowledge of the Rules; with Mr. Walker's Works of Grantham.

Third Year.
NOW he must be very frequent in Construing and Translating some easy Author,
wherein he may learn both Morals and Latin together; Castalio's Dialogues, and
some of the most easy of Cicero's Epistles, especially I except those which
touch upon State Affairs, because the Matter makes the Latin difficult. Let him
for variety be taught to Construe some easy Poet, according to the Method for
the Dauphin, resolving the Verses into natural Order, because Poetical Latin at
first will be more difficult, as being more Concise. Some Speeches in Ovid's
Matamorphosis being Construed, and perfectly well understood, will be worth his
learning without-Book, and repeated to exercise his Memory, which must be
exercised in something or other once every day. The Nature and differing kinds
of Verses are too difficult yet to be explained: And Composition or Imitation,
I think, may yet be let alone. How much I prefer Translation before
Composition in order to Institution I have shown in the Apparatus ad Theologiam
de Grammatica, with a Method to learn the Latin Tongue.

Fourth Year.
IF the former Course be duly taken, the Child's Judgment will begin to appear
fit for some solid Instructions; so that together with progress in the Latin
Tongue, a Foundation may be laid for more useful Knowledge than of bare Words
and Sentences: Justin I think the fittest Author to begin this Year with;
because he is less crabbed than the Style of Historians commonly is, especially
wherein much Matter is crowded into little compass; but in reading of him
regard must be had to the Chronology as well as History, and the Youth directed
to measure the time and distances of Men and Actions recorded in him, by some
such assistance as you have in the Apparatus ad Theologiam de Munere Historico;
for otherwise the Historical Narrations will be found loose, uncertain and
false.

Between whiles some Speech in Cicero, famous for the Art and Rethorick;
sometimes a Speech in Livy to be so perfectly construed and understood, that
the Child may comprehend the Strength and Nerves of the Orator.

And because by this time Wit and Sharpness may deserve to be encouraged, some
of the most notorious, chaste Epigrams in Martial will very usefully exercise
his Translating Faculty. The Nature also, Scanning and Pronouncing Verses may
now begin to be taught, and some Rules in order to Composing, that he may not
be altogether ignorant of the Mechanical part of Poetry, and may perceive the
different make of Latin in Verse from Latin in Prose. He also may be assisted
how to invent Sense upon some plain and obvious Subject, which will be the way
to stir up Fancy. But because inventing Sense for Verse is much more difficult
than in Prose, exercise him for a while to learn the Rules concerning the Feet
in long and short Verses in making Nonsense Verses without any regard to
Concordance, and only for Metre's sake.

Fifth Year.
I Presume at this time Knowledge will begin to thicken, and Composition will
ripen apace, by showing the Parts and Method of Speeches, and also of common
Themes. He will now be able to read Authors himself, and therefore must be
guided what to Remark as observable in Authors, according to the Method
prescribed in the Apparatus de Grammatica.

A Play in Terence now and then will divert by the Matter, and give a new kind
of Relish by the finery of the Phrase. In Florus the Wit, and Juvenile Elegancy
will affect a Youthful Fancy, which Martial and Ovid's Works will heighten: The
variety of Subjects in Valerius Maximus will please.

Sixth Year.
IT is odds but some Persons will wonder why not a Word of Greek all this
while; and because Wonderers must sometimes be answered in their folly, I will
tell the reason: I am afraid it is one great hinderance to progress in those
Schools, wherein before a Boy can turn his Pater Noster into true Latin, he
must play at Blind-Man's-Buff with (...), and make his Mother quite stun the
next Company she meets, with the Gossiping News what an horrible Grecian her
Son is: When all this while the Boy is but going to unlearn his little Latin,
and acts like a crippled Turn-Spit in a Wheel, he takes great pains to get up
forwards, and all he gets is to come down back again the faster.

But now at such an Age as this, it is to be presumed that he may be so far
gone in Latin, as that some leisure Hours may be spared for the Rudiments of
Greek: For the more Pains is taken, and the more Skill he gets in the Latin
Tongue, will enlarge his Capacity, and make the Greek Language more easy to be
learned than Latin was, when Memory, and Fancy were weak.

Let him spend this Year to be made fully understand the Greek-Grammer; getting
without Book Declinations of Nouns, and Conjugations of Verbs, and the use of
Pronouns, Conjunctions, Prepositions, and Adverbs.

But Care must be taken, that Pretension to Greek, may not make the young Man
think that Latin is not the more useful Language: Now Quintus Curtius, and
Lucan will be worth his Study; and composing Verses, and Speeches may be taught
him; though Versifying (beyond the bare form) how unsit it is for a Gentleman:
See the Apparatus de Grammatica.

Seventh Year.
WHen he is well instructed in the Greek Grammar, for Nouns, Verbs, and the
Syntax of both; the next thing is to furnish him with the Knowledge of the
Greek Themes. I have seen a Book (the Name I cannot remember) wherein all the
Original Greek Words were comprised in so many Sentences (with Latin annexed)
so that they might be learned in little Time, and by being often read over,
fixed in the Memory; for want of such an help, let him take Leusden's
Compendium Novi Testamenti, and practice upon that Book, first, for single
Words; and Stobaeus his Fragmenta, Epictetus, with some of the minor Poets: For
Latin, Cicero, Virgil, and Livy. This Year and the next, must be mightily
employed with all manner of Exercises, not one Hour to be lost, unless for
Health's sake.

And lest that Health should be made use of, to make the Child Idle to no
purpose, in seasonable Weather, and at leisure Times, let him learn to Dance;
because these Exercises will divert from worse, or more tedious loss of Time:
They will also prevent antic and misbecoming Gestures, which Children are apt
to get, and which prove afterward difficult to be Cured; for at this tender
Age, thsee Mascular Motions, are easily shaped to decency of Address, and
Carriages, which looks Delicately in Children, and which by degrees will grow
up into so easy an Habit, as that the Art, and Stiffness of it, being with his
Age quite lost, his Gentility shall seem Natural, and so Infinitely more
Delighting: This is an odd Digression, hut perhaps useful. Now some skill in
the Globes.

Now the Epochas in the Apparatus de Munere Historico, are to be filled up, and
distances determined; and a Method of Cronological History after Christ by
Centuries contrived

Eighth Year.
THis Year being the last at School, is to be very Laborious, especially for
Greek; it is like the distance Post at a Race, here they are to whip and spur;
Homer and Xenophon's Cyrus, for Greek; Horace, Caeshr's Commentaries, and
Tacitus for Latin.

Here I must make all the have I can to tell the Tutor, that when I name
respective Books, for each single Year, I do not mean that the Child should
read them all over in that Year, but go so far in each Book, as to taste the
relish of the singular Latin in one and the other, and hereafter to study the
Mastery of each.

Neither do I take my self to be so wife, as to make what I have said a
Standard unalterable; but, sincerely, my only Design is to prescribe a Scheam
for a young Tutour, or Schoolmaster to build upon; exchanging Method or Books
at his own Discretion.

The Third Stage.
From Fourteen to Twenty One.
AFter a just Practice of the foregoing Methods, it may be reasonably presumed
that the young Gentleman is very well furnished with skill in the Latin Tongue,
and no Stranger to Grock; and then I conceive him fit for the Us niverllty,
because public Assairs, and his own Family Concerns will hastily require him
into the World.

And here I will lay down the Resolutions which (after some Experience) I would
take; were I now chosen Tutor to a Person of great Quality and good Capacity.

(1.) Conscientious Care must be taken of his Moral Behavior in the University.

(2.) Care must be taken the Child understand, that though he be come to
Oxford, and expects the Tailor should put on him Philosophy with his Gown, yet
that Philology is still improveable, and that Speeches and Theams will still
deserve a good share of his Thoughts, though Logic, and Philosophy must make
the greatest Noise in his Head.

(3.) That Seriousness may not be thought a foreign Qualification to an Oxford
Scholar, the Tutor will do well to explain (and advise the frequent reading
over) the Directions for a more easy, quiet and less disturbed Life;
Guardian's Instruct. p. 7. which if he be made fully and warmly to comprehend,
he will know the value of his own Thoughts and Soul, and reckon the Prospect of
Two Thousand a Year, but as Paper and Pack-thread to the Fruit.

(4.) At his first coming to Oxford, it is fit he should be made acquainted
with some general knowledge of Philosophy, of the Original Design, and several
parts of it; because this will abate that confusion and surprise of Thoughts,
which cannot but attend the first entrance on this new fort of Learning.

(5.) Great Industry must be employed to explain the Terms in all the Parts of
Philosophy: Because though this may be thought dry Diet for a Gentleman, yet
hereafter it will have this use, that if the Person prove bookish, and thinks
it worth his while to read a controversial piece of Divinity or Philosophy, it
will trouble a Man of good Comprehension, not to understand an Argument, for
want of knowling some od Term on which perhaps the Stress lies.

(6.) Next to the Terms, the Rules of Reasoning, and foundations of Moods and
Figures, and Consequences, being frequently insisted on and thoroughly known,
would be more beneficial (to such a Person) (not being of a Foundation, or
intending to stay long) than to dispute Logical Questions, for either he will
be vexed to find an Argument, or will have nothing else to do but to read one
of his Tutors making, which is all lost Time.

(7.) After a short System of Physic, in the old way, a taste of the new
Philosophy would relish well, to understand the differing Principles upon which
it proceeds.

(8.) It will be very accomplishing, to have some time set apart for the
Mathematics, but for this there ought to be a Tutor particular, whose singular
conversation in that Study, shall teach him much in little time.

(9.) Ethics, Politics, History, and the Practice of Rhetoric, will be of
everlasting use to a complete Gentleman, and therefore will best become the
most designing part of the Institution,

Here it may be expected that I should be more particular in the Concerns of an
Academical Institution, both as to the Morals and Knowledge of the young
Gentleman; But that being already performed, partly in the Guardian's
Instructions, and partly in the Apparatus, I shall referr the Tutor without
swelling these Papers with a Transcript.

1. As for that Behavior, which good Manners, the Statutes of the University,
and a design of success and Proficiency oblige him to; it is at large set down
in the Guardian's Instruction, beginning page 50. and occasionally in many
other Places, with Advices to Parents, Tutor, and Scholar.

2. As for a general Scheme of Philosophy, both Speculative and Practical, from
the Original, Design and Division of it: See Appatus Chap. 9.

3. For a short and plain view of the Nature, Use, and Method of Logic: See
Apparatus Chap. 12.

The special Parts of Philosophy follow only I think Institution in Ethics,
and Civil-Law, may usefully be mixed

4. A Method for the Study of History is at large set down in the special Part
of the Apparatus de Munere Historico.

What Preparatory Directions are to be given for undertaking any one of the
eminent Professions, either of Physic, Civil-Law, Common Law, or Divinity,
(each of which are capable to reward as much Industry, as any Gentleman shall
think sit to bestow) are here to follow, and complete the design of an
Academical Education, which I take to be absolutely necessary, to sit any
Person of Quality, to serve God and his Country in any public and useful
Employment, or Calling: And therefore I wish I were able to remove those
Prejudices against the Universities, which hinder many Persons from sending
their Sons thither; whence those Prejudices arise, and (in order to remove
them) what conceros the Governors, Tutors, and Discipline of the University,
as also what concerns the Parents, and young Gentlemen to be bred up there,
has been suggested in the Guardian Instruction, to which I referr such
Gentlemen as are sollicitous for the disposal of their Children into the World:
what some put in Practice at this time I cannot approve of.

1. To send a young Gentleman to the Academy at Ten or Eleven Years of Age, to
be accomplished in those Exercises first, and afterward to be made a Scholar,
at the very first sight looks preposterous: For after he has been Mounted,
made look big, and his Head runs round with the Prancings of the Great Horse,
he will think himself sitter to lead an Army, than to sit down with the lazy.
Arts of Wisdom and Learning.

2. To take him from School and place him with a prudent exemplary Minister, is
a way probable enough to keep him Virtuous, and improve his Knowledge (provided
he will endure Confinement.) But that Conversation is somewhat of the narrowest
for a Gentleman born to spread when he comes of Age, and mix with Persons of
his own Quality, who have had a more Liberal knowledge of the World.

3. If he be sent from School to some Protestant University beyond Sea, the
strangeness of New Faces, Language, Manners and Studies may prove perhaps
uneasy: And then their great want of Discipline to confine him to Prayers,
Exercises, and Meals, is dangerous; all he will have to do is to keep touch
with a Lecturer, and what is learned from him, most young Gentlemen are so
civil as to leave behind them when they return.

If for cheapness or curiosity, instead of an English Governor he be committed
to a Foreigner, there are some in the World who without a Fee will tell you
what that is like to come to.

This Caution I thought necessary, and now shall proceed.

I cannot better compare a Person who by his honest Industry has qualified
himself to serve his Generation in some special Course of Life, than to a Man
who has labored a great while with many a Sigh and weary Step to climb up an
high Hill, and at length reaching the Top, rests and pants, and with delight
looks back down on the tedious exercise of his Limbs and Patience; then turns
about and views a mighty Plain, which offers to the curiosity of his Choice
variety of Paths to walk in, according as his Ability and Condition shall
direct him to take.

1. Some are for following their greedy Eyes, and taking the longest Path, to
borrow the Wisdom of foreign Countries for the use of their own: And no doubt
it would be a great Advantage to the Nation, did every Person study to make the
usefulness of his Travels equal the pleasure he takes in seeing things abroad,
and reporting them at home.

To this purpose it is convenient to enquire after those Authors who have
bestowed their Experience on the World very particularly on this Subject.

And because my Hand is in, and Instruction is the Word in all this Book, I am
bound to set down such general Advises for Travailing as at this time come into
my Thoughts.

I. The knowledge of your own Country is necessary, not only for your own
Pleasure and Satisfaction, but also to beget a curiosity of looking and
enquiring.

II. I would take the young Gentleman along with me round all the Circuits with
the Judges: The diversion of the Company, and the security on the Road will
balance any Inconvenience I can foresee: And by this means in few Weeks time
you will view all Counties and Cities most eminent in the Nation.

III. The History and Geographical Description of the Country you travail to
should be first studied; How it Borders, and how it is Divided, by tracing the
famous Rivers and Branches of them.

IV. Some Grammatical Instruction in the Language would prepare you more easily
to learn to Speak it.

V. A Catalogue ought to be collected and always with you of such Curiosities
Ancient and Modern in Provinces and Cities as are most observable, and the old
and new Names of Places compared; by this you will readily know what to enquire
for.

VI. As for Clothes, take only a Travailing Suit, and dress your self a-la-mode
when you arrive there. Good Skill in the Prices of things is absolutely
necessary for his Tutor.

VII. Besides Bills of Return, it will be convenient to have some Letters of
Credit to Merchants in case your Bill should fail; and some advise, to take
with you a Jewel, or any precious thing which may easily be carried and
concealed about your Clothes.

VIII. You must resolve upon a great inoffensiveness of Conversation, Patience
of disagreeable occurrences, and avoidance of Earnestness in Dispute,
especially about Matters of Religions, or Honor of Kingdoms.

IX. You must not be too open, as if every one you met were an Englishman;
neither yet so reserved as to beget a suspicion of your Jealousy.

X. When you receive Money keep it private, least it be borrowed one of the two
ways.

XI. When you remove from one Province to another, keep the time of your
departure secret, laest other Foreigners, or your own Countrymen (who
sometimes prove the most impertinent of Acquaintance) pin themselves upon you.

XII. You must study your own Constitution, and carefully observe how it
relishes the great change of Air and Diet; and remember to eat Fruit wisely.

XIII. You must not expect that all you see others practice, and do your self
abroad, must be equally practiced here when you return. For Example.

If you see a French Nobleman run a poor Peasant through, for not taking notice
of him a Mile off, you must not do that here, for fear of a Knock in the Poll,
with a Club or an Ax.

If you see a Venetian Lady standing at a Window and looking, as who should
say, you must not Complement her with a Billet Douce, lest you receive a dried
Pear for your Kindness.

If you see a Fopp ambling in the Street, his Toes awayward, as if the had
fallen-out, simpering as Formally, and cringing as stiffly as the two Beaux do
on the Sign of the Salutation, and you practice that here, you will be as much
Laughed at in England, when you come back, as you were in France when first you
went over to learn it.

If you see a poor Animal run a Mile for one Farthing to open a Gate for a
Passenger, and wear out his Wooden Shoes to the Bargain by scraping Thanks, you
must beware of expecting that here, lest the same Fellow shut the Gate against
you when you come that way again.

Because you care not Threepence for any Man you meet in the Streets of Paris,
Rome, Venice, or Amsterdam, you must not bring hither such a Selfishness, as to
despise Relations, old Acquaintance, Friends and Neighbors; for if you do so,
they will all wish you gone again.

Above all things, if you see others Atheistical and careless, do you double
your own private Devotions; for Fear, keep your Soul diligently, and secure the
Blessing of Him whom Wind and Sea obey.

XIV. Now, lastly, you must make me one Promise, That you will tell no more
when you return than you saw: And so I wish you a good Journey; and if you can
send me News of any Nation the King of France has not made Fools of, it is odds
but I and my Friend may follow.

2. If his Temper rather inclines him to settle and spend his Talents in the
Country, how he may pay his Duty to God in being useful there, I referr him to
the Directions given in the Guardian's Instruction, page 13. in the Honorable
Offices he may be called to; and if he merit a Promotion into the
Parliament House, he may sind some thoughts spent upon a young Gentleman's
Carriage there, Guardian's Instruction, page 85. See more on this Head in the
Gentleman's Calling.

3. If the delight of the Study, or gainfulness of the Practice make him fancy
the Profession of Physic, then good and more than ordinary skill in the Greek
Tongue is necessary for understanding Terms of Art and Authors to be met
withal: As also considerable understanding both in old and new Natural
Philosophy. As for a Method of entering on the Study, Advices being various, he
must consult with his Friends knowing in it.

I have heard a Person learned in the Science, and skilful in the Practice,
recommend Chemistry first, as most agreeable to the order of Knowledge: For
since we can have but little or no Notion of the Saliva, ferment of the
Stomach, Chylisication, and all other Ferments and Juices upon which the
Economy of all Human and Animal Bodies depends; as likewise but an imperfect
Knowledge of the Medicinal qualities of Simples, without a previous and general
insight into the nature of Salts, and the various Effects their mixture with
Liquors may produce: It seems but reasonable to give Chemistry the first place
in a Study of this Nature. Now though Anatomy has not that Relation to Botany
as Chemistry has to both, yet because the use of the latter, as far as it
makes a part of the Materia Medica, depends wholly upon a nice acquaintance
with the former, it would look like a preposterous Method to consider that
first.

4. If the noble Study of the Civil-Law makes his Mouth water after good Latin,
Reason, and History, these following Books are thought advisable by the
Learned.

I. Duc de Authoritate Juris Civilis. This shows of what Authority it is now in
the several Nations of the World.

II. Ridley's View of the Civil-Law.

III. Justinian's Institutions, to be read with an easy Comment; the most
easy is Mynsinger in Institut.

IV. Bronchurstius de Regulis Juris.

V. The first and last Books of the Digests.

The first and Three last Books of the Codex.

These H. Grotius does particularly recommend to a Person of Quality, and may
best be read with the Assistance of Calvin's Lexicon, and Wesenbeehii Paratitla.

VI. Vulteii Juris prudentia Romamana; which gives a full view of the Roman
Law, under most exact Divisions.

Lastly should be read several useful Questions exactly stated, (viz.) in

VII. Zouch Questiones Juris Civilis.

VIII. Hotomanni Questiones Illustres.

5. No Study can make a Gentleman more considerable and useful to his Country
than good skill in the Common Law of England, to which purpose some advise,

I. Fortescue de Laudibus Legum Angliae.

II. Terms of the Law.

III. Smith de Republica Anglorum.

IV. Doctor and Student.

V. Sir Francis Bacon's Introduction to the Laws of England, at the end of his
Maxims.

VI. Wingat's Abridgement.

VII. Coke upon Littleton: His Institutes, and some of his Reports,
occasionally read.

VIII. Bracton.

IX. Fleta with Selden's Notes; consult the Learned.

Directions for the beginning a complete Course in the Study of Divinity, by
the help of the Apparatus ad Theologiam, Written for that purpose, and sold by
Walter Kettilby, and Sam. Smith in St. Paul 's-Church-yard; and the Booksellers
in Oxford.
1. SInce the different Persuasions in Religion and Controversies shelter
themselves mainly under the Authority of Scripture, the first Step, and I am
certain the surest Footing, for a young Divine must be on a sound Knowledge of
the Language and Text, Sense and Context of Scripture, and a sincere search
after Truth must exclude all prejudice in the Application.

2. The Hebrew Language being narrow, and therefore obscure, I advise that the
close Study of that Tongue be deferred for the first Two or Three Years,
because it may discourage and stop the beginnings of the Study.

3. For perfecting his Knowledge in the Greek, it will be requisite to buy the
Septuagint, and a Greek Testament, the larger the better, and get them
Interleaved, to write down the explication of such Words he knows not, with
their various Significations, and Authors who use them.

3. He must also have an English Bible Interleaved of a large Size; and if
bound up in two Volumes no matter, wherein he may put down the Interpretations
of all difficult places, which he either Casually or Industriously finds, to he
constantly in his Study, differing from the Bible he is afterward to use in
the Pulpit.

4. He must get the Art of Writing down his Observations and Explications very
briefly, otherwise his Transcriptions will be infinite and tedious: A Method of
Marking difficult places. See Apparat. page 120.

5. Several Observations to be made in reading the Scriptures, concerning,

I. The Chronology, so far as till the Heathen Computation of time begins to
have certainty.

II. The History of the illustrious Examples of Good and Bad Men; of
Deliverances and Judgments, etc.

III. The Geography, especially as far as concorns the Holy Land, and bordering
places mentioned.

IV. Weights, Measures, and Distances, and what Proportion they bear to ours
now.

V. The English Phrase and Rhetoric, which will be of great use hereafter in
the Pulpit.

VI. Such Texts as are a kind of Commonplace Texts, either of good Life and
Manners, or to Preach on upon occasion.

VII. Next to the Study of Scripture, he must acquaint himself with the
Doctrine of his own Church, out of the Articles, Homilies, and especially the
Collects, as also to be well versed in Canons and Rubricks.

VIII. The various opinions dissenting from the Doctrine, and Practices
dissenting from the Canons of his own Church: -- Arch-Hereticks, Scismaticks
Ancient and Modern, etc.

IX. Then to read the Lives of the Apostles, Apostolical Men, Fathers; Heads
and Founders of differing Opinions, the Eives of the Emperors; with a
Chronological Series to be learned without-Book, and frequently repeated; this
will help the knowledge of Church History.

X. Two great Paper-Books for Heads and Common places; the first for things
Theological: See Apparatus, page 45. The second for some other promiscuous
matters: See page 13. cap. 6. this will be useful all his lifetime, to set
down, or referr to what he reads; but with brief and contract writing,
mentioned before.

XI. A short Catalogue of the best Books for his purpose, which for the first
Two or Three Years are absolutely necessary, he must be directed to; and then
what private Tracts are most Orthodox and Learned, on any part in his Divinity
Head-Book.

XII. He must seriously consider to which part in the Study of Divinity his
Nature inclines him, for the main bent of his Indistry, according to that
Division: Apparatus, page 1.

As for Preaching, both Method, Materials, and Delivery, it is not convenient
to be published; it is best taught by Discourse and Example, when the Person's
Capacity, Knowledge, and Temper is known.

This I think is a safer Course for a young Divine than to begin with Systems,
and suck in Opinions before he understands them: If the Divine be a Person of
Condition and Quality, I would advise him the Assistance and Tutorage of some
experienced Person, it would turn to great Account, by easing Difficulty,
shortening the Course, and effectually obtaining the Design. Something like
this Project I approve of very well, which a very worthy Gentleman of good
Sense and Fortune is now putting in Practice: He has one only Child, Heir to a
very considerable Condition in the World, and who for Personals might make as
fair pretensions to the Vanity and Courtship of it, as Men of less Discretion
do; but his Parents are resolved that the World shall not have him, for they
will give him back again to God; and which is something more strange, the young
Gentleman himself is as willing as they can be, to be lent unto the Lord, so
Hannah called her Son Samuel's Ministry: And I persuade my self that a dutiful
Compliance with so pious a design, at the rate of God's Mercifulness, can
hardly fail of the desired Blessing.

The Method the Father intends to go by is this: After the Advice of Tutors in
a round Course of University-Studies, he intends to provide his Son a Tutor for
Divinity, which, by the the way, is as necessary as for Logic and Philosophy,
and so I might say for Physic and Civil Law too: His great aim is to find a
Man knowing in the Studies, and experienced in the Practice of a Divine: And
the advantage may prove very great: For what is written in Books is dead and
stiff in comparison of what is delivered Viva Voce. When Friendship and
Familiarity (beside solid and fundamental Instruction) shall draw out a
Thousand little Advices of great moment, though not fit to be Printed, neither
does any Man care to publish to all the World what himself knows, and has
practiced in his Function: Two Years of such an Institution, rightly managed,
and intelligently received, would give so great a lift into the Pulpit, and to
Preferment also (if that were wanted or aimed at) as is not to be valued.

New Instructions TO THE GUARDIAN, The Third Part.

THE CONCLUSION: In behalf of Holy Orders.

London, Printed in the Year 1694.

THE CONCLUSION: In behalf of Holy Orders.
WHY may not a Man be bold to persuade the Nobility and Gentry, after such an
Education of their Children, as has been prescribed, to make more of them
Clergymen.

1. From the Nature of the Profession.

Certainly, every good Man must needs own, that it is a singular Blessing, to
have that for a Man's peculiar Business and Calling, which is the greatest
concern of all Mankind; Namely, the Study of our Duty to God and Man, to which
other Professions are a great Hindrance, and Idleness a very Enemy.

2. The usefulness of it, and the great Service their Children may do to God
and Man, according to the Instructions in Mr. Herbert's Country Parson, who was
a Man of Quality, and a Famous Example.

3. The Credit they will do the Profession which is infinitely enhanc'd by the
Dignity of the Person: Divinity in a Man of Quality shines like a Diamond in a
Case of Gold; it communicates and reflects a mutual Luster; it attracts the
Eyes, the Admiration and Love of all, and becomes a Present for a King and
Queens Closet: Whereas Learning in vulgar Persons, is like the same Diamond
unpolished, it is rough and unregarded, and few Men have Skill enough to venture
their Credit by showing of it.

4. Secular Advantage, also may be considered and looked upon as a good
Encouragement, though not aimed at as the end of the Study: What opportunities
have Persons of Quality by their Acquaintance with, and Interest in Men of
power to reward the Industry of their Relations, with Dignities, and place them
in Stations to serve the King by their Counsel, and the Kingdom by great and
good Examples? And because this Advice may meet with some Objections, a word or
two to them.

1. The difficulty of the Study is obvious.

^ born with as good Abilities as others? nay, better if they knew it; and why
they are not bred up to as much Industry, I am afraid I have hit upon the
reason in the Guardian's Instruction, I am sure no wise Man can give any Reason
why they should not be bred so.

2. The Gravity, Strictness, and Confinement in that Profession is too great,
and the restraint of the high flying Liberties and Properties of a Gentleman:
as if looseness of Manners were Noble and Gallant! if the young Man should say
he thought so, I would believe him, and I would pity him, but if a Father and
Mother should talk so, were Solomon alive now, I know what he would call them.

3. I fear the greatest Discouragement of young Gentlemen, from taking Orders,
is the envy they see some bear the dignified Clergy, and the mean Esteem,
Unrighteousness and Hardship the Inferior Clergy are treated with in many
Places (some particular places must be excepted) Few People love a Profession
which is contemned, since the Government has made the Clergy Gentlemen, it is
pity but the People should think them such; especially coming by their
Gentility so Honorably as by Act of Parliament, which is much better than when
a Man right or wrong has gotten an Estate, and barters ten Pounds with the
Herald for a paltry Coat of Arms, and presently grows as proud as the Emperor
Maximilian was when he heard that his Pedigree reached Noah; 'till his own Fool
told him, Sir, then I am of Kin to you.

It must be confessed, and some of us are bound to own, That there are many
excellent Persons and Families who give us great Respect and Countenance, who
Honor the Function, and are just in their Regards, and are Merciful to the
Complaints of such as are overtaxed: And may all the Blessings of the Left and
Right Hand of the Almighty God of Heaven and Earth be upon them, and upon all
their Posterity, for ever and for ever.

But the number of such Persons is not great enough to make this Complaint
unreasonable, which does not spring from any singular and private Resentment,
but from the general Sighs of the Rural Clergy; who though they they are as
willing as any Men living to contribute their Share to the necessary defense of
the Nation, yet they cannot forbear to wish that they had no reason to
complain, That many times Assesments, Rates, and Payments of Dues, are not made
with that Righteousness by which we must all [Clergy and Laity] one Day be
tried, when the dreadful Trumpet shall sound, Arise, and (...).

This makes many a Man with sorrow appeal to the Great Judge of all the Earth.

Here it will be returned; the Law is open for a remedy: No doubt, to relieve
the Oppressed was the great Design, and is the Noblest Practice of the Law: But,

1. Some Men are of a Temper rather to endure a Wrong, than the bustling
Mechanical part of a Suit of Law.

2. It is some odds against a Clergyman, when the Jury shall reckon themselves
a Party; as I am afraid many times they do.

3. If a Jury of Countrymen should prove Twelve good Men and true, and he
carry the Cause, it is catching a Tartar, it will cost Five times more than the
thing is worth; and to call that a Remedy, must be either an Irony or a gross
Catachresis.

4. Set Case every Minister should Sue for such Dues as they are wronged of,
how would it fill all the Courts of England; and what a Clamor would then be
raised of the Litigiousness of the Clergy, when every Action is as Righteous as
if there were a Coach and Six Horses for a Fee.

5. Suppose a Parsonage of Threescore Pounds a Year, after the Payments of Poll
and Land-Taxes, Parish Rates, Procurations, and Synodalls, Servants Wages, and
Feeding and Clothing a Family, what will remain at the Years end to manage a
Suit for Twenty Shillingsworth of Tythe-Milk or Wool, with a Sturdy Ill-bred
Wealthy Farmer, who denies it merely because he knows the Minister unable to
oppose him: But let such a Wretch read, and tremble when he reads, when the
Poor curses thee in the bitterness of his Soul, he shall be heard by him who
made him.

Certainly, every sober Person must needs look on this as a great Hardship on
the Inferior Clergy, and a great Discouragement in the Performance of their
Duty: For it is natural to think the Labourer worthy of his Hire; and the
Scripture tells us, That the Hire which is kept back by Fraud, Cries, and the
Cry enters into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath.

I cannot reckon such an Oppressor as this a downright Atheist, because he has
a rambling, consused, giddy, Rude Notion of God, Providence, and Judgment to
come, and many times varnisheth over his hidden Malice, Lying and Fraud with
the formal outside of Religion: He frequents the Church, Receives the
Sacrament at Easter, and perhaps with Tears shall complain of his own rotten
and deceitful Heart; and to make sure work, shall accuse his Neighbor of
Swearing, Whoring, or Drunkenness; and how will this Man think himself on
Tip-toe for Heaven.

But all this does not exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
Luke 18.11. God, I thank thee I am not as other Men, Extortiners, Unjust,
Adulterers, or even as this Publican: But Christ says, Woe to you Scribes and
Pharisees; condemns them for what they are, while they justify themselves for
what they are not; He determines the Case in favor of Humility, Confession,
and Repentance, and shows that Blindness of Heart, Pride, Vainglory and
Hypocrisy, Envy, Hatred, Malice, and all Uncharitableness, are wrong Signs of
Justification.

Such is the Oppressor I speak of, what he calls Religion shall do him no more
Service at the Hour of Death, than a strong Potion does a Malefactor who is
going up the Ladder; he takes it not to save his Life, but to prevent showing
Fear, or feeling Pain at the present.

Thus does the fair Pretense of Godliness stupifie the Man's Conscience (like a
sweet Morsel which Charms the Dog that by Barking should save the House) there
is no Roaring, no Horror, no Distraction on the Deathbed, which makes the
Fooll who tends him, tell the World he went away like a Lamb, whereas when the
Scene is shifted, and he gone out of sight, instead of a Lamb, he is doomed to
the Kennel of Dogs, Foxes, and Woolves, to everlasting Howling and gnashing of
Teeth: With what Amazement will he receive the Sentence? stare about him,
grumble and mutter all the way, and wonder, 'till he comes to know, what such a
Saint as he is going to Hell for.

And now since the Revenues of the Church and Pious Donations are settled and
confirmed by as wise Laws as any Man's Patrimony, and the Purchaser is
considered for the Tithes; what a sad thing is it that it should be so hard to
persuade the generality of the Vulgar, that it is a Sin to cheat the Parson:
the Vulgar, I say, because the Gentry know better; and the Generality, I say,
because some Country People pay honestly and cheerfully, and many of them that
grudge it, yet they dare not make so bold with their Consciences as to Lie,
Cheat, and Steal.

And methinks it should confound the Guilty Soul of every one who is told, That
the Great God to whom Vengeance belongs, has said, He that despises you,
despises me: That God who withered Jeroboam's Hand, Destroyed the Children who
mocked the Prophet, made Vzziah a Leper, rotted the Flesh of Antiochus alive, 2
Maccab. 9.9. and struck Ananias and Saphira Dead, Acts 2. is as jealous of his
Honor now, and still as well able to revenge it; and many a Man's Heart would
ache, if every one would read Spelman de non Temerandis Ecclesiis.

The great muttering among those that do not love Churchmen is this, That many
of the Clergy have much more than they deserve, Live too High, and are too
Great, and that the Inferior Clergy are many of them Idle, Ignorant,
Quarrelsom or Loose; this is often murmured, and when they are in a good
Humor, spoken out aloud; therefore something shall be replied.

As for the First part of the Objection, that some of the Clergy have much more
than they deserve: Truly, if God should measure out every Man's share in
England according to their deserts, if he should lay Judgment to the Line, and
Righteousness to the Plummet, it would be Impudence in any Man to think he
deserves the Bread he eats: And if God be so Gracious as to bless any Man's
Industry in an honest Profession, I hope he will have so much manners as not to
Sacrifice to his Net, or burn Incence to his own Dragg, as if by them his
Portion were made fat, and his Meat plenteous.

But if Merit were to be the Standard of Worldly Happiness, what great desert
is there in being born Eldest Son and Heir to several Thousands a Year, when
sometimes it falls out, that the Person is hardly able to Answer Two or Three
the easiest Questions in the World wisely enough to save himself from being
Begged. And therefore I think we were better to let the Word Desert alone, and
leave the Law to judge of that, which gives the Right and Title.

No doubt the Day-Labourer murmurs now and then at his Miserable condition, and
the unequal distribution of Riches in the World, and thinks he deserves better
than to work late, rise early, and eat the Bread of Carefulness, and be an
everlasting Drudge in the Service of others, who would be thought to deserve
their Luxury less than he does his Bread, if the judicious Rabble should
undertake to be Judges, as under the Tribunes in Rome, and in the Sanguinary
Tumults of Germany they did.

The next part of the Objection is, that many of the Clergy live too high, and
are too great; If they do live too high, they are very much to blame; and now I
think of it, that is the folly of the whole Kingdom at this time: Men live as
profusely and as unthinkingly as they did when they paid no Taxes; and, I dare
say, there is scarce a Man of any wealthy condition, but might pay the Taxes,
by bateing some needless excesses in Habit, Diet, Pocket-money, etc. and if
they would wear nothing but our own Cloth, drink nothing but our own Liquor,
keep none but their own Wives, they need not quarrel at the King and Parliament
for burdensome Impositions.

By the (...) I suppose the Bishops are a^^ed at: The King is the Fountain of
Honor, and let him be Judge of the most convenient Disposal, and of the
serviceableness of Persons who are to be in that mighty Meeting: And why may
not His Majesty presume that the laborious Education of the Clergy may furnish
them with Abilities capable to administer Pradent Counsel to the great concerns
of the Kingdom?

The last and heaviest weight of the Objection is, That many of the lower
Clergy are Idle, Ignorant, Quarrelsom, or Loose: There is not one Word of
Excuse to be made for this wherever it is found; though where the Profits are
poor it can hardly be avoided: But I seriously believe, that if the utmost of
our Enemies Malice were gratisied, if there were an universal change in the
Nation, and a new Set of Clergy (of any Persuasion whatsoever) put into all the
Cures and Dignities of the Church, considering the great number, there would
hardly be fewer exceptionable Persons for any due Qualifications, than there
are at this day. And if the Clergy were kept up in Credit and Esteem, then they
would exercise their Function with some Authority, which I am afraid this Age
will never endure.

St. Ambrose and Theodosius were remarkable Instances of the Power of a Bishop,
and the Christ anity of a Prince. The good Emperor did not allege Greatness to
Indemnify the horrid Murder of Seven Thousand People in a Fit of Sovereignty:
He did not call the Bishop Pragmatical Prelate for telling him that he should
never come into the Church, and could never go into Heaven without Repentance.
He took the Censure as one of the Arrows of the Almighty sticking in him, and
the Poison thereof had well-nigh devoured his Spirits; he was like to have
perished by a voluntary Famine; he cried, and tore the Hair from his Head, and
fell flat on the Ground: Such was a Bishop then, (says Theodoret gloriously)
and such was an Emperor. And forasmuch as Heaven and Hell is the same thing now
it was then, and few Men are wiser, better, or more Religious than he, and no
Man greater than Theodosius was; why should any Man's Wealth, Greatness, or
something worse, make him think himself above the Sins of Human Infirmities, or
notorious Guilt? He should thank the Hand that gives him the Sacrament, and the
Man who helps him in Confession of his Sins, begging Pardon, promising
Amendment, and Prayers for assistance to perform these Promises: This was the
design of the Holy Function, this it did heretofore, and this it does do still
wherever we are looked on as the Ministers of Christ, and not the mere
Servants of Men: But (...) Apostolical Maxim, The Less is blessed of the
Greater, is not now without all Contradiction.

Oh good God! that after the Blessing of so much Knowledge, by the Gracious
Liberty of Preaching and Reading the Gospel, we should run counter to all
Mankind! Examine all the (too many several) Persuasions of Christians in the
World, Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists, Presbyterians, Independants, the word
Priest and Pastor is a Term of affection, deference and Veneration: Ask a Jew,
Turk, or Infidel, he will tell you that no Subjects are more Honorable than
those who serve their Public Worship: Therefore if we worship the True God,
and if the Communion we profess, be altogether as good, or much better than any
other whatsoever, why should not those who Administer to the National Religion
be esteemed for their Works sake? St. Paul would have spared some of his
Rhetoric in Magnifying his Office, and Celebrating the Ministration of the
Gospel, above the Law: He would never have dressed up the Function with such
Glorious Titles as Enthassadors, Stewards, Overseers, and Coworkers with God,
had he thought that Contempt would have been the English of all this: When the
same words applied to Secular Persons, here and every where else, are words of
an Honorable Distinction, Worth, and Reputation. And why should more Pride,
Malice, Covetousness, or Atheism, make English Men an Exception to all Ages and
Nations in the World?

To sum up the Import of this Conclusion: If the Nobility and Gentry breed up
their Sons Clergymen, they would be able to maintain the Interest, and support
the Honor of the Priesthood, which Men of mean Birth and Fortune are like to
sink under: And so farewell to Priest-Riding, (as they call it) that is, farewell
to that Courage in the Preaching and Power in the Governing-Clergy, which
should reprove and restrain the Wickedness of the Nation, and prevent the fatal
Measure of Iniquity.

It is hard to leave off, and it is pity to go on; and if the Reader will
believe that there is more Grief than Anger in all this, he will do Justice to
a Mind full of terrible Apprehension, that our Destruction cannot linger: For
of National Sins the Punishment is much more likely than the cure.

So it is where Selfishness has eaten out all the good Qualities of our
Ancestors; where shall we find any true Generosity of Spirit? Where is the old
true Justice and Righteousness in Dealings? Sincerity in Words and Promises is
lost, and no true Charity and Friendship to be found: So that whereas there is
much Talk of mending the Clergy, alas, there is such an ill habit in the whole
Body of the Kingdom, that I pray God mend both the Failings of the Clergy, and
the Gainsaying of the Laity too; if God will not, I fear an Earthquake, or the
French King must do it.

FINIS.

