The Spirit of ALEXANDER THE Copper-Smith Lately Revived; now JUSTLY REBUKED:
OR AN Answer to a Late Pamphlet, Entitled, The Spirit of the HAT, or the
Government of the QUAKERS. In which the Confederacy is Broken, and the Devil's
Champions Defeated. By a True Witness of the One Way of God, W. P.

To which are added the Testimonies of those Persons whose Names are chiefly
quoted by the Author of that Pamphlet.

Nevertheless the Foundation of God stands sure, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Printed in the
Year, 1673.

The Spirit of ALEXANDER THE Copper-Smith Revived, and Rebuked: OR, An Answer
to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, The Spirit of the HAT, or the Government of the
Quakers.
SAtan, that Great Enemy to the Work of God, failing of his End in all those
Attempts he has made to Hinder, Pervert or Destroy it by the earnest
Endeavors of some of the most Envious among the many Sects in this Nation,
has at last pitched upon an Old Kanker'd Apostate (the best Spoke in his Wheel)
and therefore called an Ingenious Quaker by the Publisher, because he has
endeavored to promote the Common Design of our Overthrow in this World.

It is a manifest Token to me, that the Devil is hard beset, his Affairs
brought to a low Ebb, and his Condition Desperate, that he is fled to his last
Refuge of Palse Brethren, and very Apostates. A Treachery that shall evermore
infame this perverse Alexander with Good Men, and increase his Account with the
Great and Terrible Judge of Heaven and Earth.

But is it not strange to see, that Independents, Anabaptists and Socinians now
in Arms against the Quakers, should so heartily hugg the Labors of one they
esteem such, and which is more Remarkable, as a true and primitive One too; as
if they had been all this while angry with us, not for being Quakers, but for
being not True Ones; which is such a thing, as would make a Body think them to
be the Only Right Quakers, at least Well-Wishers to them; and we but a Pack of
Apostates. O how Ingenuous is this Author of the Spirit of the Hat! A fit Title
for it; in which there is so little Head, or at least no more Brains then in an
Empty Hat: and as little Fear of God, and Honesty toward Men, as could be well
found within such a Compass. I say, how ingenuous is he to Rail against Power,
and Love it; to decry Authority, and seek it; to accuse G. F. for Tyranny, and
use so much in doing so; to be Angry, not that there is Rule, but that he has
no Share in it; to repute our Censure of a Disturber about such Unprofitable
and Unseemly Customs, as to keep on the Hat in public Prayer, a Resemblance of
the Church of Rome's Excommunications, and to rebuke a Malepert Stickler
against the Church's Peace, Usurpatlon and Oppression: But which is rarest of
all, Independents, Anabaptists and Sociuians, are to Hedge their naked Cause
with this Man's Feathers, and his Lies are to be their Refuge, and it is that
very Hat we would have off in Prayer, they desire to cover their Head within
this day of Battle against the Quakers.

Are they such Friends to that Token of Irreverence to God? Will they Spit in
our Faces for not pulling off our Hats to them, and yet glory in the Envious
Labors of a Man that denies it to God himself, and therefore cannot be owned
of us? Shall we be counted Conceited and Ignorant to forbear that Ceremony to
Men; and this Vile Apostate reputed ingenious, etc. for making so bold with
God? What! is it become a Crime in the Quaker to perform that sincerely to his
Creator, which is with so much Formality every day done by his Opposers? O
Partial! O Unreasonable and Downright Impious Generation! who are not only
ready to invent, pervert and misconstrue us about Matters of Religion; but can
take part with an Apostate, a Clamourer, a mere Alexander, Phygellus,
Hermogenes, Hymenaeus, Philetus: in short, a very Mutineer in Religion, to
bespatter us and our Principles in the World; and that because we abhor,
renounce, and rebuke with Severity that Rude Imagination of the Hat on in
Public Prayer which did we use it, we should be but esteemed by you the Worse,
or you go from your own Principles. Nay, is it not unjust with a Witness, that
we should be so vehemently de^ny'd by some, because we Preach not with our Hats
off; If yet we must be run thus furiously down for disowning a Person, that in
Praying keeps it on; Certainly it must needs be manifest to all the Impartial
World, that such procedure is freighted with the very Ranker of Malice, Fury
and Revenge; and which is more, with Folly too: They have writ their own Answer
in their base Accusation, for either they, I mean the Professors, that printed,
buy and disperse the Pamphlet, own him for a Quaker, or they do not; If not, it
is no Discredit to us, that he should pretend to be precisely one, and us to be
Apostates: If he be one; then either a better or a worse: if a better, and that
by better is understood, more separated from the several Sects of Professors;
then behold, how much more kindly they receive a True Quaker in his first
Principles and Practice, then such as they conceive to have Apostatized: It
would make one think, that they are no Abettors of those Priests and
Professors, that writ so sharply against them in their first Appearance: If
worse, and that by worse is understood apostatized, or gone back; then is not
his End answered, which he pretends was to testify against our Apostasy, that
is, Our Running into Forms, Methods, and Discipline, like to other Professions;
that is, Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, etc. and if so, I wonder,
with what Confidence those Professors dare undertake our Disgrace by it, when
at the same time that he thinks to render us Odious, he makes the Reason of it
to be our becoming like unto them. Certainly if our Order, Discipline, and
Church Authority be Apostasy, we cannot be the only People, that are concerned
in his Meaning. In short, the Matter is so ordered, that whatever they venture
to urge against us, strikes them sorely. What then can the Professors do in all
this Busle? Why thus much; a Turbulent Spirit is disowned by the Quakers: he
contemns their Church Authority which so renounced him: for this he cries; They
are like Rome, and are quite Apostatized: and if so, may the sober Professor
say, then we are all Apostates too, it being but what we our selves do
practice, and that frequently.

In short, There is nothing, that this Alexander the Copper-Smith has said
more Disgraceful of the Quakers, then that the most uncorrupted of them should
despise Government (his own notorious Fault; and I know not why, unless because
he is not our Dictator) who under-went, and still do all Hardships that befall
our Testimony; that the Principle of Truth and Righteousness might govern not
only Individuals, but whole Societies. We shall not think our selves nor
Principles much put to it to vindicate these Assertions: 1. That we are a
Religious Body. 2. That we have, as such, a Power within our selves. 3. That by
the Power and Spirit of the Eternal God we have condemned, as well as justified
many Practices. 4. That being in Holy Peace and Unity, and that Singular Spirit
of the Hat getting place with some, and secret Rents, Divisions, and
Animosities being like to ensue among us, as among the first Christians, we did
with such other Carriages, as were reputed unbecoming the Blessed Gospel,
condemn that of keeping the Hat on in time of public Prayer to Almighty God
(to whom alone from a sensible Mind we perform that Holy and Due Reverence) as
introduced by a singular, Conceited and Deceitful Spirit. 5. That the Author of
the Spirit of the Hat, etc. has resisted many Loving Treaties, Serious
Invitations, and abundance of Good and Wholesome Advice, for his own Good, and
the Church's Peace, and because he is not owned in that Practice, which, should
we, God's Spirit would disown us in so doing: therefore, as a Man enraged
beyond all Bounds of not only Christianity, but Manhood, with Folly, Madness,
and desperate Revenge has he endeavored our Ruin among Men. Now that here in
he has not shown himself the Primitive Quaker, and great Lamenter of our
Apostasy, as he pretends, may be clearly seen, in that he does endeavor to
render the Good as well as Bad among us suspected by those, whom he confesses,
cannot have that Discerning he has; and consequently their Lives and Ministry
ineffectual; Next, to do it at this time of the Day; What greater Demonstration
of Implacableness can there be, when so many are against us? and that as
Quakers in any sense; yea, for owning those Principles, he himself asserts:
their hands are strengthened thereby. Lamentation; Murder: Mercy; Revenge: our
Recovery; our utter Destruction: and nothing below it must have been sought by
that Discourse; but it all retorts from our Impenetrable Armor upon himself,
and he will prove at last only to have discovered his own Nakedness by this
Impious Attempt. Whence, if any thing appears, it is this, that because he is
indeed gone back from what he was, and we remain what we were, the World, that
once persecuted him, and still does us, count him now a very White Boy; and I
am persuaded. let him but continue to write against us, though a pretended
Quaker, I dare warrant, they will reckon him a very Good Christian.

It is this Sort of Unruly Beast that the Professors, (who themselves would
have cast him out an Hundred times) maintain for an Ingenious Quaker, though
their bare Entertainment of him against us, were Ground enough to suppose him
either an Imposture or Renegade, as indeed he is little better; since first he
pretends to be that in Religion which he is not: And secondly, that he is slipped
from what he once was, or at least pretended to be. I will briefly observe the
most weighty things of his Libel, and which indeed comprehend the Whole, and so
close this Animad version.

First, That G. Fox should say, No Liberty out of the Power; which he compares
with the Papists, thus: No Liberty out of the Church. What! Liberty to the
Sectary? No. What! p. 12.
Liberty to the Heretic? No. And G. Fox, says he, thus: What! Liberty to the
Presbyter? No. What! Liberty to the Independents and Baptists? No; Liberty is
in the Truth.

Upon which he Comments at large: But had this Man but one Grain of that great
Stock of Righteousness he unjustly pretends to, and seems to lament the Absence
of among us, he would never have dared to suffer this to be so Printed to the
World. The Truth of the Matter is this: G. Fox having an Occasion to speak of
Liberty of Conscience, said, He never liked the Word, as commonly used; for,
Conscience being an Inward and Spiritual Thing, no mortal Man could bind or
inthrale it: He meddled not at all with the Outward Exercise of Conscience, as
to the Performance of Worship, commonly called, Liberty of Conscience;
wherefore he proceeded, No Liberty out of the Power; that is, The Power of God,
Nor in reallity is there: For all Consciences that are defiled, or enslaved by
Wicked Works, they are not truly free; the Power of God has not delivered such
into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God: And since those Persuasions Deny
Liberty from Sin on this side the Grave, at least the immediate Light, Power
and Spirit of God, to work it in the Soul, he therefore said, What! Liberty to
the Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists? etc. No. That is, What Spiritual
Liberty and Freedom of Conscience? No; for then in vain are we become Quakers,
as the world calls us: And why should they deny a State of Freedom? In short,
He spoke, and meant it of an Inward Liberty of Conscience from Sin, which is
called in Scripture, Purging the Conscience from Dead Works, and If the Truth
make you Free, etc. and this Alexander the Copper-Smith, that Vile and Peevish
Apostate, turns to an outward Exercise of Religious Worship, as if G. F. would
have had those Professors persecuted by the Civil Magistrate. O Base and Wicked
Perversion of an Innocent Man's true Words! But for all this shall the Eternal
Just God bring him to Judgment.

His next great Cavil is about his pulling off the HAT at Public Prayer,
either upon Conviction, or the Judgment of the Body; wherein he tells us, That
not only some of us counseled, or required him to yield, because the Body
would have it; saying, p. 14, 15.
That was yielding to the Power: But his not so yielding, but persisting is no
Dissension; but our Disowning any Person for that Cause, is a Breach of the
Great Gospel-Charter of Liberty. Let him deny this to be the Strength of his
Book if he can or dare; and which is as soon blown away, as the Chaff before
the Wind.

There is either such a Thing as a Christian Society, sometimes called a
Visible Body, or Church, or there is not: If there be not, all is at an end;
and why Contend we at all? If there be; then this Church either has Power or
not: If no Power, then no Church. If a Body, Church or Society, (for the Word
Church signifies no more borrowed from the Assemblies of the A^^enians) then
there must be a Power within it self to determine; an Anointing to lead into
all Truth. Deny this, and all falls of it self. Well, but this I suppose, will
be confessed to. The Question then is this, But, how far may this Church in
join the Consciences of Individuals any Performance, supposing their Dis-like?
I answer; It would be first enquired into, Whether those things have been once
generally owned by such a Church or not? secondly, Or if it be about some super
added Ceremony, something over and above what each Member at first sat down
contented with?

Now it is manifest, that this very Perverse and Quarrelsom Man, when he at
first came among us, and walked with us; that he was not in any such Practice.
As keeping on his Hat in time of Public Prayer; but believed, and in some
measure walked in the Way we profess, conformable as we are, and we hope, for
Conscience sake. He dare not also say, That he enjoyed nor some Comfort from
those Prayers that came through an Uncovered Head, but acknowledges page 1, 2,
3.
the contrary; and at that time of Day all was well: It was the Gospel, the
Truth, the Way of God, said he; and others, since of his Stamp, they were
Zealous also to promote it. This now will be the Question, Whether, If any
Person that had given those Signal Testimonies for a Way and People, and so
incorporated himself with them, finding afterward Fault with a Practice so
Innocent, so Reverent, as keeping off the Hat in time of Public Prayer to
Almighty God, should step out of that ^omely Order, set up a New Mark and
Standard, whereby some should have their Heads covered, others uncovered (a
most divided, confused and unseemly Sight) the Church in this Case may not
Admonish, andafter her due Admonition, and the Parties tenacious, resolute, and
captions Disputes for that unsuitable Practice, may not justly disown him as a
Disputer about needless Questions; and one that is gone out of the complete
Union of the Body, and exercised by another Spirit? Deny this, and Farewell to
all Christian Church Order and Discipline, yea, and Truth it self: For it is an
absolute Inlet to Ranterism, and so to Atheism, near whose Borders this Author
dwells. I say, If the Scripture is to be credited, this is sound Doctrine; If
the several Societies or Churches then gathered were not to pass Judgment, till
the Heretics or Schismatics were convinced of, and acknowledged their
Mistake, they had never done it, since upon such Conviction and Acknowledgment
they ceased to be such; unless we should believe, that notwithstanding they
were convinced in their Consciences of their Errors or Dissentions, they still
persisted in the Belief of them, which I will not affirm. If then a Society or
Church so anointed, as aforesaid, have that Power, We do by Authority thereof,
as a Christian Society, judge all Persons concerned with the Spirit of this
Author to be thus far led by a Delusive, Turbulent, Unchristian Spirit, which,
if once given way to, there is no Imagination so Sordid and Scandalous, as it
would not lead to; and by this will we stand in the Day of the Lord, when it
will be proved no Popery, but Gospel to do so with him, and this Novice appear
a Wretched Slanderer.

His Objection, Were I among you, could I Marry, if an whole Nation, since you
deny it to Dissenters from you? is Childish in every thing but the Malice of
it. If all page 13.
the World but he were Believers, he might ask the Apostle Paul that Question,
who said, Be ye not unequally yoked together: It is not the Fault of the Body
that he dissents, but his own Imaginations and Whimsies. His Suggestion, that
we would then deny him a Burial, because we should deny it him always as one
of us; but especially our now Usurping his Property in a Burial Place, is a
downright Forgery.

That our Friends require any Man to practice what they are not convinced of, I
utterly renounce in their Name, and that as an Infamous Slander. But that we
will be Page 15.
well satisfied with any Member's Dispractice of an orderly Performance, once
cheerfully owned, is also true, and most reasonable and orderly.

That we Exalt our selves is a Calumny of his making; but we know our Places in
the Body. And for his saying, Every Member is Equal; it is false: For though
Page 15, 16.
it belongs to the same Body, yet not to the same Service; some are in that
sense more Honorable then others. This shows an Aspiring, Discontented Mind in
him, that where he cannot be Superior, he would be Equal.

He says, that with sorrow has he seen pulling down, haling out, and
thrusting forth of our Meetings, and that we went as far as our Power, and
wanted only more to punish. page 29.


But could we do so, as he wickedly and falsely suggests, we should have been
perhaps more formidable to our Insolent, Envious and Perverse Opposers, who
come not for Conscience sake, or to seek Satisfaction, which we shall never
refuse, but to Disturb, introduce a Rabble, beget Laughter, or any thing that
might disquiet our Assemblies, and as much as in them lies, render them
Unprofitable to the People. If we ever so used any Conscientious Inquirer or
Opposer, let us know them. It is Baseness it self to suggest our Ill-using of
People in general, and none named: perhaps we have refused and condemned the
bawling Opposition of such Apostate Slanderers as our Adversary; but we appeal
to God's holy Witness in all Consciences, if that has been, or is our Practice,
which is insmuated against us, much less that his Uncharitable Expression, If
he had Power equal to our Will, we would punish, should have any place; the
Suggestion of the common Adversary.

For his saying, that the Ministers are Ravening Wolves, that prey upon the
Flock^: and that if they commit a Fault, they are not to be judged by the
Laity, but their Peers or page 29.
Equals.

It is easy with him to Slander, but hard to prove. What one Minister ever
made a Prey upon this Authors Person or Estate, let him give us his Name. If
Preaching the Everlasting Gospel in season, and out of Season, Rising early,
and laying down late, Suffering, Traveling, and Spending and being spent in
Body and Estate, Sacrificing the Joy, Strength, and Pleasure of their Youth, to
the Service of the Living, Eternal God, and the Salvation of Peoples Souls, if
all this makes them Ravenous Wolves of Pray, then has he rightly denominated
them; but if this be Love unfeigned to God and Men, then will that Righteous
Judge certainly reckon with this Apostate for all his Slanders and Calumnies
against his Faithful and Painful Messengers.

For not being judged by the Laity, but their Peers, as he wickedly
distinguishes; be it known to all, That if any such Person have committed an
Injury against any of those, who are not exercised in the Ministry; then as
well those as the Ministry are proper Judges: but in Cases that may more
strictly concern the Exercise of his Gift, it is most equal and reasonable,
that such other faithful public Laborers as may be gotten together with some
of the more approved among us, whom we can call Elders, should be Judges in the
Case. But how? Only as they are upon serious Waiting to receive Counsel and
Wisdom from God, directed of his Holy Spirit to speak, act, or determine. Now
what great Matter of Evil, Apostasy, Popery, Tyranny, Lordlings, etc. can there
be in so orderly a Practice? O this Libertine, Ranting Spirit! that therefore
hates us, because we would have it Ruled, Guided and Governed with the Curb of
Truth; and not under a Pretense of Gospel-Liberty run out into all Excess, in
which we have some Cause to fear this pretended Lamenter has too deeply
involved himself. True Liberty is not to Commit Sin Innocently, as some fancy,
but to be freed from Sin, which is ever Nocent, and will prove destructive of
all who are seduced by it.

Nor is he less untrue and unrighteous to us, when he says, That as others
Erred in setting up the Scriptures as the Standard, Trial, and Touchstone of
Doctrines and Spirits, so we do p. 21.
greatly Err in setting up the Body above the Spirit.

There is no such Doctrine as the Latter maintained among us. It is well known
that the Former is by the many Professors, yea those, who boast in his
Treachery and Lies; But this always has been, and still is, and we hope, ever
will be our Belief, that no mere Body of People, without the Guidance of God's
Spirit, are capable of Determining in Matters of Religious Concernment: For it
is not an Hundred Persons (singly void of the Holy Spirit) coming together,
that makes them any whit more certain in their Judgment. The only and
indispensable Qualification to that great Work being Discoveries and Assistance
of the Holy Spirit? A Body then, without the Holy Spirit, can be no
Touchstone; but a Body, attended with the Holy Spirit, certainly is. The
Question then is not. If we prefer the Body above the Spirit? for that is the
False Insinuation of this Apostate, who is enraged, that we should so severely
censure him, and such Contentious Persons as he is; But, Whether we, as a
Believing Body have the Holy Spirit, or no? Of which much has been said by way
of Vindication already in other Tracts; and we shall leave it to God's Witness
in the Consciences of those we are concerned with in Matters of that Import,
whether we are acted by that holy Wisdom and Direction, which gives true and
sound Judgment. We know we are of God; and the World, whether Apostates or
others, that thus withstand our Testimony, are in the Gaul of Bitterness, and
Bond of Iniquity.

His Objection, That the Hat on in Prayer is a Trifle, or of no such moment, as
justly to occasion such a Busle, makes for us; since he cannot be other then a
Trifler at best, for all his high Pretenses, who hazards the Church's Peace,
gives this Disturbance, bears this Ill Will, and shows that Revenge for a
Trifle; 'Twere well if his Conscience were so nice in Cases of more Weight: I
fear he is as well a Demas as an Alexander, and that his Cries against our
Ministers decent and clean Apparel, is but a better sort of Coyer for his own
Rusty Pharisaical kind of Garb, the Effect perhaps of his fordid Avarice. It
seems by his Letter, that the Quakers mean Clothes made up much of his
Convincement at first. Truly, that Faith which came in by the Outside, will go
out by it too.

But it is a Wonder to me, that the Costly Clothes and Prodigal Feast (to
Excess and Derision) of that Exalted J. Penniman, and his Beloved Mary Boreman
(who in Token of her Self-Denial, and Attainment to a more excellent
Administration, exchanged her Cloth Waste-Coat for a Silk Farendine Gown, her
Blew Apron for one of Fine Holland, and her Ordinary Bodice for Rich Satin it
self; to say little of her Riding in Fine Coaches, and several other things
(once accounted by her Self-Righteousness Abominable Things) did never offend
this Author's Nice and Squeamish Stomach: But we are they only, who must be
condemned; and I perceive that must be reputed a Sin in us, which is accounted
a Virtue in them. Away with such Deceit for Shame.

He says, That we desert the Light, for the Judgment of the Body; A wretched
Begging of the Question: page 18.
We do deny that to be Light in him, which opposes it. He at other times
grants the Body has Light, though not some Elders: But the Body judges him;
How will he do then? For him to say, he believes the Body to be in the Right,
and yet subject them to his own Conceits, is what deserves to be disdained of
all understanding Men. He should have gone to those Elders, and cleared
himself, if he had ought against them, and not place their Miscarriages (as he
thinks) to the Account of the whole Body. Were he any thing of a True Quaker
(and that he pretends to) he would have abhorred to add thus to their
Endeavors, that strike at True as well as False: And if by True is understood
something more refined then we are, he may be said to add to our Sufferings so
much the more. What, but a Dark, Envious, Inveterate Man would have done such a
thing at any time, but especially at this Juncture and Season?

Behold the Hat now, and what a notable Spirit it affords us; one drop of
which, by Antipathy, were enough, one would think, to cure any one, not too far
gone in Prejudice and Schism! O that all who profess the Truth of the Living
God, may be kept out of such Temptation, that they may never sacrifice the
Peace of the Church, and Quiet of their own Souls, to the Introduction or
Promotion of any thing so Unserviceable, Senseless and Unprofitable both to
Soul and Body; but Eyeing the Blessed Truth in their Inward Parts, may by it be
Exercised in Body, Soul and Spirit, to all Godly Conversation among Men; so
will God be glorified, and they preserved.

For his other Stories, Some things are true, and hurt us not, but show our
Care to preserve Unity and Order, though they will the JUDAS, that both
revealed and augmented them: Other Passages are greatly abused, and downright
Lies told, as before, three of which I cannot forbear to mark out, with a
Challenge to prove them, notwithstanding the following Testimonies. First, That
our Ministry is Vicious and Wanton, guilty page 22. 23, 43.
of Whoredoms; and that Strumpets are among them. This we do in the Name of the
Holy God deny, and defy any Man on Earth to prove any part of this Ungodly
general Charge against our Ministry, to so much as belong to any one Person by
us accounted of it: If any such thing be, let the Accuser, his Witnesses, and
the Accused be brought forth, and an Hearing shall never be refused. But let me
ask this Apostate, If ever he knew such a one? If he admonished him? If upon
Continuance in such Ungodly Living he told it to the Church, before this
Publication of his Ungodly Slanders to the World: If he says he did, he adds to
his Lies; be it then True or False in it self, he has done but like a
Treacherous Renegade; I fasten an Action of Defamation upon his Head, and that
in the High and Holy Court of Heaven, before God the Righteous Judge, who will
avenge the Cause of the Innocent upon their false Accusers.

Next, That we, with the Papists, prefer a Loose Person before a
Nonconformist, or such like, is an horrid Lie. We own, and cannot but cherish
Sobriety, and a Conscientiousness to God in all, which we never could
Profaneness; but where Men, like the Pharisees, have a Show of Religion, and
their Fury has eaten out their Moderation, insomuch, as that they are become
Envious and Persecuting, such we say are worse then Publicans, as says the
Scripture, Whoremongers and Adulterers shall enter the Kingdom of God before
them. But neither is this the Case in hand; for he is far less excusable, who
having walked with Upright People, deserts them, then those Non-Conformists
that were never of them. Nonconformity may be Ignorance, but Apostasy is
wilful distorting, and erring from the Faith, Worship and Discipline of the
True Church: and as a Christian turned Turk is observed to be most Cruel to the
Profession; so none so great Enemies to the Poor Quakers, as those who have
been reputed of them. The worst Enemies are those of a Man's own House: 'Twas
Judas the Disciple that betrayed his Lord; and none we hear of, did Paul more
wrong then Alexander the Copper-Smith.

Lastly, His Judging their Recantations, that denied their former Acts of
Dissension, and gave Testimony against them to have been done in an hour of
Temptation, is a Lie in it self, and in him high Incharity, and at most but a
Begging of the Question: I Challenge him to prove it; If he cannot, he is a
Belyer of God's Convictions upon the Soul. Their professed Sincerity and
Brokenness of Heart, and Contrition of Spirit, had been enough to have Melted
any thing but an Adamantine Alexander the Apostate, who not only was Bad; but
we never heard that he proved Good again; the Doom I fear of this Perverter of
the Right Way of the Lord, who will certainly reward him according to his
Works. But because I design not to be long, nor yet to give an Account to the
World of our Church-Procedure, nor are we obliged to it for every nameless
Accuser, let this suffice to show the Baseness and Revenge both of the Author
and his Publisher, and their great Inconsistency with the Designs of each
other, and his with sound Reason, Scripture, and Himself.

God will Raise the Horn of his Salvation above all their Opposition; he will
Prosper his Truth, Bless his People and Dissipate every Mist that Ignorance,
Rags or Malice of Ungodly Men may for a time cloud the Beauty of the one or
call in question the Unspotted Reputation of the other by; and He shall have
the Glory, whose it is, forever.

I am a Servant to the Truth, and them that Love it, William Penn.

Innocence further Cleared, And the Spirit of Alexander the Copper-smith
Further Detected.
Or, The Full and Plain Testimonies of those very Persons (whose Names are
quoted by the Author of the Spirit of the HAT, in favor of it, which doubtless
give the greatest Credit to that Malicious Piece in the Minds of People) given
forth against the Wicked and Pernicious Design of him that writ it, and for the
Clearing of God's Truth and People.
WHereas the Author of the Spirit of the HAT insinuates* That our Ministry is
guilty of Uncleanness, Whoredoms, and such like Beastly Practices, under a
feigned Commendation of us underwritten; as Prosecutors of such Persons, that
they may be brought to Judgment. We do declare in the Fear of the Everlasting
God, That though we abhor with our whole Souls such Unrighteous Practices, and
if such things were, we should, we hope, clear our Consciences for God, and his
Living Truth, and People: Yet we do declare in the Uprightness of our Hearts,
that we know of no such, nor can acknowledge any such to be either of our
Ministry, or our Body, much less those who are Eminent among us, (as has been
Wickedly Suggested by the Author of The Spirit of the Hat) whom we have found
Painful and Faithful to God, his Truth and People. Therefore to say, we were
hindered from bringing them to Judgment, whom we never went about to charge,
neither can we, is a Wicked, Envious and Palse Suggestion of the Adversaries of
the Truth; and this in God's Fear we testify to the World.

John Bolton, Samuel Newton.


AS for that part of the Bemoaning Letter (so called) which does more
particularly concern me, I observe this; That the Author under the specious
Show of Pity and Compassion to the Oppressed, does traduce me, as well as
others; First, In setting me in Opposition against John Bolton: Next, In
Insinuating as if I had been so Hipocritical* as for Peace sake to Judge that
in Public, which I Justified in Private. As to the first I say, There may be
between two of one Judgment, through a Misunderstanding of each others Words
and Intentions a seeming Opposition, and yet really none; and so was the Case
between J. B. and my self: For the Intent of my words, and that which answered
my Judgment, was, That it would not recommend any to us, to judge a Thing for
Evil, unless they believed it was so; but that every one should be left to
God's Witness in their Consciences, to Condemn what that condemns, and to
Justify what that justifies; and not to condemn or justify barely upon the
Motion or Judgment of others; which is true, and will stand to our
Justification against this Slanderer, who would introduce, That the Tyranny of
our Elders is such, as to impose upon the Weak and Simple that which they
cannot believe: But I being mis-apprehended, there was an Occasion to call for
the Judgment of the Meeting; for if my words had extended so far, as that
nothing was to be accounted an Evil, unless the Guilty Party saw it to be so,
(which is the Principle of the Ranters, and not of the People of God called
Quakers) the Zeal of the Lord might well rise against it, where it was supposed
to be; for that would excuse all Scared Consciences, who commit Sin with
Greediness, and drink up Iniquity, as an Ox drinks Water: But when my Words
were repeated, and explained, and the Intent of my Mind seen and understood, J.
B. was satisfied, and all others, as far as I know. So it appears that I had no
Occasion, neither did Condemn that in Public, which I Justified in Private;
and the False Accusation is cast off, and returned upon the Author. And herein
I must commend the Care of J. B. that he would not have any thing of a Wrong
Judgment remain with a Brother.

And this I have further to add, that though latet anguis in herba, yet the
Snake is seen in the Grass; and that this twining Serpent has no place in my
Heart, but is forever judged by me, as coming from the Bottomless Pit, and
thither must return; and God's Truth is over all Justified, and shall spread
over the whole Earth to his Glory, who has began the Work, and will finish it
in his Time; and these Mists and Fogs, that do arise from the Pit, cannot
darken the Son of Righteousness, who is appeared in the Hearts of a Remnant,
and whose Glory shines, and will shine over all, to the fulfilling of that
which was prophesied of him in Times past, That God would give him the Heathen
for an Inheritance, and the utmost Parts of the Earth for a Possession.

James Claypool.

AS concerning the Letter called, The Spirit of the Hat: This I testify, It
proceeded from a Subtle, Dark, Insinuating, Treacherous and Malicious Spirit;
in words seeming to magnify the Name of the Lord; but its Workings ever brought
reproach and dishonor thereunto, of which to my great Sorrow I have been a
Concerned and Experienced Witness: For, Reader, this know, That the Lord God
Everlasting, having visited this Nation with the Dayspring of Eternal and
Immortal Life, how were our Hearts affected, and our Spirits revived, and our
very Souls made exceeding and unexpressibly glad! Ah! how did the Solitary
rejoice! How were the Mourners comforted* How beautiful were the Feet of them
that brought us Tidings of this blessed Day! We knew throw Judgment and
Burnings, and no otherwise the Oil of Joy, and River of Gladness; for the
Ancient Path, which is Holiness to the Lord, that was, and is cast up, and the
Joy of many Generations was, and is come, and the Angel of his Presence that
rewarded Disobedience with Judgment, was known; and his Mighty Arm, that
wrought Wonders of old, that was and is with us. And Oh! that the Nations knew
this their Day of Visitation! For of a certain Truth, the Lord God of the
Hebrews has appeared unto us, and his Message is, He has seen, He has seen
the Afflictions of his holy Seed, by reason of Sin and Iniquity, and he is come
down to deliver out of spiritual Darkness and Bondage; Many have been and are
the Witnesses hereof, and are raised and raising to testify thereunto, and
their Testimony shall endure and remain. Yet notwithstanding as of old, many
that have confessed to this Testimony, have turned aside, and given heed unto
Fables, and forgotten the right Way of the Lord; and many Spirits have risen up
to Stop the Passage of this blessed Work, and many have turned aside, and some
are fallen, as in the Temptations and Provocations in the Wilderness in Isreal's
journying toward the blessed Land; and as record is made in the Scriptures, of
what befell them in their Travels, that Ages to come may hear and fear, and not
tempt and provoke the Lord as they did; The same in some measure being in this
Age also manifest, in which I my self was concerned, and saw the Snare, and
through the Goodness and Mercy of the Lord am delivered from, and have often
had it in my Heart, to leave it on Record to Ages to come; Therefore let him
that reads understand. When we had seen the great Plunges in Egypts Land, and
had traveled through the Red Sea, and saw the Wonders of the Lord in the Field
of Zoar, and Sang the Song of his Praises upon the Banks of Salvation, and were
Traveling on in the Wilderness to Canaan's Blessed Land, we were Proved,
Tried, Tempted and Assaulted by many Enemies; and as we kept unto the Angel of
his Presence, we were kept and preserved from all Danger; That was a Pillar of
Fire by Night, and a Cloud to cover us from hurt by Day; and Angels Food we
knew, and the Water out of the Rock we saw, and drank of the River of his Good
Pleasure; and the Desert did rejoice, and the Wilderness did blossom as a Rose:
But after all this we tasted the Waters of Merra, and through want of
Watchfulness liked not the Food of Angels; but desired other Meat (and Quail
sell amongst us) upon which Judgment came; and many fell for Disobidience, and
some are yet Monuments of his Mercies; and some yet withstand their
Visitations. And that none may pretend Ignorance, and that all may be left
without Excuse, the thing was this: A Spirit arose in John Perrot, pretending,
that the putting off the Hat in prayer was a Romish Tradition, and that a
higher Dispensation was to be waited for. This, and much more was asserted
under a pretense of a more excellent Way, accompanied with pretenses of a more
strickt and mortified Life, which I sought for; and was grieved, that some that
made a profession thereof, did not walk answerable unto this: in which trouble
I, with several was amused and muddled, and not Watching in that, that
discovers the Enemy in every Appearance, did not understand the working of that
Spirit, nor that Power that withstood this Spirit, though often warned thereof
by them that kept their Habitations: For in a Mystery it did wotk, and still
does, and lead many to the Chambers of Death, and Death is its Food: for into
prejudice it brought many, that did eat as a Canker, and the Good was not
discerned; but they were, and some yet are as the Heath in the Desert, that
knows not when good comes. And the Spirit, that introduced that Practice, is
manifest; and him by whom it was first asserted, has merited in the Hearts of
several the Appellation and Detestation, as of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, that
caused many in outward Israel to Sin.

And now as to the Insinuations by the Author of this Letter, concerning the
Meeting at Devonshire house, in which my name is mentioned, and my Case stated
as a grand Proof of the Lordlyness and Corruptness of the Second Days Meeting
there, I have this to say; I have as often been refreshed and comforted in the
Good Presence of the Lord, that there I have found and felt, as in any Meeting
I ever was in. And the Opposition I had there, related not to my Marriage as a
Marriage, or to hinder my proceed therein, for that J. B. and all said at that
time, he had nothing against; but that the Meeting could not pass it as their
Approvement, I being not in Unity with the Meeting as to that matter aforesaid:
So that the Letter does not present the Matter truly as it was; but in a
prejudiced Spirit states things, to render the Meeting, and its proceeds
odious, both in that and several other particulars, which I expect others may
reply unto.

John Osgood.

I Having seen a Printed Paper (to which the words above relate) wherein my
Name is made use of by way of Instance, I find my self concerned to testify on
this wise; That as the Blessed Eternal Truth was received by me, in the Love of
it, through the Testimony of that Blessed People called Quakers; I being, soon
after I was Convinced, shut up in a Close Prison, and continuing a Prisoner for
diverse years: though the Bent of my Heart was after the Lord, in a measure of
Singleness; yet the Enemy of Truth and my Soul being permitted to bring forth
his work in a Mystery, and therein to assault and gain Ground upon several of
that People, some whereof I had an Affectionate Esteem for, hoping and
believing well concerning them: And I being at a Distance, and much alone, that
spirit had an Influence upon me, to the betraying of the Simplicity in me, to
the writing of that Paper therein mentioned, and thereby to be an Occasion of
Stumbling to others, and to Weaken the Hands of them I should have been a
Strength to, and to Strengthen the Hands of them I should not have been a
Strength to: And when I came to see it, I came forth in absolute Judgment
against that Paper, and the spirit in which it was writ; and what I did in it,
I did it absolutely to the Lord, and to answer his Pure Manifestation and
Appearance in my Heart, and durst not do otherwise in the Pure Fear of the Lord
(who in a signal Manner Appeared in me. and by a strong Hand and lifted up Arm
opened my Heart, and raised a pure Zeal and Indignation in it against that
Treacherous Lying Spirit) and my care was, to clear Truth, and its Testimony
and Faithful Friends, whom I found the Enemy had struck at through me; and the
Judgment I gave forth against that Paper, was not given forth in an Hour of
Weakness and Temptations; but in the Strength and Dominion and Evidence and
Clearness of Truth, and stands and will stand forever.

And I do further testify, that the Spirit, that has wrought in a Mystery
against Friends, and to break their Unity, under swelling Pretenses of further
Discoveries and a Singular Larger Zeal, whether of that Spirit which leads unto
the Practice of wearing the Hat in Public Prayer, or such like, to Catch the
Mind of the Young and Simple, they not being aware of his Devices, is the same
(though under diversity of Appearance) that works in the Children of Deceit and
Disobedience to incline and entice them to all manner of Cruelty, Lust and
Vanity, and is the Ranting Spirit, is Corah's Spirit, that resisted and
murmured against the Servant of the Lord in former days; and therefore we find,
that Apostates from among us, and Professors of all sorts and Profane can and
do center here in one Spirit of Enmity, and Opposition against the Truth, and
its Followers and Witnesses: and of this the Lord has made me deeply sensible,
and through the Mercy and Power of the Lord God a Zeal and Indignation lives in
my Heart against that Cursed Twining Spirit, and a Care and Travel in measure
for all that have been Entangled by it, that they may see, and be sensible of
it, and may be raised up to come forth in a clear and full Testimony against it
without Reserve.

John Swinton.

ANd whereas it is said by the Author of that Scandalous Pamphlet called The
Spirit of the Hat, that he remembers a Paper to have been sent down to Hartford
subscribed by a Dozen of the Great Ones, as this Malecontent scoffingly terms
them, and that it had this Passage in it, That if any Person had (as he
thought) a Command from God, to do any thing, or put forth any thing in print,
he must come, and lay it before the Body, and AS THEY JUDGE, THEY MUST SUBMIT,
(p. 18.) querying, If this was not an Arbitrary Government, bound by no Law,
but what G. F. and a few more please? and affirming, That it was much disliked
there. This we underwritten say, and that in God's Fear, who are Men well
known in that Place, that we know of no such Paper, so signed or sent;
Consequently there could not be any such passage: Neither was it possible that
we should dislike it, unless we should dislike what was not. So that five great
and manifest Lies meet in these few Lines. (1.) That there was such a Letter.
(2.) That it had that Passage in it. (3.) That Twelve of the Great-ones, as he
reproachfully calls them, signed it. (4.) That it was disliked: And Lastly,
that he remembers all this. He that can remember things that never were, may be
reasonably supposed to make those things: It shows his Malice to invent, and
great Wickedness to affirm such Invention for very Truth: God will plead with
this Traducer of the Innocent, in a Day when he shall not escape his
Indignation. This is our true Testimony for the Clearing God's Truth and People.

Henry Stout, Nicholas Lucas, Richard Martin.


I Perceiving the Wicked Design of this obscure Author of the Spirit of the
HAT, is not only to bring a Reproach upon Christ's Government and good Order
among us his People, as Tyrannical and Oppressive to tender Consciences, (which
is an abominable Slander) but also to sow* Discord among us; I must signify
this to the World, that his Work is neither of Credit nor Effect with me, or
us. For (1) he has manifested himself to be a Belialite, or a Son of Belial,
without a Yoke, and without the Bounds of Truth and Good Order; so that for him
the Spirit of Ranterism is more proper and significant, then the Spirit of the
Hat; however he makes that his Cover. (2) He is deeply a Partaker not of the
least of those seven Abominations Prove. 6. 17, 18. 19. Being guilty of a Lying
Tongue; an Heart that devises wicked Imaginations; and is a false Witness that
speaks Lies; and one that sows (or rather would sow) Discord among
Brethren: And wherein he attempts it between me and that upright Man of God G.
F. I tell him, and the World, That his Bait and Wicked Device shall not take
with me, since the Lord in Mercy has opened my Understanding, to see beyond
Prejudice and Darkness, upon which the Adversary of Mankind seeks occasion to
Divide and Scatter where God has Gathered and United: And the occasion that
this Son of Belial, and Spirit of Ranterism takes wickedly, to represent me and
G. F. to the World, as divided; was a Mistake that I was under, and an
unadvised Expression privately spoken, which did reflect upon the holy Zeal of
that Man of God; which when I came to see, it was my Burden; and the Lord's
Reproof I owned on that; and to his Testimony and Judgment I stand against that
Spirit of Prejudice, which did in days past weaken and vail my Understanding,
while I stood not in the Unity of his Ministers and People, in which State the
Life and Refreshments in the Body were not partaken of, as now felt through the
Lord's Love which has reached my Soul, and engaged my Heart to himself and
People, not in any thing to offend, but to watch against the Dis-uniting
Spirit, and to live in Union with the Church of Christ, whose Light is sprung
up and arisen out of Obscurity, Praises to our God for ever; for whom I stand a
Witness, in my Measure, against all loose disobedient Spirits, Backsliders and
Ranters, and against that disorderly irreverent Carriage of keeping on the Hat
in public Prayer, and the dis-uniting Spirit that sought to set it up and
impose it among us, which, when it could not carry one its Design, but was
opposed by the Power of God among us, it cried out, Oh! Imposition upon
Conscience, Pope, Arbitrary Government; Rule without to lead us from the
Movings of God's Spirit, Rule and Government of Christ within; as this
Apostate, who one while pleads Conscience; another while, the Spirit's
Requirings; another while, a further Dispensation; another while, the Rule and
Light within; another while, the great Charter of Liberty: And what for? What Is
the great Matter and Drift of the Business, but for keeping on his Hat in
Public Prayer? But in page 24. he confesses, They keep it neither off nor on,
upon a Religious account; which is a manifest Contradiction to the former;
which being read together amount to this sense (or as if he should say) I keep
on my Hat in public Prayer on the Account of Conscience, at the Requirings of
the Spirit, Light and Rule within, etc. but not upon a Religious Account. Oh
monstrous Work! Irreligious, and void of both Conscience and Spirit, and yet
pretend both as the Main Stress of his Work. By this the Ingenuous Reader may
see his gross Hypocrisy in pretending Conscience, and the Spirit of God for
that, which he has no Religion in* And while he pretends to be a Deep Mourner
in Israel, page 44. he is Reviling and bringing forth evil Reports against the
Lord's People, as one that will both Bite and Whine; who falsely accused the
Body with the same Spirit of Reproach being entered, that is in the Papists;
because of the Phrase [Spirit of the Hat, or Hat* men] (though it be confirmed
in the Title of his Pamphlet) and yet his tender Conscience will serve him
Scornfully and Reproachfully to call our Unity (which is the Unity of the
Spirit professed by us) The Foxoman Unity: Oh fordid Hypocrisy and Scorn! This
is he that is against the Spirit of Reproach, and Names of that tendence; and
yet can thus Reproachfully Nickname our Unity.

And whereas this pretended deep Mourner in Israel would appear very Zealous
for the People called Quakers, as in the beginning; but now in the current of
his Work charge them or the Body with a great Apostasy, Tyranny, Persecution,
Violence, etc. and therein would be looked upon both as a Master Controller and
Judge over them; as also to be a Quaker, standing in his first Purity, both as
to his Life and Principles, viz. For Christ's Government, Guidance of his
Spirit, Light Within as the only Rule, etc.

Let it be considered how the Quakers were at first treated, and his Pamphlet
now received and embraced by their open Enemies and Persecutors; the Quakers
were Persecuted and Reviled by the World, by whom his Pamphlet, is owned and
cried up as an Ingenious Pi^^e, and he as an Ingenious Quaker, even by the
Envious* Dippers, and others, who are of a Persecuting spirit, who are of the
World, by whose Slanderous Tongues and Pens the Quakers are Persecuted and
Reviled: ^o that this pretended Mourrer is no real Quaker; but appears plainly
to be one of those Antichrists, who are of the World, and whom the World
hears, and applaudeth for his Envious Work against the Quakers. And seeing
that some Anabaptists and Socinians own his Pamphlet in the Publication and
Spreading of it, and cry it up as such an Ingenious siece: We charge manifest
Contradiction upon them, in their opposing the Spirit or Light of Christ Within
as the Rule, which this Mourner* owns in words; unless they Recant of their
opposing this Inward Rule, and acknowledge themselves to be real Primitive
Quakers, only opposing the Body of us as Apostates; and hereupon we challenge
them to be ingenuous, and not to shuffle; but be plain, and tell us, Whether
this shall be the Matter in Controversy? or, whether they really own, what
they publish of this kind against us? if they do not, then what they do, will
the more appear to be of mere Malice and Revenge. And as for this Author, We
challenge him to signify his Name, if he dare stand by his Work in this Spirit
of the Hat? otherwise, let the World judge, how Infamously he has notified
several Persons by Name, and yet dare not appear, nor discover his own.

We can manifest him guilty of many gross Lies and Forgeries in his Pamphlet,
more then we have mentioned, both against particular Persons, and the Body in
general; who being a Vagabond from Christ's Light, Government and Order* he is
one of them that despise Government, while he asperseth those Helps and
Governments that Christ has set up in his Church, which has Power to mark,
abstain from, and reject all such Contentious and Disorderly Walkers, of which
number the Author of the Spirit of the Hat is, and so do warn him to
Repentance; as also exhort him to the Calling-in that Envious Letter, or Book,
called, The Spirit of the HAT, and commit it ^o the Fire, and send forth into
the World from an Honest (...) Denial of the same, in a due Acknowledgment of
the Evil of his so doing, that so, if possible, he may find Mercy from the
Lord, whose Name, Truth and People he has dishonored, and so appears not one
(though he pretends to it) of the Principle and Practice of the People of God
called Quakers, whose Work, Travel and Service is for the Prosperity of the
Truth, and not against it, as his has been.

William Gosnell

THE END.

