upon the State of Christ-Hospital.

(...)per 1

Mr. PEPYS to the Lord Mayor Upon the Present State of CHRIST-HOSPITAL.
To the Right Honorable Sir Humphry Edwin, Lord Mayor.
Tuesday, October. 25. School. York-Buildings. My Lord,
ANother Three Months are now run-out, and the whole twelve of your Lordship's
Great Office at the Eve of their Expiring; while our poor Orphans remain in the
same reliefless State I left them in with your Lordship, in my Letter of the
5th. of April last. Wherein nothing more was proposed of Trouble to your
Lordship toward the remedying it (and that too of your Lordship's own seeking)
than the accompanying with your Authority my Report thereof to the Gentlemen of
Christ-Hospital (to whom it was specially directed) and to the Body-Corporate
of the City, which, as I have heretofore noted, stands originally answerable
for the same, to the Crown.

In neither of which, though abundantly apply'd-to in both, has your Lordship
thought fit to express any regard to your Undertaking to me. But so much the
contrary; as to have arraigned my late Memorial to you concerning it (even
after your Own and the Court of Aldermen's solemn Thanks to me for it) as a
Libel, and the only Occasion of the No-Voice given your Lordship, at the late
Parliament-Election for the City. And this delivered me from your Lordship, and
my Lady Mayoress too, as your Joint-Message, by the same Worthy Citizen, and
Member both of your Common Council and Hospital, whom your self was first
pleased to employ to me, on those Pious Errands I was misled by, to the
submitting the Execution of this Matter singly to your Lordship.

My Lord, I shall not offer at the asking-after, or even aiming at the Ground
of this your so extraordinary Dealing, in a Cause of so Religious an Import; as
leaving that to God, the City, and your Self, to be reckon'd-for. It shall
suffice me, My Lord, to observe, That it has arisen from neither of those
Causes, whereto the Court of Aldermen were led to join with your Lordship in
the assigning it, and in the yet unperform'd Undertaking for its Recovery; your
Sickness, I mean, My Lord, and Sir Tho. Stamp's Absence.

Give me leave only, to bewail the Consequences of it to the Poor; whatever it
may end-in to the City. Namely, the Continuance hereby occasioned to the
Imposure upon the Gentlemen of the Hospital; whose better Information could not
but e're this have produced some good Effects toward its Relief. Next, the
more confirmed Admission of their Methods, whose Interest (and therefore
Business) it seems to be, to suppress that Information. And lastly, the
rend'ring the Poverty, Disorders, and Impieties of the Place, so much less
superable than they appeared to me when first laid before your Lordship; as to
put me beyond all Hopes of their Redress, from any lower Hand than that of a
Royal Visitation.

The Power of which (after so glorious a Proof of it as I have lately seen, to
the lasting Honor of his Lordship, the present Lord Chancellor, in the Case of
St. Katherines) I cannot, on behalf of our distressed Orphans, and in right to
their Holy Benefactors, but bless Almighty God for; and henceforward direct my
self wholly to; without offering either your Lordship, my Lord Elect your
Honorable Successor, his Brethren the Court of Aldermen, the Gentlemen of the
Hospital, or my Self, the Interruptions I have been so long driven, at the end
of every Three Months, fruitlesly to repeat on this Subject. But apply my self
to the speedy bringing-up to this Day what is now behind of my Report, for the
Six Months your Lordship has thus unhappily added to the Time I had last
adjusted it to, relating to the Moral Part of this House's Misery: In order to
such Use to be made thereof, as a like Royal Inspection may, I trust, find it
convertible to.

It remains; That in taking my Leave of your Lordship (which I would do with
all the Respect due to your Lordship's Just Character) I beg you to consider,
Whether what I either have done, am now doing, or may have further to do, in
Exposing my Observations and Sentiments in this Matter, be either more or
other, than what my Change as a Governor obliges me to; and what my self
alone, through my closer Applications to the Service of the House, am
inlighten'd to do; or otherwhere, than by my immediate Duty I am bound; or,
which is yet more, in any other manner, than what is alone left me to do it in.

Especially, after the Miscarriage of all other Methods (Personal and Written)
employed by me with those I thought most concerned to improve them; whether at
their Committees and Courts, or separately as Private Governors and Superior
Ministers; viz. the Treasurer, President, and last of all your Lordship, both
alone, and in Conjunction with your Brethren the Aldermen: For preventing ( if
possible) the obvious Consequences of my being compelled to the carrying them
elsewhere.

And even this too, with such a degree of Tenderness, as, after all that has
been said of its being made the Entertainment of Coffee-houses, (to the
Offense, I find, of my Lady Mayoress as well as your Self, and not a little to
my own too, for the sake of the Poor,) to stand ready with a Reward of Five
Pounds to whoever shall show me any one of my Printed Copies, other than what
were strictly delivered by Mr. Town Clerk to Your Self, the Aldermen, and the
Assistants of that Court; and those severally indors'd by a Hand of my own,
with the Name of each Person entitled to the same.

And if this, My Lord, be a Libel; I shall not undertake for its being my last,
where nothing gentler will be hearkened to; rather than be conscious of an
approaching Ruin to a Foundation like this I Am concerned for, and be Dumb.

Next, My Lord, for avoiding any unnecessary Repetition of Trouble to the Court
now sitting, where Your Lordship has yet the Honor of Presiding; permit me to
pray, That in the Notice you may see reasonable to take there, of this Paper:
You will please to be its Remenbrancer, in what, for the Considerations
assigned in my last, I then bespoke its Favor in reference to the
disburthening me of a Charge, in which I am at the end of any Hopes of seeing
my self further serviceable.

Lastly, let it be no Offense to Your Lordship, that I end with an Observation,
impossible for me to overlook. Namely; That while I am here lamenting the
Misfortune of our Poor, from the Suppression of this Report of mine, calculated
for their Relief; I find so much of it (and so much only) as seemed to me the
properest Introduction to it, in Advancement of Charity; transferred in
terminis to the Head of a Sermon and made the Text of it, preached before your
Lordship, and published by Your Command, in express Diminution thereof. And not
that only; but to the doing violence to the Memory of One (scarce yet Cold in
his Grave) whose Good Works have been too many and too conspicuous, not to have
covered Errors of a much greater Magnitude (for no Man thought him Infallible)
than any I hear him charged with. Especially, in a Point of Faith; wherein it is
hard to say, which raised the greater Dust, and most to the offense of Weaker
Eyes: His single Departure from the Doctrine of Our Church, toward the Wrong;
or that of our own Doctors from One another, in their Determinations touching
the Right.

So far only I shall adventure to interpose, in the particular Doctrine
advanced in this Sermon by Your Lordship's Chaplain (whom I take to be the
first that ever raised it from that Text) as with all deference to recommend it
back to Your Lordship, with this only Improvement, for the rendering it more
apposite and edifying in the present Case; Viz. That the Neglect of the Poor is
as little an Evidence of a True Faith, in any Body else; as the Care of them is
a Justification of a Mistaken one, in Mr. Fermin.

I am, most respectfully, My LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient Servant, S.
Pepys.


