Mr. PEPYS To the President and Governors of CHRIST-HOSPITAL upon the Present
State of the said HOSPITAL.
To the Honored Sir John Moor, Knight. and President, and the rest of my Honored
Friends, the Governors of CHRIST-HOSPITAL.
York-Buildings. Monday, Novem. 21. School. Gentlemen,
IN pursuance of a Resolution of his Lordship the present Lord Mayor and Court
of Aldermen at their last Sitting (our Worthy President Sir John Moore present)
in approval of a Proposition of mine on that behalf: I enclose you Copys of two
Papers of mine lately wrote, and for their readier Use prepared as these are,
and directed to the several Members of that Court; relating to what has passed
between the late Lord Mayor, the said Court, and My self, upon the present
State of this Hospital.

And this I do; as well for your Information in all my Proceedings in this
Matter, and satisfaction in the Regard shown therein to the Honor, no less
than Service of this House (notwithstanding what has been so injuriously
averred in it to the contrary) as for inlight'ning at once your whole Body, in
the Truth, and Moment of the Particulars in present Debate concerning it.

In order whereto, and for that the Court of Aldermen have not yet thought fit
to allow of my repeated Suit to Them, for their disburthening me of the Charge
I still lie under from them, as your Fellow Servants. I do (as such) tender it
as my earnest and humble Advice to you, that these Papers may not, like others
of mine of equal Import, be taken-up, and the knowledge of them suppressed, to
the (I fear) irreparable Wrong of this House: But, if it may stand with your
good liking, communicated to a General Court specially called on that behalf.
For as much as, that being done, I shall not doubt a much happier Issue of your
Deliberations thereon, than can attend any longer want of it: Besides the
preventing what I should otherwise be most unwillingly driven to, of supplying
the ineffectuallness of these Papers thus addressed to You in a Body, by a
several One to be transmitted to every Member of it. Which I cannot but think
my Duty to see done; while standing all of us equally interested in the
knowing, and accountable for the due improving thereof, to the Benefit of the
Poor, and satisfaction of Those we stand intrusted-by for Them.

Which praying your taking in good part from me, as the last Occasion, I hope,
ever to have of asking it on these Terms; I do with most sincere Respect remain,

Honored Gentlemen, Your faithful and obedient Servant, S. Pepys.

At a General Court holden in Christs-Hospital. the 21th. day of Novem. School.
UPon reading a Letter with some printed Papers from Samuel Pepys, Esquire which
were all enclosed in a Cover, and directed to the President, and Governors of
this Hospital, assembled in Court this 21 th of November School. It was by this
Court ordered, that a General Court shall be summoned to meet on Friday next in
the Afternoon, particularly for consideration of these Papers; And Major
Aungier is desired to attend Mr. Pepys, and acquaint him with the meeting of
the Court next Friday. and request the favor of his Presence, and to let him
know, that if he does not think that a convenient Day, than to desire him to
appoint some other short Day, as may best suit with his occasions; and come
provided with the particulars of his charge against this Hospital.

William Parrey.


