TO THE Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House,
now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of Arundell Penruddock, widow, late wife of John
Penruddock, Esquire, deceased.
Shows,
THat Oliver Cromwell the late pretended Protector, having traitorously
murdered the late King, by force broken the Parliament, and banished his
Majesty out of his Dominions, the Petitioners husband, with many others of his
Majesty's Loyal Subjects in the year 1654. according to their bounden Duty, and
Allegiance, and by virtue of his Majesty's Commission, endeavored by lawful
Arms, the suppression of the Forces of the said Oliver Cromwell, and the
restitution of his Majesty to his Right and Kingdoms.

But the forces of the said Oliver Cromwell, under the command of Colonel Crook
over-pouring the Petitioners Husband and his party, the Petitioners Husband and
his party were taken and imprisoned.

And afterward the said pretended Protector, did grant out a Commission of
Oyer and Terminer unto John Glyn, William Steel, Sergeants at Law, and John
Lisle, Esquire, and others for the trial of the petitioners husband, and the
rest of his party, although contrary to Articles made with them by Colonel
Crook, who afterward perfidiously denied them.

That the said pretended Commissioners, proceeding to execute that Commission,
caused the petitioners Husband (amongst others) to be Arraigned at Exeter, at
which try all the said, Sergeant Glyn, and the rest of the Commissioners,
refused to allow the petitioners husband any Counsel although he took many
particular exceptions to the Indictment, both for the matter and form.

They also declared to the people and jury that to raise forces for his
Majesty, against the said pretended Protector, was Treason, within the Statute
of 25. Edw. 3. and that Arms taken against him, were as against the King,
within the meaning of that Statute.

Whereupon, the Petitioners Husband was by a Jury (which Sir John Coppleston,
the then Sheriff) had maliciously packed and returned for that purpose) found
guilty of Treason, and Judgment of death being passed upon him, by the said
Commissioners, he was afterward beheaded by the Command of the said sir John
Coppleston, to the unexpressible grief and irreparable loss of the
disconsolate Petitioner, and her fatherless Children.

That Captain James Dewy in the County of Dorset, before Conviction, seized
upon the estate of the Petitioners late husband, to the value of one thousand
pound, and converted the same to his own and the pretended Protectors use.

All which proceedings of the said Commissioners being against all Right, and
Justice, and (as the petitioner believes) against the Consciences and
Judgments of the Commissioners themselves (they being learned in the Laws) and
the Commission being only set on foot to maintain the Tyranny and Usurpation
of the said pretended Protector against his Sacred Majesty.

The Petitioner in all humility, prays that although she has no remedy at Law
by any appeal, against the said Commissioners, yet that the said Arbitrary and
Malicious Judgment, given by the said Commissioners, contrary to the known
Laws, may be condemned and reversed.

And to the end that the said commissioners may be made exemplary in this
punishment, She humbly prays, that the Offense of the said Commissioners may
be excepted out of the General Pardon and Oblivion:

And that her said Husbands estate may be restored by the said Dewy and others,
who seized the same, to the Petitioner and her Children.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. Arundell Penruddock.


