THE Spirit of Truth VINDICATED, Against That of Error and Envy; Unseasonably
Manifested: In a late Malicious LIBEL, Entitled, The Spirit of the Quakers
Tried, etc.

By a Friend to Righteousness and Peace, W. P.

Ever Learning, and never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth. But Evil
Men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3. 7, 13. But unto you that fear my Name, shall the Son of Righteousness
arise, with Healing in his Wings: And ye shall tread down the Wicked; for they
shall be Ashes under the Soles of your Feet, Mal. 4. 2, 3. Printed in the Year,
1672.

To the Impartial READER.
I Have at last, with some Difficulty obtained a small Respit, from more
serious Affairs, to the Examination of a late Discourse, entitled, The Spirit
of the Quakers tried, according to the Discovery it has made of it self in
their great Prophet and Patriarch, George Fox, etc. And whilst I was willing to
inform my self of the Design and Temper of the Author, by a very careful
perusal of his Book (at least, expecting something that might pretend to claim
a Reputation in Controversy, excelling all other of our Adversaries (who never
struck higher then at our Doctrines) whilst this man ventures to tell the World
what Spirits we are of) I find him in reallity filled with nothing, but
disingenious Reflection, empty Stories, and unprofitable Cavils, about a few
Scriptures, he mostly confesses, that but one of us has mis-cited, either in
reference to a disorderly Quotation of the words, or an unsuitable Application
of them.

The Judgment I then made of the Man, and still continue in, is this, Had he
not wonderfully loved being some body in Print, he needed not to have given
himself or other People the trouble of so many unserviceable Sheets; nor a
small trifling Solicitor for their kind reception in the World, the toil of so
much Insinuation, even to Nautiating. But I design not to be long, and
theresore shall briefly contract my Exceptions against the Author, to the
Reader, into these four Particulars.

1. Then, He has behaved himself the most unjust of any that ever yet
undertook to write against us; which so ill becomes a man that would reform
others, that it rather insenseth all worthy minds, and is Reason enough to
beget a Jealousy, both of the Truth of his Cause, and his own Honesty: For who
(truly Just) would draw a general Charge from a particular Failing (in case it
were so?) And what good Christian would stigmatize an entire Body for the
Defects of any individual Member?

He finds fault with George Fox, and to be revenged of him, bespatters a whole
Society; so that if I should grant him all he would have against that Person (
whom I doubt not to defend from his base Abuse) yet why he should place his
Infirmities (suppose them such) to our account, cannot be resolved me by any
that is not willing to suffer for other men's Faults.

George Fox he thinks has mis-cited a Scripture, Ergo -- He is an Imposter, and
the Quakers a pack of Heretics:

It is after this lofty manner of Disputing, he undertakes our Overthrow; but
if this be good arguing, the man is Orthodox with a witness, and deserves the
Chair, Nemine Contradicente.

2. My second Exception is, That if he had been provock't to any hard Thoughts
against George Fox, from the perusal of his Book, it had been handsome, and
well-becoming a Christian to have visited that so much mistaken Person (in his
account) and have endeavored, either a better understanding of him, or his
better Information in the Scripture; and not (at a juncture, when he might
understand him to be at so great a distance as America) to exhibit an angry
Charge against him in England. But his generosity here, is much like to his
Reason elsewhere.

3. But why, above all times of the World, does the man choose the present
season, to shower down his Displeasure against us; just when we should make the
best of an unexpected Tolleration, to the Refreshment of our afflicted Minds
and Bodies, by the late Persecutions that have been? What! Is he angry that we
have Liberty, or does he think that none deserve it but himself? I wonder what
Testimony there had been, or how few to have received a Liberty of Conscience,
if the Quakers had squared their Carriage in the Storm, according to his sorded
creeping into Holes and Corners, or else, to public places of Protection.

And if he tells us, that he had no mind to add to our Troubles, he deals
deceitfully: for as it is almost impossible for him to write against us, but he
must expressly or implicitly contradict the avowed Principles of the Church, by
his scattered Seeds of Socinianism, so knowing the Danger that would ensue such
undertakings, as well as the difficulty of Printing, his Self-safety, and not
Charity to us, was the Hindrance.

4. And Lastly, (...) why was he ashamed of his Name? (I cannot but make his
own words good by such an Inquiry ( without concluding him a Prophet) and great
Reason there is that we should ask him a Reason for it, if we may lawfully ask
that which his whole Discourse seems to character him a Stranger to; for since
he tells us, That he declines all ways of Controversy with us, but that of
matter of Fact; however able we may be to clear our selves from such
Indictments, yet our ignorance of his Name deprives us of that scope we might
otherwise have, for producing (perhaps) as large a Catalogue of Doctrinal
Mistakes, in what he himself, or those to whom he adheres have writ, as he has
of Verbal ones out of any Writings belonging to the People called Quakers. And
though he seems to excuse the absence of his Name, by that Occasion he pretends
we take to abuse our Adversaries: Yet the truest Reason is a Consciousness of a
disingenious and unjustifiable Practice in himself; perhaps he also was afraid
of such Truth as may be seasonably told of him, to the discrediting of his
Enterprise: But till he had been so served by us, it had become him not to have
reproach't us, in the vindication of other men, in whose Opinions he will by no
means allow himself to be concerned otherwise then to explode them for
Heretical: Thus the Man's for any Game; he cares not whom he defends, if he can
but have his End upon the Party he designs to mischief; sometimes he will be a
Churchman, against a Nonconformist, and back again; sometimes either, against
a Quaker; then for him, against them both; and lastly, a Socinian against them
all: His seeming Labors against us for common Principles, being but a plowing
our Backs with their Heifers, for the promotion of his Biddlean or Socinian
Cause; which Owl-light way of stabbing men, or deceiving People under the
Livery of every Persuasion (whilst for none of them) is very remote from being
either Christian or Manly; nor will the Righteous God of Heaven and Earth bless
or prosper such ignoble, clandestine Projects, and maskt Attempts, as what our
Adversary, and his small Cabal are plentifully guilty of.

It Is true, I cannot say all are equally concealed in their Endeavors against
us; for when the man has writ and printed his Book, there is a small Crier of
his, that like an Eager officious Broaker, runs too and fro to disperse it,
most commonly known by smelling; his Breath stinking of such foul Epethites as,
Knave, Puppy, Fool, Rascal, Loggerhead, Cheat; which with much more of the same
loathsome Sent he is pleased to bestow upon George Fox, as a necessary
Introduction to our Adversary's Confutation of his Book.

Certainly Reader, we have little Cause to esteem these men, the Restorers of
Paths to dwell in, Defenders of the true Religion, and Tryers of other men's
Spirits, who give such little Proof of the Knowledge of their own, as to be
wanting in the very Alphabet or first Principle of Common Civility.

But Reader, I will not longer detain thee in an Epistle, whatever variety of
matter I may have to invite me; hoping that the ensuing Discourse will
abundantly satisfy thee in those very things for which our Adversary thinks us
most unfit of all to be believed.

I have not given my self the common range that other Writers do; few caring to
buy, and fewer to read large Discourses; but as the Matter briefly and
naturally riz upon every Head, without any other artifice or dress, it is
presented to thee. I omit more then an Hundred Things, that would engage to
personal Reflection; for my Soul has no Pleasure in striving therein, as
knowing the inconsistancy of that uncharitable virulent Temper with a Christian
Spirit, which I am assured is quite another thing, from what is Verbose,
Abusive Cavelling, Airy, and merely Notional; which had our Adversary duly
considered, he would have found it more his true Interest to have lived in a
daily Subjection to the pure Grace that brings Salvation, and have kept his
mind diligently exercised therein, to the perfecting Holiness in the Fear of
the Lord, then thus to exalt himself against an inoffensive People; but I leave
all with God, whose Will be done; recommending thee ( Reader) to his holy
Witness in thy Conscience, to be by that alone Condemned or Justified in this
Apologetical Undertaking.

W. Penn.

READER,
THE Author's Absence from the Press, and that Difficulty, which otherwise
attends our Printing, have occasioned several Errors, as well in Words as
Letters, besides in many places a neglect of due Stops; a brief view of which,
is here presented to thee; and the common Courtesy in both Excusing and
Correcting them, is now desired and expected from thee.

Page, Line, Errors, Corrected 11 1 is are 14 obstruse abstruse 32 o to 13 17
ruin run 29 8 Contex Context 30 25 sense sense 30 into body into one Body 33 7
Paul Peter 37 28 and so, that as and so, as that 38 15 these those 39 19
neither either 52 17 faith far the 53 9 he be 54 9 the of the Light of 14 that
comes coming 15 the this 17 thaet comes coming 18 20 that comes coming 22 that
comes coming 60 8 as blot it out Page, Line, Error. Corrected 76 28 worldly
creaturely 78 35 what could what more could 79 21 Motions Notions 81 28 Eternal
External 32 or or as 83 38 our your 84 ^1 read fall 92 29 and blot it out 105
11 degree decr^e 114 7 says he he says 115 33 are were 126 6 scarce by
scarcely.

THE Spirit of Truth VINDICATED, Against That of Error and Envy; Unseasonably
Manifested: In a late Malicious LIBEL, Entitled, The Spirit of the Quakers
Tried, etc.
I Cannot but esteem it a peculiar Providence of Mercy from the Most High God,
to us his poor Despised People, though an Instance of great Unkindness in our
Adversary; that after our several years pressure, under the Heavy Calumnies of
being involved with a Socinian Confederacy, he should so suffer it to come to
pass, that without the least Provocation given on our parts, one of that sort
of men should become our Compurgator, indeed our best Advocate in pleading
against us; for whilst he goes about to detect the Quakers of an Erroneous
Spirit, it is to be supposed, that he denies them any share in his; and
therefore no Socinians. I hope whatever comes of this Debate, we shall no
longer suffer for being what we are not; it would be hard, that we should both
be condemned for Socinians, and then abused for refusing to be so: Let them not
be offended with me if I use the word; its not from any undervalue of the Man
they take it from, nor out of any Reproach to them; but only as a word of
Difference to distinguish Persons or Persuasions by.

And without any other Prologue or Introduction, I shall descend to the Book it
self.

. 1. First then, Tit. P. 1.
He is pleased to allow us, at least, a great many among us, To be
Honest-hearted, yet wonderfully deluded, and very Dangereus to the Christian
Religion. I confess it is no wonder, when men will make themselves Work, and
rather then want it, bestow their Cavils at the Truth it self, that they should
fall into strange and impertinent Contradiction; but that any man pretending so
highly to Reason and Religion should show so little Understanding in either, as
to conceive that a Man can be properly Honest-hearted, and yet Deluded, and
Dangerous to the Christian Religion; I confess is beyond my skill to reconcile.

I desire, God knows, to be the Honest-hearted Man, and let him take the rest
to himself: For that which reduces man ( fallen short of the Glory of God) to
an Honest Heart, and a Life good and Laudable, as our Adversary speaks of us,
must be the Grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, and not another thing;
and consequently, who has that, is not Deluded, nor Dangerous to the Christian
Religion.

. 2. If we Excel in all things, as he confesses; which is to say, page 1.
that there are but few things wherein we don't transcend all others; how
possibly can we be Dangerous and Dishonorable to the Christian Religion? Is
the Christian Religion among the few things, wherein we are supposed wanting,
which is the main thing of all? if so, What are the many?

. 3. It was ill done, and an Aggravation not only of his Uncharitableness and
Incivility, page 1, 2.
but his great Injustice and Deceit, to refuse us his Name, upon a Pretense of
avoiding a Subject for our Personal Reflection, whilst both his Beginning and
End is an entire Abuse against our Persons and Practices.

And what he owns Praiseworthy in us, is not because he would be honest to us;
but that he might by paying us our due in lesser matters, the more plausibly
Rob us of our Right to what is of more weighty Importance, namely, The true
Life and Doctrine of Christianity, which shows how little a share he has of
either.

. 4. Nor does he less then palpably belie us, in telling the World, page 2.
We condemn all Virtuous Persons whatsoever, if not of our own Persuasion;
since we never held nor defended any other then the Principle of Virtue (there
is none good but o^e, and that is God) and such as are in all circumspection
conformable to him, those we esteem our best Friends; our Controversy with the
World, not being about dark, obstruse, unprofitable Notions, nor Contests about
words; but men's being so rich in Profession, and so barren in Obedience; they
saying, They will go, and they do not; praying, Thy Will be done, and they
never set about to do it; which Will is their Sanctification, through the
Eternal Spirit, if they would but obey the Convincing Light thereof in their
own Consciences; since it was given, that all might be convinced of sin; and in
being converted and led by it, they might be adopted Children of God, and Heirs
of his Glory.

. 5. Christ's Person (which he prejudicially says we deny) is (strictly
considered) an Unscriptural Expression; page 2.
for that place which seems most to countenance such a way of speaking, viz. 2
Cor. 2. 10. is to be understood, and may and ought to be rendered, for Christ,
by Christ's Authority, instead of Christ, in Christ's Presence, on his account,
or the like: and it ill becomes a man to write against others for perverting of
Scriptures, whilst himself is manifestly guilty of the same Defect. We
reverently confess to Christ's Appearance, both in Flesh and Spirit; and when
called, ^o it, shall be as Ready, Hearty and Christian (God assisting) in our
Confession of the same, as to the Beginning, Progress and End of that Blessed
Manifestation, as the Person who accuses us. But we dare not say, That the
entire Christ was that visible Body that was crucified; as believing (with the
Scripture) most sincerely, That He that took upon him the Seed of Abraham
according to the Flesh, was, and is, and is to come, God over all blessed
forever: which Persuasion I know to be most Heritical in this Adversaries
Apprehension, and no part of his Biddlea^ Creed.

. 6. His Darkness, in reflecting upon our Heaven within us, denying us to have
a due regard to things above on Christ's Right Hand, page 2.
is as thick as Aegypt's; for if God's Presence makes the Heaven, as we have
been always taught, and all have believed and confessed; then, since God
vouchsafes to Temple and Tabernacle in men, it follows, that his Heaven is
there also: but certainly this conceited man fancies with sottish Reeve and
Muggleton, and the vain Anthropomorphites of old, That God's in the shape of a
Man, and that Heaven is a Visible Place to be lived in, bearing some
resemblance to this visible World; which characters him more Mahomaton then
Christian; otherwise he could never be so stupid or Malicious, as to conceive,
that because we assert a divine and heavenly Enjoyment of God's Presence within
us, therefore we deny Christ the Dignity of his Father's Right Hand above us,
or that there is no such thing as setting our Affections on things that are
above: What can be more dark and ignorant then this man's inference?

. 7. But he further tell us, That though we are much to be commended for our
Courage and Patience, page 2.
yet we are highly to be discommended for our Superstition and gross Ignorance.
I dare warrant, the man is highly opinionated of this fine gingling Phraise:
But its beyond the ken of his greater Knowledge (as he thinks) to vindicate his
own Expression from Folly and Inconsistence, as well as justify his Abuse of
us thereby: for I utterly deny, That any man can be much commendable for his
Religious Courage and Patience (Divine Gifts) and yet be superstitious, and
grossly ignorant; for the Day is not an effect of Light, more then Heat,
Passion, Persecution, Frowardness and Precipitation are the proper and Natural
fruits of superstition and gross Ignorance: But such as have done the Will of
God have need of Patience; Why? because it works Experience, and that Hope,
which makes not ashamed, nor afraid; the want of which made this man, with the
rest of his Serpentine Associates, creep and cringe to this and the other
conforming Chaplin (friendly to their Faith) as the Mountains and Rocks that
were only able to cover in the gloomy day of severe Inquisition after, and
Persecution upon the despised Quakers; this is the meaning of his following
words, Whereby you expose your selves in great part to those Labors and
Hazzards you undergo; to render which into better English, thus, That because
you will walk in an inconformable Way to the World, too severely press a
Christian Life, as that without which you deny all possibility of Salvation,
particularly in keeping your Meetings, not forsaking the assembling of your
selves together; and refusing to acquiess in the obedience of those Laws about
Oaths and Tithes; and sometimes going to bear a Sermon, to prevent
Excommunication, and the Brand of Phanaticism; or Separation, with the like
Convenient Prudent Actions; you do unnecessarily ruin your selves into
Sufferings, and bring upon you what you might with Christian Policy and
Discretion secure your selves from.

And if he denies my comment, I am able to prove it upon better terms, then he
can our Superstition and Ignorance: for with him and his Brethren to think
Practice more necessary then Notion, is want of Discretion; and to be Plain in
the Profession of our Faith, and Constant, is the Superstition and Headiness he
charge us with.

. 8. But he promises for the future to decline this way of proceed, page 2.
and withal, To avoid the use of both Scripture and Reason, in that our
Leading-men have so ordered the matter, that we refuse our Ear to the most
demonstative Arguments against us, and embrace the weakest Reason on our side.

I will not give him the Lie, but I hope he will not say I am Uncivil or
Unchristian, if I tell him, He has already contradicted himself, and broke his
word with us; for within Eight Lines, he that Premised To relinquish all
Personal Reflection, and proceed so his Business, in the next Sentence lays to
our Charge as great and as nnjustifiable a Crime, as what he left off with
before, by how much* it is worse to refuse Information when clearly given, then
to be so grossly ignorant as to need it: What fair Dealing we may expect from a
man not just to us, no not to himself Eight Lines together. let the sober
Reader judge.

. 9. But when did any of our Leading-men, as he is pleased to call them, refuse
this Idle Boaster, indeed a very Dreamer, such sober rational Conference, in
Public or Private, by Personal Discourse or Writing, as might be to
Edification? they were never the men that denied it on those terms, wherein it
might redound to such Christian Advantage, as should be principally aimed at in
the like Exercises.

. 10. And for accepting the weakest Reason that is on our side; I shall only
say, That so very grateful is the lowest degree of Reason to us, wheresoever we
find it, that we can no more deny it, or occasionally refuse our selves the use
of it, then the greatest, since its being so does not unreason it, or render it
no Reason in it self; though confessedly a less degree of Reason: nor is it
possible that the meanest Appearance of Reason can withstand the greatest,
since Reason always acknowledges and owneth her self, in what Degree soever
she meets: It is not Stature that makes a Man, nor Magnitude a Tree or Stone,
but the Nature and Property of each.

And truly we are well contented with our weak Reason (as he is pleased to call
it) we know it to be God's Light, Grace and Spirit of Truth; that since we gave
our Minds entirely to be governed and exercised by it, We have found that
Mortification of Sin and Corruption, that Renewing of Heavenly Divine Life,
that holy Courage and Patience, and it has brought us to so good an
Understanding of the Mysteries of God's Eternal Kingdom, and Assurance (as we
are faithful to the same) of Everlasting Blessedness; that it is beyond the
power of the rattling of these Leaves of Charge and Reproach to scare us from
our Standing, or beget the least Question in us concerning the certainty of
this Pure Unchangeable Way of God, in which we walk; but is invisible to his
vulterous Eye, who so disdainfully writes against it.

I had some hopes he had done with Personal Contest, at least, against the
Body; but I find him still in his Reflections, For whilst you look upon your
selves as led by an infallible Spirit (though it be indeed nothing but the
Fancy of G. Fox, or some other of your Teachers) you must needs reject the
clearest Light that God has given to Men (...) Angels, when it opposes your
Sentments.

Though he could scarce say any thing of us more disingenious and scurrilous,
rendering us such deluded Sots, and very Iddeots, as to captivate our own
Understandings (if he can think we had ever any) to the Dreams and Fancies of a
few illiterate men, under an Apprehension of being led, not by them; but an
Infalible Spirit: Yet since in this one Expression lies wrapped up, if not his
great undervalue of an Infallible Spirit, at least, his Disbelief of any such
thing, as the Guide of men, and his unworthy Reflection upon us in crediting
any such Doctrine, I am more then ordinarily engaged to state and vindicate
that one most necessary Doctrine, (viz.) Whether God's holy and Infallible
Spirit be the proper Rule of Faith, Judge of Controversies, and Guide of a
Christian Life, or any other thing: this I reckon as the main Hing on which all
turns, and I now make it my Post, by which in God's Strength I am resolved to
stand firm in its Defense, and that by Scripture and Reason; hoping, whatever
uncharitable Thoughts he entertains of us, that he is not so devoid of all
sense of either, as that they may not be used with advantage to him under his
present Ignorance and Presumption.

It Is true, this deserves an entire Discourse of it self, as that which above
all other Subjects disputed on in the whole World, deserves man's most weighty
Consideration; and if the Lord make way, it may be by some or other more
distinctly and at large han^ll^d another time, in a particular Tract; however,
I shall state, and briefly defend the Question, I hope to present satisfaction.

The Question Stated.
Whether God's Holy and Unerring Spirit ( for I am so Charitable as to think he
believes God's Spirit to be so) is, or should be the proper Judge of Truth,
Rule of Faith, and Guide of Life among men, especially under the Administration
of the Blessed Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, or not? I affirm
it, and proceed to prove it both by Scripture and Reason.

First, Genesis 6. 3. And the Lord said, My Spirit shall not always strive with
man, for that he also is Flesh; yet his days shall be an Hundred and Twenty
Years, etc.

If God's Unerring Spirit has been wont to strive with men, either to convince
them of, and convert them from the Evil of their Thoughts, words and Deeds; or
else, to provoke them yet more fully to do the Will of God, so as to press on
from one degree of Glory to another; then Men have had an Unerring Spirit to be
their Teacher, and Judge and Rule, and Guide of that Truth, concerning that
Faith, and in that most holy Way which leads to Eternal Life: But the Scripture
proves the first Proposition, That God's Spirit has frequently strove with men,
and for the Ends beforementioned; and consequently, they have not been without
an Holy Unerring Spirit to Teach, Judge, Regulate and Guide them.

Secondly, Neh. 9. 19, 20. Yet thou in thy manifold Mercies forsookest them not
in the Wilderness; the Pillar of the Cloud departed not from them by Day, to
lead them in the Way; neither the Pillar of Fire by Night, to show them Light,
and the Way wherein they should go.

Thou gave also thy good Spirit to instruct them, etc.

If under the Dispensation of the Law, God gave his good Spirit to instruct his
People, which is to say, that it should teach them, rule them, and guide them
in whatever was necessary for them to know or do; otherwise God's Spirit would
have been lame and defective in his holy Instruction (which far be it from any
sober man to affirm) then will it follow, that much more should the same
Eternal Spirit be poured out under the glorious Dispensation of the Gospel:
But, all that acknowledge the Divine Authority of the Scriptures must confess
to God's Goodness to his People in the outward Wilderness, in the free Gift of
his Eternal Spirit; therefore the Eternal Spirit was and is the Teacher, Judge,
Rule and Guide of his People now: besides, that state was but figurative of the
Mystical Travel of the true Church in the days of the Gospel; and how is God
so propitious now as then, if he be not as a Pillar of Cloud by Day, and of
Fire by Night, I mean Spiritually and Invisibly, so to illuminate his People
concerning the way he would have them to walk in.

Thirdly, Job 32. 8. Prove. 2. 6. But there is a Spirit in man, and the
Inspiration of the Almighty gives them Understanding.

For the Lord gives Wisdom; out of his Mouth comes Knowledge and
Understanding.

If the Spirit in man, be not of man, as the foregoing words show, and
therefore is that divine Spirit, by and from which comes the Inspiration of the
Almighty; and if the Understanding, he mostly intended, be of Divine and
Eternal Matters, as the whole Subject treated on in the preceding and
following Chapters, as well as that in which the words are, manifests; then is
it not from the strength of man's Reason, Memory, or utmost Creaturely* Ability,
that his Knowledge of Religious and Heavenly Things comes; but from the
Revelation and Discovery of the Inspiration of the Almighty? And if by such
Divine Inspirings it be that the Will of God comes to be understood, then
certainly must God's unerring Spirit be the Judge of what is God's Will from
what is not, and the Rule how and in what we ought to believe unto Salvation,
and that Guide which infallibly leads in the Way that is most acceptable with
the Lord. Nothing can be more Natural then these Consequences.

Fourthly, Psalm. 139. 7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I
flee from thy Presence.

If God's Unerring Spirit be so nigh, and the sense of it so certain, it must
either be to reprove for Evil done, or to inform, uphold, lead and preserve in
reference to all Good: Now in which of the two senses it shall be taken, the
Presence of God's Eternal Spirit, and his being the Saints Instructor, Judge,
Rule and Guide, are evidently deduceable from the words.

Fifthly, Psalm. 143. 10. Teach me to do thy Will; for thou art my God: thy
Spirit is good; lead me into the Land of Vprightness.

The Question will be, Whether it was David's intent, and the scope of his
desire, that God should teach and lead him by his good Spirit, or some other
thing; but methinks it is resolvable in the affirmative in two respects.

1. In that David is so very frequent in his desire to the Lord for the
Assistance, Strength, Teaching and Guidance of God's unerring Spirit; otherwise
declaring, how that the Word was hid in his Heart; and largly speaking of the
Force of that Internal Law, Word and Spirit of God, which plentifully shows,
how much he was an Enthusiast and Quaker in the sense this man esteems us most
hetrodox.

2. The very words imply the thing we urge them for, and can import no other
sense, viz. That God would please to teach him to do his Will, and lead him
into the Land of Vprightness by his good Spirit: else, what did that Claws do
there, the Unerring Spirit being that by which God vouchsafes to discover his
Divine Knowledge, and convey his most Spiritual Succor and Consolation to his
People? and consequently his Saints have ever known, but do more especially
under the Gospel, enjoy an infallible Judge, Rule and Guide in and about Faith
and Worship.

Sixthly, Isa. 30. 1. Woe to the Rebellious Children, says the Lord, that take
Counsel, but not of me; and that cover with a Covering, but not of my Spirit;
that they may add sin to sin.

From whence I plainly argue thus;

If they are Rebellious against God, and add sin to sin, who take not Counsel
of him, and are not covered with his Holy Unerring Spirit, that leads into all
Truth, Innocence, Patience, Faith, Hope, Charity, and every good Word and Work.
Then

1. God's Children have an Immediate Councellor, and need not another; and are
covered, or encompast about by the infallible Spirit of God to all Soundness of
Mind and Holiness of Life. And

2. They must be Heinous Offenders, and obstinately Rebellious, and Adders of
sin to sin with a witness, that not only neglect or refuse to be so counseled
and covered; but dispute fervently against it, as a mere Whimsie, and Effect of
an Ignorant Erroneous spirit; for besides that such deprive themselves and
others of the unspeakable benefit that comes thereby, they are most ungrateful
to God, and do certainly incur his fierce Wrath in their so wicked requital of
him for his Heavenly Gift.

Seventhly, Isa. 59. 21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the
Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my Words which I have put in thy Mouth,
shall not depart out of thy Mouth, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of
the Mouth of thy Seed's Seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and forever.

I think it is granted by all that own the Christian Religion, that this
remarkable place refers to Christ, the true Seed and Heir of promise, who
bruiseth the Head of the Serpent, in whom alone all Nations of them that
believe come to obtain the Blessing: But whether it will be allowed, or another
Interpretation allotted (as that the Promise was to the Church) to be sure here
is enough to maintain our Position, viz. That God, in the days of the Gospel
more particularly, has given his good Spirit for an Instructor, Judge, Rule and
Guide, in all that concerns the Eternal Well-being of the Souls of Believers,
as I proceed to prove.

If that very same Eternal, Holy and unerring Spirit, which God poured out upon
his only begotten Son, be in a way of succession ordained to continue with and
upon all the Faithful, his Seed, and Seed's Seed, begotten unto a lively Hope
by the raising of Christ Jesus from the dead, and so become Members of his own
Glorious Body, then are not the Children of God destitute of his Unerring
Spirit, not left to their own frail, and fallible Judgments, to determine of
what is Right or Wrong, what Men should believe, and what not, how they should
walk, and how not.

But so gracious is the Promise, and so certain is the performance (as we
livingly witness against all the dry cavelling Letter-m^ngers in the World (who
Quarrel about the holy-mens words, and are Strangers to the Convictions,
Judgments, Trials, Tribulations, Temptations and Travels they underwent, in
order to that knowledge they had (and which frets their serpentine natures,
whose vulterous Eye would in its unregenerate state of Worldly Wisdom, that
knows not God, fain (without the Death of the Cross) creep into the knowledge
of the mystery of the Resurrection, which state alone knows the things that are
above, at the Right Hand of God.)

Therefore I conclude, That God's Unerring Spirit under the Gospel, does
attend, assist, direct, and finally establish his Children in the Way of Truth;
and that his so doing is but the Answer or Accomplishment of the most eminent
Prophesies, referring to the Transcendent Glory of the last Ages of the Church.

Eighthly, Ezekiel. 36. 27. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to
walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments, and do them.

Behold a most pregnant Instance in the express Language of the Holy Ghost,
brought to the proof of our Assertion, that (with reverence we would say it)
scarcely could it have been more exactly and emphatically worded, as I proceed
to show.

1. That this Passage has a relation to the Times of Reformation, or Coming of
the Messiah, and Days of the Gospel Covenant; read the whole Chapter. I know
not that it was ever doubted, or otherwise taken by any, no not the very
Rabbis themselves, who from such places have observed the coming of a Messiah,
and Glorious times that would ensue.

2. That if it be granted, then the Unerring Spirit of God was to be placed
within the Hearts and Consciences of his People, and consequently they could
not be properly and truly under the new Covenant; and be without it, since the
having of that Eternal Spirit for the Ends and Purposes aforementioned, is the
very Badge, Condition, and Mark of the New and Last Covenant.

3. It seems to be the means under the Gospel, by which God causes his Children
to keep his Statutes, etc. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to
walk in my Statutes; and ye shall keep my Judgments, and do them.

To conclude (to speak strictly) If in the days of the second Covenant, which
began from Christ's visible Appearance, God put his Spirit within his People,
as says the Apostle to the Hebrews, and that it was thereby he did and does
cause them to walk in his Statutes and keep his Judgments; then God's Children
are not without an Infallible Teacher and Leader in the Things that appertain
to their Eternal Salvation: But we plainly see and read from the very Letter of
the Scriptures, that God gives his Spirit; or Light within, to Judge, Lead and
Guide; and consequently, the opposite Doctrine is both false and very
pernicious. I might further argue thus, That if God's Unerring Spirit only
enables men to walk in his Statutes, and keep his Judgments to do them, then
since all are required to walk therein, none are exempted from a sufficient
measure of that Unerring Spirit in order to it. Much might be argued hereon,
but this shall suffice.

Ninthly, Joel 2. 28, 29. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour
out my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy,
your Old Men shall dream Dreams, your Young Men shall see Visions: And also
upon the Servants and upon the Handmaids in those days will I pour out my
Spirit.

That this is generally believed, and frequently quoted as a Proof of
Gospel Times, is well known to most who are inquisitive after Matters of
Religion, and how hard it bears upon the Anti-spiritual Opinion of our
cavelling Adversary, though very evident; yet we shall further proceed to show,

1. Here is God's Royal Engagement, to effuse or pour forth of his blessed
Spirit in the days of the New Covenant.

2. Here is on whom it is to be poured forth, expressed in two words, ALL FLESH;
in more words, Young and Old, Men and Women, Masters, Mistresses, and Servants:
Mark the Universality of God's Mercy and Grace. Now from hence I argue,

If God's Unerring Spirit be to be poured out on all under the New Covenant,
and that this is the time thereof, then has God poured out of his Unerring
Spirit, as aforesaid; that the Spirit is to be poured out under the
Administration of the Gospel the Text proves; that this is the Time he himself
confesses, page 1, 12, 13, 45. therefore the Conclusion is undeniable, viz.
That God has poured forth of his Holy and Unerring Spirit.

Again, If the Spirit of God is that, without which none can obtain Prophecy
and Vision, and that Prophecy and Vision are Christian-Church Gifts, then,
since the Church of Christ is not to be without Prophesies and Vision to the
End of the World; it follows, she cannot be without an infallible Spirit to the
end of the World.

Or thus, If without having the Spirit none can have Prophecy and Vision, and
that Prophecy and Vision are both to be and to continue in Christ's Church
universally; then it will naturally follow, that she cannot be without that
Unerring Spirit; and that such as are, cannot in that state be Members of the
true Church; then consequently Heretics, as concerning the true Faith.

Tenthly, Hag. 2. 5. According to the Word that I Covenanted with you when ye
came out of Egypt, so my Spirit remains among you, fear not.

This place does very emphatically prove my Assertion, concerning the Judgship
and Guidance of God's Spirit, two things seem clear.

1. That it was a part of God's Old Covenant, to wit, That his Spirit should
remain amongst them.

2. That the Spirit's so remaining was to some eminent Service; for said the
Lord, Fear not; as much as to say, don't faint in your Minds, concerning the
Work you have to do, neither be ye filled with Doubts or Scruples, who shall
inform us, who direct us, or we want a Leader in this difficult matter, some
one to remove our Objections and Fears, and to preside or be as Judge among us,
how to order and regulate us to the doing of the Service expected from us; for
thus says the Lord, My Spirit remains among you, fear not; He is sufficient
for you, He shall teach and counsel you, repair to Him, advise with him, and
you shall be supplied with all things necessary for you: Don't rebel against my
Good Spirit, and you are safe; it shall be well with you. In short,

If it was a Condition of the Old Covenant, That God should accompany his then
Children with the Assistance and Presence of his good Spirit, and accordingly
he testified by his Prophet, That his holy Spirit remained among them, then
much more reasonable it is to believe, that the Presence of that Eternal Spirit
should continually accompany his Children under the New and Last Testament: The
first part the Place proves, the second is made good by the plain import of the
following Prophetic verses, where he says, I will shake all Nations, and the
Desire of all Nations shall come: And I will fill this House with Glory; and
the Glory of this latter House shall be greater then of the former, says the
Lord of Hosts.

How then can it possibly be, That God's Evangelical House and Tabernacle
should be a dry, empty, barren erroneous man, always enquiring, but never come
to the infallible Knowledge of the only True God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent, whom to know by the Revelation of the Eternal Spirit is Life Everlasting?

Nay, who so great, who so pernicious Enemies to the transcendent Glory of the
latter House, and Temple of God, as the cavelling Anti-spiritual Men of our
Age, who are so angry with those that own a Conviction, Faith and Worship
grounded upon an Infallible Inspiration, that their Rage leads them (because
they feel it not) to the utter denying of any such things: but I will assure
them, they shall yet grope in the dark, till they come into the daily obedience
of the Light, and there rest contented to know only as they experience; and not
from a ravening comprehending Brain, that would, in its unregenerated state,
grasp at the clear Mysteries of the Kingdom; into which, fleshly Comprehensions
and Notions can never enter: but all must be as unlearned from their first
Birth, Education and traditional read Knowledge, as he is unmanned, that is,
again become a little Child, before the Secrets of God's Work come to be made
known; therefore said our Lord Jesus Christ, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the Prudent, and
revealed them unto Babes.

Eleaventhly; John 3. 5. Jesus answered, Verily, verily I say unto thee, Except
a man be born of Water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God.

This most weighty Scripture, containing the very Work of Regeneration, and,
sine qua non, or that only certain Means, Condition and Requisite, without which
there can be no obtaining of Eternal Life and Salvation; requires our best
notice and consideration: in order to which I shall divide the place into these
two Heads, and briefly raise my Argument thereon.

1. Christ's most positive exclusion of all from any Portion in God's Kingdom
who were not born again (in answer to Nicodemus, his carnal Conceit of the
impossibility of an old man's entering a second time into his Mothers Womb.)

2. That the Birth which all such as would inhererit God's Kingdom, should be
Witnesses of, was and is the Birth of Water and the Spirit; upon which I thus
proceed to argue,

If none can Inherit God's Holy Kingdom, but those who are regenerated of Water
and the Spirit, then none can inherit God's Holy Kingdom, but such as are
cleansed by Water, and taught, led and guided by God's Holy Spirit.

The first none can deny that own the Scripture, it being but a part of the
very verse quoted; the second I evidently prove thus.

If Water and Spirit be the only operative to Regeneration, and Regeneration
the alone Way to the Kingdom of God, then can no man inherit God's Kingdom,
that is not regenerated; neither can any man be regenerated, that is not washed
by the Water of Life, begotten, work't, formed, inspired and acted by that
Eternal Spirit to Newness of Life.

That to be begotten, is to be principally guided and acted by that by which
any is so begotten, I prove.

No man can live, move, sensate or act but from the original Heat, Life, Motion
and Action of that which did beget him; because the Nature of that which
begets, being conveyed to the begotten, truly renders him begotten, or else
there were no such thing: but every regenerate man is the Begotten of the
Eternal Spirit, so far as concerns his Renovation or Regeneration; therefore
every such regenerated man was and is led, motion'd and acted by that Eternal
Spirit which begot him; and consequently, the Saints which are the regenerated,
are not left destitute of an infallible Teacher, Judge, Rule and Guide amongst
them.

In short, We look upon being born of Water and the Spirit to be, Our being
cleansed from all filthiness, and quickened, informed, ruled and guided by the
most pure and perfect Dictates and Operations of God's Eternal Spirit: And how
a Regenerated man can be made or continue such, without the daily Guidance of
that Infallible Spirit, and the Scriptures kept clear from the Reflection of
Contradiction, if not gross Error, is a Riddle too hard for me to explain, and
a Task I may without Presumption say too great for our trifling Antagonist to
perform.

Twelfthly, John 14. 16, 17, 18, 20. and 16. 13. And I will pray the Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you forever:
Even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it sees Him
not, neither knows Him; but ye know him; for he dwells with you, and shall
be in you. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you; at that day ye
shall know, that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you.

Again, Howbeit, when he the Spirit of Truth is come, be will guide you into
all Truth.

Upon these Divine Passages, thus particularly expressed by the Holy Ghost, I
offer these short Arguments.

1. If the Spirit of Truth, or most infallible Spirit, be God's Gift to his
Servants, in Gospel times, to abide with them forever; then are they
accompanied with an infallible Spirit: but we see the plain Text proves, that
God gives his Spirit of Truth to his Servants, that they might be assisted in
all their Wants; and therefore they are not without such an infallible Spirit.
And our Adversary is more to blame to reflect upon the Guidance of an
infallible Spirit, which is so consonant with the express Letter of a multitude
of Scripture Passages, then we are because we credit G. F. upon Conviction.

And if he tells us, That unless we believe what our Eyes see of Contradictions
(as he pretends) by him collected out of G. F's Book, that he will not believe
whatever we shall say or affirm; we may on much better Grounds conclude, never
to believe what he asserts, and wholly to decline writing or speaking to him (to
use his own words) if hereafter he will dare to continue in the belief of so
Anti-scriptural and Anti-gospel an Apprehension, as that there is no infallible
Spirit to guide men in the Way of Salvation; which is as express and evident
from many naked Texts of Scripture, as that God is Truth; else never did any
Writing more delude Mankind, because none could be more particular and plain in
the Promise and allowance of it: But let God and his written Will be true, and
our Vnspiritual Adversary in his confessed Fallible Judgment of us a very Liar.

2. If the not seeing and knowing of the Spirit of Truth be the Reason rendered
by our Lord Jesus, why the World receives it not, then may we most justly
infer, that they never saw it, neither know it; but are of the World, who
cannot receive it, but write against it, in reference to its greatest Office (
viz.) Of being the Saints Teacher, Leader and Comforter. And indeed, because
the Spirit is not some visible elementary thing, that may be seen by their
outward Eyes, and be comprehended by their dark confused and disputative Brains
(which is contrary to the Decree and Way of God's manifesting of his Will from
the conviction of the least sin, to the enjoyment of the highest Glory)
therefore they dis-regard it as contemptible, and dis-believe it as incredible.

3. If the Ground of the Saints Knowledge of that Infallible Spirit, be the
Spirit's inhabiting them (for, He dwells with you, and shall be in you) then
were they not without that Spirit; and consequently they were attended with an
infallible Guide within them.

4. If the Lord Jesus would not leave them comfortless, but though visibly
withdrawn, yet in a more Spiritual and Invisible manner would come to them
again; and that at that day they should know, that He was in his Father, they
in Him, and He in them: Then were his Servants not destitute of an infallible
Judge, Leader and Guide, because they had Him that was the Way, Truth and Life,
to whom all Power and Judgment were committed.

5. If both the Spirit of Truth was promised to come, and when come, to guide
into all Truth; that is to say, that whateve they scrupled, were ignorant in,
or ought to know and practicer with what they were obliged to reject and
testify against, should, be by that Eternal Spirit discovered unto them; then
undoubtedly they were not without an infallible Spirit, to Judge, Regulate and
Guide them, in all that concerned Faith, Worship and Conversation: but the
first Proposition is purely Scriptural, and therefore the consequent not
deniable by such as own the Divine Truths contained in those Writings.

Nor is the dint of this to be avoided by saying, That these Promises were only
to the Apostles, and no body denies them to have had all this; for if we are to
walk, as having them for our Examples, we are to have the like Sufficiency and
Guide. Nor does Christ leave the matter there; for in his most solemn Prayer to
his Father he thus speaks, Neither Pray I for these alone, but for all them
that shall believe on me through their word, that they all may be one, as thou
Father art in me, and I in thee, that they all may be one in us: which how it
is possible for those who then believed, and us of after Generations to be,
without being born of, and baptized and drunk into the same one Eternal Spirit,
I know not to believe, neither can any man that gives himself the use of his
own Understanding.

Thirteenth, Romans 8. 1, 9, 14. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit;
but you are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of
God dwell in you: now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.

1. If to be brought and kept out of Condemnation, men must walk according to
the Leadings and Guidings of the Spirit of God, and that it is a state unto
which Christian men should come, then are they not without God's Infallible
Spirit to lead and direct them in what Way they ought to walk, and
consequently, the contrary Opinion is perniciously false; since such must needs
live ever under Condemnation, who are so far from walking after the Leadings of
God's unerring Spirit, that they deny men to have any such thing. Again,

2. If to have the Spirit of Christ dwelling (that is, ruling) in us, be to
live no more after the Flesh; and not to have that infallible Spirit of Christ
ruling in us, be to be none of Christ's; then both Christian men should not be
without Christ's Spirit dwelling in them; and such as are without that Spirit
are none of Christ's: But we plainly see, that the Apostle asserts, That every
man that walks not after the Flesh, has that Spirit dwelling in him, and is
guided thereby; and that such as have not the holy Spirit of Christ, are none
of Christ's; therefore it follows, That Christian men are led by an Infallible
Spirit. But

3. If as many as are led by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God, as says
the Apostle, then both God's Children are led by an Infallible Spirit, and such
as are not we utterly deny to have any part or portion in Him, notwithstanding
their Praying, Preaching, Writing, Reading and Disputing: but the plain
unaltered words of Scripture testify, that both God has given his good Spirit
to lead men into that holy Life, Nature and Conversation, by which they truly
become his Image and Children; and that such (and we may say, only such) are
his own begotten Children, and Heirs of Eternal Glory.

Fourteenth, 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11, 12, 14, 15. But God has revealed them unto us
by his Spirit; for the Spirit teaches all things, yea, the deep things of God.

For what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man, which is
in him; even so the Things of God know no man but the Spirit of God.

Now we have received not the spirit of this World, but the Spirit which is of
God, that we might know the Things that are freely given to us of God.

But the Natural man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God; for they
are Foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually disc^^ued.

But he that is Spiritual judges ( or discerns) all things, yet he himself
is judged ( or discerned) of no man.

Methinks the bare recital of these pathetical Sayings of the holy Ghost on the
matter in controversy might be sufficient Proof for the affirmative of the
Question, did not our Adversary under all his Pretenses of honoring the
Scriptures, either implicitly deny them their just Authority, or by false
Glosses disguise and pervert them to his sinister Persuasions; and so I
proceed, as before, to offer my Arguments upon them.

1. If the Blessed Things which God has prepared for them that love him, are
not revealable, but by his Spirit, and were then thereby revealed, as says the
Scripture quoted, and contex; then since there were those at that time who
loved God, and that there be many now who love God, it will Naturally follow,
That both than and now, the Things that God has laid up for such, both then
were and now are revealed by His Eternal Spirit; and consequently, God's People
are not without a familiar Communion with the Holy Spirit of God.

2. If the spirit of a man, or humane intelligent spirit, be that by which man
comes to an understanding of those things that strictly and properly concern
him in an humane capacity; and that the Spirit of God is that only by which man
comes to know the Things of God, because the Things of God knows no man but
the Spirit of God; then it is utterly Impossible for our Adversary himself, or
any else to obtain the Knowledge of the things of God, or His Kingdom, but by
the pure unmixt Revelation of God's Eternal Spirit, from all the
Comprehensions, Conceivings, or Imaginations of man's utmost strength or science
(For ( as says the Apostle) the Spirit searches all things, yea, the deep
things of God.)

3. If the Knowledge of those things that are fecely given of God, is only to
be had from the Revelation of his holy Spirit; then since in every Age from the
most primitive Times, it has behoved every Christian man to understand those
Good and Heavenly Things, it follows, That it has behoved them, and still does
all, to wait for the Knowledge and Enjoyment of those Blessed Advantages which
only are revealed by the Eternal Spirit: And is not that Science infallible?
which the Spirit of this World ever was, and will be a Stranger too, under all
its disguised Shows of Religious Worship, with which it has deceitfully adorned
it self, in a way of Scorn of and Opposition to the most Spiritual Appearances
of God, making good the Apostle's saying, For they are but Foolishness unto
them. To conclude,

4. If the Spiritual Man, or that Man in whom dwells the Spirit of God, and
who is led by it discerns and judges all things, and is not judged, or
cannot be seen or discerned (he being in the Light, and the natural man in the
dark) then is or should God's Holy Spirit be the right Judge, Leader and Guide
of all, because it alone gives true Discerning, sound Judgment, and leads in
the Path of Life Eternal: for it searches the deep things of God, which all
Natural Understanding can never fathom, because they are Spiritually to be
discerned.

Fifteenth, 1 Cor. 6. 19. What? Know ye not that your Body is the Temple of the
Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God? and ye are not your own.

The Apostle treating of the great nearness that every Believer stands in to
the Lord, and that Blessed Union which the Dispensation of the Gospel brings
to, by the putting away the Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and the Answer of a
good Conscience before God; in winding up this subject he thus smartly, and as
if his Query were enough to clear up all that he had to say to them, as to
their Duty, and his Exhortation; What? know ye not that your Body is the Temple
of the Holy Ghost, which is in you: From whence I draw this Argument,

If Believers be the Temple, in which the Holy Ghost dwells, as evidently
speaks the Scripture, then are they not left without an Infalible Spirit, as
Judge, Rule and Guide to repair to; but it is apparent to sense, that the holy
Ghost is by the Apostle affirmed to inhabit, or take up his abode in believers;
therefore they must needs be attended with an iufallible Spirit; and for what?
if not the End beforementioned.

Sixteenth, 1 Cor. 12, 13. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into Body,
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be Bond or Free; and have been all
made to drink into one Spirit.

By which Divine Sense of the Apostle, we cannot but allow, that if they were
both baptized by one Spirit, into one Body, and made to drink into the same
Spirit, that the Saints were not without an Infallible Spirit; since such
Baptizing and Drinking do emphatically imply the whole Work of the Spirit in
their Regeneration, and their daily Union with, and intimate Enjoyment of it
the whole course of their lives. And certainly, If by that Eternal Spirit they
were baptized ito that one Body Christ, It was as impossible for them, as
Members thereof, to live without the Life, Virtue and Spirit of Christ Jesus
their Head, as for any natural Body to live without the same Life, Blood, Heat
and Motion, which belongs to its Head. And how this man can be esteemed a good
Christian, who would render Christ Jesus the Head of a Fallible Body, by
divesting Christians of an Infallible Spirit, I leave to Persons of better
Judgment, more Honesty, and greater Moderation then himself to judge.

Seventeenth, 2 Cor. 3. 18. But we all with open Face, beholding as in a Glass
the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory,
even as by the Spirit of the Lord.

This whole Chapter is an admirable account of the Super-Excellency of the
Gospel Administration of Life, to that of the Law, how far it did transcend it,
as to all spiritual Knowledge, Privilege and Enjoyment, which I desire the
Reader seriously to read, as well as to consider what is offered from the Verse
cited.

If a Christian's Change into God's Image, from Glory to Glory, be the Work of
the Eternal Spirit in men, it follows necessarily, That Christians can no more
be without the Discoveries, Leadings and Orderings of God's Spirit, then they
can be his Children without his Image (since whatever they think, say or do, in
reference to Religion, should bear a near Relation to that resemblance of God,
which above all things they ought to act correspondently with) but we see how
very expressly and profoundly the Apostle describes the exceeding Blessedness of
the New Covenant, namely, A being changed into the Image of God, from Glory to
Glory; not by our own Notions or Comprehensions, from the strength of our
natural Reason, or any Book without us; but by the Spirit of the Lord operating
in us: therefore God's Children are not without an infallible Spirit, unless he
should deny God's Spirit to be such, which methinks I cannot believe him to do.

Gal. 3. 3. Are ye so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, are ye now made
perfect in the Flesh?

If Christians are both to begin and end in the Spirit, or if a Christian
throughout the whole course of his Life, from the first step or measure to the
fullness and perfection of his stature, is to be informed, regulated and guided
by the infallible Spirit of God, as the Apostle's Reproof of the Galatians, for
their declining to be ordered thereby, evidently proves; then Christians ought
to begin and end in the Strength, Knowledge, Wisdom and Guidance of an
Infallible Spirit; and consequently, that Doctrine which denies such an
Unerring Spirit to be the Judge, Rule and Guide of Christians, is Antichristian.

Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into
your Hearts.

If God sends forth his Spirit into the Hearts of his Children, then are they
not without an Infallible Spirit; but the express Letter of the Scripture
affirms it: and consequently, our Adversary's Reflection upon us, for making it
part of our Belief, is unsound, and condemnable.

Gal. 5. 16, 18. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill
the Lust of the Flesh.

They that walk by the Spirit, must first have it; and next, be led by it: but
the Apostle exhorted the Church so to walk; therefore the Church had, and
Christians have the Spirit, and should walk in or by it; that is, according to
the Motions, Leadings and Rule of ^it.

Ephesians. 1. 17. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may
give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of Him

If the Heavenly Wisdom, and Revelation in the Knowledge of God, be through the
Spirit; then, as without Revelation, there is no Knowledge of God, so without
the Spirit there is no divine Wisdom and Revelation: And if the Church was
attended with that Wisdom and Revelation, then with that Spirit from whence
they came; and consequently Christ's Church is not without that Eternal
Unerring Spirit; as says the Apostle in the 5th Chapter, Be not Drunk with
Wine, wherein is Excess; but be filled with the Spirit: which signifies the
Apostles mind to be quite another thing, from the Judgment of our Adversary,
who thinks, All men ought to be empty of it; esteeming such as are filled
therewith, as the Jews did Paul, Drunk with New Wine.

1 These. 15, 19. Quench not the Spirit.

If those could not quench the Spirit, who had it not, then those to whom he
gave that Caution had the Spirit, consequently the Primitive Churches were not
without an Unerring Spirit; because they were not without the Spirit of God,
which is Unerring.

1 John 2. 27. But the Anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you;
and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you
of all things, and is Truth, and is no Lie; and even as it has taught you, ye
shall abide in him.

If the Judge of Truth from Falsehood, the Rule of what ought to be received and
embraced, and the Guide of Life, be the Anointing, which none denies (that I
know of) to be the Spirit of God; then both the only way to be taught all
things necessary to be believed and performed, is the Anointing, and that
Anointing is in Believers respectively; but the Scripture so asserts: And
consequently, the right Christian is not without that Infallible Spirit, to
teach and lead him into all Truth.

1 John 3. 24. And he that keeps his Commandments dwells in him, and he in
him; and hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has
given us.

If the Union betwixt Christ and his Children be, that they dwell in him, and
he in them; and that they thereby know it, by the Spirit that he has given
them; which implies, that they had the Unerring Spirit of Christ: then true
Believers are not without Christ and his Spirit dwelling in them, to Guide,
Rule, and Instruct them in all things necessary to Eternal Life and Salvation:
He that denies the first, denies the Scripture; and he that rejects the second
Proposition, had as good deny, that Day is an Effect of Light.

Jude 19, 20. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the
Spirit. But ye beloved, building up your selves on your most holy Faith,
praying in the Holy Ghost, etc.

If such as have not the Spirit are sensual, then, because the true Children of
God are not sensual, it follows, that they have the Spirit; and that those who
have it not, are not the Children of God, because such are sensual.

This the Apostle further manifests to be his mind, because, leaving the
sensualists, he addresses himself to the Sanctified of God, exhorting them, To
build up one another on their most holy Faith, Praying in the Holy Ghost: which
shows, that they performed their Worship to God in the Motion of the Eternal
Spirit; and consequently, they could not be destitute of an Unerring Spirit in
what concerned them, either toward God or Men.

Thus have I briefly run through the Scriptures of Truth, and doubt not but I
have made it appear, That God has afforded his People in all Ages such a
measure of his Eternal Spirit, as has been sufficient to Inform, Rule and
Guide them, infallibly, in and about those things which are absolutely
necessary to be known or done unto Eternal Life.

It remains, That I evidence the Truth of my Assertion by Reason also, which I
shall endeavor with what convenient brevity I can.

That Christian Men have an Infallible Principle to Judge, Rule, and Guide
them, I prove by REASON
First, I Shall take it for granted, That no man, whom either Education or
Conviction gives to believe there is a God, can be so unreasonable as to t^ink,
That any man may be farther able to understand what this God is, and his Divine
Pleasure concerning him, then the same is discovered to him by some external or
internal Operation from the same infinite Being: this then must either be by
the visible Creation, or that invisible Taste or Relish the Soul has by virtue
of the divine Touches, Influences and Discoveries, that the Almighty Invisible
God is pleased to approach his Creatures by, as the next clearest way to
communicate unto them the knowledge of himself.

Secondly, And as I know not any, who professes Religion, that makes the least
scruple of this; so how is it possible, that such Discoveries as God himself is
pleased to make, should be fallible, or subject to any Defect in themselves;
for, were that admitted (as must be, upon the Principles of our Adversary) then
must we conclude an Imperfect Knowledge; nay, an uncertain (not to say
Erroneous) Knowledge of, and Faith in God, to be from God's own defective
Manifestations of himself, which however truly deduced from his Positions, is a
most Unworthy and False Reflection upon the Mercy and Goodness of God.

Thirdly, There is an absolute necessity, That what it is convenient for man to
know, should be certainly and infallibly discovered to him, because of that
great Corruption, Idolatry and Superstition, which through that misty and
uncertain Prospect they say man has of the Divine Will, he may be subject to
fall into; and like the vain Worshippers of old, conceit an Ape, Serpent or
Crockedell to be a Deity, or some other Beeings, or Fancies; though less gross,
yet too gross for a Christian man.

Fourthly, Upon our Adversary's Principles, there can be no assured Ground of
Comfort; for when a man shall think he has workt out his Salvation in the Way
he Conceives most acceptable with God, perhaps he has followed an Erroneous
Judgment, and Unsubject Affection; and when Repentance may be too late, he is
to be fob'd off with such an Award as this, You had no Infallible Knowledge,
and having lived in an Erroneous sense of your own, you must inherit the
Displeasure that follows: thereby making well or ill, believing or doing, a
mere Lottery, or doing of things by Chance, and not from any certain knowledge
in themselves of what God required of them: A Conceit worthy to be disdained by
every sober man.

Fifthly, And were I as our Adversary, I would never beat my Brain about what
is true or false, since upon his Principles, when Truth meets me, I know her
not from Error; and after I should have writ Volums, I am as certain of the
Truth of what I oppose, as of what I assert: so that the Quakers may be in the
right for ought he knows; nor have they any certain grounds from him on which
to alter, or believe the contrary.

Sixthly, Nor does this Opinion of our Adversary ( that there is no such thing,
as man's being now led by an infallible Spirit) end there; for it rendereth the
Almighty more injust then the worst of men; since first he seems to offer men
the clearest Discoveries of so much of his Will as he requires them to live
conformable unto; yet, means nothing less, by leaving Mankind to labor under
the perplexity of an uncertain Knowledge: And secondly, Concludes him,
notwithstanding under the greatest certainty of eternal Punishment.

Methinks then, If these things seem unreasonable (though the genuine Effects
of a fallible Guide) our Adversary should by this time think it fit to allow us,

1. That God cannot be known, but by the Discoveries he makes of himself
through his Eternal Power and Spirit unto Mankind.

2. That though such Discoveries may be imperfect in Degree, yet not in kind.

3. That such Revelation, Discovery or Instruction is infallibly true, and that
there is nothing wanting on God's part, to accommodate man with a Spiritual,
Certain, Infallible Discovery and Knowledge of Almighty God his Creator; and
therefore man has to rectify and assist his fallible Judgment, an Unerring,
Certain, Infallible Spirit, Power or Principle, which as man listens unto it,
and follows it, his Understanding becomes illuminated, his Reason purified, and
a sound Judgment restored; and in all things is he made a fit Tabernacle for
the Glorious God to live in: Thus is he King of Saints, and will he be King of
Nations, who is God over all Heaven and Earth, blessed forever, Amen.

There be two Objections, which I foresee may be made by some to the way I
have taken to prove, That a Christians Judge, Rule and Guide is the Unerring
Spirit of God; whom I shall endeavor to answer.

Obj. 1. Though you have said a great deal to prove, that Christians should
have an Infallible Spirit in general; yet you prove nothing distinctly; but
confound a Judge, Rule and Guide together. To which I answer,

Answ. 1. That to me there is no more difference, then essentially there can be
in the Wisdom, Justice and Holiness of God which are but so many words, that
agree to express the Perfection of one and the same Being; and so that as the
one cannot be without the other; but the same Eternal Godhead is all, and that
in all: for he is truly Wise, in being Just, and both, in being Holy; and back
again, they are so interwoven, that the one goes not without the other; thus it
is in being a Judge, Rule and Guide: for that which gives me a right Sense or
Judgment of Truth from Error, is as well to me a Rule, what I should believe,
or dis-believe; and a Guide, what I should practice, or not practice; as at
first it was my Judge, of what was Truth from what was Error. So that the same
Informing Convincing Spirit, is that Ruling and Guiding Spirit (and not a
dristinct Spirit, or medium) by which such as are convinced through the
Illumination and Reproof of it, are to be ruled and guided in all they believe
and practice, about Matters relating to God and his Worship.

Obj. 2. But at this rate, you utterly contemn and seclude the Scriptures, as
having no Part nor Portion in being a Judge, Rule or Guide to Christians.

Answ. 2. By no means; for though we acknowledge it to be our Principle, That
the Eternal Spirit, who in several Generations has revealed a great part of
the things contained in the Scriptures to be superior to these Writings; yet
far be it from us forever, to deny the absolute necessity of our Conformity to
such weighty Christian Truths and Principles, as are therein expressed, and
urged upon the Churches, as what are indispensable to eternal Salvation: So
that we plead not, that the Spirit of God should be a Judge, Rule and Guide
contrary to the Truth declared in Scripture, nor yet exclusive of the
Scripture; but as the holy men of old time were ordered, ruled and guided by
that Eternal Spirit, in reference to those weighty things, which the Prophets
and Apostles were moved to exhort those of that time to press after: so that it
is impossible for men now to come into a right Christian-frame, and keep
therein, but by the Spirit's being their Judge, Rule, and Guide, as he was to
the Ancients, who trusted in God, and obtained a good Report.

In short, The Scripture is much like the shadow of the true Rule, which may
give us some ground to guess what the Rule it self is; as a Card, or Map of a
Country, how it lies, yet not be the very Place it self: and in this respect it
may be a kind of secondary Rule, carrying with it a Testimonial Confirmation,
that what we are led by is the TRUE SPIRIT, because the People of God in old
time enjoyed the same, as the Eternal Spirit first of all confirms the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures unquestionably to us, That they are a Declaration
of the Will and Pleasure of Almighty God to the Sons of Men in several Ages of
the World.

He that is so inward with a Prince, as to know, viva voce, what his mind is,
heeds not so much the same when he meets it in Print (because in Print) as
because he has received a more living Touch and sensible Impression from the
Prince himself, to whose Secrets he is privy. And this the Scriptures teach us
to believe is a right Christian's State and Privilege; for said the Apostle,
We have the Mind of Christ; and the Secrets of God are with them that fear Him;
and guide me by thy Counsel, and bring me to thy Glory.

To Conclude; The Scriptures we own, and the Divine Truths therein contained,
we reverence and esteem, as the Mind and Will of God to men; and we believe
that they ought to be conformed to, according to the true intent of the Holy
Spirit therein; and we know, that all good People will respect them, read them,
believe and endeavor to fulfill or obey them: And those who trade neither
Ministerially or Controversally with them, and are out of that, Cleansed, Holy
and Self-denying State they testify of, and believe it not attainable, the
Plagues therein declared of shall be their Portion forever.

I Know that AUTHORI^I^^ are of no great force with him, but since I writer
more one of an expectation of benefit to others, on whom this Libel has taken
any hold, perhaps it may not be unseasonable to subjoyn a few, and the rather
since we have not only the suffrage of some, who are called Socinians, whom he
pretends to follow; but thereby we may justly take occasion to detect him of
contradiction to their Sentements, whilst one of them.

1. Then first, Upon that remarkable Place in John, where Christ promised to
send his holy Spirit, 1 John 16. 13.
Howbeit, when the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all Truth,
etc. Those two famous Commentators (I mean so accounted by the Romanists,
Tolletus and Maldonatus, and the last very frequently, and with great Respect
commemorated and quoted by Crellius, one of the most redoubted of the Scoinian
Party.

Tollet. thus, He shall, when he is come, manifest all those things which ye
are not able to bear, Tol. in 16. cap. Joan com
and to discover to you all that Doctrine, that is fit for my Church to believe
and practice. He shall teach you the complete Truth; and to this end God gives
it to the Faithful, and to his Church, that in Doctrine, Life and Government
she may inerrably be guided.

Maldonat. Shall lead you into all Truth: that is, says he, Mald. in 16. cap.
Joan comm.
Discover unto them, and to the Church of God, all that Truth which is
convenient or fit for them to know concerning Salvation. Thus says Cyrill.
Theophil. August. and Beda too.

Beza tells us, That Protestants believe God to have given his Spirit, Bez. in
16. cap. 9. comm.
not only to his Apostles, but to his Church, that by her Testimony the World
may be convinced of Sin, that many Consciences may be compelled to confess,
that they have sinned in not believing on him, etc.

Dr Hammond thus, But when the Holy Ghost comes, D. H. H. Parap. on Evang.
whose Title is the Spirit of Truth, he shall instruct you what is to be done,
which he shall reveal to you. And I will ask my Father, and he shall send you
the Holy Ghost, to Interceed, Exhort and Comfort; and when he is come, he shall
abide with you; that is, all that shall suceed you in the Faith forever. As in
his Comment on the 28th Chapter of Matthew, upon these words, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the World; And though I shall now shortly part
with you, yet I will, by sending the Spirit upon you, to lead you into all
Truth, and by my perpetual Presence and Assistance afforded you, and by that
Authority that I have received of my Father, and now commit unto you, John 20.
21, 22. continue with you and your Successors unto the End of the World.

Now, if we read that Scripture he quotes, as an Interpretation of what he
understands by Christ's being with them and their Successors to the end of the
World, we shall find it to be this, Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be
unto you; As my Father has sent me, even so send I you: And when he had said
this, he breathed on them, and says unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. What
can be fuller, then that in his apprehension, not only the Apostles, but their
Successors in the Faith, were to have continued unto them the perpetual
Presence and Assistance of the Holy Ghost.

And says no mean Protestant upon the Place, and very truly; Hutch. comm. on
John
It is by the Spirit only, that men who do not profit under outward means, will
be enabled to profit; who, when he comes, reveals Truths clearly, and bears
them in with Life and Power upon the Heart, and does renew men's spirits to
embrace and submit to them. And on the 14th Chapter thus, The Spirit of God in
Believers is not only a Comforter, to apply and bear in the Consolations of
God, purchased by Christ upon their Hearts, but is their Advocate also, who
pleads their Cause with God, by furnishing them with Prayers and Groans that
cannot be uttered.

I shall now produce the sense of several Persons so great in the Socinian way,
conformable to what has been asserted concerning the Holy Spirit, that one
would think our Adversary ought to be concluded by it.

And the first shall be Socinus himself, who in his explication of the 1st
verse of the 8th Chapter to the Romans, Socin. explic. loc. Scrip. pa. 101.
speaks in short thus; Neque enim jam carni sed spiritui obsequuntur; spiritus
namque vitalis imperium, cui et ego, and omnes qui Christi sunt subduntur, nos
a jugo peccati and mortis assernit: For neither do they now follow or live
after the Flesh, but the Spirit; for the Power of the living Spirit (to which,
both I and all who are Christ's, are subdued) has freed us from the Yoke of
Sin and Death.

Slichtingius, who in his Comment upon the Passage already mentioned, Slicht.
in Joan Evang. comm. C. 16.
especially that part, He shall lead you into all Truth; gives us his mind thus.

Quando autem veniet ille, nempe Paracletus, spiritus ille veritatis, ducet
vos, nempe interna illuminatione in omnem veritatem, nempe ad salutem aeternam
pertinentem, ita ut omnia sciatis, and intelligatis quae vera sunt and ad
salutem pertinent. That is, When the Paraclet, to wit, the Spirit of Truth
shall come, by his internal Illumination, or inward Enlightening, he will lead
into all Truth, and to the Knowledge and Understanding of all those things
which are true and necessary, and do pertain to Eternal Life.

Now, since all are concerned in the End, namely, Eternal Life, methinks it is
most reasonable, that all should be in a share in the means to it; I mean, the
Teachings and Guidings of that Unerring Spirit. Thus much for this place: I
will instance one place more, and the thoughts of these men upon it, I mean
this last cited, and one not less Famous in the same way.

Crellius, in his Comment upon the Romans Chap. 8. verse. Crell. in Epist. Paul
ad Romans
14, and 15. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are Sons of God, for
ye have not received the spirit of Bondage, etc. says, Etenim quotquot
spiritui illi divino se regendos tradunt, ejusque ductum sequuntur quemadmodum
sane faciunt ij, qui ejus open carnis opera in se perimunt, eque non admittunt,
illi Dei ipsius sunt Filij: qui quemadmodum jam naturae ipsius sunt quodammodo
participes, ejusque similes; Ita etiam vicissim a (...) ^iliorum loco habentur,
ab eoque sunt adopt^ti, and in Filiorum jus ads^iti. Eos autem qui a Deo instar
Filiorum diliguntur, vitae sempiternae fore participes, quanquam per se
unicuique videtur patere, mox tamen planum faciam. Certainly then our
Adversary, if he has any regard for Crellius, will not oppose himself to the
necessity of Christians being accompanied by an infallible Spirit, when this
Author plainly tells us, That without that Spirit of God, and the Operation of
it to a Regeneration of Soul, there is no being a true Child of God, and Heir
to the possession of Glory; as he further speaks upon the 17th verse.

Slichtingius gives us the same Interpretation, differing only in the
Expression; Slicht. in Ep. ad Romans comm. c. 8.
says he, Probant illos victuros esse, si spiritu actiones corporis
mortificent. Again, Spiritu Dei agi, ferri, impelli, regi, and spiritu actiones
corporis perimere. They prove themselves to be Conquerors, if by the Spirit
they mortify the Deeds of the Body. Again, To be acted, led, moved, persuaded,
governed, ruled and directed, and to overthrow and destroy the Works of the
Flesh, by the Spirit of God, this is to be a true Child of God.

Crellius is most express upon the 12th verse of the 2d chapter of Paul's first
Epistle to the Corinthians, Crell. in prior Epist. ad comm. cap. 2. v. 12.
Sed spiritum qui est ex Deo, id est, qui ex Deo proficiscitur seu derivatur in
homines, ideoque Dei Spiritus merito vocatur. But the Spirit which is of God,
that is, which proceeds from God, or is derived from God into men; it is
therefore deservedly called the Spirit of God.

Crellius, upon that remarkable Passage of the same Apostle, and in the same
Chapter, Crell. Epist. ad Cor. comm. c. 2. v. 15.
But the spiritual man judges all things, etc. speaks thus, Opponit animali
homini spiritualem; Spiritualis autem homo ille est, qui non solu^ spiritu Dei
praeditus est, sed etiam ejus ductum sequitur, and a spiritu ipso totus pendet.

Says he, The Apostle opposes the Spiritual to the Natural man; that is, the
spiritual man who is not only endued with God's Spirit, but is also under the
Spirit's Conduct, and wholly depends upon it.

What man speaks more pathetically for inspiration, then Crellius does, in whom
out Adversary pretends to believe.

Nor is Slichtingius much behind him, who on the same place gives us his mind
thus, Slicht. inter Epist. ad Cor. comm. c. 2.
Spiritualis autem, id est, homo divino spiritu non tantum praeditus, sed illi
etiam totus deditus.

But the Spiritual man, that is ( says he) not only the man, who is adorned
and over-seen (as by his good Angel) by the holy Spirit; but who is also
rendered or yielded forever to his Government.

Dijudicat quidem omnia; id est, omnia quae dicuntur cognoscit, qualia sint, an
divina sint, an prophana; de omnibus judicandi habet facultatem.

Judges all things; that is, says Slichtingius, He measures and knows all
things that are spoken, of what sort soever they may be, whether they be Divine
or Profane; because he has the Faculty or Gift of right Judgment concerning
all things. Thus far Slichtingius concerning this place: I shall mention one
more of this kind, and then I shall conclude.

Crellius, upon that passage to the Gallatians, God has sent forth the Spirit
of his Son into your Hearts, Crell. in Epist. Paul ad Gal. comm.
further observes, Quia in cordibus hominum vim suam exerat: Again, Spiritus
istius operationis est, ut nos ex paterno Dei in nos amore certos reddat, and
filialem erga eum fiduciam nobis ingeneret.

What can we desire beyond this against our Adversary in this Point, to prove,
that the primitive Socinians, as they are called, believed God to have given,
and still to give his good Spirit unto Believers, as without which they could
not, neither can be Children of God? It is God's displaying his Power in the
Hearts of men, and it is by the Operation of his Spirit that he makes us
acquainted with his Fatherly Love to us, who begets in us a filial or Son-like
Faithfulness toward him, for us.

Slichtingius, on that notable Saying of the Apostle John, in his first Epistle
and second Chapter; But the Anointing which ye have received of him, Slicht. in
prim. Epist. Joan. c. 2. v. 27.
abides in you; and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same
Anointing teaches you. commenteth,

Unctio, pro eo quo facta est unctio, id est, prooleo coelesti, qui spiritus
est sanctus: Again, Hic enim erat spiritus istius sancti effectus, qui eo fine
dabatur, ut esset internus doctor veritatis, and in omnem deduceret veritatem.
Again, Unctio, id est spiritus sanctus, vos de omnibus docet, nempe ad salutem
pertinentibus. In English thus, Vnotion stands for Heavenly Oil, that is, the
Holy Ghost or Spirit: And to this End was the Holy Spirit given, that it might
become an internal Doctor, or Teacher of Truth, and lead into all Truth. Again,
The Unction is the Holy Ghost, which teaches you all things, to wit, what
pertains to Eternal Salvation.

Certainly, either our Adversary ought to relinquish his great Opinion of these
men, or else conclude, that Enthusiasm, or spiritual Motions, Revelations,
Teachings, Rulings and Guidings are not things absurd, fantastical, or
inconsistant with Christianity; but most agreeable with, and suitable to the
Nature of it, as that without which no man can possibly be a right Christian.

But neither is Crellius of this mind in his Commentaries only, Crell. of one
God the Father. Page 197.
where the weight of Scripture tends him to these Interpretations; but in his
Book of One God the Father, he frequently takes occasion to declare himself, I
think most plainly; I wish he had been as sound and clear in his Understanding
of all other Points: The Holy Spirit is the Power or Efficacy of God; namely
(that we may explain it) which proceeds from God, and issuing unto men, does
sanctify and Consecrate them, and produce various and admirable Effects in
them; which Power and Efficacy of God they are wont to call Divine Inspiration.
Again, That the Holy spirit is given to men by God, and that men obtain,
receive and have him from God by Prayers, as numberless places of the holy
Scripture show; out of which it is sufficient to have looked into but these
few, Luke 11. 13. John 7. 39. Page 205.
and 14. 16, 17. (a place by me quoted to the same purpose) Acts 5. 32. and 15.
8. Cor. 6. 19. By the Holy Spirit in these places is understood, Some Divine
and Holy Inspiration, or some Power flowing from God, which is as it were
breathed into man. Again, The Holy Spirit i^ properly given unto men, and not
Metonymically nor Metolepsically, that is, the Gift of the holy Ghost, is
simply and plainly to be taken as expressed: Page 208.
which signification ( says Crellius) was not unknown even to the Gentiles
themselves, although in the mean time, they did most grievously (...) in the
thing, taking a false Inspiration for a true one, a Davilish for a Divine. It
would be tedious to instance a fourth part of what he argumentatively writes on
this; only I will produce a few of those Scriptures which he so understands,
and applies 2 Cor. 1. Page 218, 219. 221.
22. and 5. 5. -- Ephesians. 1. 14. here a Pledge and Earnest are mentioned. Ne^^,
says he, all those places, where the Holy Spirit is said to be poured out on
men, as Isae. 44. 3. Joel (by us cited) chap. 2. 28, 29. Zachariah 12. 10. Tit.
3. 6. where (says he) men are said to be baptized in, or with it: again agree
to it that of Christ, who in John, inviting men to the participation of so
excellent a Gift, thus says, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink:
Understand it (says Crellius) of that Living Water, which, it is manifest, is
the Holy Spirit: Let those places be added (says he) in which Christ himself is
said to be anointed, or others are signified to be anointed with the Holy
Spirit, John 7. 37. Isa. 61. 1. Luke 4. 18. Acts 8. 38. Heb. 1. 9. Psalm. 51. 8.
2 Cor. 1. 1 John 2. 20, 21, 27. He proceeds to several Arguments upon diverse
other Scripture-Heads, as all Scriptures touching divine Participation, Page
222. 223. 224. 235. 223.
not quenching the Spirit, the Holy Spirit being sent, The Spirit searches all
things, etc. But above all, I shall conclude his whole Discourse with this one
Expression, viz. In this we know, that we dwell in him, and he in us, because
he has given us his Spirit, which we have expressed, is both perfect, and
plainly expresses the thing given, and such indeed as may demonstrate most
clearly that God dwells in us, in some most singular and divine manner, and we
in him, and that there is a most straight Bond of Love and Conjunction betwixt
us and him; for how could we be more straightly joined with him, or he with us,
then when he has imparted to us of his Holy Spirit.

Curcellius shall conclude these Testimonies; Nec enim desinent fideles esse
Templum spiritus sancti; Curcell. advers. Mares. dissert. prim. Page 114.
nimirum quia Deus in ipsis per spiritum suum habitaret. That is, Neither do
the Faithful cease to be the Temple of the Holy Ghost; why? because God by his
Spirit dwells in them.

Thus much for the first part of this Discourse, I shall now apply my self to
the Second, which concerns a Vindication of George Fox, and his Citation of
Scripture, from the Reproach and Unworthy dealing of our Adversary.

A VINDICATION OF George Fox, And the TRUTH by him Vindicated, Particularly his
Quotation of Scripture; from the Calumny and Cavil of this LIBELLER.
WE shall say nothing here of the Disingenuity of the Man, in writing against a
particular Person, to prove a Charge against a People, having already pointed
at it in another place; but shall fall to the Charge it self, which I will
faithfully lay down in his own words, and the rather, since it is one main part
of his Proof against G. F. that he is an Impostor, because he renders not the
very words of Scripture, though words importing the same sense.

Page 3. If you will but allow us competent Witnesses to prove that G. Fox
killed a man, supposing we have seen him at noonday thrust him through the
Heart with a Sword, or if you will grant that we can read English, and know
that A. B. is not C. O. then upon these Concessions we will undertake to prove,
that G. Fox is a false Prophet, a Liar, or Imposter.

This Reader is the Charge; And do thou not think it is rarely drawn up? Well
may I say rarely, for I dare say, it is the first of the sort that is extant in
the World.

I must confess I am at a stand what he intends with his suppository
Introduction to it; for I as little understand what the man means by allowing
Us Competent Witness (when the Us are to see the thing done) as he can pretend
Difficulty in the obscurest Passage in G. Fox's Writings: for either he should
have said; If you will but allow Us (to be) competent Witnesses, supposing we
have seen him at Noonday, etc. or if, as by him already Phrais'd, viz. If you
will but allow Us competent Witnesses (leaving out to be) then say I, it should
be, supposing They, (and not We) have seen him at Noonday, etc. for as
expressed, they are competent Witnesses: But if this be so trivial, as that our
time might have been better spent, and our Charity have over looked it, as a
slip of the Man's Pen, or in the Compositors Setting: Methinks, he was as lavish
of his Time as penurious in his Charity, that, without any Just Provocation, he
should trouble the world with an enti^e Book, containing little else but a
Collection of such slender (at most) omissions, enlarged with his own malicious
Comments.

Well, but it is now time, that we should see this wonderful discovery he has
made of George Fox, and that so plain, as killing a man at noonday (which
unhandsom Comparison is no mean Instance of his own vexed, base, and murdering
Spirit) or as his Mathematical Demonstration, that A. B. is not C. O. for which
peculiar and easy way of well-expressing of a Charge, we remain his Debtors.

To prove this Charge (the only thing we want, for of false Accusers and
Accusations we have enough) he thus goes about it, to use his own words.

If G. Fox in matters of concernment, not only to men's Bodies and Estates, but
also to their Souls and eternal Estates, affirm that to be true, which to your
own Eyes is manifestly false, or that to be false, which is true. Again* If G.
F. does belie not an ordinary Person, a mortal Man or Prince, but God Almight^
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost. Moreover, If he deal thus through
Design and Purpos^^ then he is what I have said, viz. a false Prophet, Liar,
and Impostor with a Witness.

This is but Petitio Principii, or a mere begging of the question, nothing is
more proved here then in the Charge it self, nay it is but the Repetition of
the Charge, expressed in other terms; Yet to it so expressed, I return in
short thus much.

First, I deny that George Fox his affirming things to be true which are false,
and false which are true, to be obvious to our Eyes or Senses; for we can see
no such thing: And since we are so to see them, in order to the Conclusion, it
follows, that he is no false Prophet, Liar or Impostor by his own Rule.

But Secondly, I utterly deny, that George Fox so affirming or asserting,
supposing as our Adversary says of him, renders him either a false Prophet or
Impostor; since he only is a false Prophet, that either runs to instruct or
teach a People, and not sent of God, but speaks other men's words, not his own
Visions; or who prophesies such things to come, as never come to pass, but*
happen quite contrary, in neither of which acceptations is George Fox proved a
false Prophet: therefore none. The like may be urged to clear him from
Imposture, since he only is an Impostor that assumes to himself the Dignity of
an extraordinary Ambassador from God, and proves a Cheat, as Simon Magus among
the Samaritans and Romans, Mahomet among the Turks, and the late Jew in Italy.
So that if George Fox had singly affirmed that to be true which were false, it
proved him no False Prophet or Impostor; And therefore our Adversary shows
himself a raw Disputant, and mere Novice in the sound framing of an Argument;
For what man, that understands an Horse from a Cow, would thus argue; If G.
Fox, in matters of concernment not only to men's Bodies and Estates (then in
matters of concernment, in part to men's Bodies and Estates) affirm that to be
true which is false, he is a false Prophet and Impostor; He might as well have
said, if George Fox affirms he gave ten pound for an Horse, when he gave but
five, then G. Fox is a false-Prophet and Impostor with a witness; But I think,
it will not hurt us, to let him have to himself the whole Reputation of this
kind of proving to Peoples senses the Truth of his Charge, who, had he not been
void of all Sense himself, and Reason too, would never have suffered so much
weakness and untruth to pass the Press without Correction.

Nay though he could make it appear (which neither his wickedness nor prejudice
will ever be able to do) that G. Fox has designedly and on purpose belyed the
Almighty God, the Lord Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost, as he charge him to
have done; Yet still I affirm, that he could not properly and strictly be
tearmd a false Prophet or Impostor, though all but such, would justly conclude
him as wicked, as our Adversary is malicious: for might not a deboist fellow,
that mocks at God and Godliness, when he kills, lies, or commits Adultery, say
in his defense, as the Apostle did, on ^more serious account, in another case,
that his Spirit was (...) to have avoided such things, but the Flesh was (...)
not he, which did those things, but sin in him, hereby (...) the holy Ghost,
which in the Apostle intended quite (...) thing: Yet I hope, none in their wits
would count such a fellow a false Prophet or Impostor, though very impious and
profane.

And that there are too many, who from Nathan's words to David, in the case of
Vriah's Wife, and from the liberty taken by some of the Ancients, have
interpreted and concluded, that their boundless Lusts are by Scripture
irreprehensible; thereby making at first sight the holy Ghost an accessory to
their licentious practices, who was the Author of the truth therein contained,
(which is belying him with a Witness) I suppose, our Adversaries Observation in
the World cannot but give him to understand; Yet how we can properly Character
such Libidinoso's, or inordinate Persons, false Prophets, or Impostors, is left
with the ingeneous Reader to consider.

I hope by this time, the Way he takes to prove George Fox what he wickedly
says him to be, is evidently detected of Insufficiency, and that upon his own
positions, George Fox can not be concluded either an Impostor or false Prophet.
I shall now make it appear, that he is as well mistaken in the proof of the
Truth of his Charge, as in the way he took to state it, and that no man in that
compass, could well have manifested more Weakness, Folly, Malice and Untruth
(as well in desending of his own, as in opposing our Principles) then this our
Adversary we have in hand.

To follow him into every Absurdity, would not only be more then he deserves at
our hands, or any man's that loves time better then to lose it; But it would
needlessly swell the Discourse, beyond both my Intention and the Service it is
designed to; I shall therefore contract and divide his exceptions to George
Fox's quotation of Scriptures into these three sorts.

1. Such as may refer to Doctrinal Difference, I mean wherein he opposes us.

2. Such as refer to his Socinian Interpretation of the Scriptures, wherein
Christ's Divinity is asserted, where we oppose him.

3. Such as are merely trivial, in which there can be no pretense for accusing
George Fox of any alteration, as to what himself judges generally to be the
sense of the places, only perhaps a transposing of the words, or the using of a
word of equal force, but not the same, no ways detracting or varying from the
mind of the Scriptures.

But that a man should make fifty Cavils, and faithless number doctrinal, or to
any solid purpose, befits no man that loves to be profitably employed; but it
therefore suits him, that is so overrun with the Lazy, as I am really
persuaded, he busies not himself in one serviceable Work in a week together;
only sits upon his own Saturnal Dreams till he has with difficulty hatched them
into some seeming consistency, and then they are to slutter abroad upon his
paper wings (scarce good enough for waist) to the shop, which traffiques in
such kind of ware) till persecution comes; with the Scorch of which they are
wont to singe and wrap up like a Scrole; But enough of this. Now for his
Doctrinal Exceptions.

He begins with what we confess to Gods Glory to be our beginning, and stumbles
at it, as much as did the Jews of old; I mean Christ Jesus, the great Son of
Righteousness, and Light of the invisible and spiritual World, by Which the
invisible Souls and Spirits of men come to obtain the saving Knowledge of God,
and what is required from them, in order to their eternal Salvation. What can
we expect then but Darkness, from him that seeks to disparage the Light. But
let us hear him.

The first Scripture which I shall pitch upon as misrecited (in his Language
(that is George Fox's) perverted and corrupted) shall be that in John 1. 9. he
cites it almost as often wrong as right. The Scripture runs thus in our
translation, That was the true Light that lights every man that comes into
the World. ( A long Porch, where is the House) says he, in the Greek it is
coming, (not that comes) and so it may refer to light as well as man; But
George Fox has it thus, John said, Every man that comes into the World is
enlightened, and several sayings of the like tendency. But now has he observed
that Exactness, which he requires in others? may there be no Difference between
lights and enlighteth, must every man of necessity he enlightened because the
Light lights him?

Wonderful Distinction! Certainly this man sets up for a new Class of Critics:
I wonder into what Labyrinth he has traveled for this notable gloss! a body
would think he had left his Wits (if ever he had any) behind in exchange. But I
answer,

I look upon it as conceited and presumptious, for any man to undertake what he
cannot prove, and not less base, to affirm a man mis-cites, perverts and
corrupts Scripture, when he renders the genuine sense of it. And this I briefly
prove,

If I grant to this Pseudo-linguist that (...) is a Participle, and not a Verb,
as our English renders it; what then? must it needs follow, that it refers to
(...) and not to (...)? Has he made no better use of his Greek Grammar? It Is
strange that any man so mean in that Tongue, should undertake to thwart the
current of all indifferent Translators, whom he sticks not to make use of at
other times.

I have taken a view of the most and best Editions, both of Greek, Syriack,
Arabic, Aethiopick and Latin, I could at present find; besides, several other
Languages, amongst others a Gothic and Anglo Saxonick Testament, which I
suppose I understand as much as he does Greek, or thereabouts, which I shall
also produce for satisfaction.

The Greek. (...) He was the true Light, which enlighteth every man coming into
the World.

The Syriack Version has it, Omnem venientem in mundum; All coming into the
World: Which says Drusius, is sufficient.

The Arabic has it thus, That was the true Light, which enlightens every man:
making coming to begin the next verse, which I suppose was a Mistake in the
Version of it; however, it gives no force to our Adversary, since he is said,
to enlighten all men before his coming, or being come into the World is
mentioned by the Evangelist, in him was Life, and that Life was the Light of
men; he was the of men.

In the Aethiopick Version we find it thus, And he is the Light of
Righteousness, which enlightens all men coming into the World.

Which Luther renders thus. Erat lux vera, quae illuminat omnen hominem
venientem in hunc mundum. Luther. He was the true Light, which enlightens every
man that comes into the World. Which Erasmus renders thus. Erat lux illa, lux
vera, quae illuminat omnem hominem venientem in mundum. Erasmus. That Light was
the true Light, which enlightneth every man that comes into the World. Which
Beza renders thus. Hic erat lux illa vera, quae illuminat omnem hominem
venientem in Mundum. Beza. This was that true Light, which enlightens every man
that comes into the World. Montanus thus. Erat lux vera, quae illuminat omnem
hominem venientem in hunc mundum. Montanus. He was the true Light, which
enlightens every man that comes into this World. The Italian Version thus. La
vera Luce, era quellach, illumina ogni huomo che viene all mondo. Italian. The
true Light was that which enlightens all men which come into the World. The
Spanish thus. Aquella Palabra era la luz verdadera que a lumbra a todo hobre,
que viene en este mundo. Spanish. Which Word was the True Light, that gives
Light to all men that come into this World. The French thus. Ceste lumiere la
estoit la veritable, qui illumine tout homme venant au monde. French. That same
Light is the true Light, which enlightens all Mankind coming into the World.
This a Translation in 1631. La vraye lumiere estoit celle qui illumine tout
homme, venant au monde. The Translation in 1631. The true Light is that which
enlightens all Mankind coming into the World. This a later Translation 1658.
Elle estoit la lumiere veritable, qui illumine tout homme, venant au monde. The
Translation in 1658. That was the true Light which enlightens all Mankind
coming into the World. High Dutch, or German, thus. Das war das Warhafftige
Licht, welches all Menschen erleuchtet, die in diese Welt kommen. German. That
was the true Light, which enlightens all Men that come into this World. The
Low Dutch thus. Dat wareachtige Licht was dese die allen Menschen verlicht
komende in de Werelt. Low Dutch. This was the true Light, which enlightens all
Men coming into the World. Anglo-Saxonick. Soth leoht waes that onlyht aelene
cumendne man on thisne Middan-card. Anglo-Saxonick verbatim. It was the true
light, which enlightens every man coming (or coming man) into this World.

I know not any Versions or Copies extant but what are of the same import with
these already cited. That which seems further necessary is, what has been the
Judgment of Ancient and Modern Writers in the Point.

Gregorius Nazianzenus, concione de Baptismate, is very express in this
particular, (...).

Chrysostom largely and earnestly discusses this thing, and concludes, that
(...) ought to be joined to (...) and not to (...) and in explicating this
Question, Whether then is not every one (savingly) enlightened? he very truly
and to purpose says, It is not any defect in the Light, but their fault who
will not admit of it, and yield to it; (...) which is as much as to say, The
Grace is impartially shed abroad (or held forth) unto all; but who wilfully
refuse that Heavenly Gift, must impute their Blindness to themselves.

Thus also Lactantius taught, withal, not only applying the Participle (...) to
(...); but in Honor of that Light, asserts it to have an (...), an Effi^^cy,
or effectual Operation in all such as believe in it, and walk up to it.

I shall now briefly touch upon the Opinion of some approved Men of Learning in
this Point.
Erasmus gives this paraphtastical account upon the place, Erasm. in John.
Non erat Johannes lumen illud de quo loquor, nam lumen hoc, de quo loquor,
erat lumen verum quod illuminat omnem hominem venientem in hunc mundum. Making
the Evangelist thus to speak, John was not that true Light, of which I speak;
for this Light I speak of, was the true Light, which enlightens every man that
comes into this World. And answering the same Objection (as our Adversary
makes) Ambiguitatem sustulisset additus articulus (...): that is, The Article
(...) not being in the Greek, renders the sense too ambiguous.

Beza is peremptory in the matter, for making the objection our Adversary does,
he answers; Venientem in mundum, (...), id est, nascentem, ut explicat
Christus ipse hoc dicendi genus infra. 18. 37. Et additum est istud partim
emphatico Pleonasmo, partim ut tollatur Judaeorum et Gentium discrimen. Act.
10. 35. Romans 11. 25. and Gal. 13. 26. Quod autem nonnulli Participium (...)
putant posse ad (...) referri, ut ita convertas; Haec erat illa Lux vera, quae,
veniens in mundum, illuminat omnem hominem: id, inquam, videtur violentum and
tractationem hujus argumenti, id est, manifestationes Christi confundere; Malo
igitur significari, nullum hominem nasci hujus Lucis expertem. Coming into the
World, that is, being born, as Christ himself explains this manner of speaking
below in the 18th cap. 37. verse. And that is added partly by an emphatical
redundancy, partly to remove that distinction which was between Jews and
Gentiles. Acts 10. 35. Romans 11. 25. and Gal. 3. 26. But because some think the
Participle (...) may be transposed to (...) to be construed thus; This is the
true Light, which coming into the world, enlightens every man: but with me it
seems to confound the handling of this Argument (that is of Christ's
manifestation) as unnatural and extorted. I had much rather it should signify,
that no man is born void of this Light.

Maldonatus, whom Crellius often cites with great respect, Mald. in Joan. cap.
1.
says; Quem sensum Cyrillus et alij quidam secuti sunt, estque non falsus, non
absurdus, sed mea sententia non proprius. Nam ut alia non esset ratio, nomen
hominis proxime adhaerens jure sibi hoc participium vendicaret. Et Christus non
solum in hunc mundum veniens, sed et postquam venit, et antequam veniret, erat
Lux vera quae illuminabat omnem hominem venientem in hunc mundum. Et alij
Auctores omnes ita intellexerunt, ut non Christus veniens, sed Christus omnem
hominem venientem in hunc mundum dicatur illuminasse, August. Chrysostom. Beda,
Theophylact. Euthym. That is to say: Which opinion Cyrillus and some others
followed, and it is neither false nor absurd, but in my Judgment not proper:
For, though there should be no other reason, Man, being the next Noun, should
of right challenge this Participle to himself. And Christ was, not only when he
came into this World, but before and after he came, the true Light, that
enlightneth everyman that comes into the World, And all other Authors, as
Augustine, Chrysostom, Beda, Theophylact, and Euthymius etc. underst ^od it
thus* It can not be said, that Christ coming into the World enlightens all men,
but that Christ enlightens all men coming into the World.

And of this mind also is Drusius, upon the text, omnem hominem venientem in
mundum; Drus. in Jo. ^. 1.
Satis erat omnes venientes in mundum. Sed homo dicitur antequ^m in mundum
venit: in mundum venit cum nascitur. Igitur homo veniens in mundum, non est
homo simpliciter, sed homo natus, aut quinascitur. Ebraei tamen (...) vocant
omnes homines. Lib. Musar. c. 5. Si congregarentur omnes venlentes in mundum,
ad creationem pulicis et ad infundendam animam, nou possent. In ^uacre novo
(Liber est eju^ nomini^) videbune omnes venientes mundi, i. e. in mundum, 78.
2. and alibi saepe. Phesictha 2. 1. Testimonio sunt omnibus venientibus in
mundum, quod inter ^os (...) Divinitas. That is to say: Every man coming into
the World, says he, All coming into the World, had been sufficient. But he may
he called Man before he comes into the World: he comes into the World when he
is born; Therefore Man coming into the World is not simply a man, but a man
born. But the Hebrew call all men (...) that is, coming or being both into the
World. Lib. Musar. c. 5. If all that come into the World, should meet to make a
Fles, and to infuse a Soul, they could not do it. In Munere novo (a Book so
called) All coming of the World, that is, into the World shall see, 78. 2. and
often elsewhere. Phesictha 2. 1. All coming into the World have a testimony,
that there is a Deity among them. Thus much concerning the sense of Learned men
upon the place controverted, which if it does no good, will I hope do no hurt,
though a man would think that so many able to teach him Greek, might conclude
him, unless he has more to tell us, then in his late Libel.

Overlooking then some other Authors, I shall, as I am able, give my own
reasons, why (...) more properly belongs to man then Light.

First, I^ Christ be that true Light by way of eminency, which not only the
Scriptures most plainly character him to be, but all Critics and Interpreters
agree to be the import of the place, then will it necessarily follow upon their
^^tion, who generally make coming the participle of Light rather then Man, that
true Light never saw the World, or rather the World true Light, till the
Messiah's visible coming, and that consequently all Antecedent Livers to his
external appearance, however good and holy men, were destitute of the true or
saving Light, as having never rose upon them, nor they been illuminated or
refresht with the Divine Light and Heat thereof; which, as it is a most
irreverent thought of God, and uncharitable toward many deceased Generations,
so it is forever to be exploded for false, and inconsistant with the
impressions incident to every man, as well as the testimonies of the Scripture.
For who living ^an believe, that before the M^ssiah's coming there was not a
sufficient Light given to those holy Patriarchs and Prophets, which if true,
Christ as that true Light: by way of eminency, must have been before such
manifestation. We shall easily grant, that in reference to the transcendency of
its appearance, as to what had been it might be said more eminently to come at
that time, but to exclude all lesser degrees of Illumination by the same saving
Light, ant^cedent to its brighter Discoveries in that day, we can never do; but
do and shall maintain the contrary, knowing, that it is not a distinct, or
other Light that saves now, then formerly did; but a more large Discovery of
the same.

To which agrees that of Christ himself, Joh. 8. 56, 58. before Abraham was I
am; Abraham saw my Day, and was glad; And that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 10. 4. for
they dran^ of the Spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ.
The Way of the Just is a shining Light.

2. Besides, what shall we say upon their Transposition of the words, as to the
time then present? I mean when the Light after their sense, was coming into the
World; for that the Scriptures will be most false, methinks they themselves
should see; since it is notorious, that neither whilst he was coming, nor come,
one quarter of Mankind was any whit extraordinarily enlightened, much less
savingly by him; but they remained Infidels as before.

3. Nor is this all, for at this rate, We, since his Departure, are left as
destitute as they before his coming, and as they who heard not of him, when he
was come, were wholly ignorant; for how is it possible, upon their
Interpretation, that we should have any saving Light? Christ, in whom was the
excellent Light and Power, is gone; Say they, the Scriptures in many points are
left dubious, as Peter testifies of Paul's Epistles; Say I, neither is there
any unerring Interpreter or Guide to be obtained at this time a day (Say they
again.) Certainly then, there can be but little true Knowledge, sound Faith, or
well-grounded Comfort in so ill-founded a Religion, whose Belief is a kind of
Fiction, and their Hope but a better sort of Despair. To conclude.

4. We therefore think it a wrong done to the Text, because of the Participles
unsuitableness to Light, and its natural agreement to Man; for men are
continually coming into the World, and at such enlightened, which can not be
said of Light in their sense. The Messiah don't visibly appear as formerly;
That Light is ecclipst, as he himself said it was convenient to be, or the
Comforter would not come; but that Divine intellectual Light, which was most
excellent, he promised should endure with his to the End; by a degree of which
also the holy Patriarchs of old saw the Glory of his Day, and Evangelical
Dispensation, though as to the then State of the World, it was altogether unfit
for it; wherefore it is said, that they desired to see his Day and saw it not;
How? Did they not see it as to themselves? By no means; for many of them saw
it, but they never saw it break forth as Gods Dispensation to the World (though
they much desired it) because of the Worlds incapacity to receive it.

What shall I further say? If coming cannot so properly be said of Light in
their sense, as of Man in ours, (since so every man in all ages comes to have
the benefit of that Light offered unto him, which in the other sense must be
lost to thousands, or they loose the advantage of it (being not then born in
that Age, in which that Sun (though for a little season) was pleased to visit
the World) then let it not be Light coming, but Man coming into the World. In
short, take it in their sense, and one Age is hardly benefitted, take it in
ours, and all mankind is illuminated.

As to the drift of our Adversary in his Transposition of the Participle, viz.
the Divestigating Christ of all Right to Eternal Divinity, (which is the Snake
in the Grass) I shall anon sufficiently I hope, vindicate that great Truth,
though I cannot but wonder, since we without damage can allow him, that the
Words may be true both ways, as I have already, and may yet further
demonstrate, that he would desire only to receive them in one, as if on purpose
he had a mind to dethrone him from the Seat of his Eternal Majesty; For what if
John had chiefly intended a Description of the Heavenly Structure of the New
World, and Christ to have been the Enlightner of all that come into it; and
further, that the Messiahs then coming was Author of that most excellent
Creation; must it needs therefore follow, that he was not antecedent to that
work, that he never enlightened the Fathers and holy men of old, with a
sufficient measure of that same Divine Light, which without measure appeared in
him, and far greater then before to the Sons of men? I appeal to any modest
intelligent man, if this be not Ingratitude, nay Sacrilege in the highest
degree. Certainly therefore it can be no Injury to the Scripture, if we say,
That He, who enlightened the Patriarchs and Prophets of old, has in a more
excellent manner, and suitable to the Spirituality of his own Divine Nature,
revealed himself in this Gospel administration, the which may aptly be compared
to a well built Temple, which has been of old begun, but left to these latter
days of Christ's more eminent manifestation to superstruct, complete, adorn
and sit for him the eternal Light of Life and Righteousness to be worshipped
in; so that there is a great Difference, as Grotius in other words does well
observe, between the Beginning of an administration, and of the Author of it.
That might be the Beginning of those large Discoveries, but not the Light that
gave them; and consequently, notwithstanding John should have intended a Divine
Creation, yet it will not necessarily follow, that the Light, which is that
Creator, was not in being antecedently to that Divine Creation; and so God
both by pre-existence and omnipotency. But I shall say no more of this, I mean
the transposition of the Participle (...), till our Adversary says more to the
contrary, if we may then think it worth our notice.

But it may be fit to observe, that the man shows a wave^ing in his own
Judgment, which is not only manifest from his saying, It may as well be
referred to Light as Man, but in a man^script to a Friend of ours, he affirmed
it to be unreasonable, to refer coming to Man, and not to the true Light; All
we can say is this, that though it show him to be unsettled in his own
thoughts, yet he was willing to be a little more modest in print then in his
manuscript.

For his Distinction between Lights, and Enlightneth, I confess my self
troubled, not at his great Skill, but ^olly; It shows, he would say something,
if he could tell what, and to use a familiar Proverb, The poor man will be
playing at small game, rather then stand out. Then, let us to the Word, since he
would be thought a Critic. (...) we read in Greek, in the Latin illuminat, and
should in the English enlightneth; the defect is not in the Original, nor Latin
versions, but our English only. I perceive, whether it be Original, or
Translation, which makes most for him, that is the Infallible Text, till it
happens to contradict him, and then, if in the Original the Word is foisted in,
or thus to be transposed, or rendered; if in any of the versions, then it is not
so in the Original, it is lamely rendered, and the like. But this Callenge I
make to the man, that if he can find one version in three (and three to one
that is odds) which re^dres it different from what we understand by it, I shall
acknowledge him a Critic, and our selves ignorant in words. All the Greek
Coppies and Latin Translations, I ever saw or heard of, import no other thing
then Illumination, or Enlightening. All that I have hitherto mentioned, so give
it us, quae illuminat omnem hominem, etc.

That this is the constant use of the Word throughout both the Old and New
Testament (so called) is evident: It is said of Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14. 22.
that after he had tasted a little of that honey, into which he put his rod,
his eyes were enlightened, (...) quia illuminati sunt oculi mei. See, says
Jonathan, I pray you, how mine eyes have been enlightened. The Chaldee version
has it, illuxerunt oculi mei, how my eyes shined; The Syriack thus, my eyes
have received light: The Arabic thus, quomodo illustrata est acies mea, how is
my Eyesight cleared; but the Septuagint expresses it thus; (...), behold how
my eyes have seen; which in a mystical sense is the same now, for that eternal
Light, or Word of Life, is that Honey out of that true Rock, and Milk that the
Prophet exhorted the Jews to buy without money, and without price; And who
taste of that in faith, receive that blessed effect, namely, true illumination.
Thus Job, To bring his Soul from the pit, that is, from darkness, death and
sin, (...) ad lucendum in luce viventium to be enlightened with the light of the
living. The Chaldee has it after this manner, that my Soul may shine by the
Light of the Living: The Syriack and Arabic, that is may see the Light of
Life, Job 33. 30. and upon v. 28. which speaks to the same purpose, says
Vatablus, De luce illa coele^^^ intelligit, fruetur Dei conspectu. Which is, He
means by that heaven^^ Light, he shall enjoy the presence of God. Likewise
David most emphatically uses the same Verb, and that to our purpose unde^^^bly.

(...) Quoniam tu illuminabis lucernam meam, Deus meu^ illuminabit
tenebrositatem meam: For thou will light. Psalm. 18. 28. 29.
my Candle; the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness. The Chaldee has it
thus, because thou will enlighten the Candle of Israel, which was put out in
the captivity, for thou art the Author of the Light of Israel: The Lord my God
will bring me out of Darkness into Light. A notable addition, at least
explanation of the place, yet this is in the Chaldee version. The Syriack,
Aethiopick and Septuagi^t are the same; the Arabic differs only in tenses,
thou do enlighten, for wilt enlighten, and he has enlightened my darkness,
for he will enlighten my darkness. And if the spirit of man be the Candle of
the Lord, and that God only can light it, then certainly, since man's spirit is
within him, it is not more unsound, nor any more violating of Scripture sense,
to say, that God enlightens, then that he lightens every man within, by
communicating of his own Light to man's Spirit, which receiving it, becomes
lighted by it, to all right Knowledge and good Works. Further, if David's
darkness was within him, in his Soul and understanding, as certainly he meant
it so, when he spoke of it, then must that Light which was to shine there,
shine in David's Soul and understanding. And what false Doctrine or English it
is, or perversion of Scripture, to say that man is then enlightened, let sober
people judge.

It is thus expressed in the Greek Copies of the New Testament also, and the
Latin Versions of them, witness the Apostle Paul to the Ephesians, Ep. 1. 18.
(...) etc. illuminatos oculos cordis vestri. Beza has it in his Copy and
version, (...). illuminatis oculis mentis vestrae. Bez. in not. foed.
The Syriack has it, that the eyes of your hearts may be enlightened; The
Arabic thus, enlightening the eyes of your hearts: The Aethiopick thus, and may
enlighten the eyes of your heart; all agreeing in the Word illuminating, or
enlightening, only one says of the heart, and the other of the mind, (...),
from (...), that is, men's, or the mind of man, which indeed are but so many
words to the same purpose; Certainly then this word enlighten is not of so
dangerous consequence, nor inconsonant to Scripture Language, as this idle and
ignorant Person would render it.

The like we find in the Epistle to the Hebrews; for it is impossible for those
being once (...), illustratos, Heb. 6. 4.
or inshined: But, says Beza, illuminati, enlightened, if they fall away to
renew them again, etc. they change in their cases and words, but not sense; for
to shine in the understanding, or lighten the understanding, or enlighten it,
with me are the same, that love time better and my own reputation, then to
loose both by vain conceited distinctions, that only show the emtiness of the
head from whence they come.

The like we may read in the tenth Chapter of the same Epistle, Heb. 10. 32.
But call to remembrance the former days, (...), in quibus illuminati, in
which ye were enlightened, says Montanus; quibus postquam illustrati fuissetis,
by which ye were shined into, says Beza, that is, enlightened say I. To which
agree most of the versions made use of in this Discourse, whether Oriental, or
any other; Also Zegerus, Drusius, Grotius and others are wont to give this
Interpretation upon it, both in their places before mentioned, and elsewhere,
that (...) imports as much, as to enlighten the eyes of men's understandings
unto the Knowledge of Christ, also to indoctrinate or baptize them into the
Knowledge of Evangelical Truths.

Crellius shall conclude the matter, Crell. in Epist. ad Heb. c. 10. verse. 32.
comm.
who in his Comment upon that place of the Hebrews says; Illuminati: Luce
nimirum Evangelica, per quam, ut Apostolus loquitur, Vitam et
Incorruptibilitatem Christus illuminavit, per quam omnes errores, omnem mentis
caliginem, caecitatem expulit. The English Construction is; Enlightened, that is
to say, with the Gospel Light, by which (as says the Apostle) Christ brought
Life and Immortality to Light, and by which he expelled all Error and all
Darkness and Blindness of Mind. Certainly, he was for Illumination, and such
too as is infallible (a stumbling block to our Erroneus Adversary, and his
Brawling associate, T. F.)

By which it evidently appears, that not only the word (...) in the Text
controverted, whether as Verb, Adjective, or Participle, signifies, and is used
to express what We understand by Illumination or Enlightening, and so rendered by
Translators and Commentators; but also the Holy Penmen have employed it to that
very purpose, in most of those places throughout the New Testament (so called)
wherein they have treated of Divine Enlightnings, Inspirings or Illuminations.
But after what has been urged in defense of our use of the Word, and for which
he impertinently reflects upon G. F. What, if I should grant him his two empty
Exceptions (that are like Wasps without stings) viz. Coming to refer to Light,
and that Lights and Enlightneth are different Terms. First as for Coming its
referring to Light, it would amount to no more then this, that being to give an
account of the Evangelical Testament, and Gospel administration, he might tell
us, that the breaking forth, Appearance or coming thereof gave Light to, or
illuminated all men; or, God was now fulfilling his Promise by his Son; namely,
that he would pour out of his Spirit upon all flesh, that is, every one should
be enlightened with that blessed Son of Righteousness, who then rose in a more
extraordinary manner then before. Now, this being the best use that could be
made of referring Coming to Light, and not to Man; what great matter should We
loose by it. O, say these followers of Biddle, and mungrel Socinians, but We
should get by it; for We should thereby be in hopes of shutting Christ out of
all pretenses to an eternal Divinity, by restraining his beginning to Christ's
being born of the Virgin. By being with God, We should have it, that he was
bodily taken up into the highest Heavens, and there personally taught by God,
upon solemn Conference betwixt them, what He should do on Earth, where He
received his Verbal Commssion, and descended.

And by the Words, being God, that upon his doing what was commanded him, here
in the World (for his Faithfulness) he was godded, that is, not a God by
Nature, but by Office, by Favor, and Acquisition. O strange Imagination! Be
these the men that are not for Meanings, Allegories, and strained Glosses, but
the Punctual, Litteral, Rational Scripturists, whose Maxim is, No^ credimus
quia non legimus, We don't believe because we don't read it. If G. F. or any
Quaker in England had undertaken to have imposed such an Interpretation upon
the World, in favor of his Belief, how inflamed would our Adversaries have
been against us? and that this Fancy should be the first Corner and Foundation
Stone of their Building, is very unhappy: And I heartily pity some of the
first Inventers of this Notion (indeed a very Fiction) that being so very
rational in some other Principles, especially against Infidels, Jews, Papists,
and Atheists, they should notwithstanding draw a Cloud over the Brightness of
their other Labors, by the unjustifiable Scandal, this one Conceit brings upon
them, which I verily believe to be boyed up in the Opinions of several, by the
Reputation that may be due to some other more scriptural and truly rational
Doctrines.

Secondly, What if it should contrary to the current of almost all Versions, be
allowed, that (...) is Lights, and not Enlightened? For my part, I see no
other loss in it, then that it is not so forceably expressed; For man being
composed of Soul and Body, the Soul is the Interior, the Body is the Exterior
part of man; So that when the Body is lighted by the Sun, or any other Fire, we
may say the External part is lighted about its business or occasions; and when
the Internal part, the Soul, is lighted, We may in reference to the whole man
say, He is enlightened or lightened within, because the Soul may properly be said
to be internal or within, or the most hidden and Spiritual part of man. Behold
then the redoubtableness of this Adversary, his Will is good, I mean bad, as
the Apostle says in a more serious Case, To will mischief to us was present
with the man, but how to perform he knew not; yet this pedling Controversist
will be doing, though as little to purpose as need be: Witness one material
part of his Observation against G. F. if it has any matter at all in it, viz.
that he changed the Phrase, and Tense or Time. Alas poor man! and what then?
Ergo, says he, G. F. is a False Prophet, a Liar, and an Impostor: boldly said;
but prove it who can, or will for him. But what then will become of the man that
would have the Text controverted thus rendered, Haec est Lux illa vera quae
venientem in mundum illuminat omnem hominem: this were as ingrammatical
altogether, but we spare him, though we must remember him; for we cannot esteem
it Doctrinal Error for a man to miss a Tense, and would have him and all men
know, that our Religion stands not in Grammatical Tenses, but the Fear of God,
and Faith in Christ Jesus, whose Blood cleanses from all Sin such as walk in
his Light. Nor did the Prophets and Apostles stand upon Tenses, especially
Jeremiah and John, whose Hebrew and Greek don't much exceed the Quakers
English. G. F. was not sent to preach up Propriety of Speech, the World is but
too Curious and Proud in such Human Science and acquisition; But like a
Faithful Minister of God, by his Eternal Spirit and Power to turn People from
Darkness to the Light (in which the Ransomed walk, with Everlasting Joy upon
their Heads) and from the Power and Kingdom of Satan, which stand in the Lust
of the Eye, Lust of the Flesh, and Pride of Life, unto God, and his Holy
Kingdom, which stands in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost,
Romans 14. 17. And as such it is that G. F. is owned and respected with other
public Laborers amongst us, who seek not Honor from men, as our Adversary
and most of the rest of men do; John 5. 44. Isa. 3. 17.
but that which is from God; and his Wisdom, which is first pnre, then
Peaceable, Gentle, and easy to be entreated; which is not of this World, but
by the Children thereof esteemed Foolishness and mere Enthusiasm, and that in a
way of Derision: and we know that we are of God, and the Generality of the
World lies in Wickedness, either of Flesh or Spirit.

Having, I hope, sufficiently proved, that the Participle (...), Venientem, or
Coming, is to be referred to Men, and not to Light; and that (...) is properly
rendered Illuminat, and that Enlighten: Nay, in case they were not so, that it
would prove little prejudicial to our sense (as the difference has been
already explained) I am now willing to make appear, That the Light, of which we
have been so treating, is no natural nor created Light; but, a Supernatural and
Eternal Light; which done, the Controversy, at least on this Subject, we shall
conclude.

1. If man be enlightened by that Word, John 1. 1, 2, 3.
which was with God, and was God, and that before the World was; then man is
enlightened by a supernatural and eternal Light: but the Scripture in the
first, second, and third verses of John's first chapter, proves man to be so
enlightened, and that Light to be such, as beforesaid; therefore man is
Illuminated by a Supernatural Eternal Light.

If he object another sense of these Verses, then the words simply and nakedly
seem to import; for instance, that the beginning there mentioned^ relates not
to the World, and visible elementary Creation, but the invisible Creation, as I
know is their common refuge. I Reply,

2. If all things were made by him, and without him nothing made that was made;
Verse. 3.
then, either John spoke equivocatingly, not meaning what he said; or else,
plainly, and properly, and consequently all Things (of which the World is the
greatest part) were made by him; and therefore He must needs have been before
all created things.

3. If he were that true Light, by way of exemption to all others (as the
Socinians are wont to interpret God to be true God, Verse. 9.
John 17. 3. and there is no reason to the contrary) then was he Light in
himself; and consequently, did not illuminate by a received or borrowed Light,
from another; but ex^se, out of himself, and from himself only, and therefore
God; as says John in his first Epistle, This then is the Message which we have
heard from him, That God is Light, etc. The first Proposition is Scriptural, 1
Jo. 1.
and needs no Proof; and the second I prove thus,

4. If the Divine Life of this creating Word be that True Light by way of
excellency and exclusion of all others, Verse. 4.
with which he enlightens every man coming into this World, then must he be
Light in Himself, and from Himself; unless he can be Himself without that
Divine Life which is in Him; which because he cannot, it will follow, that he
is such a true Light as has been asserted; and consequently, must be God,
inasmuch as he, who is the Fountain of true Life, is God. Which I further prove
thus,

5. If he, who is eminently that true Light, by whom only all Mankind is
enlightened, neither is, nor can be that Light, as any part of Mankind, however
immaculate ( since so he would be a Light unto Himself, which is both absurd
and impossible) then that Creating Word, which is that Divine Life, which is
evidently that true Light, by which all men are enlightened, neither is nor
could be a Mortal Man, however Holy; and properly therefore it was not Christ,
as Man, but as God, that he was and is eminently the Light of Men. Which I
further prove.

6. If that Light, in which all men ought indispensibly to believe for
Salvation, Verse. 7.
be the Light, with which men are enlightened; then are all Men savingly and
supernaturally enlightened: But the Scripture here quoted proves the Light in
which all should believe, and which illuminates all to be the same; and
consequently, the Light, wherewith men are enlightened, is Saving and
Supernatural.

7. If that World was made by him, in which he was, and which knew him not;
Verse. 10,
then, because this elementary World was the World in which he was, and Mankind
then in it, those that knew him not, it follows, that this visible elementary
World, and Mankind in it, were made by him; and if made by him, then
necessarily he must have been before them: and since this Word is that Light,
by which men are enlightened, it follows, that they are Illuminated by a
Supernatural and Eternal Light.

8. If to as many as receive him (the true Light enlighting all) to them he
gives Power to become the Sons of God; Verse. 12.
then the way to be a Son of God is, to obey the Light, or to receive and obey
the Light is the way to be a Child of God; not born of Blood, nor of the Will
of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God; but the Scripture plainly
testifies that to be the way: therefore the Light is Saving and Supernatural.

Thus much in short from Scripture: I have a few Arguments to offer from Reason.

It is, I think, granted on all hands, That God has enlightened Mankind with
some Light or other; the Question then will be this, What Nature, this Light is
of, Saving or Insufficient, Natural or Supernatural? I prove it to be
Supernatural and Saving thus.

1. If the Light, with which God has enlightened Men, were natural, then could
it inform men only in and about natural Affairs; but we see that men do thereby
in measure know and discern things that are Supernatural; therefore this Light
is not Natural, but is Supernatural, and consequently Saving.

2. That it gives men some Knowledge of Divine Things, I suppose all believe;
however, I thus prove it: God gave it for some End, or no End; for no End we
cannot, we dare not suppose; if for some End, then not in reference to Natural
Things, because they are knowable by the spirit of Man as such; consequently it
must be in and about things relating to Man's Duty to God and his Neighbor, in
which consists the Salvation of his own Soul: if so, then I prove its
sufficiently thus,

3. Whatever God gives to any Man for any end, is sufficient for that End for
which he gives it him: but God has given his Light unto men, in order to their
Duty to Him and their Neighbor, in which consists the Salvation of their
Souls; and consequently that Light is sufficient to that End.

That what God gives to any End is sufficient to compass it, I thus prove;

4. God requires all Men strictly to serve and obey him, and to work out their
Salvation with Fear and Trembling; or else, their End shall be Destruction: but
this the Almighty (with Reverence I say it) could not justly do, unless the
Light with which he enlightens men were sufficient and saving: therefore,
unless our Adversary will impeach him of manifest Injustice, or deny that he
thus requires men to fear him, and work out their own Salvation, he must grant,
that not only God has illuminated all men, but that the Light, wherewith he
has illuminated them to that great End, is Saving and Supernatural.

Object. I know the Objection that is on these Occasions frequently started,
viz. How comes it then that all Men have not a clearer View of this Light
whereof you speak?

But Men must have a care of concluding the Light ever the less Divine in it
self, because of that dim and imperfect sight their own infirmities cause them
to have of it; perhaps some are as incapable to behold the Light as it is, as
an Infant to make a true Prospect by the natural Day: Others are grievously
infested with Rumes, Bloodsheds, and many other Distempers; whilst not a few
either wilfully close their Eyes, are blinded with Motes and Beams, run into
obscure Places, or by their continued obstinacy in Wickedness, come at last
wholly to lose both the Light, and their Capacity of seeing it. Such are those
on whom the Night comes, in which none can work; and this was impenitent
Jerusalem's Case, which is too too frequently and lamentably paralelled in our
days. Men must not think to see all at once; and because their inquisitive,
impatient and wondering Mind is not answered by whole heaps of glittering
Discoveries; therefore, in a brittle unsubject Nature, sling off all regard to
the Light of God, and vainly think to compass Salvation in their own
unwarrantable strivings.

Let men consider seriously their own dark state, how song the Light has
shined there uncomprehended; and since it has pleased the Eternal God to visit
them with such a Ministry and Testimony as turns them unto that blessed
unchangeable Light, diligently to adhere to it, and be humbly contented to
practice what they know (for, to that only End and Purpose does God cause it to
shine in their Hearts) before they look after other Discoveries, from that
grasping, ravenous, comprehending spirit in man, which would know the End
before it practices the beginning, which is cursed of God, and is for eternal
Judgment; this lost Adam his Paradise, and obstructs Thousand, from entering
into the Way of God at this very day.

Wherefore Blessed are they, who knowing their own Weakness, wait diligently
upon the Lord for such daily Dawnings of his own saving Light, as suit their
own states, as to their daily Temptation, Preservation and Increase in the
experimental Knowledge of the Way of God: Such are not wise above what is
written in their Hearts by the Finger of God; and speak and declare of God, and
his Unchangeable Way, according as they have felt and handled; I mean, as He
has revealed Himself both in Judgment and in Mercy, through the in-shining
Light of his Son.

And this I publish to the whole World, That I never knew God truly and
heartily to be of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity, I was never
conscientiously convinced of any Evil, I never was brought into true
Repentance, I never experienced real Atonement, I never had right Faith in
Christ, nor did I ever inwardly come to feel a cleansing from any sin, and a
being justified by his Blood, by which to know him my Mediator, Savior and
Redeemer, but by the Reproofs of that Light wherewith Christ has enlightened
me, and by turning to it, and walking in it with all Godly Fear and Subjection,
according to its blessed Discoveries and Requirings. Wherefore I boldly call
it, A Sufficient, Saving and Supernatural Light: And according to the truth of
this, so let my Soul find Mercy with my God by Jesus Christ.

I shall sum up my Sense briefly thus.

All Mankind have been Benighted,
All Men have Degenerated;
In that state, all are Ignorant;
In that state, all are Corrupted;
And in that state, all are damned:
And this Certainly:
God would have all men be saved;
But they can never be Saved,
Till they be Regenerated:
To be that, they must be Washed;
To be Washed, they must Believe;
And to Believe, they must Repent;
And to Repent, they must see why;
And to do this, they must have Light:
And all this Certainly.
This Light must give true and right fight;
This Light must be sufficient;
Then this Light is infallible;
Then this Light must needs be Saving:
And all this is True.
This by their own Principle cannot be denied, as well as that it is true in it
self.

I conclude therefore, That all men of themselves want Light; that God, since
he would have all be saved, has given all Light; that this Light must give a
certain Discerning; and that such as are guided by it are consequently
certainly led. In short, The Light is both Universal, Supernatural, and
Infallible.

That this is not our Judgment only, I shall mention a few of many, that assert
it to be a Saving Light.

1. Thus believed Origin, (...). Orig. in Joan. c. 1. v. 9.
He is truly called the Light of Nations, or the Gentiles, by Isaiah; I have
given thee for a Light, to lighten the Gentiles, and for my Salvation to the
uttermost parts of the Earth -- But truly, our Savior is the great Light of
the intelligible World, enlightening those in the most excellent parts of their
Souls, who are capable of Reason, that the Mind may discern and perceive to it
self those things that are most proper and worthy of men's pursuit after.

2. Chrysostom positively declared his Judgment in the Matter, as we have
observed before.

3. Erasmus, upon the same place tells us, That its import, Erasm. in prim.
cap. Joan. comm.
so far as concerned the nature of the Light, lies here; Illa Lux, erat Fons
Luminis, unde ipsi quoque Johanni suum fluxit Lumen: That Light was the
Fountain of Light, from whence John himself received that Light he had. If so,
then a supernatural and saving Light, then God, and consequently more then a
Man; because as such, John was before Him, and could not be enlightened by him.

4. Beza, though he restrains that Light to a particular Number, Bez. in nov.
faed.
which is not the Point in Controversy, yet he confesses it to be a Saving
Light, at least, to as many as God has destinated it: Quasi de regenerationis
gratia hic agatur, quae Filijs Dei peculiariter est destinata.

5. Tollet speaks very notably on this occasion, Sunt vero tres illius lucis
proprietates: antiquitas, Toll in prim. cap. Joan. com. page 39.
veritas, and communitas, quae cum Johanni non insint, recte concluditur illum
lucem illam non esse -- quae illuminant omnem hominem venientem in Mundum, non
in Iudaeos solum, sed et in omnes gentes Lumen suum diffundit -- Dicitur autem
Lux illa omnem hominem illuminare, sicut and Sol, qui sufficiens lumen
expandit, and omnes illuminat and omnibus propositus est, ut videant: quod si
qui non vident defectus Solis non est; sic Christus in hoc Mundo, omnibus
quidem hominibus, quantum est in se, et ex efficacia Lucis suae lucet. That is,
There be three Properties which are peculiar to the Light; Antiquity, which
(says he elsewhere) is Eternity; Truth, by way of Excellency; and Community,
in that all men who are born into the World partake of it, or are enlightened
by it. -- But that Light, like unto the Sun, is said to enlighten all men; who
streams forth Light sufficient, that it may give Light to all; and he is set
before all, that all may see. Thus does Christ on his part illuminate all men
with his Efficatious Light.

6. Maldonatus, Maldon. in prim. Joan. cap. comm. page 411, 412.
to the same purpose thus, Non-nulli hoc de naturali rationis lumine
intellexerunt. Sed minime dubium est de spirituali lumine intelligendum, de
doctrina, de fide, de gratia, de vita illa de qua di^^erat; and vita erat Lux
hominum, Cypri. lib. 1. and Christ us non solum in hunc Mundum veniens, sed and
postquam and antequam veniret erat Lux vera quae illuminabat omnem hominem
venientem in hunc Mundum. Which is to say, Some have understood this place as
treating of the Light of Nature or Reason; but, says he, there is little
doubt, but it is to be understood of a Spiritual Light, of Doctrine, of Faith,
of Grace, and of that Life, concerning which he (viz John) had said, and that
Life was the Light of men, as says Cyprian lib. 1. -- And not only as Christ's
coming, but both before and after he came, he was the true Light, which
enlightens every man coming into the World.

7. Vatablus has it in the same sense with Erasmus, Vat. in prim. cap. Joan.
com.
He was the Fountain of Light it self, Unde etiam Johannes quicquid habebat
Lucis. From whence John received what Light be had.

Zegerus, though not on these very words, yet to the context, Zeg. in prim.
cap. Joan. com.
In him was Life, etc. speaks thus, Et Vita erat Lux hominum, and Lux in
tenebris lucet; illa inquit, vita per quam condita sunt omnia, illa vita quae
est Verbum, imo quae Deus omnis Vitae Fons, ipsa semper fuit, and est Lux
omnium hominum, quae omnibus impertit naturalis luminis and gratiae beneficium:
and haec Lux in tenebris animarum nostrarum lucet, quas animas obscurarat
Princeps iste tenebrarum Diabolus. And that Life was the Light of Men, and the
Light shines in Darkness, etc. that Life, says be, by which all things were
made, that Life which is the Word, yea, which is God, the Fountain of all Life;
that very Life ever was and is the Light of Men, which furnishes all both with
the advantage of natural (or worldly) Light, and the Light of God's Grace: And
this Light shines in the Clouds, or dark places of our Hearts, which the
Devil, that Prince of Darkness has veiled.

Cameron also is not foreign in his Exposition, but seems to conceive the same
thing; Came. in Joan. cap. 1. comm.
Etsi verum est omnem humanae mentis Lucem esse ab illo Sole, attamen
intelligendum est praecipue de illa Luce quae est ad salutem, and qua fit ut
tenebris peccati and mortis liberemur. And though it be true, that what Light
man has it proceeds from that Sun, yet it is chiefly to be understood of that
Light which leads to Salvation, and by which we may be freed from the Darkness
or Grave of Sin and Death.

Thus much as to the Judgment of these Grandees (in the World's account) as to
their concurrent Exposition of this place, by which it may be seen, that Men
famous for accute Learning, have had that sense of the truth of the letter of
the Scripture, which we have been reputed Heretics, indeed what not, for
maintaining as an Article of Christian Faith: It is to be hoped, that People
will accept of Truth from them, if their Prejudice will not admit them to
embrace it from us: but since it is not our Praise we seek, but the Glory of
Him that made us, and the Salvation of others, we shall not be displeased if
they receive the Truth at any hand, so they receive it as it in Jesus.

Here I would fain break off, but that I feel my self somewhat pressed with a few
Passages, which refer to the Light, toward the Conclusion of the Libel, that
may not improperly be considered under this Head.

Certainly it would be thought very strange, and that I have spent my time as
unprofitably as the Emperor that would be all day a killing of Flies, if at
last I should make this man speak the Language of the Light, nay, to be a
Defender of it too, against whom I have been all this while defending it; but
who can help it, if men will self-contradict, and put Weapons into their
Opposers Hands, to Disarm and Conquer themselves?

Though in one page he tauntingly says, He is persuaded that some of us have
such an Opinion of the Light, our great Fundamental, that though an Angel from
Heaven should preach any other Doctrine, then that which G. F. has preached,
they could not give ear to it ( which Saying one would think abusive enough of
the Light) yet he makes amends in the next, where he thus addresseth himself to
us, Page 39.
Or rather that so much reproached Light; I appeal to the Light in every one of
you, whether he is not guilty Himself in a much higher degree of such things as
he condemns in others. Monstrum horrendum! What man of tolerable sense would
thus write his own Reproof, and in less then two Pages give himself the Lie?
But it is just with God that such men should be strongly infatuated. Is it not
strange that he should mock at our desiring to be informed by the Light at the
bottom of one Page, and make his own Appeal unto it at the top of the very
next? Is it fit to direct us in and about what he writes, and not concerning
the Writings of other men? or, Is it a true and approved Light when it concurs
with him, and but a weak, delusive, and what not Light when it leads us to
oppose him? But out of his own mouth let him be judged. I shall therefore
contract the benefit I make of his own Appeal into these two Arguments.

1. That unto which he makes an Appeal must be capable of giving an Infallible
Judgment, and so a true Judge, or else he appeals foolishly: But the Light
within is that unto which he makes his Appeal, and we would not think him to do
it to a thing not fit to give a certain Judgment; therefore the Light is an
Infallible Judge by his own Appeal.

2. If it be appealed to by him as a competent Judge; nay, that by which we
should satisfy our own Consciences, touching the things he lays to G. F's.
charge, namely, Impostor, etc. and since those things are of the highest nature
in Religion, or against it, then will it follow, that the Light is to be the
Judge of George Fox, and not only of him, but concerning those weighty Points
of Religion wherein he is abusively charged by the Libeller: And if so, I would
both tell him, That G. F. is pronounced not guilty by the Verdict of that
Light, from which there is no Appeal: and Himself first guilty of charging him
with what he has not proved; and secondly, of Abusing, Degrading, and
Contemning the Light; and then, contradictorily to himself, of making his
solemn Reference and Appeal to the Light, as the most Impartial and Unerring
Judge.

Tell me now, what could we have said more in praise of the Light, so far as
mere words go? and what could he have said against himself?

He further adds, That it is the Protestant Principle, as well as ours, that it
is evident by their dissent from the Church of Rome, who pretending to be the
Infallible Guide in Religion; No, says the Protestant, Everyman is Judge for
Himself. Further, That God h^s for that End endued every man with such a Light
of Common and Certain Principles, written in every man's Heart, that if a
Prophet should come and give them a Sign or a Wonder, to draw them away from
the observance of that Light, and those Principles, they ought not to adhere to
that Prophet (see Deuteronomy. 12. 1, 2, 3.) Moreover, God, they say, has promised his
holy Spirit to those that humbly implore it in the Obedience of that Light.
Further, That we have entertained it under new Names; that the Contention
between us and our Adversaries is about words; Natural Light, say they, quoting
than in the Romans, For when the Gentiles, that have not the Law, do by Nature
the things contained in the Law; they having not the Law, are a Law unto
themselves: Divine Light, say you, John 1. 9. Is not the Difference betwixt you
and others about Names; for whether God has given it Men by Nature or not, it
is of God, in respect of its proceeding from Him, and tendering to Him. Thus an
eminent Preacher in a great Assembly of late upon the Text, And so far the
Quakers are in the Right, That every man has the Motions of Good and Evil
within him; which, in plain Cases of Good and Evil, Right and Wrong, will tell
him, what he ought to do, and what he ought to avoid, by which he ought to be
directed; and that his Conscience will acquit and excuse if he do the One, and
accuse and condemn him if he do the Other.

Thus far our Adversary and his eminent Preacher.

To the first I shall say, that taking it for granted, he is as Orthodox as a
Protestant, whose Cause he would seem to vindicate, yet he grossly contradicts
himself, compared with his several lessening Expressions of the Light: But I
hope, now he has told us that both the Protestants and himself receive and
assert the Light to be the right Judge and Guide, that both will never more be
angry with the poor Quakers for being of that mind; And that our Adversary will
particularly retract his Manuscript to G. W. in Defense of the Scriptures being
the Judge, Rule, and Guide, or to that Effect.

As for his refusing us the Reputation of having shown them the Way to such
Belief, saying, It was always theirs; We are contented to sit down without the
Glory of being so much as Instrumental to such Convictions. In short, If the
Light within be a more certain Ground then very Signs and Wonders; Nay, that
excellent Gift, with which God has endu'd Man in order to the safe Conduct of
his Life, as our Adversary has plentifully confessed, then have we obtained our
Post ( viz. that the Light is an Infallible Guide) and need no more contend
about what is so expressly yielded to us, and the accord confirmed by the
Concessions of an Eminent Preacher too, whom I wish as Eminent a Practitioner
and not less sound in his Life then Pulpit. But alas! such is our mans's
Uncertainty to himself as well as others, that it seems Impossible with him, to
write two Pages, and they not quarrel with each other, and both mutiny against
their Author; for after his Elogies bestowed upon the Light, he is once more
come to unbespeak them, like the Sullen Cow, that spills the Milk she gives.

And that which is more to be wondr'd at, this miserable man begins to except
against the Sufficiency of the Light, from those very Reasons, for which he
seems to have asserted it at an high rate, thus; And this helps me to show in
the third place, that you extend the Doctrine of the Light in every man further
then you ought; page 40.
for it is not to be extended to all Cases whatever, as if every man that
attends to the Light in him, did certainly know, what is good, what is Evil,
Right or Wrong in every Case.

I heartily pity the man, and am really afraid he has overcharged the Strength
of his Brain, for with me such manifest Contradiction is but a smaler degree of
Distraction; I would fain have a rational Answer from him, if he be yet capable
of one. How can the Light be a Judge of good and evil, and yet not be so, and
all within the space of ten lines? If the Light, as by him acknowledged, be a
Judge of Good from Evil, and the contrary, then in all Cases, where Good and
Evil, Right and Wrong make up the Question, the Light cannot be secluded as
wanting in true Judgment, because Good and Evil are part of the Queston, in the
granted Proposition; Deny that the Light is sufficient in any case of Right and
Wrong, and deny all. But to me it seems very strange, that the very same Light,
which was at the other side of the leaf the great Judge of Doctrinal Truth, and
with which God had endu'd men to their singular benefit, should at last be
denied the Ability of giving Right Judgment in matters that strictly belong to
Good and Evil. What is this but to say, it is a Judge of Good and Evil, But
(...) Judge of Good and Evil God's Gift, to guide us, yet in many things it may
(...)? Well, but what are all these things of moment into which this Light is
unable to wade? O! many Difficulti^^ (...) men differ in their Judgments about
them, so we see among the Saints (...) Rome, to whom Paul wrote, One (says he)
believes that he may (...) all things, another who is weak eats Herbs, One man
esteems one day above another, another esteems every (...) alike, Romans 14.
2, 5. O stupendous Folly! This way of Reasoning well becomes him; for what is
it but to say, This Light of which I speak, has sufficiency in it to discover
the nature of things of greatest concernment, but not these minute and trivial
matters, she can judge of Doctrines, but not of Ceremonies, and can try Spirits
but not Infirmities, whether they be such or not. But I hope that men in their
Wits, and I write to no other, will never abandon their Reason so far, as to
think those Persons not being as yet so clearly disentangled from the Jewish
Ceremonies and needless Observations of that exterior Worship, shall be
interpreted a defect in the Light about difficult matters; for neither are such
things difficult, but discerned to be sometimes the needless Scruples of
Weakness, sometimes the dotage of Superstition, many times Will Worship: nor
can any (...) be cast more upon the Light, or the Light justly suffer the (...)
of Deficiency, then the Eternal Sun, because some (...) have such ^ore Eyes as
they cannot strongly behold the Light.

It Is true, perhaps Abstinence may be both best, and of^^n enjoined some
Persons, either by way of Testimony against Excess in others, or having been
too apt to give themselves an (...) Liberty, and on all, that they may eat and
drink in fear, as says the Apostle; I keep under my Body, and bring it into
Subjection, least having preached to others, I my self should become a
Castaway. But what then? Must the Light be no whit concerned there in because
of the great Difficulty in the Point? By no means, the Light dictates and
requires these things in their times and seasons; for whatever our Adversary
does, no sober man can believe that the Light is sufficient to the most weighty
things that concern man's Salvation, and yet be unable to judge of those
Differences mentioned by the Apostle, which were such Weaknesses as needed
Christian Charity to bear with them.

Nay, it was by the Light that their Weakness was seen, neither could it have
been born, or they ever have grown stronger then to place dissents in those
trivial things, but by walking up to the Light, which was alone able to give
them Right Discerning in the Case. I conclude therefore that in the Instance
made by our Adversary, there could be no Difficulty too great for the Light,
nay that the Instance is so trivial in comparison of the excellent Knowledge,
and Judgment which are received by the Light, that it makes but the more for us
to the disparagement of him that has alleged it.

And thus much (though a Knock to himself, even whilst he thinks us under his
blow) when he says, And where is the Infallibility you speak of in particular
Persons, in all Cases? I am persuaded if you consider this well, you will
perceive that the Light in every man (especially in those whose Judgments have
been prepossessed into false Notions, as many of you have been before you were
Quakers) does not teach him all things whatsoever, but all things that are
necessary for him to know in order to a Holy Trust in God, and sincere
Obedience in the general Course of his Life. Well! before I would undertake
Controversies, and thus give away my Cause, nay so woefully, yet frequently
contradict my self, I would never write while I live. But to make my advantage
of this too.

Infallibility of Persons any further then as they are joined, and conformed to
the Light of God. We never affirmed: and Fallibility of the Light because of
the fallibility of Persons We never owned, and now deny as a most Ridiculous
and False Consequence

He tells us of Contrary Judgments in our Assemblies of Business, and from
thence queries, Where is the Infallibility of Persons? What then, in case that
were true, as we disclaim it? Why I am persuaded the Light in every man does
not teach him all things. This New Way of Demonstration I am a Stranger to;
What is it but to say? You sometimes differ, therefore the Light is fallible:
or thus, Every man that sins is enlightened, therefore the Light in every man
sins; If this be Absurd and Wicked, let our Adversary purge himself as he can.

Well, but Infallibility in all Cases does suppose, that though not in all, yet
in many, at least in some Cases men may be infallible; If so, I ask, in what?
Surely in those wherein they walk conformably to the Light: If so, then what is
the Consequence but this; When men live up in all things to the Light, they are
Infallible, but when they go from it, they are not. Surely then the man has but
hitherto beat the air.

And why may We not make the most of what he says for us, and infer, If that
before We were Quakers, and come to live under the holy Conduct of this Light,
we were possessed with false Notions, he means (or at least the Expression will
bear it) that since we were Quakers we came to be possessed with true ones.
Well, but the extent of the Light is not to all things, yet, (says he) what is
it to say I? why only to all that is necessary for him to know, in order to a
Holy Trust in God, and sincere Obedience in the general Course of his Life.
Very well, I would now fain understand the Difference, of knowing all, or Right
or Wrong, in all Cases wherein a man is concerned; and knowing all things
necessary for him to know, unless he will confess, when he said the Light was
not sufficient to determine the Right and Wrong of all Cases, that he meant of
Cases that did not concern men to know; and then we will with him conclude so
too. But if the Light be sufficient to discover unto man all that is fit for
him to know, in reference to God, and his own Soul, and yet in some Cases it
cannot determine the Right from the Wrong, in which man's Good is concerned, it
is manifest to all the World, that this will be the direct Consequence, the
Light is not sufficient to give men the Knowledge of all that is fit for them
to know, but the Light is sufficient to discover unto them all that which is
necessary for them to know.

But he is wonderful Jealous that We neglect the means the Light does dictate
unto us the great need and use of; namely, the Scriptures, and other diligent
study, and here he falls down right upon us: Must God be bound with his Divine
Light and Inspiration to supply the defects of our Idleness and Pride? for when
other men count it great Mercy in God, page 42.
that he is pleased through the vilest means that may be, and through their
earnest Study and Diligence, to grant them the Knowledge of his Will,
Enlightening their Mind by his Holy Spirit; You must have it like the Angels
that always behold his Face by immediate Revelation, and without Labor and
Industry.

Methinks he is both Angry, Uncivil, and Irreverent. Angry, that others should
enjoy through their unfeigned Repentance, and humble constant walking with that
Holy Light, which convinced them those daily Discoveries from the Lord of their
duty toward him, and all men, with renewed Refreshment and Consolation, which
he by all his poring, beating of his Brains, and daily striving can never
obtain; But the Scriptures are herein fulfilled, the Holy Way the (...) Eye did
never see. Some would have the Kingdom of God by Violence, and many strove to
enter, but could not; And that same Ravenous Spirit after Knowledge our
Adversary must come to know judged, and cast out of himself, as what robbed man
of Paradise at first, and keeps Thousands out at this day, and see himself to
be Low, and Empty, and Poor, and Naked, before he be exalted as Full, Rich, and
wanting nothing.

Uncivil, that he should in that rough and reflecting manner upon us (who
neither knows us to be idle, or Proud, and least of all in any thing which
concerns him) but if our diligent waiting to receive from God Strength,
Knowledge and Comfort ( and not running in our Own Wills) be Idleness, in that
Sense We evermore desire to be Idle. It is by the same ^gure that we are Proud,
namely, We rejoice with Boldness in the God of our Salvation, declaring to the
World what God has done for us not flinching in times of Tempest, neither
suffering such Creeping Spirits as his to be owned by us, as men walking in the
Light, and ransomed from this Ungodly World by the precious Blood of the Lamb
of God that takes away the Sin thereof.

Irreverent, in that he makes God to convey the Knowledge of himself through
the Vilest Means, Vile had been more then enough, he might have kept Vilest to
himself. I have not read in all the Scriptures of Truth any such Expression;
It Is true, David in answer to those who counted his serving of God a Vile
Thing, said then, He would ^e Vile still: but that is no Warrant. And God's
Judgment pronounced upon Eli's House, 1 Samuel 3. 13, 14.
much less, because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not;
therefore have I sworn to the House of Eli, that the Iniquity of Eli's House
sha^^ not be purged with Sacrifice nor O^^ering soever. Romans 1. 26.
And the Apostle Paul uses the same word in the same sense, For this Cause God
gave them up to vile Affections, etc. Now for any man to expect that God by
vilest ways should make himself known is an unscriptural and irreverent
Saying: but this may show how dark and vile the man is in the use of such
unsuitable and unsavory Expressions.

However, He once more hopes to m^ke amends, and if his last Will and Testament
may stand; I mean his last Account of his wavering Belief of the Light, then
the Light is what we have said it to be, viz. Supernatural and Saving. Hear him:

So now my Friends, I deny not that there is a Light in every man, Page 42. 43.
which he is obliged, under Pain of the displeasure of the Almighty,
diligently to eye and follow; that so doing, it will lead him by degrees into
all necessary Truth, and at length to eternal Life.

A large Confession to the Light, and as large a Contradiction to page 38., 40,
41. which because we have already observed and improved to the benefit of our
own Belief; let this suffice, that at last we have obtained what we have sought
for, viz. That the Light is a Saving Light: I shall conclude this Subject with
this friendly Caution, That they will ever hereafter do exceedingly well to
remain constant to their own Grants, and not through any disgust at the use we
have made thereof, in rehandling the same Controversy, like Children, first
give, and then take away again.

And now let none be displeased that I have been so particular in handling this
Point of the Controversy, which concerns the Light, since I confess it to be
the most eminent Article of our Faith, Christ the true Light enlightening every
man that comes into the World with saving Light, and therefore deserves of such
as so believe, to be defended with all the Circumspection and Advantage they
are capable of; and I am not conscious to my self of any neglect in the cas^.
For what concerns the remainder, though I esteem it less worthy, yet not wholly
unworthy our notice, and therefore shall briefly consider it, I hope to
satisfaction.

His second Doctrinal Cavil, or that part of our Faith which he seems to single
out for Combat is, Not Swearing, and that upon occasion of G. F's Complaint of
the Translators in those words. Page 34.
G. F. says, 1 Cor. 15. 31. I Protest by your Rejoicing, etc. now I Protest is
added, for there is nothing for it in the Greek, (...): To which, that I may
pass by his Reflections upon G. F's Greek, or rather the Oversight of some
Transcribers, to be sure no Doctrinal Error, and therefore might have escaped
so much insulting Reproof: He thus answers, My Greek Grammar says, that
(...) and (...) ne, are Adverbs of Swearing, and Sc^pula' s Lexicon says,
(...) is a Particle of Granting and Affirming, and with an Oath. The Grammar
gives for Example, (...), so it is by Jupiter; neither may any one excuse him
by saying, that ^e signifies by, and not I protest; for (...) being a Particle
that imports Swearing; and by is sometimes used when there is no Swearing, it
seems to have been necessary for the Translators to put in I protest, or some
other word equivalent. How very trivial this Objection is, and with what
Weakness and Deceit he mannageth it, I hope very Evidently to make appear.

It Is granted to him what his Grammar tells him, that (...) both are Adverbs of
Swearing, or have been frequently used among the Greeks in their Oaths; though
(...) had been enough for him to instance, unless he would have us think him
learned in Adverbs, at least, such as concern Right Swearing; also, Scapula
intimates as much; but what then? because by is often used to express an Oath,
must it necessarily follow, that wherever by is used it is to import an Oath,
or Swearing is employed? And herein he dealt unfairly with us; for, though out
of his own words we might well infer as much, viz. that (...) is a Particle of
Granting or Affirming, and with an Oath; yet that is, both beside and with, not
always with an Oath; he should have told what Scapula said a little lower,
(...) particula est, interdum indirecte ponitur, nulla praecedente
interogatione, proutique, equidem, profecto: (...), says Scapula, is a
Particle, and is sometimes placed indirectly, with never an Interrogation
before, for verily, indeed, truly, etc. I will not insist upon the suitableness
of such a signification in this place; but shall tell the Man, that allowing it
to be anciently in the best Copies (which Chrysostom, if not Theophylact, does
more then doubt) yet it can have no other force or use in this place then to
render the Verse thus (viz) Upon the account of your Joy, or for the sake of
your increase in Christ, which is the Ground of our Joy, I dye daily, or
rather, I am daily ready to be offered up: And indeed unless men by Zeal or
Prejudice have veiled their own Understandings, the place it self, and context
plainly intimates so much. For first, It is absurd to suppose, that the Apostle
should Swear by what is not a real ens or existence; and should we grant, that
all Swearing was not by Christ prohibited, (as we never can) yet our
Adversaries conclude, That all Swearing by any other thing then God Himself is
prohibited: now the Corinthians Rejoicing was not Almighty God, by whom alone
they say men should Swear. Besides, let the Context be weighed, and it has
reference to the Glorious Kingdom, which all men, who are Partakers of the
first Resurrection, come to inherit; of which says Pa^l, If there were any
doubt, why are any baptized for the Dead, and why stand we in Jeopardy every
Moment? But as if ^e should have said, So far am I from doubting or fearing,
that upon the account of your further sufficiency or increase (in Christ the
Ground of Rejoicing) I dye, or am ready to dye daily; that is, I am ready to
seal it with my Blood: an ^^arty Encouragement to the Corinthians to go on, and
not that they should think there was no Reward for all their Faith an^
Tribulation ^et this be well weighed with our common English Version, See Orig.
in Matt. page 487.
and I persuade my self, that not only this will ^em very consonant, but the
vulgar very abrupt and in^^herent; and however improper, the man is pleased to
be himself* I caution him hereafter of rendering the Apostle so.

Now for the Right Sense of the Greek Copy, with the Confirmation of some other
Versions, and Judgment of both Ancient Fathers and Modern Critics. (...).

It is vulgarly rendered thus, Per diem morior, Per vestram gloriationem quam
habeo in Christo Jesu Domino nostro.

That is. I dye every day, through (or upon the account of) your Joy, which I
have in Christ Jesus our Lord.

In the Latin Interpretation of the Arabic Version it is thus rendered. Et
ego quidem singulis diebus morior per realitatem Gloriae vestrae, quam habeo in
Jesu Christo Domino nostro.

In English thus. And I indeed dye every day, through (or by means of) the
reallity or truth of your Joy, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord.

The Aethiopick Version thus Latined; wherein I dye daily is omitted. Et quare
igitur nos laboramus, omni hora and trucidamur? et propter gloriationem
nostram, Fratres nostri quae in Domino nostro Jesu Christo est.

In English thus. And wherefore do we labor, and are slain every hour? ( even
our Brethren) for our Rejoyceing, which is in our Lord Jesus Christ.



This last seems to carry with it something of difference from the Greek Copy,
and other Versions; yet if the sense I have given of the place be received, the
alteration will be only, the omission of I dye daily, and our for your
Rejoicing, which is not much to purpose, it being truly the Joy of both: for,
whether your Rejoicing relates to the preceding Queries, or I dye daily, it
still remains firm, that all those Jeopardies, Sufferings and Deaths were on
the account of that Truth, Hope, Rejoicing and Glory mentioned or employed in
the Text; where let it be observed, that slain, and dye daily, which strictly
would signify a time past, as well as present, are to be accepted in this
sense, that they were daily in hazard of their lives through grievous
Sufferings; and were freely and daily given up for their Testimony, unto Death
it self.

I forbear to instance in many of the present used Languages, designing to be
short; and shall therefore hasten to give the sense of some of the Ancient and
Modern Writers in the Point.

Jerome, Jerome on the place.
who lived about the year 383. thus renders the words in Controversy, Propter
vestram salutem; not through your Rejoicing, but for your Salvation; which is
yet more emphatical then I have rendered it, though to the same purpose.

Chrysostom observes upon this Passage to the Corinthians, Chrysostom. ^n the place.
Profectum ideo dici gloriam, ne videretur exprobrare quod tam aspera passus
esset ob Evangelium, cum ob haec non solum non doleret, sed duplici nomine
gauderet, and quod ea passus esset ^h Evangelium Christi, and quod ca quae
passus erat cesserant in profectum Corinthiorum; That is, Chrysostom believes
profit therefore to be called rejoicing, that they might not seem to upbraid
him for so hard things as he suffered for the Gospel, who was not only not
troubled, but in a double sense rejoiced, both that he had suffered those
things for the Gospel of Christ, and that those things which he did suffer,
turned to the profit or spiritual benefit of the Corinthians. He therefore
accounts, Per vestram Gloriam mendose scriptam, not so expressed in the ancient
Copy, but corruptly written.

Ambrose, also took it in that same sense with Chrysostom, Amb. on the place.
not (...), per, or by; but (...), propter, or for the sake of your Joy.

Theophylact is more peremtory and clear in the matter, Theophy. on the place.
that is, (...), Propter vestram Gloriam; or rather thus, Vestri pofectus
gratia; for the cause of your profitting, or on the account of your increase in
the Knowledge of the Truth, which administers true Joy.

Zegerus is of this Mind upon the Place, Zeg. in 1 Cor. c. 15. v. 31. Ann.
and takes not a little pains to confute the other Notion.

Grotius, although he does not altogether seem to acquiesce in that which I
have already urged, Grot. in prim. Epist. ad Cor. c. 15. Ann.
yet is he very remote from the common Translation, and so near to it, that it
may not be amiss to offer him; Quam vere (says he in the Person of the
Apostle) ego gaudeo de vestro profectu in Christo, ita verum est me quotidie
paratum mori. As I truly rejoice at your profitting in Christ, so true it is
that I am daily ready to dye (for it is wanting, but may be understood) To this
of Grotius, a considerable, but nameless English Annotator does agree.

And let me further add, that the Various Lections have it by way of
Correction, Var. Lect.
propter, not per; for, and not by.

And now it may be time for me to tell our Adversary in general, and mine in
particular, that though I don't blush to read his Impertinencies (perhaps I am
not ingenious enough (for such he says will) he ought at least to be ashamed
of writing them: and I am truly in pain for him, that he should both afflict
himself ( for the poor man has an irksome way of telling his Tale, and is fain
to churm long before any thing comes) and also disturb others with any thing so
meanly inviting, and little profitting the People.

To Conclude, If any would in short know the plain and honest Reason of our
refusing to Swear (to omit the many Arguments that might be urged (what Glosses
might be given, or Authorities produced) it is this, That as Christ Jesus is the
Author of so perfect a Religion, that the least Affirmative or Negative, be it
but Yea or Nay, is completely and unquestionably true; so it is below his
Evangelical Righteousness, and such as are gathered not only to the belief, but
possession of it, to so much as admit of an Oath, as being fitter to be
enjoined equivocating Pharisees, then Honest-Hearted Disciples, with whom it is
the same thing to Lie as to Forswear: for, an Oath having been made from the
Distrust of Honesty in Him that was to take it, where the Cause is removed (
Lies, Equivocations, mental Reserves, etc.) the Effects, or that extraordinary
and scrupulous way of Evidence should cease. And if any object the Law of the
Land, or the Ignorance of Magistrates of our Truth and Innocence: I Answer, The
Law is either answered by Truth being spoken, or satisfied by an infliction of
the same Penalty upon the Liar that is incurred by a perjured Person; we need
no Fines, Racks, nor heavy Imprecations, to scare us into Truth-speaking, who
Believe in, Fear and Worship the God of all Truth, and that in Spirit and Truth.

The next abuse of us, so far as concerns our Belief, belongs to respecting of
Persons; he calls it, our great Doctrine in a way of Reproach, Page 31. Mat. 23.
and often cavilling, not without his wonted Folly, at G. F's Woe unto them that
are called of Men Master (in which he only says what is certainly implied in
Christ's Prohibition (which he should have first confuted) he undertakes the
Refutation of it thus,

True indeed, says Christ, Be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your Master,
even Christ, and all ye are Brethren, etc. Now I will take the Liberty to argue
a little, because the Text seems to be so plain on your side; first, you do
restrain it from extinding all Men from being called Master, whilst you allow
your Servants to call you our Masters, because you are their Masters ( which
Exception is not in the Text) why may not another call you Masters, because you
have Servants, and are Masters?

I Answer, First then, he has broke his word with us, which in plainer English
is, he has told us a Lie, in assuring us at the beginning, He would deal with
us neither from Scripture nor Reason, and yet undertakes both: Certainly he is
ill able to maintain Right Swearing, that is wanting in True Speaking, or
writing at least. We may well suppose his Evidence, so much boasted of, has
left him now, that he betakes himself to Scripture and Reason for defense; but
considering how little they will prove friendly to his Cause, he is no
otherwise to be complained of for Breach of Word, then that the Will may be
accepted for the Deed.

But next, The Text also must be blamed; Why? may an honest-hearted man say,
Because upon our Adversaries Principles it seems to be against men's being
called Rabbi, and yet is not: Strange ^rreverence to Holy Writ! What? make it
say one thing in most express terms, as much as, Thou shall not Steal, and yet
mean the quite contrary: Who makes it their Rule now, We, or our Adversary? But
let us examine his Meaning; and he is so absurd, that I am confident I have
heard a better Argument out of Bedlam; however, let us once more repeat it, If
you call men Masters, that are really your Masters, why may you not call your
very Servants Masters, if they have Servants? which is as much as to say, If
you call men Masters that are really your Masters, why should not you call
other men Masters, though they are not really your Masters? O I but they are
other men's Masters; are they? Then let other men call them so: For there is no
more Reason that we should call other Men Masters, that are not our Masters,
because they are really some bodies Masters, then that (...) should call other
men Fathers, and Servants, and other Women W^^es, that are not our Fathers,
Servants nor Wives, because they are really Fathers, Servants and Wives to
other Persons.

We can call Him Master, Father, Servant, or Her Wife, who really is so to us;
but in doing it otherwise, we believe we should Err. A Master and Father of old
I confess to have signified a Religious as well as Civil Honor (I mean,
Sect-Masters among the Jews; but since both are as well repugnant to common
Truth, as the Christian Religion, we renounce the Title; and are the rather so
to do, because of that great Thirst, which this Age as well as that in which
our Lord so severely reproved it, has after that very Vanity, Deceit and
Wickedness; and this simple honest Practice, and Zeal for it, we are not
ashamed to have weighed in the Balance of God's Sanctuary, against all the
flattering, cringing Customs of Personal Respect, whether by Word or Gesture,
now practiced in the World.

Well, But he is of the mind, that the Scripture is not a little for him,
since the Apostle, both in his Epistle to the Ephesians, and in that to the
Collossians, exhorts Fathers not to provoke their Children, and Masters to give
what was equal to their Servants: in which the poor man is as much besides
himself, at least the matter, as in all the rest; for, he might as well argue
against what he takes for granted (viz.) That we refuse not to call such
Masters, as really are our Masters; as to suppose we deny, that an Apostle or
Minister of Christ might not exhort the Fathers of Children to be tender to
them, and Masters of Servants to be just to them. Certainly none can be so
stupid as to imagine, that the Apostle called them Fathers and Masters in a way
of Title, or upon singular Respect: We may as well suppose, that because he
does reciprocally exhort Children and Servants, that therefore he styled them
so in a way of singular Respect. Either let our Adversary deny that particular
Homage and Respect are intended by the vulgar Titles of Master, Lord etc. or
else prove, That the Apostle had the same Intention with these of our Times, in
their Titles of Respect to one another, when He wrote to Fathers, Children,
Masters, and Servants.

But let it suffice, that he was laying down a general Rule for both, as in
reference to such relations, without having any particular Persons or Titles in
his Eye; and unless he had known and mentioned all the Names of those that then
were, and hereafter should be Fathers and Children, Masters and Servants, he
could not otherwise have expressed his Mind.

But why should I farther contend with so much Weakness* yet he seems to have a
little Greek for his Ignorance; let us hear what it says, (...), are all
rendered Master: But that which is used by Christ in this Text, Mat. 23. 10.
is, (...), Katheegeetees, which signifies (as the Learned tells us) a Leader of
the Way, or Guide; but as for the word (...), Kyrios, which the Apostle Paul
uses to the Ephesians and Collossians, and is translated sometimes Master, and
sometimes Sir, most often Lord; we find that the Apostles both singularly and
plurally suffered themseles to be called by it, as the Greeks called Philip,
Page 31.
Sir, we would see Jesus, John 12. 21. and the Jailer came Trembling, and fell
down before Paul and Silas, and said, Sirs, or Masters, what must I do to be
saved? I Answer,

This makes nothing for the Business, though it makes Business; for none
questions the use of several words upon several Occasions in Scriptures, as the
Apostle to the Ephesians and Collossians does, Father, Master, etc. which I
have already explained, and proved nothing to the matter in hand. (...) may
signify a Lord or Master thus, because it properly imports Authority, or One
having Power, a Governor, or the like; But this makes for us; such as are our
Governors we do distinguish by Titles that plainly express their Authority,
though not with all those gaudy Flatteries, that men in Deceitfulness invent,
and use to gratify the Proud Part in any Man. But what is this to calling Men
Master; since we deny not the use of Master, Father, Son, Servant, etc. where
they are significantly, and not improperly and Sycophantly used? And for the
Greeks, that desired to see Jesus; and the Jailer, that tremblingly cried out,
Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? they are no Instances of Advantage to him;
unless we should be so very ridiculous as to think, that because any Man
customarily calls me Master, therefore I must call him or other Men Master, and
that I thought it well done in him to call me so; or, because any man commits
an Evil, and our Adversary does not immediately reprove him, therefore it is no
Evil in it self, and he commits the like: So, what if Philip, Paul and Sil^^
were called Sirs (not either to Tempt, Jeer or Flatter them, but in a customary
manner, in which many scarce think what they say) must it follow, that the
Practice was not after the Proud Fashions of the Gentile Nations; or that they
were guilty of the same Practice, because they did not just then reprove it,
when the poor Greeks looked for a Savior; and God's heavy Judgments had taken
hold on the Jailer, causing him to possess the Sins of his Youth, which made
him a Quaker indeed (for he came fearing and trembling unto them) No, no, the
matter was then of greater moment, the Salvation of Souls: had they talked to
them of the Title Master, or Masters, that would have been no Answer to their
weighty Question, nor any allay to that earnest Enquiry and deep Agony the
Queriers were under, Show us the Savior; O! what must I do to be saved? So
that how Reprovable soever that had been in it self, or at another time, yet it
did not seem then to the Holy Ghost to be the time; the Matter in hand was how
to bring them to the Light and Knowledge of that Jesus which was given for a
Savior; and when they had found him, and he had Discipled them, to call no man
Master, nor to look for it, because One was their Master, would all naturally
follow, as relative to that Evangelical Religion?

Well, but says he, Mary Magdalene called Jesus Sir (supposing he had been the
Gardener) and you will not say that Jesus suffered her to sin in his presence
without reproving her (which I abhor to think) Yet this will not serve his turn;
Page 33. Joh. 20. 13, 14, 15, 16.
for first, that Sir was not of that force and Emphasis, which Master was (the
Title mostly insisted on) the next Verse tells us, where Jesus said unto her
Mary, and she turned her self, and said unto him Rabboni, which is to say
Master, as if she had first recalled her self, and then styled him by a more
Reverent Title then that she gave him as the supposed Gardener. Next, we know
that till the pouring out of the Holy Spirit ( which was to bring all things to
their Remembrance, that Jesus had at times said unto them, and to lead them
into all Truth) the Disciples, among whom she was not the least, were in the
practice of more Customs then that, which after they grew up in a more mature
Knowledge of Christ and his invisible Kingdom, they declined and finally
rejected. Nor does it follow that she therefore did well, because she was not
reproved of Jesus (where the Stress seems to lie) or did that which in the true
State of Christianity was so much as allowable: for Christ ^ever particularly
chek^ Peter for denying him, that we read of, and I suppose all grant Peter did
amiss; yet by our Adversary's inconsequent way of arguing, he either would make
Peter not to have done ill in denying his Lord, or Jesus so, in not reproving
him for doing it, which let me tell him, we also abhor to think.

But now he doubtless pleased himself with the Conceit of having irrecoverably
caught us in that passage of Stephen's, Page 31. Acts 7. 2.
where he says, That He, a man full of Faith and Power, said to the Council of
the Jews, Men, Brothren and Fathers, The^ were not his Fathers, but they were
Fathers. In which his good will is seen, but how to effect what he would have,
is as difficult as before; for the Jews being a People peculiarly separated
from all other Nations in comparison of others, might not unfitly be called a
great Family, as being lineally descended of twelve Brethren, so that it was
frequent among them, instead of Ancestors, to say, our Fathers did so and so;
And this Way of Speech Christ himself used, when he said, Your Fathers eat
Manna in the Wilderness; wherefore what Stephen said, might be both allowable
and true. They were Men, that is not disputed; They were Brethren, as being of
the same Blood, and Fathers, as Elders of the Tribes under that particular
Constitution. Besides, both his own and (if Married) his Wifes Fathers and
Grandfathers might be then living, and either of the Council, or concurring
with it.

In short, We therefore refuse the style of Master, and are very cautious of
being in the least lavish in Titles of Worldly Honor, because We with
Lamentation behold, through the Illumination of God's blessed Light, the Spoil,
Cruelty and manifold Evils that Proud, Flattering, Honour-seeking and
Honour-giving Spirit has made amongst the Sons of men, who to compass unjust
Dominion, has sacrificed the Blood, Wealth, and Peace of Nations to its
ambitious aims, and esteemed it no small accession to the Magnific^nce of its
exploits, that almost in all Ages she has led the Rights, Properties, and
Persons too of Millions as Captives in Triumph after her, and through the Gulf
of Rapine and Blood lane^t into the vast Ocean of unlimited Power, What Impiety
is there in the World that may not in some sense be resolved into that of Pride
or Covetousness after Honor as its proper Center; Men's overvalue of
themselves, and their Displeasure against such as have not the like thoughts of
them, beget Revenge, which taking its opportunity breaks forth into Blood and
Murder; O! let men learn to dread the Living God, and fear all their days
before him, and that will sweep the mind of these vain thoughts, and bring it
from such exalted conceits, and its insatiable Thirst after Honor, and will
establish it in the Humility and Lovely Plainness of a Meek and Quiet Spirit,
which is of great Price in the Sight of the Almighty God; which because the
World is not adorned with, but does both seek and give wordly Honor, and
Personal Respect, whilst perhaps such entertain deadly Hatred against each
other, and resolve one another Ruin for outward Ends, we are constrained by
the Meek and Lowly Spirit of Christ Jesus our Lord to testify against the
World's Vain Honors, and to hold forth an Example to them, what they must all
expect to come to, before they can receive that Honor which is from God. And
this is that Honest Reason, why We of this Age, do with Elihu say, We know not
(how) to give flattering Titles, for in so doing our Maker would soon take us
away. Thus much in Answer to his Cavills, whose Emptiness might have been
enough to sound out their own indesert of any: but for the sake of the
Honest-Hearted I have said some thing, enough for the place and occasion; If
any desire further Satisfaction, they may please to peruse a Book entitled No
Cross, No Crown, and the Serious Apology for the Principles and Practices of
the People called Quakers, page 139, 140, 141, 142. which with several others,
sufficiently vindicate both our Principle and Practice in this particular, as
also others of the same Nature and tendency.

His fourth Fling at us is about Women's S^aking in the Church, page 30.
in which point he would seem to Triumph not a little over G. F. Let your Women
keep Silence in the Churches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak; bnt
they are commanded to be under Obedience, as also says the Law. And if they
will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at home; for it is a shame
for Women to speak in the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35. Here if the Apostle (says
he) does not command Silence to Women by Sex, in those cases, wherein he allows
men by Sex to speak, I understand nothing that is written; But G. F. page 380.
says, -- Now the Woman here has an Husband to ask, and not usurp Authority
over the Man; but Christ in the Male, as in the Female, who redeems from under
the Law, and makes free from the Law, that man may speak, etc. Now if we may
take Liberty to expound the Scripture thus, it will be a Nose of wax, that may
be turned which way we please: Besides, it seems to be built upon a misreading
of Husband for Husbands, because Christ, who is but One, is made the Husbands
that must be asked at home. So one of your Authors says, But what Husbands
have Widows to learn of but Christ? And was not Christ the Husband of Philip's
four Daughters? and may not they that learn of their Husbands speak then?

But before I go any further it may be observed, how very slight his return is
to G. F's Sense of the place: and especially, that though he quotes another
Friends Query on the matter, he never offers to give it any Answer, and I am
really persuaded, he was confounded by it.

However, why is it so abusive of the Scripture, to say that which the
Scripture says it self? Are not the Spirits of Believers properly the Lambs
Bride, as being the ^^ue Church, to which he is a Bridegroom, and ^f which he
is the Head? Methinks he must never have read, or at least have forgot what he
read in the Scriptures of Truth, who denies this: If so then, why is it
Improper or Abusive as he calls it, to say, that when Men's Spirits of
themselves, especially in the unlearned State, speak, it is that Woman, which
is forbidden to speak of her self, since the Context says, that though they
may all speak one by one, yet it is if any thing be revealed to them, which
because that cannot be without Christ reveal it, whom the Father has ordained
to be his eternal Word, by which to declare to man the invisible things of his
Kingdom; it follows, that it is Christ the Bridegroom and Husband of his
People, who by his Power speaks through his People, to the Edification of his
Body? And as the Woman is the Weaker Vessel, so is Man in comparison of Christ;
and therefore may not unfitly be accounted a Woman, from his comparative
imbecility: So that as Christ Presides or Governs in the Assemblies of his
People, it may be rather said, the Man, th^^ is, the Bridegroom and Husband of
his People speaks in them, and by them, then they themselves, who without him,
are but as the Strength of a Woman, and it being her place to yield to the
Soveraignity of her Lord and Husband, to whom is ordained the Rule, she ought
to receive the Law from his mouth, who is the everlasting High Priest, and
Prophet of his People.

But now suppose I should yield it to him that the Apostle chiefly intended the
Words in a Literal Sense, and not so mystically, as we have already discoursed,
will it therefore be untrue mystically? by no means; it is frequent to find
both a mystical and literal Sense in the same passage, as when the Evangelist
alludes to Isaiah's Prophecy Chap. 5. 3. Matthew. 8. 17.
proving it to be fulfilled by Christ's bodily Cures; which is true in that
Sense, yet has one more inward and mystical. But to be short, I utterly deny
from the Literal Text, that Women are prohibited to preach, singly as Women, or
of that Sex, and for no other Reason, and consequently that some Women may
preach, which I prove thus.

If the Apostle had Companions and Fellow Laborers in the Gospel that were
Women, then we ought to believe, that all Women, as Women only, were not by him
denied to speak in the Church: But the Apostles had Female Fellow Laborers in
the Gospel; therefore not all Women, but some Women only, are excluded. That he
had such Companions, he himself is Witness; Romans 16. 1, 3.
I commend unto you (Romans) Ph^be our Sister, which is a Servant of the Church
which is at Cenchrea. Great Priscilla and Aquila, my Helpers in Christ Jesus.
Again, Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labor in the Lord: Salute the Beloved
Persis, which labored much in the Lord: who were all Women, Aquila excepted.

Next, If the Prophecy of Joel refer to the Times of the Gospel, Joel 2. 28.
in which God promised, To pour out of his Spirit on all Flesh; and your Sons
and your Daughters shall Prophecy, etc. as is remembered, and so applied by
Peter, when the holy Ghost was poured forth at Jerusalem; then Women were not
exempted, as Women, from the Gift of the Holy^Ghost, and Prophecy thereby: But
it was never yet questioned by any that I know; and therefore Women, as Women,
are so far from being excluded, that they are to partake of the Promise as well
as Men.

Again, If Anna preached to the People in the Temple at Jerusalem, the Glorious
Day of Israel' s Redemption; as may be read in Luke: Luke 2. 36 Act. 18. 26.
cap. 21.
and if Philip's four Daughters were Prophetesses: and if Priscilla expounded
to Apollo, as well as her Husband, the Way of God more perfectly, even at that
time, when he was a Preacher among the People, as may be read at large in the
Acts; then say I, with good Reason, Women, as Women, are not denied by the
Apostle to Teach and Instruct in the Ways of God. But the Scripture evidently
proves, That such Women there have been; and consequently, Women, as Women,
are not prohibited.

And methinks the Place, urged by him against it, clearly intimates as much;
For, the Apostle is not treating in that Chapter, who, or what Sex shall
Prophecy, and what not; but of that Order and Decency which such as Prophecy
ought to observe: For when he said, You may all Prophecy one by (...) if it
had been asked, Who, Men or Women? doubtless he would have answered, All, or
every one, provided any thing be revealed to you: So that then this Prohibition
of the Apostle, extends only to their Disorder in the Church, occasioned by
their Ignorance, which put them upon the proposing of their Doubts and Scruples
unseasonably; that is, such of them as were Unlearned; and not an Anna, a
Priscilla, a Tryphena, a Tryphosa, or a Beloved Persis; who Preached Israel' s
Redemption, and Expounded the Way of the Lord, and were Fellow Laborers in the
Work and Gospel of Christ. So then the words are to be read thus, I permit not
an Unlearned, or Ignorant Woman, to speak in the Church; and if she will learn
any thing, let it be at Home of her Husband, for it is a Shame that such a
Person should be suffered to trouble the Church with her Unseasonable and
Unlearned Questions.

And to this sense Grotius himself does more then incline, as may be read in
his Annotations upon this very place; says he, Intelligendum vero cum
exceptione afflatus Prophetici diximus supra: It is always to be understood
with an Exception to Prophetic Motions or Inspirations, as we said before;
which implies a plain Contradiction to the Opinion of our Adversary, who vainly
supposes, That Women, as Women, are exempted, Again, he tells us, That such
Women are the Subjects of the Apostle's Discourse, who being Ignorant, and not
well understanding what may have been spoken by the Teacher in the
Congregation, was not to interrupt the Speakers: Ne interrumpant loquentes, sed
Mares Domus suae interrogent, qui aut respondebunt exse, aut consulent
peritiores: but ask their Husbands at Home, who will either answer themselves,
or consult those who may be more experienced.

Thus much on this Particular, and I believe enough to reconcile all sober
minds to the serious Exhortations and Reproofs, as well of Good and Holy Women,
as Men; who are also Witnesses of his Resurrection, who was Dead, but is Alive,
and lives forever.

Scriptures Socinianiz'd.
I Shall now attend his Sophistication of several Scriptures, in which his
Displeasure against G. F. comes not from his ardent Love to any common
Principles, which he has hitherto seemed to militate for; but his great Regard
to Socinianism, both against G. F. and them.

The first is, his Exception to G. F's Citation of that Scripture, Page 9. Col.
3. 10.
And have put on the New Man, which is renewed in Knowledge after the Image of
Him that created him; where G. F. puts Them for Him, making the Saints the
Antecedent to Them, whereas the New Man is the Antecedent to Him, and shows,
that the New Man is created, which G. F. is not willing to allow; for he
corrects his Adversary for saying, The Light is a Creature; which is to say,
Christ, who is called the Light, is here called, a New Man, and such a one as
is created; and consequently is not God, but a Creature: A Doctrine that well
becomes our Adversary.

To which I Answer, That the New Man, who is there said to be created, is put
in opposition to the Old Man, mentioned in the Verse before, who is thus
described by the Apostle, Col. 3. 8, 9.
But now you also put off all these, Anger, Wrath, Malice, Blasphemy, Filthy
Communication out of your Mouth: Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have
put off the Old Man. Which shows he meant by the Old man, those Habits and
Customs of Evil (which were almost become Natural) that they were before
addicted to; and consequently, that the New Man was the inward Regeneration, or
New Creation of the Soul, Mind and Spirit, with the Inclinations and Affections
thereof; so that the Image of the New Man may be created or begotten in
Believers, and on that account be called the New Man; but not that Christ Jesus
is the created New Man: For, it is he by, their own Principle, That Creates all
things New in the Heavenly World of the Gospel; who having all Power, begets
his People into a New State, renewing them in all Divine Knowledge after the
Image (or that they may be the Likeness) of him that created him; that is, that
Image: for nothing can be renewed that was not lost; Read John 1. 16.
but Christ was never lost (to speak properly) in our Adversary's sense, as
well as ours; but the Image of Christ has been lost, almost from the Foundation
of the World; Therefore it is not Christ, but his Image, that is renewed and
anew created: So that if G. F. did put Them for Him, it is not false; for to
create them anew in his Image, or a new Image in them, is all one; and the
words will bear it, that Christ creates new Men after his own Image; in which
sense, the Image of Christ is by him renewed and created in right Believers,
and they made new Creatures by bearing his Image.

His next Perversion of Scripture is that in John, Page 11, 12.
which he says, G. F. often uses, and always abuses, as he remembers: I
doubt his Memory much; but let us hear it, John 2. 17. 5.
And now, O Father, Glorify thou me with thine own self, with the Glory which
I had with thee before the World was. Thus the Scripture; but G. F. thus,
Christ, who was Glorified with the Father before the World began. On which read
his Comment. You will say perhaps, his words and Christ's are the same in
sense; but does God give G. F. his Infallible Spirit to correct his Son
Christ's words. Sottish Ignorance, and Enmity with a witness! What, Is every
Variation of a Word or Syllable a Wrong done to the Meaning of Scripture? And
did ever Christ, his Apostles, or any sober Man living chide or reprove a
Person, if through Defect of Memory, or for Brevity, or in a way of Paraphrase
he did leave out, or put in, or change a Word, not in the least perverting the
Sense? so uncharitable a Person I know not ever to have heard of, fitter to be
severely reproved, then answered: and to whom Silence had been the best
Confutation, had it not been more for the sake of others then his: To dare to
conclude a Man a Liar, Imposter, False-Prophet, and I know not what more,
because he expresses the same matter with a small Variation in the Words; But I
shall say more of this elsewhere.

He proceeds, Nay, does not G. F. take his Phrase in a Diverse Sense from what
Christ intended by his; for (says He) it is manifest that Jesus prayed now to
be glorified with the Glory wherewith He was not then glorified, but God was
glorious before the World was, therefore Jesus intends by the Glory He had with
the Father before the World was, the Glory He had given him in Decree, before
the world was.

The Clinch is Foolish, and his Consequence, False, and pernicious; For what if
Christ was not then glorified, must it therefore follow, that He was not in
being, much less glorified before the World was? Can He be so great a Stranger
to the Apostles Doctrine delivered in his Epistle to the Philippians, where we
find him first Equal with God, Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8.
as being in his very Form, or Essence; next, making Himself of no Reputation;
then appearing in the Fashion or Likeness of Men; and lastly, that He humbled
Himself, and became Obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross, which
shows that he was in an exalted and glorified Estate before He humbled Himself,
else how was He humbled? And it is piece of Sacrilege and Ingratitude I almost
tremble to think on, that because He was pleased to descend in the Likeness of
men, in order to the Salvation of Mankind (in which Our Adversary may also have
his share, if He unfeignedly repent) he should unworthily robb Him of all.
Pre-existence in the Form of God, whilst He Himself thought it no Robbery to be
Equal with God; So that though in his humbled Estate and Fashion of a Man, He
could not properly be said to be glorified, and therefore prayed to be so, yet
it is no right Consequence, that therefore He never was before; For that would
be to say, because an Earthly Prince may for a certain time debase himself, and
take upon him the Condition of an Inferior Person, for some great Benefit that
He thereby designs to do his Country, if after having effected it, He desires
to be received again into that Glory and Splendour he enjoyed before, that
therefore he never had any before, only in Decree; If this would be both False
and absurd, the other is much more. This is the great Mystery of the Socinians,
indeed the Rock on which they split; they do not distinguish betwixt the Form
of God, and Likeness of Men; that which came into the World to do the Will of
God, and the Body He took, in which to perform it.

Nor does this Scripture at all make for his Opinion; John 7. 39.
for Jesus was not yet Glorified; since it might as well have been said, He has
not yet dyed the Death of the Cross, neither is Risen and Ascended, which was
the Period of that state; unto which He had from the Form of God Humbled
Himself, even to the being of no Reputation, John 17. 4.
which he thus expresses himself: I have Glorified thee on Earth, I have
finished the Work thou gave me to do: And in another place, thus, I came
forth from the Father, and am come into the World. Again, I leave the World,
and go to the Father: where is the same Reason that we should believe he was
with the Father before he came into the World, John 16. 28.
as that he did come into the World, and afterward go to the Father again;
else, why is it again going to the Father. But now let me ask him, if he can be
so brazen'd as to think, that God allows him, not only to correct his Son
Christ's words, but the very substance of his Prayer? Remember the Prophet
Micah, chap. 15, 2. But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among
the Thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall be come forth unto me that is to
be Ruler in Israel; whose Goings^ forth have bin from of Old, from Everlasting.
Was it so great a Crime (in his account) for G. F. to say, who was Glorified
before the World began, instead of, Glorify thou me with thy own self, with
the Glory which I had with thee before the World was? And is it no ways
reprovable in him, instead of the last clause, to turn it thus, Glorify thou
me ^^th thy own self, with the Glory which I had with thee, not actually, but
in degree only, before the World began? That ever any man should undertake to
Correct others in that which does not deserve it, whilst the Beam is in his own
Eye, and is himself most guilty! My Soul blesses God, that our Religion is
above these slight Shifts, and pitiful starting Holes: I would t^ll the man in
his own words of us, though more seriously, That he, whom G. F. and all of us
call Christ, by way of Excellency, was, in the Sense aforementioned, glorified
before the World began: and if what he calls Christ, was not, it is to us a
Proof, that he was not that True Christ, which both appeared to the Fathers of
old (for the Rock followed them, and that Rock was Christ) and in the fashion
of a Man in these latter Times, humbling himself to the Death of the Cross.
Thus much in the clearing of this place.

3dly, Page 15.
He is very angry with G. F. that he makes Christ speak these words by the
Prophet Amos, Behold I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed with Sheaves;
which, says he, belongs to the Lord Read Mal. 3. 1. and 4. 5. and observe,
that Christ is called Lord by way of Excellency.
or Jehovah. Grant it; Does it not therefore belong unto Christ, who is God
over all Blessed forever; that said, Before Abraham was I am? But he gives us
no reason to the contrary; and till he does, let this suffice, That as Christ
has been a Lamb slain through Sin and Iniquity, so also has he been pressed
thereby as a Cart is with Sheaves, and that since the Foundation of the World.

4thly, He quotes G. F. thus, The Promise is to the Seed; Page 15.
the Seed is Christ; and Christ is all, and in all: To which he says, The
Apostle has it thus, And when all things shall be subdued unto Him, then shall
the Son also Himself be subject unto Him that put all things under Him, that
God ( not Christ) may be all in all: He could not have do^^ greater Injury to
the Holy Spirit's words, then to put Christ for God.

It will not be hard to clear this Mistake in our Adversary, and that to his
great Shame; For who will think him fit to manage Controversies, that is
ignorant in the very letter of the Scripture? It is evident, that he denies
Christ to be all, and in all; and that G. F's so asserting him to be, is the
Cause of his Cavil at him. Now hear what the Apostle says in the matter, Col.
3. 11. Where there is neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scythian, Bond nor Free; but Christ is All, and in All: And if
Christ be All, and in All, and he that is All, and in All be the True and
Living God; then, because Christ is All, and in All, Christ is the true and
Living God.

Now, who has done the Injury, G. F. to the Holy Writ, or this obstinate and
peevish Adversary to Christ Jesus, the only Lord of Glory?

5thly, His next Socinian Clash at G. F's Citation of Scripture is in the same
Page with the former; Page 15.
and it is at his saying, God is the Word, instead of, the Word was God;
adding, That though the Word was made Flesh, (or was Flesh) yet no considerate
man will say, that Flesh is the Word. A great deal of do, for fear Christ
should be God; but from this notable Distinction of his we are not without a
Relief: If the Word was God, and the Word be God, then God must needs be the
Word; that is, If he that is called God, be the same Being with him that is
called the Word, then God may as well be called the Word, as the Word may be
called God; for instance, If Christ and Jesus agree equally to one and the same
Being, what is the difference betwixt saying, Jesus was Christ, or Christ was
Jesus? Certainly we may justly say of him what he in a way of Reflection says
of G. F. Methinks he is more Nice then Wise. And for his Instance about the
Word's being made Flesh, that is; (says he) was Flesh: I deny his Paraphrase;
for it is neither properly to be read, was made Flesh, nor was Flesh; but
rather, The Word took Flesh, and pitched his Tent or Tabernacle in us: Thus
Clarius; and almost all agree It to import a more Spiritual signification; so
Erasmus, and Grotius especially; and for the Ancients, they were positive,
Ireneus, Justinus, Tertullianus, Origin, etc. but above the rest, Tertullian
adv. Praxeam; but this is not so very material to the Point. However, if the
very Word had become very Flesh, I mean visible to Carnal Eyes; it would not be
inconsiderate in any man to say, then Flesh is or was the Word: and if our
Adversary understood himself, he would perceive, that there would be only a
Transposition of words, and no material Alteration: For that which is now
Flesh, or (as the Hebrews have it) Man, is the Word; as that which is God, is
also the Word. But enough for this, only we may observe by the way, that the
Man is not so hearty an Enemy to Transubstantiation as he would have us
believe, page 44. who can think the Word was properly made Flesh.

6thly, His Objection against G. F. for joining Christ with God, Page 16.
saying, His Father and He are greater then all, is Irreverent and Frivolous;
For, who dares deny it? and what abuse is it to Scripture? Sure I am his saying
so, and that without any Reason, shows him to be a man of Unreasonable
Confidence.

7thly, He is angry that when G. F. mentions this Passage, Page 17.
To whom every Knee must bow, and Tongue confess to the Glory of God, that he
adds not Father. I could not have believed, that any man, who loves
Seriousness, should bestow his Time so idly: Is this the earnest and deep
Study ^e talked of, by which he hopes to obtain Divine Knowledge? But says he,
Why did he not add the term Father to God, nor insert, that Jesus Christ is
Lord? But the truth of this Scripture consists not with their Doctrine, that
the Father and Son are one. I confess it is somewhat hard to understand what he
would be at; but let it suffice, that he who is called God, is called Lord
above an Hundred times, therefore one; to which Christ Himself bears Record, I
and my Father are one, my Father works hitherto, John 15. 16.
and I work; for, whatsoever things he does, those does the Son. To us a Child
is born, to us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon His Shoulders;
Isa. 9. 6.
and his Name shall be called Wonderful, Councellor, the Mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; the same Power, Spirit, Light, Life,
Wisdom and Being forever.

8thly, His next Antichristian Cavil is at G. F's making the Holy Spirit as
well to proceed from the Son, Page 17, 18.
as from the Father: The Scripture runeth thus, But when the Comforter is come,
the Spirit of Truth, whom I will send unto you from the Father [even] the
Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the Father, He shall testify of Me: But,
says he, according to G. F. thus, Christ is in the Father and the Father in
Him, and He will send them the Comforter, that proceeds from the Father and the
Son: and for this quotes an Epistle writ by G. F. and J. S. and prefixed to G.
W's Book of the Divinity of Christ. It is past my skill to understand the
Difference, unless it be this, That the Spirit he makes to proceed as well from
the Son as from the Father, and so it does if I understand Scripture; for the
place it self says it: But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto
you from the Father; which shows, that not only God, but Christ also, sends
forth the Holy Spirit into the Faithful. Also, But if I depart, I will send Him
unto you: John 16. 7, 13, 14.
He shall not speak of Himself, but whatsoever He shall hear -- He shall
glorify me and shall show it unto you -- And when he had said this (Peace be
unto you; Chap. 20. 21, 22.
my Father has sent me, even so send I you) He breathed on them, and says
unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. In short, If the Holy Spirit be sent by
Christ, and received of Christ, and is breathed on His by Christ, then the
Spirit must needs proceed or come from Christ; and consequently, what G. F.
said is sound and Scriptural, and our Adversary's Clamours are Vain and
Envious: For, whilst he quotes G. F's calling upon Vincent, Danson, and others,
for plain Scripture, and would suggest, because does proceed is mentioned
instead of is sent, that he himself is Unscriptural, He omits to tell the World
what it was G. F. made that Demand for, viz. to prove Three Distinct and
Separate Persons in the Godhead. Now whether there is the same Reason for the
one as for the other, I leave to all sober Men to judge, yea, to our Adversary
himself, if he dare be just.

9thly, His last Socinian Objection to G. F's Citation and Application of
Scripture, is this, Page 20.
That whereas the Scripture says, For this End Christ both dyed, and rose, and
revived, that He might be Lord both of the Dead and Living: He says, That he
might be God both of the Dead and Living. Also, where the Scripture says, Let
the Word of Christ dwell in you richly: G. F. has it, Let the Word of God dwell
richly in you: By all which it is easy to observe, how averse he is from
allowing Christ the least share in an Eternal Divinity, making it, his Business
to abstract from every Scripture that may in the least Favor such a thing, and
imperiously rant it over us in the abusivest terms, as Impostor, Liar, False
Prophet, Forger, void of all Reason, with abundance of the like Complexion, the
proper Language of Brutish Malice, and not a True Disciple.

But let us answer to his Objection, If Christ be God over all, Romans 9. 5.
as says the Apostle, then why not God both of the Dead and of the Living, as
well as Lord both of the Dead and Living; and likewise, why not, let the Word
of God, as well as let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly; for if the Word
of Christ be the Word of God, and if God, be the Lord, and the Lord, God, then
why not God in both places as well as Lord? First, I am well assured that God
is called Judge of Quick and Dead, 2 Timothy 4. 1.
and if so, then because Christ is Lord of Quick and Dead, Christ the Lord is
God of both Quick and Dead, 1 Pet. 4. 5.
unless there be more Lords of the Living, and the Dead, then the One Almighty
God and Lord of Heaven and Earth.

Besides, methinks this Critic might have considered, that it is not expressly
in the Greek, that He might be Lord, but that he might Reign over the Dead and
the Living, so says the Arabic; but the Aethiopick has it, That he might
judge both the Dead and the Living. In short, Christ is called both God, Lord
and Judge; and since there is but one only True God, Lord and Judge of right
Christians, we therefore believe, Christ to be that only True God, Lord, and
Judge of both Quick and Dead.

And here let me caution the Man of his eager Opposition to Christ's Divinity,
since supposing it should not be true, there can be no Detraction; and if it
should prove true, as he may one day know, he will be guilty of robbing Christ
of that, for which he thought it no robbery himself to be equal with God; that
is, to be the only true God Himself.

A Summary Consideration of such Scripture Citations, as he trivially Objects
against; not so much about Matter of Doctrine, as in Point of imperfect
Quotation and Transposition of Words.
GEorge Fox, First,
in answer to a Priest thus, Contrary to John's Doctrine and Christ's, who
says, The Light that does enlighten every man that comes into the World, Page
8. Joh. 17.
is the true Light, that man through the Light might believe. Our Adversary
answers, That it is through Him, that is, John Baptist. Now granting it to be
so; yet John was no more Instrumental then as by the Light fitted to be so; as
Erasmus well said, and others, Whatsoever Light John had, he received it from
Christ, the Fountain of Life: So that still the Light was that Medium or
Instrument. Besides, he does not positively charge G. F. with referring those
words to that Verse; and to be sure that is no Doctrinal Mistake, since most
true in it self.

Secondly, His next Criticism is this, whereas the Scripture runs thus, For
God, Page 8, 9.
who commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to
give the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ. He brings
in G. F. citing it thus, The Light which shined in their Hearts to give the
Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ. Again, Which was the
Work of the true Apostles, to bring People to the Light within, that shined in
their Hearts, to give, etc. Again, he says, The Light, that which gives the
Knowledge. But, says he, if he had recited it right, it would then have
appeared, not only that God was the Giver, but also, that it is the Light of
Knowledge, and created; for God caused Light to shine out of Darkness by
creating it, Genesis 1. 3, 4. Thus far this impertinent Man.

To all which I say, that first he obtrudes an arrant Lie upon our very Senses,
to say, that G. F. has not rightly cited it, for so much as he did cite; For
God caused the Light to shine, where? in their Hearts: So says G. F. But for
what? to give of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ;
And does not G. F. say the same? Wretched Scribler! How Idle, how Frivolous,
and how very Troublesome is he with his Ridiculous Remarks?

Secondly, that the Knowledge comes by the Light, all but such Bats as himself
must needs see; For why did God give his outward Light, if not to give external
Sight, and Discerning? And to what purpose did He cause his Invisible Spiritual
Light to shine, if not to give an Internal Knowledge of the Glory of God in the
Face of Jesus Christ? Besides, God himself is Light, He is that Great
Supernatural Sun, that shines throughout the Intellectual World, offering unto
Men the Knowledge of his Divine Glory, and that in the Face of Jesus Christ.
This is our Message, a^ it was the true Messengers of Old; And who talk of the
Creation of this Light, because it gives Knowledge, may as well say, God who
was the Fountain of it was created too, because He gives Knowledge; I would
have him give us one Scripture that therefore calls the Light created, because
it gives Divine Knowledge, or if he can, but one Reason: who fools himself, and
would others, with the Conceit that he is a great Master of it: For what
grosser Darkness can be, then to assert the Creation of the hight upon that
very Account, for which we ought most truly to believe it Spiritual and
Eternal; But enough for this.

Thirdly, G. F. says, But the Word is nigh thee in thy Heart. Page 9. 10.
Deuteronomy. 30. Moses, says our Adversary, says, But the Word is very nigh thee in
thy Mouth, and in thy Heart, that thou mayst^ do it; Where observe, that the
only Difference lies, in leaving out, in his Mouth, though it be implied; for
where it is in the Heart, it will be in the Mouth. But Reader, do thou not
think this a New Way of proving a Man an Impostor, Liar, False Prophet, and
what not? But I dare tell him, that he will not grow over-Rich with the Spoils
he is like to gain by such Conquests, though his Fancy be strong, which is the
Disease that follows him.

Fourthly, However he is resolved to proceed, that what each Cavil wants of
Strength in it self, shall be supplied by the l^^d Suffrage of their Number. G.
F. says, And the Angel said unto them that went to the Grave without, Luke 24.
v. 5, 6.
Why seek ye the Living among the Dead? He is risen* which our Adversary
corrects thus, Now the Angels words runs thus; Why seek ye the Living among the
Dead? He is not here, but is risen: So G. F. leaves out, He is not here, out of
the middle of the Citation, for that would have overthrown his Opinion of
Christ within. I still entreat the Reader to observe what Slight Grounds he
has to build his infamous Charge upon: But what will not Envy do? but, he
greatly errs, if he thinks that the putting in, or leaving out of those Words
does overthrow our Hearty Belief of Christ's manifesting of Himself within; For
what if the Angel chiefly intended the Resurrection of that Visible Body which
was slain a few days before, will it therefore follow, that the place may not
also be very aptly used to express the Mystical Resurrection of the Divine Life
(which for many Ages has as well by Jews as Pilates, Circumcision as
Uncircumcision, Professors as Profane, been crucified, laid as in a Grave, and
a Stone rolled over it, yea and guarded too, by Bands of Soldiers, lest that
which is so destructive of the Pride, Glory, Pleasures, and Religions of this
World should rise again to testify against them all) which has been the Cause
why Truth has ever met with rugged entertainment from the men of the World?
(...) it is evident that the Angel's Reproof implied an Instru^^^n of them
concerning what Faith they ought to have had in the Promise of his
Resurrection, which did direct them to an inward Power, whereby they might have
had a more Heavenly Sense of a Resurrection and Life in themselves, far more
beneficial to them, then coming thither in an affectionate haste after his
Visible Appearance, which it was expedient for them that it should be
withdrawn.

Fifthly, G. F. He is risen, and the Saints sits with Him in Heavenly Places.
Page 10, 11.
Our Adversary ( we must take no notice of the Failure in Syntax, for that is
frequent) Now Paul says Ephesians. 2. 6. And made us sit together in Heavenly
Places in Christ Jesus. Now there may be a different Sense of Sitting with
Christ, and Sitting in Him; For the People of a State may be said to sit in
their Ambassador when he is seated, but scarcely with him. I answer, First, he
wrongs G. F. in saying he has abused the Scripture by putting with for in,
since there is no Difference at all in what he would Fantastically have to be
one; for if the People are in the Ambassador, and the Ambassador sit then the
People sit, or I don't understand Words: for who can the Ambassador represent
but the People? If then the Ambassador sits, certainly the People sit
representatively. Now though the Similitude be lame, yet it plainly refutes him
as to the use for which he brought it; I conclude therefore that such as sit in
the Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, cannot be said to stand with Him, if He be
there seated, and consequently they sit with him, suitable to that expression
of his, Ye are they which have continued with me in my Temptations, Luke 22.
28, 29 30.
and I appoint unto you a Kingdom as my Father has appointed unto me, that ye
may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit on Thrones, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel. Secondly, He tells us a plain Lie, for finding Fault
with G. F's Syntax, viz. Sits for Sit, says he, that he must take no notice of
that which at the same time he flings in his Dish, and almost continually;
(...) with such Disdain of him, as if he were the only Master of (...)
^^ntences, Doctor of the Chair, or Grand Critic of the Age; who to speak
Truth, shows himself a Shollar, much at the same Rate, and by the same Figure
that Pedlars are called Merchants.

Sixthly, But now he thinks he has enough against G. F. Page 12.
and manages it, not with a little Triumph; And so to the Word Christ Jesus,
Him by whom the World was made, before it was made. This he thinks stabs our
Cause to the very Heart, and proves that good Man an Impostor, Liar, False
Prophet, Deceitful Chapman, and what else you will, without control. But let
not his frothy Spirit boast so much (saying he despairs of Information etc.)
since if so, i^ was foolishly done of him to solicit for an Answer, and would
not have been much wiser in us to have gratified him, if a Benefit to others
had not invited us to it.

But is there no allowance to be had for Curt Expressions, Escapes of the Pen,
Oversight in Compositors, and Errors in the Press? Does he deal heartily, or as
he would be dealt by? But suppose the worst that may be ( for we would not
indebt our selves to his Favor) can we make no Sense of it? Suppose a Comma at
the first made, and read it thus; Christ Jesus, Him by whom the World was made,
before it was made; where, and, being understood, explaineth the Sense, was,
makes it more clear: And how frequent are such Words, nay, of more moment,
left to be understood? Read the Scriptures, and how many Words are there that
have none in the Original, and read but the other Words once without them, and
G. F's Expression will not seem absurd or paradoxal. Besides, it is allowed by
all, if the Transposing of the Words will make out the Sense intended, that it
removes of right, the Exception; Now read the Words thus, And so to the Word
Christ Jesus, before the World was made, Him by whom it was made, and then let
our Adversary quarrel his fill.

However we have one Way of reading these Words, yet, and that by Figure he
has taught us (viz.) Christ Jesus, Him by whom the World was made in Decree,
before it was actually made; for so he says, Christ had of his Fathers Glory
before the World began, not actually, but by Decree only, which if it seem
Ridiculous, I hope he may have a better understanding both of himself and the
place. But to proceed:

Seventhly, G. F. answering a Priest that denies Conscience can justify,
says, Page 13.
which is contrary to plain Scripture, where the Apostle says, their
Consciences either accusing or excusing. But hear our peevish Adversary, who
would think that G. F. should have either so little Wit or Conscience as to
write in this manner? For the Scripture words are these, their Consciences also
bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or excusing one
another. The Difference (I mean Doctrinal) in this place I don't see; It
becomes a Man of his Wit and larger Conscience to perceive it, who can make and
fling dixt for the Alteration or Omission of a word not absolutely necessary:
for how can we suppose he meant those good Gentiles that became a Law unto
themselves, to have thoughts different from their Conscience, so far as
concerned Evil or Good, and the Peace or Trouble that followed the Doing of the
one, or the committing of the other? For to what did their Conscience bear them
Witness if not to their Doing Well or Ill, and consequently to acquit or
accuse? Therefore their Conscience did bear Witness to the Accusing or Excusing
as well as their Thoughts, for that their Thoughts and Opinion of one another
Innocence or Guilt are squared by the Witness that their Conscience did give,
the place strongly implies. In short, they could not make that Judgment of one
another without a certain Knowledge of the same thing in themselves, and they
must have received that only by the Testimony of their own Conscience; which is
no more but this, the Judgment of a man concerning his own good or ill State,
by the In-shining and Discoveries of God's Holy Light: and this the Gentiles
had in measure, and our Adversary grants it, as well as his Eminent Preacher,
page 40.

Eighthly, G. F. says, in answer to the Priest, that denied him to be perfect
who bridled his Tongue, Page 14.
which is contrary to the Apostle James, who says he is; which our Adversary
calls belying the Apostle, who says, If any man offend not in word, the same
is perfect. And what Difference is there now? one says, He that bridles or
rules the Tongue, and the other says, He that offends not in Word is the
perfect man: unless a man's Tongue can be said to be bridled or ruled when it
offends (which cannot be supposed by any, but Persons of this man's Ignorance.)
In short, Not to offend in word, or bridle that which would utter it, is one
and the same thing: for that which bridles the Tongue bridles the Body, which
is the perfect man that offends not in word.

Ninthly, G. F. says, That God works all in us and for us; Page 14. 1 Cor. 12.
6. Ephesians. 3. 20. Phil. 2. 13.
for which he reflects upon him as at other times, saying, he knows no such
place: but it is strange that he never heard or read, And there are diversities
of Operations, but it is the same God which works all in all -- according to
the Power that works in us; for it is God that works in you both to will
and to do. Now, unless when God works all in all, etc. we are to exempt his
working in us ( and so give the Scripture the Lie) or, if workt in us, yet not
for us, which is to give our own Understanding the Lie; it will follow, and
does follow, That God, who works all in all -- according to his Power in us,
both to Will and to Do, does work it both in us, and for us. But, Oh the Vanity
of this poor man! that thinks by these Paper Pellets, his Malice casts at us,
either to Wound us in our selves, or in the minds of Sober People.

Tenthly, But he thinks he has done G. F's business for him now, Page 16.
where bringing him in saying, through the Power of God the Gospel; again, the
Gospel is the Power of God: he thus adventures to correct him, The Apostle
says, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the Power of God
unto Salvation, etc.

Now where to find out that Difference, which this Quicksighted Man abuses G.
F. for (saying, it proceeds from the same bitter Root in him that perverts the
sense of Scripture) is past my skill; for, if the Gospel be God's Power, then
God's Power is the Gospel: In one of the Passages it is as he would have it,
which may show, that G. F. meant by the other Transposition of the word: No new
Sense or Doctrine; Gross Folly, Incharity, and Carping.

Eleaventhly, But he stiffly charges him with miscitation in this Passage. Page
16. 2 Pet. 2. 1.
G. F. And so deny Christ the Lord that bought them. Peter says only, Denying
the Lord that bought them. Which, says he, may as well agree to God the
Father, as Christ the Son.

We may guess at his Meaning without an Interpretation; But must Christ be
Lord, and not Lord, at every turn, when this presumptious Person will? If the
foregoing Chapter be considered, it will appear, That Christ is that Lord that
some should deny, after they had made Profession of Him. In short, If a man's
believing Christ to be that Lord, must conclude him an Impostor, etc. who is
true; let all the World read, and observe of what Ungodly Stuff and very Trash
his Libel does consist.

Twelfthly, The Scripture (says our Adversary, and his own) runs thus, He that
believes on Christ, Page 19.
out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of Living Water; where His Belly is plainly
spoken of Him that believes: But G. F. applies it to the Light Christ, out of
whose Belly slowed Rivers of Living Water, the Light, the Light must be
Magnified by G. F.

To which I shall only say, That it is no improper sense at all; for no man's
Belly can be filled, but from His; therefore He is the Fountain of Living Water
Himself, from whose Belly ours come to be filled. Besides, If a Scripture will
admit of two distinct senses, without Contradiction, they may be used in both
those senses, upon occasion: So Christ the Light (whom we will Magnify above
our Adversary's Darkness) is that Belly and Fountain; and such as believe in
Him, shall have their Bellies filled with the Rivers of Living Water, that come
from Him: He is the Fountain that is set open for Judah and Jerusalem, and the
River that makes glad the City of God.

Thirteenth, G. F. The Church is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, Page 19. Ephesians
5. 25, 27.
without Spot, or Wrinkle, or Blemish, or any such thing. Our Adversary thus,
And the Apostle says, That He might present it unto Himself a glorious Church,
not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing. He says, that might and should,
not that it is; but this is the old Devilish Distinction of Sin-Pleasers, that
would never have the Church Compient.

Two things follow hence; First, A Disbelief of the Perfection of the present
Mystical Church, by which Christ is rendered the Head of a spotted Body.
Secondly, That he is himself in a spotted and wrinckled Condition, and every
such thing; and therefore an unfit Person to maintain the Faith of the true
unspotted Church of Christ.

Fourteenth, G. F. (True Christians) are Flesh of His Flesh, Page 19.
and Bone of His Bone. But the Apostle, says our Adversary, has it thus, For
we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones. The Fault is this,
that he left out, For we are Members; hoping that it sufficiently proves Christ
to be in Heaven, absent from his Church; not considering, that a Body can be no
more without its Head, then Flesh; nay, it can better disp^nse with the loss of
much Flesh and many Bones, then the Head; for, if that be absent, the Body
quickly dies: Christ is the Head, Root, and Life of his Church, without which
she can never live one Comfortable Day. Besides, it contradicts positive
Scripture, John 14. 18, 19.
I will not leave you Comfortless, Matt. 28.
I will come to you; I will be with you to the End of the World: because I live
you live also. He that is with you shall be in you, etc.

Fifteenth, G. F. and the Apostle said, The deep Things of God was revealed by
the Spirit of God. Page 20.
But the Apostle, says our Adversary, speaks not so, But God has revealed
them unto us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, 1 Cor. 2. 10.
yea, the deep Things of God.

Let all Sober People judge, whether this man does not groundlesly cavil at us:
For, if God reveals his deep Things by his Spirit, then does the Spirit give
unto us the Revelation of the deep Things of God. Could he blush, he might be
ashamed to show himself such a frivolous Busi-body.

Sixteenth, G. F. And so, who is in Christ is a New Creature, Page. 21.
old things pass away. Our Adversary, The Apostle thus, Therefore if any be in
Christ he is a New Creature, old things are passed away, behold all things are
become New, 2 Cor. 15. 17. The Apostle speaks of the New Creation, as done; G.
F. as a thing doing; but with great Patience (for a little would be tired) I
Answer, Where old things are done away, and all things become new, there the
New Creation is done; But in such as he, that believes the Church of Christ to
be spotted, wrinkled, etc, all things are far from being made new, since old
things are not past away; and in such there can be no New Creation as yet.

Seventeenth, G. F. For it is the savor of Death to the Death, Page 21. 2 Cor
2. 16.
and Life to the Life. The Apostle, says our Adversary, thus, To the one the
savor of Death unto Death, to the other the savor of Life unto Life. Thus,
that he may be true to his Way, he undertakes the Confutation of G. F. and
Proof of him to be an Impostor: the Difference betwixt the Apostle's saying,
and G. F's citation, is, imputting the before Death and Life, which is the same
in Sense and Intention. But again,

Eighteenth, The Scripture quoted by our Adversary thus, Page 21.
Of this sort are they which CREEP into Houses, and lead captive silly Women,
laden with Sins, and led away with diverse Lusts, ever learning, but never able
to come to the Knowledge of the Truth. But G. F* says, Of such as have got the
words, etc. who are Reprohates concerning the Faith; which crept into Houses
before the Apostles decease; which have kept always learning, and never able
to come to the Knowledge of the Truth (...) led away with diverse Lusts. Very
well; and what is the Error or Perversion here? Why, the Apostle does not
attribute to these False Teachers, that they kept People always learning, but
they led captive such as were so. And what then? therefore is it not true in
the sense in which G. F. quotes it? What wrong is there done to the Text, or
such Teachers either? For who knows not that false Teachers do keep People
always learning, but never bring them to the Knowledge of the Truth? And
certainly, they cannot be false Teachers, that are not led away of diverse
Lusts: therefore they are both led away of diverse Lusts, and they lead others
too. But it is worth our notice, That he who has so frequently, and with such
Derision, reflected upon* G. F's Syntax and false English, is so far from being
unblamable himself as to make that Elegant Apostle guilty; for in the Epistle
it is, They which Creep; in his Quotation, They which CREEPS. But we delight
not to spend our time so unprofitably; such are his Contests about the Hebrew,
Greek and Latin, being set over Christ's Head by his Crucifiers; for he would
have it written as said in the Scriptures; and G. F. says, Set atop of Christ,
that is, over His Head; and true it is what he observes. That all Languages
have crucified Him; and those that have been most Learned, have been furthest
from the Kingdom, that is resembled to little Children: I thank thee, O Father,
Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the Wife and
Prudent, and revealed them unto Babes.

Nineteenth, G. F. says, the Gospel is preached in every Creature; Page 22, 23.
Our Adversary says, was preached to every Ceature; and both are true: for in
time past it Was, and now I hope he will not deny but it Is. In every Creature,
or To every Creature may be the same; For when the Gospel of Repentance and
Faith in God, are by his Light and Spirit secretly revealed and declared in
eveey Heart, doubtless it is also to the Heart as well as in it; And though
there may be outward Preaching of the Gospel, yet that which is Effectual,
comes from the Spirit and Power of the Gospel, and reaches into the Innermost
Parts, and the same Spirit gives there the true Discerning and Sense, and makes
the Effectual Application thereof, so that his Carping there is like all the
rest, Malicious and Troublesome! But he has something to the same Purpose.

XX. Again G. F. If Christ be not within People, they are Reprobates. Page 23,
24.
The Apostle and Translators say, Know you not your own selves that Christ is
in you, except ye be Reprobates, 2 Cor. 15. 5. as if in you could admit of no
other Sense but within you. Let us see if the Words of Christ will always
admit that Sense, Mat. 20. 26, 27. But it shall not be so within you, but
whosoever will be Great within you, let him be your Minister etc. thus far our
Adversary. But certainly the Man cannot think, that because (...) may sometimes
signify among, that therefore in all cases it must do so; for let us read the
verse cited so, Know you not your own selves that Christ Jesus is among you
except ye be Reprobates? This in his Opinion of Christ's Residence would be
most false: Besides, if it should be read within you, it might be understood
thus, within your Precinct, Company, or Society; and the Sense very good still.
However, it shows he has but little to do, who shall employ his time in
correcting within you for in you, since whatever is in any thing, is within
that in which it is, or else I know nothing. But he tells us that G. F. is
guilty of the like fault in relation to John 2. 27. where the Apostle speaks
of the Anointing, which abides in you; but he thus, the Apostles brought the
Saints to the Anointing within them; To which I say, that He is Guilty of the
like Fault of Fooling as before; For a Schoolboy would be whipped for so much
Ignorance, and Ill-spent Time: He might have learned better his Greek Grammar;
but indeed, I have cause to question his Proficiency: '(...), says Xenophon,
Intra duos vel tres dies, within two or three days, where '(...) is used to
express within.

XXI. His Cavil at G. F's Calling the Kingdom of God, Page 24.
the Kingdom of Heaven, and then saying it is the grossest Forgery, is as
solvable as the rest: For first, the Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of Heaven
are all one, unless when men are in the Kingdom of Heaven, they are not in the
Kingdom of God; and so contrary wise. Thus John called that very Kingdom which
in the Text is styled the Kingdom of God, Mat. 3. 2.
the Kingdom of Heaven; The like may be read in the tenth of Mark. If then the
Kingdom of God and Kingdom of Heaven be all one, certainly if the Kingdom of
God be confessed to be within, Luke 17. 20.
the Kingdom of Heaven must be there too. If this be the grostest Forgery, G.
F. is far from an Impostor.

XXII. He quotes Isaiah, To the Law and to the Testimony, Page 24. 25.
if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in
them, Isa. 8. 20. but G. F. thus; For Isaiah bid them come to the Law and to
the Testimony, and you that come not to that Rule it is because you hate the
Light in you; where he is much displeased that it is hate the Light, and not
rather, that they have no Light; But this proceeds from that Ungodly Narrow
Spirit, that would not all should be Enlightened, and would rather lay* the
Blame of not Living up to the Law and Testimony to God's not giving men Light,
then to his and other men's hating of it: but every one has Light, though every
one has not the benefit of it through their own Disobedience to it.

XXIII: G. F. The Letter was dead, and did not give Life; Page 25.
but, says he, I am to seek for the Scripture, I find indeed the Apostle Paul
says 2 Cor. 3. 6. The Letter kills. But here he is not just to his Promise,
as in several other places; he finds G. F. using some Scripture Words mixed with
the like matter, and presently says; he knows not to what place they do agree,
if not to such a saying of this or that Apostle, making him to quote that which
it may be was not in his mind to quote. Next, the Literal Knowledge does kill,
and not make alive: and the Letter may also be called dead, because it makes
dead by killing, as well as that in another sense, there is no Life in it: But
We know the strict Sense of the place to relate to the Dispensation of the
first Covenant.

XXIV. But now he thinks, he has unvailed all, and detected G. F. to the
purpose. Page 26.
G. F. in Answer to a Priest about the Resurrection of the Body, he says,
answers thus, Christ -- is the Resurrection and the Life, and thy dead body
shall live with my dead body; This is Scripture: but he calls it the greatest
Vanity, and Lightness, besides Forgery, that he has observed, in citing of
Scripture. And behold his Refutation! Is not this Man a strange Kind of
Champion, who besides his Abuse, gives us no Knowledge that he takes any notice
of G. F. in the matter. For my part I think the Answer good; for Christ is the
Resurrection, and We do confess to a Resurrection of the Dead out of the Graves
in the Judgment Day, by the Voice and Power of Christ Jesus our Lord, that men
may be fashioned like unto his Glorious Body, which is Spiritual, and Glorious,
and Immortal.

XXV. But he charge G. F. with wrong Citation and Paraphrase Mat. 5. 37, Page
27.
But let your Communication be yea yea, nay nay; for whatsoever is more then
this comes of evil: G. F. thus, He (Christ) says, In all your Communication
let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, for whatsoever is contrary is evil; why
not here as he has it afterward? whatsoever is more is evil, charging us with
calling God to Witness in Communication etc.

It Is strange to me that one, who not long ago was for Swearing, should now
think the Quakers that are against it go too far in calling God to witness. But
let the man know, that by contrary G. F. understands the extraordinary ways of
Affirmations, as Oaths, and the like, especially in Cases of Evidence, wherein
an Evangelical Righteousness is more then ordinarily concerned: This he might
have collected from those words he after cites; but he wanted that Candor, that
Generous Adversaries show.

XXVI. He is very angry with G. F. for putting is for was; Page 27.
God is in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, 2 Corrinth. 5. But
methinks, if he considers as he believes, that all men are not actually
reconciled, then men are at most but a reconciling, and that is the time
present: wherefore, if God in Christ only can reconcile the World unto himself,
then since there is the greatest part of the World irreconcil'd, though the
work be going on in some; it will follow, that either none now can be
reconciled, or else God is as well (though not by so visible an appearance) in
Christ now reconciling the World to himself as formerly: therefore, is, may be
as proper as was.

XXVII. But he brings in G. F. answering a Priest about the Saints enjoying the
Divine Nature thus, Page 28.
Does not the Apostle say, that the Divine Nature the Saints were made
Partakers of: but says our Adversary, Where does any Apostle say so? Peter
says, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
Promises, that by these you might be Pertakers of the Divine Nature; in which I
see no difference at all, that would have given any sober Person the least
Scruple; for both import a participation of the Divine Nature. Doubless it
grieved the man he had no more against Gods People partaking of the Divine
Nature; for he seems to desire to work out all himself, and to be as little
indebted to God as he can; but, poor man, his works will be burnt.

XXVIII. G. F. quotes this Scripture, Hebr. 10. 26, 27. Page 28.
And he that sins after he has received the Truth, there remains no more
Sacrifice for Sin, but a fearful looking for of Judgment: But says our
Adversary, The Scripture has it, For if we sin wilfully after that we have
received the Knowledge of the Truth, etc. so that the difference, as he
confesses lies in the word wilfully: but as all men sin not of compulsion, but
wilfully, so it was never our Principle to make God a hard Master, or an
unmerciful Judge, as he well knows; and methinks he should have had more
respect to the just God, and his own Soul, then to insinuate what in his own
Conscience he knows to be a plain falsehood, on purpose to bring us into
suspicion and disgrace. But I wish him Repentance and Remission for this
wilful sin.

XXIX. Here he does not so much charge G. F. with corrupting Scripture, Page
28, 29.
as with Idleness and Ignorance in making use of it; Now let us see wherein,
why G. F. will have the Scriptures to be the Words, but not the Word of God by
way of excellency, as in Luke 1. Acts 1. Rev. 22. also Moses himself called
them Words; to which our Adversary replies, That in the instance out of the
Acts, that word which is Englished Treatise, is the same with that in the first
of John which is called the Word. But this is weak; for the same word may ^e
used to several ends; I mean, that the same word which signifies the Word of
God as an Excellent Being, may be simply used at an other time for Discourse,
Reason, Speaking, or the like; and great care is to be taken in rendering of
Words, that they bear the sense they are employed for in that place. So in the
Acts, It was an Historical Discourse or Narrative of the Actions of the
Apostles, and therefore would have been ill appropriated to another
signification. Thus (...) may be taken simply for the Sun in the Firmament, or
the Son of Righteousness, and the Light of the invisible World.

But that which is unanswerable is this, that the Word of God cannot be subject
to those corruptions by Translations, Fire, Water, Age, and abundance of
Casualties, which the Scriptures are; therefore the Scriptures being subject to
these things, they cannot be eminently the Word of God, but Christ the Light
only; yet the Words of God, or Treatise and Declaration of his Will, that is,
so much of it, as was given forth by the Holy Ghost. I am sorry the man is so
overrun with an envious Scurvy (who once promised better things) as to employ
his precious time about things of so little moment or advantage to the World.

XXX. I shall now conclude these Observations with his Conclusion; Page 33.
and I am very glad we are so near the end (of what has scarce by either Head
or Tail) But let us see what leave he takes, and how he winds up his Criminal
Animadversions upon George Fox, which he does thus, G. F. God justified (Job)
and said, Job did not sin with his Mouth: but, says he, the Scripture has it
thus, Job did not sin with his Lips; which he says, is far from not sinning
with his Mouth; but which way I know not: For Lips are often by Synecdoche put
for Mouth; so that, if the Lips did not sin, the Mouth did not sin. But after
this Art of Evasion, a man may say Himself or Faith to be almost any thing; and
for his Defense urge, It was not he (reserving) but his Lips that said so. I
would have the man to know, That we despise his Shuffles, and esteem him,
though not a less malicious, yet a far less formidable Adversary, then some we
have met with: Neither have I been thus Liberal for his Libel's sake; but
having an Opportunity (after much Business on another Subject) to insist upon
these serious Doctrines, herein handled, I found my self deeply engaged to do
what I did effectually. But I have a few things yet to offer, which done, we
shall conclude this Controversy, at least for this time.

First, I would desire all that read our Discourse to observe, That what makes
up the far greatest part of the Libel is the Author's Snarles at G. F's
imperfect or defective Quotation of Scriptures; mostly confessing, that the
Alteration lies more in the Words, then sense of the places by him cited. If
therefore I shall make it appear, that both Christ and his Apostles have not
observed such Exactness, as he so severely reproves G. F. for the want of: It
is to be hoped, that he will either retract his unworthy Abuse of that Innocent
and Good Man; or else, not think it hard in us to charge this Blasphemous
Inference upon him, namely, That he makes Christ Jesus and his Apostles
Perverters of Scripture, and what else he Wickedly concludes against G. Fox.

Scripture Quotations of Scripture, not Verbatim, by Christ Jesus and his
Apostle.
FOr I say unto you, that this that is written must yet be accomplished in me;
and he was reckoned amongst the Transgressors: For the things concerning me
have an End. Luke 22. 37.

Therefore will I divide him a Portion with the Great, and He shall divide the
Spoil with the Strong, because he has poured forth his Soul unto Death; and
he was numbered with the Transgressors, and he bare the Sins of many, and made
Intercession for the Transgressors, Isa. 53. 12.

Observation 1. Where take notice we have reckoned for numbered, and amongst
instead of with; besides, abundance omitted and added, as the last Clause in
Luke: And is not this as imperfect, as Before the World began, for Before the
World was?

For this is He of whom it is written, Behold I send my Messenger before thy
Face, which shall prepare thy Way before thee, Mat. 11. 10.

Behold I will send my Messenger, he shall prepare the way before thee, and the
Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, etc. Mal. 3. 1.

Observe. 2. Let it be rema^kt, that will is left out before send, that before
thy Fa^^ (...); and that we have which shall, for and he shall, with much not
mentioned: Certainly this had been very heinous in G. F. when it was an
Instance of his Imposture to cite Mouth for Lips. Thus much in brief of
Christ's Quotation of the Prophets; now for his Apostles, whether out of the
Evangelists, or other Epistles.

That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, saying, I will
open my Mouth in Parables, I will utter things which have been kept secret from
the Foundation of the World, Mat. 13. 35.

As it is written in the Book of the words of Esaias the Prophet, saying, The
Voice of one crying in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the Way of the Lord, make his
Paths straight, Luke 3. 4.

There is no such Scripture in these words, that I can find; only David,
speaking of himself, says thus, I will open my Mouth in a Parable, I will
utter dark Sayings of old, Psalm. 78. 2.

The Voice of one crying in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the Way of the Lord;
make straight in the Desert a Highway for our God, Isa. 40. 3.

Observe. 3. I hope this may a little show the Man himself, and that G. F. is
not such a bitter Enemy to Scriptures, and Perverter of the Text, as he would
represent him; since we have, make his Paths straight, for, make straight in
the Desert a Highway for our God: Certainly this must be a grosser Failure, I
mean in our Adversary's Opinion, then G. F's saying, enlightneth for lights,
or Christ within you for Christ in you.

For thus it is written by the Prophet, And thou Bethlehem, in the Land of
Judah, art not the least among the Princes of Judah; for out of thee shall come
a Governor, that shall Rule (or Feed) my People Israel, Matt. 2. 5, 6.

But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the Thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall come forth unto me that is to be Ruler in Israel,
whose Goings forth have been from of Old, from Everlasting (the Hebrews phrase
it, from the days of Eternity) Mich. 5. 2.

Observe. 4. Where we have and for but; Ephratah not quoted; though thou be
little, for, thou art the least; among the Princes, for, among the Thousands;
out forth, and shall come a Governor, that shall R^le my People Israel we have
for, shall he come unto me, that is to be Ruler in Israel, whose Going forth
have been from of Old, from Everlasting.

For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the Mouth of the
Ox that treads out the Corn, 1 Cor. 9. 9.

Thou shall not muzzle the Ox when he treads out the Corn, Deuteronomy. 25. 4.

Observe. 5. In this Passage we also have an addition and alteration, the Mouth
of the Ox, for the Ox; and that treads, for when he treads, etc. which
though all one in sense, yet had been matter of Crime enough against G. F. had
he but made the same alteration.

Of this man's Seed (that is, David the Son of Jesse) has God, according to
his Promise, raised unto Israel a Savior Jesus, Acts 13. 22.

And there shall come forth a Rod out of the Stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall
grow out of his Roots, Isa. 11. 1.

Observe. 6. The great Difference of which, I mean as to expression, one would
think might sufficiently justify G. F. and I believe will in the Judgment of
all such as reverence the Scriptures of Truth; for I don't see that there be
four words alike; yet the sense one.

Then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed
up in Victory. Oh Death, where is thy Sting? Oh Grav^, where is thy Victory? 1
Cor. 15.

He will swallow up Death in Victory, Isa. 25. 8. Oh Death, I will be thy
Plagues; Oh Grave I will be thy Destruction, Hos. 13. 14.

Observe. 7. The alteration here is manifest also, Death is swallowed up, for He
will swallow up Death; and, Oh Death, where is thy sting, for Oh Death I will
be thy Plagues, etc. We shall conclude with one more out of the Epistle to the
Hebrews.

But unto the Son he says, Thy Throne, O God is forever and ever; a Scepter of
Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom, Heb. 1. 8.

Thy Throne, O God, is for forever and ever; the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a
Right Scepter; thou love Righteousness, Psalm. 45. 6, 7.

Observe. 8. Here we have, A Scepter of Righteousness i^ the Scepter of thy
Kingdom, for The Scepter of thy Kingdom is a Right Scepter.

Thus (beside many more places, past over for brevity sake) have I made it
evidently appear, that G. F. cannot be accused by any, that would not accuse
Christ Jesus and his Apostles themselves, as to Mis-citation of Scriptures; if
their not Citing of these express words may be justly so reputed, which, though
I utterly reject it; yet since our Adversary has made it a Crime so capital in
G. F. it may not be ^^seasonable to offer, That he does inevitably conclude
Christ Jesus and his Apostles under the same Fault, which how suitable soever
it may be to his Religion, we have more Godly Fear and Reverence upon our
spirits, then to so much as admit of any the least Detraction from them any
where, and least of all would our Understandings let us in this Occasion.

But what if we were unable to render those obvious Reasons already offered?
Would it follow, that G. F. must necessarily be condemned as a Perverter of
Scripture; and as having censured others for that, wherein he is as inexcusable
himself? By no means; For it is granted on all hands, that what most of all
aggravates the Blame of any Dispu^^nt, is erring from, or falling short of, or
contradicting his own avowed Principles. This was the Case of the Priests G. F.
disputed against, but not his They say, That the Scriptures, or Writings of the
Holy Men of God, as they are transmitted to us, with every Point, Iota, or
parcel of them, are such a Sufficient, Infallible, Perspicuous and Constant
Rule, as that God has not left, or given unto men, any thing more clear,
certain, etc. But G. F. and we who are called Quakers; although we heartily
acknowledge the Scripture, so given forth, to be a Declaration of the Mind of
God, so far as it pleased him to discover it; and that men ought to believe,
read, obey and fulfill them, as the Ancients did: yet that the Eternal Spirit is
by way of Excellency the Rule and Guide of Christians, who convinces the World
of Sin, reproves for, and redeems from it, into the perfect Liberty of the Sons
of God, as received and obeyed: And this only gives the Knowledge of the Truth
of the Scriptures, and brings into those States of which the Scriptures are but
a Godly Narrative; And that this Infallible, Living, Divine Spirit is therefore
the most Certain and Unerring Rule, above and beyond the mere Letter, which
has been and is subject to any Miscarriages: Wherefore G. F. had good Reason
to put the Priests upon Scripture Proof, and that so critically, as that they
might not foyst in any Doctrines upon Abstruse and disputable Consequences of
their own drawing, but grounded on express Texts of Scripture: For, if they
defended the Scriptures in every Iota, to be the very Word of God, and only
standing Rule; of Faith, Worship and Conversation under the Gospel; it was but
reasonable in him to tie them to their own Rule; whilst on the contrary, G. F.
not believing them to be that alone most excellent standing Rule of Christians,
(however he might otherwise esteem them) as rightly believing, That not a Law
engraven on Tables of Stone (much less writ on Paper) but an invisible
Spiritual Law of Life writ in the Hearts and Consciences of Men and Women, was
and is the Great, Living, Infallible and Perpetual Gospel-Rule, he was not
confined to the very express Words and Points thereof as his Rule.

So that there is not, there cannot be the same Reason for reproving G. F. of
what they are most deserving of severe censure. Nay, G. F. is very excusable,
in what they by their own Principle are condemnable. And therefore he cannot be
upon the same terms with them: For it would be to say, that because I obliege a
man with strictness to his own Rule, therefore I am an Impostor if I do not as
precisely square my self by the same; which is to beg more then becomes a
Modest Man to ask, or a Reasonable Man to grant: for it is the very thing
controverted, Whether that Light, Life, Power and Spirit, which gave forth the
Scriptures at several times, on several Occasions, be that only Infallible Rule
of Christians, or the Letter, so subject to variety of Corruptions, Additions,
Diminutions, etc. either in its Original, or the numerous Translations that are
in the World* whereof so scarcely two agree: We say, not the Letter, but the
Life it self is the Evang^lical Rule; they say, not any such Divine Life o^
Spirit, by any Internal Discoveries or Operations, but the bare, single Letter,
or Scriptures containing so many express Words, Points, etc. are that only
Gospel^Rule.

Wherefore to make G. F. as condemnable as the Pri^^ts, they must first prove
him to hold the same Principle that they do* which because he does not, he is
not liable to the same Reproof with them, Indeed to none at all. Where let it
be further considered. That they affirm the Scriptures to be their Rule, whol^
excluding the Spirit of God: And we believe the Eternal Spirit to be our Rule,
not excluding the Serious Use of Scriptures; suitable to that Saying, They that
are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God: and, I will write my Law in
their Hearts, and put my Fear in their Inward Parts: The Scriptures testify of
me, but ye will not come unto me that ye may have Life.

But before I conclude this Subject, I must needs tell the Man that he has not
only taken as well a New as Insufficient Way to prove G. F. an Impostor etc.
but he has equally manifested his Ignorance, and Want of Candout in what he has
done; For who is there that ever understood the Laws of Translation, that would
revile a Man for giving the same Sense in Words, as forceable, though not the
very same? Or, Who would count a Man an Impostor, False Prophet, etc. because
of a mere Verbal Alteration in a Sentence, where the Matter remains entire, and
unviolated: Certain I am, that the best Translators in the World, have
endeavored to make their Authors speak their matter in the Phrase and
propriety of that Language, into which they have been rendered, which had been
utterly impossible if they had been turned Verbatim, and after the genuine
Phrase and mode of their Original Tongues: Such Versions being like the wrong
side of the Cloth, or reading Words backward. Let our Adversary inform himself
after what manner all the Classick Authors, Great Philosophers, and Famous
Historians, are made French by the Critics of that Tongue, in their New
Academy at Paris; Nor is Our Country wholely-void of Instances: as the
Translation of Thusidides, Polybius, Justinus, Caesar's, Comentaries, Quintus
Curtius, Livius, Seneca, Tacitus, Homer, Virgil, Ovid, Lucan, Council of Trent,
Campanella. Du-Plessy, Grotius, B^colini, Malvetzy, St Amor, and forty more
pieces, in which I dare affirm, that neither Verbs, Nouns, Pronouns,
Participles, Gerunds, Adjectives, Conjunctives, Copulates, Subjunctives,
Prepositions, Adverbs, Tenses, Cases, Numbers, etc. are so much as considered
in their Translation, but only how the Matter so expressed in its Original
Tongue, may be most aptly rendered into Our own: If then this Scope is both
practiced by, and allowed to all Translators, I would fain know why it should
be so Criminal in G. F. to have given the Scope and whole tendency of Scripture
Texts, in other Words then what are in our conmon Translations.

But certainly, this shows that rank Enmity which lodges in the Man's Mind,
and is to me a plain Demonstration of his implacable Malice, that (like the
Black Jaundies) has so overrun him, as I fear it will almost be impossible that
he should ever recover to any tolerable moderation, though We could desire he
might come to a Sight and Sense of his Folly, Ignorance, and Bitterness against
us, and not longer continue to kick against the pricks in himself, nor to
endeavor (however he miss his aim) to gore the sides of an Innocent People,
with his False Glosses and Calumnious Accusations; for certainly the Righteous
God of Heaven and Earth will effectually judge for these things, by whose
eternal Power and Spirit, and for whose Cause on Earth we are what we are at
this very day: And though the Contradiction of Abstinate sinful men, be truly
burthensom on their account; and this continual toil of Controversy very
unpleasant to our selves; yet for the alone sake of Gods unchangeable Truth,
and Heavenly Way to Life Eternal, we do cheerfully overlook our own Trouble,
Weight and Exercise, counting it our duty (and therein our Satisfaction) to be
at all times ready for the Service of it, let what will ensue. And be it known
to all the World, that as our Religion stands not in the Doctrines, Meanings,
Preachings, or Notions of men's devising or deducting from the Scriptures
themselves, but in the Living Quicking Power of the Eternal God, which plainly
discovers Sin, and wounds deeply for it* and as obeyed ransoms the Soul from
Death, Hell, and the Grave, to serve the Living Lord God in his New, Living and
Spiritual Way, So do we proclaim it to the Nations, that all Religions short of
this, are but the Form without the Power, and make up but that Wh^re with her
golden Cup, which has bewitched Tongues, and Kindreds, and People, She that has
a name to Live as the Lambs Bride, true Church, etc. whilst indeed She is but
that great Harlot, that has committed all manner of Abomination with whole
Kingdoms, under the specious show of Religion; wherefore every one of you to
whom this Book comes, search and examine in the Dread and Fear of Almighty God,
how it stands with thee; Have thou ever been pricked to the Heart, and repented
with that Repentance which sorrows for Sin past, and turns from Sin to come;
which is never to be repented of? And do thou feel the Living Powerful
Workings of Gods Power and Spirit in thy Heart, regenerating thee, without
which thou can not be a Child of God, and Heir of Glory? I say, O Man! unless
thou come to know the work of thy Souls Redemption from the Pit, and
Deliverance of thy mind from the Snares and Temptations of the Devil begun in
thy self, by which to live to God, and to have the Testimony of his Eternal
Spirit in thy Conscience, that thou have turned at the Reproof of Instruction,
and have felt the Blood of Cleansing, and art now walking on in the strait and
narrow Way of Life and Righteousness, which ^rucifies the Earthly Mind, thy
Praying, Preaching, Observations, and whole Religion are vain, and will prove
all of none effect in the Day, when the Lord God Eternal shall make strict
Inquisition and Search after what Fruits have been by every one brought forth.

Wherefore be ye all awakened to the Fear of the Lord, and mind diligently that
Blessed Light, which shines in your Hearts, and is able to give unto you the
Knowledge of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, which is the true Knowledge and
Wisdom that come from above, that make Wise to Life Eternal: for, the Wisdom
that is from below may study, carp, contend about Scriptures and Religion, and
from thence frame and imagine how those thing^s are workt that are mentioned
therein, and I know does, but can never give True Unfeigned Repentance, nor
Living Faith, by which to overcome the World, and to live unspotted in it,
walking with God till the time of Dissolution comes. O^ this is the Life of
Christians indeed; and Blessed are they forever, who having found that Living
Holy Light and Power, abide with it; certainly it will never fail them, in any
Time of Straight, or Hour of Temptation; but will always reveal it self to
their Defense and Protection (as their Minds are circumspectly eyeing the
same)* though whole Armies should besiege them, both within and without, to
their utter Ruin and Destruction: This is that Foundation which can never be
moved, and that durable Rock which the Gates of Hell could never shake, nor
prevail against them that built thereon in any Age; for which the Holy Host of
Heaven, and we on Earth Magnify the Name of God, and return and ascribe to
Him, by Jesus Christ, all Honor, Glory, Praise, Wisdom, Power, Strength,
Majesty and Dominion, who alone is worthy, now and forever.

THus in the Fear of God, and in a measure of good Understanding, which I have
received from him, have I gone through what I promised in the beginning, and do
believe the Lord will make my Labor effectual to the vindication of his
Righteous Truth and Servants in the hearts of many, which is the alone Mark I
have in my Eye, and not to gratify their desire, or as esteeming my self
(though they do) the single man that was best able to encounter them which,
Page 43, 44
though fawning enough, cannot but manifest the contradiction of that Person
from whom it came, who, a little after that creeping Invitation to answer him,
says, That if I do, he shall ever after have a better opinion of the Popish
Writers that defend Transubstantiation, implying, That I should be the
absurdest of men, by how much there is not a more ridiculous Position in any
Religion then that: but this Absurdity and Abuse I return upon himself, since
no such Writer could spend his time more unprofitably then our Adversary in his
trivial Objections against G. F. and perhaps scarce so scurrcously.

I forgive him his small Essays at me (for they pinch me not) only I will tell
him, that the Eighteen pence Apology he would seem to lash both me and G. W.
for, contains that Truth, Reason and Evidence, as are not refutable by a
greater man then himself; and will stand over the Heads of those pee vish
perverse Spirits concerned in it for ever.

And for the Excuse he makes, why he seruples to tell us who he is, I have
already Answered it, and therefore need not reiterate the same things, only one
Passage may be further considered, and that is, where he says; If you had my
name, it must be considered what Party I am of, whether Episcopal,
Presbyterian, Independent, Page 44.
etc. and accordingly all that is odious either in the Doctrine or Practice of
the whole Party, or any Particular Person thereof, must be reckoned up against
me; or if I should chance to be an old man, as your Adversary Jenner, that
would help to render me doting at every turn; or if I have been a Brasier, or a
Tailor, the World must be told my name, with Tinker, and Tailor at the end
on it; and if this will not do, you have a way of suggesting (as G. Whitehead
against Mr Danson, that he was given to Gaming, Bowls and Nine-Pins) and if it
prove false, you may come off as he, by saying, you did but query, etc.

To all which I say, First, That he horribly belyes us, for we never charged
the Infirmities of a single Person farther, then upon that guilty Person,
unless he were connived at, or justified in his Wickedness by any whole Party.
I charge him to give us one Instance to prove his Reflection: Secondly, We know
him to be neither Episcopal, Presbyterian, nor Independent, but a Vizarded
Socinian, either ashamed, or afraid of his Profession. Thirdly, In the worst
sense, he is an old man; for Malice, Slander, Pride and Enmity reign in him,
the nature of the Old Man that is Accursed: and if he be otherwise Young, he is
so much the more blameable, that he should dote before he is old. Fourthly, We
never told the World men's Trades in a way of Detraction, or Reproach: our Souls
abhor it; it is well known what we are our selves, not of the great Tribes of
the Earth, and therefore ought the less to despise others for being Mechanics,
whilst we are mostly such our Selves, though were we what we are not; It were a
token of Pride and Incivility, as the other would be of Insolency, to disdain
either Poverty or Labor. It may be indeed, that the Trade of some man may more
generally denote him, then his Name, because there may be many of the same
Name, but not of the same Calling; as many Bunnions, but not many Bunnions that
are Tinkers, and being generally so styled, not in reproach (that we know of (
since that title neither adds nor diminishes) but in a way of distinction,
perhaps we may have so distinguished him; but certainly if our Adversary were
either of an honest Calling, or sought not after a reputation in the World
above it, he need not be ashamed of telling us who he is.

Lastly, his base Suggestion of G. W. is manifest: for who knows not that the
Priests give themselves the Liberty of more then that, what Game (almost) do
they scruple to play at: But indeed their religious Game they are most constant
and expert in, which they get most by; for in other Sports, they sometimes
lose, but in that Game, they alwales win, the poor People are the Losers: And
if G. W. to detect the Priest, since others gave themselves that lose, did
therefore make that Query; must it therefore be taken for granted that he
concluded him such? Would this malicious Adversary be so served in every Query
that may be put by him? But I appeal to all the reasonable men that shall ever
read us, if his apprehension of our calumniating him, be a Good reason for him
to refuse us his name, ^ whilst he takes his whole fill in abusing of us, and
that by name too: thereby condemning that in others, by way of anticipation,
which he is actually guilty of himself.

Well, but the holy, and just God will certainly one day avenge our Innocence
upon the head of this malicious Slanderer, and all such as wilfully take part
with him to traduce it, unto whom we recommend our selves in all our endeaours
for the promotion of his holy Truth, being freely resigned to do his Will in
our Generation, knowing, that he is a plentiful Rewarder of those that truly
fear him, though the time hastens that he will also take vengance upon the
Ungodly; and I doubt not but in that day, our Adversary will wish he had as
well concealed his Book as his Name.

Postscript.
I Am to advise the Man, if he intends any farther Controversy with us, That
he should not lose his time, nor trouble us, in the Defense of any common
Principles, wherein we are judged to Err, for we have common Adversaries
enough, upon our hands (especially since he cannot but be conscious of
Hypocrisy to himself in such a Work, that not being the ground of his
Displeasure against us) but if he please to be so open with us, as to come
forth in what we have some Ground to believe is his Complexion, that is to say,
If he will tell us, that Christ is but purus homo, purely a man, that the holy
Spirit is a Creature, that Father, Son, and Spirit are three distinct Essences
and Persons; that God is in a Bodily Shape in Heaven, like a man; a gross
conceit borrowed from the Egyptian Monks (therefore called Anthropomorphites)
that the Soul is mortal, with some other the like Articles of his Biddlean
Creed, then I hope we shall endeavor to maintain the Truth as it is in Jesus,
and to give a sufficient Reason of the Hope that is in us.

THE END.

