Mr. PEPYS To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Child, Knight. Lord Mayor, and to
the Court of Aldermen, upon the Present State of CHRIST-HOSPITAL.
York-Buildings, March 7 th. School/9. My Lord and Gentlemen,
THAT nothing may rest uncommunicated to this Court, of what goes from me to
that of Christ-Hospital; any more than, by your Allowance, I withold from
Them, ought of what I offer You: I here tender you a Copy of a Letter of mine
thither, of the 25. of January.

The Contents of which bearing my Farewell to Them, as with all respect my
purpose is in this to You; I cannot but recommend the Perusal thereof to this
Court; as carrying with them such a Representation of the perishing State of
that House, in some fresh Particulars essential to the Well-being of it, as
render it a thing little less than hopeless for me (by ordinary Means, at
least) any longer to think of saving it: After finding my self put to above
seven Months Labor, in compassing only its Treasurer's Signing that one
Article of his Account, which you had before had from him Vnsign'd; and more
than ten, in finding Passage only, through this Court thither, to my late
Report of the State of the same.

And What it is that may be look't-for from it, even now it is there, with a
Committee of few less than forty, and of them the Majority such, as will find
little Work for them in it, but Self-Arraignment; I submit to your Lordship and
this Court.

Especially, when you shall be pleased to reflect upon the present
Circumstances of that House's Government; viz. UNDER the Guidance of a
President, equal indeed to the worthiest of his Predecessors, both in his
general Virtues, and special Munificence to that Place. But One, whose Piety
has outlived his Strength for being otherwise personally aidful to it, in any
of the Weightier Duties of that Charge. UNDER a Treasurer, who (besides what
you have elsewhere before you concerning him) was also pleased to declare
himself unable both in Mind and Body, for the longer Execution of his Office;
and therefore made his formal Resignation of it, and had it as formally
accepted-of from him in Court there, above two years since. UNDER the Direction
of Gentlemen acting indeed as Governors, and to whom as such I have for more
than 23. years had the Honor of reckoning my self a Fellow Servants; but are
said to stand reported to You at this day by your Learned Council, not to be
such, nor capable of being so, without (what they have never yet had) the
Confirmation of this Court. And lastly, UNDER an Administration also on the
part of your Lordship and your Honored Brethren, so Gentle; as to have
suffered your Orders thither, even in Points the most important, to lie 7.
Months together wholly neglected, and your Authority as openly renounced;
without having yet thought fit to have ought done (within my Notice at least)
in Assertion of it.


A Reflection, My Lord, as hard to be accounted-for, as in it self Grievous.

Forasmuch as, If after so uninterrupted a Jurisdiction, as has been always
exercised by this Court, and with a Submission as constantly paid thereto from
these Hospitals; If after so long a Succession of Gifts and Bequests to them,
and those to great Values, in reliance upon the Credit and Authority of this
Court alone for their Security; If after so established a Veneration acquired
to it, as Guardians of these Foundations, and particularly as the Moral Fathers
of the Orphans of this House, when in your Easter and other Solemnities, They,
as Your Children, bear no small part in the Honor of your Processions; And
lastly, If after what in my particular I have been endeavoring herein for Your
Service, and for the Service of the Poor; this Court shall appear to have been
all this while thus credited and thus obeyed, without Authority at this day,
under the greatest of their Miscarriages, to visit and reform Them; for so also
your Learned Council are said to have determined. What must be thought of this
mistake? And particularly, How will the Pious Credulity of our Princely
Founders and past Benefactors be to be lamented; and what more to be either
hoped or wished for of Them, on these Terms, in time to come? What must the
Apprehensions now be of Those, whose Subsistence rests upon the Authority only
of this Court, for the Payments that House stands charged with to their Use,
out of the larger Benevolences of their Charitable Ancestors? Or Theirs; whose
Debts of more modern Date, lie unpaid (many Thousand Pounds deep) by that
Hospital at Interest, upon no other Security? What is there to be rely'd-on of
Fruit from the Retrospections said to be now on foot there, or those lying
before your Lordship and this Court, from my Report? Or in a Word; What to be
hop'd-for either of Satisfaction for so much of our Poor's Stock and
Benefactor's Bounties as has already miscarried; or of better Provision in time
to come, for securing the Remainder?


What, I say my Lord, must the Result of all this be, and how to be
answerd-for; should this Court be so unhappy, as knowingly to permit such a
Foundation and its Revenue to rest one day longer, in Hands no otherwise
qualify'd-for, nor better entitled to the Trust of it? While by a Resolution of
its own, not yet 16. Months old, you have been pleased to declare your selves
standing Governors of the same, and (as such) required your being (as
anciently) summoned to every of its Courts, and accordingly have ever since
been so, and now are: To the entitling Your selves ( I fear) to a nearer
Concernment in the Fate of it, than may have been yet sufficiently
reflected-on; and possibly, to an Accountableness with Them, for the good or
bad Events of their Managements there.

A Consideration I am the more willingly your present Remembrancer in, from the
fresh Endeavors said to be now on foot there, for resuming their Old Liberty
of taking-in Children, while unprovided of a Bit of Bread for those they now
have, otherwise than by running into new Debt, or lengthening their Score of
Interest upon the Old; Besides sacrificing the Innocence of so many fresh
Infants, to the Dissoluteness of Manners now reigning, among those they are to
be there mixed-with. The Evil of whose Contagion, and Pressure of which Debt, I
take to be no otherwise removable, than by a total Stop to be for some time
put, to the Occasions of Both.

An Expedient, that I well know will at the first hearing be thought as
Impracticable, as in other Respects Extraordinary.

But the Case is Extraordinary too; and consequently, to restrain its Remedy to
Ordinary Methods only, is little other, than to leave it Remedy-less. Which I
cannot think any Gentleman, who has the Honor and Trust of a Governor there,
will contentedly sit-down with, while furnished with any thing to offer toward
the Saving it, as (for want of better) I do this: And yet with an Opinion so
far from deeming it Impracticable, as to reckon it a Work neither of Length nor
Difficulty; if, in Atonement for that Misconduct of ours, by which, from the
Prosperity this House was in while under the Care but of 16. Governors with
500. Children, it has been brought into the Condition it now lies with 400.
Governors (little more or less) and but 400. Children; if (I say) in Atonement
for that Misconduct, we would improve the Opportunity of this nearness in our
Numbers, to the easing the House at once of the Whole, by every Governor's
taking to himself One: Thereby leaving the Income of it entirely free to the
Discharge of its Debts, doing Right to its Founders and Benefactors, and that
being done, to the setting-out afresh, with a Revenue cleared, its Discipline
reformed, and Provision made for its future better Conduct through the Whole.
And this I lay with all Deference before your Lordship and this Court, as that
without which, or some other Aequivalent, I must avow my Despair of ever seeing
this unhappy House in the State it ought to be; and therefore would be glad,
with your Concurrence and the Concurrence of the Gentlemen of that Body, to be
doing my part, either in this or any other Effectual Proposition, toward it.

I am well aware, My Lord, of the Censure this Fervor of mine may expose me to,
as One overpressing in a Cause, wherein Others neither less interested nor less
discerning than my self, are pleased to show so little of the Dissatisfaction I
do; and without any surprise on my side at it, as well remembering how little
different my own Sentiments were of it, while my Knowledge thereof (like
theirs) had no other Direction, than the Information of Others. Whereas no
sooner was I engaged in the closer and more deliberate Enquiries applied
thereto of my own, but that Indifference of mine was awakened to the Degree of
Concernment I now profess; and which, on like Conviction, would be no less in
any other, whose Morals (like mine) know no middle, in matters of Trust at
least, between scrupulously Just, and downright the contrary. Or to speak more
plainly; between mixing my own Hand in the Ruin of this Religious House, and
sitting silently within View of its being brought-about, by the Vanity,
Supineness, Prodigality, or Self-interest of Others.

Indulge me therefore, My Lord, the Liberty of this One only closing Note to
Your Lordship upon this Subject. Namely, That as the Direction of the
Hospitals, has in all times hitherto been undeniably exercised by your
Honorable Predecessors, in this Place; and as uninterruptedly submitted-to. So
is it no less evident, that however an Occasion has now (after sevenscore years
Practice) been administered to the questioning it; Your said Predecessors, (the
Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of London) upon Covenants first by Them
entered-into with K. Edward VI. for the good Government of Them, were by his
special Charter of Incorporation as Governors thereof, furnished with all the
Powers requisite to the enabling them to make-good those Covenants.

In consideration of which, and in Duty to Your Lordship, to the City, to this
Court, and to the Poor, I cannot (as a Servant to all) but most earnestly pray;
that this Matter may without delay, be laid for Remedy before that Body
Corporate, wherever it now rests; in order to the preventing, if possible,
any unnecessary recourse to Methods Extraordinary, for what should be thought
attainable by Ordinary. Especially while, Sitting a Parliament, with so many of
your own Number, and of the Hospital's, Members therein, and with a Bill
already (I take it) before Them, relating to Charitable Uses* no reasonable
Supplement ought to be doubted from it, to that Ordinary Power: If any such can
be judged wanting, after so illustrious a Proof, as I have sometime since given
you, of the issue of his Lordship, the present Lord Chancellor's Proceeding in
the late Memorable Case of St. Katharines (...) Proceeding I cannot but remind
you of; as well as of the Check put but few years before at the Great Seal, to
a Visitation then offered-at, in a Method less regular, in the Case of St.
Thomas's.

To conclude, My Lord, this Calamity of ours in our Hospital-concernment is a
Spot not to be covered in our Feasts of Charity, once the Glory of this City.
And a Spot not at the worst neither, but daily spreading, and daily deepening
too, through every part of it. Witness its Appearance (where least to have been
lookt-for) in the very last act of our Treasurer's signing this Account; as
giving you therein, his own Hand in Evidence against the Truth of what you had
had before from him Vnsign'd; and in which, as in all other its former
Editions, to my self, to the Hospital, and from thence to the Lords of the
Treasury, there had been suppressed in the single Article of Sea Wages, a Sum
no less than 1400 l. besides others of greater Moment yet behind. And this too,
notwithstanding repeated Cautions to them concerning it; and particularly in my
last, whereof this brings you a Copy. And since which (as fresh at it is) they
have nevertheless adventured to ask, and actually received more than 700 l.
upon that very Head on which the Treasurer has so lately owned his having twice
that Sum of the King's in his Hand, yet to be accounted-for.

Be pleased therefore to think of some speedy Prevention to the Growth of this
our Reproach. And toward it, permit me only to say; That as uneasy as the
Undertaking may appear to others; I see no Cause of apprehending any thing of
more difficulty needful toward it (whether as to the due animadverting upon
what is past, or better providing for what is to come) than a Right Choice of a
very few Hands to be assigned thereto, supported with an Authority suited to
the Work, and Powers requisite to the rendering their Labors and Determinations
therein Effectual.

Which being adjusted, and that only; I should with great assurance of success,
both readily and gladly pay the utmost of my personal Service to the Gentlemen
so commissioned; as well in detecting the Errors of my own Calculations (and
which for the Poor's sake I could wish more, than I dare yet hope them to be)
as suggesting and applying adequate Remedies, to what those Gentlemen in their
happyer Enquirys may find truly needing the same.

But if after all (which God avert) it should be our Infelicity, even with the
aid of that Charter, not to have wherewith of our own to help our selves
herein. The Cause nevertheless is too sacred, both in it self, and as it is the
King's, to be permitted to sink, while within the support I have so often
mentioned, of his Own Sovereign Visitation; And more particularly in what
relates to Himself within our Care in the Mathematical Foundation; by
translating it, from the Hands in which it now languishes, to those he is
pleased to entrust with that of his Own later Erection, to the same Royal
Purpose in the Advancement of Navigation, within his Own Palace and Inspection
at Greenwich.

I am in most respectful manner, My Lord and Gentlemen, Your ever most faithful
and obedient Servant, S. Pepys.


