Peppa: OR, The REWARD OF CONSTANT LOVE.

A NOVEL.

Done out of French.

With several SONGS set to MUSIC, for TWO VOICES.

By a Young-Gentlewoman.

Licensed, 1689.

JAMES FRASER.

LONDON, Printed for William Crook at the Green-Dragon without Temple Bar.
1689.

TO THE HONORABLE THE LADY ISABELLA ROBERTS.
MADAM,
IT was a considerable Time before I could resolve upon a Dedication; but,
knowing that few Books, (and especially Novels,) are wanting in this Point, I
then presently fixed my Resolution; trod in the steps of those that went
before; and submitted to the Tyrant Custom. I was not long in resolving to whom
I ought to dedicate it: Your Honor became instantly the Object of a Thought
lofty, and aspiring, which hurried me to this Boldness. Yes, Madam, you will
think it is a new way of being grateful for past Favors, to ask new ones: And
yet this very Absurdity do I now commit; but I am sensible of your generous
Temper, and relying upon that alone, I beg this one Favor more, your
Patronage, and Acceptance of this Virgin Essay, the Product of my leisure Hours.

This piece in all its Designs, aims at what is great and generous, and is
founded partly upon Truth; many of the material Circumstances having been
really acted at Genoa but few years ago: It insists chiefly upon two Subjects;
the effects of an unparalled Friendship; and the Force, and Reward of
Constant Love. It appeared first of all in French; and tho now naturalized into
our good-natured Climat, and become English, yet it has lost nothing of its
French Vanity, and Presumption, but daringly hopes to crow'd into your Honor's
Closet, there expecting the happy Time when, Madam, you will be pleased to
throw away some spare moments.

Those Readers who have not yet been blessed with your Honor's Acquaintance,
may perhaps say, This is not like a Dedication, and their Reason for it will
be, because it is not stuffed with fulsome Flattery, and because I have not
described to 'em either your Person, or Virtues; but I must tell them
(whosoever they may be) that I am a very ill Encomiast, and a worse Flatterer:
However, rather than Men should go away discontented, if in few words a plain
undeniable Truth will satisfy 'em, they shall have it; that your Birth, Nature,
and Education have conspired together to make you every way truly agreeable,
which, tho it has procured you the strongest Envy of our Sex, it has attracted
no less the highest Admiration of theirs.

One Favor more I importunely crave, that for some Reasons (which by you,
Madam, shall be commanded from me at any time,) I may be permitted to refrain
the publishing my Name in Print; tho really nothing is so sensible a Grief to
me, as that I am forced to stifle my greatest Ambition, which is, to declare to
the World, the Name of her, who, among all the Crowd of your Admirers, is the
most zealously,

Madam, Your Honor's Most Humble, Most Faithful, And most devoted Servant, A.
C.

PEPPA: OR, THE REWARD OF CONSTANT LOVE.
GEnoa is a City of Italy, not less famous for its Antiquity than for the
flourishing Condition it is in at present, maintained chiefly by a Commerce,
and good Correspondence with almost all the Nations of the Universe; and is now
esteemed one of the richest Towns in Europe.

As this City is very Ancient, so there is in it many Illustrious Families, and
some that are allied to Sovereign Princes, amongst whom, the Prince Mark Antony
Doria made no small Figure, being in as great esteem for his vast Riches and
Possessions, as for the Nobility of his Ancestors; and having an earnest desire
in these latter Times, to make the Glory of his Family shine out in his own
Person, he applied his youthful Time and Courage, for some years, in the
Service of the Spaniard; but not meeting with those Honorable Rewards which
his Courage had merited, he discontentedly retired to Genoa; where, some little
time after, he married the Sister of the Marquess Durazzo, a person of an
exquisite Beauty. All People looked upon this Marriage as very happy, seeing
the assiduous care the Prince Doria took to please his Wife, who in requital
loved him with an extreme Passion. About a year after they were married, she
was delivered of a Daughter; but her lying in was followed with a Consequence
so fatal, that tho all means were used, she relapsed into a great weakness of
Body, and, after having languish'd five or six Months, died. The Prince was so
sensibly touched with this loss, that he withdrew himself for a long time into
a Monastery, without seeing any body, avoiding even those very persons who were
only capable of giving him some Comfort. The little Princess, who was named
Peppa, was brought up under the Tuition of her Aunt the Marchioness Durazzo,
who had a Daughter of the same age. The Prince Doria led a life very retired
for four years, not endering to hear of a second Marriage; nevertheless his
Relations and Friends did urge him with such pressing Arguments, that having at
length determined to give them satisfaction, he courted a Lady of the House of
Spinola It was not long before he married her, but she had never the fortune to
be with Child; so that Peppa, who in her tender Infancy had already the marks
of a perf^ct Beauty, was looked upon as one of the greatest Fortunes of all
Italy.

The Princess Doria, now after a seven years Marriage, despairing ever to give
her Husband a Successor, found some Comfort in thinking, that she might one
day unite the two Houses of Doria and Spinola, by the Marriage of the young
Marquess Spinola her N^phew, with Peppa; and to the end that she might have the
opportunity of preparing betimes the Mind of Peppa, she earnestly entreated her
Husband to recall his Daughter into his own House, assuring him, that she had
an extreme affection for her, and that she did now look upon Peppa as her own
Child. The Prince Doria loved his Daughter most entirely, was in an ecstasy of
joy to understand the desire of his Wife, and did not delay the satisfaction
which she desired.

Peppa was received into her Father's House with all the Testimonies of Love
and Affection that she could expect from a Mother-in-law, who would be no
longer such toward her, for she desired her Husband to let Peppa call her
Mother; and she would give her the name of Daughter. Peppa, who was of a fine
Wit, answered with an obliging readiness to all the kindnesses expressed to her
by her Mother-in-law. The Princess on her side did whatever she thought would
please her Daughter-inlaw; and being informed that Peppa was much troubled to
part with one of her Cousins which she loved entirely; ^he entreated the
Marchioness Durazzo, to permit her Daughter Julia to be bred with Peppa in the
Family of the Prince Doria. The Marchioness, who had many Children, and could
not maintain them according to their Quality, had designed them Nuns. 'Twas for
this reason, that with much difficulty she was brought to yield, that Julia
should live with her Cousin. Nevertheless Peppa wished it with so much
eagerness, and her Relations, who had a great deal of kindness for her, so
earnestly desired this of the Marchioness, that she no longer opposed it. Peppa
and Julia suffered not the displeasure of being parted, and the delights of
living always together, contributed still further to the strengthening that
perfect Union which was between them. The Princess Doria, who had her Interest
in prospect, let slip no opportunity of entertaining Peppa with the Grandeur of
the House of Spinola, the famous Captains that it has produced for the Honor
of Italy, and a great many advantages considerable that it had above the other
Families of Genoa. She added, that she was much deceived if the young Marquess
Spinola, who had already a delicate Mien, and a great deal of Wit, did not
maintain with Splendour, the Glory of his Ancestors. Peppa listened to the
discourse of the Princess, without making the least Reflection; but in the end
perceiving that they made the Marquess of Spinola be more than ordinary
assiduous, in rendering her his Devoirs, and that her Mother-in-law, cunningly
engaged to make now and then Appointments of Diversions with the Marquess, she
complained to Julia of this constraint of her Humor, finding her self only
pleased when she was in her company; and all the means that the Princess Doria
used made Peppa have the greater aversion for the Marquess.

In the mean while, tho Peppa was yet but fourteen years old, all that saw her,
spoke of her Beauty with admiration; she was of a fine shape, the Features of
her Face were very delicate, curious ^yes, a fine Skin, and she had some^hing
in her Face that was so taking, that it was impossible to look on her without
having an infinite esteem for her person.

Julia was not so perfect Beauty, but she had much Spriteliness, and not a
little Sweetness appeared in the whole Cymetry of her Face. She would sometimes
say to her Cousin, That she was of a different Humor from all other young
Maids, who are always troubled that they are not handsome enough, whereas
nothing discomposed her more than to hear the World say she had Beauty; for had
she been deprived of it, she could have quitted the World without any Regret,
and past the rest of her life in a Convent, as she was designed. Peppa
endeavored to comfort her, by letting her know, that she was not made for the
Cloister, and that something might happen which would cause a change in the
Will of her Parents.

The fame of Peppa's Beauty was carried over all Italy, and that she was the
only Heiress to the House of Doria. All these reasons obliged several Persons
of eminent Quality to esteem the Possession of her to be a Fortune that would
crown their utmost desire. There was one, even a Sovereign Prince, who desired
her for his Son, but the Princess Doria raised secretly so many difficulties,
that the business was at last broke off. The Marquess Spinola, who found Peppa
very agreeable, and perceived the great advantages that would accrue to him by
this Alliance, made it his whole study to please her; and now through his own
Inclination he began really to love her, who till then had but seemingly done
it, out of compliance to his Relations. He perceived that Peppa was not in the
least touched with his Love, which made him resolve to try, whether he could
not take the advantage of the Carnaval-time, for to give to his Mistress the
most public marks of the Passion he had for her. This Carnaval is a time of
Rejoicing, (or rather, mad Frolicks) in most Countries of Europe, (especially
among the Romanists), and lasts from Christmas till Shrove-Tuesday at night, at
which time their madness ends; for which, during the Lent, they seem to do
Penance: This is something agreeable to an old English Proverb; Sweet Meats
will have sower Sauce. But to return to our Marquess, he came to all the Balls
with a magnificent Appearance. There he danced several times with Peppa; and
when she retired, he took care that several Violins should always attend her
Coach to the Door, and there stay the greatest part of the night. Nevertheless,
as all things seem insipid to a person that has no Taste, Peppa made no returns
to his pressing Solicitations, and acknowledged to Julia, in private, that she
did not find her self at all disposed to receive Addresses from the Marquess,
and that she well foresaw, she should be the most unhappy person in the World,
if her Parents did oblige her to marry him.

The Chevalier of -- and another French Gentleman, by chance happened to be at
Genoa during this Carnaval, and going to several Balls in Masquerade, as being
the Custom of the Country; they, hearing that there was to be at the Palace of
the Marquess Justiniano a great Feast, which was to be concluded with a Ball,
were resolved to go thither, disguised in the form of Sea Monsters. It being an
unusual sort of Masquerade, every one was strangely surprised to see a
spectacle so extraordinary, and which frightened some of the Ladies; the two
Gentlemen perceiving it, they untied only a small string, by the help whereof
they slipped out of their monstrous Habit, and appeared extremely gallant. The
Chevalier of -- was one of the handsomest Men in the World, and his shape was
not less admirable, which attracted the Eyes of all that were present. They
both danced with a very good Grace, and particularly the Chevalier, that the
other Gentlemen durst scarce dance after him. All the Assembly remained not a
little satisfied, crowning them with all the Applause imaginable. The Chevalier
of -- having observed that Peppa and Julia were in discourse with two other
Ladies, went and placed himself by them. The Ladies gave him infinite praises,
assuring him, that they never saw a Man so gentilely habited, nor that danced
so finely. The Chevalier answered very modestly to all their Compliments, but
with a great deal of Wit. The Ladies, who knew him not, and were ignorant even
of what Nation he was, because he spoke very well their Language, were very
curious of his Acquaintance. They had all no small respect for his Person, and
the more he uttered any thing that charmed these Ladies, the more their
Curiosity increased: At last it came to that, that they desired him to take off
his Mask for a moment. The Chevalier, who was satisfied that they did not know
him, had the Complaisance to do what they desired, and let them see a Face,
which if disagreeing with the rest of his person, was only so by being too
handsome. He put on his Mask again not long after, and remained some time
conversing with them. He observed Peppa very attentively, and thought her the
most beautiful Creature that he had ever seen. He began to take a great delight
in being near her, and was just about examining all the Features of her Face,
when the Marquess Spinola came to desire her to dance. Peppa, who was in
discourse with the Chevalier, and not a little pleased with it, was so troubled
at the Marquess's Compliment, that, tho she rose to give him her Hand, she
scarce knew what she did; and she had not danced long before she was seized
with such a Faintness, that forced her to quit the Ball before it was ended.
The Chevalier of -- went out presently after, and the next morning went aboard
his own Vessel to return to France, where he discoursed to all his Friends of
the charming Creature that he had seen at Genoa; he himself wondering at the
same time, how he could command himself so far as to leave her, and take a
Resolution of departing. Notwithstanding, as he was no less skilful in Music
and Poetry, than in the Dance, he had not the power to withstand some soft
moments, wherein he composed several Sonnets in praise of the fair Peppa; among
which here is one.

^ WHen Phillis first I saw, that lovely Maid,
^ how great was my surprise:
^ She in a moment did my Heart invade,
^ wi'th' Magic of her Eyes:
^ She in a moment did my Heart invade,
^ wi'th' Magic of her Eyes;
^ wi'th' Magic of her Eyes.
2.
Approach I did, but with so great an Awe,
I trembling speechless stood:
Unusual heat did all my Veins overflow,
Then chilled was all my Blood.
Unusual, etc.
3.
Confusion did my Resolution bind,
Scarce could I speak, or move:
Despair had took possession of my Mind,
And checked my hopes of Love.
Despair, etc.
As soon as Peppa was alone with her Cousin, she unbosom'd her thoughts to her,
and declared, That she would never pardon the Marquess Spinola the sensible
displeasure he had done her, by his interrupting the Conversation which they
had with the Stranger, whom they found so obliging. Have you ever seen,
continued Peppa, a Man so handsome, that had so fine a Wit, and so agreeable,
and that danced with such a Majestic Air? If we had discoursed longer with
him, interrupted Julia, we might perhaps have discovered who he was. I must
needs own, cried Peppa, blushing, the sight of him has made no small impression
in my Thoughts, and not to make any further secret of it between us, I cannot
but acknowledge, that ever since that time I have felt such emotions, whereof
till then I was wholly ignorant. In the mean time I don't know him, neither can
I tell the Country he is of, and perhaps we shall never see him more. These
last words were ended with a sigh, which discovered, that this Stranger was not
indifferent to her, and although her Cousin gave her some hopes that she might
meet him at another Ball, yet this hope was too weak to bring her much Comfort.
These two Ladies met at almost all the diverting Pastimes that were performed
at Genoa, during the time of the Carnaval. Peppa, who found not what she looked
for, was always in a Melancholy Humor, and complained still to her Cousin of
her bad Fortune. She sometimes obliged her to keep her company the greatest
part of the day at the Window, where they could see all that past by, without
being seen by any, flattering her self, that she might at last see him, who was
now become the sole object of her Thoughts. But notwithstanding all this
trouble for a whole month, it was to very little purpose, since that the
Chevalier of -- was now in France, where all his Estate and Fortune lay.

The Count Centurione of Genoa, who had been acquainted with him in Italy,
happening to be at Paris, after his return from a Voyage in Germany, was
overjoyed to find the Chevalier there. He went to see him, and was received
with a great deal of kindness. It was not above two days after that the Count
was in a troublesome Affair with an English Gentleman. They fought, and the
English Gentleman was much wounded; but the greatest danger was, that they were
both seized, and as none doubted but that it was a Duel, (which Crime in France
finds no Favor) their Trial came on. The Chevalier, who was advertised of it,
by a Note from Centurione, took this Affair in hand, but foreseeing that they
could not escape being convicted, and that his Friend thereby would run the
hazard of losing his Head, he thought it not convenient to endeavor any thing
from the Judges, who, he knew, lay under indispensable obligations of
proceeding to give Sentence according to Evidence; but having understood, that
they who saw the Action were People of a mean Quality, he privately searched
them out, and by great Rewards obliged them to steal out of Paris, so that
there might be none to witness against his Friend. This took the desired
effect, for the Judges finding no proof against him that was valid, were forced
to acquit him. Centurione out of acknowledgment for this generous proceeding of
his Friend, would have made him a considerable Present; but the Chevalier
refused it, assuring him, that he was fully recompensed for that care he took
to bring his Affair to a happy end, by the Pleasure he received in being
serviceable to a person of his worth. The Count Centurione returned back into
his own Country full of grateful Acknowledgments for the generous Action of his
Deliverer, having always before his Eyes the obligations that lay on him for so
signal a piece of Service.

In the mean while, the great Discourse at Genoa, was of the Marriage of the
Marquess Spinola with Peppa, it being looked upon as a thing agreed on between
the two Families. The Princess Doria, who most passionately desired it, pressed
several times her Brother, and her Husband, to procure a meeting of their
Relations, to make an end of regulating all matters: But Peppa, who was always
full of the Idea of her Stranger, and who, not seeing which way to evade this
Marriage, which she now was afraid would be too certain, fell into a
languishing illness, which equally put a stop to the Design of both Houses; so
that they deferred their meeting to seal the Articles to a longer time. The
Physicians, tho they were ignorant of Peppa's Distemper, prescribed her several
things, and through their Advice, she was carried to a Countrey-House, which
the Prince Doria had at Sancto P. di Arena, for a change of Air. Julia, who
alone could administer any Comfort to her, because she knew her Secrets, did in
vain represent, that she filled her Thoughts with the Idea of a Man, whom
probably she should never see again, and blamed her infinitely for resisting
her Father's Will, who would make sure to her his whole Estate, upon her
Marriage with the Marquess Spinola. Peppa rested satisfied with the Reasons
alleged by her Cousin; but at the same time affirmed, That 'twas impossible to
alter her Mind, and to drive from her Thoughts the Image of her dear Stranger.

The illness of Peppa caused so much trouble in the Mind of the Marquess
Spinola, who now really loved her, that his Relations thought it sit to
dissipate his too great care for his Mistress, that he should go and see most
of the chief Towns that were in Italy. Of this Peppa was soon informed: And as
it would prolong the Marriage, it became a matter of great Consolation, and
from that moment she grew better, and began to shake off her Distemper: Julia
forgot nothing that might divert her, and perceiving that she did not speak so
often to her of her Stranger, there having been almost two years gone without
hearing any news of him, she instantly begged, that now she would banish from
her Mind, that fatal Idea, and consider, that the happiness of her Person, and
of two Illustrious Houses depended solely upon her own Will, since it was in
her power to be the happiest person in Italy, and to taste the greatest
Delights that any rational Creature can here either expect or hope for. Peppa
answered not a word to this Discourse, which Julia took as a good Omen; judging
by her silence, that by little and little she would yield to Reason: Her
Health, which daily augmented, fortified her Opinion, that the Stranger did not
now so much disquiet her.

The Marquess Spinola was at Rome when he heard that his Mistress was perfectly
recovered of her Indisposition. So good News exciting his Passion, through the
Impatience it caused in him of seeing this charming Person, he thought of
nothing but to dispatch his Voyage to Genoa: And having heard that at Civita
Vecchia, there was (...) Squadron of French Ships ready to Sa^^ which were to
put in at Genoa, he pr^sently left Rome, in company of two other Gentlemen of
Genoa, who were glad to take the same opportunity, for to return to their own
Country. They arrived at Civita Vecchia the same day that the French Ships were
to depart. The Chevalier of -- that commanded the whole Squadron, received them
with a great deal of Civility, taking them aboard his own Ship. As he had not
been ignorant of the Name, and Quality of the Marquess Spinola, he treated him
with a singular Respect. His Table, tho served with all sorts of delicates, was
the least of the Entertainment. They often drank the health of Ladies, which
obliged the Gentlemen of Genoa to tell the Chevalier, that the Marquess had a
Mistress, who was certainly the finest person in Italy. The Chevalier
infinitely commended the Beauty of the Ladies in their Country, and confessed,
That being at Genoa in the time of the Carnaval, he went in Masquerade to a
Ball, whereof he related to them the particulars; but that he never was in his
life in so great danger of taking leave of his Liberty, and (...) he was forced
to summon all his ^^^son, to resist a secret inclination for ^^ery amiable
person that he had seen at a Ball, whose Name he nevertheless had not inquired
after. He now thought certainly, that he should never be in love, since that he
had escaped so great a danger. After this Discourse the Chevalier drank the
Health of the Marquess's Mistress, and to do him the greatest Honor that could
be done at Sea, he fired all the Guns of his Ship. The Marquess, overjoyed,
told him, Tha^ his Mistress was not unworthy of this Honor, and promised him,
that he should see her as soon as they came to Genoa, where they arrived soon
after.

Peppa was overperswaded by Julia to receive favorably the Marquess, although she
designed to defer her Marriage as long as she could. As soon as the Marquess
was arrived, he went to wait on the Princess Doria his Aunt, who was not a
little glad of his return. She carried him into the Appartment of Peppa, who
answered him with expressions more of Compliment than Love, to all the obliging
things he said to her. After several Civilities passed, the Marquess let them
know the great obligations he had received from the Chevalier of -- when he was
aboard his Ship, with all the marks of Respects that he could wish, so far as
to fire every Gun of his Vessel at the drinking the Health of the fair Peppa.
He then gave them a very advantageous description of his Person and his good
Qualities; and seeing that this recital displeased not the Ladies, he informed
them of the Adventure that happened to the Chevalier in his Masquerade, and how
far he forced his Inclination to defend himself from being in Love with a
lovely Person, that he had seen at a Ball. Peppa, who at first found that the
Description of the Chevalier was very like that of her Stranger, remained much
disturbed all the time that the Marquess was speaking of what had passed at the
Ball, and of all the other Circumstances which so exactly resembl'd her
Adventure, that the Company might easily have perceived the disorder that she
was in, if at the same time, the Marquess had not turned about to speak to his
Aunt in private, for to entreat her to find some means to make good his Promise
which he had made to show the Chevalier his Mistress The Princess, who had a
great deal of kindness for her Nephew, took it upon her self to obtain her
Husband's Consent; and to accomplish the better her design, she told the
Marquess, that she would have on the morrow, at her House, a Consort of Music
with a Collation, to which she would invite the Ladies of the Neighborhood,
and that he might bring with him his Friend. The Marquess retired well
satisfied with the Expedient that his Aunt had found out, and did not in the
least perceive the perplexity wherewith the Mind of his Mistress was agitated.
As soon as he was gone, Peppa gave an account to her Cousin of all that she had
learnt; and as her Father had an esteem always for the Spaniards, and therefore
she being educated all along with Sentiments of Aversifor the French, she
showed no little trouble that this Gentleman, whom she had found so agreeable,
was a Frenchman. Julia acquiesc'd in her Opinion, and added several strong
Arguments to persuade her from thinking any more of him. Peppa promised to
follow her Counsel; but she conjured her once more to lend her Assistance to
find some way whereby she might see again that dangerous Gentleman, assuring
her, that she had no other design, but that of discovering, whether this was
the Stranger that caused all her disquiet. Julia full of tenderness for Peppa,
and altogether as curious, promised to contribute her utmost to satisfy her in
this point. They were both busying themselves to find out some means to see
this Chevalier, without being seen by him, when the Princess Doria entering the
Chamber where they were, told them, That the next day she would give them a
Consort of Music with a Collation, and that she would invite some Ladies, whom
she named to them. She advised them to dress themselves with all the advantage
they could, For may be, (said she) the Marquess Spinola will bring some French
Gentlemen, that came from Rome with him. Peppa, o'rejoy'd that Fortune offered
so happy an opportunity, whereby she might satisfy her Curiosity, spent all the
night with much impatience. She therefore retired betimes to her Chamber, and
went to bed sooner than her usual hour, as if that would hasten forward the
night, and occasion a quicker return of the morning. Nevertheless she found the
time very long, and was not a little uneasy in her thoughts. One while she
pleased her self to think, that she should contemplate, at leisure, that dear
Object, which before she had seen but a moment, and which had made so great an
impression in her Mind: Then again, she was afraid to see him, and represented
to her self, a train of inevitable Misfortunes, that would be the Consequence
of her resisting the Will of her Parents. In spite of all these Reflections,
the fear of being deceived in her hopes, caused her greatest trouble; for when
she began to think that the Chevalier of -- might not be the Stranger that she
looked for, and that all her assurance for it, was but the Report that she had
received of the Adventure of the Chevalier, which seemed to be like that of her
Stranger; she therefore would willingly see him without running any hazard. In
this incertitude, she took a great deal of care the next day to dress her self
with all the advantage she could, and she did not fail in her design; for the
Princess Doria and Julia agreed, that they never saw her in a Dress so
magnificent as she was then. The Princess being persuaded, that she did it to
please the Marquess, appeared extremely satisfied. It is certain, that the
richness of her Dress gave so much Luster to her natural Beauty, that all those
who saw her, could not forbear crying out, That they had never seen so fair a
Creature.

The Marquess and the Chevalier, accompanied with several of their Friends,
came to the Consort. As soon as they were entered into the Ladies Apartments,
Peppa, who easily singl'd out the Chevalier from the rest, was in a great
Confusion. She found, however, such infinite satisfaction in seeing him again,
that she forgot those Reflections which she lately made. The Marquess presented
his Friend to the Princess Doria, who received him with much Civility. They
then offered their Respects to Peppa, who had scarce the Courage to look up.
The Marquess transported with Joy, seeing the great splendor of her Beauty,
could not hold from saying to the Chevalier, That now he might judge, whether
she did not merit the Honor he did her, when he drank her Health at the report
of all the Guns of his Ship. The Chevalier, who immediately knew her to be the
same person that appeared so beautiful at the Ball two years before, was in so
great a surprise, and beheld her so attentively, that he gave no Answer to what
the Marquess said to him. This Affection which cost him a great deal of trouble
to overcome the first time that he had seen Peppa, was now renewed; and he
found by some private motions of his Heart, that it would be impossible for him
to resist. Peppa, who sat next to Julia, had always her Eyes fixed on the
Chevalier: She found him so much to her liking, that far from repenting of
those amorous Sentiments she had for him whilst he was yet unknown to her; she
reproached her Cousin for her having so often blamed this Amor; and she
endeavored to make her observe in his person, the new Agreement that she each
moment discovered. The Marquess, who was wholly taken up with the Music,
listened to it with so much attention, that he did not perceive the Confusion
the Chevalier was in, and he flattered himself with the imagination, that his
own presence might in some measure be the cause of the Joy which added so great
a Luster to Peppa's Beauty. As the Chevalier spoke nothing to him in praise of
the Music; he asked him if he did not like it? The Chevalier answered him
freely, That although he was always a great admirer of Music, yet he had not any
relish for it now, when he had before his Eyes the most beautiful person of the
World. The Marquess perceiving well that Peppa had the greatest share in his
Answer, assured his Friend, That the Custom of Italy could permit of a familiar
Conversation, he would also be satisfied, that her Wit was no ways inferior to
her Beauty. The Collation being served up, the Marquess prayed the Princess
Doria to place the Chevalier next to Peppa, to which the Princess easily
condescended, to please her Nephew. Although Peppa and the Chevalier had a
sensible delight to see themselves so near together, yet they were uneasy in
being deprived of the pleasure of beholding one another; but the Chevalier not
being willing to lose so happy an opportunity, found means to speak to Peppa,
without being overheard by any of the Company, That he saw it was impossible
for a person to withstand his Destiny; and as for him, he never would complain
of his, for he was sensible, that he was born to adore her all his life. The
Modesty of Peppa would not allow her to give him an Answer to these
Expressions, nevertheless something in her Actions let him know, that she was
not displeased with what he had said. The Chevalier satisfied with the progress
he had made in his Amor, entered into Conversation with the other Ladies, and
took care to say nothing afterward but what every one might hear. The Banquet
was concluded with much Magnificence; al^ho the Chevalier did not believe it
had lasted long enough, yet before he retired, he had the pleasure to meet the
kind looks of his Mistress, and by this mute Language of their Eyes, they fully
discovered the Sentiments they had for each other.

The Chevalier spent the night without sleeping; the lovely Peppa appearing
always in his Thoughts, and he thought himself the most happy Man in the World,
when that he repassed over in his Mind, that she had heard him without being
displeased at it, that even her Eyes had let him understand, that she had not
an indifferent Affection for him; but presently making Reflections upon the
state of his own Preferment, foresaw, that being advanced in the Service of his
King, he could not receive into his Breast so great a Passion, and particularly
at Genoa, without great hazard of ruining his Fortune. In spite of all these
Reflections, his Amor got the Victory of all these Commotions, and he could
not tell which way to take a Resolution of parting from his Mistress. An Order
that he received upon his Arrival at Genoa to depart immediately for France,
put him into the greatest disorder imaginable; but knowing how nice the King
was in all that related to his Service, he resolved not to admit of the
thoughts of deferring his Voyage one moment, although he probably believed, that
he should never get such another occasion, or to agree with her what Methods
and Measures to observe for the time to come. In this extremity he resolved to
write to her, for to let her understand, the real motions of his Heart: He
deferred it not till it was day; for having called his Servants, he asked for a
light, and writ this following Letter.

I Once had the thoughts that I should never be in Love, since I had the power
to resist its force, when I saw you two years ago. I was confirmed in this
Opinion by infinite Arguments; but I had no sooner seen you a second time, when
that all these Arguments, which before had appeared to me invincible, became
weak; and now far from endeavoring to preserve my Liberty, I repent of my
former Resistance, and I esteem the time past as lost, not being able to
comprehend, that there can be a Felicity in this World, equal to that of loving
you. A Duty most cruel, but yet not to be dispensed with, obliges me to return
suddenly into France. I should have met with a far greater resistance, in
resolving this absence, had I not believed, that that Man must be unworthy of
you, who can fail in his Duty to his King. This reason alone makes me go
without hesitating, but with a resolution to make a speedy return, to find you
out in what place soever you are; to adore you continually; and to sacrifice my
Life to a Love that is perfect, and constant.


He found this Letter exactly conformable to his Mind; but he was in a great
perplexity, how to give it to the charming Peppa, for he very well knew, that
the greatest part of the Nobility of Genoa live extremely retired, and that it
would be very difficult to have access into their Houses, and particularly,
near their Wives or Daughters. He feared, that if he should commit this Secret
to Mercinary Persons, they would act but faintly in his Affair; and especially
in his absence. He was thus disquieting himself, when that the Count Centurione
entered his Chamber; he began to chide him for his unkindness, that he came not
to lodge in his Palace. The Chevalier excused himself upon his short stay,
having an Order to make Sail from Genoa with all expedition. The Count
perceiving him to be very uneasy, conjured him to let him know, whether he
could contribute any thing to his satisfaction; assuring him, that he would
expose both his Life and Fortune in his Service. The Chevalier, sighing,
confessed, That he had plunged himself in the most cruel Affair that he ever
met with in all his Life: This obliged the Count to renew the offer which he
had made him before, adding all that he could think of, to persuade him, that
he should esteem himself the most happy man in the World, if he could find an
occasion to testify to him his Acknowledgment. The Chevalier without any
further difficulty, made him a Confident in his Secret. Having in short
acquainted him with the beginning of his Adventure, he confessed, that he was
in Love; and that notwithstanding he could not prevent his departing, and
absenting himself from the only person he could love. The Count represented to
him, the almost invincible difficulties that he would meet with in his
Enterprise; but however he offered him all the Assistance in the World; and
assured him, that he would stick at nothing where his Service was in Question.
The Chevalier showed him then the Letter which he had writ, and told him, That
he should depart with less trouble, if he would take the charge upon him, to
convey it to Peppa. The Count engaged himself with a great deal of Joy, and
promised to take such exact Measures, that he might rely upon the safe
conveyance of his Letter to his Mistress. They had some other Conversation
together before the Chevalier embarked, to whom it was a matter of great
Consolation to find a Friend so truly grateful.

Peppa past the night with as little rest as the Chevalier: She would sometimes
start as she began to close her Eyes, and then would imagine, that all which had
passed the day before, was but a Dream; but when she recollected her self, how
that she had seen distinctly the Chevalier, and that he had also spoke to her
in such tender Expressions; she found no little delight in repassing in her
Mind, those very words he had used; and banished all Reflections that might
diminish her Joy. As soon as it was day she went into Julia's Chamber, whom she
awaked, to talk of her Lover. She made her take notice how much Wit was in all
his Discourse, and even applauded his Discretion, for his having spoke so
little to her in private. Julia, either to do Justice to the Chevalier, or out
of Complaisance for her Cousin, owned, that if a weakness of this nature might
be pardonable in a young Maid, she was far less criminal than another, since
the Chevalier in all his Actions appeared so graceful. After a long Discourse,
Peppa, who flattered her self, that Love might still procure some new means for
her to see him again, took no little care in adorning her self. She was all the
day long mightily discomposed, and, under some pretext or other, visited the
Balconies, and all the Windows of the Palace Doria. She was in this diligent
search, when she heard the sound of several great Guns, which moved her
Curiosity to enquire into the Reasons: And being told, that the Galleys of the
Republic saluted the French Ships which were under Sail. This news much
surprised her, because she could not have imagined, that the Chevalier, after
the declaring himself to her as he had done, was capable of departing, without
letting her hear from him. She was sensibly touched with this appearance of
Contempt, and called to her Remembrance all that she had heard reported to the
disadvantage of the French Nation, who had this general Character in their
Neighboring Countries, that they could easily engage themselves in any Amor,
and as easily quit it again, without the least concern in the World. She
bemoaned her misfortune to Julia, and in the angry humor she was in,
endeavoring to lessen all that was charming in the Chevalier, she promised her
never to think more of this Ingrate.

We must now leave the Chevalier pursuing his Voyage to France in a stormy
season of the year, and upon an unruly Sea; but whether that or his Passion was
his greatest care, this Song, the product of his solitary Thoughts, will best
testify. He sent it with the first Ship, for his Friend Centurione at Genoa,
who till a long time after, could not meet with an opportunity of putting it
into the Hands of the fair Peppa.

^ OH my Zelinda! could you see
^ the fury of each foaming Wave,
^ you would think, that the tempestuous Sea
^ would every moment be our Grave:
^ But, oh Zelinda! could you view
^ the greater Tempest in my Heart,
^ you would know that it was raised for you;
^ So sad, so sad it is to depart;
^ so sad, so sad it is to depart.
2.
Come to my aid some gentle Wind,
And thus my Amorous Message bear;
Tell all the troubles of my Mind,
And whisper how I love my Fair:
Tell her my Fancy all the day
Does still enjoy her glorious sight;
But tell her too, that absence may
Involve me in eternal Night.
Involve me, etc.
The Assembly of the Relations of both Families, which should have met long
before, upon the treaty of Marriage between the Marquess Spinola and Peppa, but
which was then deferred by reason of Peppa's illness, met two days after the
Chevalier set Sail. They regulated the Affairs on each side, and resolved to
have them married immediately. Peppa, who could not forget the Chevalier, in
spite of all his Ingratitude, being informed of this Resolution, went
presently into the Chamber of her Cousin, where she gave her self wholly up to
her Grief and Tears, without having the power to utter one word. Julia did what
she could to comfort her, and advised her to obey willingly her Parents, and
not to hazard the Content of her whole life, by a vexatious opposition. She
added, That it was part of her good Fortune to be undeceived of the Chevalier,
since she had now found by her own Experience, that he never had a true
kindness for her. I believe all that you say, interrupted Peppa, but yet you
must acknowledge, that I am the most unhappy person that breaths, seeing that I
am going to be sacrifis'd to a Man that I can never love, when he alone, whom I
thought worthy of my Love, shuns me. The many sighs and tears, which stifled
her Voice, hindered her from proceeding any further in her Complaints.

In the mean while that Julia, who shared in her Cousins sorrow, lamented with
her, the Count Centurione, who was to convey to Peppa the Letter given by the
Chevalier, tried all manner of ways to gain one of the Women that waited on
her. After several Intreagues, finding that his endeavors to win her to him
proved fruitless, he told her at last, as a secret, that she might deliver it
without the least apprehensions, since that this Letter came from the Marquess
Spinola, who did only design to surprise his Mistress, and to see if she could
guess whence it came. The Servant being overperswaded by this false appearance,
took charge of the Letter, and presented it to her Lady. Peppa something amazed
at this novelty, demanded from whom she received it. The Servant answered her,
That she was forbid to tell, but that she would soon know in reading it. Peppa,
who at first consulted only her Honor, refused to receive it, but as soon as
she was alone, she repented that she had let it go, imagining, that it might
have come from the Chevalier. A hundred times was she going to have asked her
Servant for it, and as many times her Modesty and her Fear, that it was the
Marquess Spinola who had sent it, hindered her. In fine, after several
Irresolutions, her Curiosity, or rather, her Love, got the victory. She sent
after the Servant, and threatened to turn her away, unless she would declare
from whence the Letter came. The Servant, still reserving that as a Mystery,
delivered it without making her any Answer. Peppa, for all her Modesty, had not
the power to resist her Curiosity to know what was in it; she read the Letter,
and immediately retired in private, to abandon her self without any constraint,
to all the transport of Joy that this pleasant perusal had caused in her. She
read it a thousand times, and a thousand times she repented of the
disadvantageous Opinion that she had had of her Lover. Her Marriage, which was
brought now to a conclusion, was a trouble to her not to be imagined. Her Love,
notwithstanding, gave her still some hopes to find out a Pretext to defer this
Marriage: She resolved, eve^ at last, to feign her self sick, and t^ make use
of all her Address, to preven^ this Affair from being concluded. I^ the mean
time she busied her Thoughts for an Answer to the Chevalier; which near upon
was expressed in these words.

THE Rules of Modesty would fearce permit me to answer a Letter that was so
full of Gallantries as yours, but the same Destiny which has engaged you in an
esteem for me, does likewise compel me to do that for you alone, which I
thought never to have done for any. I would therefore have you believe, That
your Cares for me will not be unwelcome, and that I shall receive no small
delight when I may see you again.


Peppa, supposing that the Chevalier had found the safest way to hear from her,
was content to take no further care, but only to remit this Answer into the
Hands of the Servant who gave her the Letter, not doubting but that she would
be faithful in the delivery; her Modesty not permitting her to enquire into the
measures that were to be taken. This Maid being prepossessed, that the Count
Centurione was of the Plot with ^he Marquess Spinola, and that the An^wer which
her Mistress gave her was ^eally for the Marquess, met him by ^hance a moment
after: She was so ^leas'd with her Negotiation, that it was impossible for her
to hide her Joy. You save me the trouble to go any further, said she to him, in
giving him the Letter from Peppa. She withdrew without staying for his Answer,
for fear that she should be seen to talk with him. The Marquess, who knew the
Hand of his Mistress, tasted beforehand all the Pleasure that a passionate
Lover can conceive in having a Letter delivered to him from a person whom he
entirely loves; but after that he had perceived in reading it, that it was
designed for another, and not for him, he was seized with Horror and
Amazement, never having had the least thoughts that Peppa was capable of a Love
Entreague: His Indignation and Anger gave him not leisure to make any further
Reflections; he entered the Chamber of the Princess Doria full of grief, and
giving her the Letter, uttered a thousand Reproaches, that she would have had
him married a person who was so false to him. The Princess surprised at this
fury of he^ Nephew, and the Expressions so little respectful which he used,
read the Letter which he gave her. She asked the^ the Marquess, to whom this
Letter wa^ directed, and by what adventure it fe^^ into his Hands. I cannot
satisfy you i^ that, answered the Marquess, I know very well that Peppa
preserves all her Love for another, whilst that I am going to marry her. It was
one of her Women that gave me this Letter; you see hereby that she was
mistaken, and it must be without doubt that she was not well instructed. The
Princess made the Woman be called, whom the Marquess had named, and after
having told her, that she should undergo the severest effects of her Anger, if
she did not declare the truth; she aks'd her the meaning of this Letter. The
Woman confessed, That the Count Centurione had given her one to deliver to
Peppa, that she had acquitted her self of the charge laid upon her, and had got
an Answer, which she put into the Hands of the Marquess Spinola, believing, as
the Count Centurione had assured her, That they were both of Council together,
and that it was all one to deliver the Letter to either of them, since that the
Count ^^d no other design, but what was only ^or the Interest of the Marquess.
This ^nswer made them believe, that the Woman had been deceived. The Princess
conjured her Nephew to have a ^ittle Patience, and to let her have ^ime to
search into the bottom of this ^ntreague, assuring him, that she would be the
first that would break off his Marriage, if she found that Peppa held the least
Correspondance with the Count Centurione. The Marquess dissembled, as well as
he could, his Despair, promising, that he would patiently expect the event, and
so retired. The Princess without losing one moment of time, secured first the
Servant, shutting her up in a Chamber, whereof she her self kept the Key. She
passed from thence into the Apartment of her Daughter-in-law, and told her as
soon as she came in, That she would acquaint her with such News which would
surprise her. Peppa was impatient till she knew it. We have discovered,
continued the Princess, that the Marquess Spinola is so strictly engaged with a
Lady of Rome, that it is not in his power to marry any other, which makes your
Father resolve to hearken to the Count Cent^rione, who earnestly demands you in
Marriage: He gave me a charge that I shou^^ make you acquainted with his
design, a^^ to prepare you to receive kindly this n^^ Lover, whom he himself
will offer to yo^ to morrow. Peppa was wholly surpriz'^ at this Discourse which
she so little expected. She conjured her Mother-inlaw, with tears in her Eyes,
to hinder the effects of so sudden a Resolution, telling her, That she could
not take up a Resolution of marrying a Man whom she had never seen, and hardly
knew his Name. However, answered the Princess, your Father did not determine
this Affair, but upon the consideration that he was assured you have a great
kindness for this Count. Peppa protested to her over again, That she did not
know him, and declared, that she had rather live all her days in a Nunnery,
than to consent to such a Marriage. I have never heard, answered the Princess,
in a serious tone, that when one writes kind Letters to any person, they do not
at the same time know who they are. Peppa touched with these last words,
answered her coldly, That she knew not what she meant; and that without doubt
some person, envious of her happiness, ^ade use of this Contrivance to ruin ^er
in the Opinion of all her Friends. The Princess said, She was sorry that ^he
must be forced to convince her; and to let her see that she had invented
nothing of her own Head, told her, That she need only follow her; she brought
her to the Chamber wherein ^he had shut the Maid, whom she called by her Name,
as soon as she had opened the Door; but was mightily surpised to find no body.
This Maid frightened by the threatenings of the Princess, had found means to
escape out by a private Door that was behind the Hangings, and she left Genoa
with so much Diligence and Caution, that it was impossible for the Princess to
discover, whither she was gone. Peppa, who was really innocent of any Intreague
with the Count, but yet had feared the discovery of her Affair with the
Chevalier, from the mouth of this Servant, became now more bold, by the absence
of the only person that could confront her, and reproached the Princess for her
Injustice, in suspecting her so lightly. The Princess touched with the
Reproaches of her Daughter-in-law, hoped still to convince her by the Letter
that was in the Hands of the Marquess, to whom she writ, for to pra^ him to
send it her; but it was in vai^ for the Marquess, not being capable (...)
receiving Comfort for the Infidelity o^ his Mistress, nor of pardoning the
Count Centurione the Artifice that h^ used to make the Servant take charge o^
his Letter, resolved to fight him; and having met him by chance the same day,
he made him draw, after having torn in his presence, Peppa's Letter, although
the Count declared, that he was not his Rival, and that this Letter was not
directed to him. They fought some time with an almost equal advantage; but in
fine, Fortune declared for Centurione, and Spinola was worsted. This Affair
made great noise at Genoa; there was scarce a person but what talked of it, and
strove to search into the Subject of their Quarrel. These two Gentlemen, had
nevertheless so much Discretion, that no body could discover, that the Daughter
of the Prince Doria had any share in the Action. The Princess informed of the
Misfortune of her Nephew, and of the Declaration which Centurione had made to
him before he would draw his Sword, began to believe that there was some
Mystery hid in this Affair, and that may be some person, who envied the
Grandeur of the two Families, had used this perfidious stratagem to breed a
Disturbance, when they obliged the Servant to deliver the Marquess this Letter
of Peppa's, whose Hand without doubt they had counterfeited. All the
circumstances of this Intrigue, and particularly, the flight of this Servant,
confirmed her in these thoughts; and as one is apt to believe those things
which one wishes, she rested satisfied, that Peppa had been betrayed, and was
reconciled to her. The Princess was then willing to undeceive the Marquess; but
whether that he was not so easy to be persuaded as his Aunt, or that he was
ashamed of the advantage that Centurione had had over him, he went from Genoa
without taking leave of any one, and passed into the Emperors Army, which was
then in it is March to raise the Siege of Vienna.

The sudden absence of the Marquess Spinola surprised every body, and much
troubled the Princess Doria, who hereby saw all her hopes frustrated, and the
Union of the two Families as far off a^ ever. Her Husband himself was much
offended at so extravagant a way o^ acting, and began to hearken favorably to
the Proposals that one of hi^ Friends made to him, which was to give his
Daughter to the Marquess of Vill^ Mediana Celi, first Minister of Spain, and
who served at Milan, at the Head of a Regiment of Foot. He gave him for
example, the Marquess of Los Balbazes, who went for one of the most cunning
Politicians that had been in Genoa of a long time, who was more assured of the
Protection of Spain, by marrying his Children to the Spaniards, than by his
long Services. The Prince Doria was moved by these reasons, and promised his
Friend to consider seriously of it. The Marquess of Villa Mediana having had
notice of the favorable Inclination that the Prince Doria had for him, and
finding that Peppa was one of the richest Heiresses of Italy, came to Genoa in
all diligence. The Prince Doria received him very civilly; which engaged him to
make use of all the Gallantries which were practiced in Spain. He walked the
greatest part of the night under Peppa's Window, and in the day never failed to
be at all the Churches that she usually went to; but Peppa, who still flattered
her self with the thoughts of seeing quickly again the Chevalier, had the
malice never to regard this diligence of the Spaniard, who nevertheless did not
despair, but hoped that in the end his Constancy would prevail. In all his
Serenades, Songs were not wanting, that declared the strength of a Passion;
like this that follows.

^ LOvely Coelia, let your Ear
^ listen to my humble Prayer;
^ let it hear your dying Lover;
^ let it hear, and then discover
^ how innocent, and free
^ I am from flattery.
^ How little all! How little all the World I prize,
^ to one kind glance from Coelia's Eyes!
^ To one kind glance from Coelia's Eyes.
2.
Welcome Shores to those that are
Shipwrack'd, and of Life despair,
Or t'Offenders Pardon given.
Or to the Holy Man his Heaven,
Not greater Pleasures be,
Than Coelia kind to me.
So little all the World I prize,
To one kind glance from Coelia's Eyes.
In the mean while that he forgot nothing that would produce success, the
Marchioness Durazzo took her Daughter home, for to put her afterward into the
Nunnery, whereto she was designed. Peppa, who had never hid any thing from her
Cousin, and who found a great deal of Comfort in disclosing her Thoughts to her
without any constraint, was so afflicted at this parting, that she begged her
Parents to let her be entered some time into the Nunnery where Julia went to
take the Veil; but her Father would never consent to it, which obliged her to
lead a life very retired, scarce going out of her Chamber, and without any
other Pleasure but what the hopes gave her of the return of her Lover. The
Count Centurione had not failed to write to France, and to inform him of the
Destiny of his Letter, and of all that had passed at Genoa, since he was gone;
and even gave him hopes, that if he would send another Letter, he would leave
nothing untried that might procure him an Answer. The Chevalier sent him a
second Letter, full of passionate expressions, which set his Thoughts on work,
how to deliver it. The Zeal that he had ^or the Service of his Friend, engaged
^im to write with the most certain promises, that he would procure him greater
success in the delivery of this second Letter, than there was in that of the
first. However, as he knew no body that had access near Peppa, and she leading
a life very retired, since her Cousin was not with her, it was impossible for
Centurione to convey his Friend's Letter to her. He informed himself of all
those who had acquaintance in the Palace Doria, if Peppa had not some
particular Friends, whom she loved to converse with; he understood that she
loved Julia very well, and that she would admit of no Comfort for her Absence.
The Count despairing of doing any thing for his Friend, reproached himself
every moment with his want of Industry, was afraid, that the Chevalier, who had
trusted him with an Affair so delicate, might either have some belief that he
kept Intelligence with his Rival; or, that he acted but weakly for his
Interest, since that he acquitted himself no better in the charge he had
undertaken, after he having engaged himself in the attempt, and promised even a
fortunate success. The remembrance of the great Obligation^ that he has
received from the Chevalier, and the generous means that he used in his Affair;
this put him quite into despair. But when that he considered, that the
Chevalier might with the soonest opportunity arrive at Genoa, and come secretly
to his House in hopes to hear some good news, and yet he had nothing to tell
him: Thi^ last thought put him into so great a^ confusion, that he could with
Pleasure have quitted the best part of his Estate, to find an occasion of being
serviceable to his Friend, and to give him a testimony of his Acknowledgment.
In this extremity, he took so extraordinary a Resolution, that no example of
Friendship can parallel. He had a particular acquaintance with the Marquess
Durazzo, who was one of the chief Senators of Genoa. He one day made him a
Visit, and after having declared to him in obliging expressions, the esteem
that he had for his person, he told him, That he should be very glad to enter
into the Alliance of a Man of his worth, and to become his Son-in-law. The
Marquess, who knew very well the great Estate of Centurione, answered him,
smiling, That his Daughters were not Fortunes for him, nor had that vanity to
think of such a Person as he was, who could make Pretensions to any of the
richest Fortunes of the City. Centurione replied, That he was not of the humor
of the other Genoeses, who in settling themselves, minded less the satisfaction
of their Minds, than procuring vast Estates; but that for him, he should think
himself extremely happy in marrying one his Daughters; assuring him, that no
manner of Articles between them should break off the Match. The Marquess
charmed with this noble Action of Centurione, told him, That two of his
Daughter were already Nuns, that he had two others remaining at home, one
whereof was brought up with the Daughter of the Prince Doria, and just upon
taking the Veil; That if he persisted in the same Sentiments he already had
declared, he might consult with his Friends about it, and returning to him
again, should then be able to give him (...) positive Answer. The Count retired
very well satisfied; and as he was long before capable of governing himself and
his Estate, it was not difficult for him to obtain the consent of his
Relations. The Marquess on his side, consulted his Friends: His Wife, who
perceived that Julia had no great Inclination for the Cloister, was overjoyed
at the Proposition of Count Centurione: She was very scrupulous of putting her
Daughter into a Nunnery against her Will, which made her persuade her Husband
to let her want no advantage, rather than lose a Match so important. The Count
Centurione, who in marrying Julia, was sure of easily seeing Peppa, and of
advancing toward this fair person, the Pretensions of his Friend, returned to
the House of the Marquess Durazzo, and was received very favorably both by the
Husband and Wife. The Affair being concluded the same day, the Marquess
presented Centurione to his Daughter, and exhorted her in his presence, to
acknowledge all her life time, how much she was obliged to the Count, who
preferred her with a small Fortune, before diverse Matches that would have been
to him very advantageous. Julia, to whom such a happiness came unexpected,
especially in a Country where the Estate regulates the Marriages, received the
Count with all the Marks of Esteem, and acknowledgement that he could wish, and
they were married a little while after with an equal satisfaction on both
sides. Peppa was at all the Ceremonies, and was so joyful for her Cousin's good
Fortune, that she gave infinite Praises to the Count, for the Generosity that
he showed. The Princess Doria who then thought she saw further into this
Business than the others, rested satisfied that the Count had been of a long
time in Love with Julia, and that the Letter which had caused so much Trouble
to her Nephew, was the hand of this Kinswoman, who writ much like Peppa,
because they had learnt of the same Master.

The Count who saw Peppa every day, finding himself capable of serving his
Friend, prepared a great Feast in his Palace, and did resolve to take hold of
this Opportunity for to speak to this lovely Person in behalf of the Chevalier,
delivering into her hands the Letter whereof he had took Charge. And as he was
infinitely contented with his Wife, and not enduring to hide any thing from
her, he confessed to her one day, after having assured her of his constant
Love, that he esteemed himself the happiest Man alive, in having married her;
but that nevertheless he was beholden to one of his Friends for this great
happiness, who had rendered him the highest Obligation that ever Man received.
He then told her, that this Friend was in Love with Peppa, and that he had
engaged himself to speak to her in his behalf; but that he resolved not to
attempt it without asking her Advice. Julia surprised at her Husband's
Discourse, counseled him forthwith, to ^ndeceive his Friend, and told as a
secret, that her Cousin was already so taken with a stranger, that though she had
made use of all her Interest to exclude his Memory from her Thoughts, she found
it was but to little purpose, and that her Cousin was resolved never to forget
him. You did then oppose the Interest of my Friend, interrupted the Count? I
doubt very much, replied Julia, whether you know him that I mean. The Count was
going to give her an Answer, when he was informed that two strangers very
earnestly inquired for him. He went out to know what they desired of him, and
was sometime without knowing who they were. He perceived at last, that he whom
he spoke to was the Chevalier -- who was come to Genoa privately in a Disguise,
and accompanied only with one Servant. The Count was overjoyed to see him, and
carried him into a stately Appartment, that he had already prepared for him,
and where the Chevalier changed his Habit for that which was more suitable to
his Quality. They had together a long Discourse. Centurione gave him an Account
of all that had past at Genoa since his Absence, and particularly of the Motifs
of his Marriage. The Chevalier confounded with these extraordinary Obligations
which he had received from his Friend, could not find words capable of
expressing how sensible he was of so true a Friendship. The Count told him that
this very day there was to be in his Palace a great Feast, the Order whereof
the Princess Doria had taken upon her self to regulate, and gave him also to
understand, that perhaps he might procure him the Conversation of his Mistress;
but because he had need of his Wifes help to succeed, he resolved to introduce
the Chevalier into her Presence first, and thereupon he entered his Wifes
Chamber, to prepare her for this Visit. He informed her of the Arrival of his
Friend; and after having exaggerated to her the important service that this
Friend had rendered him, he prayed her to receive him with all imaginable
kindness for his sake. Julia who desired nothing so much as to please her
Husband, promised him to follow his Orders, but ^he assured him again, that the
greatest piece of Service, and of most Advantage for his Friend, would be to
counsel him to think no more of her Cousin. Let not that trouble you, answered
the Count, may be that Peppa is not of your Mind. He went out without staying
for her Answer, returned a moment after, accompanied with the Chevalier. Julia,
who knew him at first sight, to be her Cousin's Lover, was in so great a
surprise, that she could scarce return the Civilities of the Chevalier, and
complaining to her Husband, that he did not reveal to her his Friend's Name.
Judge you, answered the Count, whether I had best counsel him to think no more
of your Cousin? A Color that overspread Julia's Face, hindered her from
replying. The rest of their Discourse was of the Feast; They found it necessary
that the Chevalier should not appear; but that he should remain hid in the
Count's Appartment.

The Princess Doria and Peppa arrived some time after at the Count Centurione's
Palace. The Feast was carried on with a great deal of Magnificence; and the
Marquess of Villa Mediana, who would not lose any Opportunity to be at all the
Places where he might see Peppa, appeared in a Mask followed by several Slaves,
wearing about their Necks Collars, with a Motto in Spanish, which signifies in
our Lauguage, Our Master has no more Liberty than we; but he was so little
disguised, that every one knew who he was. Peppa, who could no longer suffer
the tiresome Gallantries of this Marquess, drew near to her Cousin, and told
her, that she had resolved to come no more to these kind of Feasts, that she
might be delivered from the Importunities of this Spaniard, who endeavored to
infuse Love into her Breast at a Time when she had so much Reason to be
afflicted, being separated from her Lover, and still in an uncertainty of
seeing him again. Julia promised her with an Accent which showed the
Astonishment she was in at a Passion so constant, that if the Picture of the
Chevalier could give her any Consolation, she would show her one in her
Husband's Closet, which represented him so lively, that she would be surprised
at it. Peppa, whose Curiosity was very great in any Thing that related to her
Amor, conjured her Cousin not to defer the giving her this Satisfaction, and
of conducting her to this Closet. They wanted not a pretense to get out from
the Company, and went directly to the Count's Closet, where he was alone with
the Chevalier. Never was any Surprise more pleasing than Peppa's, when she
beheld her Lover. The Chevalier cast himself at her Feet, and assured her, that
he would now forget his past Misfortune, since he enjoyed the pleasure of
seeing the Person that in the World was most dear to him. Peppa, who was
unprepared for a happiness so extraordinary, was at first in some Confusion
that her Lover should express himself so passionately in the Presence of
Centurione; and seeking to save her Honor, which she imagined this Interview
might blemish, she complained to her Cousin of the Cheat she had imposed on
her. Julia presently guessing the Cause of her Confusion, told her that her
Husband was infinitely obliged to the Chevalier, that they hid nothing from one
another, and that she might declare her privatest Thoughts before him without
any Reserve. Peppa taking Courage at this Discourse of her Cousin, did no
longer dissemble the Joy that she had of seeing the Chevalier. They discovered
to each other all that had passed, and gave an interchangeable Account of all
the disturbances they had undergone since they had seen one another. Their
Conversation had lasted much longer, if Julia, who fearing that the Princess
Doria would be in search for her Daughter, had not advised her to make haste to
return, for fear that she deferred it too long, she might be sent for, whereby
that which they designed to keep secret, would be discovered. Peppa being
afraid lest her Mother should find her in this place, prepared to follow her
Cousin's Advice, but she made so little haste, that Julia was forced to take
her by the hand, and carry her away almost by force. The Count seeing that the
Chevalier, being deprived of what he loved, was in a condition which caused
Pity, engaged his Wife to make an Invitation for the next day, and directed her
chiefly to get a Promise from the Princess Doria, that she would bring Peppa
with her again. The hopes of seeing one another the next day, diminished the
Sore that the two Lovers had to be separated; and Julia accquitted her self so
well of the Commission that her Husband gave her, that the Princess promised to
leave her Daughter with her on the morrow all the day long. Peppa appeared to
be in a very good Humor during the Remainder of the Feast. The Marquess of
Villa Mediana, who expounded every thing to his Advantage, flattered himself
that his Cares did not displease her; and as he had never seen her so Handsome
as she was that day, he all along beheld her with a particular Attention. Peppa
laughed to her self at the vain Cares of the Marquess, and was sometimes so
malicious as to cast a Look toward him, but after such a manner as should not
give him cause to have the least Hope; however a Spaniard flatters himself much
more than another Man, and particularly in Love. The Marquess of Villa Mediana
imagined that he was no longer indifferent to Peppa. Upon this ground he writ
to the Spanish Court, and let his Relations understand that he had the esteem
of Peppa, and that if the King of Spain would take notice of it to the Prince
Doria, his Marriage would infallibly be accomplished.

In the mean while the Countess Centurione failed not to go the next day to the
Palace Doria, for to desire the Princess to keep the Promise which she had made
her. The Princess who was now very well satisfied with her Daughter's Conduct,
and who endeavored to put out of her mind by all sorts of Complaisance, the
injustice that she believed to have done her in suspecting her of a
Love-Intrigue, consented without any difficulty, that the two Cousins should go
out together, and promised within a little while to come to them. The Chevalier
who expected his Mistress with the highest impatience, was in extraordinary
transports of Joy at her coming; and whether the care she had taken in her
Dress, or t^^ Pleasure in beholding whom she lov'^ gave a new Luster to her
Beauty, (...) fancied, that he had never seen her (...) handsome before.

Although their Discourse was hel^ in the Presence of the Count Centurion and
his Wife, it was notwithstanding entirely moving and passionate; and as the
Business of the State did touc^ both their particular Interest, they also spoke
of that. Peppa acknowledged to the Chevalier, that it was a trouble to her, to
behold the Conduct of those that governed the Republic, who took no care to
put a stop to the Complaints that the King of France had made against them,
whereof she feared the Consequence for the Interest of her Family, and for the
further Obstacle that it might occasion to her own happiness. The Chavalier
assured her, that whilst he was assured of her Love, the differences between
the King and the Republic should never give him any Trouble, since that there
was not any probability that so many great Men, which, as he had heard, did
compose the Senate of Genoa, could think to resist a Monarch who had compelled
some of the greatest Powers of Eu^^pe to accept the Conditions of Peace that he
had offered them. Peppa, and ^enturione approved of those Reasons, and the
Chevalier added, that after all ^hese beginnings of disorder were over, ^e
flattered himself with the hopes that His Majesty would give him leave to
^eturn to Genoa, and to demand Peppa publicly of her Relations. This lovely
Person sighed at his Proposal, and as she knew that the Chevalier exposed
himself to all sorts of dangers, she conjured him to spare himself a little for
her sake, and to think how that she should never be comforted for his Loss, and
that therefore he ought to endeavor something in the Favor of a Person whose
Life was wound up in his Destiny. So much goodness piercing the very Soul of
the Chevalier, made him vow to her, that he was in despair to think of parting;
but nevertheless his Honor, his Duty, and the attendance that he owed to the
King his Master, obliged him to depart instantly for Toulon, there to receive
the necessary Orders from Court. Peppa did not disapprove of his Reasons; she
prayed him only that he would take all Opportunities to write to her, and bid
him remember that this would be the only Pleasure she should receive in his
Absence. She could not utter these last words without melting into Tears, which
so sensibly touched the Chevalier, that he was ready to dye with Grief at the
feet of his Charming Mistress. The Count and his Wife took care to separate
them before the Princess came, and were forced to deceive them both, for to
prevent their Sorrow in taking leave of one another. They told the Chevalier
that his Mistress was returned to her Father's, and assured Peppa that her
Lover went away, that he might not be the cause of her relapsing into the like
passionate Tenderness. And indeed he departed with his Friend, and returned
with the greatest speed possible into France.

Peppa remained so full of Grief for the departure of her Lover, that without
listening to the Reasons that her Cousin alleged, to oblige her to overcome the
disorder she was in, for fear lest the Princess Doria should surprise her in
this Condition, she abandoned he self to her Grief, and was in Tears at the
very moment that the Princess came. The Countess at first was in great
confusion, both for her Cousin and her self; but she supplied by the ^eadiness
of her Wit, the Indiscretion of Peppa, for it coming into her mind ^o hide a
little Dog, that her Cousin ^ov'd very well, she went to receive ^he Princess
in an Antichamber, and ^old her that he came in a good time ^o comfort Peppa,
who was in the utmost affliction, because she had lost her Dog. The Princess
finding her Daughter in Tears, told her that her Age did not admit of so much
grief for the loss of a Dog, and that it would not be difficult to procure
another as handsome as that which occasioned those Tears. The Countess assured
her, that she would engage for the finding him again, but Peppa appeared not
the less afflicted, and went away a little while after with the Princess Doria.
However foreseeing that her Cousin might perhaps send her Dog the next day, she
privately prayed her before she went out, to keep him at least a Week, that the
pretense of her Sorrow might remain, lest otherwise the Truth might be
suspected.

The Princess Doria, who had sent a Man that she could trust into Germany, for
to inform her Nephew of the Coun^ Centurione's Marriage, and for to clear all
the doubts which might have still remained in his Mind, received, about the
same time, a very obliging Letter from the Marquess, which returned thanks for
her kindness, and expressed to her the great sorrow that afflicted him for
having displeased Peppa; he entreated further his Aunt to speak in his Favor,
and that he would expect an Answer at Venice, assuring her, that he would not
go from thence till his Mistress had pardoned him. The Princess, who cunningly
managed this Affair, waited for a favorable opportunity to show her
Daughter-in-law her Nephew's Letter. In the mean time Don Carlos Bacan, Envoy
from Spain to the Republic of Genoa, went to the Prince Doria, as from the
King his Master, to intimate to him, that this Monarch declared himself for the
Interest of the Marquess of Villa Mediana; and that he could not by a more
sensible mark, demonstrate his good Affection toward the Court of Spain, than
by receiving this Gentleman for his Son-in-law; assuring him, that in favor of
this Marriage, he would give him, when Opportunities did occur, all the marks
of Esteem that he could desire. The Prince Doria received, with a profound
Respect, the Honor that the King of Spain did him, and assured Don Carlos
Bacan, that he would immediately advise with his Family about it; and that he
would ever observe that Submission which was due to the Command of so great a
Monarch. The Princess Doria was very much alarmed at this Negotiation;
notwithstanding she managed her Husband's Mind with so much Address, and gave
him such good Reasons, to let him see that the Marriage with the Marquess
Spinola was a thousand times more fit, and more advantageous for Peppa, than
with a Spaniard, of whom they had no knowledge, either of his Estate or Family,
that at last the Prince Doria remained satisfied, and promised his Wife never
to consent that his Daughter should marry the Marquess of Villa Mediana. In the
mean while, the Princess Doria was resolved not to defer any longer the
speaking to Peppa in behalf of her Nephew, and showed her the Letter she had
received from him. Peppa, hiding part of her Resentment, answered her coldly,
That her Honor had been too sensibly touched to hearken to a Man that had once
no^ esteemed her worthy of him. The Princess judging it not convenient t^ press
her any further, imagining that she should find some means in length of tim^ to
vanquish this nice Punctilio.

As the Marquess of Villa Mediana ha^ writ to Spain, that Peppa would not b^
sorry to have him, and had the vanity to add several things to his advantage
the Prince Doria near that time had (...) Letter from a Genoese that was hi^
Friend, who resided at Madrid. H^ gave him an account, that he had heard talk
of the offer that was made him to marry his Daughter to the Marquess of Villa
Mediana, and how he also knew that the King of Spain used his Interest in the
case; that thereupon he could not forbear counselling him as a Friend, that if
he aimed at the Quiet and Satisfaction of his Family, he ought not to oppose
this Marriage, being informed from good Hands, that the Marquess had before
hand possessed himself of the good liking of his Daughter, and that therefore
he ought, as a wise man, to consent handsomely to a thing that he could not
easily hinder.

The Prince Doria received this Letter with all the Regret and Despair of a
Father, who has but one only Daughter, in whose Education he has taken great
care, and who nevertheless disposes of her self without his share in the
Approbation. Not knowing where to lay the blame, he complained of his
Misfortune to his Wife, and reproached her, in showing her this Letter, with
the Liberty that she had given to his Daughter. The Princess had no longer
occasion of surprise at the Answer that Peppa made her, when she spoke to her
of her Nephew. She advised her Husband to dissemble his Anger, and cunningly to
endeavor to procure from Peppa a Confession of the Truth. Doria went directly
into his Daughters Chamber, and after he had exaggerated the Kindness that he
had for her, the Care he had observed in her Education, and the Pains that he
had taken, not only to conserve the Inheritance of his Fathers, but even to
augment it; he told her that notwithstanding such manifest Obligations, he was
informed from sure hands, that she had suffered her self to be led away by the
subtilty of a Stranger. Peppa answering not a word to this discourse, her
Father continued to exhort her to conceal nothing from him and promised her,
that if she did dea^ ingenuously, he would pass by all occasions of complaint
against her, and would let her see, that he was very indulgent. Peppa, softened
by these words and prepossessed that her Father mean^ all this while the
Chevalier, he being the sole person that she esteemed worthy of her Love,
thought that now she would make good use of the favorable Disposition wherein
she saw him, and casting her self at his Feet, her Eyes bathed in Tears, she
confessed, that it was true, she did love. Her Father interrupted her, without
giving her the time to explain her self any further, and after having reproved
her with the highest Injuries and Reproaches, he returned into his Wife's
Chamber, for fear that in his Anger, he might be moved to any violent action
against his Daughter. He was so transported with his Passion, and at the same
time so penetrated with grief, that he fell dangerously ill. All means were
used for his Recovery, which being applied in time, did in a little while
regain him his former health. His Wife, who every day saw him extremely
animated against his Daughter, promised him, that ^f he would let her manage
Peppa by a Contrivance to marry the Marquess Spinola, that she would take such
exact measures, that none should know of it till 'twas done. Doria, not
enduring the thoughts that a Spaniard should force himself into his Alliance,
and become Master of all his Fortune, in spite of his endeavors to the
contrary, declared, that he would take no farther care what Son-in-law he had,
provided that Villa Mediana was not the Man. Soon after the Prince Doria being
perfectly recovered, his Wife, with his private consent, feigned that she had
made a Vow to our Lady of Loretto for the recovery of her Husband, and declared
that she would go for to acquit her self of it. Peppa, who was very glad of
this Occasion, to show that she was no less forward than the Princess in the
care of her Father's Health, declared, that it would be a great satisfaction to
her to accompany her in this Journey; and they set out so secretly, that only
the Countess Centurione was advertised of their departure.

The Princess Doria assured of her Husband's consent, and prepossessed that
Peppa had not any natural Aversion against the Marquess Spinola, although she had
still observed some trouble in her Carriage, resolved to finish cunningly the
work that she had begun so many years ago, and having sent a Man in whom she
could confide, to her Nephew, who was then at Venice, she sent him word, that
it was time to conclude an Affair that the two Families equally desired; that
therefore, as Peppa was one of the richest Heiresses of Italy, and that new
obstacles might probably ^rise to prevent his Marriage, she had determined,
thereby to avoid all Inconveniences, to bring Peppa with her to Loretto, to
the end, that he might seize upon her at their return along the
Adriatick-shore, where they must of necessity pass. She added, that it being
usual to see Pirate-ships send their Pinnaces ashore, and take away by force
whatsoever they meet with, she judged it fit that he should arm a little
Frigate, and that he might not render himself odious to his Mistress by this
Violence, if he appeared in it, he should send a Pinnace ashore with eight or
ten of his Men clothed like Turks, who might ^eset a little before day, a lone
House, where she would lodge purposely; and that these Men, after having
carried them away, and led them into their Pin^ace, should take care to terrify
them by all the appearances of a cruel Slavery, and that the next morning
betimes the Marquess should pursue the Pinnace with his little Frigate, and
after a short engagement should take it, and deliver them: That if he executed
all this with Judgment, Peppa, that was of the Humor of the greatest part of
young Ladies, who are always overjoyed to have those that court them, do
something for them that is extraordinary, would be sensible of the Bravery that
he might show in relieving her, and would think her self very happy to fall
into his Hands, after having escaped from those of the Turks; that thereupon he
should conduct her to Venice, where she would take care to have a Priest ready
to marry them, whilst the Impression of the great Service he had done in
delivering her remained yet strong in her Fancy.

The Marquess received this Project with all the Joy imaginable, and as Time
and the Advices which the Princess had frequently given him, served but to make
him the more amorous, he prepared all things on his side to put in execution.
The Princess always lodged at her return in small straggling Inns, to bring her
Project about. 'Twas in one of these Houses, between Rimini and Ancona, that
the counterfeit Turks, sent by the Marquess Spinola, put themselves in a
posture to seize upon the Princess and Peppa, and to carry them off. They soon
rendered themselves Masters of the great Gate of the Inn, and having terrified
the Servants by some violent Actions at their first entrance, they run up into
the Princesses Chamber, who had her Daughter in the same Room with her, and
rudely forced them to dress themselves with speed. The Princess, who saw Peppa
very much alarmed, began to counterfeit a Greatness of Mind, and exhorted her
to submit to her Destiny without murmuring, assuring her, (by a kind of a
Prophetic Spirit) that Heaven would not abandon her.

The Chevalier of -- who was just upon going to take a great Voyage at Sea, was
desirous to take leave of his Mistress before he embarked. He went Post to
Genoa, accompanied with one of his Friends; having understood, when they
arrived, that Peppa was gone to Loretto, he continued on his Journey, with
design to meet his Mistress, since his time would not permit him to stay for
her at Genoa. He happened to arrive very late at the Inn where Peppa lodged
that same night that the Counterfeit Turks were executing the design of
carrying her away. As this Project could not be put in execution without some
noise, the Chevalier, and he that accompanied him, being awaked out of their
Sleep, started up, and quickly dressing themselves, followed them so close,
that they came up with the Men just as they were preparing to carry off the
Ladies on board of their Pinnace. They charged them with that Courage, that
these supposed Pirates, who did not expect to find so fierce a Prevention, left
the Princess and her Women, and retired in disorder. However, notwithstanding
the Confusion they were in, three of the strongest, who probably knew their
Masters Secret, seized Peppa, and fled in all haste toward their Pinnace. The
Chevalier having overheard her Voice, pursued them so hard, and with so much
Courage, that he presently disabled two of them, and went to run his Sword
through the other, when that this wretch fell down, and begged him to spare his
Life, assuring him, that he was no Turk, but that he and his Companions were
employed by the Marquess Spinola, who had agreed with the Princess Doria to
steal away this fair person that he had now delivered. Peppa was so troubled,
both with her Adventure, and with what she heard this fellow relate, that she
scarce yet knew to whom she was obliged for her Liberty. She just began to
thank her Deliverer in terms full of Esteem and Acknowledgment, when she
discerned by the dawning of the ^ay, that she spoke to the Chevalier of --.
Never in so small a time was any one removed from a great Terror into a
perfect Joy. A moment before she thought her self a Slave, and whilst her Mind
was still possessed with frightful Ideas, she found her self in the Arms of a
Lover beloved. So agreeable a change is far more easy to imagine than to
express. The Chevalier related to Peppa, that he came to Genoa with a design to
see her, and that not having time to expect her return from Loretto, he had
determined to meet her on the Road; that he arrived last night late in this
Inn, where his good Fortune had conducted him so opportunely; thereupon he
offered to carry her into France, to secure her from the Violence of her
Relations. Peppa imagining at first, that the Chevalier spoke this only to
prepare he^ for a design of forcing her out of the Hands of her Father and
Mother, let him understand, that her Father had some knowledge of his Passion,
and told him, that she did not despair of gaining at last his Consent for their
mutual happiness; therefore she conjured him not to destroy the Merit of the
Service that he had now done her. The Chevalier, who of all Lovers was the most
respectful, threw himself at her Feet, and complained of the mean Opinion she
had of him, assuring her, that he would rather die a thousand times, than to
have the least thought of displeasing her. They continued, saying a thousand
kind and passionate things to one another, and gave new Assurances, that their
Love should last with their Lives. The Chevalier, who would not be known by the
Princess; and who after he had broke her Measures, would not have been very
well received by her, desired his Mistress to permit him not to appear, and
that after having conducted her safe to the House where she had lodged, he
might remain undiscovered, and following her at some distance, might be her
Guard till she came to Genoa. Peppa acquiesc'd in his Sentiments, and in
parting, when she perceived she was just arrived at the Inn, she prayed him to
remember, that working her safety, was employing himself for that person in the
World who desired most to complete his happiness. The Chevalier had no sooner
left his Mistress, but he met immedi^tely the Gentleman who had seconded him in
attacking the Counterfeit Turks. This Gentleman, who had been troubled all this
while for his absence, told him, that he had been careful to attend the
Princess Doria, and to prevent any ill usuage that might have been offered her
during this Confusion, but she showed so little Acknowledgment, that far from
thanking him, her discourse appeared full of Discontent, letting him know that
she was not at all obliged to him for his having exposed his Life for her. This
was no matter of surprise to the Chevalier, who presently imparted to his
Friend what he had discovered concerning the private Intelligence that was
between the Princess and the Ravisners; and the Promise that he had made to
this lovely Creature, to be always near, during the rest of the way to Genoa,
that he might be able to assist her, if there should be made any further
Attempt.

In the mean while the Princess Doria, whom the Chevalier's Friend carried back
to the Inn, and who feigned in the presence of her Women to be much troubled,
was comforted in her mind for the Misfortune which had happened to her Nephew's
Men, being prepossessed, as several Persons had assured her, that they had
carried Peppa off. She began already to think of going immediately to Venice,
to authorize the Marriage of her Daughter-in-Law, by her Presence, and by the
Consent of her Father, which she had under his Hand, when that Peppa entered
the Room. At first she appeared in a very great astonishment; but as Ladies,
and particularly those in Italy, without any Difficulty at all can dissemble
their real Sentim^^^s, the Princess threw her self about her Daughters Neck,
and outwardly showed an extreme Joy to see her escaped from so great a danger.
Peppa, who concealed also what she had heard, and who was still sensibly
touched with what her Lover had just related, about his being forced to return
immediately into France, embraced her Mother-in-Law, the Tears flowing from her
Eyes. They presently parted from hence, followed at some distance by the
Chevalier and his Friend. While they were on their Journey to Genoa, the
Marquess of Villa Mediana made use of all his industry to gain the Prince Doria
over to his side. He engaged his greatest Friend to speak to him in behalf of
his Love, and made him see so many advantages for his Family, and chiefly for
his own Person; that Doria was vexed that he had given his consent to his Wife,
to marry his Daughter to the Marquess Spinola; but when that he understood by a
Letter from the Princess, the unfortunate success of this Project, he thought
that Heaven would not permit this marriage, since it raised so many
Difficulties, and now no longer scrupled to give Peppa to the Marquess of Villa
Mediana, especially when he reflected upon the agreeable surprise this would be
to his Daughter, by declaring to her such News, as he did really believe would
be pleasing.

As soon as the Princess and Peppa were returned to Genoa, the Chevalier being
obliged to be at Toulon before the departure of the Fleet, quitted this beloved
Place, without having so much time as to contrive an Enterview with his fair
Mistress. In the mean while the Marquess of Villa Mediana, who was satisfied of
the good Intentions that the Prince Doria had for him, appeared with a most
magnificent Livery, and frequented all the Streets, and all Places where he
believed he should see Peppa. As she was thus importuned with his Services, she
took hold of all Opportunities to treat him ill, and was so malicious as to
place her self in the Church so, that the Spaniard could never see her Face.
The Princess Doria being informed by her Husband, of the Design that he had to
marry Peppa to this Gentleman, observed several times, that her Daughter-in-Law
was always careful to avoid him, and that she appeared to have an extreme
Aversion against him. She had much ado to comfort her self for not having
succeeded in concluding the Marriage of her Nephew, and this Design running in
her Head, the least matter raised her hopes. Therefore she gave an Account to
her Husband, that Peppa seemed very far from having any Inclinations for the
Marquess of Villa Mediana. The Prince Doria, prepossessed (as he thought) with
the contrary by the confession of his Daughter, judged, as all Fathers are
easily induced to flatter themselves, that Peppa used this constraint because
she would not displease him. This supposed constraint so worked upon him, that
going thereupon to Peppa's Chamber, he declared to her, that forgetting his own
peculiar Interest, and not weighing what would be most advantageous for his
Family, he had considered only of making her happy, and had determined in
favor of the goo^ will that she had for the Marquess (...) Villa Mediana, to
marry her to this Spaniard. Peppa remained so amazed at a Discourse she so
little expected, that it was impossible for her to answer one Word. A Moment
after she fell in a ^woon upon her Bed. The Prince Do^ia, surpised and
troubled at the swoon^^g of his Daughter, called for help; ^eppa's Women ran in
to her Assistance, and the Princess came soon after. When ^^e saw that she was
recovered, she en^eavour'd to console her by all the ^ays of flattering and
caressing, and at ^ength demanded of her from whence ^his Fainting did proceed.
Peppa owned that she never had a strong Aversion, ^ut against one only person,
and that ^evertheless she was so unhappy, that ^er Father had made choice of
this ^ery same Person to make his Son-in-Law. The Princess, after having
assured her that the Prince Doria would not use such Violence to her
Affections, went toward her Husband, and blamed him very much for having
driven his Daughter into Despair, since that he might have remembered, how she
had already perceived that Peppa had no ^^clinations for Villa Mediana. Doria,
^^o comprehended nothing of all this that he heard, believed that his Wife, who
as she was ingenious and contriving, had turned the Mind of his Daughter, and
had engaged her to prefer the Marquess Spinola before the Spaniard, which
confirmed him in the Opinion that he had already of the Inconstancy of the
greatest part of Women; but he was nevertheless in a great Perplexity and Doubt
what measures to take.

In the mean time, as the Senate did not proceed to any Resolution to satisfy
the King of France, upon those occasions of Complaint that he had caused to be
declared to the Republic, the French Envoy retired from Genoa; which raised
cruel Apprehensions in the Minds of the greatest part of the Senators,
especially since they came to know that there was fitting out at Toulon a great
Fleet, and that all the Ships were loaded with a prodigious quantity of Bombs,
Grenades, and Mortar-pieces. The Commonalty maintained that all these great
Preparations were made against the Algereens, whom the French designed to
exterminate. The greatest part of the Genoeses believed all this to be very
probable; besides they were so possessed, that it was a difficult matter for
any State to injure them, that they would never believe that these forces were
preparing against Genoa; but the wiser sort who know that Kings do seldom ^et
Affronts go unpunished, lived in great fears, and were of Opinion that ^hey
ought to accommodate the matter with that King upon any Terms. The public
Affairs employed every Body ^o hard, and private persons were so ^ssiduous at
Council, and at the diffe^ent Assemblies that were thereupon summoned, that
none had leisure to think of their domestic Affairs. The Prince Doria, who was
without contradiction one of the most considerable of the City, was called
every moment to the Consultation of the Senate, and the little Time that he had
to himself, obliged him to defer his private Affairs. He determined therefore,
by the Counsel of his Wife, not to fix upon any Resolution about the Marriage
of his Daughter, while this Business which concerned the public was not fully
decided.

While the Affairs of Genoa were in this Condition, Peppa lived in continual
fears, encompassed with her Enemies, under the Authority of a Father, who would
sacrifice her to a Spaniard, and under a Mother-in-Law, who meditated new
Projects to betray her to the Marquess Spinola. Every thing wa^ suspected by
her, and at last the public Calamity became her private consolation; for the
formidable Fleet tha^ the French fitted out, and the just occasions of
Complaint that the King had against the Genoeses, though a matter of disquiet
to all, was the only Subject of her joy, and the only thing that nourished her
Hopes, because that if the French King became Master of Genoa, she should then
have the Pleasure, by loving the Chevalier of -- to be assured beforehand of a
Powerful Protector for her Family. As she could not find one Person but what
spoke against the French, she avoided all Conversation: Her Cousin to whom she
disclosed her most secret thoughts, was the only Person that she thought endued
with Reason, since she condemned not the French.

Much about that time they heard that the Divan of Algiers, more cunning then
the Senate of Genoa, had made his Peace with the King, without staying for new
Marks of his Anger, and that he had already sent away Ambassadors, to ask this
Monarch Pardon for what was past. This news put the Genoeses quite into
Despair, no longer doubting but that the Storm which was gathered about Toulon,
would fall upon their City. The Senate assembled at all Hours in the Day; at
every turn they were making new Propositions, but never came to any Conclusion.
The Wisest were of Opinion that it was best to send away Post an Ambassador to
make their Submission to the King; others judged that it was too late. The
Envoy of Spain hereupon arrived, promised them that they should not want a
Fleet bravely manned, nor a Warlike Army: And he would send for all the Gold of
Peru for their Service. Although their Counsels were very different, they
received however a Spanish Regiment into the City, which the Governor of
Millan sent thither. They also recalled all the Bandits, and as much as the
Confusion (wherein they were) would permit them, they distributed through all
Parts such Orders as were necessary to put them in a Condition of making a
vigorous Resistance. In the mean time the most considerable Persons of the
City, sent their Wives and Children to Millan, and to the other neighboring
Villages. The Prince Doria, after having most tenderly embraced his Wife and
his Daughter, would also have them take their Leave of Genoa, and gave them an
Equipage more numerous than magnificent. He advised the Princess his Wife to
retire either to Millan, or to Turin, which she thought most convenient; and
above all things recommended his Daughter to her Care. The Princess Doria, who
had still a design for her Nephew, and who feared the Authority of the Marquess
of Villa Mediana, would not therefore go to Millan, lest she should deliver her
self up into the Hands of the Spaniards. She retired to Turin, where she had
some Relations, believing as she had Reason, that she should there have her
Liberty more than at Millan. Soon after her Arrival, she writ to the Marquess
Spinola, who was still at Venice, sending him Word that she impatiently
expected him.

The Court of Savoy, which is without contradiction one of the most polite in
all Europe, has been an inviolable Sanctuary for the Illustrious Unfortunate.
It would be even a difficult matter to find a Stranger that was ever
discontented with his Reception at Turin. The Officers of the Portuguese Fleet
can testify, whether Victor Amadeus the Second, who now Reigns in- Savoy and
P^^^mont, has degenerated from the M^gni^^cency of his Ancestors; and of la^e,
the Officers of the King of France's Household, retired from Ch^^^b^ay, laden
with Presents, and so extremely satisfied with their acting after an obliging
manner, which doubled their value, that at their return, there was not one but
what spoke the Elogies of the Duke of Savoy. This Prince had just espoused
Mademoiselle, the Offspring of many Kings, and to speak in a word, Daughter to
Monsieur of France. Upon the Princess Doria's arriving at Turin, the Duke, who
knew her Merit and Quality, received her with all the marks of Esteem that she
could wish or expect, and offered her very obligingly, all that was in his
Power. Peppa, who did not want the Assistance of her Birth, to gain the
Respects of all wheresoever she appeared, was regarded by all the Nobility with
Admiration. The Ladies perhap^ could not see her without some Jealousy,
whereof there was no great cause of wonder. Nevertheless she was not at any of
the Diversions that the Duke of Savoy had prepared at the arrival of the
Duchess, because the Princess Doria pretended to a Pre-eminence which could
not be granted her, without Injustice to several Ladies of extraordinary
Quality, who were at the Court of Savoy. The Nobility, who would have been very
glad to have seen Peppa at all the Entertainments, proposed several Expedients,
to satisfy the Princess Doria; but as it is much more easy to regulate the
Interests of Princes, than the Ranks of Ladies, they found it impossible to
bring it to a Conclusion. The disorder of the Affairs at Genoa served well
enough for a Pretense to excuse her absence from the Diversions of the Court;
for there came news, that the French Fleet was before Genoa, that several
Volunteers had landed, and that after having made themselves Masters of the
Fort of St. Peter di Arena, they had burnt those fine Country-Houses which were
the Delight of the Genoeses; that the Frigates warping close to the City, had
cast into it such a prodigious quantity of Bombs and Granado's, that it
appeared rather a Mount-Etna covered with Flames, than that Genoa which was
named Genoa la superba; and in fine, that the Consternation was so great, that
several Families retired to the Mountains, and abandoned both their Goods and
their Houses; esteeming themselves happy if they could secure their persons
safe, as well from the Fire, as from the Banditti, who began to pillage the
City. There was added to all these Circumstances, that the French had lost
several Volunteers at their landing before the Fort of St. Peter di Arena, and
that also a Chevalier of a very great worth, who was one of the most
considerable Officers of the Fleet had been killed upon the place; and that he
was generally lamented by all the Army. All this news was a sensible affliction
to the Princess Doria; but when that Peppa was informed of the loss that the
French had received, and of the death of a Chevalier, who was a person very
deserving; her Love, which at this Report was alarmed, made her tremble for
the Life of her Lover, and all the Circumstances that she had heard of the
Merit of this Chevalier, and of the sorrow that every body showed for his loss,
increased her Terror. She privately retired, and beforehand gave her self
wholly up to all the Emotions of Grief, which a person that loves tenderly can
be capable of at such a time. She past over two whole days without mitigating
in the least her trouble: Her Grief oppressed her in a very high degree, and
although she had still a small spark of hopes left her, believing that there must
be several Officers of Merit in so great a Fleet as this of the King's, she
durst not however enquire of the Particulars of the News, fancying that
whatsoever she should hear spoke of the Chevalier that was dead could be
applied to none but her Lover. The Princess Doria, who would not be comforted
for the Misfortunes wherewith her Country was oppressed, had not observed the
great Disturbance that Peppa lay under. But seeing that she came not out to
receive the Ladies that visited them, she sent to her to come into her Chamber
for to hear the reading of a long News-Letter in the presence of several
persons, giving an account of all that had passed at Genoa. Although Peppa had
resolved to prefer the cruellest troubles wherein she was, before the clearing
her Doubts, which might prove either very Tragical, or else very pleasing, yet
she could not resist her timorous and pressing Curiosity to be informed of the
destiny of her Lover. She entered her Mother-in-laws Chamber, where she found
several Ladies who impatiently expected her, but rather for to know the
particulars of the Affairs of Genoa. The Princess Doria read her Letter, which
confirmed all that she had heard before at Turin. They sent her word, after the
several Circumstances of the French landing, that they had lost upon the spot,
several Officers, and that above all, they were extremely afflicted for the
loss of the Chevalier de Lhery, who was a Gentleman much esteemed, and who upon
all occasions had given proof of his Valor and Conduct. This name which
sounded like that of the Chevalier of --, whether or no it was ill spelt in the
Letter, or that the Princess pronounced it not well in Italian, cast Peppa into
such an excess of Grief, that it deprived her of her Senses. She understood it
to be the Chevalier of --, and at the same moment she fainted away upon a Couch
where she sat. The Ladies ran to her assistance, but had no suspicion that the
loss of the French was the cause of her fainting, being persuaded that Peppa,
touched with the Relation of so many Misfortunes, whereof the French Fleet had
been the occasion at Genoa, was thereupon seized with this weakness. They had
much ado to recover her, and were forced at last to call her Women to her, who
having quickly undressed her, put her to Bed. She was pierced to the Heart with
this cruel News, and fell into so violent a disorder, that she spent several
days with a careless Indifference for every thing, and almost without any
visible Sense; and if there was sometimes a small interval from her excess of
Grief, 'twas only to make her the more tormentingly sensible of her loss. She
reproved her self, for her (as she thought) Indifference, for having still had
the Courage to live, since she could no longer doubt the death of her Lover;
she continued many days in these cruel agonies, but at last, the force of her
Youth surmounted so far that of her Grief, as to permit her, when she had no
Company in her Chamber, to pass some melancholy moments in breathing forth this
Song.

^ COme, come gentle Death, and close these Eyes;
^ come stop the Current of my Grief;
^ on you my Rest relies,
^ be quick with your Relief:
^ For by the chance of War my Damon's laid,
^ mangled, and bloody in his Grave:
^ Oh God! Oh God of Battle! No distinction made
^ between the Coward, and the Brave!
^ Zelinda weep, Zelinda weep, until thy Tears
^ drown both thy self, and all thy Cares;
^ but hasten sooner, (oh ye Gods!) my Doom,
^ that I may fly, that I may fly to Damon in his Tomb,
^ to Da -- mon in his Tomb.
The Princess Doria, who daily expected her Nephew, whom she knew was gone from
Venice, left nothing untried to manage the Inclinations of Peppa, and although
she could not comprehend the Reason of the Despair wherewith she saw her
oppressed, she notwithstanding acted with all imaginable Complaisance. The
Marquess Spinola, being arrived at Turin about this Time, went immediately to
find his Aunt, who received him with inexpressible Joy; but she durst not
present him to her Daughter-in-Law, in the Disorder wherein she then was.
However the next day after his Arrival, she would carry him to see Peppa, but
bethinking her self of the Anguish that afflicted her, she desired the Marquess
to stay in the Antichamber, whilst she would go and prepare her to receive him
obligingly. She thereupon went into Peppa's Chamber, and after having ordered
the Women to withdraw that served her, she told her that the Marquess Spinola
was just arrived, that he had passed through Genoa, and that he could give a
more particular account of every Accident that had happened there. Peppa, who
presently perceived that the Princess aimed at some new Design in favor of her
Nephew, gave her not time to proceed, but interrupting her with Tears in her
Eyes, told her that she would now no longer make a Secret of her Inclinations
which she had hid till then, since also she had now nothing more to trust to,
being resolved to deprive her self of Worldly Converse, which was become
insupportable to her. She then declared that she had all along had some
Inclination for the Chevalier of -- since they saw one another at the Ball,
that was given at the Palace of the Marquess Justiniani; that Sympathy had
worked the same Effect upon the mind of the Chevalier who retired into France,
for to avoid the Consequence of this Inclination, which forced him to love in
spite of all his Resolution; that they had run over two years without either
seeing or knowing one another till the time that the Marquess Spinola being by
chance returned from Rome with the Chevalier of -- had conducted him to their
House, and so had unknowingly given them the Opportunity to revive their first
Sentiments, to declare anew their Affections, and to love with a Passion most
violent and lasting; that in the end, their Love had taught them an Expedient
both to see, and to Write to one another, as well as to exchange on both sides
an Assurance to continue firm in their Sentiments. 'Twas he, added Peppa, that
arrived so opportunely in the way to Loretto, as to deliver me from the Turks,
who were not what they appeared, for one of them confessed to us, that they
were employed by your Nephew, who had privately agreed with you, to carry me
off by force. I never yet spoke to you of it, because being assured of the
Constancy of my Lover, all other things gave me not the least trouble. I still
flattered my self with the Hopes that the Senate would make their Peace with
the King of France, and that that might facilitate our Marriage; but all these
flattering hopes are vanished, and I now propose to my self no other
Consolation but that of lamenting the Loss of my Lover, all the rest of my
Life. She poured forth a Flood of Tears, in uttering these last words.
Nevertheless she continued her Discourse, and told the Princess that she was
resolved to go throw her self at the feet of the Duchess, to entreat her
Protection, and to beg that she might be received into the Society of the Nuns
of the Annunciation. However, if after the Confession that she had made, there
remained yet in her Breast some Sentiments of Compassion for her, she might if
she pleased easily save her the Confusion that would seize her when she went to
inform so great a Princess of her weakness, and prevent her becoming the talk
of all the Court; wherefore she expected this promise from her that she might
be conducted to this Convent wherein she desired to enter without staying for
her Father's Orders. The Princess melted into Tears at her Relation, and had
scarce the Force either to blame her weakness, or to make her sensible that she
shared in her Grief. She at last assured her, that she would contribute to her
satisfaction as far as possible she could, and went out to entertain the
Marquess Spinola, who had overheard all their Conversation, and who was so
sensibly afflicted with Grief at the Recital Peppa had made, that 'twas not
difficult to be discerned when the Princess came to him. He was infinitely
concerned to have bin thus long a Pretext to his Aunt for opposing a Passion
both so real and so tender. He was then of the mind that if he had but known
how conformable were the Sentiments of Peppa and the Chevalier, he would have
taken no small delight in serving them and favoring their design. The Princess
was extremely surprised to find her Nephew in this condition, but she was much
more so, when he told her that he heard all that Peppa had said to her, and
that he was sensibly grieved, as well for the Sorrow she endured, as for the
Death of the Chevalier. He mentioned him with the greatest marks of Esteem, and
complained to his Aunt of the trouble that she had given the two Lovers. The
Princess assured him that she never had any Knowledge of their Passion, and
told him ^urther, that in the condition wherein Affairs were then, she would
have advised her Husband not to refuse the Chevalier his Daughter, since that
he loved her so entirely, because it might very probably come to pass that if
the Senate did not find some Means to appease the King, this Monarch would
reduce the whole State of Genoa under his Subjection.

In the mean time the Chevalier of -- being informed that his Mistress was at
Turin, immediately took post thither: As soon as he was landed, he happened by
chance to stop at the same house where the Marquess Spinola lodged. Our
Marquess presently knew him, and was so surprised to see a man whom he was
informed was dead, that he looked at him several times without saluting him,
imagining that he was mistaken by the Resemblance of some Features. The
Chevalier, who judged by the surprise of the Marquess that he had knowledge of
his Passion, did not forbear coming up to him, and saluting him very civilly.
He then told him, that he was persuaded that the same Affair was the cause of
both their Journeys to Turin. The Marquess ^^^lling himself out of the Surprise
he was in, returned the Complement to the Chevalier, and declared to him that
(waving whether or no they came both upon the same Errand,) he knew, that for
his part, he esteemed no Business more important, then the care he always took
to contribute to his happiness. He gave him an Account of the Report that was
spread abroad of his Death, by what means he had heard the particulars of his
Love toward his own Mistress, of the despair Peppa was in, and of the
extraordinary Resolution that she had taken, to leave the World, and to shut
her self up for ever in a Convent. The Chevalier hearkened with infinite
satisfaction to Peppa's Resolution, which sufficientciently justified the
Strength of her Passion; but having heard that she was sick, and that no body
was permitted to enter into her Chamber, he believed it a very difficult thing
for him to see her, especially having the Princess Doria against him, who had
in Prospect what was wholly opposite to his Love. The Marquess left him still
in his Error, and without letting him know that the Princess would be more
favorable to him than he could imagine, he only promised him that he would
find out some means to introduce him secretly to Peppa. This Promise put the
Chevalier into a great Ecstasy. He embraced the Marquess, who left him to go
speak to the Princess. She appeared to him much concerned that Peppa still
persisted in her first Resolution, and was continually pressing her to be
carried to the Nunnery of the Annunciation. The Marquess told her that he was
just come from a Gentleman whom he had known at Rome, and whose fame was very
great for his Ability in curing any Distemper of the Mind, and that if she
pleased, he would bring him that he might give his Opinion of the despair and
trouble which Peppa labored under; and he would assure her before hand, that
this Gentleman would diminish much of her trouble as soon as ever he had but
spoke to her. The Princess who was still far from suspecting the Mystery that
the Marquess hid from her, conjured him to bring this Gentleman the very same
day. She added so many things concerning the Joy she should receive, if she
could but give Peppa as great an occasion now to commend her, as formerly she
had reason to be displeased, that the Marquess Spinola thought he might no
longer dissemble the happy Rencounter that he had made. He was resolved however
to know, before he told her that the Chevalier was living, if she would really
favor his Passion, as she declared how much she wished to have been made
sensible of it before. He turned the Discourse to the Affairs of Genoa; and
after he had exagerated the Importance thereof, he told her that he had heard
from very good hands, that a general Peace was agreed on, none having had so
much care for the Interest of the Republic, as to see that Genoa should be
included, the French King having reserved to himself what punishment he had
designed them, that this caused in him a great deal of Fear for his Country,
and she might hereby see that the Marriage of Peppa with the Chevalier of --
would have been very advantageous to her Family. The Princess who admitted all
these Reasons of her Nephew to be very substantial, assured him that she should
not have opposed it, if the Correspondence that the Chevalier had with Peppa,
had but been known to her. Since that you are in this mind, replied the
Marquess, it depends now upon you to oblige the Republic with a Protector, who
has no small Power in the French Court, and engage Peppa to you by an
everlasting Acknowledgement, and to do an Action which will Crown you with
Glory. The Chevalier of -- is not dead; and to conceal nothing from you, it is
he that I intend to bring to Peppa, under the name of the Gentleman of Rome,
who is Master of such great Secrets in Physic. The Interest of our Republic,
as well as the Esteem that I have for him, persuades me to propose to him that
he should marry Peppa privately; and methinks by all the Reasons which I have
urged, you must needs receive a great satisfaction in being favorable to the
Passion of two Persons who have loved so long and so tenderly. Although the
Princess Doria was convinced with these Reasons of her Nephew, she was
notwithstanding in a great Perplexity. She feared to take upon her an Affair so
nice; but the Marquess still alleged so many Reasons, and so earnestly begged
her to grant him the Favor which he asked, that she promised at last to
consent to the Union of these two Lovers. She would however let Peppa take the
Pleasure of the surprise, and told the Marquess that without letting her
re^eive the least notice of the Truth, she would propose to her only to see a
Man who would engage for her Recovery. The Marquess returned to find out the
Chevalier, who upon the hopes of the Assistance promised, did now suffer a most
tormenting Impatience for the sight of him. He assured him, that he should
quickly see Peppa; and the Thanks that ^he received for it, convinced him so
much of the true Passion he had for her, that he believed he might now be plain
with him. He therefore counseled him, since that he was so much in Love, to
think of contriving a secret Marriage, and not to expose any longer a Passion
so true, so reciprocal, and so tender, to the uncertain Events of Fortune,
which might still produce new Obstacles. He promised him further, that he would
make all the Interest he could with the Princess Doria, in his Favor. The
Chevalier, who durst not have extended his Hopes so far, was charmed with this
Promise; and embracing the Marquess, told him, That this was giving him more
than a Life, to obtain of the Princess, that she would let him marry Peppa.
They continued a long Conversation together, and the Chevalier showed so
fervent a Passion, that the Marquess had much a-do to forbear disclosing what
Sentiments the Princess had for him. Judge to what great excess was his Joy,
when that the Marquess having gone out the next morning, returned a little
while after, he told him, That he had discoursed with his Aunt, and that having
let her know that he was still not only alive, but that it was his highest
Ambition to make Peppa sensible of his Love, by any Obligation whatsoever that
might be proposed to him, he had found her disposed to agree to all that he
could expect. His Happiness appeared so little credible, that he was long in
doubt, whether or no his Sense of Hearing was as good as it used to be. He made
the Marquess repeat over again several times the Assurance he had given him of
the Consent he had obtained of the Princess. The Service that he had done for
him, exciting his Acknowledgments, made him that he did not know how to leave
off returning Thanks, which he expressed with a Zeal that sufficiently
testified the strength of his Passion. It was indeed too violent, to let him
defer any longer the seeing of the Princess Doria. He conjured the Marquess to
carry him to her, and he had all the reason in the World to be satisfied with
his Reception. She assured him very obligingly, That she would not have
persuaded her Daughter-in-law to marry her Nephew, but that she was ignorant
that she was pre-engag'd; and that when she had heard of the secret
Intelligence that had past between them, she lamented his death, which put it
out of her Power to make amends for the Disquiets whereof she had been the
cause. She added, smiling, That she much feared that Peppa was not in a Humor
to receive his Visit; because she had mentioned him as a Man admirable in
curing such Distempers that all other Physicians had not the least Knowledge
of; to which all the Answer she received, was, That far from admitting of a
Cure, she should die with Grief, if she did believe her self capable of
receiving any Comfort. I believe, continued the Princess, speaking to the
Chevalier, that she remains still in the same Resolution of not seeing you.
I Will once more try if I cannot succeed this time, then you shall use the Power
you have over her. In speaking these words she conducted the Chevalier to her
Daughter's Apartment; and leaving him in the Antichamber with the Marquess,
she went in to Peppa, who had kept her Bed two days. She in vain endeavored to
make her consent to the Visit they came to make her. Peppa remained all along
obstinate in refusing. It is not just, said the Princess to her, to have that
Complaisance for you, as to let you die without help. At these words she
ordered one of her Women, who waited, to introduce the Gentleman that was in
the Antichamber, and who had boasted to have a sure Remedy for her Distemper.
Peppa, whom her Sorrow made always wish to be alone, and who could not
comprehend, that there could be any Remedy for a troubled Mind, where the Body
suffered not, complained of the Violence that she imposed upon her; and
perceiving a Gentleman enter her Chamber, she turned to the other side, without
so much as looking on him, being resolved to make no Answer to any of the
Questions that he might ask her about her Illness. The Princess convinced more
and more of her real Grief, pleased her self with the thoughts of the sudden
change that she would find in her condition; and stepping toward the
Chevalier, I Will leave you all alone with the sick person, said she to him, The
restless condition wherein her Disease has cast her, having made her averse to
all manner of Physic, I perceive she designs not to hearken to you; but I
hope, that since you are master of such an infallible Secret, as I have heard
reported, you have also Skill enough to persuade her to make use of it. She
went out in saying that, to her Nephew, who attended in the Antichamber, till
'twas time for him to come in. In the mean while the Chevalier approached to
the Bed, where his Mistress lay, and for to oblige her to turn toward him;
What, said he to her, cannot all my earnest desires of offering you my Service,
merit so much as one look? Have you such great reason to hate your life, that
nothing in the World can oblige you to preserve it?

These words letting her hear a Voice like that of her Lover, cast her into a
Disorder which is impossible to describe, she thrust forth a sigh at the
remembrance of his loss; and not daring to believe that the news of the
Chevalier's death was false, she remained still in the same condition, without
looking toward him that spoke to her. In the name of Goodness, continued the
Chevalier, disdain not my Care. What fatal Resolution soever you have taken,
perhaps you may change it, if you will but admit of my Assistance. He
pronounced these words with an Accent so tender, that Peppa trembling, and in
disorder, turned at last toward him, and raising her Eyes up to his Face, she
knew again all those Features, of which her Heart was but too full. You live
then, said she to him, with a feeble and unassur'd Voice, may I believe my
Eyes, and am I not in a Dream? I do live, answered the Chevalier, and while you
see that all my Endeavors are to be with you, you would be unjust, if you did
not believe, that I live only for you.

We must no longer believe it possible to die with Joy, since Peppa could
suffer the Emotions which a sight so dear, and so agreeable caused in her. The
Chevalier transported with Love, told her in the most obliging and softest
terms, That he was not in a condition to demonstrate openly the greatness of
his Passion, but he would sacrifice to her his All, and never part from her
more. The Liberty that now was permitted them to speak without Constraint, gave
them the opportunity of declaring what they had suffered for one another, they
made a thousand Protestations of an everlasting Constancy; and their
Conversation had not been so soon finished upon a Subject so inexhaustible, if
the Princess, who was impatient to participate in their Satisfaction, had not
entered with her Nephew. Peppa at that moment began to reflect upon what her
Grief had often made her speak in her hearing; the Remembrance hereof put her
into a Confusion that would scarce let her look up. The Princess Doria
dissipated this trouble, in declaring to her that she might follow the Dictates
of her Heart, and that far from opposing the happy success of a Passion that
she saw so well established, she brought her Nephew to her, who renouncing in
favor of the Chevalier all the Pretensions that he had made formerly, came now
to assure her that he aspired but to this only Advantage of being received as a
Friend to them both. The Marquess Spinola confirmed this Assurance by all that
the most real and sincere Friendship can inspire in a generous Heart; and Peppa
full of acknowledgement for so great an Instance, answered him with all the
esteem that he could expect. The Chevalier who was owing to his Assistance for
the favorable Sentiments of the Princess, expressed himself again to him in all
the obliging things that could be said to a Friend to whom one is infinitely
bound; And as his Passion made him protest that he would never more leave his
lovely Mistress, the Princess Doria interrupted him, by letting him know, that
for both their Interests his return to France was indispensable. She added,
that, not to let him have any just occasion of being any longer disquieted, she
would have him marry her Daughter-in-law before his departure, not doubting but
that after the manner she designed to write to her Husband, she should easily
gain his Consent, which was necessary thereto; but that for several Reasons
which respected the one and the other, she judged it most proper, that this
Marriage should be kept secret, and that they should not declare it till after
that the Affairs of the Republic were come to some Conclusion with the King.
It is very needless to say any thing of the Joy that the two Lovers received
from a Proposition which would raise them to such a State that was the final
Object of all their Wishes. The imagination of those who never had their hearts
touched with Love, cannot possibly penetrate far enough to conceive the extent
of such a joy. The Princess Doria wrote to her Husband, and the Chevalier took
upon him the care of dispatching a Courier to Genoa. His quick return showed
that 'twas Love gave the Orders which were executed with so much diligence. He
brought the Consent which they expected, and the two Lovers enjoyed the
Pleasure of being at last united, after so many Obstacles with which their
Passions had been crossed.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by M. Crook at the Green-Dragon without
Temple Bar, nigh Devereux-Court.
DIVINITY.
1. BRevis Demonstratio, being the Truth of the Christian Religion proved by
Reason, in 12o. Price bound, 10d.

2. The Protestant Religion the safe way to Salvation; or an answer to a Book
Entitled, Mercy and Truth, etc. Together with the Apostolical Institution of
Episcopacy. As also Nine Sermons on Special Occasions; by W. Chillingworth, the
5th. Edition. To which is now added Mr. Chillingworth's Reasons against Popery,
to persuade Mr. L. to return again to the Church of England, in fol. price
bound 14s.

3. Mr. Chillingworth's Book as before made more generally useful, by Mr. P.
with some Additions, in 4to. Price bound 7s.

4. The Doctrine of Passive Obedience, Delivered in a Sermon on the 30th. of
January, by J. Ellesby of Chiswick, 4to. price 6d.

5. A Discourse about Conscience, in relating to both the Extremes of Popery
and Fanaticism. Id. in 4to. price 6d.

6. Mr. W. Howell's Visitation Sermon before the late Bishop of Chichester,
4to. price 6d.

7. Dr. G. Hascard Dean of Windsor his Three Sermons, one upon the 5th. of
November, the other two before several Lord Mayors, in 4to.

8. Mr. Manyngham Preacher of the Rolls, and Lecturer of the Temple, his Six
Sermons Preached on Public Occasions, whereof two of them are on
Anniversaries, in 4to. price bound 2s. 6d.

9. A Sermon Preached at the Savoy, by Monsieur Des Escotais, now Printed in
French and English, Twelves.

10. Hugo Grotius's Catechism, Greek, Latin, and English, with a Praxis to it
of all the Greek words therein, in 8^o. price bound 2s.

11. The Spirit of Phrophesy, proving that Christ and his Apostles were
Prophets; written by the Directions, and recommended to the Press by the late
Learned Dr. Peter Gunning, then Lord Bishop of Ely, in 8vo. price bound 2s. 6d.

12. The King-killing Doctrine of the Jesuits in a sincere Discourse to the
French King, written by a Roman-Catholick-Gentleman, in 4to. price 1s.

13. A modest Plea for the Clergy of the Church of England, wherein is
considered the Reasons why they are contemned and slighted, in 8vo. price bound
1s. 6d.

14. An Introduction to the Holy Sacrament, or a short, plain and safe way to
the Communion Table, being instructions for the worthy Receiving the Lord's
Supper, Collected for, and familiarly addressed to every particular
Communicant, by Dr. L. Addison Dean of Litchfield. To which is added the
Communicant's Assistant, being a Collection of Devotions to be used before, at,
and after the Rec^iving the Holy Sacrament; price plain bound 1s. guilt on the
back 1s. 6d. This Book is also bound up with Common Prayers of several Binding,
sold by W. Crook.

15. The Case of Resistance of the Supreme Powers stated and resolved according
to the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, by W. Sherlock D. D. in 8vo. price
bound 2s.

16. Two Discourses, The first concerning Truth, the second showing Popery the
great Cause of Atheism, by T. Mayningham, Preacher of the Rolls, and Lecturer
of the Temple. 8vo. price bound 1s. 6d.

17. The Souls Communion with her Savior, or the History of our Blessed Lord
Jesus Christ, as it was written by the Four Evangelists, and now for the
benefit of all pious and devout Christians digested into Devotional
Meditations, by a Reverend Divine of the Church of England; in 12o. price bound
1s. 6d.

18. Bishop Sanderson's Sermons, the last Edition, in fol. with his Life to it.

19. The Duty and Benefit of Frequent Communion, in a Sermon Preached at St.
Peter's Church in Lincoln, upon Passion-Sunday, by W. Leightonhouse, late
Fellow of Lincoln-Colledge, Oxford, in 4to. price 6d.

LAW.
1. The Jurisdiction of the Authority of Court-Leets, Court Barons, Court
Marshals^a's, etc. together with the most necessary learning of Tenures, etc.
by J. Kitchen, 8vo. price bound 6s.

2. Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae, Author F. Clarke, in 12o. price bound
1s.

3. The Reports of Hen. Hobard, Chapter Just. in folio, price bound 10s.

4. The First, Second, Third and Fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of
England, being a Commentary on Littleton's Tenures. An Exposition of the
Statutes. Pleas of the Crown, and Jurisdiction of Courts, in 4 Parts, in 3 vol.
in Folio.

5. The Law of Charitable Uses Revised, and much enlarged, with many Cases in
Law both Ancient and Modern, with the reading of Sir Fr. Moor upon the Statute
of the 43d. of Elizabeth, digested by G. Duke Esquire.

6. Officina Brevium, select and approved forms of Judicial Writs and other
process, with their Returns and Entries in the Court of Common Pleas; as also
special pleading to Wrics, in Fol. price bound 12s.

7. A Dialogue betwixt a Student and a Philosopher about the Common Laws of
England, by Tho. Hobs of Malmsbury, in 8vo.

8. The several Statutes of Bankrupt, with the Judges Resolutions thereon.

9. The Complete Clerk, being forms of all Presidents and Conveyances etc. in
4to. price bound 12s.

10. Les Reports des tres Honorable Edw. Seigneur Littleton, Baron de
Mounslow, Custos de la Grand Seal d'Angletterre, and de ses Majeste plais
Honorable Privy Council en le Courts del Reign de Roy Charles I. in Fol.
price bound 12s.

11. The Complete Solicitor, entering Clerk and Attorney, fully instructed in
the Practice, Methods and Clerkship of all his Majesty's Courts of Equity and
Common Law, Superior and Inferior; as well those in Westminster and the City
of London, and elsewhere through the Kingdom of England; a Collection more
uniform and universally advantageous than any extant of the same kind, in 8vo.
price bound 3s. 6d.

12. The Reports and Pleadings to them of the late Lord Chief Justice Sir
Edmond Saunders Knight. in Fol. in Two Volumes.

13. A new Book of Declarations, and other Pleadings, General and Special, in
the most usual Actions in the Courts of King's Bench; as also, a Choice
Collection of special Writs and their Returns, together with Observations in
Pleading, Instructing the Younger Clarks in the Practice of that Court, Printed
from the Original Manuscript out of Court-Hand, to prevent the Errors that
does happen by the Transcribing; to which is added Appeals of Murder and
Mayhence, with Pleadings thereon, which no other Book of this kind has, etc.
Collected, and drawn by John Hansand, Gent. late of Cl. Inn, in Folio, price
bound 10s.

14. Two Dialogues in English, between a Doctor of Divinity, and a Student in
the Laws of England, of the Grounds of the Laws; in 8vo. bound, price 2s.

15. The New Natura Brevium of the most Reverend Judge Mr. Anthony Fitzherbert,
Corrected and Revised; whereunto is now added the Authorities in Law, and some
other Cases and Notes by the Translatour, out of the Year Books, and Grand
Abridgments of the Law, with a New and Exact Table of the most material things
contained therein, 8vo. price bound 6s.

16. Reports D'ascuns Cases (qui ont evenus aux tems du Roy Henry le septieme
de tres-heureuse memoire, and du tres-illustre Roy Henry le huitiesme, and ne
sont comprises deins les livres des terms, and Ans de mesmes les Roys) seliges
horse des papieres de Robert Keisiway Esquire; par J. Croke Sergeant al Ley, Jades
Recorder del City de Londres and prolocuteur del meason des Communes, etc.
Ovesque les Reports d'ascuns Cases prises per le Reverend Juge G. Dallison,
etc. and per G. Bendlo Sergeant al Ley, etc. La tierce Edition un belly de
pluis que deux milles Reference aux autres livres Cy bien Ancient que Modern de
la Ley, Folio, price bound 14 s.

17. An Exact Abridgment of all the Statutes in Force and Use, from the
beginning of Magna Charta down to the Year 1689. comprised Alphabetically under
their proper Heads and Titles. In this Impression, the year of the King, and
the Chapter of every Act of Parliament have been compared with the Statute Book
at large, wherein many hundreds of false References are corrected with great
ex^ctness and care, to prevent the Reader's being misled as he has been in
former Editions, 8vo. price bound 7 s.

18. All the 4 parts reprinted of Leonard's Reports, Fol. together.

19. The 3 parts of Bulstrodes Reports reprinted, in Fol. in one Volume.

20. The Register of Writs, new Printed, with the Digest of Writs added to it,
and several New Writs in Fol.

HISTORY, etc.
1. An Institution of General History, or the History of the World in Two
Volumes, by W. Howell, Dr. of Civil Laws, and Chancellor of Lincoln, in Fol.

2. Clelia, the whole Romance, in Five Parts, written in French, now put into
English, Fol.

3. Scarron's Comical Romance, being an Historical Account of a Company of
Stage Players, full of variety of Novels, rare Adventures, Amorous Intreagues,
being Witty, Pleasant and Profitable for all that design Innocent Mirth, Fol.
price bound 8 s.

4. The whole Series of all that has been Transacted in the House of Peers
concerning the Popish Plot in 1678, and 1679. wherein is contained the most
material passages in both Houses of Parliament, relating to the full discovery
thereof, in 8vo.

5. A Copy of two Journals of the House of Commons. The first, for the Sessions
of Parliament begun at Westminster the 21st of October 1678. and continued to
the 30th of December next following. The Second, of the Parliament begun at
Westminster the 6th of March 1678. containing the Transactions from the first
day of their Sitting to their Dissolution, in 8vo.

6. Historical Collections, or an exact Account of the Proceedings of the Four
last Parliaments of Q. Elizabeth, of Famous Memory; wherein is contained the
Complete Journals both of the Lords and Commons, taken from the Original
Records of their Houses; as also, the more particular behaviors of the worthy
Members during all the last Notable Sessions, comprehending the Motions and
Arguments of the Renowned and Learned Men of that time, as Cecil, Bacon,
Rawleigh, Egerton, Burleigh, Buckhurst, Walsingham, Hatton, Coke, Croke,
Spelman, etc. Laboriously and Faithfully Collected, by Heywood Townsend Esquire; a
Member in those Parliaments, in Fol.

7. Megalopsichy, A particular and exact Account of the last Seventeen years of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, both Military and Civil; (being the former Journal of
Queen Elizabeth's Four last Parliaments) with Sir W. Monson's Account of the
Wars between England and Spain, with the Number of Ships and Commanders at that
time; to which, at the end is added Dr. Parrey's Trial and Execution for
Treason against Queen Elizabeth, in Fol.

8. The Connection being choice Collections of some principal matters in King
James the First hi^ Reign, which may serve to supply the vacancy betwixt Mr.
Townsend's and Mr. Rushworth's Historical Collections, in 8vo. price 1 s. 6 d.

9. The Historian's Guide, or Brittain's Remembrancer, being a Summary of all
the Actions, Exploits, Sieges, Battles, Designs, Attempts, Preferments,
Honors, Changes, etc. and whatever else is worthy Notice, that has happened
in his Ma^esties Dominions, from the year 1600 to 1688 showing the Year, Month,
and Day of the Month in which each Action was done, price bound 1 s. 6 d.

10. The Bucaniers of America, or an Account of the most Remarkable Assaults
committed of late years upon the Coasts of the West Indies, by the Bucaniers of
the English, Dutch, and French in Jamaica; to which is added the Second Volume,
containing the dangerous Voyages, and bold Attempts of Captain Bartholomew
Sharp, and others, in 4to.

11. Mr. Tho. Hobs of Malmsbury, his Translation of Homer's Illiads and
Oddisses into English, with the Life of Homer, and a large Preface of the
Virtues of Heroic Poesy.

12. Mr. Hobs, etc. his Poem in Latin and English, of the Wonders of the Peak
in Darbyshire, commonly called the Devils Arse of Peak.

13. Mr. Hobs, etc. His Four Tracts. First Behemoth, the History of the Causes
of the Civil Wars in England, from the year 1640, to 1660, Printed from the
Author's own Copy, never Printed (but with a thousand faults) before, with a
defense of his Leviathan, against Bishop A. Bramhall, and a Narration of
Heresy, etc. 8vo. price bound 5 s.

14 Compendium Geographicum, or a more exact, plain, and easy introduction
into all Geography, than any yet extant, after the latest Discoveries or
Alterations; very useful, especially to young Noblemen and Gentlemen, the like
not printed before, with 2 Alphabets of the Names of Towns and Places, the one
Ancient, the other Modern, in 12o. price bound 1 s.

15. Moral Instructions of a Father to a Son, upon his long Voyage, being an
easy way to guide a young man to virtue, 12o. price bound 1s.

16. The Court of Curiosity being the most exact and Curious Book of Dreams and
Fortune Tellers that is extant, being much enlarged and explained in this new
Edition, in 12o. price bound 1s. 6d.

17. The Flower-Garden, and complete Vineyard, being an exact Flower-Garden,
and a true manner of planting all sorts of Vineyards, in 12o. price bound 1s.
6d.

18. A Modern view of such Parts of Europe that has lately been, and still are
the places of great Transactions, viz. Italy with all is Princes, France with
all its Provinces, etc. Germany with the Dukedom of Lorrain and all the
Electorates, Spain with all its Dominions, etc. with Curious Remarks of
Antiquiry, 8vo. price bound 2s. 6d. Printed, 1689.

19. The Present State of the Jews, 12o. price 1s. 6d.

20. The first Estate of Malandison, in 8vo, by the same Author.

21. The Translation into English of all Homer's Illiads and Odisses, by Tho.
Hobs, in 12o. price bound 5s.

22. Britains Glory, and Englands Bravery, wherein is shown the degrees of
Honor from the Prince to the Pesant, with the honor of the Nobles, and
Privilege of the Commons, and ^he proper places and precedence of all Persons,
from the Throne to the Bondsman, more particularly in Coronations, Feasts,
Funerals, etc. To which is added a Continuation of the Historians Guide, to
June 1689. in 12o.


