THE Quakers Advice TO THE PRESBYTERIANS. OR Their evil practices against the
now established GOVERNMENT, BEING Friendly Admonitions to exhort them to
Loyalty and Obedience.
Written by an Eminent Quaker, and sent in a Letter to a Gentleman of the Black
Cloak.
By W.P.
FRiend,
I being moved by the secret impulse of the Spirit; for thy good I have thought
it meet to Reprove thee and say unto thee, thy ways have been perverse, yea,
thou have walked in an unknown Path and the light is departed from thee: thou
have given up thy self to sow Sedition in the Nation, and art full of Pride,
and Malice, since for which thy Counselor the Old Serpent was tumbled
headlong into the bottomless Pit; yea, I must tell thee plainly Satan has
prevailed over thee, and thou have gone astray like one of the Wicked? I say,
thou art fallen from thy Obedience, and darkness has covered thy understanding:
therefore, it is that I have Administered unto thee to show thee the right way
which neither Jack Calvin thy Grandfather nor Oliver thy Father had the Honesty
to do; woe be unto thee I say, for thou would have cast off thy Yoke which
thou ought to bear with Patience: thou I say have murmered against thy
Ruler, and have endeavored to turn aside the people: yea, I say thou have
turned them aside by teaching Rebellion amidst thy Congregation, and did so
terrify thy Flock with apprehensions of the sudden approach of Beelzebub,
Mahomet, and the Whore of Babylon, that all the Brethren in much Confusion ran
to their Coffee-house Clubbs, whilst the kind Sisters sought shelter under the
Skirts of thy Garments, where thou keep them warm in the absence of their
Yoakmates; woe be to thy upper Garment, I mean thy black Cloak: yea, the
Abomination of Desolation is lodged there; there I say Hypocrisy has taken up
her dwelling, and the Secret pleasures of the flesh are indulged: yea, thou
have often conspired to bring us into Bondage, and make us return again into
Egypt: verily thy Locusts are come up, and almost darkened the face of the
Land; thou like thy eldest Sister the Whore of Babylon delightest to conspire
against thy Ruler; yea, the inward man does say that thou lately sadlest thy
Elephant to meet her, yea, and that thou had met her had not thy Girts broke
and thou obstructed in thy design; therefore I say unto thee beware how thou
fallest any more, least thou fall into Perdition: Remember the sins of your
Forefathers, Hewson, Oliver, Ireton, Bradshaw, Cook, etc. Those were the Men
that taught thee to Rebel against thy Ruler, they were the true Sons of Babel
that turned all things into Confusion and had like to have made me gone astray
had not the inward man prevail against their Temptations. Those were the men
that dipped their hands in the blood of their Ruler, whose Actions thou art so
profane as to approve of, which shows thee to be of the Seed of the Serpent,
and the very Seed-plot of all Conspiracy and Rebellion; yea, I am greatly moved
at the evil of thy doings: Remember the Holy cheat thou put upon the Holy
Sisterhood, to draw in a Numberless quantity of Bodkins and Thimbles to
maintain Rebellion against thy Ruler; which thou Hypocritically perswadest them
was for the Good Old Cause: yea, I say let that Old Cause (which was the Root
of Rebellion, and the main Instrument with which the Old Serpent works) perish,
and all that seek its welfare, (that I) to ruin this Spot of Earth which our
Creator has given us to live peaceably on; Yea, let it perish, for I well
remember that Old Cause was once the cause of all our miseries, that Caused the
losing of a Hundred Thousand Lives: that was the Cause that caused the Land to
blush with Blood: it was the Cause that caused so many Widows and Orphans to
water their Couches with Tears; O I shake, I quake, I tremble to think of that
wicked Old Cause that caused so many troubles in our Nation, and put thy Ruler
to flight; it is no wonder thy Ruler refused to unbridle thee, for had he done
it thou would soon have grown too Headstrong for his Rule, and have ventured
another Race for the Cause, which would have caused a Thousand woes: nay, thou
did begin to Gallop, and had put on full speed, had he not held thee in in
time. Thou know very well that thy Original falling out with those men
called Bishops, and those Ceremonies used in the Church so called was, only the
more unsuspectedly to gull the poor silly women from their Pence, but remember
that those practices can be termed only Deceit and Robery, and that thy design
is no more Adopted to disturb us, then that of Mahomet, to obtain the Worlds
Empire as long as we have a peaceable Ruler over us. Well it is certain thou
bear a very evil mind, and would fain be at the 41st. Year again; I have
often reproved thee for it, but thou have turned a Deaf Ear unto me: I once
more Advise thee to be peaceable, and love thy Ruler, for he is merciful and
thou know he has given thee a great deal of Tolleration in thy Profession:
therefore beware least thou provoke him, and his hand falls heavy upon thee;
ponder well what I have said. And so farewell.

W. P.

Printed for W. B. 1681.


