The LORD required me the last week to print a Copy of a Letter, which I had
writ to George Fox, and at the lower end to print these following words, which
being of more universal Concern, I am required to have them printed by
themselves, the 7th of the Month called August, 1671.

These Lines were added, and printed the eighth instant.
On which day the LORD ordered me to go to Devonshire-house, ( there being a
Meeting of the People called Quakers) where Arthur Cook and Thomas Padle
brought me word, that it was the Resolution of their Friends that I should not
come in, and therefore advised me to go away, For ( as T. P. said) in plain
terms, We are resolved thou shall not come in; So I departed (The LORD having
showed me that they would not give me admittance, according as 'twas printed
the last week, with the above said Letter.) Wherefore having some of the said
Papers in readiness, I gave them to several as they came out.

THe Indignation, the Wrath of the LAMB is come, Let all Flesh tremble before
HIM, yea let all faces gather paleness who are joined to Iniquity either of
Flesh or Spirit; for the Day of their Torment, yea, I say, the Day of their
Misery, Vexation and Torment is come and coming, yet more to be revealed and
made manifest: Wherefore I say again, and it is the WORD of the LORD, That all
Flesh is but as grass before Him, who is the MIGHTY, DREADFUL, TERRIBLE ONE;
Yea, who is, and will be more manifested to be a Consuming-Fire to all the
Workers of Iniquity: My Charge is, to Warn you, yea to Alarm you, that whilst
it is called to Day you harden not your hearts, but that you would repent, and
turn unto the LORD, if by any means you may find a place of Repentance, before
the Night come (which is hastening on apace) wherein none can work: THE MOUTH OF
THE LORD HAS SPOKEN IT.

But as for you whose Hearts are chaste, and entirely given up to serve the
LORD, I am to proclaim, That the Year of JUBILEE is come, yea the Time of your
Deliverance, yea, I say, the Set-time of your Deliverance is come and coming,
yet more to be revealed and made manifest. GLORY and PRAISE, HALLELUJAH and
THANKS be given to our GOD, who Lives and Reigns in all His Saints and
Sanctified Ones, both as KING, PRIEST and PROPHET. GLORY and PRAISE in the
HIGHEST be given to HIM from this time forth and for evermore. Amen, HALLELUJAH.

Subscribed and Published by one of the least of the Thousands of Israel, yet
one of that Number whom the LORD has (of His Infinite Mercy) chosen to follow
Him fully, and has accounted Me worthy to stand in the Gap, and to be a
Living-Witness against all Unrighteousness, yea I say, against All manner of
Unrighteousness. O let my Soul for ever Praise and Magnify His Name, who Alone
is Worthy, says His Servant

John Pennyman.


