TO THE Churches of Jesus Throughout the WORLD. Gathered and settled in his
Eternal Light, Power, and Spirit, to be One Holy Flock, Family, and Household to
the Lord, who has Redeemed them from among all the Kindreds of the Earth.

Godly Zeal, Wisdom, Power, Perseverance, and Victory, with all Heavenly
Blessings, be multiplied among you in the Name of the Lord. William Penn.
Printed in the Year, 1677.

TO THE Churches of Jesus Throughout the WORLD. Gathered and settled in his
Eternal Light, Power, and Spirit, to be One Holy Flock, Family, and Household to
the Lord, etc.
Dear Friends and Brethren,
WHO have been visited with the Fatherly Visitation from on high, and have
received God's Eternal Word and Testament in your Hearts, by which you have
been gathered home to Christ Jesus, the true Shepherd, from all the
Idol-Shepherds, and their barren Mountains, and unprofitable Hills, where you
have been scattered in the dark and gloomy Day of Apostasy, and by his Light,
Spirit, and Power have been convinced of sin, righteousness, and judgment, and
can say, The Prince of this World is judged by his holy righteous, and powerful
Appearance in you, unto whom all Judgment in Heaven and Earth is committed; who
is the blessed Lamb of God, the Light and Savior of the world; who is King of
Salem, and Prince of Peace: My Soul loves you with everlasting Love, even with
the Love with which my God and your God, my Father and your Father has loved
me, and visited my Soul and your Souls, in this do I dearly salute and embrace
you all, in this the Day of the fulfilling of his glorious Promises to his
Church in the Wilderness, and Witnesses in Sackcloth. And O magnified be his
Name, and everlastingly praised and renowned be his holy Power and Arm, by
which he has reached unto us, and brought Salvation near us: For he has sound
us out, and has heard our solitary Cries, the deep and mournful Supplications
of our bowed Spirits, when we were as the little filly Dove without its Mate,
and the lonely Pelican in the Wilderness; when we were ready to cry out, Is
there none to save, is there none to help! O when shall the Time and Times and
Half a Time be finished! when shall the One Thousand, Two Hundred and Sixty Days
be accomplished! and when shall the Abomination, that stands in the Holy Place,
be cast out! when shall the Captivity of the People be turned back! O when
shall Babylon come into Remembrance before God; the Dragon, Beast, and False
Prephet be cast into the Lake! And when shall the Law go forth out of Sion, and
the Word of the Lord out of Jerusalem! When shall Sion become the Joy, and
Jerusalem the Praise of the whole Earth! And when shall the Earth be covered
with the Knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea!

Friends, The Lord of Heaven and Earth has heard our Cries, and the full time
is come, yea, the appointed time is come, and the Voice of the Eternal Spirit
in our Hearts has been heard on this wise many a time, Awake thou that
sleep, and I will give thee Life: arise out of the Dust, and shine; for thy
Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. And the Lord God
has given us that Light by which we have comprehended the Darkness in our
selves and in the world: and as we have believed in it, dwelt in it, and walked
in it, we have received Power to overcome the Evil one in all his Appearances
in our selves; and faithfully and boldly to testify against him in the World.
And the Blood of Jesus in this holy way of the Light have we felt in our Souls,
to cleanse us from Unrighteousness; and given us to know the Mystery of the
Fellowship of the Gospel one with another, which stands in Life and
immortality. And here we become an holy household and family unto God, that live
in his Presence Day and Night to do his Will, as becomes his redeemed and
ransomed Children by the most precious Blood of his Son, and no more to return
to Folly.

And Friends, Let it never pass out of our Remembrance, what our God has done
for us, since he has made us a People: Has any Weapon formed against us,
prospered? has he called us, and not protected us? has he given Power to
conceive, and not to bring forth? has he not sheltered us in many a storm? did
he ever leave us under the Reproaches and Contradictions of men? nay, has he
not spoken Peace to us? were we ever cast out by men, and he forsook us? no,
the Lord has taken us up: were we ever in Prison, and he visited us not?
hungry, and he fed us not? naked, and he clothed us not? or have we been sick,
and he came not to see us? when were the Jayles so close, that he could not
come in? and the Dungeons so dark, that he caused not his Light to shine upon
us? O nay; he has never left us, nor forsaken us; yea, he has provided richly
for us; he has brought us into the Wilderness, not to starve us, but to try
us; yet not above our measure: For he fed us with Manna from on high, with pure
Honey and Water out of the Rock, and gave his good Spirit to sustain us: By
Night he was a Pillar of Fire to us, to comfort us; and by Day a Pillar of
Cloud to hide and shelter us. He was the Shadow of a mighty Rock, that
followed us; and we never wanted a Brook by the way to refresh us. Was God good
to Israel outward? much more has he abounded to his spiritual Israel, the
proper Seed and Offspring of himself. O the noble Deeds and valiant Acts that
he has wrought in our day for our Deliverance! He has caused One to chase
Ten, and Ten an Hundred, and an Hundred a Thousand many a Time. None has been
able to snatch us out of his Hands, who abode in his Truth. For though the
Winds have blown, and the Sea has raged, yet has he rebuked the Winds and
the Sea for his Seed's sake: he has said to the Winds, Be still: and to the
Sea, Thus far shall thou come, and no farther. He has cast up a high Way for
his Ransomed to walk in, so plain, that though a Fool he shall not err therein.
This is the Light, in which all Nations of them that are saved must walk for
ever.

And therefore, Friends, Let us stay our Minds in the Light of the Lord for
ever; and let the Awe, Fear and Dread of the Almighty dwell in us; and let his
holy Spirit be known to be a Covering to us, that from the spirit of this World
we may be chastely kept and preserved unto God, in the holy Light and
self-denying Life of Jesus, who have offered up himself once for all, leaving
us an Example, that we should also follow his steps; that as he our dear Lord
and Master, so we his servants and Friends and Children might by the eternal
Spirit offer up our selves to God in Body, in Soul and in Spirit, which are
his; that we may be his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works,
to the Praise of him that has called us; which Calling is an high and an holy
Calling by the eternal Light and Spirit in our Consciences. O that it might for
ever remain in high Estemation with us; and that it may be the daily VVatch and
Travel of us all, in the Presence of the holy and Living God, that has called
us, to make our great Call and Election sure, which many have neglected to do
(who have been convinced by the blessed Light and Truth of Christ Jesus
revealed in their hearts, and who for a time have walked among us) have been
overcome by the Spirit of this World, and turned their hands from the Plough,
and deserted the Camp of the Lord, and gone back into Egypt again, whereby the
Heathens have blasphemed, and the Way and People of the Lord greatly have
suffered.

Therefore, O my dear Friends and Brethren, in the Sense of that Life and
Power, that God from Heaven so gloriously has dispensed amongst us, and by
which he has given us multiplied Assurances of his Loving Kindness unto us,
and Crowned us together with heavenly Dominion, and in which my Spirit is at
this time broken before the Lord, do I most earnestly entreat you to watch
continually, lest any of you, that have tasted of the good Word of God, and
the Powers of the World to come, fall by Temptation; and by Carelessness and
Neglect tempt the living God to withdraw his fatherly Visitation from any of
you; and finally, to desert such* for the Lord our God is a jealous God, and he
will not give his Glory unto another. He has given to Man all, but Man
himself, and him he has reserved for his own peculiar Service, to build him up
a glorious Temple to himself; so that we are bought with a Price, and we are
not our own.

Therefore let us continually watch, and stand in awe, that we grieve not his
holy Spirit, nor turn his Grace into Wantonness: But all of us let us wait, and
that in an holy travail of Spirit, to know our selves sealed by the Spirit of
Adoption, unto the Day of our complete Redemption; when not only all our Sins;
but all Sorrows, Sighings and Tears shall be wiped away from our Eyes; and
Everlasting Songs of Joy and Thanksgivings shall melodiously fill our Hearts to
God, that sits upon the Throne, and to his blessed immaculate Lamb, who by his
most precious Blood shall have completely redeemed us from the Earth, and
written our Names in the Book of Life.

Friends, The Spirit of the Lord has often brought you into my Remembrance,
since I have been in this desolate Land, and with Joy unutterable have I had
sweet and precious Fellowship with you in the Faith of Jesus, that overcomes
the World: For, though absent in Body, yet present in him that is Omnipresent.
And I can truly say, you are very near and very dear unto me; and the Love that
God has raised in my heart unto you, surpasses the Love of Women. And our
Testimony, I am well satisfied, is sealed up together. And I am well assured,
that all that love the Light shall endure to the End throughout all
Tribulations, and in the End obtain Eternal Salvation.

And now, Friends, as I have been travailing in this dark and solitary Land,
the great Work of the Lord in the Earth has been often presented unto my view,
and the Day of the Lord has been deeply upon me, and my Soul and Spirit has
frequently been possessed with an holy and weightly Concern for the Gloty of
the Name of the Lord, and the spreading of his everlasting Truth, and the
Prosperity of it through all Nations, that the very Ends of the Earth may look
to him, and may know Christ the Light to be given to them for their Salvation:
And when the sense of these things has been deeply upon me, an holy and strong
Cry God has raised in my Soul to him, That we, who have known this fatherly
Visitation from on High, and who have beheld the Day of the Lord, the Rising of
the Sun of Righteousness, who is full of Grace and full of Truth, and have
beheld his Glory, and confessed it to be the Glory of the only begotten Son of
God; and who by Obedience to his appearance are become the Children of Light,
and of the Day, and as the First Fruits to God after this long Night of
Apostasy, might for ever walk and dwell in his holy Covenant, Christ Jesus, the
Light of the World; because in him we have always Peace, but out of him comes
all the Trouble.

And whilst this heavenly Sense rested with me* the Lord God, that made me, and
called me by his Grace unto Salvation, laid it upon me, to visit you in an holy
Exhortation. And it is the Exhortation of my life at this time, in the earnest
and servent Motion of the Power and Spirit of Jesus, to beseech you all, who
are turned to the Light of Christ, that shines in your hearts, and believe in
it, That you carefully and faithfully walk in it, in the same Dread, Awe and
Fear, in which you began; that that holy Poverty of Spirit, that is precious in
the Eyes of the Lord, and was in the days of your first love, may dwell and
rest with you; that you may daily feel the same heavenly Hunger and Thirst, the
same Lowliness and Humility of Mind, the same Zeal and Tenderness, and the same
Sincerity and Love unfeigned; that God may fill you out of his heavenly
Treasure with the Riches of Life, and crown you with holy Victory and Dominion
over the god and spirit of this World: That your Alpha may be your Omega, and
your Author your Finisher, and your first Love your last Love; that so none may
make shipwreck of Faith, and of a good Conscience, nor faint by the way. And as
in this state we are kept in holy Watchfulness to God, as in the beginning, the
Table which our heavenly Father spreads, and the Blessings with which he
compasses us about, shall not become a Snare unto us, nor shall we turn the
Grace and Mercies of the Lord into Wantonness; but we shall eat and drink in an
holy Fear, apparelour selves in Fear, buy and sell in Fear, visit one another
in Fear; keep Meetings, and there wait upon the Lord in Fear: yea, whatsoever
we take in hand to do, it shall be in the holy Fear of God, and with an holy
Tenderness of his Glory, and Regard to the Prosperity of his Truth: yea we
shall deny our selves not only in the unlawful things, but in the things that
are even lawful to us, for the sake of the many Millions that are unconverted
to God.

For my Friends and Brethren, God has laid upon us (whom he has honored with
the beginning of his great Work in the World) the care both of this Age, and of
the Ages to come; that they may walk, as they have us for Examples, yea, the
Lord God has chosen you to place his Name in you; the Lord has entrusted you
with his Glory, that you might hold it forth to all Nations; and that the
generations unborn may call you Blessed.

Therefore, let none be Treacherous to the Lord, nor reward him evil for good;
nor betray his Cause directly by willful wickedness nor indirectly by
negligence, and unfaithfulness: But be zealous and valiant for Truth on Earth;
let none be slothful, or careless: O remember the sloathful Servants State: And
let the loving kindness of the Lord overcome every Soul to faithfulness; For
with him are Riches and Honor, and every good thing, and whither should any
go? he has the words of Eternal Life. O, let none loose their Testimony, but
hold it up for God; let thy gift be never so small; thy Testimony never so
little. Through thy whole Conversation bear it for God; and be true to what
thou art Convinced of: And wait all upon the Lord, that you may grow in your
heavenly Testimony; that Life may fill your Hearts, your Houses, and your
Meetings, that you may daily wait to know, and to receive Power to do the Will
of God on Earth, as it is in Heaven.

And O! that the Cross of Jesus may be in high and honorable Esteem with every
one; that the Liberty of all may stand in the Cross, which alone Preserves;
for it is the Power of God, that Crucifieth us to the world; and the world to
us. And through Death, way is made unto Life and Immortality; which by this
blessed Cross, the Gospel, the Power is brought to Light: So shall the Seed of
Life that God has sown in our Hearts, grow; and in that Seed shall we all come
to be blessed, unto whom God has appointed the Dominion over us: and it is
good for all to live under the Holy Government of it; for the ways of it are
the ways of pleasantness, and all its Paths are Peace, and all that are born of
it, can say, Thy Scepter is a Scepter of Righteousness. And, O! That all
Friends every where, may continually bow unto his righteous Scepter, and keep
to his holy Law, which is written in their Hearts; that it may be a Light to
their Feet, and a Lanthorn to their Paths. So shall they come to witness that
holy Promise made good unto them, Isaiah 59. That the Spirit, which I have
given unto him, the verse. 21. Seed; and the words, which I have put into his.
Mouth, shall not depart from him, nor from his Seed, nor from his Seeds Seed
unto all Generations.

Wherefore Friends, redeem the time, because the Days are Evil, God has given
you to see, they are so: and be ye separated more and more, yea, perfectly
disentangled from the Cares of this World. And be ye not cumbred with the many
things; but stand loose from the things, that are seen, which are Temporal.

And you, that are poor, murmur not; but be Patient, and trust in the Lord, and
submit to his Providence, and he will provide for you, that which is convenient
for you, the days of your appointed time. And you that are Rich, keep in the
moderation, and strive not to multiply Earthly Treasure, nor to heap up
uncertain Riches to your selves; but what God has given you more than what is
convenient for your own Use; wait for his Wisdom, to employ it for his Glory;
that you may be faithful Stewards of this worlds Mammon, and the Lord God shall
reward you into your Bosoms, of the riches of that Kingdom, that shall never
have an end.

O my Friends and Brethren, whether Rich or Poor, in Bonds, or at Liberty, in
whatsoever state you are; the Salutation of the universal Life of Jesus is to
you. And the Exhortation is, to bow to what is made known unto you; and in the
Light, by which ye have received in measure the Knowledge of God, watch and wait
diligently to the further Revelation of the Mind and Will of God unto you, that
ye may be endued from on High with Power and Might in your inward Man, to
answer the call and requirings of the Lord, that ye may be enabled to make
known to the Nations, what is the Riches of the Glory of this blessed Mystery
in the Gentiles; which is Christ Jesus the Light of the World in you the hope
of glory. For this I have to tell you in the Vision of the Almighty, that the
Day of the breaking up of the Nations about you, and of the sounding of the
Gospel-Trumpet unto the Inhabitants of the Earth, is just at the door: And they
that are worthy, who have kept their Habitation from the beginning; and have
dwelt in the Unity of the Faith, that overcomes the world; and have kept the
Bond of Peace: The Lord God will Empower and Spirit you to go forth with his
Everlasting Word and Testament to awaken, and gather Kindreds, Languages, and
People to the Glory of the rising of the Gentiles Light; who is God's Salvation
unto the ends of the Earth.

And I must tell you, that there is a Breathing, Hungring, Seeking People,
solitarily scattered up and down this great Land of Germany, where the Lord
has sent me; and I believe it is the like in other Nations: And as the Lord
has laid it upon me with my Companions to seek some of them out; so have we
found several in diverse Places. And we have had many blessed Oppornities
amongst them, wherein our Hearts have greatly rejoiced; having been made deeply
sensible of the love of God toward them, and of the great openness and
tenderness of Spirit in them to receive the Testimony of Light and Life through
us. And we have a steadfast belief, that the Lord will carry on his Work in this
Land effectually; and that he will raise up those, that shall be as Ministers
of his eternal Testament amongst them. And O! our desire is, that God would put
it into the Hearts of many of his faithful Witnesses, to visit the Inhabitants
of this Country, where God has a great Seed of People to be gathered; that his
work may go on in the Earth, till the whole Earth be filled with his Glory.

And it is under the deep and weighty sense of this approaching Work, that the
Lord God has laid it upon me, to write to you to wait for the further powrings
out of the Power and Spirit of the Lord; that nothing that is Careless, Sleepy,
Earthly, or Exalted, may get up, whereby to displease the Lord? and cause him
to withdraw his sweet and preserving presence from any that know him: But let
all keep the King of Righteousness his Peace, and walk in the steps of the
Flocks of the Companions: For withering and destruction shall come upon all
such as desert the Camp of the Lord, or with their murmuring Spirit, disquiet
the Heritage of God: For they are greater Enemies to Sion's glory, and
Jerusalem's Peace, than the open Armies of the Aliens.

And it is a Warning to all, that make mention of the Name of the Lord in this
Dispensation he has brought us to. That they have a care how they let out
their minds in any wise to please the lusts of the Eye, the lusts of the Flesh,
and the Pride of Life; which are not of the Father, but of this World; lest
any be exalted in a liberty, that makes the Cross of Jesus of none effect; and
the offense thereof to cease: For such will become as Salt that has lost its
savor; and at last will be trod under the Feet of God and Men. For the Lord
will withdraw his daily presence, and the Fountain will come to be sealed up;
and the Well of Salvation be stopped again.

Therefore, as all would rejoice in the joy of God's Salvation; let them wait
for the saving Power, and dwell in it; that, knowing the Mystery of the work of
Regeneration, Christ formed in them the hope of their glory; they may be able
in the motion of him, that has begotten them through death to life, to go
forth and declare the way of Life and Salvation.

And all you, that are young Convinced of the Eternal Truth, come into it; and
then you will feel the Virtue of it: And so, you will be Witnesses; otherwise
Vain Talkers, Wells without Water, Clouds without Rain; for which state is
reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever.

Wherefore gird up the loins of your minds, and be sober, and Tempt not God;
but receive the Day of your Visitation, and walk worthy of so great love, and
delight to retain God in your Knowledge; and grieve not his holy Spirit, but
join to it, and be led by it; that it may be an earnest to you of an Eternal
Inheritance.

And take up your daily Cross, and follow Christ; and not the Spirit of this
World. He was meek, and lowly, he was humble and plain; he was few in Words,
but mighty in Deeds: He loved not his Life unto death, even the reproachful
death of the Cross; but laid down his life, and became of no Reputation; and
that for the Rebellious. O the height, and the depth, the length, and the
breadth; yea, the unsearchableness of the love of God in Christ Jesus.

Wherefore, while it is to day, hearken to his Voice, and harden not your
Hearts; and make no bargains for your Self, neither consult with Flesh and
Blood: But let the Lord be your Light, and your Salvation; let him be the
strength of your life, and the length of your Days. And this know assuredly,
that none ever trusted to the Lord, and were confounded.

Wherefore hold up your Testimony for God; as ye would enjoy the Increasings of
his Life and love: And let your Light shine, and confess him before the whole
World; smoother not his appearance, neither hide thy candle, God has lighted
in thee, under a bushel: For Christ walks among his Candlesticks of pure and
tried Gold: Wherefore set thy light upon a Candlestick, and show forth thy good
Conversation in meekness and godly fear, that thou may become a good Example;
and others beholding thy good Works, may glorify God. But for the Rebellious,
the Fearful, and the Unbelieving, the Day hastens upon such, that the things,
that belong to their Eternal Peace, shall be hid from their Eyes forever.

And all you my dear Friends and Brethren, who are in Sufferings for the
Testimony of Jesus, and a good Conscience; look up to Jesus, the Author and
Finisher of your Faith; who for the Joy, that was set before him, endured the
Cross, and despised the shame; and is sat down at the Right Hand of the Father
in the heavenly Place; into which, if you faint not, you shall all be received,
after the Days of your Pilgrimage shall be at an End; with a Well done, good
and faithful Servant.

And though these afflictions seem not joyous, but grievous for the present;
yet a far more exceeding weight of glory stands at the Door.

Wherefore count it all Joy, you fall into these Trials, and persevere to the
end; knowing that he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, and that
his Reward is with him. Remember the Martyrs of Jesus; that loved not their
lives to the death for his Names-sake, that had called them. And Jesus himself,
that made a good Confession before Pontius Pilate; who has consecrated through
his Blood a new and living way for all, that come unto God by him, who is made
a high Priest, higher than the Heavens, one that can be touched and moved; and
is daily touched and moved with our Weakness and Infirmity; that through him
we may be made strong in the Lord, and more then Conquerors through him that
has loved us.

Wherefore let it not seem, as if some strange thing had happened to you, for
all these things are for the Trial of your Faith; which is more precious than
the Gold that perishes. It Is the old quarrel, Children of this World, against
the Children of the Lord; those that are born after the flesh, warring against
those that are born after the Spirit: Cain against Abel, the Old World against
Noah, Sodomites against Lot, Hagar against Sarah, Ishmael against Isaac, Esau
against Jacob, Egyptians against Israelites, the false Prophets against the
true Prophets, as Isaiah, Jeremiah, etc. The Jews under the Profession of the
Letter of the Law against Christ, that came to fulfill the Law, and all his
spiritual followers and Disciples: And all the false Apostate Christians
against the true and Spiritual Christians, and Martyrs of Jesus.

So, your conflict is for the Spiritual Appearance of Christ Jesus against
those that profess him in words, but in Works and Conversations every day deny
him; doing Despite to the Spirit of grace in themselves, and those that are
led by it. But though Gog and Magog shall gather themselves together to lay
waste the City of God; yet the Lord has determined their destruction, and he
will bring it to pass.

Wherefore rejoice, O thou little Hill of God, and clap thy Hands for Joy; for
he that is faithful and true, Just and Righteous, and able to deliver thee,
dwells in the midst of thee: Who will cause thee to grow and increase, till
thou becomest a great Mountain; till thou becomest the praise of the whole
Earth, and the whole Earth be filled with thy Glory,

And to you all, who are the followers of the Lamb of God, who was dead, but is
alive, and lives for evermore; who is risen in your Hearts, as a bright shining
light, and is leading you out of the Nature and Spirit of this World, in the
Path of Regeneration. I have this to say by way of holy Encouragement unto you
all; the Lord God eternal that was and is, and is to come, has reserved for
you the glories of the last Days; and if so be, that the Followers and Martyrs
of Jesus in Ages past, when the Church was going into the Wilderness, and his
witnesses into Sackcloth, were notwithstanding so Noble and Valiant for the
Truth on Earth; that they loved not their lives unto the Death, and suffered
joyfully the Spoiling of their Goods for the Testimony of Jesus, how much more
ought you all to be encouraged unto Faithfulness, who are come to the
Resurrection of the Day, which shall never more be eclipsed; in which the
Bridegroom is come, to fetch you his Spouse out of the WILDERNESS to give you
Beauty for Ashes, and the Garment of Praise for the SPIRIT of HEAVINESS who
will cover you with his Spirit, and adorn you with his fine Linen, the
Righteousness of the Saints, lean upon his Breast for ever. And know your
joining in an Everlasting Covenant with him, that he may lift up the Light of
his Countenance upon you, and delight to do you good; that in blessing he may
bless you, increase you and multiply you in all spiritual Blessings now and
forever; that to God through him you may live all the days of your appointed
time: to whom be Glory and Honor, Praises and Thanksgivings in the Church
throughout all Ages, and for ever. I am.

In the Faith, Patience, Tribulation and Hope of the Kingdom of Jesus, your
Friend and Brother, William Penn.
MY Companions in the Labor and Travail of the Testimony of Jesus, G. Keith
and B. Furley salute you all in the Love of our God. We have passed through
several Cities of Germany, and are now at Franckfort, where the Lord has given
us Three blessed Opportunities with a Serious and Seeking People; whereof, as
in other places of this Country, many of them are Persons of great Worldly
Quality; blessed be the Name of the Lord, to whom be Glory for ever.

Franckfort, the 22th of the 6th Month, 1677. W. P.



THE END.

