Mr. PEPYS To the President, and Governors of CHRIST-HOSPITAL, upon the
Present State of the said HOSPITAL.
To the Honored Sir John Moor, K t. and President, and the rest of my Honored
Friends, the Governors of CHRIST-HOSPITAL. York-Buildings, March 30th. 1699.
Gentlemen,
YOUR Resolution of the 22 th instant, importing your Election of me to the
Treasurership of this Hospital, was delivered me by the worthy Gentlemen
appointed thereto, with a degree of Respect as obliging on their part, as the
Message it self was on Yours; and both surprising.

Surprising I say; but without ought of what (I find) was in too much
Tenderness apprehended from me by some of this Body concerning it; as being
One, who think nothing below the Character of any Man to execute, in a Service
of Charity: And who therefore in my late Searches into the Condition of this
House, descended to Offices much beneath any thing that can occur in what you
are now calling me to.

I therefore do most thankfully own the Proof you herein tender me of the
Continuance of your Esteem, after the unwelcome Freedom I have for some time
been unavoidably exercising toward you, upon the Unhappy Subject of your
present State; in which Your selves are now pleased to give me this Testimony
of your acquiescence: and in the Redress whereof, this Court shall never want
any thing within my power improvable thereto.

But whether in the method you now propose, is what I have made it my business
for some days to consider; without being able to bring my self to any other
Determination in it, Than that the giving you any conclusive Answer (whether of
Acceptance or Refusal) before this Resolution of yours shall have passed the
Censure of another Court, is a no less Exposing of Myself, than Imposing on
You, (as in a very late Case) under the Uncertain Issue of a subsequent Court;
and when that is over, of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen also: As that
without which, by the known Constitution of all our Hospitals, no Election of a
Treasurer is valid. A Consideration of more than common Weight at this time;
from the Question under which the Authority of that Court now lies with this;
without Ought I can hear-of yet done on their side, in its Assertion.

Which while in doing, and for Your clearer Guidance in Your second Debates on
this matter at the next Court, I think it becoming me, in faithfulness both to
You and Myself, to lay before You the few following Considerations.

1 st. -- That I am no Freeman; and consequently, according to the Original
Book of Ordinances by which alone (without entering into the Reason of it) this
Court and that of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen are at liberty to Act herein; I
neither am capable of being Your Treasurer, nor You nor They, apart or
together, in a Capacity of making me so. Nor is there, I believe, any one
Instance to be shown me, of a Treasurer not a Freeman: And should therefore
most unwillingly subject Myself to Question, for meddling unwarrantably with a
Revenue so Sacred as that of the Poor's; or be an Occasion of Your adventuring
upon that in my Case, which was never yet done in any, nor can now justifiably
be in this.

2 dly. -- That the Office and Work of Your Treasurer ought not to be estimated
by what we have seen of it in its Execution for some Years past; but by the
Condition the House is reduced to, from its being executed no otherwise. As
being an Office, that calls at once for Qualifications, such and so many, as
rarely meet in the same Person: Such are (besides that of an approved
Integrity) Vigor of Mind, Steadiness of Health, Entire Leisure,
Vninterestedness, Zeal for and Tenderness toward the Poor, General Experience,
and particular Practice in the Business of Accounts, a Genius fitted for
Command joined with Temper, a Thorough-Insight into the Laws and Ends of our
Constitution, and a Capacity of Controlling every of our Officers and Masters
in the Execution of their Dutys, with a constancy of Attendance and Application
(in his own Person, and not by Others) to the Performance of his own. A Task
both in Bulk and Weight, too much for my Age and known Infirmities; Besides the
Disabilitys I am alone Conscious to my self of, for it.

And though what I have here to add, might not possibly be reckoned of Moment
enough alone in this Debate: yet in Conjunction with what is already said, I
know not how without Injury to my self to omit the observing; that I can with
no Satisfaction think of accepting of a Charge, which my self must be owned to
have had the greatest Hand in the rendering Vacant.

3 ly. -- That suitable to my Advice to you elsewhere on this Subject, I do not
see with what Safety this Court can proceed to the giving a final Discharge to
its late Treasurer, nor how it should expect his being Succeeded by any Person
of Sincerity or Substance, till a State shall be first Adjusted of all your
Accounts, Revenues, Charges and Debts, to your Own and Their Satisfaction; and
that also laid before, and acquiesced-in by the Court of Aldermen. Besides the
Review and fresh Establishment fit to be first had of the Work and Instructions
of that Officer, before the Admission of a New. As foreseeing little Fruit from
any Change of Hands (be it what it will) where those Hands shall be obliged by
no other Rules nor Restrictions, than those we owe our present Distresses to.

For the more Successful Dispatch of which, as well on the part of your said
Treasurer as Your selves; I submit it to You, whether it may not be advisable,
that the Current Work of this Office be for the Present lodged with a small
Commmittee of Your own Number, properly chosen; till by the Adjustment of these
Matters, You shall be in a Condition of restoring it to its Ordinary Methods.

4 ly. -- Lastly, That no Degree of Industry, Experience, or other the Virtues
(before required) in a Treasurer, can alone be thought Sufficient at this
Juncture (where our Whole Constitution lies at once out of Order) to compass
its Reformation, without equal Aid from a no less vigorous and persevering,
however otherwise meritorious a President. One, I mean, whose
thorough-knowledge in the Design, Powers, Limitations, and Orders of this Pious
Foundation, and the Rules of their Execution, is able both to preserve himself
from being either discouraged or imposed-on, and by his Authority, Zeal and
Vigilance, to prevent those Practices which, from the want hereof, the
Generality of this House has been so long misled by, to its Undoing. A
Reflection, that in one word, would alone suffice (lay there nothing else in my
way) to deter me from the Undertaking You invite me to, under the Circumstances
we at present labor in this Particular.

Which having said, and the Reasons of it thus opened; it remains only for me
to beg, that my declining Your present Offer may not be taken for a Declension
in any part of my Concernment for the Prosperity of this House. Forasmuch as no
Consideration shall ever discourage or divert me from the pursuit of it; till
by some Means, Ordinary or Extraordinary (though much rather the former) I see
it restored to the State wherein all Good men wish it.

In view whereof, give me leave with great Satisfaction once more to assure
You, that (without any such Obligation as this of your Treasurership) neither
You nor Your helpless Orphans shall ever want the best Effects of my Personal
Attendance and Service, from the Moment that, by Your thorough-Applications,
and those of the Court of Aldermen toward it, I shall have any Grounds to
hope, that such my Attendance and Service, may be followed with any Success, to
the Recovery of the lost Honor of this House, by its Return to that Religious
Strictness which once distinguished it from all others, in its Compliances with
the holy and charitable Ends provided-for by its Munificent Founders and
Benefactors* I am

Gentlemen, Your most humble and obedient Servant, S. Pepys.


