The Perfect Conveyancer OR, SEVERAL SELECT and CHOICE PRESIDENTS Such as have
not formerly been printed. Collected by Four several Sages of the Law. EDWARD
HENDEN, Knight, late one of the Barons of the Exchequer. WILLIAM NOY,
Attorney General to His late Majesty. ROBERT MASON, sometime Recorder of
London. And HENRY FLEETWOOD, formerly Reader of Grayes-Inne.


Wherein are contained many excellent Examples and Instructions touching the
manner and method of Conveyances; useful for all Persons that are Professors
in the Law, and desire to be rightly and judiciously informed.

With an exact Table for the Readers more ready recourse to any the particulars
contained therein. The second Edition, much Corrected and Amended.

A Commum observantia non est recedendum, Magister rerum usus, 1. Instit. Sect.
371: Brevis via per Exempla, long a per Praecepta, 1. Instit. Sect. 372. and
445. Touching the great use and benefit of Presidents.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for George Thompson, at the White Horse in
Chancery Lane, near Lincolns Inn, 1655.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
It Is a memorable saying, and no less ancient, than experimentally true, That
there would not be wanting Homers, if there were not wanting Alexanders, (non
deessent Homeri, si non deessent Alexandri:) It Is honor that nourishes Arts,
(honos alit arts) and surely I may without the least guile of flattery
confidently affirm, That it was a noble and lawful emulation, to purchase unto
themselves deserved honor, that made these venerable Sages of the Law, by
their indefatigable labors, to become so transcendent in knowledge; of which,
what the learned Heathen once said of Man's Soul, I may now more justly affirm,
that it is divina particula, e divina mente delapsa: And sure if there be any
study, one more mysterious than other, the Law will in no kind challenge the
second place: How much then they deserve, that have enucleated so grand a
mystery? nay more, well remembering (that they were not borne for themselves
alone, but for their Countries good) have with no small pains; nay, I may
rather justly affirm, with an Herculean labor, brought to light so many rich
and unparalleled gemmes of knowledge, as are here commended to thy public
view; A work (absit jactantia verborum) no less useful than commendable; it
were to light a candle at noone day, to speak in the praise of that which
abundantly speaks its own worth; and not to commend the Authors, were to
discommend my own judgment, who am a true Lover and willing Student of so
noble, so necessary, so deservedly commendable a Science; Jus suum, cuique
tribuere, is the end of the Law; and I wish every one might attain that end;
what a happy Commonwealth should we then have? learning nor learned Men would
not then find so many Enemies, it being an undoubted Maxim, Scientiam, non
habere majorem inimicum, praeter ignorantem: To them, I will not commend this
work, and to others I need not; it does sufficiently commend its self: As it
was written for the Weale-Publiques good, so I wish it may publicly be
entertained. And thus I silence to speak more, because it does highly speak
its own worth, all I shall crave from the knowing Reader, is, first to read,
then censure. Farewell.

Thine, if thou art a candid Lover of the Law, R. M. Barrister of that
Honorable study.

The Stationer, to the courteous Reader.
THough many Books of this nature, have been, by many deserving Men, (maturely
verss'd in the knowledge of the Law) formerly commended to the Press for the
benefit of the Republique; yet without the least ostentation of this, so
industrious, so laborious, so useful a work, or derogation from others, who
have employed their Talent, to the same end, none, if the opinion of knowing
Men, (who had the perusal of this, before it took life from the Press) does
seem more necessary or useful for these present times: Here are happy
Presidents, selected out of the choicest of former Ages; and although the Law,
be a Labyrinth, yet here is an Ariadne's Thread to lead thee out of it; Buy it
freely, it is for thy own profit, as well as mine, it being a Golden Library,
taken out of the principles of Law, which thou may purchase for a reasonable
sum of Silver; not to press thee, or to oppress my self; 'twill counsel
thee, without a Counselors Fee; it is then (if I mistake not) good policy, to
lay out some money, upon such terms, as will bring in such gallant usury.
Farewell.

T. G.

A Table for the following Book.
A
AN assignment of a statute staple, whereupon execution has been had, and of
all such lands as are thereby extended, with special Covenant. Page 57 An
assignment of the Moity of the lands which the Lessee has, with diverse
special Covenants. Page 77 An assignment of a Lease. Page 99 An assignment of
two Leases by an Assignee made of several lands, by several persons. Page 128
An arbitrament. Page 166 An assignment of a Bond by Deed Poll, together with a
Letter of Attorney irrevocable, and usual Covenants for the same, Page 171 An
assignment of an Executorship, with Covenants from the Assignee to save
harmless, etc* the Assignor, also a grant of an annuity. Page 175 An
assignment from the Committee, of the body and lands of a ward. Page 180 An
acknowledgement of the receipt of certain moneys due upon the sale of certain
lands, and a release of the same, and of all security taken therefore, and a
release of all Covenants in certain Indentures with a general release. Page 188
An assignment of Dower by the heir u^ to the feme. Page 190 An assignment of a
debt unto etc. Page 203 An attornment of the Lessee of the lands conveyed by
the Feoffment upon livery and seisin. Page 219 The award of Sergeant Henden
made the 28 day of January 1631. between R.A. and I. C. of the Parish of B. in
Com. Kanc' Page 227 An assignment of tithes in a very good form. Page 407 An
assignment of a lease of lands made by the etc. which were seized for a debt to
etc. by obligation, penned by William Noy, Esquire Page 415 An assignment of
Letters, Patents for a Water Mill, from etc. and made over for the assurance of
a Marriage portion, with other Covenants, penned by Council. Page 422 An
assignment of diverse estates in a very good form, penned by R. Mason Esquire Page
460 An annuity made to the use of the poor people in certain Parishes, penned
by Council. Page 477
B
A Bargain and sale upon Condition for the payment of a certain sum of money
upon a day by the Render to the Rendee, with warranty against all men, in
manner etc. of an usual Indenture of Mortgage. Page 32 The Bargainer does
covenant with the Bargainee, that he is seized of an estate in fee in his own
right, and that he will free him from all evictions, etc. except from R. etc:
and that he will make him further assurance. Page 36 A Bond to the Sheriff for
appearance in Banco Regis. Page 54 A bargain and sale to the etc. of a Prebend,
etc. Page 232 A bargain and sale of Tithes for three years, penned by William
Noy Esquire. Page 428 A bargain and sale of some lands, as alalso a Lease of
other, and also a Letter of Attorney irrevocable, for receiving the profits of
other lands for satisfaction of debts. Page 432 A bargain and sale of a
Message, with the appurtenances in fee farm, penned by William Noy Esquire,
with very good Covenants. Page 434 A bargain and sale of a Message with the
appurtenances in fee farm, with good Covenants in a very good form, penned by
Robert Mason Esquire Page 453 A bargain and sale of a Barque or ship. Page 473
C
A Covenant that the Bargainer is solely seized of a rightful estate in fee or
fee-tail, the reversion or reversions not to the King. Page 39 Covenants that
the Bargainer shall make satisfaction for so much of the premises as shall be
recovered from the Bargainee. Page 39 A Condition of an obligation to perform
an award. Page 50 A Condition of an obligation for enjoying the lands,
mortgaged according to the purport of the Deed, containing also the effect of
diverse necessary Covenants. Page 61 A Condition for the better enloying of
lands granted by the Deed only, containing the effect of diverse usual
Covenants. Page 68 A Condition of an Obligation, with the usual Covenants for
the better assurance of lands mortgaged. Page 106 A Condition of an Obligation
to perform Covenants in an Indenture. Page 107 A Condition to abide an award
for lands in Controversy. Page 107 A Condition to abide an award, etc. to
stand to the award of an Vmpire Page 108 A Condition to save a surety harmless.
Page 109 A special Covenant which was in an ordinary Lease contained. Page 131
Condition of an Obligation to the Sheriff upon a Replevin. Page 144 The
Condition of an Obligation to restrain Tenements intailed to be aliened, by
fine, recovery, or otherwise. Page 155 A Condition that the Obligor was
lawfully seized of the premises at the time of granting of the annuity, with
other usual Convenants contained in such Grants. Page 189 A Condition, that if
the Wife survive her Husband, that his Executors shall pay unto the Wife the
sum of, etc. Page 19 A Condition of a Bond for performance of Covenants Page
224 A Condition to save a Surety harmless. Page 226 Another. Page 227 A
Condition of an Obligation to make a Release. Page 235 Covenants of Marriage
very necessary. Page 277 Special Covenants concerning the same, and other uses
to that intent. Page 288 A Condition that a Churchwarden shall give an account.
Page 474 A Covenant to levy a Fine to settle by way of Intail, with diverse
Covenants upon Marriage. Page 509 Covenants for a Fine and Recovery, etc. Page
543
D.
A Defeazance of a Statute, entered into for performance of Covenants contained
in Indentures. Page 1 An usual Deed of Feoffment, with general warranty. Page
19 A Deed of Feoffment of a Message, Lodge, Garden, Orchard, etc. with general
warranty, with Livery upon the Deed of Feoffment, and when it is by Attor^ey.
Page 30 A Deed of Mortgage, with warranty against the Mortgager and his hei^s
only. Page 59 A Deed of Mortgage, with general warranty. Page 65 A Deed of
Feoffment of the lands before mentioned in the Indentures. Page 9^ A Deed of
Feoffment of a Parsonage, etc. Advowson of the Vicaridge there to belonging,
with warranty against the Feoffe and his heirs. Page 9^ A Deed of Reteyner of a
Chaplein by a Nobleman, according to the Statute. Page 127 A Deed of Feoffment
to uses contained in certain Indentures. Page 147 A brief Deed of grant and
assignment of certain goods, chattels, and debts, with a Letter of Attorney
therein contained. Page 169 A Deed of Feoffment of Gavelkind lands by an
Infant, according to the Custom. Page 173 A Deed Poll of revocation of uses,
according to a proviso by other Indentures, as also a limitation of new uses.
Page 185 A Deed Poll of receipt of a sum of money, according to a proviso
contained in certain Indentures, and an acquittance thereof. Page 192 A Deed of
Gift of Hay, and Corn in Barns, together with the Barns as also of standing
Corn, with the soil whereupon, etc. and of goods in particular. Page 192 A
Defeazance upon a Statute. Page 406 A Deed Poll in very good form. Page 464 A
Deed of Covenants to stand seized to uses, according to former articles of
agreement upon Marriage, in tail, and for part of a Jointure. Page 485 A Deed
of Covenants to lead the use of a Fine, Feoffment, or Recovery, etc. with
special Covenants therein contained. Page 530 A Deed Poll, containing a
Feoffment of certain parcels of Land which the Feoffed had, inter alia, assured
unto him upon a common recovery, with special warranty. Page 179
F.
A Feoffment in Consideration of Marriage, with general warranty. Page 69
G.
A Grant of an annuity out of land, with distress, and Covenant to stand seized
of the land for non-payment, to the use of the Grantee, with a proviso to
determine to the use of the Grantee, with the Annuity, upon payment of a sum in
gross. Page 15 A Grant of an Executorship, and of all such goods and other
things as the Executor has, or ought to have of the Testator by the
Executorship or otherwise, in which Grant are diverse Covenants. Page 54 A Grant
of an Annuity or yearly rent, with a nomine poenae distress for both, and a
proviso not to charge the person of the Grantor or his heirs. Page 64 A Grant
of all such goods as belong to one Exec. where are two Executors made, with
special Covenants. Page 70 A Grant of an annuity or yearly rent for lives, with
diverse good Covenants therein contained for the better enjoying of the Rent.
Page 101 A Grant in Fee-farm, with warranty against the Feoffor and his heirs,
in which Grant a Letter of Attorney is incerted to give Livery. Page 104 A
Grant of an annuity out of land, with a proviso not to charge the person, Page
145 A Grant of a rent to others, to the use of the Feoffees for a Jointure
before Marriage. Page 157 A Grant from her Majesty of the wardships of the
bodies of Coheirs. Page 160 A Grant of a Bayliwick of levying of moneys, and
power to make Deputies for the doing of the same. Page 214 A Grant of a
rendition, with a proviso to determine it upon payment of money. Page 222 A
Grant by the Stewards of Liberties to certain persons to be their Bailiffs, and
to collect all issues, fines, and amerciaments, etc. Page 231
I.
An Indenture of Bargain and Sale to be enrolled. Page 2 An Indenture of
Covenants upon the above written Indenture of Bargain and Sale, the which is
drawn and made by it self, for the avoiding of charges of inrollment. Page 5 An
Indenture of Covenants for the surrender of a Lease, and leaving the possession
by a day, according to an Order of the Court of Common Pleas Page 12 An
Indenture of Covenants of stand seized to uses in consideration of natural
affection. Page 22 An Indenture for sale of woods, with a proviso of
redemption. Page 25 An Indenture of the sale of woods, with Covenants to Coal
the said Wood upon the ground. Page 28 An Indenture to lead the use of a Fine
of some part of the premises, and to lead the use of a Recovery of the residue,
the use of some part of the premises, to be to the Vendee absolutely, and of
the residue, but upon condition for the assurance of certain money, hereafter
to be paid by the Vendee unto the Vendor. Page 42 An Indenture to lead the use
of a Fine and Recovery. Page 46 An Indenture to lead the use of a Fine only.
Page 48 An Indenture to lead the use of a Recovery. Page 48 An Indenture for
the assurance of Lands in marriage, for the Iointure of the Wife, with usual
Covenants for the better assurance of the said lands. Page 51 An Iointure that
the Grantor shall infeoffe another person before the day limited in the
Indenture of certain lands, with general warranty to such as shall be limited
by the feoffment. Page 91 An Indenture of bargain and sale made to the Lessee
of the same land, with proviso, that if the Bargainee do not pay a certain sum
of money at a day, then the grant to be void. Page 95 An Indenture of bargain
and sale, and to lead the use of a Fine to be levied. Page 97 An Indenture to
lead the use of a Feoffment, or other assurance in nature of a Will. Page 131
An Indenture of Covenants upon a marriage. Page 139 An Indenture for assurance
of lands to charitable uses viz. erection of a school and relief of the poor.
Page 148 An Indenture made before marriage. Page 154 An Indenture to lead the
use of a Feoffment made by a woman before marriage, to the use of her, and him
that shall be her Husband, with a general Covenant that all assurances shall be
to these uses. Page 158 An Indenture of exchange of Lands. Page 163 An
Indenture of partition of lands in Iointenancy, as also in Copercenary in
Gavelkind, Page 167 An Indenture of Grant and Covenant, whereby one may
discharge some part of land liable to a rentcharge, and not discharge the
residue. Page 183 An Indenture by Baron and Feme to levy and limit the use of a
Fine of the Femes lands. Page 187 An Indenture of Covenant to lead the use of a
Fine, Feoffment, etc. inconsideration of natural affection. Page 165 An
Indenture to declare the use of a precedent Indenture, with a power of
revocation. Page 201 An Indenture by a high Sheriff deputing one to be his
under sheriff. Page 204 An Indenture of the Commissioners for the assessing and
levying of the subsidy, whereby they make one high Collector of many hundreds.
Page 212 An Indenture to certain in trust to uses herein mentioned. Page 213 An
Indenture declaring the use of a Fine before levied. Page 215 An Indenture to
try a Title upon an ejectment Page 219 An Indenture of Covenants upon Marriage,
with extraordinary Covenants therein contained. Page 236 An Indenture for the
levying of a Fine, and to lead the use of a Recovery, with Recoveries for two
several annuities. Page 256 An Indenture of Covenants upon uses for levying of
a Fine, and for the perfecting of the estate of the Lessee for years. Page 261
An Indent. of revocation of issues, with diverse other Covenants to that
purpose. Page 262 An Indenture of Covenants of Marriage, and for repayment of
Marriage money, if either party die before Marriage, with other special
covenants. Page 273 An Indenture of Covenants upon Marriage, with special
covenants. Page 281 A perfect assurance of a Jointure after Marriage had, by
way of Coven. Page 284 An Indenture of Marriage already agreed upon, with
diverse special covenants concerning the same, and other uses to that intent.
Page 288 An Indenture of use for the Cutting off Lands intayled in the right of
the Wife, making the same to the use of her Husband for ever. Page 300 An
Indenture of a Lease of a Waterhouse etc. Engines, penned by Council. Page 301
An Indenture of Covenants in form like a Lease, for the enjoying Lands in
reversion. Page 325 An Indenture of Lease with diverse special covenants in a
very good form. Page 330 An Indenture of Lease for 3 lives, with special
Covenants. Page 336 An Indenture of Lease for 3 lives of a tenement, with
special covenants. Page 340 An Indenture of Lease for the term of 3 years, and
after the 3 years from year to year, until one half years warning be given of
dislike, with special covenants. Page 342 An Indenture of Copartnership between
2 Brewers, penned by Council. Page 346 An Indenture of Copartnership between
Pewterers. Page 356 An Indenture of Copartnership between Drapers. Page 363 An
Indenture of Copartnership between 2. of the Art or Profession of Cottoning of
Fustians, etc. penned by Will. Noy of Lincolns-Inee Esquire Page 369 An Indenture
of Copartnership between 2 Brewers, penned by William Noy Esquire Page 373 An
Indenture of Copartnership about the begging of Letters Patents for setting up
of a Beacon, penned by Council. Page 382 An Indenture of Copartnership between
Ironmongers, in a very good form, and ponned by Will. Noy, Esquire Page 385 An
Indenture of Bargain and Sale, and Copartnership, penned by Will. Noy Esquire Page
390 An Indenture of Copartnership, concerning buying and getting up of ships,
etc. penned by Council. Page 394 An Indenture of Copartnership between
Promooters in a very good form, Page 396 An Indenture of Bargain and Sale of
Manors, Lands, etc. demised by fourth parts to the Grantee, penned by William
Noy Esquire Page 401 An Indenture where etc. by Letters, Patents to I. C. of
certain lands for term of three lives, and afterward by another L^tter Patent
demised the same to I. C. in reversion; now the said I. C. sells his interest
by this Indenture, penned by learned Council. Page 419 An Indenture of Lease of
a house in London, penned by Robert Mason Esquire Page 442 An Indenture of
assignment of an obligation, with a Letter of Attorney for the recovery of the
sums of money contained in the said Obligation and condition thereof, penned by
R Mason Esquire Page 442 An Indenture of assignment of part of a lease of land and
other Covenants there incerted, penned by R. Mason Esquire Page 450 An Indenture of
Covenants to levy a Fine, and suffer a Recovery, for increase of a Jointure.
Page 489 An Indenture of Covenants to levy a a Fine, for the payment of an
Annuity, etc. Page 502 An Indenture of Covenants to levy a Fine. Page 507
L
A Lease ^f lands mortgaged to the Mortgager. Page 63 A Letter of Attorney to
be contained in a Deed by the delivery of seisin. Page 66 A Lease of a Message
with certain lands, woods, and Mines thereto appertaining, and also a power of
fishing upon the said ground, together with power to coal the wood upon the
ground. Page 72 A Lease of a Mansion house, certain lands, etc. with a large
exception, and many special Covenants therein contained. Page 82 A Lease of
Attorney irrevocable, for the assignment of a Recognizance acknowledged in
Chancery; whereupon judgment is there had (with diverse Covenants therein
contained) to the proper use of the Assignee Page 86 A Letter of Attorney
irrevocable, for the assignment of an Obligation to the proper use and behoof
of the Assignee. Page 90 A Lease of an Iron Furnance, Work Hammer, or Iron
Mill, containing ordinary Covenants, for the better enjoying of the same Page
109 A Lease of a Vicaridge Page 120 A Letter of Attorney to make Leases and to
receive rents and accounts for the profits of lands, making the Grantee Bailiff
and Receiver to the Grantor irrevocable for certain years. Page 125 A Lease to
try a title, with direction to execute the same. Page 164 A Letter of Attorney
authorizing to enter into certain lands, and after entry to seal and deliver a
Deed subscribed by the Mr. by which those lands are conveyed over. Page 194 A
Letter of Attorney to receive Money upon a Bond. Page 218 An Indorsement of
Livery and seisin by an Attorney. Page 219 Letters Patents for making an Alien
to be a free Denizen. Page 220 A Lease of a Prebend. Page 234 A Lease of a
house, and for non-payment of a sum of money at certain days before mentioned
the lease to be void. Page 311 A Lease of a house and goods, with diverse
necessary and special Covenants therein contained. Page 315 A Leaso of Lands,
with a special Proviso. Page 322 A Letter of Attorney to enter and to deliver a
deed as Attorney, the same being first signed and sealed by the party. Page 484
M
A Mortgage of a house in fee-simple for indempnification, in a very good form,
penned by Robert Mason, Esquire Page 466 The right form of a Mortgage, penned by R.
Mason, Esquire Page 470 A Mortgage at 10 l. in the 100 l. protempore. Page 525
O.
An Obligation conditioned for the release of an Annuity. Page 24 An Obligation
conditioned for the payment of money. Page 30
P.
The form of a Perpetuity by will, with a proviso to restrain alienation, etc.
Page 152 The Patent whereby Serj. Henden was made Baron of the Exchequer. Page
225
R.
A Release of Estrepement, and of arrerages of Rent, Actions of Covenant and
debt. Page 10 A Release upon a Deed of Feoffment. Page 20 A general Release.
Page 22 A Release of right and title to land, as also of Conditions and titles
of entries or re-entries. Page 67 A Recognizance. Page 167 A Release of right
to land. Page 211 A Release of Legacies. Page 212 A Release of Errors upon a
Fine. Page 194 A Release of a Proviso and Condition. Page 199 A particular
Release of a Vicarige, and all claim thereunto, together with a general release
of all actions and suits whatsoever. Page 217 A Release of Errors upon a
judgment in debt in the Common Pleas. Page 222
S.
A Sale and Confirmation of an estate of a lease of 100 years, to an Assignee
of part of the term. Page 230
W.
A Warrant to the Bailiff of a Manor, for summoning of Tenants to hold a Court
Baron. Page 224 A Warrant to one of the Receivers of the Revenues of the
Duchy, for the payment of 5 l. every Term to Sir E. Henden Knight, one of the
Barons of the Exchequer. Page 225
The End of the Table.
A DEFEASANCE OF A STATVTE, Entered into for the performance of Covenants,
contained in Indentures.
THis INDENTURE, made, etc: Between A. of the Parish of R. in the County of
York Yeoman, of the one part, and B. of L. in the County of Kent Gentleman, and
C. of S. in the County of Hertford Clothier, on the other part, Witnesses,
that whereas the said B. and C. by their Bond or Recognizance in the nature of
a Statute for the Recovery of Debts made and provided, and acknowledged before
Sir I. P. Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England, and bearing date the 17 day of
June last past, before the date of these presents, did jointly and severally
become bound unto the abovenamed A. in the sum of, etc. of current English
money, to be paid unto the said A. his Executors or Assigns, at or upon the
feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist next ensuing the date of the said
Statute, as by the same more at large appears; Nevertheless it is concluded
and agreed between the said parties, and the said A. is well contented and
pleased, and does for him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
covenant and grant, to and with B. and C. and either of them, their or either
of their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form following:
That is to say, that if the said B. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, shall and
do well and truly observe, perform, fulfill and keep, all and singular the
Covenants, Grants Articles and Agreements, which on the part and dehalf of him
the said B. are to be performed, fulfilled, and kept, specified and contained
in certain Indentures made between him the said B. of the one part, and the
abovenamed A. on the other part, bearing date the 10. day of July last past
before the date of these presents, That then the said Bond, Recognizance and
Statute to be utterly void, frustrate, and of none effect, or otherwise to be,
and remain in his full force, strength, and virtue.

An Indenture of Bargain and Sale to be enrolled.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between I. H. of B. in the County of C. Yeoman on
the one part, and E. H. of R. in the County of Middleseex Esquire, on the other
part, Witnesses, that the said I. H. for and in consideration of the sum of
300 l. of current English money, before the ensealing hereof, by the said E. H.
unto him the said I. H. well and truly paid, whereof and wherewith the said I.
H. does acknowledge himself to be fully and wholly satisfied and paid, and
does thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, acquit and discharge the
said E. H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them
by these persents, Has given, granted, bargained, and sold, and does by these
presents give, grant, bargain and sell unthe said E. H. his Heirs and Assigns,
all that his principal Mansion or Message, together with all barns, stables
and other edifices and buildings whatsoever to the same belonging, or in any
wise appertaining, and 2 gardens, 6 acres of Land, 50 acres of Meadow, 50 acres
of Pasture, 4 acres of Wood-ground, containing in the whole six score and
eighteen acres of land, meadow, pasture, and wood, whether more or less,
situate, lying, and being in B. in the said parish of B. in the County of K.
aforesaid, and now in the several tenures and occupations of I. H. and M. G. or
one of them, their Assignee or Assignees, and the reversion or reversions,
remainder and remainders of the same, and of every part and parcel thereof,
together with all tenements, rents, commodities, and other hereditaments
whatsoever, with their appurtenances, and also all ways, easements, and all
and every other profits or commodities with their appurtenances, to the said
Mansion House or Message, or other the said premises, and every, or unto any
part or parcel thereof belonging, or together with the same at any time
heretofore, or at this present had, occupied, or enjoyed, or reputed, accepted,
or taken as part, parcel, or member of the same, or any part thereof. And
furthermore for, and in, and upon the consideration aforesaid, he the said I.
H. has given, granted, bargained and sold, and does by these presents give,
grant, bargain and sell, unto the said I. H. his Heirs and Assigns, all those
his several Mansions, Messuages or lands, with their appurtenances, and all and
singular edifices and buildings, to them, or either of them belonging, or in
any wise appertaining, in the several tenures and occupations of O. N. P. R. S.
F. or of their Assignee or Assignees, together with all and sigular the lands,
tenements, rents, commodities, and other hereditaments, to them, every of them,
or any of them belonging, appertaining, or had, used, occupied, or enjoyed with
them, or in them, situate, lying and being in B. in the said parish of B. in
the said County of Kent, and containing in the whole, by estimation, 30 acres
of land, meadow, and pasture; And the reversion or reversions of the said three
several Messuages or Tenements, and of all and singular other the premises, and
every of them, together with all and singular ways, easements, and all other
profits or commodities whatsoever to them or any of the^ belonging, or in any
wise appertaining, or being, or reputed, or at any time heretofore accepted or
taken, to be part, parcel, or member of them or any of them: And also all that
the Close of him the said I. H. commonly called and known by the name of
Hedgsus Ham, with the appurtenences, situate, lying, and being in the said
County of Kent: And the reversion and reversions, remainder or remainders
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof: And also all and singular his
lands, tenements, rents, services, commodities, and all other his
hereditaments, whatsoever, with all and singular the appurtenances: And the
reversion or reversions, remainder or remainders of them and every of them,
together with all buildings, easements, profits, and commodities whatsoever to
them or any of them belonging, or in any wise appertaining, situat, lying and
being in the Town or Hamlet of B. H. B. or else wheresoever in the said County
of K. And furthermore, the said I. H. for and upon consideration aforesaid,
has given, granted, bargained and fold, and does by these presents, for him,
his Heirs and Assigns, give, grant, bargain and sell unto the said E. H. his
Heirs and Assigns, Bargain and sale of the Deeds and Coveyanc^s, concerning the
premises.
all and singular Deeds, Charters, Escripts, Fines, Exemplifications of Fine or
Fines, Exemplifications of Recovery or Recoveries, and all other writings
whatsoever, being, or in any sort concerning the said premises above specified
by these presents given, granted, bargained and sold, or meant or intended to
be by the same given, granted, bargained and sold, or any part or parcel
thereof, the which I the said I. H. or any other party by his consent or
appointment, has in his or their hands, custody and possession, To have and to
hold the said Message or Tenement, the said 20 acres of Land, 50 acres of
Meadow, 50 acres of Pasture, 4 acres or Wood-ground, and also the 30 acres of
Land, Meadow, and Pasture to three of the Messuages or Lands belonging, and
also one close called H. and all and singular other the premises whatsoever,
with all and every their appurtenances, unto the said E. H. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever: Proviso, that if the Bargainer, etc. pay such a sum, at, such
a day, that then the bargain and sale shall be void.
Provided always, and upon condition, that if the abovenamed I. H. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, do content, satisfy and pay, or cause
to be well and truly satisfied, contented and paid, unto the said E. H. his
Heirs and Assigns, at or upon the 20 day of October, which shall be next and
immediately ensuing the date hereof, at or in the South porch of the Parish
Church of Rolve^den in the said County of Kent, the just and entire sum of
300 and 50l. of current English money, that then, and from thenceforth this
present gift, grant, bargain and sale, and every clause, article and agreement
therein specified, shall be utterly void, frustrate, and of none effect, any
thing before specified unto the contrary in any wise notwithstanding: And it is
further covenanced, granted, conditioned, Covenants, that all conveyances made,
or to be made, shall be to the uses, and under the codition, in this Indenture
specified, and to no other use or purpose whatsoeever.
concluded and agreed upon between the said parties, That all and singular Fine
and Fines levied or to be levied, Feoffment or Feoffments, and all and every
other covenants, conveyances or assurances whatsoever by the said I. H. his
Heirs and Assigns made, or to be made, shall be to the only uses, intents and
purposes, and under the condition in this present Indenture specified and
contained, and to no other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. In Witness
whereof, the parties abovenamed, to these present Indentures, their hands and
Seals interchangeably have put, the day and year first above-written.

An Indenture of Covenants upon the above-written Indenture of Bargain and
Sale: the which is drawn and made by it self for the avoiding of the charges of
Inrollment.
THis INDENTURE made, etc. Between I. H. of B. in the Parish of B. in the
County of Y. Yeoman, on the one part, and E. H. of R. in the County of K.
Gentleman, on the other part, Witnesses, that whereas the said I. H. by his
Indenture of gift, grant, bargain and sale, being of the date with these
presents, and for and in consideration of the sum of 30^ l. of current
English money unto the said I. H. by the abovenamed E. H. before the ensealing
of the said Indenture, well and truly contented, satisfied and paid, did give,
grant, bargain and sell unto the said E. H. his Heirs and Assigns, all that his
principal Mansion or Message, together with all barns, stables, and all other
edifices and buildings whatsover to the same belonging, or in any wise
appertaining; And two gardens, 20 acres of Land, 50 acres of Meadow, 50 acres
of pasture, 8 acres of Wood-land, containing in the whole, by estimation,
sixscore and eight acres of Land, Meadow, Pasture and Wood-ground, whether more
or less thereof there to be had, situate, lying and being in Bollings, alias
Bollinge Horton, and Brandesend in the said Parish of Brandeford in the County
of York aforesaid, being in the several tenures and occupations of the said I.
H. M. H. or their Assignee or Assignees; And the reversion or reversions of the
same, and of every part and parcel thereof, together with all and singular
lands, tenements, rents, commons, and all other hereditaments whatsoever, with
their appurtenances; And also all ways, easments, and all and every other
profits and commodities, with th'appurtenances to the said Mansion or Message,
and other the said premises, and unto every, or unto any part or parcel thereof
belonging, appertaining, or together with the same at any time before the
ensealing of the said Indenture, or at the time of the ensealing thereof, had,
used, occupied or enjoyed, or reputed, accepted or taken as part, parcel, or
member for the same, or any part thereof: And furthermore, whereas the said I.
H. for the consideration aforesaid, did give, grant, bargain, and sell unto the
said E. H. his Heirs and Assigns, all those his three several Messuages of
Tenements, with the appurtenances, and all and singular edifices and buildings,
to them or any of them belonging, or in any wise appertaining, in the several
tenures and occupations of W. C. M, P. R. G. or of their Assignee or Assignees,
together with all and singular lands, tenements, commons, and all other
Hereditaments whatsoever, to them, and every of them, or any of them belonging,
appertaining, or had, used, occupied, or enjoyed, with them or any of them,
situate, lying and being in B. aforesaid in the parish of B. in the said County
of York, and containing in the whole, by estimation, 30 acres more or less of
land, meadow, and pasture. And the reversion or reversions of the said three
several Messuages or Tenements, of all and singular other the premises, and of
every of them; together with all and singular Easments, and all other profits
and commodities whatsoever to them or any of them belonging, in any wise
appertaining, or being reputed, or at any time before the ensealing of the said
Indenture accounted or taken as part, parcel or member of them, or any of them;
And also all that the Close of him the said I. H. commonly called and known by
the name of H. with the appurtenances, situate, lying and being in the said
parish of B. in the said County of York. And the reversion or reversions,
remainder or remainders, and of every aprt and parcel thereof; And also all and
singular other the lands, tenements, rents, services, commons, and all other
hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular the appurtenances, and the
reversion or reversions, remainder or remainders of them or every of them,
together with all liberties, easments, profits and commodities whatsoever to
them or any of them belonging, or in any wise appertaining, situate, lying and
being in the Town or Hamlet of B. in the parish of B. or in any other village,
hamlet, town or place whatsoever in the said County of York. And furthermore,
whereas the said I. H. for and upon the consideration aforesaid, did give,
grant, bargain and sell unto the said E. H. his Heirs and Assigns, all and
singular Deeds, Charters, Escripts, Fines, Exemplifications of Fine or Fines,
Exemplifications of Recovery or Recoveries, and all other writings and
engagements whatsoever belonging or in any sort concerning the said premises,
above by these presents given, granted, bargained or sold, or meant or intended
to be by the same given, granted, bargained or sold, or any part or parcel
thereof, the which the said I. H. or any other person or persons by his or
their assent, consent, or procurement, has or have in his or their hands,
custody and possession, or may any way come unto him or them; To have and to
hold the said former several Messuages or Tenements, the said 20 acres of Land,
50 acres of Meadow, 50 acres of Pasture, 8 acres of Wood-ground: And also the
said 30 acres of Land and Meadow, and Pasture, to three of the said Messuages
or Tenements belonging, and the said Close called H. and all and singular other
the premises whatsoever, with all and every their appurtenances, unto the said
E. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever: Covenants that the Bargainor was seized
in Fee-simple or Fee-tayl of part of the premises; and that they are in such
places, and known by such names; and may be sold, as in the said recited
Indenture is specified, and that there is such a quantity of acres, every acre
according to the measure allowed by Statute.
Now it is fully and absolutely condescended, concluded, and agreed upon, by
and between the said parties to these presents, in manner and form following,
And first the said I. H. for him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, does covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said E. H. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, That the said I. H. was at the
time of the ensealing of the said Indenture, lawfully seized in fee-simple of
and in four Mansions, Messuages, and Tenements, in the tenure or occupations of
them the said I. H. M. H. W. C. M. P. and R. S. and of and in such Lands,
Meadows, Pastures, Wood-grounds and other Hereditaments, And in such Parishes,
Towns and Hamlets, called and known by such name or names, as in the said
recited Indenture they are specified, set forth, and conveyed. And that the
said former Messuages, and the lands, tenements, meadows, pastures, Wood-lands,
and all other the premises, with th'appurtenances in the said recited Indenture
specified and contained, and the use and uses thereof, are, and may be
conveyed, given, granted, bargained and sold, by such name and names, in such
manner and form as they are in and by the said recited Indenture set forth and
expressed, limited and appointed; And that the said Lands, And that the
bargainer was seized in his demean as of fee, or as of fee-tail, of so much of
the premises as amount to 25 l. per annum. And that the bargainer was seized in
reversion (the estate in possession being but one life, and no more) of the
residue of the premises amounting unto 25 l. per an. And that all the premises
bargained and sold amount unto the clear yearly value of 50 l.
Meadows, Tenements, Pastures, Wood-ground, and other the premises in the said
recited Indenture contained, are of such quantity, and contain such number of
acres, every acre being accounted according to the measure allowed by Statute
for the measuring of land enacted, as in the said recited Indenture is
particularly expressed and set forth; And that the said I. H. at the insealing
of the said recited Indenture was seized in possession in his demean as of Fee,
of so much of the said premises in the said recited Indenture given, granted,
bargained, conveyed, and sold, as amounts unto the clear yearly value of 25 l.
of current English money, over and above all charges and reprizes whatsoever:
And the said I. H. was at the time of the ensealing of the said recited
Indenture seized in reversion, in fee-simple or fee-tayl, and the estate and
interest in possession, being but one life only and no more, of such part,
residue of the said premises, by the said recited Indenture given, granted,
conveyed, bargained and sold, or meant, or intended to be by the same given,
granted, conveyed, bargained and sold, as does amount unto the clear yearly
value of 25 l. over and above all charges and reprizes whatsoever: And that all
the whole premises by the said recited Indenture given, granted, bargained,
conveyed and sold, or meant or intended to be by the same given, granted,
bargained, conveyed and sold, being in possession, and reversion, are of the
clear yearly value of 50 l. over and above all charges whatsoever: Covenant to
deliver the evidences bargained and sold to the bargainee, etc. before such a
day.
And the said I. H. does further, for him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said E. H. his Heirs,
Executors, Admistrators and Assigns, That he the said I. H. his Heirs,
Executors or Assigns, shall fully deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the
said E. H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, at or before the
Feast of Saint James the Apostle, next ensuing the date hereof, at or in the
now dwelling house of the said E. H. situate in K. aforesaid, all such Deeds,
Charters, And that the bargainer was seized of a sure and indefeisable estate,
in fee-simple, or fee-tayl, and that there is no impediment, whereby the
premises may not be sold, or the use thereof arise, and be transferred in
possession or reversion.
Exemplifications and Writings whatsoever, as are by the said recited Indenture
given, granted, bargained and sold unto the said E. H. his Heirs and Assigns:
And also that he the said I. H. was at the insealing of the said Indenture
lawfully seized of the said premises, with the appurtenances, in the said
recited Indenture specified and contained, of a good, sure, perfect, absolute
and undefeazable Estate in Law, in fee-simple, or fee-tayl, without any
condition, limitation, future or contingent use or uses, and that there is not
any let, hindrance or impediment whatsoever, whereby all and singular the said
premises in the said recited Indenture specified and contained, with the
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, may not be given, granted,
bargained and sold, or the use and uses thereof, and every part and parcel
thereof, shall or may not spring, arise, and be transferred in possession or
reversion unto the said E. H. And that the bargainer may enjoy the premises
under the condition in the said recited Indenture specified, without any
lawful interruption of any person (except M. which has an estate for life, in
part of the premises) according to the purport of the said recited Indenture.
his Heirs and Assigns, according unto the intent, purport and true meaning of
the said recited Indenture: And also that the said E. H. his Heirs and Assigns,
under the proviso and condition in the said recited. Indenture specified, shall
and may quietly and peaceably, without any lawful let, vexation, molestation or
disturbance of the said I. H. his Heirs or Assigns, or any other person or
persons whatsoever, (the estate of M. H. mother of him the said I. H. of and in
parcel of the said premises only for term of her life excepted and fore-prised)
Have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said premises by the abovenamed Indenture
given, granted, bargained and sold, or meant, or intended to be by the same
Indenture, given, granted, bargained and sold, and every part and parcel
thereof, with the appurtenances, to him the said E. H. his Heirs and Assigns,
according unto the intent, purport and true meaning of the said recited
Indenture, and the clauses and articles therein contained: And also that the
said four Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, And that the premises by
the said recited Indenture bargained and sold, were, and shall continue free
from all former bargains, states, joyntures, etc.
and all and singular other the premises by the above-written Indenture give,
granted, bargained and sold, or meant or intended to be by the same given,
granted, bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof, with the
appurtenances, at the time of the ensealing and delivering of the said
Indenture, were, and so under the proviso and condition in the said recited
Indenture contained, shall be and continue unto the said E. H. his Heirs and
Assigns, free, clear, and exonerated and discharged of and from all former
bargains, states, joyntures, dowers, morgages, judgments, executions,
recognizances, fines, forfeitures, The Rents due to the Lords of the Fee, and
two several estates for lives, of several parts of the premises excepted.
fines for alienations, rent-charges, rent-sects, and of and from all and all
other manner of charges and encumbrances whatsoever; The rents and services now
due, or hereafter to be due, unto the Lord or Lords of the fee of the said
premises; and one Estate made unto M. G. in the one half of the said premises,
for term of her natural life only, and no longer; and one other Estate made
unto D. H. now wife of the said I. H. of and in one part of the other half of
the said premises, for the term of the natural life of the said D. H. only, and
no longer, always excepted and foreprized. Covenant by the bargainee, that the
bargainer shall receive the rents, and take the profits of the premises,
bargained and sold, until the bargainer shall make default in payment of the sum
in the Proviso in the said recited Indenture contained.
And the said E. H. does for him, his Executors and Assigns, Covenant and grant
to and with the said I. H. his Executors and Assigns, that he the said E. H.
his Heirs and Assigns shall and will permit and suffer the said I. H. his Heirs
and assigns, to take, receive, and levy the rents and profits of the said
premises by the said recited Indenture given, granted, bargained and sold, or
meant or intended to be by the same given, granted, bargained and sold, until
he the said I. H. his Heirs or Assigns, shall make default, or fail in payment
of the said sum of 300 and 50 l. in the proviso in the above-recited Indenture
contained, all things before specified to the contrary notwithstanding. In
witness whereof, the parties abovenamed to these present Indentures their hands
and seals interchangeably have put, the day and year first above-written,
Annoque Dom. 1624.

A Release of Waste and Estrepement, and of arrerages of Rent, actions of
Covenant and Debt.
TO all true Christian People to whom this present writing indented shall come,
T. B. of S. in the County of K. Esquire sends greeting in our Lord God
everlasting; Know ye, that I the said T. B. for diverse good causes and
considerations me thereunto especially moving, have remised, released and for
ever quit claimed, and by these presents do clearly, sully and absolutely
remise, release, and for ever quit claim unto A. D. of B. in the County of W.
Wid: W. S. of B. aforesaid in the said County Esquire A. L. of S: in the said
County of W. Widow, all and all manner of waste or wast made, committed, or
done by them, or by any or either of them, or by any other person or persons
whatsoever, by or in their or any of their right, title, means, procurement or
permission, in and upon any the houses, site, and demean Lands heretofore by
Indenture made, bearing date upon the Feast day of All Saints, in the eight and
twentieth year of the reign of K. Henry the Eight deceased, by William late
Abbat of Gloucester, and Covent of the same, demised, granted, and to farm
letten to George Daston Gent. for 80 years, if he lived so long; And of and
from all, and all manner of Rents, and arrerages of Rents whatsoever, due or
payable to the said T. B. by the said A. D. W. S. A. L. or any or either of
them, for or in respect of any the houses, site, and demean Lands before
mentioned; And of and from all and all manner of actions of Waste, actions of
Trespass, actions of Covenant and Debt, and of and from all other actions,
suits, and demands whatsoever, had or prosecuted, or to be had or prosecuted
against them, or any of them, for or concerning any the matters or causes
before mentioned; so as neither the said T. B. nor his Heirs, nor any other
person or persons whatsoever, for him, or in his name, any action or suit at
any time hereafter, shall or may have, or prosecute against the said A. D. W.
S. A. L. or any, or either of them, for or in respect of any the causes before
mentioned: But of and from the same shall be hereafter excluded and barred by
these presents. In witness whereof, the parties abovenamed their hands and
seals to these present Indentures interchangeably have put, the day and year
first above written, Annoque Dom. 1614.

An Indenture of Covenants for the surrender of a Lease, and leaving the
possession by a day, according to an Order of the Court of Common Pleas.
THIS INDENTURE made, etc. Between 7. B. of S. in the County of K. Esquire of
the one part, and A. L. of S. in the County of W. Gent. of the other part,
Witnesses, That as well for and in performance and accomplishment of a certain
Order or Rule made in the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, in the Term of
Easter now last past, before the date hereof, in an action of Ejectione firm,
depending in the said Court, by A.L. Lessee of the abovenamed T.B. Plaintiff,
against W. S. and others, Defendants, for and concerning the title, right,
interest, and possession of the said T. B. in and to the Site, Manor-house, and
Demeans of the Manor of H. in the said County of G. with th'apputtenances; as
also for and upon diverse other sufficient causes and considerations, it is
covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed upon, by and between the said
parties to these presents, Covenant according to the Order, to deliver up the
peaceable possession of the lands.
in manner and form follwing: And first the said A. D. does for him, his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, covenant and grant, to and with the said
T. B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, That he the said A. L.
shall and will according to the Order abovementioned, and the true meaning of
the same, yield and deliver up, or cause to by yielded and delivered up unto
the said T. B. his Heirs and Assigns, at the Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel next ensuing the date hereof, the quiet and peaceable possession as
well of the Farm-house, with the appurtenances, Site, and Demeans of the said
Manor of H. in the County of G. aforesaid, And that the may peaceably enjoy the
land, without eviction or disturbance of W. G. or A. or of any other person,
etc.
as also of all Lands or Tenements, used or occupied, as part, parcel, and
member of the Demeans of the said Manor: And also that he the said T.B. his
Heirs and Assigns, shall and may peaceably and quietly, from the Feast of St.
Michael the Archangel next ensuing, hold and enjoy the said site, Farm-house,
and Demeans of the Manor of H. and all other the premises, with the
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, without any let, eviction, or
disturbance of the sard A. L. W. D. of H. in the said County of G. deceased,
G.D. of H. aforesaid deceased, or A. D. of B. late in the said County of W. or
any of them, and without any lawful let, or disturbance of any other person or
persons, lawfully claiming in, by, from or under them, or any of them: And that
the premises shall be discharged or saved harmless, from all charges, or
encumbrances committed or done by W. G. etc. or any other, amp;c.
And furthermore, that the said premises, with the appurtenances, and every
part and parcel thereof, shall be and continue unto the said T.B. his Heirs and
Assigns, acquitted and discharged, or otherwise upon request sufficiently
saved harmless and indempnified, of and from all manner of charges and
encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, or done by the said A. L. W.D.
G.D. E.D. A. D. or A.D. junior, or any other person or persons lawfully
claiming by, from, or under them, or any of them: And the said A.L. does
furthermore for him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, Covenant
and grant, to and with the said T. B. his Executors, Covenant, that the
su^rederer will upon request made by the surrenderee, save him harmless, and the
premises from all actions, and cotroversies had, or brought by A. W. G. etc. or
any other person, etc.
Administrators and Assigns, That he the said A. L. his Executors and Assigns,
shall and will from time to time, upon reaasonable request to him or them by
the abovenamed T.B. his Heirs and Assigns made, save, and keep harmless as
well the abovenamed T. B. his Heirs and Assigns, as the said Site, Farm-house,
and Demeans of the said Manor of L. and all other the premises, with the
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, of and from all, and all
manner of suits, actions, and controversies, which shall be had, made,
commenced, or brought by them the abovenamed A. L. W. D. G. D. E. D. A. D. or
A. B. or any of them, or any other person or persons lawfully claiming, or
lawfully pretending any right or title, by, from, or under them, or any of
them: And also, that as well the said A. L. his Heirs and Assigns, And also,
that as well the surrenderer, as also the said W.G. etc. shall within such a
space, upon request of the surrenderee, make such further assurance, etc. be it
by release, confirmation etc. so that the same comprehend no other Warranties,
etc. but against them, and all persons claiming under them.
as also the said W.D. G.D. E.D. and A.D. and all other person or persons
lawfully claiming any right, title, or interest unto the said premises, by,
from, or under them, or any of them, shall and will, at all times within the
space of 12 years next following the date hereof, upon reasonable request unto
them, or any of them made, at the proper co^^is and charges in the Law of the
said T. B. his Heirs or Assigns, make such further Assurance and Security, unto
the said T.B. of their and every of their right, title and interest, of and in
the said premises, with the appurtenances, as by the said T.B. his Heirs or
Assigns, or their Counsel learned in the Law shall be reasonably devised or
advised, be it by Release, Confirmation, Feoffment, or otherwise, so that such
assurance comprehend no further Warranties, or Covenants of Warranties, than
against themselves, and all other person or persons lawfully claiming in, by,
from, or under them, or any of them; and so that they be not compelled to
travel for the making of such assurance, And lastly, the surrenderer does
assign all his interest and term of years which he pretends to have in the
premises, by color of a lease made to one G. by one A. the which since is come
to the now Assignor, and that part of the Indenture of lease made, unto the
said G. and all other writings, which he covenanteth to deliver at the sealing
of these presents.
further than the County of Gloucester. And lastly, the said A.L. does for him,
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, assign
unto the said T.B. his Heirs and Assigns, as well all and sigular the right,
title, interest, and term of Years, which the said A. L. has, or pretends to
have, of and in the said Site, Manor-house, and Demeans of the said Manor of H.
and other the said premises, with the appurtenances, by virtue or color of one
Lease thereof made by the late A. of G. unto one G. D. the right and interest
of which said term, is by mean conveyance and assurance, lawfully (as is
pretended) possessed and assigned unto him the said A.L. as also of one part of
the said Indenture of Lease made by him the said A. unto the said G. under the
covent seal; as also all other Writings, Covenants and Deeds whatsoever
concerning the Lands in the hands and custody of the said A. or which the said
A. may come unto, concerning the said premises, or any part thereof, without
sure in Law: The which said Indenture, and other Writings, the said A. does for
him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, covenant and grant, to
deliver unto the said T. B. his Executors and Assigns, at the time of the
ensealing and delivery of these presents: In witness whereof, the parties
abovenamed to these present Indentures their Hands and Seals interchangeably
have put, the day and year first above written, Annog; Dom. 1601.

A Grant of an Annuity out of Land, with distress, and covenant to stand seized
of the Land for non-payment, to the use of the Grantee, with proviso to
determine the Annuity, upon payment of a sum in gross.
THIS INDENTURE made, etc. Between B. F. of S. in the County of S. Yeoman, of
the one part, and T. F. of S. aforesaid Yeoman, of the other part, Witnesses,
That whereas the Mayor, Jurats, and Commonalty of the ancient Town of
Winchellsey within the liberty of the Cinque ports in the County of S. did with
one consent and mutual agreement, by their Indenture bearing date the 20 day of
August, in the 38 year of the Reign of the late Queens Majesty, bargain, sell,
give, grant, and confirm unto the said B.F. his Heirs and Assigns, all that
their Brewhouse, and the edifices, and buildings thereunto belonging, together
with all the Lands, Meadows, Pastures and Wast ground to the said Brewhouse
appertaining, and with the same then or late usually occupied, and afterward
in the said Indenture mentioned, expressed, and recited, (that is to say) the
Brewhouse, and the buildings thereunto belonging and appertaining, and the
ground thereunto adjoining, situate, lying and being in the Strand in
Winchellsey aforesaid, and abutted to the Queens high Street there South, to
the common Chanel North, to the lands of I.V. West, and to the lands of A. A.
Esquire East, containing by estimation, 3 acres, more or less: One other piece or
parcel of Land did lie at St. Leonards near Winchellsey aforesaid, and abutteth
to the Lands then, or late, I. W. North, to the lands of I.P. South, to a Lane
called P. East, to the Fleet called St. Leonards Fleet, West, containing in the
whole, by estimation, 2 acres, more or less: And the other piece or parcel of
Land lying near unto the Kings green (that is to say) to the Queens high way
South and West, to the commons of the Town of Winchellsey East, and to the
Lands of A. H. North, containing, by estimation, one quarter of an acre, more
or less, as the ancient bounds and marks thereof more plainly did show and
divide: To have and to hold, the said Brewhouse, and the edifices and bulldings
thereunto belonging, together with all and singular other the edifices, with
all and all other the said several premises before recited and expressed, and
every part and parcel thereof, with th'appurtenances, to the said B.F. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever; Yielding and paying therefore yearly to the said
Mayor, Jurats, and Commonalty, their Successors and Assigns, the yearly Rent or
Farm of Six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence of lawful money of
England. at two usual Feasts and Terms in the year, (that is to say,) at the
Feast of Saint Michael th'Archangel, and the Feast of the Annuntiation of the
blessed Virgin Mary, by even and equal portions to be paid, as in and by the
said recited Indenture does and may more plainly appear, Now this Indenture
witnesses, that the said B. F. for diverse good causes and considerations him
thereunto especially moving, has given, granted, and confirmed, and does by
these presents, for him, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, give, grant,
and confirm unto the abovenamed T.F. and his Assigns, one annual or yearly
Rent of 10 l. of current English money, issuing, going forth, and to be yearly
had, levied, perceived and received out of the said Brewhouse, and other the
edifices, and buildings thereunto belonging, together with the said several
pieces and parcels of land, and out of all and every the premises in the
above-recited Indenture specified and contained, with all and singular the
appurtenances; To have and to hold the said Annuity, or yearly rent of 10 l. of
current English money, issuing, going forth, and to be levied, received, and
perceived out of the above-recited premises, with the appurtenances as
aforesaid, Power to enter into the land, and distrain for the rent behind, and
the distrainer to detain until he be satisfied of the Rent.
unto the said T.F. and his Heirs, for and during the natural life of the said
T.F. and the same to be paid yearly at, or in the South porch of the Parish
Church of S. aforesaid, at or upon the second day of May. which shall be in the
year of our Lord 1595. And if it shall happen the said Annuity or yearly rent
of 10 l. or any part or parcel thereof to be behind, or unpaid, by the space of
fourteen days next after the day and time in which it is limited and appointed
to be paid, as aforesaid, that then, and from thenceforth, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said. T.F. and his Assigns, during the natural life of
the said T. F. as aforesaid, into the said Brewhouse, with all the edifices and
buidings thereunto belonging, and into all and singular the Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances, in the above recited Indenture
specified and contained, and into every or any part or parcel thereof to
re-enter, and distrain; and the distress or distresses there so taken, to lead,
drive, chase, carry away, impound, and the same to keep and detain, until the
said T.F. and his Heirs and Assigns shall be of the said Annuity or Annual rent
of 10 l. and every part and parcel thereof, which shall so fortune to be behind
and unpayed, fully and wholly contented, satisfied and paid. And the said B. F.
does for him, his Heirs and Assigns, covenant and grant, Covenant, if the rent
be behind and unpayed by the space of 30 days, next after the day of payment,
that the it shall be lawful for the Grantee to enter into the land, and the
same to have to him, his Heirs, and Assigns for ever.
to and with the said T. F. his Heirs and Assigns, That if it happen the said
Annuity or Annual rent of 10 l. or any part parcel thereof to be behind and
unpaid by the space of 30 days next after the time and day of payment, upon the
which it ought to be paid as aforesaid, That then it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said T.F. and his Assigns, into the said Brewhouse, with all
edifices and buildings to the same belonging, and into the said several parts
and parcels of Land above specified, and into all and singular other the
premises whatsoever, with all and singular the appurtenances in the
above-recited Indenture mentioned and contained, and by the same given,
granted, bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof, to enter, and
the same to have, hold, and enjoy, unto the said T. F. his Heirs and Assigns,
unto the only and proper use and behoof of him the said T.F. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever. And that immediately from and after such default of payment
of the said Annuity or yearly rent of 10 l. by the space of 30 days next after
the time and day of payment, And that after such default in payment, as
aforesaid, all persons seized of the land, shall stand seized to the use of the
Grantee his Heirs and Assigns for ever.
in which the same ought to be paid as aforesaid, as well the said B.F. his
Heirs and Assigns, as all other person or persons whatsoever, which now are, or
at the time of default in payment, or at any time hereafter shall be seized of,
and in the said Brewhouse, with all the edifices thereunto belonging, and of
and in the said several parts or parcels of land above-recited, and of and in
all and every other the said premises whatsoever, with all and singular the
appurtenances in the said recited Indenture specified and contained, shall
stand and be seized of and in the same, to the only use and behoof of him the
said T. F. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to no other use or uses, intent,
and purports whatsoever.

Proviso, that if the grantor do pay 60 l. at such a day, that then this Grant
shall be ^oid.
Provided always, that if the said B. F. his Heirs or Assigns, or any of them,
do content, satisfy and pay, or cause to be well and truly contented,
satisfied and paid, unto the said T. F. his Heirs and Assigns, the entire sum
of 60 l. of current English money, at or upon the second day of May, which
shall be in the year of our Lord, according to the computation of the Church of
England, etc. at, or in the South porch of the Parish Church o^ S. aforesaid,
That then, and from thenceforth, as well the said Annuity or Annual rent of 10
l. as also all and every other action, clause, condition, and agreement in
these present Indentures specified and contained, shall be utterly void,
frustrate, and of none effect, Covenant, that the grantor was lawfully seized
of the premises, out of which etc. of a good estate in law in see-simple.
and determined in Law, to all intents, constructions, and purposes; any thing
before specified to the contrary notwithstanding: And the said B. F. does for
him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, covenant and grant, to
and with the said T. F. his Heirs and Assigns, that the said B. F. is at the
time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, lawfully seized of and in
the premises, out of which the said Annuity or Annual rent is granted as
aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof, And that the premises, out of
which, etc. are, and so shall continue acquitted, and discharged, of all
charges and encumbrances, etc.
of a good, sure, and perfect estate in Law, in Fee-simple: And that the said
Brewhouse, edifices, buildings, lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and all other
the premises, out of which the said Annuity or Annual rent is granted, and
every part and parcel thereof, at the time of the date hereof, and at the time
of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, are, and so shall be, and
continue, acquitted, discharged, and otherwise sufficiently saved harmless, of
and from all, and all manner of charges and encumbrances, Covenant that the
granter has not don, nor will not do any act or thing, whereby to frustrate
this grant.
whereby the Annuity or Annual rent granted unto the said T. F. as aforesaid,
may or shall be frustrate, overthrown, or by any way or means whatsoever
determined: And the said B. F. does further for him, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, covenant and grant, to and with the said T. F. his
Heirs, Executors, Aministrators and Assigns, That he the said B. F. has not
heretofore committed or done, or will hereafter commit or do any act or acts,
thing or things whatsoever, whereby the said Annuity or Annual rent, granted
unto the said T. F. as aforesaid, shall or may be by any way or means
impeached, And that the granter will pay, or cause to be paid, this rent,
according as it is before granted.
frustrated, or determined: And also that he the said B. F. his Heirs and
Assigns, shall and will well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said
T. F. and his Assigns, during the natural life of the said T. F. the said
Annuity or Annual rent of 10 l. yearly, at or upon the second day of May, or
within the said 30 days next after the said day, in manner and form as is
before in these present Indentures limited and appointed: Of which said Annuity
or Annual rent of 10 l. to be paid as aforesaid, the said B. F. has put the
said T. F. in present and full seisin and possession, and by giving him the sum
of Sixpence. Seisin given of the rent.
In witness whereof, the parties abovenamed to these present Indentures their
hands and seals interchangably have put: Dated the day and year first above
written, Anno Domini, etc.

An usual Deed of Feoffment, with general Warranty.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, T. P. of T.
in the County of K. Yeoman, Greeting in our Lord God everlasting; Know ye, me
the aforesaid T. P. for, and in consideration of the sum of 60 l. of good and
lawful money of England, to me the aforesaid T. P. by I. T. of B. in the
aforesaid County, Clothier, well and truly beforehand paid, whereof I
acknowledge my self to be fully satisfied and contented, and said I. T. his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators to be for ever acquitted and exonerated, by
these presents, have given, granted, infeoffed, and by this my present Writing
confirmed to the aforesaid I. T. his Heirs and Assigns, all that Manor,
Message, or Tenement, Barn, Stable, with all other edifices to the said
Message or Tenement belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or with the same
heretofore usually occupied; And also one garden, one orchard, three pieces or
parcels of land, meadow, and pasture, with their, and every of their
appurtenances, containig in the whole, by estimation, 10 acres of land and
pasture, more or less, situate, lying and being in the Parish of R. aforesaid,
and abutting upon the Kings highway toward the South and West, and the lands
of the heirs of F. A. toward the South and East, toward the land of A. M.
toward the North, and to the land of A. H. toward the North and East, as by
metes and bounds thereof they are set forth and well known; Which said
Message, and other the premises whatsoever, now are in the tenure or
occupation of one I. L. or of his Assigns; To have and to hold the aforesaid
Message or Tenement, with all and singular the edifices to the said Message
belonging, th'aforesaid three pieces or parcels of land, meadow, and pasture,
with all and singular edifices, with their appurtenances, and other the
premises whatsoever to the aforesaid I. T. his Heirs and Assigns, to the use
and behoof of the said I. T. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, To hold of the
chief Lords of the Fee thereof by services hertofore due, and of right
accustomed. And I the aforesaid T. P. and my Successors aforesaid, the said
Message or Tenement aforesaid, three pieces or parcels of land, meadow, and
pasture, and other the premises whatsoever, A general Warranty.
with all and singular the appurtenances to the said I. T. his Heirs and
Assigns, against me, mine Heirs and Assigns, and against all other men, do
warrant, and for ever defend, by these presents. In witness whereof, I the
aforesaid T. P. to this my present Writing have put to my Seal. Dated the first
day of May, in year, etc.

A Release upon a Deed of Feoffment.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, T. P. of T.
in the Parish of T. in the County of K. Greeting in our Lord God everlasting;
Know ye, me the aforesaid T. P. for, and in consideration of the sum of 60 l.
of good and lawful money of England, to me th'aforesaid T. P. by I. T. of the
aforesaid Parish of B. in the said County of K. Yeoman, beforehand well and
truly paid, and for diverse other good causes and considerations me hereunto
especially moving, have remised, released, and altogether for me and my Heirs
for ever quit claimed, by these presents, unto I. T. of K. aforesaid Yeoman, in
his full and peaceable possession and seisin, being to his Heirs and Assigns,
to the only and proper use and behoof of him the said I. T. his Heirs and
Assigns, for ever, all my right, title, claim, interest or demand, which I the
aforesaid T. P. have, or at any time had, or any ways hereafter may have, of,
or in one Message or Tenement, Barn, Stable, with all and singular edifices,
buildings, and other the appurtenances whatsoever to the said Message or
Tenement belonging, or in any wise appertaining; and of, and in one Garden, one
Orchard, three pieces or parcels of land, meadow, and pasture, with the
appurtenances, containing in the whole, by estimation, 16 acres of land,
whether more or less, situate, lying and being in the aforesaid Parish of B.
in the aforesaid County of K. abutting on the Kings high way there toward the
South and West, to the lands of the Heirs of F. A. to the South and East, to
the lands of A. M. toward the North, and to the lands of A. H. toward the
North and East; as by the metes and bounds thereof, as they are divided, are
set forth and well known: So that neither I the said T. P. nor my Heirs, nor
any other by us, for us, or in our right, and property, title, claim, interest,
or demand, of or in the said Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances
aforesaid, Barns, Stable, with all other edifices aforesaid, one Garden, one
Orchard aforesaid, three pieces of parcels of land, meadow, and pasture, with
the appurtenances, and of or in other the premises whatsoever, with their
appurtenances, nor in any part or parcel of the same, we may, or hereafter
ought to require, claim, or challenge, but from every action, right, title,
claim, use, interest, and demand in the same, we are altogether excluded by
these presents. In witness whereof, I the said T. P. to this present writing
have put my seal. Date^, etc.

A General Release.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, that I R. G. of R. in the County
of K. Yeoman, for diverse good causes and considerations me thereunto especially
moving, have remised, released, and quit claimed, and do by these presents, for
me, my Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, remise, release, and quit
claim unto W. M. late of P. In the County of S. Tanner, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, all and all manner of actions, both real, personal,
and mixed, and all, and all manner of Bills, Bonds, Obligations, Debts, or
Duties, Judgments, Executions, Accounts, and Demands whatsoever; And all and
all manner of Actions which I the said R. G. my Executors, Administrators, or
Assigns, have or had, may or can have against the said M. W. his Executors or
Administrators, in or upon Bill, Bond, or other Specialty, in the which the
said M. W. solely or jointly with the other stands bound unto me the said R.G.
and all other controversies and debates whatsoever, which I the said R. G. my
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, have, may, might or shall have, for any
cause or matter whatsoever, from the beginning of the word until the present
day of the date of these presents. In witness whereof, I the said R. G. my
hand and seal hereunto have put. Dated the fourteenth day of January, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants to stand seized to uses in consideration of natural
affection, etc.
THis INDENTURE made, etc. Between T. B. of S. in the County of K. Yeoman, of
the one part, and I. B. of S. aforesaid Yeoman, one of the Sons of the said T.
B. on the other part, Witnesses, That whereas the said T. B. is lawfully
seized in his demean, as of Fee, of and in one principal Mansion or message
with the appurtenances, commonly called and known by the name of little A. or
by whatsoever other name or names the same is, or at any time heretofore has
been called or known by, together with all and singular Buildings, Barnes,
Stables, Outhouses, Lodges, Orchards, Yards, Gardens, and all other profits,
commodities, and easements to the said mansion or message belonging or
appertaining, and also of and in 19 pieces or parcels of Land, Meadow, Pasture
and Wood-ground, with th'appurtenances, containing in the whole, by estimation,
60 acres of Land, Meadow, Pasture, and Wood-ground, with th'appurtenances,
whether more or less, situate, lying and being in the said Parish of S. in
said County of K. upon the Demeans of A. and L. and which now are, or late were
in the several tenures and occupations of the T. H. and N. W. their, or either
of their Assignee or Assignees, and the said premises do bound and abutt in
manner and form following (that is to say) to the Queens high street leading
between N. and S. toward the North, to the lands which were sometimes one I.
P. and now of R. L. Gentleman, and to certain other Lands of the said T. B.
toward the West, toward the Lands of T.S. South, and to other lands of the
said T. B. toward the East, South, and North, as the metes and bounds thereof
do divide, mete, and show: Now the said T.B. for and in consideration of the
natural love and affection, which he the said T. B. has and bears unto his
said Son I. B. and for the advancement and maintenance of him the said I. B.
and preferment to his Heirs, and also for the establishment, and settling of the
said Message, Lands, and Tenements, and other Hereditaments in these presents
before specified and contained, according to the true intent and meaning of him
the said T.B. and for diverse other effectual and motive considerations him the
said T. B. the Father toward his said Son especially moving and inciting, does
for him, his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, covenant, grant, conclude
and agree, to and with the said I.B. his Heirs and Assigns, that he the said
T.B. his Heirs and Assigns, and every other the person or persons, which now,
or at any time hereafter shall be seized of and in the said Mansion or
Message, with the appurtenances, and of, and in all and singular Lands,
Tenements, Meadows, Pastures Wood-grounds, and all and every other the premises
before mentioned, with all and every their appurtenances, and of and in every
part and parcel thereof, and of and in the reversion and reversions, remainder
and remainders thereof, and every part and parcel thereof, shall stand and be
seized to the uses, intents and purposes, hereafter limited and appointed, and
to no other use, intent and purpose whatsoever, that is to say, to the use and
behoof of him the said T. B. during the term of his natural life, and after the
decease of him the said T. B. to the use and behoof of the said I. B. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever: Covenant, that all conveyances made, or to be made, shall
be to the uses in these Indentures expressed, and to no other use or intent.
And it is fully covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed upon, by and
between the said parties to these presents, and every of them, and the said T.
B. does for him, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, covenant, grant, and agree,
to and with the said I. B. that all and singular Fines, Recoveries, Feoffments,
Alienations, Conveyances, and all other Conveyances and Assurances whatsoever
of the said premises, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel
thereof, now and at all times hereafter to be made, shall be and inure, and are
by these presents appointed, limited, and declared to be and inure to such use
and uses as are by these presents before limited, appointed, and declared, and
to no other use or uses, intent or intents whatsoever. In witness whereof, the
parties abovenamed to these present Indentures their hands and Seals
interchangably have put, the day and year first above-written: Anno. Dom. etc.

An Obligation conditioned for the release of an Annuity.
Neverint universi per praesentes, nos, etc.

THe Condition of the within written Obligation is such, That whereas the
within bounden I. H. and W. A. have by their release bearing date with these
presents, remised and released unto the within named R. S. a certain Annuity or
yearly rent of Thirteen shillings and fourpence, yearly issuing or going out of
two pieces or parcels of land of the said R. S. containing, by estimation, 4
acres, situate, lying and being in R. aforesaid, as by the said Deed more at
large appears; If therefore the said R. S. his Heirs and Assigns, shall or
may, from time to time, and at all times hereafter, have, hold, and enjoy the
said two pieces and parcels of land, ou^ of which the said Annuity or yearly
rent of Thirteen shillings and four pence is issuing as aforesaid, acquitted
and discharged of the said Annuity or yearly rent, without and lawful let,
interruption, expulsion, or eviction of them the said I. H. and of M. now his
Wife, and of the said W.A. and of A. now his Wife, and without any lawful let,
interruption, expulsion, or eviction of the Heirs or Assigns of them the said
M. and A. and of all other person or persons, claiming in, by, from, or under
them the said I.H. and M. his Wife, and by the said W. A. and A. his Wife, or
in, or by, from, or under any of them, and the Heirs or Assigns of them, or any
of them; That then this present Obligation to be void, frustrate, and of none
effect; Or else to stand, be and remain in his full force, power, strength and
virtue:

An Indenture of sale of Woods, with a proviso of Redemption.
THis INDENTURE made, etc. Between I. W. of B. in the County of K. Yeoman, of
the one part, and P. F. of B. in the said County of K. of the other part,
Witnesses, that the said I.W. has granted, bargained, and sold, and does by
these presents for him, his Heirs, and Assigns, grant, bargain, and sell unto
the said P. F. his Executors and Assigns, all and singular Woods, Underwoods,
Timber, and Timber Trees, standing and growing in and upon two pieces o^
parcels of Wood-grounds, situate, lying and being in the parish o^ B in the
said County of K. and belonging and apertaining unto one M^ssuage, Farm or
Tenement, now in the occupation of the said P.F. or together with the said
M^ssuage, Farm or Tenement now occupied and enjoyed, and one piece or parcel of
the said Wood-ground, whereupon the said Woods, Underwoods, and Timber, do
stand and grow, containing, by estimation, 16 acres, and abutteth and boundeth
unto certain Wood-grounds of R.S. and to the Lands of I.C. toward the East, to
the lands of I.S. toward the West, to the Queens high street there toward the
North, and unto the lands of the said I.W. in the South, and the other piece or
parcels of Wood-ground, whereupon the said Woods, Underwoods, and Timber trees
do stand and grow, containing, by estimation, 8 acres, and abutteth and
boundeth unto the lands of I.C. toward the South and West, and unto the lands
of I. W. and I. S. toward the East, and unto the lands of I. C. toward the
North; To have and to hold the said Woods, Underwoods, Timber, and Timber
Trees, now standing and growing in and upon the said two pieces or parcels of
Wood-ground, unto the said P.F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, unto
the proper use of the said P.F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns; The
said woods, under-woods, and timber, to be cut and carried away, within the
space of 4 years next after the date of these presents, and not after the said
space. Proviso, that the bargainee, etc. shall not cut down, or appoint to be
cut down, the said woods, etc, (without license of the bargainer first had)
until after such a time. Proviso, that if the bargainer, etc. pay such a sum,
or if he fail of payment of that, if he shall pay such a sum, that then this
bargain and sale shall be void.
The said Woods, Underwoods, Timber and Timber Trees, to be sold, cut down, and
carried away, off and from the said Wood-ground, within the space of 4 years
next ensuing the date of these presents, and not after the sad space and time;
Provided always, and upon condition that the said P. F. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, shall not fell nor cut down, or cause, or appoint
to be felled or cut down in the said Woods, Underwoods, Timber, and Timber
trees, nor any part or parcel thereof (without the assent, consent, or license
of the said I.W. in writing first had and obtained) until after the first day
of January, which shall be in the year of our Lord God according to the Church
of England, etc. Provided always, and it is conditioned, That if he the said
I. W. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or any of them, shall
well and truly pay, or cause to be paid, unto the said P. F. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, at or in the porch of the Parish Church of B.
abovenamed, the sum of, etc. of, etc. at or upon the, etc. which shall be next
and ensuing the date hereof, or if he the said I. W. his Heirs Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall fail to make payment of the said, etc. at or
upon the, etc. Then if he the said I.W. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, or any of them, in or at the place aforesaid, shall pay, or cause to
be said unto the said P. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the sum
of, etc. of, etc. That as well this present grant, bargain, and sale of all and
singular the said Woods, Under-woods, Timber, and Timber Trees above specified,
and every part and parcel thereof, as also this present Indenture, and every
covenant, clause, article and agreement in the same specified and contained,
shall be utterly void, frustrate, Covenant, that the bargain^e under the
conditions before expressed, shall, during the time limited, enjoy the woods,
etc. without interruptio^ of him, or any person claiming under him, and that he
shall have free ingress, egress, and regress, for Horse, Cart, etc. to cut and
carry away the same.
and determined to all intents and purposes whatsoever; And the said W does for
himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, covenant and grant,
to and with the said P. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assign, that he
the said P. F. his Executors and Assigns, shall and may under the condition and
conditions, proviso and provisoes before specified, during the time and term
above by these presents limited, have and enjoy the said Woods, Underwoods,
Timber, and Timber Trees, now growing and standing upon the premises, and the
fall and shore of them, without any let or interruption of the said I. W. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or of any other person or persons,
clayming, or pretending to have any right, title, or interest, by, from, or
under him. And also that he the said P. F. his Executors and Assigns, and his
and their servants, and workmen, under the condition and conditions, proviso
and provisoes, before in these presents specified, shall and may have free
ingress, egress, and regress, into, and from the said two pieces and parcels of
Wood-ground, upon which the said Woods, Underwoods, Timber, and Timber Trees,
do stand and grow, and every of them, with Horse, Cart and Carriage, Covenant,
that the bargainee will ^ot fell, or ^^^se to be felled the said wood, etc. but
(...) seasonable times, according to the custom of the country where they grow.
at all times during the time aforesaid, for the selling, cutting down, hewing
and carrying away the aforesaid Woods, Underwoods, and Timber, at his and their
will and pleasure. And he the said P. F. does for him, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, covenant and grant, to and with the said I. W. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and ^ssigns, that he the said ^. F. his
Executors and Assigns, shall not fell, nor cause to be felled, any of the said
Woods, Underwoods, Timber. and Timber trees, but in due and seasonable time of
felling, according to the custom of the Country used in those parts, where the
said premises grow, And that the bargainee, etc. will not destroy the springs
after the fall of the woods, but will preserve the^.
and continue; And also that he the said P.E. his Executors and Assigns, shall
and will not hurt or destroy the sheats and springs which shall grow in and
upon the said premises after the fall of the said Woods as aforesaid, but shall
and will to his and their uttermost power, keep, save and preserve the same. In
witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture of the sale of Woods, with Covenants to cole the said Wood upon
the Ground, etc.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between T.P. of W. in the County of S. Gent. of
the one part, and T. G. of E. in the said County, Yeoman, of the other Party,
Witnesses, that the said T. P. for, and in consideration of the sum of, etc.
of, etc. to him the said T. P. by the said T. G. well and truly in hand paid,
whereof, and wherewith the said T.P. acknowledges himself to be fully
satisfied, contented and paid, and thereof, and of every part thereof, does by
these presents clearly acquit and discharge the said T. G. his Heirs,
Executors, and Administrator, has granted, bargained and sold, and by these
presents, does grant, bargain and sell unto the said, ^. G. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, all and singular the Woods, Underwoods, and Trees,
Grant of full power and license to fell, cut down, cleave out, hew, saw, cord
and cole the said wood, etc. at seasonable times, until the feast of, etc. and
to carry away the same, etc.
now standing, growing, or being in or upon the Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditament of the said T. P. hereafter mentioned; that is to say, in or upon
certain Lands called the F. lying together, and bounding to the Lands, etc. And
further, the said T. P. does by these presents, for him, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and unto him the said T. G. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns grants that it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said T. G. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to have full power
free liberty, license and authority, for him, his heirs, etc. to fell, cut
down, cleave out, hew, saw, cord and cole the said Wood, Underwoods, and Trees,
or any part thereof before by these presents meant and intended to be bargained
and sold, from time to time, and at all covenient and seasonable times, until
the Feast of, etc. which shall be in the year of our Lord, etc. And further to
have and enjoy free liberty, full power, license and authority from him the
said T. P. his Executors, to carry away all or any part of the said Woods,
Underwoods, or Trees before mentioned to be bargained and sold, from time to
time, and at all times conventent, and by convenient ways, And that it shall be
lawful for him to dig pits for sawing the timber, and colepits, etc. and to
take earth and dust for the making of the said coals, in places most
convenient, and least hurtful.
until the Feast of, etc which shall be in the year of our Lord God, etc. And
that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T. G. his Executors, etc.
from time to time, and at all times, until the Feast of, etc. which shall be in
the year of, etc to dig and make pits for the sawing of the said Timber, and
Cole-pits and Cole-places for making of the said Coals, and Colliers Lodges for
the workmen, and to take earth and dust room, and other things necessary for
the making and converting of the said Woods or any part thereof into coals upon
the said premises, in such place and places as shall be most meet and
convenient therefore, and least hurtful unto the said T. P. his Heirs and
Assigns. Covenant that the grantee will not cut down, or cause to be cut down
the Coppised woods, in unseasonable times; but at such time only.
And the said T. G. does by these presents, for him, his Heirs, etc. covenant
and grant to and with the said T. P. his Heirs and Assigns, That neither he the
said T.G. his Executors, Administrators, nor Assigns, nor any of them, shall
not fell nor cut down, or cause to be felled or cut down, any of the Coppised
woods in unseasonable time or times in the year; but only between the Feast of
Saint Michael th'Archangel, and the first day of May, in any of the said years;
And the said T. P. for him, his Heirs, etc. does by these presents covenant and
grant to and with the said T. G. his Executors, Covenant that the Grantee may
lawfully take and enjoy the said woods etc. without intertuptio^ of any person,
other than such part as ought to be paid for Tithes.
etc. that he the said T. G. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any
of them, shall or lawfully may have, take, and enjoy all and singular the said
Woods, Underwoods, and Trees before mentioned to be bargained and sold, and
every part and parcel thereof, with all such liberty, license, and authority,
as are before by these presents granted, according to the purport and true
meaning of these presents, without any lawful let or interruption of any
person or persons, other than such part thereof as shall ^or ought to be paid
for Tithes, if any such there shall be due; Proviso, that if any part of the
wood shall be upon the premises, after the Feast of, etc. that then, as to so
much, the bargain and sale to be void, and the bargainee to have the same to
his own use.
Provided always, that if any part of the said Woods or Trees beforementioned
to be bargained and sold, shall be remaining or lying upon any part of the said
premises, after the Feast of, etc. which shall be in the year of our Lord God,
etc. then for such, and so much thereof, this present bargain and sale to be
void, and it shall from thenceforth be lawful to and for the said T. P. his
Executors, etc. to take or have the same to his or their own use or uses. In
witness whereof, etc.

Obligation Conditioned, for the payment of Money.
Neverint Universi per Praesentes, nor, etc.

THe Condition, etc. That if they th'above bounden L. T. and I. T. or either of
them their, or either of their Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or
the Heirs, etc. of them or either of them, do well and truly content satisfy
and pay, or cause to be well and truly contented, satisfied and paid unto the
abovenamed T. C. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the sum of, etc.
of, etc. at or upon the, etc. which shall be in the year of our Lord God, etc.
at or in the South porch of, etc. That then, etc.

A Deed of Feoffment of a Message, Lodge, Garden, Orchard, etc. With general
Warranty.
TO all Christian People, etc. Greeting in our Lord God everlasting; Know ye,
that I the aforesaid T. H. for and in consideration, etc. to me the said T.H.
by L. T. of the aforesaid Parish of R. in the aforesaid County of K. Yeoman, in
hand well and truly paid, whereof I do acknowledge my self to be fully
satisfied and contented, and the said L.T. his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators thereof fully to be acquitted and exonerated by these presents,
have given, granted, delivered, infeoffed, and by this my present Writing
confirmed unto the aforesaid L. T. his Heirs and Assigns, one Message or
Tenement, with th'appurtenances, one Barn, one Hay-house called a Lodge, with
all edifices to the said Message belonging or appertaining, one Garden, one
Orchard, and 9 pieces or parcels of Land, Meadow, and Pasture, with
th'appurtenances containing in the whole, by estimation, 20 acres of Land,
Meadow and Pasture, be they more or less, situate, lying and being in the
Parish of R. in the aforesaid County of K. and abutting on a certain Lane
there, called M. lane leading between L. and N. toward the West, to the lands
of R. L. and R. S. toward the South, and the Lands of the said R.G. toward
the East and North, as by the met^s and bounds thereof they are divided, are
set forth, and well known; To have and to hold the aforesaid Message or
Tenement, with th'appurtenances, the aforesaid Barn, Hayhouse, called a Lodge,
the aforesaid Garden, Orchard, and the aforesaid 9 pieces or parcels of Land,
Meadow and Pasture, with th'appurtenances, and all other premises whatsoever,
with their and every of their appurtenances aforesaid, to the said L. T. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, to hold of the chief Lord of the Fee thereof, by
the services thereof heretofore due, and of right accustomed. And I the
aforesaid T.H. and my Heirs, the aforesaid Message or Tenement, with
th'appurtenances, the aforesaid Barn, Hay-house, called a Lodge, the aforesaid
Garden, Orchard, and the said 9 pieces or parcels of Land, Meadow, and Pasture,
with th'appurtenances, and other the premises whatsoever, with every of their
appurtenances, to the said L. T. his Heirs and Assigns, against me and my
Heirs, and all other men will warrant, and for ever by these presents defend.
In witness, etc.

Livery upon the Deed of Feoffment.

PEaceable possession and seisin of the Messuages, Lands, and ^^^er the
premises contained in this Deed, was delivered by the within-named T.H. to the
within-named P. W. and to his Heirs, according to the form and effect of this
Deed, in the presence of us whose names are underwritten.

And when it is by Attorney, thus.

PEaceable possession and sesin of all and every the premises in this Deed
contained, was delivered the 9th day of June, in the year within written, by R.
S. and N. B. within-named, Attorneys of the said I. D. within named, to the
raid E. H. according to the force, form, and effect of this Deed, in the
presence of those whose names are underwritten.

A Bargain and Sale, upon Condition for the payment of a certain sum of money,
upon a day, by the Rendor to the Rendee, with Warranty against all Men, in
manner and form of an usual Indenture of Morgage.
THis INDENTURE made, etc. Between W.L. of H. in the County of S. Yeoman, of
the one part, and T. S. of L. in the said County, Yeoman, on the other part,
Witnesses, that the said W. L. in consideration of the sum of, etc. of, etc.
to him the said W. by him the said T. S. before the ensealing and delivery of
these presents, well and truly in hand paid, whereof, and wherewith the said W.
L. acknowledges himself to be fully satisfied, etc. has given, granted,
bargained, and by these presents does give, etc. unto the said T. S. all that
the Site and Manor of L. with the appurtenances, lying and being in H.
aforesaid, and all and singular those lands, tenements, rents, services and
hereditaments whatsoever in H. aforesaid, being part, parcel, or member of, or
belonging to the said Site, or Manor of L. containing in the whole, by
estimation, etc. and all and singular the lands, tenements, and hereditaments
in L. aforesaid, called and known by the name of, etc. And further the said W.
L. has for the consideration aforesaid, given, granted, etc. unto the said T.
S. the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders of all and singular
the said Site and Manor, and of all other the premises before by these presents
mentioned to be bargained and sold; And all rents, services, and other thing
reserved upon, or payable by reason of any demise or lease of the said
premises, or any part thereof; To have and to hold all and singular the said
Site and Manor, etc. before by these presents mentioned to be bargained and
sold, with all and singular their appurtenances, unto the said T. S. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever; And the said W. L. does by these presents, for him, his
Heirs, etc. Covenant and grant to and with the said T. S. his Heirs, Covenant
that the bargainor is seized of a good and indefeasible estate in fee-simple,
and that he had full power in his own right to bargain and sell the premises.
etc. and every of them, in manner and form following; that is to say, that he
the said W. L. is at the time of th'ensealing and delivery of these presents,
and at the time of the first estate thereof to be made, executed, or conveyed
unto the said T. S. lawfully seized in his own right, and to his own use, of
and in the said Site and Manor of L. and of and in all and singular the Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, and other the premises before by these premises
mentioned to be bargained and sold, with the appurtenances, and of and in every
part thereof, in his Demesne, as of Fee-simple, of a good, sure, lawful,
rightful, absolute, and indefeasible Estate, without condition, morgage, or
limitation of use or uses, and at the time of th'ensealing and delivery of
these presents, has, and at the time of the first estate thereof to be made,
exempted or conveyed, shall have full, lawful, and rightful authority in his
own right, to bargain, sell, and convey the said premises, and every part
thereof, And that the premises are, and so shall continue, clearly acquitted
and discharged, or else sufficiently saved harmless, from all former Bargains,
Sales, Feoffments, etc. Charges, etc. except the Rents due to the Lords of the
Fee, and the Dower of the Mother of the Bargainer.
unto the said T. S. and his Heirs, according to the purport or effect of these
presents, and that the Site and Manor of L. and all other the Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, and premises beforementioned to be bargained and sold, at
the time of th'ensealing and delivery of these presents be, and from time to
time, and at all times hereafter, shall continue, remain, and be clearly
acquitted and discharged, or by the said W.L. his Heirs, etc. sufficiently
saved harmless, and indempnified, of and from all manner of Bargains, Sales,
Feoffments, Alienations, and from all manner of Estates, Tails, Uses, Statutes
Merchant and of the Staple, Recog. Judgments, Condemnations, Annuities,
Rent-charges, Rent-secks, Arrerages of Rents, Conditions, Forfeitures, Entries
or Re-entries for Condition or Conditions, broken Joyntures, Dowers, titles of
Dower, and of, and from all other interests, titles, charges, and encumbrances
whatsoever, before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, had, made,
done, committed or executed, or at any time hereafter before the time of the
making, executing, or conveying of the first estate of the said premises unto
the said T. S. to be had, done, made, committed, or executed by the said W. L.
his Heirs or Assigns, or by any other person or persons whatsoever; The rents
and services from henceforth to grow due, or payable for, the said premises, or
any part thereof, And that the bargainer shall peaceably hold, and enjoy the
premises, without any lawful evictio^, or disturbance of any person, except the
Lord of the Fee touching his Survey, and the Mother touching her Dower.
to the Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees thereof, and the Dower or title of
Dower, according to the course of the Common Law, of Eliz. Mother of the said
W. L. now Wife of M. F. only excepted. And further, that the said T. S. his
Heirs and Assigns, shall or may, from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
lawfully and quietly have, hold, and enjoy the said Site and Manor, and all
other the premises beforementioned to be bargained and sold, according to the
purport, and true meaning of these presents, without any lawful eviction or
expulsion, let, or disturbance of the said W. L. his Heirs or Assigns, or any
other person or persons; The Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the said
premises, touching only their Seigniory of and in the same, and not otherwise,
And the said Elizabeth touching only her Dower, or title of Dower, according to
the course of the Common Laws, Proviso, that upon payment of such a sum at such
a day, that the bargain and sale shall be void; and that it shall be lawful
for the bargainer to re-enter, etc.
of the endowment of W. A. deceased, and not otherwise, only excepted. Provided
always, that if the said W. L. his Heirs, etc. or any of them, shall, or
lawfully will well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said T.S. his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, in or upon, etc. next ensuing the date
of these presents, at or in, etc. the sum of, etc. without fraud or further
delay, that then, and from thenceforth, this present gift, grant, bargain and
sale, shall cease, be void, and of none effect; and that then, and from
thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said W. L. his Heirs
and Assigns, into the said Site and Manor of L. and into all other Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, and other the premises before by these presents
mentioned to be bargained and sold, to re-enter, and the same to have again,
repossess, and enjoy, as in his and their former estate, any thing before in
these presents contained to the contrary notwithstanding. And further, the said
W. L. does by these presents for him, his Heirs, And that if the bargainer fail
in payment of the said sum, etc. that he and all other persons, claiming any
interest under him, shall upon request, and at the cost and charges in the Law
of the bargainee, make further assurance, be it by Fine, Feoffment, etc.
etc. Covenant and grant to and with the said T. S. his Heirs, Executors and
Assigns, that if default in payment of the said sum of, etc. or any part
thereof, shall happen to be made by the said W. L. his heirs, etc. at the time
and place before limited for the payment thereof, contrary to the limitation
aforesaid, that then the said W. L. his Heirs and Assigns, and every other
person and persons whatsoever, any interest or thing having, or lawfully
claiming to have, of, in, or to the said Site or Manor of L. and other the
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and premises before mentioned to be bargained
or sold, or of, or into any part thereof, by, from, or under the said W. L.
shall and will, from time to time, and at all times, during the space of, etc.
next ensuing such default in payment, upon reasonable request, and at the costs
and charges in the Law of the said T. S. his Heirs or Assigns, knowledge, make,
do, execute, and suffer, or cause to be made, done, knowledged and executed,
all and every such act and acts, thing and things, devise and devises in the
Law whatsoever, for the further assurance, better surety, sure making, or
conveying to the said Site and Manor, and other the premises, and of the
absolute inheritance thereof, unto the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns, be it
by Fine, Feoffment, Recovery, with Voucher or Vouchers, Deed or Deeds, enrolled
or not enrolled, or by the inrollment of these presents, Release, Confirmation,
or otherwise, with Warranty against all men, or without Warranty, or by all,
any, or as many of the said assurances and conveyances, with Warranty against
all persons, or without Warranty, as by the said T. S. his Heirs or Assigns, or
by his or their learned Counsel in the Law shall be reasonably devised, or
advised and required; And further, that he within such a time after default in
payment, will deliver all the evidences concerning the premises.
And moreover, that the said W. his Heirs, Executors, or Assigns, shall and
will, within the half year next ensuing such default in payment of the sum of,
etc. (if default in payment thereof shall be made) well and truly deliver, or
cause to be delivered unto the said, T. S. his Heirs or Assigns, to the proper
use and behoof of him the said T. S. his Heirs and Assigns, all and singular
the Deeds, Evidences, Charters, Court-Rolls, Rentals, Terrors, and Writing,
touching or concerning only the premises beforementioned to be bargained and
sold, or touching any part thereof, or of any of them, as he the said W. L. or
any other person or persons, to his, or by his delivery, now has or have, or
may lawfully come by, without Suit in the Law, or then shall have, or may
lawfully come by, without Suit in the Law, whole, safe, uncancelled, and
undefaced. In Witness whereof, etc.

The Bargainer does Covenant with the Bargainee, that he is seized of an
Estate, in Fee, in his own Right, that he will free him from all Evictions,
etc. except from R. etc. and that he will make him further assurance, etc.
ANd the said W. B does by these presents, for him, his Heirs, etc. Covenant
and grant, to and with the said I. L. his Heirs, etc. in manner and form
following; that is to say, That he the said W. B. is at the time of the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, lawfully seized in his own right in
his Demean, as of Fee-simple, of and in the said Message, etc, and other the
premises before by these presents mentioned to be bargained and sold, with
th'appurtenances, of a good, sure, lawful, and rightful estate in Fee-simple;
And then had good rightful power, and lawful authority to bargain, sell, and
alien the said Message, and other the premises, with th'appurtenances, and
every part and parcel thereof, unto the said I. L. his Heirs and Assigns; And
that the said I. L. shall, or lawfully may from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, for ever, lawfully and quietly have, hold, occupy, and enjoy the
said Messuages, etc. without any lawful let, eviction, expulsion, or
disturbance of the said W. B. his Heirs or Assign, or of any other person, or
persons whatsoever; other than of and from such evictions and disturbances, as
by the Heirs or Assigns of R. B. late of B. in the said County deceased, shall
hereafter happen to be made by re-entry upon the said premises, according unto
a Condition in a certain Deed Indented, bearing date, etc. contained; by reason
only for and in default of payment hereafter by the said I. L. his Heirs or
Assigns, to be made unto the said Heirs or Assigns of the said R. B. deceased,
contrary to the form of the said Condition of one Annuity or yearly Rent of
payment, of, etc. hereafter in or by the said Indenture reserved, granted, or
payable unto the said R. B. his Heirs or Assigns, of some part thereof; And
that the said Message, etc. and all and singular other the premises before by
these presents mentioned to be bargained and sold, with th'appurtenances, at
the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, be, and so from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, shall continne, remain, and be unto the
said I. L. his Heirs and Assigns, clearly acquitted and discharged, or else
sufficiently saved harmless and indempnified, of, and from all and all manner
of Morgages, Feoffments, grants, alienations, Entails, Joyntures, Dowers,
Leases, Conditions of Statutes Merchant, and of the Staple, Recogn.
Rent-charges, Rent-secks, Arrerages of Rents, Judgments, Condemnations,
Executions, and of and from all other interests, titles, charges, and
encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, done, executed, committed or suffered by
the said W. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or by any other person or persons
whatsoever; The Rents and Services from henceforth to be due and payable to the
Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees thereof; And one yearly Rent or payment of,
etc. a year, due or payable unto one I. B. of S. aforesaid, and his Heirs; And
all re-entries by the Heirs and Assigns of the said R. B. hereafter to be made,
by virtue of the said recited Condition only, for, and in default of payment
after the ensealing and delivery of these presents by the said I. L. his Heirs
and Assigns, to be made by the Annuity or yearly rent, or payment of, etc. in
or by the faid recited Indenture reserved or payable, only excepted and
forep^sed. And also that the said W. B. and M. his Wife, and the Heirs and
Assigns of the said W. and all and every person or persons, anything in the
said Messuages and premises, or in any part thereof, having, or lawfully
claiming to have, by, from, or under the said W. B. his Heirs and Assigns,
shall and will, from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during the space
of, etc. next ensuing the date of these presents, upon reasonable request, and
at the cost and charges in the Law of the said I. L. his Heirs and Assigns,
knowledge, make, do, execute and suffer, or cause to be made, done, knowledged,
and executed unto the said I. L. his Heirs or Assigns, or to such other person
or persons, as he or they shall nominate and appoint; All and every such
further act and acts, thing or things, devise and devises whatsoever, be it by
Fine, Feoffment, Recovery with Voucher or Vouchers, Release, Confirmations,
with Warranty against all persons, or without Warranty, or by any, or as many
of these ways and means, or by any other lawful assurance, or assurances, as
by the said I. L. his Heirs or Assigns, or by his, or their learned Counsel in
the Law shall be reasonably devised or advised. And finally, the said W.B. does
by these presents, for him, his Heirs, etc. further covenant and grant, to and
with the said I. L. his Heirs, etc. that the said recited Condition in the said
recited Indenture contained, made or reserved for the payment of the said
Annuity or yearly rent, or payment of etc. is not, nor at any time heretofore
has been, by him the said W. his Heirs or Assigns broken, nor that the Heirs
or Assigns of the said W. B. nor any person or persons, may, or ought, for or
by reason of any default in payment of the said yearly rent, or payment of the
said, etc. nor for any other condition, cause, or matter whatsoever, heretofore
made, done, committed, executed, or suffered, enter or re-enter into the said
Message, or other the premises, or any part thereof, or lawfully defeat the
estate, interest or possession of the said W. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or of
the said I. L. his Heirs or Assigns, or any part thereof, in and to the said
Message and premises, or of in, or to, any part or parcel thereof. In witness
whereof, etc.

A Covenant that the Bargainer is solely seized of a rightful estate in Fee,
or Fee-tayl, the Reversion or Reversions not to the King.
ANd the said I. R. does by these presents, for him, his Heirs, etc. covenant
and grant, to and with the said I. G. his Heirs, etc. in manner and form
following, viz. That he the said I. R. at the time of the ensealing and
delivery of these presents is solely, lawfully, and rightfully seized of and in
the said Manor, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Services, and other the premises with
the appurtenances in his own right in his demean, as of Fee-simple, or in Fee
tail general, or as heir of the tail special of an absolute estate, without
condition or determination, otherwise than for default of issue of his body
lawfully begotten, with the reversion or reversions thereof in Fee-simple to
him and his Heirs, or to some other common person, and not to the Commonwealth,
etc. immediately appertaining, etc.

Covenants, that the Bargainer shall made satisfaction for so much of the
premises as shall be recovered from the Bargainee.
ANd further the said I. T. does by these presents, for him, his Heirs,
Executors and Assigns, covenant and grant to and with the said A. L. That he
the said I. T. his Heirs, etc. shall and will likewise from time to time, and
at all times, for ever, from and after the ensealing and delivery of these
presents, either well and sufficiently save, and keep harmless, as well the
said A. L. his Heirs and Assigns, as also the said capital Message, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments before mentioned to be bargained and sold, with
all and singular their appurtenances, of and from all and all manner of
Rent-secks, Arrerages of Rents, Statutes Merchant, and of the Staple, Recog.
Judgments, Executions, Forfeitures, Amerciaments, Intrusions, and of and from
all other interests, titles, charges and encumbrances whatsoever, before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents had, made, done, committed, or
executed, which at any time or times hereafter, before the full and perfect
execution of such good and perfect estate of the said premises, as by these
presents are meant to be had, made, done, executed and conveyed unto the said
A. L. his Heirs and Assigns, shall be had, made, done, committed or executed by
the said I. T. I. S. the Father, etc. or by either or any of them, or by the
right, estate, consent, means or procurement of them, or either, or any of
them; The said old and accustomed rents, customs, and services before excepted,
and the said Lease for term of years made unto the said I. L. always excepted:
Or else, if the said I. L. his Heirs or Assigns shall at any time or times
hereafter happen to be damnified by reason of the act or acts, person or
persons aforesaid, or every, or any of them, then the Vendor to make
satisfaction as follows, of any the Rents, Arrerages, Statutes, Recog.
Judgments, Executions, Fines, Issues, Americiaments, Intrusions, Interests,
Titles, charges, or encumbrances last before recited (except before excepted)
That then and so often he the said I. T. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, or some of them, shall and will, after such damnification had and
sustained, within the space of, etc. next after notice thereof, and request
therefore to be made to the person of the said I. or of his Heirs, Executors,
or Administrators, or else by open publication in the Parish Church of W. in
the said County upon some Sunday in the forenoon, in the presence of 10 of the
Parishioners of W. aforesaid, at the least, by the said A. L. his Heirs, etc.
or any of them, well and truly content, satisfy, and recompense or pay unto
the said A. L. his Heirs and Assigns, and his, and their, or one of their
Executors and Administrators, or some, or any of them, at one whole payment, at
or in the Church Porch of R. aforesaid, all such damages as the said A. his
Heirs or Assigns, thereby, or by reason of the same, then, or before that time,
shall have sustained, or then shall or may thereby sustain. And moreover, the
said I. T. for him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
covenanteth and grants, to and with the said A. L. his Heirs and Assigns, by
these presents, that if the said Freehold and Inheritaace of the said capital
House or Tenement, and other the premises before by these presents mentioned to
be bargained and sold, or any part thereof, shall at any time or times
hereafter happen to be by any former title grown or accrued before the delivery
of these presents, or by reason of any act or thing had, made, or done, or
suffered before the delivery of these presents, without fraud or covin, on the
part and behalf of the said A. L. his Heirs or Assigns, or any of them, by any
lawful Action, Suit, Judgment, Execution, or Entry lawfully recovered or
evicted from the said A. L. his Heirs or Assigns, or by any person or persons,
other then by the said I. T. and I. S. the Father, or either of them, and other
then by the Heirs and Assigns of them, or any of them, or claiming in, by,
from, or under them, either, or any of them, and other then by the Ancestor or
Ancestors of the said I. T. his Heirs or Assigns, or any of them, That then the
said I. T. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall and will,
after such recovery, eviction, or expulsio^, within the space of etc. next
ensuing such notice thereof as aforesaid given, well and truly pay, or cause to
be paid, unto the said A. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their, or one of
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at or in the Porch of the Parish
Church of R. aforesaid, in manner and form following, that is to say, so many
sums of, etc. of, etc. as there shall be acres of the premises before mentioned
to be bargained and sold, so recovered or evicted as aforesaid, (except the
capital message or tenement, if the same or any part thereof shall happen to
be as aforesaid recovered or evicted) or the said A. his Heirs or Assigns, to
be of the freehold or inheritance thereof as aforesaid, lawfully expulsed or
evicted, the sum of, etc. of lawful, etc.

An Indenture to lead the use of a Fine, of some part of the premises, and to
lead the use of a Recovery of the residue, the use of some part of the
premises, to be to the Vendee absolutely, and of the residue, but upon
Condition, for the assurance of certain money, hereafter to be paid by the
Vendee unto the Vendor.
THis INDENTURE made, etc. Between H. P. of, etc. of the one part, and I. F. of
the other part, Witnesses, That for and in consideration of, etc. And also for
diverse good causes and considerations hereafter mentioned, it is convenanted,
granted, concluded, condiscended, and fully agreed, by and between the parties
to these presents, and either of the said parties do by these presents, for
them, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, covenant, grant,
conclude and condescend in manner and form following, that is to say, That the
said H. P. shall before the first day of etc. next ensuing these presents, at
the costs and charges in the law of the said I. F. his Heirs and Assigns,
before the Justices of Common Pleas at West. acknowledge and levy one Fine sur.
cogniz. d. droit com ceo que il ad deson. don, with proclamations, according to
the form of the Statute in that case provided, That part of the Indenture which
is to lead the use of the Fine.
in due form of Law to be levied unto the said I. F. of all that his house,
water-mill, and parcel of ground, containing by estimation one acre, situat and
being in B. in the said County of S. aforesaid, by such number, names of acres,
and quantity of land, as in the said Fine, so to be levied, shall be contained;
which said Fine so to be levied, and the execution thereupon to be had, shall
be to the only use and behoof of the said I. F. his Heirs and Assigns for ever,
and not to any other use or uses. And further, that he said I. F. shall, before
the first day of, etc. next ensuing the date of these presents, at the costs
and charges in the Law of the said I. F. purchase and sue forth against him the
said H. P. one original writ of E^tre sur disseisin in l' post retornable
before the said Justices of the said Court of Common Pleas, That part which is
to lead the use of the Recovery.
to demand against him the said H. all those the Manors, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Underwoods, Rents, Services and
Hereditaments, called or known by the name of B. with the appurtenances,
situat, and being in S. aforesaid, and all other the messuages, lands,
tenements, meadows, pastures, feedings, woods, commons, ways, waters, rents,
reversions, services, Court leets, liberties, and all other hereditaments,
whatsoever they be, lying and being in S. aforesaid, which A. P. Father of the
said H. sometimes purchased and had of I. F. Esquire by certain names, number of
acres, and quantity of land, to be in the said writ contained, unto which said
wri^, so to be purchased, the said H. P. shall appear gratis, and vouch to
warranty the common Vouchee, who shall likewise appear gratis, enter into the
warranty and plead, and after make default, and that there upon judgment to be
given, that the said I. F. shall recover the said Manor, messuages, lands,
tenements, hereditaments, and all other the premises, with the appurtenances,
against the said H. P. and the said H. P. shall recover in value against the
common Vouchee, so that a perfect recovery may be thereupon had, and that both
the said parties to these presents, and the said common Vouchee, shall at the
costs and charges in the Law of the said I. F. make, do, and execute all and
every matter and thing whatsoever, meet, necessary, or expedient, for the
prosecution of the said recovery, according unto the course of common
Recoveries with single Voucher in such cases, which said recovery so to be had
and executed, and the execution thereof, and the said Manor, messuages, lands,
tenements, hereditaments, and all other the premises, shall be to the only use
and behoof of the said I. F. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. Provided, that if
the said I. F. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, Proviso, that
if the recoverer fail in payment of such a sum, that then the use limited to
him to be void.
shall not well and truly content and pay, or cause to be well and truly
contented, satisfied and paid unto the said H. P. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, in, or upon the, etc. which shall be, etc. the sum
of, etc. at or in the now dwelling house of the said H. P. situate in H.
aforesaid, but in payment thereof, or of some part thereof, shall make default,
contrary to the effect, intent, and true meaning of these presents, that then
and from thenceforth the uses before limited, of, or concerning the said
Manor-house, or principal messuages or tenements, also of or concerning all
those lands, etc. shall cease and determine, and the then and from thenceforth
the said Manor-house, etc and the said Recovery thereof as aforesaid to be had
and executed, and the execution thereof to be taken, for and concerning only so
much of the said premises as are before mentioned to be bounden out, and the
use thereof, and all and every other person and persons that shall stand or be
seized thereof, or of any part thereof, shall from and after such default in
payment, to be as aforesaid made by the said I. F. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, or any of them, of all or any part of the said sum
of, etc. stand and be thereof seized to the only use and behoof of the said H.
P. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and not to any other use or uses, and the
said H. P. for him, Covenant, that the land under the condition aforesaid is
and shall continue, either acquitted or saved harmless from all former
bargains, etc. except the condition aforesaid, and the rents due to the Lord of
the Fee.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does by these presents
covenant and grant to and with, etc. in manner and for following, that is to
say, that the said Manor, Message, etc. at the time of the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, be, and so from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, under the said proviso and condition before mentioned, shall remain,
continue, and be, unto the said I. F. his Heirs and Assigns, according to the
limitation and use aforesaid, either clearly acquitted, and discharge, and
sufficiently saved harmless, of and from all, and all, and all manner of
former bargains, sales, gifts, alienations, Leases, Conditions, etc. whatsoever
before had, made, done, executed or committed by the said H. P. his Heirs or
Assigns, or by H. P. Esquire deceased, Father, etc. his Heirs or Assigns, or by any
other persons or persons by their consent, means, or procurement, or either of
them, or by reason or means of any other act or thing whatsoever, Or else that
the recoveree will, if the recoverer shall be lawfully expulsed, except by such
encumbrances before excepted, within, etc after notice of such expulsio^, pay
so much, as the recoverer shall be damnified thereby.
heretofore, or before the making or conveying of the first estate or assurance
of the said premises to the said I. F. to be had, made, done, executed, or
committed, by the said H. F. his Heirs or Assigns, or by any other person or
persons whatsoever, by his or their consent, means or procurement; All such
encumbrances which are or shall be, or happen, by reason or means of the said
proviso; And the rents, payments, and services from henceforth to grow due or
payable, for or by reason of the premises, or any part thereof, to the Lord or
Lords of the Fee or Fees thereof, and one Lease heretofore made by the said H.
of a Tenement, etc. which upon the yearly rent of, etc. is reserved, and shall
or ought to be payable, during the term yet to come, unto the said I. F. his
Heirs and Assigns only excepted; or else that if, and as often as the said I.
F. his Heirs and Assigns shall at any time or times hereafter happen to be,
without fraud or covin, lawfully expulsed or evicted, of all, or any part of
the said Manor, Messuages, etc. except by reason of such encumbrances as be
before excepted; That then, and so often, the said H. P. his Heirs, Executors
of Assigns, shall and will within, etc. next after notice to him, or any of
them given, by the said I. F. his Heirs or Assigns, of any such eviction,
expulsion, or damnification (except before excepted) well and truly pay and
satisfy unto the said I. F. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
so much as the said I. F. his Heirs or Assigns shall sustain, or be damnified,
by means of any eviction, expulsion, or damnification, upon, or by reason of
any the encumbrances aforesaid (except before excepted.) And further, the said
H. P. does by these presents, for him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and every of them, Covenant, to make further assurance of the
premises, other than of the Lands contained under the proviso.
Covenant and grant, to and with the said I. F. etc. that he the said H. P. his
Heirs and Assigns, and all and every other person or persons whatsover, any
estate, interest, or thing having, or lawfully claiming, in all or any of the
said Manor, Messuages, etc. or any part thereof, by, from, or under him the
said H. P. his Heirs or Assigns, other than the said I. R. concerning the said
interest or lease before excepted, shall and will from time to time, and all
times hereafter, during the space of, etc next ensuing the date of these
presents, upon reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of
the said I. F. his Heirs or Assigns, knowledge, make, do, execute and suffer,
or cause to be made, done, knowledged and suffered, all any very such further
and reasonable act and acts, thing and things, devise and devises in the Law
whatsoever, for the further assurance of the said premises, And that if the
Recoverer do pay the money according unto the proviso, that then the Recoveree
will make further ass^rance likewise of these lands.
or any part thereof, according to the purport, and true meaning of these
presents, other than the said Manor-house, etc. And such part and parcel of the
said premises, as is before bounden, and limited out, be it by Fine, Feoffment,
etc. And further, if the said I. F. his, etc. or any of them, shall well and
truly content, and pay, or cause to be well and truly contented and paid, unto
the said H. P. his Executors, etc. the said sum of, etc. according unto the
purport and true meaning of the said proviso, at the time and place limited for
the payment thereof, that then the said H. P. his Heirs and Assigns, and all
and every other person and persons whatsoever, any estate, interest or thing
having, or lawfully claiming to have, of and in all, or to any part of the said
Manor, Messuages, etc. before by these presents mentioned to be bounded out,
shall and will from time to time, and at all times after the payment of the
said sum of, etc. according to the said proviso, during the space of, etc. next
ensuing such payment, at the costs and charges in the Law of the said I. F.
etc. knowledge, do, make, execute, etc. for the further absolute assurance,
better surety, and surer making and conveying of the said Manor-house,
Messuages, etc. before mentioned to be boundent out, be it by Fine, Foeffment,
etc.

An Indenture to lead the use of a Fine, and Recovery.
THis INDENTVRE Tripartit, made, etc. Between I. G. of etc. of the first party;
R. R. of, etc. of the second party; and T. A. of, etc. of the third party,
Witnesses, that for diverse good causes and considerations it is covenanted,
granted, concluded, condiscended, and fully agreed upon, by and between all the
said parties to these presents, and either of the said parties do by these
presents, for the^, their heirs, etc. covenant, grant, conclude, condescend,
and fully agree to and with the other, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, in manner and form following, that is to say, that the said I. G.
shall and will before the, etc. next, etc. at his own proper cost and charges
in the Law, before the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster,
knowledge one Fine, sur cognizance, d. dr^it come ceo, que il ad d. son done
unto the said R. R. and T. B. with Proclamations according to the form of the
Statute in such case made and provided in due form of Law to be levied, of all
that the Messuages, etc. situat, lying and being, in the Parish of H. in the
said County of K. now in the tenure or occupation of A. T. the younger and
sometime were the lands, tenements and hereditaments of W. H. deceased by
certain names, number of acres, and quantity of land in the said Fine to be
contained. By which fine, the said I. G. shall acknowledge the said Messuages,
etc. and all and singular other the premises, with th'appurtenances, to be the
right of the said R. R. and T. B. as those which the said R. R. and T. B. shall
have of the gift of the said I. G. and the same shall remise, release, and quit
claim unto the said R. R. and T. B. and their Heirs forever; which said Fine so
to be acknowledged and levied, and the execution thereupon to be had and taken,
and the said Messuages, etc. shall be adjudged, deemed, and taken to be, and
every part and parcel thereof, to the only use and behoof of the said R. R. and
T. B. their Heirs and Assigns for ever; and not to any other use. And further,
that the said R. R. and T. B. shall after the said Fine so to be acknowledged
and levied, permit and suffer the said T. A. party to these presents, and I. G.
to purchase and sue forth against them the said R. R. and T. B. one Writ of
Entry sur disseisin en l' post, etc. and thereby to demand against them the said
R. R. and T. B. the said Messuages, and all other the premises, with the
appurtenances, by certain names, in the said Writ to be contained, unto which
said Writ so to be purchased, the said R. R. and T. B. shall appear gratis, and
Vouch to warrant the said I. G. which said I. G. shall likewise appear gratis,
and enter into Warranty, and plead, and after make default, and that thereupon
judgment shall be given that the said T. A. party to these presents, and the
said I. G. shall recover the said Messuages and other the premises with the
appurtenances, against the said R. R, and T. B. and that they shall recover
over in value against the said I. G. and that he shall recover in value against
the Common Vouchee, so that a perfect recovery thereupon be had: And that all
the said parties to these presents, and the said Common Vouchee, shall make,
do, and execute all and every matter and thing, mere, necessary, and expedient
for the prosecution of the said Recovery, according the course of common
recoveries with double Voucher in such case used, which said Recovery so to be
had and executed and the execution thereof, shall be and inure to the only use
and behoof of the said I. G. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and not to any
other use, intent, or purpose. In witness, etc.

An Indenture to lead the use of a Fine only.
THis INDENTURE made, etc. Between L. R. of etc. of the one part, and W. R. of,
etc. of the other part, Witnesses, that it is covenanted, etc. by and between
the parties to these presents, and the said L. R. for her, her Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does covenant, etc. in manner and form
following, that is to say, that she the said L. R. shall and will before the
Feast of, etc. by Fine in due form of Law to be levied in the Court at
Westminster before the Justice of the Common Pleas, with Proclamations,
according unto the form of the Statute in that case provided, acknowledge all
that the Barn, etc. hereafter mentioned, that is to say, one Barn, etc. in W.
aforesaid, whether more or less thereof there be had, called and known by the
names, etc. and bounding and abutting in manner and form following, that is to
say, by such names, number of acres, and quantity of Land, Meadow and Pasture,
as in the said Fine shall be mentioned to be the right of the said W. R. as
that which the said W. R. has of the grant of the said L. and that the said
Fine so to be levied, and the execution thereupon to be had or taken, shall be
to the only use and behood of the said W. R. his Heirs and Assigns, and not to
any other use or uses. In Witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture to lead the use of a Recovery.
THis INDENTURE Quadrupartit, made, etc. Between H. P. of, etc. of the first
party; T. P. of, etc. of the second party, I. T. and I. S. of the third party,
and A. P. of etc. Widow, late wife of T. P. deceased, of the fourth party;
Witnesses, that for diverse, etc. it is covenanted, etc. by and between the
said parties to these presents, and either of the said parties do by these
presents covenant, etc. to and with the others, in manner and form following,
that is to say, that the said I. T. and I. S. shall on this side, and before
the Feast of, etc. next ensuing, etc. purchase and sue forth out of the high
Court of Chancery, one original Writ of enter sur disseisin in l' post against
the said H. P. retornable before the said Justices, etc. at a certain time in
the said Writ to be mentioned, and by the said Writ shall demand against the
said H. P. all the Lands, etc. Situate, lying and being in H. and W. or in
either of them, in the said County of S. called or known by the name of, etc.
or by whatsoever other name or names the same been called or known, or as part,
parcel, or member thereof, reputed, esteemed, or taken, containing in all, by
estimation, etc. whether more or less, and also all and singular other the
premises, with th'appurtenances, in H. W. aforesaid, or in either of them,
which the said H. P. late purchased, or had of the gift or grant of the said T.
P. party to these presents, by certain names, number of acres, and quantity of
land in the said Writ to be specified, unto which said Writ the said H. P.
shall appear gratis, and take upon him the Tenancy of the said Lands,
Tenements, and other the premises, with the appurtenances, and Vouch to
warranty the said T. P. party to these presents, who shall likewise appear
gratis, and after shall make a departure in despite of the Court, so that
judgment shall be thereupon given, that the said I. T. and I. S. shall recover
the said Lands, etc. and other the premises in the said Writ to be contained
against the said H. P. and that the said H. P. shall recover in value against
the said T. P. party to these presents, and the said T. P. party to these
presents shall recover in value against the said Common Vouchee, and that
execution of the said recovery so to be had shall be made according unto the
form of common recoveries in such case used. And further the said I. T. and I.
S. H. P. and T. P. parties to these presents, and the said Common Vouchee, and
either and every of them, shall and will make, do, knowledge, execute, and
suffer, all and every such act and acts, thing and things whatsoever, meet,
necessary, or expedient for the prosecution of the said Recovery, and the
Execution thereupon, according to the form and order of Common recoveries, with
double Voucher in such cases used. And it is further covenanted, etc. by and
between all the parties to these presents, and either of the said parties does
by these presents, covenant, grant conclude, condescend, and fully agree, to
and with the other, in manner and form following; that is to say, that the said
Recovery of all and singular the lands, etc. and the execution thereof, and all
the Lands, etc. and other the premises, shall for ever, immediately from and
after the Recovery and Execution had, be, and remain, and all and every person
and persons, which now at the time of the said Recovery to be had, shall stand
or be seized of the said premises, or of any part thereof, shall stand and be,
of all and singular the lands, etc. and other the premises, or any part thereof
seized, to the only use and uses hereafter, expressed, and not to any other use
or uses, intents and purposes; that is to say, to the use of the said A. P. for
ever, during the natural life of her the said A. and after her decease to the
use and benefit of the said H. P. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and not to
any other use or uses. In witness whereof, etc.

A Condition of an Obligation to perform an Arbitrament.
THe Condition etc. That whereas diverse and sundry controversies, suits,
strifes and debates, have heretofore been had, moved and stirred up, and yet
are depending between th'abovenamed T. C. and W. W. of etc. Brother of th'above
bounden R. M. for the ending of which said controversies, actions, suits and
debates, as well the said W. W. and the said T. C. as th'above bounden R. M.
who by Letter of Attorney from the said W. W. prosecuteth the said strifes,
have submitted themselves to the award, order, rule and judgment of P. M. of,
etc. and one R. B. of, etc. Arbitrators indifferently elected and chosen, as
well on the part of the said T. C. as on the part of the said W. W. and R. M.
to order, determine, and final end to make of all and all manner of
controversies, suits, strifes and debates whatsoever, heretofore had, being or
depending between the said T. C. and the said W. W. from the beginning of the
world until the present day of the date hereof; If therefore the said W. W.
and the said R. M. and either of them, their Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and
the Heirs, Executors and Assigns of any of them, do from time to time for ever
hereafter, well and truly stand to, perform, fulfill and keep the award, order,
and final determination of the said Arbitrators concerning the aforesaid
premises, so as the said award be made and yielded up in writing by the said
Arbitrators before, etc. That then, etc.

An Indenture for the assurance of Lands in Marriage, for the Jointure of the
Wife, with usual Covenants, for the better assurance of the same Lands.
THis INDENTURE made, etc. Between H. F. of, etc. of the one part, and R. T. of,
etc. of the other part, Witnesses, that the said H. F. does by these presents
Covenant and grant, to and with the said R. T. that he the said H. shall and
will, before the, etc. next, etc. marry and take to wife M. T. one of the
Daughters of the said R. T. if the laws of holy Church will permit, and the
said M. will thereunto agree. And the said R. T. does covenant and grant, to
and with the said H. F. that the said M. shall likewise before then said, etc.
next, etc. marry and take to Husband the said H. F. if the laws of holy Church
will that permit, and the said H. will thereunto agree. Covenant, that he is
seized of a sure and indefeasible estate, in Feesimple, in his own right, and
that he had full power to convey the Lands, according to the intent of these
presents.
And further the said H. F. does for him, his Heirs, etc. covenant and grant to
and with the said R. T. his Heirs, etc. that he the said H. F. is at the time
of th'ensealing and delivery of these presents, seized in his demean as of Fee
in his own right, of a good, sure, lawful, rightful, absolute and indefeasible
Estate in Fee simple, without condition, morgage, limitation or alteration of
use or uses, of and in all and singular the Messuages, etc. hereafter
mentioned, with th'appurtenances; that is to say, of and in all those parcels
of, etc. with all and singular their appurtenances, now in the tenure of, etc.
containing in all, by estimation, etc. and do lie and be in the Parish of, etc.
And that the said H. F at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these
presents, has full power and lawful authority in his own right to convey and
assign all and singular the lands, etc. and other the premises aforesaid, in
manner and form in these presents expressed, according to the intent of these
presents. And moreover, that the said H. F. does by these presents, for him,
his Heirs, etc. in consideration of the said marriage so to be had and
solemnized, and for the full and entire jointure of the said M. and in
recompense and satisfaction of all the Dower and title of Dower which she the
said M. may at any time hereafter claim, challenge, or demand, of, in, or out
of any Lands, etc. of the endowment of the said H. and for the advancement of
the said M. and of the Heirs males of the body of the said H. upon the body of
the said M. to be begotten; And for diverse other good causes and considerations
him thereunto moving, does covenant and grant, to and with the said R. T. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form following,
that is to say, that the said H. F. his Heirs and Assigns, and all, and every
other person and persons whatsoever, which at the time of th'ensealing and
delivery of these presents, stand, or be, or at any time hereafter shall stand
or be seized of, and in all, or any part of the said Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, and other the premises, shall immediately from and after the
said marriage solemnized, And that the lands are, and so shall continue
discharged or saved harmless, from all former bargains, etc. and encumbrances,
the Rents due to the Lords of the Fee, and one Lease of the premises excepted.
stand, and be, of all and singular the said Lands, tenements, Hereditaments,
and all other the premises, with th'appurtenances, seized to the only uses and
intents hereafter in these presents expressed or limited, and not to any other
use or intent; that is to say, to the use of the said H. F. and M. for, and
during the term of the natural lives of the said H. and M. and of the longer
liver of them, And of the heirs males of the body of the said H. upon the body
of the said M. lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such issue, to the
right heirs of the said H. F. for ever. And that the said Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises with th'appurtenances,
at the time of th'ensealing and delivery of these presents, be, and from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, shall continue, remain, and be clearly
acquitted, and discharged, or by the said H. F. his Heirs, etc. sufficiently
saved and kept harmless, and indempnified of and from all and all manner of
bargains, etc. and encumbrances whatsoever, before the ensealing and delivery
of these presents, had, made, don, knowledged, committed, executed, or
willingly or wittingly suffered, by the said H. F. his Heirs or Assigns, or by
any other person or persons whatsoever, the rents and services from henceforth
to grow due and payable for the premises, or any part thereof to the Lord or
Lords of the Fee or Fees thereof, And one Lease of, etc. whereupon the yearly
rent of, etc. is reserved, and shall during all the said term be payable, only
excepted and fore-prized; And moreover, that the said H. F. his Heirs and
Assigns, And that he will upon reasonable request make farther assurance.
and all and every other person and persons, any estate, interest, or thing
having, or lawfully claiming to have, by, from, or under the said H. of, in, or
to the said premises, or any part thereof, other than the said lease, for or
concerning any the said interest or term of years before excepted, and not
otherwise, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during
the space of, etc. next, etc. upon reasonable request, and at the costs and
charges in the law of the said R. T. his Heirs of Assigns, knowledge, etc. (ut
antea) or of any part thereof, to the said R. T. his Heirs or Assigns, as shall
be nominated or appointed to the uses and intents before in these presents
expressed, be it by Fine, Feoffment, Recovery with Voucher or Vouchers, etc.
(ut antea) as by the said R. T. his Heirs or Assigns, or by his or their
learned Counsel in the Law shall be reasonably devised, or advised and
required. And further, that the said H. F. shall not at any time or times
hereafter, make or convey, or procure to be made or conveyed, And that he will
not do, or cause to be done, any act or thing, whereby to defeat this
conveyance, so that the lands may not deseend, remain, and come, etc. according
to the limitation in this conveyance.
any estate or estates of the premises, or of any part thereof, to any person
or persons in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, or for term of life or lives, or make any
di^continuance of, nor otherwise defeat, avoid, or annihilate the estates
before in these presents limited, nor any of them, nor shall make, do, commit,
execute, or wittingly or willingly suffer to be done, made, committed or
executed, any act or acts, thing or things, devise or devises whatsoever,
whereby all or any part of the said lands, tenements, hereditaments, and other
the premises, shall not or may not be enjoyed, and continued, remain, descend,
come, and be according to the limitation aforesaid, and according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents. In witness whereof, etc.

A Bond to the Sheriff for appearance in Banco Regis.
Noverint, etc. nos, etc. tenevi, etc. I. S. Armiger, Vice-com. Com. K.
praedict. in, etc. solvend. eidem, etc.

THe Condition etc. that if the above-bounden I. D. shall and do appear before,
etc. at Westminster, Dis Sabbath^, prox. post Octab. Sancti Martini, to answer
to E.D. Widow, in a plea of Trespass upon the case, That then etc.

A Grant of an Executorship, and of all such goods, and other things, as the
Executor has, or ought to have, of the Testator, by the Executorship, or
otherwise: In which Grant are diverse Covenants.
THis INDENTURE made, etc. Between M. C. etc. Executrix of the last Will and
Testament of E. C. late of, etc. aforesaid Widow, deceased, of the one part, and
I. S. etc. aforesaid of the other part, Witnesses, that the said M. C. for and
in consideration of, etc. has given, granted, bargained and sold, and by these
presents does give, etc. unto the said I. S. his Executors Administrators and
Assigns, all and singular the goods, leases, chattels, both real and personal,
that were unto the said E. at the time of her decease belonging, which the said
M. has, or of right ought to have, as Executrix of the last Will of E. or
otherwise, and of all manner of debts, duties, advantages, commodities and
demands, which the said M. her Executors, Administrators or Assigns, has,
might, or ought to have, take, challenge, or demand, as Executrix of the last
Will of the said E. or otherwise, by virtue of the said last Will and
Testament. And further the said M. does for the consideration aforesaid, make,
constitute, and in the place and room of her, A large Letter of Attorney made
to the Grantee, his Executors and Administrators, to receive all moneys, debts,
and duties, and to commence all actions in all Courts for the same, at the suit
of the Executor in his name, and all such moneys, etc. to have to his own use.
her Executors and Administrators, appoint the said I. S. during his life, and
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, after his decease, to be the true
and lawful Attorney and Attorneys of her the said M. and of the Executors and
Administrators of her the said M. giving and granting unto the said I. S.
during his life, and unto his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, after his
decease, full power, and lawful liberty, license and authority, in the name of
her the said M. her Executors and Administrators, to take, have, ask, receive,
and levy all and singular such debts, duties, and demands which were due and
owing unto the said E. as Executrix of the said last Will, or otherwise which
she the said M. by force of the said Will, may ask, have, take, demand,
receive, recover, or levy; And further, that he the said I. S. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, shall, or may from time to time, and
at all times hereafter, in the name of her the said M. her Executors or
Administrators, commence any action or actions, suit or suits, plaint or
plaints, against any person or persons, in any Court or Courts whatsoever, or
any to Arrest for any debt, duty, matter, cause, or thing whatsoever, due,
owing, or accrued unto, or demandable by the said E. at the time of her
decease, and Attorney and Attorneys in the name of the said M. to make,
constitute, revoke, alter, remove, and change, And the same actions, suits,
plaints, and Arrests, or any of them, shall or may, in the name of the said M.
her Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at the costs charges in the Law of
the said I. S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, prosecute and follow,
until judgment and execution shall be thereupon had and made, And all and
singular such sum and sums of money, goods, chastels, debts and other things as
shall be so in the name of the said M. received, recovered, had or levied, by
the said I. S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall and may have,
hold, keep and retain in the hands of him the said I. S. his Executors and
Administrators, to his and their proper use and behoof, without any account or
other thing therefore unto the said Executors or Administrators of the said E.
yielding, rendering or paying, giving and granting unto her said Attorney, his
Executors and Administrators, full power and authority to do and execute all
and every act and acts, thing and things, touching and concerning the said
premises, in as large and ample manner in all respects, Convenant that the
Grantor has not made any gift, grant, bargain and sale, or release of any of
the Goods or Chattels, etc. nor any Release, Acquittance, etc. of any the
debts, duties, etc. but that he may take and receive them without disturbance,
revocation, etc.
as she the said M. can or might make, ^o, or execute. And further, that the
said M. does by these presents, for her, her Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, Covenant and grant to and with the said I. S. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form following, that is to say, That
she the said M. has not before th'ensealing and delivery of these presents,
made any gift, grant, bargain, sale, or release of any of the Goods or
Chattels, before by these presents mentioned to be bargained and sold, nor any
Release, Acquittance, or other discharge of any of the debts, duties, or other
things before by these presents mentioned to be granted, but that the said I.
S. his Executors. Adminstrators and Assigns, shall and may have and enjoy all
and singular the Goods and Chattels, before by these presents given, granted or
sold, and receive, have, take, recover, levy and enjoy, all and singular the
debts, duties, liberties and authorities, and other things before by these
presents mentioned to be granted, bargained, sold, or assigned unto him,
without any let or disturbance, or any revocation or adnihilation of the said
M. her Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or of any person or persons by
the procurement or assent of the said M. her Executors, Nor that she will not
release any such debt or duty, action or actions, etc. but that she will
justify all acts done by the Grantee etc. and suffer him, etc. to receive all
sums, etc. and take all goods, and chattels to his own use.
etc. And further, that she the said M. has not heretofore discharged or
released, any Debt, Duty, or other thing, which she, is Executor of the last
Will, or otherwise by virtue of the said last will, may, can, might, should, or
ought to have, take, demand, or recover; nor that she the said M. her Executors
Administrators or Assigns, nor any other by her or their consent or
procurement, shall or will, at any time or times hereafter, discharge or
release any such Debt or Duty, or any action or actions, suit, or plaint, that
shall or may be taken or commenced for any such Debt or Duties, but that she
the said M. her Executors and Assigns, shall and will from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, justify and allow, confirm and avow all and every such
action and actions, suit and suits, plaint and plaints, prosecutions, judgments
and executions, as her said Attorney or Attorneys, shall have, make, commence,
prosecute, sue or levy in her name, touching the premises, and permit and
suffer the Attorney to receive, take, and have to his, her, and their own use
and uses, all and every such sum and sums of money, goods, chattels, and other
things, as She, her Executors or Administrators ought to have, receive and
levy, as Executrix of the said Will, or otherwise by virtue of the said will.
And further, that she the said M. her Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
And further, that he will suffer the grantee, etc. to have the whole execuon of
the Will, etc.
shall and will, at all times, hereafter, permit and suffer the said I. S. his
Executors, Adminstrators and Assigns, from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, to have the whole execution of the said last Will, and all the
doings and dealings touching the same, and the administration of all the
chattels, goods, debts, evidences and leases, which were belonging to the said
E. at the time of her decease; And the said I. S. for him, his Heirs, etc.
covenanteth and grants, to and with the said M. her Executors, etc. by these
presents, that he the said I. S. his Executors, etc. shall and will well and
truly pay, and satisfy all the debts of the said E. deceased, and all the
legacies in the said Will contained, according to the true meaning of the said
Will; And therefore shall and will at all times hereafter, well and
sufficiently save and keep harmless the said M. her Executors and
Administrators. In Witness whereof, etc.

An assignment of a Statute-Staple whereupon execution has been had, and of
such lands as are thereby extended, with special Covenants.
THis INDENTURE made, etc. Between S. F. of, etc. of the one part, and T. R. of,
etc. of the other part, Witnesses, that whereas one I. W. of, etc. is, and
stands holden, and firmly bounden unto the said S. F. by one Recog, or Bond
obligatory, made according unto the form of the Statute lately made and
provided for the Recovery of debts, bearing date, etc. knowledged, taken and
sealed, before Sir I. L. Knight, Lord chief Justice of England, as by the said
Recognizance appears; And whereas the said S. F. has sithence the
acknowledgeing of the said Recognizance, sued execution thereof, and thereupon
has extended diverse and sundry the messuages, etc, lying in the said County of
S. which were unto the said I.W. at a certain value, and has had the said
Messuages, etc. lawfully delivered unto him in execution upon the said Recog.
by virtue whereof, he the said S.F. has been, and yet is, of the said
Messuages, etc. lawfully possessed; Now these presents witnesses, that the
said S.F. for, and in consideration of the sum of, etc. to him by the said R.T.
before the ensealing and delivery of these presents well and truly in hand
paid, whereof he acknowledges himself by these presents to be fully satisfied,
and thereof acquitted, etc. has granted, bargained, sold, assigned and set
over unto the said R.T. all singular the said Messuages, etc. with
th'appurtenances, which were as aforesaid executed and delivered unto the said
S.F. in execution, upon or by virtue of the said Recog. and all the estate,
right, title, interest, possession and term, which the said S.F. has, or of
right ought to have, of, in, or to all the said Messuages, etc. Together with
the said Recognisance, Extent and Execution, or either or any of them; To have
and to hold the said M^ssuages, etc. and all other the premises before by these
presents mentioned to be granted, sold, assigned and set over unto the said
R.T. his Executors and Assigns, from the East of, etc. next, etc. for and
during all such time, interest estate and term, as the said S. F. has, or
holds, or may, should, or ought to have, hold and enjoy the same to all
intents and purposes. Covenant that the Gra^tor has not done, nor that his
Executor shall not do, or cause to be done, any act or thing, whereby to
frustrate or avoid this grant or assignment.
And that the said S. F. does by these presents for him, etc. covenant and
grant, to and with the said R.T. his Executors, etc. That he the said S.F.
heretofore has not, nor that he, his Executors, etc. nor any by his or their
means or procurement, shall not, nor will no^ make, do, commit, procure or
execute, or cause to be made, done, committed, procured or executed, any act or
acts, thing or things whatsoever, whereby the said Recog. Extent and Execution,
or either or any of thein, is already, or hereafter shall be released,
discharged, frustrate, adnihilated or avoided, or whereby the said Messuages,
etc. and other the premises, or any part thereof, shall, may, or ought to be
evicted, taken, had or recovered from the said R.T. his Executors, etc. And the
said R.T. shall, or lawfully may from time to time, and all times hereafter,
have, hold and enjoy, And that the Grance shall enjoy the premises without
eviction or disturbance of the Grantor, or any one claiming under him.
all and singular the said Messuages, etc. with th'appurtenances, as aforesaid,
executed and delivered in execution, during, and by all such time as the said
S.F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, may, can, should, or ought to
have and enjoy the same, by virtue of the said Recog. Extent, and Execution, or
either of them, without any eviction or expulsion, let, or disturbance of the
said S.F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or of any other person or
persons, any thing therein, or in any part thereof, claiming, by, from, or
under him the said S.F. his Executors and Administrators or Assigns; And that
saved harmless from all encumbrances.
And that saved harmless of all grants, interests, charges and encumbrances,
had, made, or committed by the said S.F. his Executors, etc. or by his or their
means, assent, consent or procurement. And if the said I.W. shall at any time
hereafter pay, And that if the Obliger shall pay any money, or other things unto
the Grantor, that then he shall, within such a time, pay it to the Grantee, or
Assignee.
or cause to be paid unto the said S.F. his Executors or Assigns, any sum or
sums of money, or other thing whatsoever in part of satisfaction of the said
Recog. Extent and Execution, or either of them, or of the sum or sums of money
in the said Recog, contained, That then he the said S.F. his Executors or
Assigns, shall or will, within the space, etc. next ensuing such payment, well
and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said S.T. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, all such sum and sums of money, and other things,
which the said S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall so receive,
take or gain of the said I.W. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
without fraud, covin, or further delay. In Witness whereof, etc.

A Deed of Morgage with Warranty against the Morgager, and his heirs only.
TO all, etc. Know ye, me the said T.M. in consideration, etc. to me by one
I.G. of G. in the County of K. well and truly beforehand paid, whereof I
acknowledge my self to be fully satisfied and paid, and the aforesaid I.G. his
Executors and Administrators, to be ^^onerated and acquitted by these presents,
have infeoffed, delivered, and by this my present writing indented have
confirmed to the aforesaid I.G. all that Message, etc. in B. aforesaid, in the
County of S. wherein the aforesaid T.M. lately did inhabit and dwell, one Barn,
etc. in B. aforesaid, containing in the whole by estimation, etc. be they more
or less: All and every which aforesaid premises, with th'appurtenances,
sometimes were the lands, tenements, and hereditaments of one W.A. deceased, and
the rendition and renditions, remainder and remainders of all and singular the
aforesaid premises, with th'appurtenances, and of every part and parcel
thereof, To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, etc. and all other
the premises, with all singular the appurtenances before in these presents
mentioned to be delivered, or confirmed to the aforesaid I.G. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, to the only use and behoof of the said I.G. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, To hold of the chief Lord of the Fee thereof, by the services
thereof due, and of right accustomed. Proviso, that if the Feoffor, pay so much
money, that then this conveyance shall be void, and that it shall be lawful for
him to ^e-enter.
Provided always nevertheless, that if I the said T.M. my Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, do pay, or cause to be paid to the aforesaid I.G.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the sum of, etc. at or in the now
Market house of B. situate, lying and being in the said County of S^ in and
upon, etc. which shall be in the year of our Lord God, at an entire payment,
without any fraud or further delay, That then this present writing indented,
and all and singular things in the same contained, together with the seisin
upon the delivery thereof, shall cease and be frustrate, and remain of no force
in the Law; and that then and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to
and for me the said T.M. my Heirs and Assigns, into all and singular the
aforesaid lands, tenements, hereditaments, and other the premises, with the
appurtenances before by these presents mentioned to be delivered and confirmed,
and every parcel thereof to re-enter, and the same to have again, repossesse,
and reinjoy as in my former estate, any thing notwithstanding. And I the
aforesaid T. M. and my Heirs, all and singular the aforesaid premises, lands,
etc. and other the premises, with all singular the appurtenances to the
aforesaid I.G. his Heirs and Assigns, in manner and form and under the
Condition aforesaid, against me and my Heirs will Warrant, and for ever by
these presents defend. Warranty.
In witness, etc.

A Condition of an Obligation, for the enjoying the Lands morgaged, according
to the purport of the Deed, containing also the effect of diverse necessary
Covenants.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the above-bounden T.M. has by his Deed
Indented, bearing date, etc. enfeoffed the abovenamed I.G. of and in all that
Message or Tenement, with th'appurtenances, in B. etc. of one Barn, etc. To be
had and holden unto the said I.G. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, under a
certain proviso or condition in the said Deed Indented contained, for the
payment of, That the Feoffee shall enjoy the lands without any lawful
eviction, etc.
etc. unto the said I.G. etc. at a certain time and place in the condition of
the said Deed indented mentioned, as in and by the said recited Indenture more
at large it does and may appear; If therefore the said I.G. his Heirs and
Assigns, and every of them, shall and lawfully may, from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, peaceably, etc. have, hold, etc. the said Messuages, etc.
and all and singular other the premises, before by the said recited Deed
indented mentioned to be aliened, granted or confirmed, And that the lands are,
and shall continue discharged, or saved harmles from all alienations, etc. and
encumbrances other tha^ such encumbrances as are by the said Feoffment and the
rents due to the Lord of the Fee.
with all and singular their appurtenances, without any lawful eviction or
disturbance of the said T.M. his Heirs or Assigns, or of any by his or their
assent, means, etc. according unto the true meaning of the said Deed indented.
And the said Message, etc. and all and singular other the premises at the time
of th'ensealing and delivery of the said Deed indented, and of seison
thereupon, were, and so from time to time, and at all times hereafter, shall
continue, and be unto the said I.G. his Heirs and Assigns, clearly discharged,
or by the said T.M. his Heirs and Assigns, sufficiently saved harmless, and
indempnified of and from all estates, alienations, etc. and encumbrances
whatsoever, had, made, done, executed or committed by the said T.M. his Heirs
or assigns, other then such estates and encumbrances as been made or executed,
in or by the said recited Deed indented, and other than the rents and services
from henceforth to accrue due and payable for the premises to the chief Lord or
Lords of the Fee or Fees thereof. And further, if it shall happen, at any time
or times hereafter, that the said I.G. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or any of them, shall be lawfully evicted, expulsed, or put out of all
or any part of the said Message, etc. by any person or persons whatsoever, or
that the same, And that if the Land shall be lawfully evicted, that he upon
notice given thereof, will pay so much for every acre evicted, within, etc.
after notice given.
or any part thereof, shall be lawfully recovered from the said I.G. his Heirs
or Assigns by any person or persons, other than by means or reason of the said
Proviso in the said recited Dee^ indented contained, That then if he the said
T. M. his Heirs, etc. or any of them, do well and truly content and pay, or
cause to be well, etc. unto the said I.G. his Heirs, etc. the sum of, etc. and
so after the rate for every acre of the said premises, so as aforesaid to be
evicted or recovered from the said I.G. his Heirs or Assigns, within, etc. next
after such notice given of such eviction, expulsion or recovery by the said I.
G. his Heirs or Assigns, or any of them. And further, if default of payment of
the said, And that if default of payment be made contrary to the Proviso, that
then he, and all others claiming under him, will make further conveyance and
assurance.
etc. mentioned in the said Proviso of the said Deed indented, shall happen to
be made contrary to the purport of the said Proviso, That then if the said T.
M. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and all and every other
person and persons whatsoever, any estate, interest, or thing in the said
Message, etc. or any part thereof, having, or lawfully claiming to have, by
from or under the said T.M. his Heirs or Assigns, shall and will from time to
time, and at all times from and after such default in payment, during the space
of, etc. then next ensuing, upon reasonable request, and at the costs and
charges in the Law of the said I.G. his Heirs or Assigns, make, knowledge, do,
execute and suffer all and every such further Act and Acts, thing and things,
devise and devises in the Law whatsoever, for the further assurance, etc. and
all other the premises, according to the purport of the said Deed, Be it by
Fine, Feofment, etc., or otherwise, or by any other lawful or reasonable
assurance or conveyance in the Law, with Warranty only against him the said
T.M. his Heirs or Assigns, which by his or their learned Counsel in the Law,
shall be reasonably devised or advised and required. And furthermore, And that
he will, within, etc. after default in payment, deliver all the conveyances
concerning the premises.
that the said T.M. his Heirs or Assigns, shall or will, within, etc. next
after such default in payment, well and truly deliver, or cause to be delivered
unto the said I.G. his Heirs or Assigns, all and singular the Deeds, etc.
concerning the said premises, which the said T. M, or any to his use, or by his
delivery, now has, or which he the said T.M. his Heirs or Assigns, or any
other by his or their delivery, or to his or their use, then shall have
concerning the said premises, or any part thereof, That then, etc.

A Lease of Lands morgaged to the Morgager.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between T. M. of etc. of the one part, and I.G. of,
etc. of the other part, Witnesses, that the said I.G. for diverse good causes,
etc. has demised, etc. and by these presents does demise, etc. unto the said
T. M. all that the Message, etc. with th'appurtenances, before by these
presents mentioned to be demised unto the said T. M. his Executors, and
Assigns, from the day of the date of these presents, until the, etc. which
shall be, etc. yielding, etc. yearly unto the said I.G. his Heirs and Assigns,
the sum of, etc. upon the Feast of, etc. which shall be in, etc. And if it
shall happen the said yearly rent, or sum of, etc. or any part or parcel
thereof to be behind, in part, or in all, at the Feast aforesaid, in which the
same ought, For default of payment of the Rent nomine penae, and distress for
both, and power of deteiner until full satisfaction.
or is limited to be paid (being lawfully demanded) that then the said T.M. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns; shall forfeit, and does for him, his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, grant, promise, and agree, to forfeit,
lose, and pay unto the said I.G. his Heirs and Assigns, or any of them, the sum
of, etc. in the name of a pein; And that then and from thenceforth it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said I.G. his Heirs and Assigns, or any of them,
into the said Message, etc. or into any part or parcel thereof, to enter and
distrain, as well for the said rent of, etc. as also for the said, etc. to be
forfeited in the name of a pein, and the distress and Distresses there so had,
and taken from thence, saw-fully to lead, bear, drive and carry, and the same
to withhold, detain and keep, until he or they shall be as well of the said
Rent of, etc. as also of the sum of, etc. to be forfeited in the name of a
pein, together with his and their costs, losses, damages, and expenses, by
reason of the non-payment sustained, fully satisfied, contented, and paid. In
witness whereof, etc.

A grant of an annuity or yearly rent, with a nomine penae, distress for both,
and a Proviso not to charge the person of the Grantor, or his Heirs.
TO all, etc. Know ye, me the said I. G. for diverse good causes and
considerations me hereunto especially moving, have given, granted, and by this
my present writing idented confirmed unto I.R. of W. in the County aforesaid
Widow, one Annuity, or yearly rent, etc. good, etc. going, and to be taken out
of, and in all singular my lands, etc. called or known by the name of D.
situate, lying and being in W. aforesaid, and of and in all, etc. in the County
aforesaid. To hold, etc. the said Annuity, or yearly rent, etc. to the
aforesaid I.R. and her Assigns, for and during the term of the natural life of
the said ^. at four usual Feasts or terms of the year, etc. by equal portions
to be paid; And so often as it shall happen the said Annuity or yearly rent,
etc. or any part or parcel thereof to be behind and unpaid, Grant that if the
rent be behind, that the Grantor will forfeit so much nomine penae.
in part or in all, by the space, etc. at any Feast of the Feasts aforesaid, in
which as aforesaid it ought to be paid; that then, and so often, the aforesaid
I. G. or his Assigns, shall forfeit to the aforesaid I. R. and her Assigns,
etc. well, etc. in nomine penae. And that then, and so often after, it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said I. R. and her Assigns, as well for the
said Annuity, or yearly rent, etc. or for any parcel thereof so as aforesaid,
nomine penae to be made into all singular the aforesaid Lands, etc. or into any
parcel of the same to enter, and distrain, and the Cattle thereupon taken and
had, from thence lawfully to lead, drive, carry away, and impound, and
altogether to keep and detain, until the said I.R.: Power to distrain for the
nomine penae and rent behind.
and her Assigns, as well for the said Annuity or yearly rent, together with the
arrears thereof if any be behind, as for the said sum, etc. so as aforesaid
nomine poenae to be forfeited, shall be fully satisfied and paid, of which said
Annuity or yearly rent aforesaid, the aforesaid I. in full and peaceable
possession and seisin of the aforesaid Annuity or yearly rent aforesaid, by
payment, etc. of lawful, etc. at the time of sealing of these presents, Seisin
given of the rent.
in the name of seisin of the rent aforesaid.

Provided always nevertheless, that this present Writing indented, or any
grant or thing in the same contained, Proviso, not to charge the person of the
Grantor.
shall not extend to charge the person of me the said I.G. or my Heirs, but
only to charge my lands or tenements, etc. In witness, etc.

A Deed of Morgage, with general Warranty.
TO all, etc. Know ye, me the aforesaid T. for diverse, etc. have given,
granted, etc. to G.C. of, etc. all those pieces or parcels of land, called or
known by the name of R. alias R. or by what other name or names the same are
called or known, containing, by estimation, etc, be the same more or less,
situate, lying and being in the Parish of, etc. and abutting and hounding in
manner and form following, that is to say, etc. all and singular which
aforesaid premises, I the said T. lately purchased of one E. M. To have and to
hold all and singular the said premises, with th'appurtenances, unto the said
G.C. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only proper use and behoof of the
said G.C. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, of the chief Lord of the Fee thereof,
by the service for the same due, and of right accustomed, under this Condition
following, that is to say, that if I the aforesaid T.I. my Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, shall pay, or cause to be paid unto the said G.C.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in and upon, etc. at or in the now
dwelling house wherein the said G. now dwells, situate in B. aforesaid, the
sum, etc. at one entire payment; that then, and from thenceforth, it shall be
lawful for me the said, etc. my Heirs and Assigns, into all the aforesaid
premises, with th'appurtenances, or into any parcel thereof, to re-enter, and
the same to have again, repossesse, and enjoy, as in my former estate; And that
then, and from thenceforth, this present Writing indented, and all and every
thing therein contained, together with the seisin thereupon had and delivered,
shall cease, be frustrate, and of no value in the Law, any thing before in this
present writing indented conteind to the contrary hereof notwithstanding. And I
the aforesaid T.I. and my heirs, all and singular the aforesaid premises, with
the appurtenances, to the aforesaid G.C. and his heirs, against all men, to the
use and intent of these presents, will warrant, and for ever defend by these
presents, In Witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney, to be contained in a Deed for the delivery of Seisin.
ANd moreover, Know ye, that I the aforsaid A. B. have made, or dained,
constituted, and in my place put, my loving Friend in Christ, T. B. and R. L.
of, etc. Gent. my true and lawful Attorneys, jointly and severally, for me, in
my stead, in my name, and to my use, to enter into all and singular the
aforesaid premises, with the appurtenances, before by these presents mentioned
to be delivered or confirmed, or into any parcel thereof, in the name of all
and singular the aforesaid premises, with th'appurtenances, and full and
peaceable possession and seisin for me, in my stead, in my name, and to my use
to take, and such possession and seizin thereupon taken and had of all and
singular the premises, with the appurtenances, before by these presents
mentioned to be delivered or confirmed, for me, in my stead, and in my name to
the aforsaid R. M. or to his Attorney in this behalf to deliver, according to
the tenor, force, form, and effect of these presents, ratifying, and by these
presents all and whatsoever my said Attorneys jointly, or either of them
severally shall do, etc. in the premises. In witness, etc.

A Release of a Right and Title to Land, As also of Conditions, and Titles of
Entries or Re-entries, etc.
TO all, etc. Know ye, that I the said I. for diverse causes and consideration,
etc. have remised, released, and altogether for me and my Heirs, have quit
claimed unto W. B. of, etc. in his full and peaceable possession and seisin
being, and to his Heirs and Assigns, all my right, estate, title, claim, use,
interest and demand, which I th'aforesaid I. any time had, have, or in any wise
for ever may have, or my Heirs at any time hereafter may have, of, or in one
Message, etc. with th'appurtenances, situate, lying, etc. and abutting and
bounding in manner and form following, that is to say, etc. containing in the
whole, by estimation, etc. whether it be more or less. Know ye moreover, that
I the said I. S. for the Consideration aforesaid, have remised, released, and
always for me and my Heirs have quit claimed to the aforesaid W. B. his Heirs
and Assigns, all and all manner of Conditions, Entries, Re-entries,
Forfeitures, and other Demands whatsoever, which I the aforesaid I. have, or in
any manner hereafter may have, of, to, or in the aforesaid Message, etc. with
th'appurtenances, or out, of, in, or to any parcel thereof, by virtue or reason
of any thing, cause or matter made or accrued whatsoever, from the beginning of
the world, until the day of the date of these presents; So, etc. that neither I
the aforesaid I.S. my Heirs, nor any other by us, for us, or in our names, any
right, estate, title, claim, use, interest or demand, of and in the said
Message, etc. and other the premises, nor in any parcel thereof, may, or
ought to require, claim, or challenge, but from every action, right, title,
claim, use, interest, or demand to the aforesaid premises, or to any parcel
thereof, we are altogether excluded by these presents. In witness, etc.

A Condition for the better enjoying of lands granted by the Deed only,
containing the effect of diverse usual Covenants.
THe Condition, etc. that whereas th'above bounden T. B. did by his Deed
bearing date, etc enfeoff th'above-named H.P. of one principal Message, and of
certain lands in the said Deed mentioned, situat in S. abovesaid, to be had to
the said H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, upon a certain condition in the
said Deed expressed, That he was seized of a sure and rightful estate in
Fee-simple, in his own right, and had full power to make this grant. That they
are and shall be discharged or saved harmless, from all former bargains, etc.
and incu^brances, the rents to the Lords of the Fee, and one Annuity excepted.
as by the said Deed more at large appears; If therefore the above bounden
T.B. were at the time of the delivery of the said Deed, and of seizen and
state, delivered unto the abovenamed H.P. of the said Message, etc. and other
the premises in the said Deed lawfully and rightfully seized, in his own right,
in his Demean, as of Fee-simple, of a good, sure, etc. of and in the said
Message, etc. and then had full power, and lawful authority in his own right,
to alien the same unto the said H.P. his Heirs and Assigns, according to the
purport of the said Deed; And that the said H.P. his Heirs and Assigns, shall
or may, from time to time, and at all times hereafer, continue, and be clearly
discharged, or by the said T.B. his Heirs or Assigns sufficiently saved
harmless, of and from all manner of former Feoffments, etc. and encumbrances
whatsoever, the rents and services from henceforth to be due unto the Lord or
Lords of the Fee of Fees thereof, and one Annuity or yearly rent of, etc. only
excepted. And further, if the said T.B. his Heirs and Assigns, and all and
every other preson or persons, any thing in the said Message, and other the
premises, or in any part thereof, having, or lawfully by, from, or under the
said T.B. claiming, shall and will, from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, And further that he, etc. will make further assurance
during the space of, etc. make, knowledge, do and suffer, all and every such
further act and act, etc. unto the said H. his Heirs and Assigns, according to
the purport of the said recited Deed, Be it by Fine, Feoffment, etc. at the
costs and charges in the Law of the said H. his Heirs or Assigns, That then,
etc.

A Feoffment in Consideration of Marriage, with general Warranty.
TO all, etc. Know ye etc. in consideration of a certain Marriage between the
aforesaid, etc. on the one part, etc. Daughter, etc. D. Clerk on the other
part, hereafter agreed unto to be solemnized, Have given, granted, and by this
my present Writing indented have confirmed to the aforesaid, all my moity of an
House, Message or Tenement, called W. and P. situ^te, lying or being in the
Parish of S. now, or late in the tenute or occupation of one W. L. or his
Assigns, To have and to hold all and singular the aforesaid premises before in
these presents mentioned to be given or confirmed, with all and singular their
appurtenances to the aforesaid, etc. his Heirs and Assigns, to the use, behoof,
and intention hereafter in these presents mentioned, and declared, and to none
other intent etc. that is to say, to the use and behoof of the aforesaid, etc.
and their Assigns, for and during the term of their natural lives, and of the
longer liver of them, without impeachment of any waste, in the person
aforesaid, etc. and after the decease or the aforesaid, etc. then to the use
and behoof of the Heirs of the body of the said, etc. by the aforesaid, etc.
lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such issue, to the use and behoof
of the heirs of the body of the said, etc. lawfully to be begotten, and for
default of such issue, the remainder thereof to the right heirs of the
aforesaid, and their Heirs for ever, and to none other uses or intents
whatsoever, To hold of the chief Lord of the Fee thereof by the services due
and of right accustomed. And I the aforesaid, etc. and my Heirs, all and
singular the aforesaid premises before by these presents mentioned to be given
or confirmed, with all and singular th'appurtenances to the aforesaid, etc.
their Heirs and Assigns, to the use, behoof, and intentions aforesaid, against
all men will warrant, and fore ever defend by these presents. In witness, etc.

A Grant of all such goods as belong to one Executor, where are two Executors
made, with special Covenants.
THis INDENTURE made, etc. Between A.S. Widow, late Wife of R.S. of, etc.
deceased, and one of the Executors of the said R.S. of the one part, And T.B.
of, etc. of the other part, Witnesses, that whereas the said R.S. did by his
last Will and Testament in writing, make I.S. his Son, and A. his Wife, joint
Executors of his last Will and Testament; And whereas the said R.S. did further
by his said last Will and Testament devise and bequeath certain legacies to
diverse and sundry persons, as by the said will amongst other things therein
contained more at large it does and may appear; Now these presents witness,
that the said A.S. for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. to her the said
A. by the said T. B. well and truly in hand paid, Covenant by the Grantor, to
join in probat of the Will with the other Executor. And that neither the
Grantor, nor any other by her consent shall without the consent of the Grantee,
meddle with the administration of any the goods, chattels, etc. except, etc.
And further, that the Gra^tor will not, without the consent of the Grantee,
release, or otherwise acquit any Debtor, etc.
etc. has granted, bargained, sold, assigned, and set over, and by these
presents does fully, etc. unto the said T. B. his Execut, Administrators and
Assigns, the moiety and one half of all and singular such goods and chattels,
as well real as personal, Debts, Duties, and other things whatsoever, which the
Executors of the said R.S. now have, or which either of them has, or which
they or either of them at any time or times hereafter can, or may of right
have, claim, challenge and demand, of any person or persons whatsoever, or
otherwise as Executor or Executors unto the said R. S. except such things as
hereafter; that is to say, etc. And the said A.S. for her, her Executors, etc.
does by these presents, Covenant and grant, to and with the said T. B. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form following, that is to
say, that she the said A. shall and will at any time hereafter, within the
space of, etc. upon reasonable request, and at the costs and charges of the
said T. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, join in the probat of the
said Will with the said I. S. the other Executor. And further, that neither,
she the said A. nor any other person or persons, by her assent, consent, means
or procurement, shall or will at any time or times hereafter, without the
consent or agreement of the said T. B. his Executors or Administrators, in any
sort, meddle or deal with the administration of any of the goods, chattels, or
other things of the said R.S. or with any part or parcel thereof, except with
such things as are before excepted. And further, that she the said A. at any
time or times hereafter, shall not, nor will not, without the consent or
agreement of the said T.B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, release,
discharge, or otherwise acquit any Debtor or Debtors, Debt or Debts, sum or
sums of money, or other things whatsoever, And that the Grantee shall,
without disturbance of the Grantor, or any other claiming under her, do, or
cause to be done, any act touching the administration of the goods, except, etc.
which already is, or at any time or times hereafter, shall or may accrue,
come, belong, or of right appertain, unto the said Executors, or either of
them, as Executors of the said Will and Testament. And further, that he the
said T. B. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall, or lawfully may,
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, without any eviction, let, or
disturbance of the said A. S. her Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or of
any other person or persons, clayming by, from, or under her, make, do, execute
and commit, or cause to be made, done, executed, or committed, all and every
matter and thing, act and acts whatsoever, touching the administration of all
or any of the goods and chattels (except the goods and things as are before
exepted) to all intents and purposes, Covenant by the Grantee to keep the
Grantor, his goods, lands, etc. indemnified from all bargains, debts, duties,
etc. wherewith she is chargeable as Executrix.
and in every respect, as she the said A. might have done, if this present
grant had never been had or made; And the said T.B. for him, his Heirs, etc.
does Covenant and grant, to and with her the said A. S. her Executors, etc.
that he the said T. B. his Heirs, etc. shall and will, from time to time, and
at all times hereafter, well and sufficiently save and keep harmless and
indemnified, the said A. S. her Executors and Administators, and also her and
their goods and chattels, lands and tenements, of and from all and all manner
of Legacies, Debts, Duties, Suits, Actions, Encumbrances, and Deeds whatsoever,
wherewith or whereby she the said A.S. her Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or either of them, shall or may be at any time or times hereafter,
either solely, or jointly together with any other person or persons, arrested,
impleaded, charged, damnified or encumbered, as Executor or Executors of the
said Will, or by reason of the said Will, or for, or by reason of any debts,
bargains, or other things in the said Will contained. In witness whereof, etc.

A Lease of a Message, with certain Lands, Woods, and Mines thereto
appertaining, and also a power of Fishing upon the said ground, together with
power to coal the Wood upon the ground.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between R.C. etc. of the one part, and G.G. of
the other part, Witnesses, that the said R.C. for diverse good considerations,
etc. has demised all that his Message, etc. with the appurtenancess, called
and known by the name of, etc. And all his Lands, etc. lying and being in W.
aforesaid, to the Message, etc. called B. appertaining, or as parcel thereof
usually occupied, containing in all, by estimation, etc whether more or less,
which lies, boundeth and butteth as fooloweth, viz, etc. all and singular the
Woods, Underwoods and Trees, now standing, growing, or lying, or which at any
time during the said term shall grow, or be in or upon the premises by these
presents demised, or any part thereof, And all and singular the Mines now
growing, or being in and upon the premises by these presetns demised, on any
part thereof, Power to coal the wood, and to do other acts necessary for the
same.
together with free liberty, full license, power and authority, for him the
said R. C. his Heirs and Assigns, and for his and their Workmen, Servants, and
Laborers, from time, and at all times during the said term, at his and their
will and pleasure, to fell, cut down, cleave out, cord and coal the said Woods,
Underwoods and Trees, or any part thereof, and earth, dust, cover, and all
other things necessary and expedient for the co^verting of the said Woods,
Underwoods and Trees, or any part thereof, Power to open the mines, and to dig,
draw, cast up, etc. Power with Cart, carriages, etc. to carry away the Woods,
Cores, etc.
into cole, upon the said premises, or upon any part thereof, and to take and
have Colliers Lodges upon the said premises from time to time, during the said
term, at his and their will and pleasure to make and remove, and the said Mines
to open, and the Mines therein from time to time during the said term, in
convenient places to digg, draw, and cast up, lay and bestow upon the said
premises, or any part thereof, and the said Woods, Trees, Coals and Mines, or
any part thereof, from time to time, and at all times during the said term, at
his and their will and pleasure, Lease of a Pond upon part of the premises,
with liberty to dig for the mending thereof, and all Fish and fishings in the
said Pond.
with Wains, Cart and Carriages, from thence, by necessary and convenient ways,
over and through the said premises, or any part thereof, to fetch and carry,
whither, and to such place or places, as to the said R.C. his Heirs or Assigns
shall seem good; and one Pond made upon part of the said premises, and the
banks, bays, and sluices thereunto belonging, with liberty to digg earth and
clay for the mending thereof, and all Fish and Fishings in the said Pond. And
also all the fish now being, or which at any time during the said term, shall
be in three Marl-pits hereafter expressed; that is to say, And also all the
Fish and fishing in 3 Marl-pits, with liberty to, come and go, by any means to
take the same.
etc. together with free liberty and authority from time to time, etc. and at
all times during the said term, for him the said R.C. his Heirs and Assigns, to
come, and go from the said Marl-pits, or any part of them; And the same pits,
or any part of them, with Angles, Engines, or by sewing or letting out of the
water, or otherwise, as to him or them shall seem good, to fish: To have, etc.
the said Message or Tenement called B. the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
and other the premises before by these presents demised, with all and singular
th'appurtenances unto the said G.G. and his Assigns, for and during the natural
life of the said G.G. Yielding, etc. during the said term, at or in the now
Manor-house of the said R. C. called C. Sit. etc. unto the said R.C. and unto
the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, Reservatio^ of a Rent upon a Lease for
life, to the Lesser, and the heirs of his body, and for default of such heirs,
to such persons to whom the reversion shall descend.
and for default of heirs of his body lawfully begotten, to such person and
persons, their heirs and Assigns, to whom the said premises before by these
presents demised, or the reversion or reversions, remainder or remainders
thereof, shall after the death of the said R. without heir of his body lawfully
begotten, descend, revert, remain, accrue, or be, etc. of lawful, etc. at two
usual Feasts in the year; that is to say, etc. by equal portions yearly to be
paid. And if, and as often as the said yearly rent, or any part thereof, shall
happen to be behind and unpaid by the space of, etc. next after any of the said
Feasts in which the said yearly rent, or any part thereof ought to be paid;
That then he the said G.G. and his Assigns, shall forfeit unto the said R. C.
and unto the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and after the decease of the
said R.C. without heir of his body lawfully begotten, to such person and
persons to whom the said premises shall descend, revert, remain, accrue, and
be, for every day after the expiration of the said, etc. days next after any of
the said Feasts, in which the said yearly Rent, or any part thereof shall be
behind, Nomine penae for the nonpayment of the Rent reserved, and distress for
both.
etc. of lawful, etc. And that then and from thenceforth it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said R.C. and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten,
and after the decease of the said R. without heirs of his body lawfully
begotten, to and for such person and persons to whom the said premises shall
descend, revert, remain, accrue, or be, into all and singular the premises, or
into any part thereof, to enter, and there to distrain, as well for the said
yearly rent of, etc. as for all such sums of money as shall be forseited in the
name of a pein; And the distress or distresses there so had and taken from
thence, to chase, drive, lead, bear, and carry away, and that they or them to
detain and withhold, Covenant by the Lessor to pay the rents etc. due to the
Lords of the fee, and thereof to acquit the Lessee.
until they shall be of the said yearly rent, and the arrerages thereof, and
also of all such sums of money as shall be forfeited in the name of a pein, and
of his and their consts and losses by non-payment thereof sustained, fully
satisfied and paid. And the said R.C. for him, his heirs, etc. does by these
presents Covenant and grant to and with him the said G.G. and his assigns, in
manner and form following; that is to say, that he the said R. his Heirs and
Assigns, shall and will from time to time, during the said term, Covenant by
the lessor, after request, to assign timber for repairing, or new making of the
houses, etc. if need shall require, as also for fireboot; and that if shall be
lawful for the Less, etc. to fell, cut, and carry away the same, without
interruption, etc.
bear, pay, and do all manner of rents, payments and serveices, which during
the said term shall accrue, and grow due to the chief Lord or Lord of the Fee
or Fees thereof, and of the same, and of every part thereof, shall and will
discharge, or sufficiently save harmless the said G.G. and his assigns. And
that the said R. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will from time to time, and
at all times, at his and their proper costs and charges, during the said term,
within, etc. days next after reasonable request to him or them by the said G.G.
or his Assigns made, or to be made, not only assign and appoint to them, or
some of them such and so much timber, growing and being upon some part of the
said demised premises, as shall be sufficient, convenient, and neccessary, for
the repairing, mending, maintaining, or new making (if need shall so require)
of all or any of the houses, arns, buildings, now situat and being upon any
part of the premises, or for the mending or building one new Barn upon some
part of the said premises, if the said G. shall be disposed, or will new make
or build any such, but also shall likewise, during the said term, within, etc.
next after like request to him or them, by the said G.G. or his Assigns, at the
said mentioned house of the said C. to be made, at his or their like costs and
charges, assign or appoint unto him or them, within one mile of the said
Message called B. for, and toward their fuel and fire-boot to be expended in
the said Message, etc. Wain Loads of wood, which timber and wood so appointed
or assigned, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said G.G. and his
Assigns, And that the Lessee shall not only have hedgeboot without Assignment,
but timber also of the worser sort, if the Lessor after request shall appoint
it, and in default of appointmen, that he shall take it without, necessary for
posts and rails to be set along the bank of the River, etc. And that the Lessee
may not only digg Marl upon any part of the premises, but may also digg stone,
carth and clay, for the reparations, or new making of the houses, etc.
or any of them, or for the assigns, servants, or workmen of them, or any of
them, at all times during the said term, to fell, cut down, and work out, and
the same to have and take with their Wains and Carriages, and that to carry
away and employ about the said reparations and buildings, and fire-boot,
without any lawful let or disturbance of any person or persons, and without
any account and thing therefore yielding or paying. And further, that it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said G. and his Assigns, from time to time,
and at all times during the said term, as often as need shall require, not only
to take and have without any assignment upon the said premises demised,
sufficient and competent hedgeboot, bushes and shrubs, stake and Bar Rods to
be employed upon the said premises, and such timber of the worser sort growing
upon the said premises, by the appointment of the said R. his Heirs or Assigns,
if he or they shall appoint the same within, etc. next after request; And in
default of such assignment, without assignment of the said R. his Heirs or
Assigns, as shall be convenient, meet, and sufficient for Bar posts, to be
occupied in convenient places about the premises, and for the making of posts
and rails, to be set upon the said premises, along the shore or bank of the
River or stream, which stretches, etc. And that he the said G. his Heirs and
Assigns, servants and work men, shall and may, form time to time, and at all
times during the said term, at his and their wills and pleasures, not only dig,
take, have and carry Marl and Grite, out and from any the Marl-pits in and upon
the premises demised, or some part thereof, to be laid, employed or bestowed
only upon the demises premises, or some part thereof, but also shall or may
likewise digg, take, and have upon, and carry from any convenient place or
places of the said premises, stone, earth and clay, meet, necessary, and
suffient to be employed or bestowed during the said term, in, upon, or about
the reparations, mending, or new making of any houses or buildings upon the
premises, Covenant that the Lessor etc. shall enjoy the liberties and other
things excepted, without interruption.
or any part thereof; And the said G. G. for him, his Heirs, etc. does by these
presents covenant and grant, to and with the said R. C. his Heirs, etc. in
manner and form following; that is to say, the he the said. R. C. his Heirs or
Assigns, shall or may from time to time, and at all times during the said term,
have, use and enjoy, all and singular such liberties, and other things, as are
to them, or either of them, before in or by these presents mentioned to be
Note, that there was an exception in the beginning which I left out.
excepted or reserved, without any expulsion or disturbance of the said G.G.
his Executors, etc. or any of them; and that he the said G.G. his Executors,
etc. shall or will, from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during the
said term, not only well and sufficiently repair, maintain, sustain and keep,
And that the Lessee shall not only well and sufficiently repair, etc. and the
hedges, ditches, etc. and so shall the at the end of the term leave up; But
also shall ridd and scowr such a ditch or River, and so shall leave it up at
the end of the term.
all and singular the houses, barns, and buildings, now builded or set, or
which at any time during the said term, shall be builded or set upon the said
demised premises, or any part thereof, And the hedges, ditches, fences, and
enclosures, in, upon, and about the demised premises, or any part thereof, in
and by all manner of necessary reparations and amendments, and the said houses,
barns, and buildings, in and by all things well and sufficiently repaired and
amended, and the said hedges, ditches, fences, and enclosures, well and
sufficiently made and maintained, in the end of the said term, yield and leave
up, but also shall and will, from time to time, and all times during the said
term, when and as often as need shall require, well and sufficiently ridd,
scowr and cleanse, etc. the said lands called the T. unto the said Mill, called
the C. Mill, and such part of the said River, or Stream as aforesaid, well and
suffiently ridded, scowed and cleansed, shall during all the said term keep and
maintain, and so sufficiently ridded and scowred, in the end of the said term
shall yield and leave up. And further, that the Lessee
And further, That he the said G. G. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
nor any of them, shall not any time hereafter, during the said term, shall not
assign the premises to any person, other tha^ such person as shall be able to
pay the Rent, and maintain the premises, according to the Covenant etc. without
license of the Lessor.
without license of the said R. G. his Heirs or Assigns first had and obtained
in writing, demise, grant, let, set or assign, the said Message, etc. or any
part thereof, or all, or any part of the said Lands, and other the premises by
these presents demised, to any person or persons, other than such person or
persons as shall be sufficient and well able to pay and yield, during the said
term, the said yearly Rent reserved, and maintain and keep the houses, etc.
according to the Covenant before in these presents expressed. In Witness, etc.

An assignment of the moity of the Lands, which the Lessee has; with diverse
special Covenants.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between R. S. etc. of the one part, and I. T. etc. of
the other part, Winesseth, That whereas the Right Honorable H. N. Knight, Lord
Abur. did by Indent. tripartite, bearing date etc. demise, and to farm let, the
Manor and Farm of B. with th'appurtenances, in the County aforesaid, unto R. S.
of, etc. and E. C. of, etc. and to their Assigns, for, and during the lives of
G. G. I. S. and I. C. and the longest liver of them, reserving the old and
accustomed Rent; by virtue of which said Demise and Lease, the said Lessees, R.
S. and E. C. did stand, and lawfully were seized of and in the premises, to
them and their Assigns, for and during the lives of the said, etc. and the
longest liver of them; And where sithence the said R. S. and E. C. being so
seized, for good considerations them thereunto moving, Did by Indenture
tripartite, Dated, etc. demise, grant, and to farm let unto the said R. S. all
that the etc. demise, grant, and to farm let unto the said R. S. all that the
aforesaid Farm and Manor of B. with th'appurtenances, and all those Messuages,
etc. with th'appurtenances, situate and being in B. aforesaid, or elsewhere in
the County aforesaid, which they the said R. S. and E. C. or either of them
then had, or might claim by virtue of the demise aforesaid; (The Pigeon house,
etc. being parcel of the said Manor always reserved unto the said R. S. and
E.C: their Executors and Assigns, during the said term, Exception of a Pigeo
house, and ingress, egress, and regress to the same, as also into and from the
Manor-house, for tendering and paying the Rent, ^eserved by the first Lessor.
with liberty also to the said R. S. and E. C. and to their assigns, to have
free ingresse, egresse, and regresse, from time to time, and at all times, as
well into and from the said Pigeon house, as also into and from the Manor-house
of B. aforesaid, for the tendering and paying there every half year yearly, at
the Feasts, etc. the Rent reserved by the aforesaid Lord upon the said Lease by
him made, unto the said R. S. and E. C. always excepted and foreprized) the
said Mansion, and other the premises, with th'appurtenances (^except before
excepted) to be had and holden unto the said R. S. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast of, etc. last past, before the Date
of the said, last recited Indenture, for and during the term of, etc. from
thence next ensuing, and to be fully complete and ended; Yielding, etc.
therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said R. S. and E. C. and their
Assigns, the sum of, etc. that is to say at the Feasts of, etc. (with clause of
Re^entry for non-payment of the said Rent in the said last recited Indenture
mentioned to be reserved.) And whereas the said R. S. has in and by the said
recited Indenture made diverse and sundry Covenans, Grants, and Agreements, to
and with the said R. S. and E. C. their Executors and Assigns, as by the said
last recited Indenture more at large it does and may appear; Now these presents
witnesses, That the said R. S. for diverse good causes and considerations him
thereuto especially moving, has demised, granted, assigned, and set over, unto
the said I^^. all his term of years, Estate, Right, Title, and Interest, which
he has yet to come, and unexpired, of and in the half or Moytie of the said
Manor or Farm, with th'appurtenances, and all other the premises in or by the
said last recited Indenture mentioned to be demised unto him the said R: S. by
the said R. S. and E. C. To have, etc. the said one half or Moytie of the said
Manor and Farm, and other the premises, with all and singular their
appurtenances, unto the said I. T. his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
from the, etc. for and during all the said term of years yet to come, and
unexpired therein, and so largely, amply, and fully, to all intents and
purposes, as the said R. S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of
them, might have holden and enjoyed the same, if this present grant or
assignment had never been made; Yielding, etc. therefore yearly, during the
said term, at or in the Mansion or Manor house of B. aforesaid, unto him the
said R. S. his Exec. Administrators or Assigns, the sum of, etc. Provided
always, Proviso, that if the ^ent be not paid by the space of, etc. after any
of the Feasts, etc. being demanded, that then the Assignor may r^enter, etc.
etc. that if the said rent, or any part or parcel thereof, shall happen to be
behind and unpaid, at the place aforesaid, over or after any of the said
Feasts, or days of payment, in which, as aforesaid, it ought, or is limited to
be paid, by the space of, etc. (being lawfully demanded at B. aforesaid, by the
said R. S. his Executors, administrators, or assigns;) That then it shall and
may be lawful, to and for the said R. S. his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, into the said one half of the said Manor, and other the premises
before by these presents demised or granted, to enter, and the same to have
again, repossesse and enjoy, as in his or their first and former estate; any
thing in these presents contained to the contrary notwithstanding. Covenant by
the Assignee during the time that he shall lawfully hold the premises, to pay
the rent reserved upon the assignment.
And the said I. T. for him, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does by
these presents Covenant and grant, to and with the said R. S. his Exec.
Administ* and Assigns, That he the said I. T. his Executors, etc. shall and
will, during all the time that he or they shall, or lawfully may have and hold
the premises by these presents demised, we all truly pay, or cause to be truly
paid unto the said R. S. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the said
yearly rent of, etc. before by these presents mentioned to be reserved, at such
Days, Times and Places, as the same is by these presents limited, or ought to
be paid, according to the purport and true meaning of these presents. And the
said R. S for him, his Exec. etc. does by these presents covenant and grant, to
and with the said I. T. his Executors, Covenant by the Assignor, to pay the
rents, etc. upon the first assignment, and thereof to acquit the now Assignee,
etc.
etc. in manner and form following; that is to say, That he the said R. S. his
Executors, etc. shall and will from time to time, and at all times during the
said term, according to the purport of the said recited Indenture, unto him by
the said R. S. and E. C. made, well and truly pay, and discharge, all such
rents, duties and payment, as shall be due and payable for the premises, or any
part thereof, unto the said R. S. and E. C. or the Executors or Assigns, of
them or either of them, and thereof shall from time to time, and at all times,
clearly acquit and discharge the said I. T. his Executors, Mutual Covenants,
that neither the assignor, nor assignee, will do any thing, or leave any thing
undon, whereby to make void the Lease, or whereby any of the Covenants shall be
broken. And that they at their equal charges will perform and keep all the
covenants and agreements in the last recited Indenture, other than such which
concern the payment of the rent which the assignor ought to pay, in respect
that he has reserved a rent, and the reparations of the Mansion house.
etc. And the said I. T. and R. S. and either of them, does by these presents,
for themselves, their, and either of their Executors, etc. severally Covenant
and grant, to and with the other of them, their, etc. in manner and form
following, that is to say, That neither the said I. T. and R. S. their
Executors, etc. nor any of them, shall at any time or times during the said
term, make, do, execute or commit, or willingly suffer to be done, or leave
undone or omitted, any act or acts, thing or things whatsoever, whereby the
said Lease for term of years, made or granted unto the said R. S. by the said
R. S. and E. C. shall be made void, frustrate, or defeasible, or whereby any of
the Covenants or agreements therein contained, shall be broken or infringed;
and that they the said R. S. and I. T. their Executors, etc. at their equal and
indifferent costs and charges, shall and will from time to time, and at all
times during the said term by these presents demised or granted, well and truly
observe, perform, fulfill, and keep, all provisoes and agreements as are to be
observed on the behalf of the said R. S. his Executors, etc. mentioned,
contained, or specified in the said last recited Indenture made between the
said R. S. and E. C. of the one part, and the said R. S. of the other part,
according to the purport and true meaning of the said Indenture, other than
such Covenants, grants, and reservations, as are thereby made for the payment
of the said yearly rent of, etc. and the reparations of the said Mansion house,
which said rent of, etc. is to be paid only by the said R. S. in respect of the
rent to him by these presents reserved. And the said Mansion house is to be
repaired by the said R. S. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, during
the said term; Which Rent to pay, and reparations to do, he the said R. S. does
by these presents, Which Rent the assignor does covenant to pay, and also to
repair the house, for that it is agreed betwee them, that the assignor shall
dwell therein during the term.
for him, his Executors, etc. Covenant and grant, to and with the said I. T.
his Exec. etc. to pay, perform, and do, in respect and consideration that it is
agreed between the said parties, that the said R. S. shall or may there dwell
and inhabit in the said Mansion house solely, during the said term. And the
said I. T. and R. S. do, and either of them does, for themselves, and for the
Executors, etc. of either of them, severally Covenant, grant, and agree, to and
with the other, his Executors, etc. that they the said I. T. and R. S. their
Executors, etc. shall and will, at their equal costs and charges yearly, during
the said term, pay one yearly Rent of, etc. payable for, Mutual Covenant, to
pay a Rent, issuing out of the premises to the Q^. at their equal costs; As
also to stock the Farm with Corn, Cattle, etc, to be occupied in common.
or issuing out of the said Manor and premises, to the, etc. and shall and will
likewise at their equal costs and charges, stock the whole Farm of the Manor of
B. with Sheep, Corn, Cattle, and other things, which shall remain and be
occupied in Common between them both, and between the Executors etc, of them,
during the said term; And that the parties to these presents, their Executors,
etc. shall equally and indifferently have, perceive, take, and enjoy, yearly,
as it shall arise, the profits, commodities, and increase coming of the whole
Manor, and other the premises, and of the stock thereupon, being, or to be
during all the said term; And in the end of the said term, And that the
parties, during the said term, shall equally take the profits in common, and the
stock. And at the end of the term, or before, if they so agree, to make equal
division of the Manor, Stock, etc. and that ever after they shall not hold in
common, etc.
or at any time before the end, when both the said parties, their Executors,
etc, or any of them shall think meet, to leave their joint occupying, to make
an equal division both of the said Manor, Stock, and other the premises; And
that neither of the parties to these presents, nor the Executors, etc. of
either of the said parties, shall at any time or times hereafter, take any
advantage, profit, or commodity of the said Farm, Stock, or other the premises,
or of any part thereof in Common; But either party to these presents, their
Executors, etc. shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, have,
receive, perceive, take, and enjoy the moity of the said Manor, and Stock, and
of the profits, commodities, benefits, and increase thereof, without any let or
interruption of the other party, his Executors, etc. according to the true
intent of these presents. And further, the said parties, for them, their
Executors, etc. do by these presents Covenant and grant, Mutual Covenant, that
the Assignor shall solely, during the term, occupy the Manor-house, except such
lofts etc. as shall be sufficient yearly during the said term, for the laying
of the Corn of the Assignee. Covenant, that the premises are, and shall
continue discharged of all former grants, etc. and encumbrances, except such
encumbrances as are contained in the said recited Indenture etc.
and either of them to and with the other, his Executors, etc. that the said R.
S. his Executors, etc. shall and will, from time to time, and at all times
during the said term, have, hold, occupy and enjoy, solely to his and their
private use and commodity, the said Manor-house, except such Lofts and Garners
there, as shall be sufficient yearly, during the said term, for the laying and
bestowing there of the Corn and Grain of the said I. T. which the said I. T.
his Executors, etc. shall have, or may take, without any eviction, or expulsion
of either, or any of the said parties to these presents, their Executors, etc.
And finally the said R.S. does by these presents Covenant and grant, to and
with the said I.T. his Executors, etc. that the said Manor, and other the
premises before by these presents demised or granted, now be, and at all times
hereafter shall continue, clearly acquitted and discharged of all grants,
charges, interests, and encumbrances, before delivery of these presents had,
made, done or committed by the said R.S. or his assigns, or by his or their
means, consent, or procurement (such encumbrances as are contained in the said
Indenture made between the said R.S. and E. C. of the one part, and the said
R.S. of the other part, only excepted and foreprised.) And further, that the
said I. T. his Executors, etc. shall from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, have and enjoy the moity of the said Manor and Farm, and of all such
benefits, And that the Assignee shall enjoy the moity of the Manor, and of all
benefits, advatages, etc. of the Covenants etc. contained in the said recited
Indent.
advantages, profits and commodities of all the Covenants, grants, Articles and
agreements, contained in the said receited Indenture made between the said R.S.
and E.C. of the one part, and the said R.S. of the other part, which on the part
of the said R. S. and E. C. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, ought
to be performed and done. In Witness whereof, etc.

A Lease of a Mansion House, certain Lands, etc. with a large exception, and
many special Covenants therein contained.
THIS INDENTURE, made, etc. Between H. P. etc. of the one part, and I.M. of
the other part, Witnesses, That the said P.H. etc. has demised, granted, and
to farm-letten, etc. all that the Mansion House, etc. situate, lying and being
in etc. (All and singular the Woods, Exception of Woods, with power to cut
down, cleave, etc. and to cord, cole, and carry away.
Underwoods, and trees, now standing, and growing, or being, or which at any
time hereafter shall grow, or be in or upon the demised premises, or any part
of parcel thereof, together with free liberty, full power and authority, for
him the said H. P. his Heirs and Assigns, and for his and their Workmen,
Servants and Laborers, from time to time, and at all times, during the said
term, hereafter in these presents expressed, at his and their will and
pleasure, to fell and cut down, cleave out, and saw, and saw-pits and
coal-places to make and dig, and the said woods and underwoods, or any part
thereof to cord, coal, and carry away, together with all and all manner of
Hawking, Hunting, Fishing, Fowling, in or upon the said premises, or any part
thereof; and also full power, Exception of Hawking, Hunting, Fishing, Fowling,
with power to keep Courts, etc.
free liberty, license, and authority, to keep Courts in the said Mansion, at
such time, as to the said H. his Heirs or Assigns shall be thought good, always
out of this present demise, excepted and foreprized) To have and to hold all
that the said Mansion house etc. (except before excepted) unto the said I.M.
his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, from the Feast of etc. from thence,
next ensuing and fully to be complete and ended, Yielding etc. yearly, during
the said term, unto the said H.P, his Heirs and Assigns, the sum of etc. at 2
of the usual feasts or terms in the year, that is to say, etc. by even portions
to be paid; And if it shall happen the said yearly rent, of etc. A power of
teentry for non-payment of rent lawfully demanded.
or any part or parcel thereof, to be behind and unpaid, in part or in all, by
the space of, etc. over or after any of the said Feasts or days of payment, in
which, as aforesaid, it ought or is limited to be paid (being lawfully
demanded) that then, and from thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful, to and
for the said H.P. his Heirs or Assigns, into all and singular the said dwelling
houses, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, and other the premises before
mentioned to be demised, and in every part thereof, to reenter, and the same to
have again, repossesse and enjoy, as in his or their first and former estate
and estates, Covenant, that the Lessor will repair the house with needful
reparations, and the hedges, ditches, etc. and so repaired will leave them at
the end of the term.
any thing before in these presents contained to the contrary thereof, in any
wise notwithstanding. And the said I. M. does by these presents, for him, his
Executors, etc. covenant and grant, to and with the said H.P. his Heirs, etc.
in manner etc form following, that is to say, that he the said I.M. his Heirs,
etc. shall and will from time to time, and at all times, during the said term,
at his and their own proper cost and charges, well and sufficiently repair,
sustain, maintain, and keep the said Manor house, and other buildings, and
hedges, ditches, fences, and enclosures, in, upon, and about the demised
premises, and every part and parcel thereof, in and by all needful and
necessary reparations, Covenant that the Lessee will provide or cause to be
provided, dinners, for the Lessors etc. Steward etc. when any Court shall be
holden, as also horse meat and Stable room for their horses.
and amendments, and the said Mansion house, and other buildings well and
sufficiently repaired and amended, and the hedges, ditches, fences and
enclosures, well and sufficiently made and maintained, in the end and
expiration of the said term shall yield and leave up.

And further, that he the said I.M. his Heirs, etc. shall and will from time,
etc. provide, find, or cause to be provided, and found, at his and their own
proper costs and charges, the dinners for the said H.P. his Heirs or Assigns,
and for his and their Steward, and other Officers, when and as often as there
shall be any Court or Courts holden or kept for the said Manor, and also good
and sufficient horsemeat, and stable room, for his and their horses, Covenant
that the Lessee will at his proper costs maintain the marks, fences, and
enclosures of the land of the Lessor, therefore paying, etc.
when and as often as the said Court shall be there holden.

And further, that he the said I. M. his Executors, etc. shall and will, at his
and their own proper costs and charges, well and sufficiently make, maintain,
and keep, or cause to be maintained and kept, all such marks, fences, and
enclosures, of the said demised premises, which shall or be against all or any
of the said Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments of the said H.P. now in the
occupation of the said H.P. his Executors or Assigns, paying or allowing
therefore yearly unto the said I. M. his Executors or Assigns, etc. of good,
etc. Provided always, that if the said I.M. A Proviso that the Lessee shall not
assign without license of the Lessor, etc. in writing first had, and if he
does, that the Lessor, etc. shall and may seenter, etc.
his Executors, etc. or any of them, shall at any time or times hereafter,
during the said term, demise, grant, assign, or set over, or cause to be
demised, granted, assigned or set over, all or any part of the said Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, and other the Premises before mentioned to be
demised, or vesture, or herbage thereof, to any person or persons whatsoever,
without license of the said H.P. his Heirs or Assigns, thereunto in writing
first had and obtained. That then and from thenceforth it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said H. his Heirs and Assigns, into all and singular the
lands, etc, and other the premises before by these presents mentioned to be
demised, and into every part and parcel thereof, to Reenter, and the same to
have again, as in his or their former estate, any thing before in these
presents contained to the contrary thereof notwistanding. And the said H.P. for
him, his Heirs, etc. does by these presents Covenant and grant, Covenant that
the Lessor etc. at his proper costs shall within etc. after request, assign
timber for reparations and new making of etc. if need be. As also that the
Lessor after like request, shall yearly assign sufficient fireboot, etc. and
that it shall be lawful for the Lessee, etc. to cut down, work out, and carry
away the same, to be employed about the said uses, and not otherwise, without
paying or account render for the same. And in default of Assignment after
request, to take without assignment.
to and with the said I. M. his Heirs, etc. in manner and form following, that
is to say, That he the said H. P. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will, etc.
during the said term, at his and their own proper costs and charges, within,
etc. next after request to him or them, by the said I. M. his Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, to be made, not only assign and appoint unto him or
them such and so much timber, growing or being upon some part of the said
demised premises, as shall be sufficient and convenient for the repairing,
maintaining, amending, or new making (if need shall require) of the said
Mansion House, or other buildings before by these presents demised; But also
shall likewise yearly during the said Term, within etc. next after like request
to him or them by the said T. M. to be made, at his and their like costs and
charges, assign or appoint unto him or them, upon the said premises, sufficient
and convenient fuel and fire-boot, gate-boot, wain-boot, Cart-boot, and
plough-boot, to be expended or spent upon the said premises by these presents
mentioned to be demised, and notelsewhere, which said timber, fuel and
fire-boot, gate-boot, wain-boot, cart-boot, and plough-boot, so assigned, or
appointed, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said I. M. his Executors,
etc. or for his and their servants and workmen, or any of them, from time to
time, and at all times during the said term, to fell, cut down, and work out,
and the same with their Waynes and Carriages to carry away, and employ about
the said reparations, buildings, fuel, and fire-boot, gate-boot, wayn-boot,
cart-boot, and plough-boot, and not otherwise, without any let or disturbance
of the said H. P. his Heirs or Assigns, without any account or other thing
therefore yielding, rendering or paying, And in default of such assigment, after
such request, as aforesaid, made, without any assignment to take and have the
same timber, fuel and fire-boot, cart-boot, wayn-boot, gate-boot, and
plough-boot, so as before to be expended or spent, and not otherwise. And
further, the said I. M. for him, his Heirs, etc. does by these presents
Covenant and grant, Covenant that Lessee shall not sow or cause to be sown such
ground by such sapce before the end of the term. Covenant, that if the Lessor,
etc. shall cut down any of the woods, or underwoods, that then it shall be
lawful for him, etc. to enclose them, and that the Lessee shall not depasture
them with any cattle other than Colts of a year old, And that the Lessee, etc.
shall at his proper costs maintain the hedges, etc.
to and with the said H. P. his Heirs, etc. in manner and form following, that
is to say, That he the said I. M. his Heirs, etc. shall not sow, or cause to be
sown, any of the Marish ground before by these presents demised, before the end
of the said term, and space of, etc.

And further, that if the said H. P. his Heirs or Assign, shall at any time or
times, during the said term, fell or cut down any of the woods or underwoods,
growing upon the said premises, that then, and so often, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said H. his Heirs or Assigns, to encompasse or enclose
so much of the said wood-ground whereupon such felling shall be, And that after
such incolosure made, the said I. M. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
nor any of them, shall depasture or feed in the said Coppizes so to be
enclosed, nor put, nor suffer to go there any manner of cattle, other than
Colts of one year old, during the said term of 5 years, and shall further
during that 5 years, at his own costs fence and maintain the said hedges and
fences so to be made by the said H. P. his Heirs or Assigns. In witness
whereof, etc.

Letter of Attorney irrevocable, for the assignment of a Recognizance
(acknowledged in Chancery) whereupon Judgment is there had (with diverse
Covenants therein contained) to the proper use of the Assignee.
KNow all men by these presents, That whereas A.S. etc. did by Recognizance
acknowledged at Westminster in the Court of Chancery (tali die and anno)
acknowledge himself to be indebted unto one I.M. etc. of, etc. to be paid unto
the said I.M. or to his sure Attorney, upon the Feast, etc. then next following
the date of the said Recogn. with a certain condition thereupon endorsed, as by
the said Recogn. and Condition more at large it does and may appear; and where
sithence the acknowledging of the said Recognizance the said I. M. has sued
two Writs of Scire facias against the said A. S. in the said high Court of
Chancery at Westminster, upon the said Recognizance, against the said A. S. as
by the said Judgment remaining of Record in the said Court of Chancery
appears. Now these presents witness, that the said I. M. for diverse good
causes and considerations him thereunto specially moving, has granted,
bargained and sold, and set over, and by these presents does fully, clearly and
absolutely grant, bargain, sell, assign and set over, unto H. P. of etc. the
said Recognizance, and all sums of money therein contained, together with the
together with the said judgment thereupon given, with all such benefit,
advantage, commodity, and sums of money, as the said I. M. his Executors,
Administrators, or any of them, may or can, might, should or ought to have,
receive, take, recover, or in execution have, by force or means of the said
Recognizance, judgment, and execution, or any of them. And further the said I.
M. does by these presents, for him, his Executors, etc. ordain, constitute, and
in his place put and appoint the said H. P. during the natural life of the said
H. and lawful Attorney or Attorneys irrevocable, for him, and in the name of
him the said I. M. during his life, and of the Executors, etc. of him the said
I. M. after his decease, to ask, demand, receive, recover, and in execution to
take, levy, and have, of, and against the said A. S. the Executors and
Administrators of the said A. S. or any of them, all or any of the said sums of
money, mentioned, contained or specified in the said Recognizance, and all and
every such sum and sums of money as is already recovered, or may arise, grow
due or payable, upon or by reason of the said Recognizance, and judgment, or
any of them, and execution or executions in the name of the said I. M. his
Execut etc. upon the said Recognizance, and judgment, thereupon given, at the
cost and charges of the said H. P. his executors, etc. to take, have, sue
forth, and levy; And ^uch sum and sums of money, as shall or may be had, taken,
recovered or levied, upon, or by reason of the said Recog. and judgment
thereupon given, or either of them, to receive, perceive, take, have, and
detain, to the proper use and behoof of the said H. his Executors, etc. without
any account or other thing therefore yielding, rendering, or paying, unto the
said I. M. his Executors, etc. And in default of payment of all, or any part of
the said sum or sums of money mentioned in the said Recogn. to Arrest, sue or
implead, or execution to take against the Heirs, Executors, or Administrators
of the said A. S. or any of them upon the said Recogn. or judgment, as upon
either of them, in any lawful Action or Actions, Suit or Suits, Plaint or
Plaints, in any Court or Courts of the Commonwealth of England, for or in the
name of the said I. M. his Executors or Administrators, And judgment and
execution thereupon to take and have, And Attorney or Attorneys, for, in, or
concerning the said premises, or any part thereof, for or in the name of the
said I. M. his Executors, etc. to make, constitute, ordain, and appoint, and
them also at his and their will and pleasure to alcer, revoke, change, and
remove; And further to make, do, execute and commit, or cause to be made, done,
executed, and committed, in the name of the said I. M. his Exec. etc. all and
every matter and thing, Act and Acts whatsoever, meet, necessary, expedient, or
convenient for the recovery, levying, having, or execution, making, taking, or
having of all, or any of the sum or sums of money mentioned or contained in the
said Recogn, and judgment thereupon given, or either of them, and all and
singular such sum and sums of money, or other thing, as he the said H. his
Exec. etc. shall by reason of the said Recogn. or judgment, or Execution
thereupon to be had, made, or taken, have, take, levy, or recover in the name
of the said I. M. his Executors, etc.

And the said I. M. does for him, his Executors, etc. Covenant and grant, to
and with the said H. his Executors, etc. that if shall and may be lawful,
Covenant that the Assignee or Attorney, etc. shall retain the sum to his, etc.
own use, without account rendered.
to and for the said H. his Executors, etc. to have, take, retain, keep and
enjoy, etc. to his and their own use, without any account, or other thing
therefore to be yielded, rendered, or given. And the said I. M. ratifieth and
allows, and by these presents confirms and avoweth, all and every matter
and thing, Act and Acts whatsoever, which the said H. P. his Executors etc. or
any of them, shall at his and their costs and charges, do, execute, or commit,
or cause be done, executed or committed, in the name of the said I. M. his
Executors, etc. in, about, touching or concerning the premises, or any part
thereof, and the said I. M. does by these presents, for him, his Heirs, etc.
and every of them, Covenant and grant, Covenant, that the assignor has done no
Act or thing, nor that he, his Heirs, Executors, etc. shall do or cause to be
done, whereby the Assignee etc. shall be hindered of the recovery, or receipt of
the sum or sums due upon the Recogn. or judgment thereupon had.
to and with the said H. P. his Heirs, etc. in manner and form following, that
is to say, that the said I. M. nor any other person or persons, by his or their
consent, privity, or procurement, already has not made, done, executed or
committed, nor that he, his Heirs, etc. nor any of them, nor any other person
or persons by his or their procurement, shall or will at any time or times
hereafter, make, do, execute or commit, or cause to be made, done, executed or
committed, any Act or Acts thing or things whatsoever, whereby the said Recogn,
or all, or any of the sum or sums of money therein contained, or any action or
actions, suit or suits, plaint or plaints, commenced or to be commenced
thereupon, or any judgment or judgments thereupon already given, or hereafter
to be given, now be, or at any time or times hereafter shall be, released,
discharged, discontinued, nonsuted, disallowed, or otherwise hindered, or made
void or frustrate, or whereby the said H. P. his Executors, etc. in the name of
the said I. M. his Executors, etc. shall not nor may not recover and have the
said sum and sums of money in the said Recogn. mentioned, and execution or
executions of the said Judgments.

Covenant, that the Assignor, etc. upon request at the charges in the law of
the Assignee, will do any Act, thing, or devise in the law necessary for the
recovery of the sum or sums of money contained in the Recogn, etc.
And further, that he the said I. M. his Executors, etc. shall and will from
time to time, and at all times for ever hereafter, upon reasonable request, and
at the costs and charges in the law of the said H. P. his Heirs, Executors,
etc. make, do, execute, or cause to be made, done and executed, all and every
such Act and Acts, thing and things, devise and devises, in the law whatsoever,
meet, necessary, or expedient, for the said recovery of all or any of the sum
and sums of money before mentioned, and for the execution of the said judgment
already obtained upon the said Recognizance, by the said H. P. his Heirs, etc.
or by his or their learned council in the Law, shall be reasonably devised,
advised and required.

Covenant, that the Assignor will not revoke the Letter of Attorney, nor do any
thing whereby to frustrate the same; But will avow every thing therein
contained, and all acts and things don by the Assignor, etc. by reason of the
Recog. or judgment thereupon.
And finally, the said I. M. does by these presents, for him, his heirs, etc.
covenant and grant, to and with the said H. P. his Executors, etc. that neither
he the said I. M. his Execut. etc. nor either, or any of them, shall or will at
any time or times after the date of these presents, revoke, countermand
disanull or avoid, or by any other means or way whatsoever make frustrate, or
adnihilate the said Letter of Attorney, or any liberty, license, power, and
authority, or any thing in these presents contained, But shall and will, from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, justify and allow, uphold, maintain
and avow the same, and every matter and thing therein contained, or thereby
covenanted or granted, and all and every such suit and suits, execution and
executions, act and acts, thing and things, as the said H. his Executors, etc.
shall and will at his and their costs and charges, take, commence, prosecute,
sue, or follow, in the name of the said I. M. his Executors, etc. upon or by
reason of the said Recognizance, and judgment thereupon given, or either of
them. In witness whereof, etc.

Letter of Attorney irrevocable, for the Assignment of an Obligation to the
proper use and behoof of the Assignee.
KNow all men by these presents, That whereas, etc. Now these presents
witnesses, that the said R. W. has for diverse considerations granted,
assigned, and set over, and by these presents does grant, assign, and set over
unto W. E. etc. the said Obligation, and all sums of money therein contained,
together with all such benefit and commodity as the said R.W. his executors,
etc. can or may take or recover.

And further, the said R. W. does by these presents constitute, and in his
place put, the said W. E. to be his lawful Attorney irrevocable, for him, and
in his name to ask, levy, recover, take, and have of the said I. F. and W. F.
or either of them, the said sum of, etc. contained in the said condition, at
the time and place in the said condition specifyed, or at any other time or
place, and in default of payment thereof or any part thereof, to be made unto
the said W. E. in my name, or in the name of my Executors, etc. to arrest, sue,
or implead the said I. F. and W. F. their Heirs, Executors, etc. or either of
them, upon the said Obligation, in any suit or plaint, in any Court or Courts
within the Commonwealth of England, and Attorney and Attorneys, for me, and in
my name to make, and if need be to revoke, and all or any of the said actions,
suits or plaints, in my name to follow and prosecute, against the said I. F.
and W. F. or either of them, ratifying and allowing all and every the matters
and things, act and acts whatsoever, which my Attorney, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, or any of them shall lawfully make, do, execute or
commit, or cause to be made, done, executed or committed, in, about, or
concerning the premises. In witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture that the Grantor shall infeoff another person, before a day
limited in the Indenture, of certain Lands, with general Warranty, to such uses
as shall be limited by the Feoffment.
THIS INDENTURE made, etc. Between I. A. etc. of the one part, and I. W. etc. of
the other part, Witnesses, that the said I. A. in consideration, etc. And the
said I. A. does by these presents for him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, Covenant and grant, to and with the said I. W. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form following; that is to
say, that he the said I. A. shall and will, before, etc. upon reasonable
request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said W. by Deed infeoff
I. E. the younger, of, etc Yeoman, and G. A. of, etc. of and in all those, etc.
whether more or less, and bounding and butting in manner and form following,
that is to say, etc. as the marks and bounds divide and show, to be had and
holden of the said I. E. and G. A. their Heirs and Assigns, to such use and
uses, Covenant, that the bargainor is, and at the time of a future Feoffment to
be made, shall be seized in fee or fee tay I general, of a lawful, absolute,
and indefeasible estate in his own right, etc.
and in such manner and form, as in and by the said Deed of Feoffement shall be
limited and declared, and not to any other use or uses, intent or purpose.

And the said I. A. does by these presents, for him, his Heirs, etc. Covenant
and grant, to and with the said I. W. his Heirs, etc. that he the said I. A. at
the time of the ensealing and delivery of those presents, is, and at the time
of seison and state thereupon execute according unto the purport of the said
Deed of Feoffment, shall be seized in his demean, as of fee-simple, or fee-tayl
general, of a good, sure, lawful, rightful, absolute and indefeasible estate,
And now has, and then shall have, good, lawful authority, and rightful
power, in his own right, to give, grant, and convey the said Lands, and all
other the premises, with the appurtenances, according to the purport of the
said Deed of Feoffment, unto the said I. E. and G. A. And to such uses and
intents as shall be contained in the said Deed of Feoffment, And that such
person or persons to whom the use or uses shall be in or by the said Deed of
Feoffment limited, Covenant, that they to whom the uses shall be limited by the
future feoffement, may peaceably and lawfully enjoy the said Lands, etc.
without any lawful let, etc. acquitted and discharged, or saved harmless from
former bargains, etc. and encumbrances etc. the Rents and services only due to
the Lord etc. of the fee excepted.
shall, or lawfully may, from time to time, and at all times after the
execution of the estate upon the said Deed of Feoffment to be made, peaceably,
and lawfully have, hold, and enjoy the said Lands and Tenements, and all other
the premises, with the apurtenances, according to the limitation of the uses in
the said Deed of Feoffment to be contained, without any lawful let or
expulsion, eviction, or disturbance, of the said I. M. his Heirs, etc. or any
other person or persons whatsoever, And that clearly acquitted and dicharged,
or else from time to time, from and after the execution of the said estate by
the said I. A. his Heirs, etc. sufficiently saved harmless and indemnified, of
and from all and all manner of former bargains etc. and encumbrances
whatsoever, had, made, done, executed or committed, or before the execution of
the said estate to be had, made, done, or committed by the said I. A. his
Heirs, etc. or by any other person or persons whatsoever, The rents and
services from henceforth due or payable for the said lands, and other the
premises to the Lord or Lords of the fee or fees thereof only excepted; And
further, the said I. A. his etc, and all and every other person and persons,
any estate, interest, or thing, The Common Covenant for further assurance to be
made.
having or lawfully claiming to have, by, from, or under the said I. A. his
etc. shall and will, from time to time, and at all times during the space of,
etc. next, etc. upon request, and at the costs and charges in the law of the
said I. W. his Heirs, etc. acknowledge, make, do, execute, or suffer to be
acknowledged, made, done, and executed, all and every such further reasonable
and lawful Act and Acts, thing and things, devise and devises in the law
whatsoever, for the further assurance, etc. and other the premises, with the
appurtenances, to such person or persons, their Heirs and Assigns, to whom the
use or uses of the said premises shall be in or by the said Deeds of Feoffment
limited; Be it by Fine, Feoffment, etc. as by the said I. W. his Heirs, or
Assigns, or by his or their learned Council in the Law, shall be reasonably
devised, or advised and required.

And further, the said I. A. does by these presents, bargain and sell unto the
said I. W. all and singular the deeds, chaters, The usual clause of sale of the
evidences which concern the title: and covenant to deliver them before a day
certain.
writings, evidences, escripts, and minuments concerning only the said
premises, or any part thereof, all or so many of them as the said I. A. or any
other person or persons to his use, or by his delivery, has in his or their
custody, or which he may lawfully come by, without suit in law.

And he the said I. A. does by these presents, for him, his Heirs, etc.
Covenant and grant, to and with the said I. W. his Heirs, etc. well and truly
to deliver the said, etc. or cause them to be delivered unto the said I. W. his
Heirs, etc. on this side or before that etc. next ensuing the date of these
presents. In Witness whereof, etc.

A Deed of Feoffment of the lands before mentioned in the Indenture.
TO all, etc. know ye that I the aforesaid, etc. for diverse Causes and
Considerations, me especially moving, have, given, etc. and by this my present
writing indented have confirmed unto I. E. the younger of, etc. and G. A. of
etc. all those, etc. and the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders
of all and singular the aforesaid Lands and Tenements, with the appurtenances
before mentioned to be given or confirmed, with all and singular their
appurtenances, to the aforesaid I. E. and G. A. their Heirs and Assigns for
ever, to the use, behoof, and intents hereafter in these presents mentioned and
declared, and to none other uses or intents; viz. to the use and behoof of I.W.
Son and Heir apparent of I. W. of, etc. his Heirs and Assigns for ever.
Provided always, A Proviso for the Lesser of the old uses upon tender of money.
nevertheless, that if the aforesaid I.W. aforesaid, or his Assigns, do pay,
or bring to pay, or bring to the elder Churchwarden of the Parish Church of,
etc. aforesaid for the time being, in the Church Porch of the Parish Church of,
etc. aforesaid, Twelve pence of lawful, etc. any time or times during the life
of the aforesaid I. W. aforesaid, at one entire payment; that then, and from
thenceforth the uses aforesaid before by these presents limited to the
aforesaid I. W. the Son, shall cease, be frustrate, and have no longer
continuance, and that then, then afterward, and altogether from thenceforth,
the uses of the Lands and Tenements aforesaid, shall be, and the aforesaid I.
E. and G. A. and their Assigns, and all others, shall stand, and be seized to
the only use and behoof of the said I.W. aforesaid, his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, and to none other uses or intents, any thing before in this present
Writing contained to the contrary hereof notwithstanding, To hold of the Chief
Lord of the Fee by the service therefore due, and of right accustomed. And I
the aforesaid I. A. and my Heirs, all and singular the aforesaid Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, and other the premises, with all and singular their
appurtenances, to the aforesaid I. E. and G. A. their Heirs and Assigns, to the
use, behoof, and intents aforesaid, against all men will warrant, and for ever
defend by these presents, In witness, etc.

A Deed of Feoffment of a Parsonage, and Advowson of the Vicaridge thereto
belonging, with Warranty against the Feoffor and his Heirs.
TO all, etc. Know, etc. all that my Rectory of V. with the Advowson and
Presentation of the Vicaridge of V. aforesaid, and all and singular houses,
barns, edifices, lands, Glebes, tenements, pensions, portions, tithes,
oblations, obventions, and hereditaments hwatsoever, being, or reputed to be,
part, parcel or member, with the appurtenances of the Rectory aforesaid usually
demised, used, or occupied with the same, which the aforesaid I. B. lately
purchased of, etc. To have and to hold the Rectory aforesaid, together with the
Advowson and Presentation of the Vicaridge aforesaid, and all and singular
houses, edifices, lands, Glebes, tenements, pensions, portions, tithes,
oblations, obventions, hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises,
with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid, etc. his Heirs and assigns for ever,
of the Chief Lord of the Fee, by the service therefore due, and of right
accustomed, etc. (With the usual clause of Warranty.)

An Indenture of bargain and sale, made to the Lessee, of the same land, with
Proviso, that if the Bargainee do not pay a certain sum of money, at a day,
then the Grant to be void.
THIS INDENTVRE, etc. Between the Right Honorable H. Lord Windsor, of the one
part, And I. H. of etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That the said H. Lord
Windsor, as well for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. to him the said
H. Lord W. by the said I. H. well and truly in hand paid, etc. As also for and
in consideration of, etc. to him the said H. L. W. by the said I. H. his
Executors, etc. to be paid in manner and form according to a proviso hereafter
in these presents contained, has bargained and sold, and by these presents
does fully, clearly, and obsolutely bargain and sell unto the said I. H. All
and singular the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, hereafter mentioned, that
is to say, the Site or Manor-house, of G. etc. and other buildings to the said
Site or Manor-house belonging or appertaining, with the appurtenances, one
Orchard, etc. situate, lying and being, in the Parish of etc. and now being in
the tenure or occupation of etc. or his Assigns, by virtue of a demise thereof
made to him the said J. H. by the said H. Lord. W. which said Site or
Manor-house, are together situate, lying and being in etc. aforesaid, and do
bound and butt, etc. And further the said H. Lord W. has for the consideration
aforesaid, bargained and sold, and by these presents does fully and clearly
bargain and sell, unto the said I. H. the reversion and reversions, remain and
remainder, of all and singular the said Site, or Manor-house, etc. and all and
singular other the Lands, etc. of the said H. Lord W. which he the said H.
holds by reason or virtue of the said two several Leases to him made by the
said H. Lord W. and the receipts and other things reserved upon, or payable by
reason of any demise or demises of the said premises, or any part or parcel
thereof heretofore made, together with all and singular the Deeds, etc.
concerning only the said Site or Manor house, Lands, Tenements, and other the
premises before mentioned to be bargained and sold, or only any part thereof,
And the true Copies of all such other Deeds, Evidences, and writings as concern
the said premises, or any part thereof, jointly together with other Lands, and
Tenements, the same Copies to be written out at the costs and charges of the
said I. H. his Heirs or Assigns; To have, etc. the said Site or Manor-house,
etc. and all and singular other the premises, unto the said I. H. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever. Provided always, that if the said I. H. his Heirs, etc. or
any of them, shall not well and truly content and pay, or cause to be well and
truly contented and paid unto the said H. Lord W. his Executors, etc. the sum
of, etc. before recited, in manner and form following, that is to say, etc. at
or in, etc. and etc. one other parcel thereof, at the place aforesaid, in or
upon the etc. But in payment thereof, or of some part thereof, shall make
default, That then and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said H. Lord W. his Heirs or Assigns, into the said Site or Manor-house,
etc. and into every part and parcel thereof, with all and singular their
appurtenances, to reenter, and the same to have again, repossesse and enjoy, as
in his or their first and former estate and estates any thing before in these
presents contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

[Here followed the usual Covenants, as first, that the Bargainor is seized of
a rightful, absolute, indefeasible estate, in fee-simple, or fee-tayl general,
etc. in his own right, and had lawful power in his own right to convey, etc.
as aforesaid; And that upon payment as aforesaid the Bargainee shall peaceably
and lawfully enjoy the etc. without any eviction or disturbance, etc. and that
the lands are and shall be discharged or saved harmless from all former
bargains, etc. and encumbrances whatsoever, the rents due to the chief Lord of
the fee excepted. Secondly, the usual Covenant of further ussurance, etc. if
the Bargainee perform the Condition. And lastly, the usual Covenant to deliver
the deeds and evidences (if the Bargainee perform the condition) to the
Baagainee before or at a day certain.]

[Note, that these Covenants are not always thus placed, but are sometimes
transposed and altered, as may appear by the Presidents before.]

And Indenture of bargain and sale, and to lead the use of a fine, to be levied.
THIS INDENTURE, etc. Between I. G. etc. and I. his wife, of the first party,
I. H. etc. on the second party and H. P. etc. on the third party, Witnesses,
That the said I. G. and I. his Wife, and I. H. for diverse good causes and
considerations, etc. has granted, bargained and sold, and by these presents,
etc. unto the said H. P. all those lands, etc. with all and singular their
appurtenances, situate, lying and being, etc. commonly known, or called by the
name of, etc. containing in all, by estimation, etc. whether more or less, and
all and singular other the lands, etc. of them the said I.G. and I. his Wife,
and I.H. or either of them, in H. aforesaid. And further, the said I. G. and I.
his Wife, The usual clause of sale of the deeds which, etc. with covenant to
deliver the to the Bargainee before a day certain.
and I. H. do by these presents bargain and sell unto the said H. P. the
reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders of all and singular the said
land, etc. and other the premises, with th'appurtenances, together with all and
singular the Deeds, etc. concerning only the said lands, and other the
premises, or any part thereof, which said Deeds, etc. or so many of them as
they the said I. G. and I. his Wife, and I. H. have, or either of them has in
their or either of their custody or possession, or which they, or either of
them, may lawfully come by, without suit in Law, the said I. G. for himself,
and his Wife, and the said I. G. for him, his, etc. do by these presents
covenant to and with the said H. P. his Heirs and Assigns, well and truly to
deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the said H. P. his Heirs or Assigns, on
this side, and before the Feast of, etc. so whole, safe, uncancelled and
undefaced, as they are at the time of the delivery of these presents; To have,
etc. unto the said H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the only use and
behoof of the said H. P. his Heirs and Assigns for ever. And it is further
covenanted, granted, concluded, condescended and fully agreed, by and between
all the parties to these presents in manner and form following; that is to say,
that they the said I. G. and I. his Wife, and I. H. shall and will before the
Feast of, etc. at the costs and charges in the Law of the said H. P. his Heirs,
etc. before the Justices of the Court of Common pleas at Westminster, knowledge
one Fine sur Cognizance de droit come ceo q'il ad d. son don unto the said H.
P. with Proclam. according to the Stat. in that case provided, in due form of
Law to be levied, of all and singular the said Lands, etc. and other the
premises, with th'appurtenances, by certain names, number and quantity of Land
in the said Fine to be contained, By which said Fine so to be knowledged and
levied, the said I.G. and I. his Wife, and I.H. shall acknowledge, the said
Lands, etc. and all other the premises before mentioned, to be bargained and
sold, with th'appurtenances, to be the right of the said H. P. as these which
the said H. P. shall have of the gift, and grant of the said I. G. and I. his
Wife, and I. H. etc. and the same shall release, and quit claim unto the said
H. P. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, which said Fine so to be knowledged and
levied, and the execution thereupon to be had and taken, and the said Lands,
etc. and other the premises, shall be to the only use and behoof of the said H.
P. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and not to any other use or intent.

Now follows the usual Covenants, that the Lands are and shall be discharged
or saved harmless from all former bargains, encumbrances, etc. except the
Rents, etc. due to the chief Lord of the Fee, and one Lease heretofore made;
that the Bargainee shall peaceably enjoy without eviction or disturbance, etc.
and lastly, the Covenant for further assurance, etc.

An Assignment of a Lease.
THIS INDENTVRE, etc. Between E. A. etc. of the one part, and W. S. etc. of the
other part, Witnesses, That whereas the Right Honorabfe A. V. M. etc. did by
Indenture bearing Date, etc. demise, etc. unto W. A. all that the Site of the
Manor or Farm of P. with the houses, etc. [Recite the Original Lease unto the
end of the payments of the Rents,] with clause of re-entry for non payment of
the said Rent, as in and by the said Indent. amongst other things more at large
it does and may appear; The estate, right and interest of which said W. A. of
and in the said Site of the said Manor, and other the premises, the said E. and
E. A. by good and lawful assurance, and conveyance in the Law, has sithence
obtained, and now has and holds. And whereas the said A. V. M. did further
by the said recited. Indenture make diverse and sundry Covenants, Grants, and
agreements, to and with the said W. A. his Executors and Assigns. Now these
presents witnesses, that the said E. A. for the sum of, etc. to him by the
said W. S. before the delivery of these presents well and truly paid, whereof
the said E. acquitteth the said W. his Heirs, etc has given, granted,
assigned, and set over unto the said W. S. all the said term of years yet to
come and unexpired of and in the said site and other the premises, And all the
estate, right, title, interest, and term of years which the E. A. at the time
of the ensealing, and delivery of these presents, has yet to come and
unexspired of and in all and singular the said Manor, Lands, etc. and other the
premises in the said recited Indenture mentioned to be demised, with all and
singular their appurtenances, together with the said recited Indenture of
Lease, and all such benefit, advantage, and commodity as the said E. his
Executors or Assigns, can or may have, receive, perceive, or take by means of
the said recited Indenture and demise, or by reason of all or any of the
Covenants, Grants, and agreements in the said Indenture contained, To have and
to hold the said Manor, etc. and other the premises before by these presents
mentioned to be bargained, assigned, and set over, with all and singular their
appurtenances, unto the said W.S. his Executors, Administrators, and assigns,
from the day of the date of these presents, for and during all such time,
interest, and term of years as are yet to come, or be unexpired, as he the said
E. A. his Executors, etc. or any of them might have had taken, and enjoyed the
same, if this present grant had never been or made. And the said E. A. does by
these presents, for him, his Heirs, etc. covenant and grant, The usual
Covenant for peaceable and quiet enjoyment without eviction or disturbance, etc.
to and with the said W.S. his Executors, etc. that he the said W.S. his
Executors, etc, shall and may, from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
during all the said term of years yet to come, or unexpired, peaceably,
lawfully, and quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said Site, and all
other the premises before mentioned to be granted, assigned, and set over, with
all and singular their appurtenances, without any eviction or expulsion, let or
disturbance of the said E. A. his Executors, etc. or of any of them, or of any
other person or persons whatsoever, any estate, interest or term in the said
premises, or any part thereof, having or claiming to have, by, from, or under
the said E. A. his Heirs or Assigns, or by, from, or under the said W. A. his
Heirs or Assigns.

Covenant, that the Assignor has neither done nor omitted any thing, whereby
to forfeit or avoid the lease.
And further, that neither he the said E. A. nor W. his Father, their
Executors, etc. not any of them, already have not executed, committed, or
suffered, or left undone or omitted, any Act or Acts, thing or things
whatsoever, whereby the said lease or term of years is forfeited, or may be
defeated, made frustrate, or avoided, or the estate, interest, or term of years
of the said W. S. yet to come and unexpired therein any ways hindered or
adnihilated, In Witness whereof etc.

A Grant of an annuity or yearly rent, for lives, with diverse good covenants
therein contained for the better enjoying of the Rent.
THIS INDENTURE, etc. Between G.G. of etc. and G. G. Son and Heir apparent of
the said G. of the one part, and H. P. of etc. of the other part, Witnesses,
that the said G. and G. for diverse good causes, etc have given, granted, and
confirmed, and by these presents do give, grant, and confirm, unto the said
H.P. his Heirs and Assigns, one Annuity or yearly rent of, etc. of good, etc.
to be issuing and going out of all and singular the Manors, etc. here after
mentioned, situate, lying and being in the said County, that is to say, of, in
and out of the Manor or etc. [Recite the Land] to have, levy, perceive, take,
and yearly enjoy the said annuity and yearly rent of etc. unto the said H. P.
his Heirs, etc. immediately from and after the decease of A. B. of etc. for,
with, and during the natural life or lives of etc. [recite the names of the
parties] and of the survivor and survivors of them, at usual feasts or terms in
the year, that is to say, by even and equal portions yearly to be paid, at or
in the Mansion or Manor-house of etc. aforesaid, And if it shall happen the
said annuity or yearly rent of etc. or any part or parcel thereof, to be behind
and unpaid, in part or in all, over or after any of the said feasts, or days of
payment, in which as aforesaid it ought to be paid, by the space of, etc. next
after any of the said Feasts, For default of payment, of the rent, a Nomine
poen^e is granted, and distress for both irreplegiable.
or days of payment limited for the payment thereof that then, and so often
they the said G. G. their Heirs and Assigns, shall forfeit and lose to the
aforesaid H. P. his Heirs or Assigns, etc. of good, etc. in the name of a pein,
and that then, and so often, and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said H. P. his Heirs and Assigns, and the said G. the Father,
and G. the Son do, and either of them does, for them and either of them, and
for the Heirs and Assigns of them and either of them grant, that it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said H. P. his Heirs and Assigns, as well for the
said Annuity or yearly rent of, etc. as for the said sum, or for any part or
parcel thereof, so as aforesaid forfeited, in the name of a pein, unto all and
singular the said Manors, etc. or into any part or parcel thereof to enter, and
distrain, and the distress and distresses there so had and taken, from thence
lawfully to lead, drive, and carry away, and the same to impound, detein, and
keep irreplegiably, until the said H. P. his Heirs and Assigns, shall be as
well of the said Annuity or yearly rent, together with the arrerages thereof,
(if any shall happen to be) as also of the said sums of etc. so as aforesaid to
be forfeited, in the name of a pein, fully satisfied, contented, and paid. Of
which said Annuity, or yearly rent of, etc. the said G. and G. have put the
said H.P. in full, Seiz^^ of the rent given by the Grantor.
quiet, and peaceable possession and seizon, by the delivery and payment of,
etc. of etc. unto the said H. P. at the time of th'ensealing and delivery of
these presents, in the name of seizon of the said Annuity, or yearly rent
before mentioned.

And the said G. G. the Father, and G. the Son do, and every of them does
severally by these presents, for them and either of them, Co^enant that the
Grantor is seized of an absolute and indefeasible estate of the Lands charged;
and that he has good and lawful power in his own right to charge them.
Covenant and grant, to and with the said H. P. his Heirs, etc. in manner and
form following; that is to say, that the said G. the Father, at the time of
th'ensealing and delivery of these presents, is solely, lawfully and rightfully
seized in his demean as of Fee-simple, of a good, sure, lawful, absolute, and
indefeasible estate, of and in all and singular the said Manors, etc. and other
the premises, out of which the said Annuity or yearly Rent before granted is
mentioned to be issuing, And that the said G. the Father, at the time of the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, had good rightful power, and lawful
authority, in his own right to charge the said Manors, etc. and all and
singular other the premises, with the appurtenances, out of which the said
Annuity or yearly Rent is before limited to be granted, with the said Annuity
or yearly Rent, according to the purport of these presents, and in manner and
form aforesaid. And further, the said G.G. and G. do, and either of them does,
for them, and either of them, and for the Heirs, etc. of them and either of
them, Covenant that the lands out of which, etc. in default of payment shall be
overt liable and sufficient to the^^^ distress, etc.
Covenant and grant, to and with the said H. P. his Executors, etc. That the
said Manors, etc. and all other the premises, and every part and parcel
thereof, out of which the said Annuity or yearly Rent is mentioned to be
issuing, shall and will from time to time, and at all times from and after any
default in payment to be made of the said Annuity or yearly Rent, or of any
part thereof, at any of the time or times before limited for the payment
thereof, be overt, liable, and sufficient to the distress and distresses of
the said H. P. his Heirs, etc. And further, Covenant that the lands out of
which, etc. are, and during the continuance of the said Rent, shall be of such
value, etc. above all charges and reprises. Covenant that the Gra^tee shall
peaceably enjoy the rent.
that the said Manor, etc. and other the premises, out of which the said
Annuity or yearly Rent beforementioned to be granted, and issuing, now be, and
shall from time to time, and all times hereafter, during the continuance of the
said Annuity or yearly Rent, and during such time as the said Annuity or yearly
Rent before granted, is mentioned to be payable unto the said H. P. his Heirs
or Assigns, continue, remain, and be of the clear yearly value of, etc. over
and above all other charges and reprizes whatsoever. And that the said H. P.
his Heirs, etc. shall, or lawfully may, from time to time, and at all times
during the continuance of the said term, peaceably and quietly have, perceive,
take, and enjoy, the said Annuity or yearly Rent, according to the purport of
these presents. Covenant that the Lands are, and shall be, during the
continuance of the rent, discharged, or else saved harmless, etc.
And that the said Manors, etc. and all other the premises out of which the
said Annuity or yearly rent before granted is mentioned to be issuing, at the
time of th'ensealing and delivery of these presents, be, and so from time to
time, and at all ^imes hereafter, during such time as the said premises shall
be chargeable with the said Annuity or yearly Rent, shall continue, remain, and
be acquitted and discharged, from all former Bargains, gifts, grants, etc.
grants by Copy of Court Roll, and one Lease made, excepted.
or else from time to time, and at all times hereafter sufficiently saved
harmless and indemnified, of and from all manner of former bargains, sales,
gifts, grants, etc. and encumbrances whatsoever; All grants and demises
heretofore made or granted, by Copy of Court Roll to any person or persons
according to the customs of the said Manors of any customary or Copyhold lands
heretofore usually letten by Copy of Court Roll, And one Lease heretofore made
by Indenture to one I. L. for the term of, etc. of the new house in H. with the
appurtenances, etc. being part of the premises, only excepted and foreprised.
In witness whereof, etc.

A Grant in Fee-farm, with warranty against the Feoffor and his Heirs, in which
Grant a Letter of Attorney is inserted, to give Livery.
TO all, etc. Know ye, that I the said R. R. for diverse Causes, etc. have
demised, infeoffed, delivered, and by this my present Writing indented
confirmed unto I.R. etc. all that, etc. with the appurtenances, situate, lying
and being, etc. containing in the whole, by estimation, etc. whether it be more
or less, and bounding and butting in manner and form following; that is to
say, etc. To have and to hold the aforesaid, etc. with all and singular their
appurtenances, to the aforesaid I.R. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, of the
chief Lord of the Fee thereof, In default of payment grant of power to
distrain, and if no sufficient distress may be found upon the ground, that then
it shall be lawful for the Feoffor to re^enter.
by the Services therefore due, and of right accustomed; Yielding and paying
therefore to me the aforesaid R.R. and my Assigns, yearly, etc. at two terms of
the year, viz. etc. by equal portions yearly to be paid. And if, and as often
as it shall happen the aforesaid yearly rent, etc. or any parcel thereof to be
behind and unpaid, in part or in all, after any Feast of the Feasts aforesaid,
in which the same, as aforesaid ought to be paid, that then, and so often, and
afterward, it shall be lawful for me the said R. R. and my Assigns, into all
and singular the said Lands, and other the premises, and into any, and every
part thereof, to enter and distrain, and the distresses so there taken and had,
from thence to lead away, drive, take, and carry away, and the same to retain
and detain, until the said annual rent, etc. and the arrerages thereof (if
there be any) be fully satisfied, paid, and contented. And if it happen the
aforesaid annual rent, or any parel thereof, to be behind unpaid, in part, or
in all, after any Feast of the Feasts aforesaid, in which the same ought to be
paid as aforesaid, by the space etc. and no sufficient distress, in or upon
the aforesaid, etc. or any parcel thereof, by all that time may be found. That
then, and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful for me the said R. R. my
Heirs and Assigns, in and upon the aforesaid etc. and other the premises, with
the appurtenances, to re-enter, and the same to have again, repossesse, and
re-enjoy, as in my former estate, and the aforesaid I. R. his Heirs and Assigns
from thence totally to expel and amove; any thing before in this present
Writing indented to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

The usual clause of Warranty.
And I the aforesaid R. R. and my Heirs aforesaid, etc. with the appurtenances,
to the aforesaid I. R. his Heirs and Assigns, against me and my Heirs will
warrant, and for ever defend by these presents. And moreover, Know ye, Letter
of Attorney to give livery.
That I the said R. R. have made, ordained, constituted, and by these presents
in my place put, my beloved in Christ I. S. of H, etc. my true and lawful
Attorney, for me, in my stead, and in my name to enter into the aforesaid, etc.
with the appurtenances, and seinsin for me, in my stead, and in my name, to my
use take, and after such possession and seisin so for me, in my name and stead
to the aforesaid I. R. his Heirs and Assigns, to deliver according to the
tenor, force, and effect of these presents only, and whatsoever my said
Attorney shall so do, or cause or suffer to be done in the premises, I do
ratify and confirm. In witness, etc.

A Condition of an Obligation with the usual Covenants for the better assurance
of the Lands Mortgaged.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the above bounden S.S. has by his Deed
indented, bearing date, etc. for and in consideration of a certain sum of money
in the said Deed specified; given, granted, and confirmed unto the above named
T. B. his Heirs and Assigns, three parcels of Land and Meadow in the said Deed
indented mentioned, whereof the one is called, etc. containing in all by
estimation, etc. or thereabouts, with proviso or condition in the said Deed
Indented contained, That if the said S.S. his Heirs, Executors, or Assigns, do
pay unto the said T. B. his Executors or Assigns, the sum of, etc. at a certain
day and place in the said Deed indented specified, That then the said Deed
Indented, and seison thereupon delivered, shall be void, as in the said Deed
indented, at large appears, If therefore the above said T. B. his Heirs or
Assigns, Covenant for peaceable enjoyment, and (in default of payment) for
further assurance, etc.
shall or may from time to time, and at all times here after, peaceably and
lawfully have, hold, and enjoy the said 3 parcels of Land, and all and singular
their appurtenances, according to the purport and intent of the said. Deed
indented, And further, if the above bounden. S.S. his Heirs etc. shall happen
to make default in payment of the said sum of etc., or of any part thereof, at
the day or place in the said Deed Indented limited for the payment thereof,
Then if the abovesaid, S.S. his Heirs, etc. and every other person or persons,
any right, interest, or thing, having, or lawfully claiming to have, in, to, or
out of the said 3 parcels of Land, or any part or parcel thereof, shall or will
from time to time, and at all times hereafter during the space of etc. next
after default in payment to be made, upon reasonable request, and at the costs
and charges in the law of the said T.B. his Heirs, etc. knowledge, make, do,
execute, and suffer, or cause to be done, knowledged, executed and suffered,
all and every such further lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and
things, devise and devises in the Law whatever, for the further assurance
better suerty, surer making, and absolute conveying of the said 3 parcels of
Land, with th'appurtenances, and of every part and parcel thereof, unto the
said T. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, as by the said T. B. his Heirs or
Assigns, or by his or their learned Connsel in the Law shall the reasonably
devised or advised, Be it by Fine, Feoffment, Recovery, or otherwise with
warranty against all persons, or without warranty, That then, etc. Or else, etc.

A Condition of an Obligation to perform Covenants of an Indentute.
THe Condition, etc. that if the within bound I. R. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, do, from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, well and truly observe, perform, fulfill, and keep and
singular the Convenants, grants, and agreements, which on his and their part
are to be observed, performed, and kept, mentioned, contained, specified or
declared in one pair of Indentures bearing date, etc. made between the said I.
R. of the one part, and the said I. G. of the other part, according to the
purport, effect, intent, and true meaning of the said Indenture, That then, etc.

A Condition to abide an Award for Lands in controversy.
THe Condition, etc. That where deivers controversies, variances, debates, and
suits, have been, risen, grown, and are yet depending between the above named
T. W. of the one part, and the above bounden I C. of the other part, touching,
etc. lying in the Parish, etc. containing by estimation, etc. whether more or
less, and touching the estate and title thereof, for appeasing whereof the
said parties have of their mutual consents, assents, and agreements, submitted
themselves to the order, award, and determination of L. W. and E. P. or etc.
and of T. T. of etc. Arbitrators indifferently elected and chosen, as well on
the part and behalf of the said I. C. as on the part, etc. to arbitrate, order,
determine, rule, and judge touching and concerning the premises, So as the said
award be made by the said Abitrators on this side the etc. If therefore, etc.
That then, etc. Or else.

A Condition to abide an award, etc. and to stand to the Order of an Umpier.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bounden R. P. etc. do for his and their
part stand to, obey, perform, fulfill and keep the award, Arbitrament,
ordinance, determination and Judgment of etc. Arbitrators indifferently named,
etc. as well on the part and behalf of the within bounden R. P. as on the part,
etc. to Arbitrate, etc. of, for, upon, touching and concerning all and all
manner of Actions and causes of actions, suits, quarrels, variances, discords,
debts, debates, accounts, Covenants, trespasses, claims, controversies, deeds,
had, moved, stirred, commenced, or depending between the said parties, for any
matter, cause or thing whatsoever, from the beginning of the world, unto the
day of the date within written, So that the said Arbitrament, etc. of the said
Arbitrators, of and upon the premises, be made and given by them the said
Arbitrators in writing Indented under their hands and seals, ready to be
delivered unto the said parties demanding the same, on this side or before the
etc. And if it shall happen that the said Arbitrators cannot, nor do not make
any award or agreement between the said parties, within the time and space
before limited, That then if the said R. P. his Heirs and Assigns, do likewise
stand to, obey, perform, fulfill and keep the award, arbitrament,
determination, and judgment of W. B. Vmpier between the said parties
indifferently named, elected, and chosen, to Arbitrate, award, deem, judge,
rule and determine, of, for, upon, or concerning the premises, so that the same
award, ordinance, decree, determination and judgment of the said Vmpire be
made and given up in writing indented under his hand and seal, on this side and
before, etc. That then, etc. Or else, etc.

A Condition to save a Surety harmless.
THe Condition, etc. That where the within named E. P. at the special instance,
and for the only debt of the within bounden I. C. stands, jo^ntly and severally
bounden with the said I. C. and with the within bounden H. T. unto one R. C.
etc. in 20 l. of etc. by obligation bearing date, etc. with Condition thereupon
indorsed for true payment of the sum of, etc in and upon the, etc. as the said
recited obligation and condition more at large appears; If therefore the
within bounden I. C. and H. P. their Heirs, Exec. Administ. and Assigns, or any
of them, do well and truly content and pay, or cause, etc. unto the said R. C.
his Exec. or Assigns, the said sum of, etc. at the time and place limited for
the payment, according unto the purport of the said condition of the said
recited obligation, and thereof, and from all sums of money in the said recited
obligation and condition specified, do from time to time, and at all times
hereafter well and sufficiently save and keep harmless the said E. P. his
Heirs, Executors, Administ. and Assigns, and his and their lands and tenements,
goods and chattels, against the said R.C. his Heirs, Execut. Administ. and
Assigns, That then, etc. Or. else, etc.

A Lease of an Iron Furnace, Work Hammer, or Iron Mill, together also with
Woods, and Mines, containing ordinary Covenants, for the better enjoying of the
same.
THIS INDENTVRE, etc. Between F. F. and F. F. Son and Heir apparent of the said
F. of the one part. And H. G. etc. and M. M. etc. of the other part, Witnesses,
That the said F. and E. for and in consideration, etc. have demised, granted,
and to Farm letten, and by these presents, etc. unto the said H. G. and M. M.
one Iron Furnace, or work, Hammer, or Iron Mill, newly erected, situate, and
being, etc. and all Bellows, Implements, Tools, and other necessaries thereunto
belonging, and all Ponds, Waters, Water-wayes, Watercourse, Streams, Banks,
Bays, Damms, Sluices, Standgates, to the said Iron Furnace, and Iron Forge, or
to either or any of them belonging or appertaining, or therewith heretofore
letten, occupied or enjoyed, and also the edifices, houses and buildings,
lately erected near about the said from Furnace and Forge, or either of them,
for the dwelling of workmen, or for laying of Cole, Iron, or other things. And
also such, so much, and so many parcels, pieces, and plots of ground, of the
land or soil of the said F. or E. or either of them, next adjoining unto the
said Iron Furnance or Forge, Hammer or Iron mill, as shall be meet and
convenient for the said H. G. and M. M. their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, or any of them, not only to build and erect necessary houses upon, for
the better keeping, harboring, or lodging of such their Servants or Workmen,
as they or either of them shall use or employ, in and about the said Iron
Furnance or Forge, or either of them, during the continuance of this present
Lease, Butalso to use for places to lay Wood, Cole, Mine, Iron wear, Sowes of
Iron, Earth, Stone, Sand, Cinder, and other necessaries for to be spent,
employed, or used in and about the said Iron Furnace, Iron Forge, Hammer, or
Iron Mill aforesaid, To have and to hold the said Hammer, Forge, or Iron Mill,
Ponds, Waters, Waterways, Streams, Bays, Damms, and other the premises before
by these presents mentioned to be demised, with all and singular their
appurtenances, unto the said H. G. and M. M. their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, from the Feast of etc. last past before the date of these
presents, Rendering so much Rent the first three years, and so much after.
unto the full end and term of, etc. from thence ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended; Yielding and paying therefore yearly, during the said first
three years, of the said term unto the said F. F. his Heirs and Assigns, the
sum of, etc. and from and after the, etc. which shall be in the year of our,
etc. the yielding and paying during all the residue of the said term of, etc.
then to come or to be unexpired, yearly, and every year at the Feast of, etc.
unto the said F. F. his Heirs and Assigns, the sum of, For default of payment,
of the rent, a Nomine poen^e is granted, and distress for both irreplegiable.
at the Iron Forge or Hammer aforesaid, of good, etc. And if, and as often as
it shall happen the said yearly Rent of, etc. before by these presents
reserved, or any parrt threof to be behind and unpaid, in part, or in all, over
of after any of the said Feasts or terms of the year, or terms of payment in
the which the same ought to be paid, by the space of, etc. being lawfully
demanded at the Iron Forge, or Hammer aforesaid, that then the said H. G. and
M. M. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall forfiet unto the said
F. F. his Heirs and Assigns, the sum of, etc. in the name of a pein; and that
then, and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to and for the said F.
F. his Heirs and Assigns, into all and singular the Iron Furnance, Iron Forge,
Hammer, Iron Mill, and all and singular other the premises, or into any part or
parcel thereof, to enter, and distrain, as well for the said yearly Rent, as
also for all such sum or sums of money as shall be forfeited in the name of a
pein; and the distress and distresses there so had and taken, from thence
lawfully to lead, bear, drive, and carry away, and that to withhold, detain,
and keep inrreplegiable, until that the said F. F. his Heirs and Assigns, shall
be of the said yearly rent, and arrerages thereof, (if any shall happen to be)
and also of all such sum and sums of money as shall be forfeited in the name of
a pein, fully satisfied, contented, and paid.

And the said F. F. and E. F. and either of them, does by these presents, for
them and either of them, Covenant and grant to and with the said H. G. and M.
M. and either of them, Covenant, that the leassor, upon request, shall assign
so much wood, to the lessee, as shall make 500 cords of wood.
and to and with the Executors, Administrators and Assigns of them and either
of them, in manner and form following; that is to say, that they the said F.F.
and E.F. their Heirs and Assigns, shall and will, yearly, and every year,
during all the said term of, etc. upon reasonable request to them or any of
them to be made, by the said H. G. or M. M. or either of them, their Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, at or in the now Mansion House of the said F. in
G. etc. assign, appoint, and set over unto the said H. G. and M. M. or to the
survivor of them, or to their or either of their Exec. Administ. and Assigns,
within two miles of the said Iron-mill, or Iron-works, of the proper woods of
the said F. and E. their Heirs or Assigns, or of one of them, such and so much
wood as shall be sufficient to make 500 cords of wood, every cord to contein in
length 4 foot, in height 6 foot.

And further, the said E. and F. and either of them, does for them, and either
of the, and for the Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns of them, or
either of them, covenant and grant, Convenant that the Lessees shall employ the
wood for the making of Coals, or otherwise without interruption.
to and with the said H. G. and M. M. their Executors, Adiministrators and
Assigns, and either of them, and to them the said H. and M. their Executors,
etc. do by these presents grant, that it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said H. and M. or either of them or the Executors, etc. or either of them,
from time to time, and at all times after such assignment or appointment of the
said woods as aforesaid, to them the said H. and M. and either of them, or the
Executors, etc. of them, or either of them, to be made, felled, cut down,
cleaved out, and corded, to have, take, and employ the said woods so assigned,
appointed or set out, for, or to the making of Coals, or otherwise at their
will and pleasure, without any lawful let or interruption of any person or
persons whatsoever. And the said F. E. and either of them, does by these
presents, for them and either of them, covenant and grant, to and with the said
H. and M. their Executors, etc. that if upon such request as aforesaid made for
the assignment and appointment of the said woods for the making of the said 500
cords of wood aforesaid, Covenant, that if no assignment be made that the
Lessees shall take without assignment.
the said F. and E. or any of them, or the Heirs, etc. of them or any of them,
do not assign, appoint, and set forth the said woods for the making of the said
500 cords of wood of the scantlyn aforesaid, unto the said H. and M. or any of
them, or the Executors, etc. of them or any of them, that then, and as often as
any such default of Assignment, appoinment, or setting out shall be by the said
F. and E. their Heirs or Assigns made, it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said H. and M. and either of them, and the Executors, etc. of them and
either of them, to have, and to take in any of the ground of the said F. and E.
or either of them, the Heirs, etc. of them or either of them, Convenant, that
the Lessees shall cause the wood to be felled and corded, and that they shall
not be carried away, or converted to coals, until a week after request made to
the Lessors, etc. number the cords, etc.
lying and being within two miles of the s;aid Furnace or Forge, so much as
will suffice to make up full 500 Cords of Wood of the scantlin aforesaid, for
that year and time wherein default of assignment or setting forth shall be made
as aforesaid, if so much wood be then to be had upon the woods, ground, or land
of the said E. and F. or either of them, or the Heirs or Assigns of them or
either of them, within two miles of the said Forge, Furnace or Ironwork, for
the certain doing thereof, and for the avoydance of question or controversy in
and about the delivery or taking of the said cords or wood, it is covenanted
and agreed between the said parties, and the said H. and M. do covenant and
grant, for them, their Executors, etc. to and with the said F. and M. their
Heirs and Assigns, that they the said H. and M. their, etc. shall yearly,
during the said term, cause the wood by virtue of these presents to be felled,
and to be set up into Cords, that neither they, nor either of them, nor their
Executors, etc. shall or will, after the making of the said wood to them
assigned and set forth, or delivered as aforesaid into Cords, carry away any of
the said cords of wood, or put or convert any of them into Coals, until within
one week after they, or some of them have made request unto them the said F.
and E. or one of them, or the Heirs etc. of them or one of them, at the
dwelling house of the said F. in H. aforesaid, to tell and number the said
cords of wood so made of the wood to them assigned, appointed, set forth, or
delivered as aforesaid.

An further, the said F. and E. do, and, either of them does by these presents,
Covenant, that there is sufficient Iro^ Mine, and Iron wear upon the lands of
the Lessors, within two miles of the Furnace, Or else that they will find or
procure sufficient in the lands of others within two mises, etc.
for them, and either of them, and for the Heirs, etc. Covenant and grant, to
and with the said H. and M. and either of them, and to and with the Executors
etc. of them and either of them, that there is and shall be during the said
term of, etc. good Iron Mine, and Iron wear sufficient, and enough to be
employed, spent, or blown out of the said Iron Furnace, to be had, dug, and
drawn, within the ground, land and soil of the said F. and E. their Heirs, etc
lying and being within two miles of the Furnace aforesaid; Or else for want of
sufficient Iron Mine, or Iron wear, to be spent, employed, or blown out at the
Furnace aforesaid, so as aforesaid to be had and found in the lands or soil of
the said F. and E. or one of them, or the Heirs, etc. of them, or one of them,
that the said F. and E. at the proper costs and charges of them, or one of
them, shall and will, from time to time, during the continuance of the said
term, procure, find, get, and assign unto the said H. and M. their Executors,
etc. or to some of them, land, ground, soil, and places, lying and being within
two miles of the said Furnace, where there shall be so much good Mine of the
said F. and E. their Heirs, etc. as shall suffice to be spent in the said
Furnace, and to supply the want of Iron Mine, and Iron wear, which shall be
wanting or lacking in the ground, land or soil of the said F. and E. their
Heirs and Assigns, within two miles of the Furnace aforesaid.

Convenant, that the Lessees, etc. may dig, etc. such and so much Iron Mine,
etc. within 2 miles of the furnace, and to have places there to lay the Mine,
and ways for carrying thereof, without any molestation of any person.
And the said F. and E. do, and either of them, does, by these presents, for
them, and either of them, and for the Heirs, etc. of them, and either of them,
Covenant to and with the said H. and M. and either of them, their Executors,
etc. and either of them, do grant by these presents, that it shall and may be
lawful, to and for the said H. and M. their Executors, etc. and either of
them, and the Assigns, Servants, Workmen and Laborers of them, and either of
them, from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during the said, etc. to
digg, draw, have, take, and carry away such, and so much Iron Mine, Iron wear,
and Iron stone, out of all or any of the said lands or grounds of the said F.
and E. or either of them, within two miles of the said Furnace, and also out of
the said land, ground or soil of other men, within two miles of the said
Furnace; And to have places there to lay the said Mine, and reasonable and
convenient ways for the fetching and carrying thereof to the said Furnace,
without trouble, let, molestation, or impeachment of the said F. and E. their
Heirs, etc. or either of them, or any of the Owners of the said lands, ground,
or soil, or any other person or persons whatsoever. And the said F. and E. do,
and either of them does by these presents, for them and either of them, and the
Heirs, etc. of them and either of them, Covenant, Covenant, that the Lessee
etc. shall have free ingresse, egresse, and regresse, and convernient ways,
etc. with Carts for carrying wood, cole, mine, etc. to be employed about the
making of Iron in the said Furnace.
to and with the said H. and M. their Executors, etc. and to and with either of
them, And to the said H. and M. their Executors, etc. and to either of them, by
these presents do grant, that it shall be lawful for, and that they the said
H. and M. their Executors, etc. and either of them, and their Servants and
Workmen, and every of them, may and shall, from time to time, and at all times
during the said term, have free liberty, ingresse, egresse, and regresse, and
convenient and necessary ways in, by, over, and through the ground and soil of
the said F. and E. their Heirs and Assigns, and such other grounds wherein wood
shall be as aforesaid to them or any of them appoointed, with Carts, Wains, and
Carriages, for the carrying of Wood, Coal, Mine, Iron sowes, Earth, Sand, Dust,
Cover, Sinder, and other necessary stuff or implements to be occupied or
employed in or about the making of Iron in the said Furnace, Forge, or Iron
work, to or from the same, or to be employed or used in or about the said Iron
works, or about the making of coals, or other employments whatsoever touching
the same, Covenant, that the Lessee may make Colliers Lodges, and places to
make Coals in any convenient place, etc.
and to make Colliers Lodges, and also to dig and make necessary place and
places to make coals in any convenient place or places within any the woods,
ground or soil of the said F. and E. or in any other grounds wherein the said
F. and E. or either of them, shall assign or appoint them to fell wood as
aforesaid, within two miles of the said Iron words, and to cut and take Fern
and Cover, and to digg and take as well places for Cole-pits, as also necessary
and convenient earth or dust for the covering and healing of their, Covenant to
cut Fern and Cover, and to dig earth or dust for covering of the Colepits or
other use for the making Coals to be spent in the Iron works. Convenant to digg
earth, stone, g^^te, clay, o^ any other stuff, for repairing or new making the
banks, bays, etc. in places most convenient, and least hurtful.
and either of their Cole-pits, or other uses, which shall be made and used for
the making of Coals to be spent and employed in the said Iron works, And earth,
stone, grite, clay, or any other stuff, necessary for the repairing,
maintaining, amending, or new making (if need shall so require) of all or any
of the banks, bays, damms, ponds, sluices, gutters, or other necessaries of the
said ponds, waters, watercourse, and Iron-works, or any of them, from time to
time, and at all times during the said continuance as aforesaid, as need shall
require, in such place and places of the ground and soil of the said F. and E.
as shall be most meet and convenient for the taking thereof near unto the said
ponds, where the same shall be needful to be used, and least hurtful unto the
said F. and E. their Heirs and Assigns, or any of them.

And the said H. and M. do, and either of them does; by these presents, for
them, and either of them, Covenant and grant, to and with the said F. and E.
their Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, that the said H. and M. their
Executors, Convenant, that the Lessees (if they shall lawfully take and enjoy
the 503 Cords of wood, etc.) will pay so much to the Lessors.
etc. shall and will, in and upon the Feast of, etc. which shall be, etc. or
within, etc. next ensuing (if they the said H. and M. their Executors, etc. or
any of them, shall, or lawfully may, by virtue of these presents, in the year
next before the end of the said Feast of, etc. which shall be in, etc. have,
take and enjoy the said number of 500 Cords of wood before mentioned, by the
assignment and appointment of the said F. and E. their Heirs, etc. or either of
them, or otherwise without assignment, upon the Lands and Soil of the said F.
and E. or one of them, within two miles of the said Iron-works, according to
the purport and true meaning of these presents) well and truly content and pay,
or cause to be paid unto the said F. F. or his Assigns (if he shall then be
living) or to the said E. his Heirs or Assigns (if he the said F. shall be then
dead) at, or in the said Iron Forge, the sum of, amp;c. at one whole and entire
payment. And furthermore, that the said H. and M. their Executors, etc. shall
and will, from and after the Feast of, The like Covenant as before upon lawful
enjoyment etc. to pay such a sum, yearly.
etc. which shall be, etc. upon the Festival day of the, etc. in every one of
the residue of the said years, which shall be then to come, of the said term
of, etc. or within, etc. after, in which they the said H. and M. their
Executors, etc. or any of them, shall or lawfully may by virtue of these
presents, have, take and enjoy the said 500 Cords before mentioned, by the
assignment and appointment of the said F and E. their Heirs, etc. or either of
them, or otherwise without assignment, upon the Lands and soil of the said F.
and E. their Heirs, etc. or either of them, within two miles of the said Iron
works, according unto the purport and true meaning of these presents, well and
truly content and pay, Covenant, that the Lessee, in default of payment of the
said several sums, shall feit so much, nomine pane. Covenant to keep the Lessee
harmless from all outrages, spoils etc. of the said Iron, etc. Colepits etc.
houses, etc. and breaking up of the Ponds etc.
unto the said F. or his Assigns (if he shall be then living) or to the said E.
F. his Heirs, etc. (it he the said F. shall be then dead) at or in the Iron
Forge, the sum of, etc. at one whole and entire payment, And if and as often as
the said H. and M. or their Executors, etc. shall make default in payment of
any of the said several payments, in form aforesaid covenanted to be paid, that
then the said H. and M. their Executors, etc. covenant, grant, and agree, to
forfeit and pay unto the said F. F. (if he shall be then living) or to the said
E. his Heirs, etc. (if the said F. shall be then dead) for every such default
etc. in the name of a pein, and the said F. and E. do, and either of them does
by these presents, for them, and either of them, and for the Heirs etc of them,
and either of them, further covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said
H. and M. their Executors, etc. and every of them, that they the said F. and E.
their Heirs, etc. shall and will, during the continuance of this present Lease,
save, defend, and keep harmless, the said H. and M. their Heirs, etc. and
every of them, of, from, and against all outrage, spoil, and hurt, hereafter to
be done, or done, by any the people in the Country or others, in wilful
burning or destruction of any the said Iron or workforge, or Iron Mill,
Cole-pits or Cole heaps, houses, or Cabyns, Convenant, that the Lessees shall
take timber for repairing, or making of the furnace etc. or other buildings
built for the use aforesaid.
which already are, or at any time hereafter during the said term shall be
erected, builded or made, in or upon the said premises, or any part thereof, in
cutting, pulling, or breaking up of any of the said Ponds or Pond heaps, which
are now, or at any time hereafter shall be made for the use of the said
furnace, forge, or Hammmer Mill, during the term aforesaid, and the said F. and
E. do, and the Heirs etc. of them, and either of them, does covenant and
grant, to with the said H. and M. their Executors, etc. that it shall and may
be lawful, to and for the said H. and M. their Executors etc. during the
continuance of this present Lease, to take upon the lands of the said F. and E.
or either of them, or the Heirs etc. of them, or either of them sufficient
competent; and necessary timber, for the repayring, making, or amending of the
said Furnace, Covenant, that if such persons shall judge the Iron works worth
so much yearly, besides the Rent aforesaid, reasonable gains allowed, and shall
set down in writing, that the Lessees shall pay so much, that then they will
pay the said sum besides the Rent.
Hammer, Mill, or Iron work, or any other necessary buildings or edifices which
shall be erected or built, in or upon the premises, for the necessary use or
uses aforesaid, And it is further covenanted, concluded, and agreed, by and
between the parties to these presents: And the said H. and M. do and either of
them does, by these presents, for them and either of them, their Executors,
etc. Covenant and grant, to and with the said F. and E. their Executors, etc.
and every of them, that if R. C. and R. L. of etc. shall within etc. next after
the Feast of etc. find cause to judge, or shall think in their Consciences,
that the said Iron works shall be worth yearly the sum of etc. and besides the
yearly Rent before mentioned with reasonable gains to be allowed to the said H.
and M. their Executors, etc. for their travel, and the use of their stock in
this behalf, and they the said R. C. and R. L. thereupon do within the said
etc. conclude, agree, and set down in writing under their hands and Seals, that
the said H. and M. their Executors, etc. shall pay yearly during the residue of
the years then to come, the said sum of etc. or any part thereof, that then
they the said H. and M. their Excecutors etc. shall and will, from thenceforth
yearly satisfy and pay unto the said F. and E. over above, and besides the
yearly rent and payment before reserved, the sum of etc. Or so much thereof as
the said R. L. and R. C. shall set down in writing under their Hands and Seals
as aforesaid. Covenant, that the Lessors during etc. will not alien the woods
to any person, but Lessees, but to leave them for the Iron works; Woods
necessary to be employed about the Mansion house of one of the Lessors,
excepted.
And it is also covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed, by and between all
and every the said parties, and they the said F. and E. and either of them,
does, for them, Covenant and grant, to and with the said H. and M. their
Executors etc. and every of them, that neither they the said F. and E. nor
either of them, nor the Heirs etc. of them, or either of them, shall or will at
at any time or times hereafter, during the continuance of this present Lease,
sell, grant, convey, or alien away any of the woods fit for the making
Cord-wood, standing, growing or being within two miles of the said Iron-works,
or any of them, to any person or persons, other then to the said H. and M.
their Executors, etc But shall leave the same woods to remain, serve. and be
employed, in, upon, or for the use of the said Iron works, woods necessary to
be employed in or upon the new Mansion house of the said F. only excepted. And
the said F. and E. do, and either of them does, for them and either of them,
The usual Covenant that the Lessors are seized in fee, and have full power to
demise the premises.
and for the Heirs etc. of them, and either of them, Convenant, promise, and
grant, to and with the said H. and M. their and either of their Executors etc.
and every of them, that they the said F. and E. are, or one of them is lawfully
seized in their demean as of Fee, of all and singular the Lands, Woods, and
Wood-grounds called H. C. and of the said streams and parcels of Land and
ground where the said Furnace or Forge are situate and being, and also of the
said Furnace, Forge, and other buildings thereunto belonging or appertaining,
and before by these presents demised. And that they the said F. and E. have, or
one of them has, good right, full power, and lawful authority, to demise,
let, and grant all and singular the premises before mentioned to be demised,
letten or granted, in manner and form aforesaid.

[Here follows the usual Covenant of quiet and peaceable enjoyment of the
things demised, as also the Covenant of discharging or saving harmless the
same, from all former conveyances, and encumbrances.]

And further, Covenant, that if there shall not be sufficient wood upon the
lands of the Lessors, etc. to supply the 500 Cords yearly, that then the
Lessors shall assign so much as is wanting in the hands of others: Or else that
the Lessees shall retain, of their Rents and payment, two
he said F. and E. do, and either of them does, by these presents, for them
and either of them, and for the Heirs etc. of them, and either of them,
covenant and grant, to and with the said H. and M. their Executors, etc. and
every of them, That if it happen the woods of the said F. and E. or of the
Heirs and Assigns of them, which do grow upon the Lands or soil of them the
said F. and E. or the Heirs or Assigns of them, or any of them, within two
miles of the said Furnace, Fordge, or Iron works, to be spent, so as there
shall not be sufficient lest to supply or satisfy the said number of 500 Cords
of wood yearly, according to the purport, effect and true meaning of these
presents, Or that the said H. and M. their Executors, etc. or any of them,
cannot, or may not, lawfully have, take, and enjoy the said 500 cords, so as by
reason of the want or lack of such Woods, growing, or to be growing upon the
lands or soil of the said F. and E. or either of them, or the Heirs or Assigns
of them, or either of them, the said H. and M. or either of them, or the
Executors or Assigns of them, or either of them, shall not have delivered,
assigned, and appointed, Or may not lawfully have and take the said full sum of
500 Cords of wood yearly, during the said term, within two miles of the said
Furnace, Forge, or Iron-work aforesaid, according unto the purport of these
presents, That then the said F. E. or one of them, or the Heirs of Assigns of
them, or one of them, shall provide, get, assign, appoint, and deliver yearly
so much wood as shall be wanting, or not growing, of the said sum of 500 Cords,
upon the Land, ground or soil of some other person or persons, within two miles
of the said Furnance etc. aforesaid, where they the said H. and M. their
Executors etc. shall and may, lawfully have and take, fell, cut, coal, and
carry away the same, or else that it shall and may be lawfully, to and for the
said H. and M. their Executors etc. to abate, deduct, recoup, and retain in
their hands every year of their rents and payments aforesaid, or of either of
them, 2 shillings for every Cord of wood, that they by occasion of means
aforesaid shall yearly want of the said 500 Cords of wood, which should or
ought to be delivered or assigned out them as aforesaid. In Witness whereof
etc.

A Lease of a Vicaridge.
THIS INDENTURE etc. Between I. L. etc. Clark, Vicar of the Church Parochial of
T. of the one part, and I. C. and C. F. of the other part, Witnesses, that the
said I. L. for diverse, etc. has demised etc. unto the said I.C: C.F. all that
the Vicaridge Tithes of T. aforesaid, and all manner of Tithes, tenths,
pensions, portions, fruits, profits, issues, rents, payments, commodities,
advantages, emoluments, and other thing whatsoever to the said Vicaridge
belonging, or being, or reputed to be part, parcel, member, or belonging to the
said Vicaridge, or any part thereof, and all rents and payments reserved and
payable to the said I. L. upon any Lease or Grant of any of the said Tithes
heretofore made by the said I. L. (all that the Vicaridge house, An exception
of the Vicaridge house, barn, garden, orchard, glebelands, etc.
barn, garden, orchard, glebelands, and chancel offerings, oblations, duties
for solemnization of marriage, Churchings of Women, for christening of
children, for burying the dead, within the said Parish, with the appurtenances,
unto the said I. L. his Assigns, out of this present Demise always excepted and
fore-prized,) to have, hold, occupy, perceive, and enjoy, the Vicaridge,
Tithes, Pensions, and Portions, and all other the premises before mentioned to
be demised, except such things as been before excepted, unto the said I. C. C.
F. etc. and to the survivor or survivors of them, And in default of assignation
or grantees of the demised premises by them to be made to the Executors and
administrators of the survivor and survivors of them, from the day of the date
of these presents, for and during the term of etc. from thence, etc. (if the
said I. L. shall continue so long to be Vicar there) Yeeldirg, A special
reservation of the Rent.
etc. to the said I. L. and his Assigns (so long as he is Vicar there) during
the said term, in manner and form following, that is to say, that for the Tith
and tenths of the corn and grain, sown or to be sown, in or upon the Meadow
ground within the said Parish, commonly called the Meadown corn, being parcel
of the said demised premises, etc. and for the residue of the demised premises,
etc. (except before excepted) etc. the said two several Rents before reserved
to be paid in the Porch of the Parish Church of T. aforesaid, In default of
payment of the rent, a nomine poenae is granted.
at the Feasts of etc. by even portions yearly to be paid, And if it shall
happen the said several yearly Rents and sums of money before expressed, or any
part or parcel thereof, to be behind and unpaid at the place aforesaid, by the
space of etc. next after any of the said Feasts in which it ought to be paid,
as is aforesaid, that then they the said I. C. C. F. etc. shall for every
default in payment, forfeit and pay to the said I. L. and his Assigns, the sum
of etc, more of lawful etc. in the name of a pein, And the said I. C. C. F.
etc. and every of them, do for them, Covenant, (upon enjoyment without lawful
let) that the Less^e will not only pay the tent, etc. But also, in respect that
the Lessor is a learned man, and sufficient to preach the Word of God, so much
yearly during the term, and in default of payment, so much nomine poenae.
their Heirs etc. severally by these presents Covenant and Grant, to and with
the said I. L. his Executors, etc. from time to time, during the continuance of
the said term (if the said I. L. shall so long continue Vicar of Y. aforesaid.)
And that the Lessees, the survivor or survivors of them, or the Executors,
Assigns, or Grantees of them, or of the survivors of them, shall, or may
lawfully have, perceive, and enjoy all that the said demised premises (except
before excepted) without lawful let of the said I. L. and his Assigns, and of
all and every other person and persons, any estate, interest, or thing having
or clayming, into, or out of the said demised premises, (except before
excepted) in, by, from, or under the said I. L. according to the purport of
these presents, not only to content and pay, or cause to be contented and paid
unto the said I. L. or his Assigns, the said several yearly Rents or sums
before reserved, at the place aforesaid, and at the said Feasts, in manner and
form aforesaid, and the sums of, etc. nomine poenae, (if any shall happen to be
forfeited and due;) But moreover also, for and in respect that the said I. L.
is known to be a learned man, and very sufficient to preach the Word of God,
The yearly rent of 20 l. of, etc. at the place aforesaid, at, and upon the
Feasts of, etc. by even portions to be paid yearly during the said term. And if
the said yearly sum of, etc. or any part thereof, shall happen to be behind and
unpaid, at the place aforesaid, by the space of, etc. next after any of the
said two last recited Feasts, in which it is limited to be paid as aforesaid,
then further to forfeit and pay unto the said I. L. and his Assigns, the sum
of, etc. more in the name of a pein for non-payment thereof; And whereas the
said I. L. has heretofore agreed severally with the several persons here under
named; that is to say, etc. that they shall severally have, retein, and enjoy
all their Vicaridge Tithes, belonging, due, or payable to the said Vicaridge,
or to the Vicar there, for the Lands, Tenths, and other things in T. aforesaid,
which they held, occupied and enjoyed at the time of the said agreement (except
the Tenths and Tithes of Corn and Grain, growing, or to grow in the Meadows of
all or any the said persons last before mentioned (except of the said etc.)
commonly called the Meadow corn, they severally paying therefore unto the said
Lessor at the place and Feasts aforesaid, by even portions, in form following;
that is to say, the said, etc. paying thereof, Covenant, that where the Lessor
had made composition with certain persons, to retain their Tithes, paying so
much, that they shall retain them, according to the agreement, without
interruption, paying the composition.
etc.) Now the said I.C. C.F. etc. do for them, their Heirs, etc. and every of
them does for himself, his Heirs, etc: covenant and grant, to and with the said
I. L. his Executors, etc. that the said several persons with whom the said
agreements has bin by the said I.L. as aforesaid made, shall if they so will,
without let or interruption of the said I.C. C.F. etc. or of either, or any of
them, or of the Executors. etc. of them, or of either, or any of them, have,
hold and enjoy the said Vicaridge Tithes for which they have agreed for with
the said I. L. according to their agreement, during the continuance of this
present demise, without any other payment or charge other than such as they
have agreed with the said I. L. to pay as aforesaid, So as the said several
persons with whom the said agreement has been made, as aforesaid, shall and
will yearly, during the said term (if the said I.L. shall so long continue
Vicar there) well and truly pay unto the said I.C.C.F. etc. or to any of the^,
or to the Exec. etc. of the survivor or survivors of the^, the said several
sums of money, Rents or payments reserved, or payable by the said agreement, for
the Tithes of the said Lands, at the Church porch aforesaid, at the said four
several Feasts, viz. etc. Covenant, that the Vicar shall be resident upon his
Cure, without being absent above, etc. in any one year. Covenant, that the
Lessees shall peaceably enjoy without interruption, etc. and that saved harmles
of all former grants, except, etc.


And the said I. L. does for him, his Executors etc. Covenant and grant, to and
with the said I.C.C.F. etc. and every of them and to and with the executors
etc. of them, and every of them, by these presents, in manner and form
following, that is to say, that the said I L. during so long as he shall
continue, remain, or be Vicar of the said Parish Church, shall be ordinarily
resident at, and serving the cure of the said Parish Church and Benefice of T.
aforesaid, without being absent from thence above etc. in any one year; and
that the said I.C.C. F. etc. and the survivor or survivors of them, and their
Grantees, etc. aforesaid, shall or may for the rent aforesaid, and under the
covenants, grants and agreements in these presents contained, lawfully and
peaceably have, hold, perceive, and enjoy the said Vicaridge Tithes, and other
the premises before by these presents mentioned to be demised, (except before
excepted) during the said term, without any lawful eviction or expulsion, let
or disturbance of the said I. L. or his Assigns, and that saved harmless of
all grants, leases, and encumbrances, heretofore made or committed by the said
I. L. or his Assigns. The said several grants made and agreed upon by the said
I.L. unto the several persons above named, for their Tithes and Tenths
aforesaid, whereupon such several Rents or payments as aforesaid be reserved,
which shall or ought during the said agreement to be paid, or in any wise
payable unto the said I.C. C.F. their Executors, etc. during the said term,
only excepted and foreprized.

Covenant, that all actions, depending, for or concerning any Vicaridg Tithes,
shall at the costs of every Plaintiff be withdrawn, etc. without recovery of
costs, etc. Covenant, that wheredebate and controversy now is concerning the
manner of tithing, whether it ought to be in kind, or a modus, etc. this
Indent, nor any thing therein shall estoppe either the Vicar or parishioners,
but that the one may claim the Tithes in kind, the other the modus.
And it is further concluded and agreed, by and between the parties to these
presents, that all such plaints, action, and suits, as are now depending
between the said etc. and all, either, or any of the parties to these presents,
or any other of the Parishioners of the Parish to T. aforesaid, for and
concerning any matter or cause touching any Vicaridge Tithes belonging, or
supposed to belong unto the said Vicaridge or Vicar there, shall at the cost
and charges of every several Plaintiff in every such suit, plaint, or action,
be withdrawn, discontinued, and non-suted, without recovery or demand of any
costs or damages, for, or by reason of any such plaint or suit, or of any
Retraxit, non-sute, or discontinuance thereof; And for that certain
controversies have heretofore risen, and were at the making of these presents
depending, between the said I. L and the said parishioners of the Parish of T.
aforesaid, or some of them, touching the Vicaridge Tithes, and manner of
tything thereof, The said I. L. claiming to have the said Tithes, in their
kind, according to the Common course of the Ecclesiastical Laws, and the said
Parishioners claiming to be discharged of such manner of Tithing, and to pay
only in respect thereof certain several sums of money by ancient custom, time
out of mind, used in the said Parish as they pretended, which said
controversies for that the same have not been decided by course of Law, but
only agreement made by mediation of T.P. and I. C. Esquires, and of certain
other friends on both parties,

It is therefore by these presents provided, concluded, condescended and
agreed, by and between all the parties to these presents, that this Indenture,
or any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend, or be taken to
extend to be any determination, dismission or decession, of or concerning the
right of the said Tithes and Tenths, or the manner of Tithing thereof, nor to
make any full conclusion, Estoppel or determination, between the said Vicar and
his Successors, and the parishioners of the said Parish that now be, or
hereafter shall be; but shall only be taken for a personal agreement between
them for quietness sake: so that the said Vicar and his Successors, or any of
them, after the determination of this present demise, shall be at liberty to
claim and sue for the Tithes of the said Vicaridge in their kind, if he or they
shall so think good, And that the Parishioners of the said Parish which now or
hereafter shall be, and every of them, shall in like manner after the
determination of this present Demise, be at their liberty to defend such suit
and claim, and to claim and maintain such customs as they have or claim for
their discharge of paying their Vicaridg Tithes in their kind at their
pleasure, This Indenture, or any thing in these presents contained, to the
contrary notwithstanding. In witness whereof, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to make Leases, and to receive Rents, and accounts for
the profits of lands, making the Grantee Bailiff and Receiver to the Grantor
irrevocable, for certain years.
TO all Persons to whom this present Writing shall come, I. R of, etc. sends
greeting, Know ye, that I the said, I. R. for diverse good causes, etc. have
given, granted, and by these presents do give and grant, unto I T. of etc.
aforesaid, in the said County of K. full and absolute power and authority
irrevocable, for and during the said term of etc. from the day of the date
hereof next and immediately ensuing, for me, and in my name, by writing
Indented, or by several writings Indented, or otherwise by paroll, as to him
shall seem good, to demile, grant, and to farm let, all and singular my
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular
their appurtenances, set, lying, or being in the several Parishes of etc. or
else where soever, within the County of K. or part or parcel of the said
premises, as to the said I. T. shall seem meet and convenient, So that the said
Lease or Leases do not exceed the number of etc. years, from the time of the
date of these presents, And so that the usual and accustomed Rent be yearly
reserved, and yearly payable unto me the said I. my Heirs and Assigns, during
the said term, And for all other Covenants, Grants, agreements and conditions
to be contained in the said several demises, by writings indented or otherwise,
as to the said I. T. shall be likewise thought most meet and convenient, And
also in my name to seal and deliver as my deed the one part of all and every
such writings indented to be made in form before rehearsed, And the one part of
the said writing indented, which by the said I. T. in my name shall be in form
before rehearsed made to and for my use, with him to retain and keep, And I the
said I. R. my Heirs and Assigns, shall at all times hereafter ratify, confirm,
and allow, all and every Act and Acts, thing and things, which the said I. T.
in my name shall do in the premises. And further know ye, that I the said I. K.
have made, constituted and appointed, and do by these presents make,
constitute and appoint, for and during the full time and term of etc. years
from the day of the date hereof next ensuing fully to be complete and ended,
the said I. T. my Bailiff and Receiver to my use and behoof, of all and
singular the Rents, issues, and profits, of all and every my Messuages, Lands,
and Tenements, with their appurtenances, set, lying and being, in the said
Parishes of etc. or else where in the County of R.

And furthermore do by these presents in my stead and place put and constitute
the said I T. my true and lawful Attorney irrevocable, for and during the said
time and term of etc. as aforesaid, for me, and in my name, and to my use
behoof, to ask, levy, recover and receive, all and singular the rents of all my
lands and hereditaments, with the appurtenances heretofore due and owing unto
me, and all accounts for the same to take, and also to levy and receive, to my
use as aforesaid, all and singular such debts, duties, sum and sums of money,
as are or shall be due or owing unto me the said I. R. by any person or persons
whatsoever, for or in any sort concerning any my Messuages, Lands and tenements
aforesaid, giving and granting by these presents unto my said Attorney, full
power and authority, for me, and in my name, and to my only use, to sue,
arrest, Grant, that the Bailiff, or receivor, shall retain and keep to his own
use of the profits of the lands and sums received, all his charges and expenses
sustained about the premises. Covenant, that the grantor will not revoke not
make void this grant nor any authority therein given, nor do any thing to
hinder the grantee in executing the premises.
implead and condemn every of my debtors and accomptants aforesaid, and at his
liberty such person and persons out of prison to deliver, or cause to be
delivered, and upon any receipt of any sum or sums of money to my use to be
received of any person or persons as aforesaid, acquittance or other lawful
discharges for the same, for me, and in my stead and name, to make, seal and
deliver, as my deed or deeds, and I the said I. R. do by these presents, for
me, my Heirs, etc. grant and agree, that he the said I. T. shall keep and
detain to his own use, of the rents and profits of my lands and tenements, and
of such sum and sums of money as he shall receive to or for my use, by virtue
of this my deed, all and singular such costs, charges, and expenses whatsover,
which he shall lay out, disburse, sustain, and be put unto, in or about the
premises, or in or about the executing of this my power and authority by these
presents unto him given, and I the said I. do further by these presents
covenant, grant and agree to and with the said I. T. his Executors, ad Assigns,
that he the said I. neither shall nor will revoke, nor make void, this present
grant, nor any authority by these presents to him the said I. T. given, neither
commit, or do any act or acts, thing or things, whatsoever, whereby he the said
I. T. shall be let, or in any fort hindered in the executing of the premises. In
witness whereof, etc.

A Deed of Retainer of a Chaplain by a Noble man, according to the Statute.
TO all etc. the right honorable E. P. Lord Morley, Baron of Bye, greeting in
our Lord God everlasting. Know ye, that I the said Lord Morley my beloved in
Christ I. P. Clark Bearer of these presents, for the conversation of his
laudable like knowledge of learning, the honesty of godliness and manners, one
of my household Chaplains, according to the tenor, force and effect of a
certain Statute for Chaplains of great men and noble men in such case provided
and established, the day of the date of these presents have received, admitted,
and by these presents do receive and admit, exhorting and requiring all and
singular persons who have interest, or in any manner may have interest, that
the said I. D. for my Household Chaplain and familiar they do respect and
repute; And further the same I. D. contrary to the tenor of these presents, or
the Statute aforesaid no manner of way do molest, vex, and disturb, or any ways
grieve. In testimony whereof, I the aforesaid, etc. my name aforesaid with my
propper hand have written, and to these presents have put my seal of Arms,
Dated, etc.

An assignment of two Leases, by an Assignee, made, of several lands by several
Persons.
THIS INDENTURE, etc. Between I. S. etc. of the one part, and W. P. etc. of the
other part; Whereas the right honorable T. S. Lord B. of etc. by his Indenture
of Lease, bearing date, etc. did demise etc. unto one G. F. etc. all those
pasture grounds, etc. commonly called and known by the name and names of etc.
with all and singular their appurtenances, containing by estimation, etc.
(except and always reserved out of the said Lease all woods, etc.) for and
during the term of etc. beginning at the feast of etc, as by the same more at
large appears; And whereas also one T. P. of etc. by his Indenture bearing
date, etc. did demise etc. unto the said G. F. etc. for and during all the time
and term of, etc. in the said Indenture specified, all those other low grounds,
etc. containing by estimation, etc. as by the said Indenture more etc. all
which said pasture grounds, etc. are set, lying, and being, in etc. And whereas
also the said G. F. by his Indenture bearing date, etc. did demise, etc. unto
the said I. S. as well all those the said pasture grounds, etc. commonly called
and known by the names of etc. with all and singular their appurtenances,
containing in the whole etc. And also all those the said low grounds, called,
etc. containing by estimation, etc. whether they were more or less, then late
in the occupation of the said. I. S. or his Assigns, situate, lying, etc. in
etc. (except and always reserved out of the said Lease all Woods, Exception of
Woods.
etc.) To have etc. as well the said pasture grounds, etc. unto the said I. S.
his Executors, etc. from the Feast of etc. unto the full end etc. yielding,
etc. unto the said G. F. etc. at or in etc. at two usual Feasts etc. that is to
say, etc. by even and equal portions, with a clause of distress and reentry
for the non-payment of the said Rent of, etc. by the said Indenture reserved,
as in and by the same more fully and plainly does and may appear; Now this
Indenture witnesses, that the said. I. S. for and in consideration, etc. unto
him the said I. S. at the time of the ensealing the etc. well and truly by the
above named W. P. contented etc. whereof and wherewith the said I. S. does
acknowledge himself, etc. Has given, granted, etc. unto the said W. P. etc. as
well the last recited Indenture of demise from the above named G. F. unto him
the said I. S. made, and all other escripts, writings, and Charters whatsoever,
concerning the said premises, or any part or parcel thereof, as also all that
his right, title, interest, estate, and term of years, of or in the above
recited lands, and other the premises, with all and singular their
appurtenances, and of and in every part and parcel thereof, And of and in all
and singular other the profits, commodities, and emoluments whatsoever, to the
said Lands belonging, or in any wise appertaining, To have etc. unto the said
W. P. etc. for and during all such time and term, and for so many years as are
yet to come and unexpired, of and in the term aforesaid, and in so large and
ample manner, to all intents, constructions, and purposes, as he the said I. S.
has, may, should, or of right ought to have, hold, or enjoy the same, by force
and means of the said last tecited Indenture, writing, and conveyance, or by
any other way or means whatsoever. [A clause, that the Assignee shall discharge
all such rents, duties, and payments, The usual covenants, that the Assignee
shall pay all Rents and duties, and keep all covenants contained in the first
lease, and shall acquit and discharge the Assignor, Covenant, that the premises
shall continue discharged of all grants, etc. forfeitures, etc made by the
Assignor, except, etc.
as by the said last recited Indenture are or shall be due, or payable unto him
the said G. F. his Executors, etc. for the said premises, and every part and
parcel thereof, and also from the day of the date of these presents, during the
whole term, perform and keep all and singular the Covenant, etc. specified and
contained in the said recited Indenture, made between the said G. F. on th'on^
part, and the said. I. S. on the other part, which are by the said Indenture on
the part and behalf of the said I. S. etc. to be performed, and him the said I.
S. from time to time, and at all times hereafter, acquit, discharge etc.]

[A clause, where the Assignor covenants to and with the Assignee, that the
premises shall continue clearly discharged of all grants, charges, interests
forfeitures, breach of Covenants, title or titles of entry, for any condition
broken, and of and from all other encumbrances whatsoever, etc. made or done by
the Assignor, etc. (one Lease of part of the said premises, Covenant, that the
Assignee shall have the same benefit of all covenants, grants, articles etc.
contained in the first Lease, which the Assignor should have had, etc.
called, etc. to end and exp^^^ (...) etc. next coming, unto one, etc. only
excepted and fore p^^zed.)

And further, that the said W.P. etc. shall and may, etc. (...) have and enjoy,
to his own use and behoof, all and singular such benefit, advantage, profit and
commodity, of all, every, (...) any the Covenants, grants, articles and
agreements, to contained in the said recited Indenture made between the said G.
F. of the one part, and the said I. S. of the other part, which the said L. S.
etc. should have, may, might, can have, or in any sort during the time
aforesaid, Covenant, that the Assignor has done no act, nor shall do, to bar
the Assignee of the benefit of the Covenants, in the first Lease.
shall or may be entitled unto, is as large and ample manner and form (...) he
the said I. S. etc. shall, can, or may have the same [A clause, that the said
I. S. has not done, nor shall do or commit any act, whereby the said W. P.
shall be barred to take any benefit of all the Cove^^^^, in the said last
recited Indenture.] In witness whereof, etc.

On special Covenant, which was in an ordinary Lease contained.
ANd the said I. R. (which was the Lessor) does by these presents, for him, his
Heirs, etc. Covenant and grant, to and with the said I. T. his Executors,
Covenant, that the Lessor shall discharge as well the premises, as the Lessee,
from one ren^ bequeathed out of the Land by the Father of the Lessor, as also
from the rents due to the chief Lords, etc.
etc. that he the said I. R. his Heirs, etc. shall and will, from time to time,
during the said term of, etc. acquit, discharge, and save harmless, as well
the said premises, as the said I. T. his Executors, etc. of and from one yearly
re^e given and Bequeathed by A. R. Father of the said I. R. by (...) last Will;
unto one I. L. limited to be issuing forth of the said premises, and also of
and from the chief rent and rents, from time to time, during the said term,
unto the chief Lord and Lords of the Fee and Fees, for the said premises, and
of and from all other charges and rents (the rent by these presents reserved
excepted) issuing and going forth of the same, etc.

An Indenture to lead the use of a Feoffment, or other assurance, in nature of
a Will.
THIS INDENTURE etc. Between E. G. etc. of the one part, and W. I. Minister of
B. aforesaid, R. S. etc. and P. H. of the other part, Witnesses, that as well
for and in consideration of the good and perfect disposing, establishing, and
settling of all and singular the Messuages, etc. and other Hereditaments of the
said E.G. hereafter particularly mentioned and expressed, to such uses,
intents, and purposes, as hereafter in these presents is limited and appointed,
as also for and in consideration that the Debs, Legacies and Bequeaths of him
the said E.G. in his last Will specified and contained, may be sufficiently
discharged and fulfilled, and also that the good and charitable uses by these
presents hereafter limited and appointed, may be fully established and
confirmed, and for diverse other good and sufficient causes, and considerations,
him the said E. G. thereunto especially moving. It is covenanted, concluded and
agreed, by and between the said parties to these presents, and every of them,
does Covenant, grant, conclude, and agree, to and with the other of them, their
Heirs etc. and every of them, in manner and form following, that is to say,
first, he the said E. G. does by these presents, for him, his Heirs etc. and
every of them. Covenant, grant, conclude, and agree, to and with the said W. I.
R. S. P. M. and P. H. and every of them, their Heirs etc. that he the said E.
G. before the Feast of etc. next etc. by his sufficient Deed of Feoffment in
the law, shall and will well and sufficiently convey, Covenant to make a
feoffment to the uses-following.
and assure, or cause to be conveyed and assured, unto them the said W. I. R.
S. P. M. and P. H. their Heirs and Assigns, all and singular the Messuages etc.
and all and every other the Hereditaments, with all and singular their
appurtenances whatsoever of the said E. G. situate, lying and being, in the
Parishes of etc. or elsewhere within the said County, hereafter in these
presents particularly mentioned and set down, except, and always out of these
presents foreprized, all and singular such the Messuages etc. whatsoever, with
their appurtenances, as are specified, contained, or to him the said E. G.
given and bequeathed, by the last Will and Testament of I. G. bearing date etc.
(as by the same does appear) which said Feoffment and other conveyance and
assurance of the premises before mentioned to be made, and every of them, shall
inure, and shall be deemed, adjudged, esteemed and taken to be and inure, And
also the said W. I. R. S. P. M. P. H. and either of them, and the survivor of
them, and either of them, their Heirs and Assigns, and all and every person and
persons seized of the said premises, and all and every part and parcel ^hereof,
shall stand and be seized of the same, and every, part thereof, to the uses,
intents and purposes, hereafter in these presents expressed, limited and
appointed, and to none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, that is to say,
of and in all and singular the Messuages, etc. what soever, with their
appurtenances, set, lying, and being, in the Parishes of, etc. on elsewhere
within the County of K. in these presents mentioned (except before excepted) to
the use and behoof of the said E. G. for and during the term of his natural
life, without impreachment of any manner of wast, and after the decease of the
said E. G. of and in all that principal Mansion house or Message, with the
appurtenances, now in the tenure and occcupation of, etc. or his Assignee or
Assignees, with all the Barns, Stables, etc. and other the appurtenances
whatsoever, And together with all and singular the lands etc. and all other the
hereditaments, ways, ealements, and commodities whatsoever, to the said
Message or Tenement belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or together with
the same at this present by the said etc. used, occupied, or enjoyed (the Lands
commonly called the B. only excepted) containing in the whole by estimation,
etc. whether more or ^esse, situate, etc. in the Parishes etc. And furthermore,
of and in all the Message or Tenement with the Barns, etc. and all other the
easements, together with all the Lands, etc. to the same belonging, or in any
wise appertaining, or together with the same had, held, used, occupied or
enjoyed, Limitations of uses toward the payment of Debts and Legacies, and
satis'ying Executors for all their charges which they have not allowed by the
Will.
and now in the tenure or occupation of etc. or of his Assignee or Assignees,
containing in the whole by estimation etc. whether more or less thereof there
be had, situate etc. To the use and behoof of A. G, Wife of the said E. for and
during the term of her natural life, and after her decease, to the use and
behoof of S. H. of etc. his Executors and Assigs, for and toward the payment
of the debts of the said E. G. and satisfying of his Legacies in his last Will
and Testament specified and contained and for the discharge of such charges as
the said Executors have or shall sustain, and be put unto, in or about the
same, and in or about the last Will and Testament of I. G. deceased; for,
during, and until the debts and bargains of the said E. G. be fully paid and
discharged, and also until the said Executors, their Exec. or Assigns, shall
have had, levied and received, all and every such charges and expenses
whatsoever, as they or any of them shall have laid out, disbursed, or be put
unto, in or about the last Will and Testament of the said E. G, deceased, which
the said Executors shall not by the last will of the said E. be allowed, and
afterward to the use and behoof G. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, Provided
always, A Proviso or power of ^^^vocation the old uses by Deed, etc. and power
by the same deed to limit new uses.
and it is fully condescended, concluded and agreed upon, by and between the
parties of these presents, and either of them, their Heirs, Executors and
Assigns, and every of them, that if it fortune E. G. of etc. Son of I. G. etc.
aforesaid deceased, to reform, himself, and also during the natural: life of
the said E. G. to have issue male of his body lawfully begotten, that then it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said E. G. by his sufficient Deed in
writing under his hand and seal, and delivered in the presence of two
sufficient Witnesses at the least, to change, alter, and revoke, in the whole
or in pats, the use and uses before by these presents unto the said G. H. and
his Heirs and Assigns, limited and appointed, of all the said recited premises,
or of part, or of so much there of as he the said E. G. shall think good, and
by the same his sufficient Deed in writing as aforesaid, to limit and appoint
any new use or uses of the said premises, or any part or parcel thereof, to the
said Issue male of the body of the said F. G. lawfully begotten, for life, in
^ay^^ or in see, or for any other astate, as he the said E.G. shall think
convenient, and that from and immediately after such limitation and appointment
of such new use and uses as aforesaid, they the said W. I. R. S. P. M. P. H.
and the Survivor of them, their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of
the said premises, as aforesaid, and the Feoffment or other assurance to be
made as aforesaid, shall be, and is by these presents meant, and intended to
be, to such new use and uses, intents and purposes, as by the same Deed in form
aforesaid, shall be limited and appointed, and after the decease of the said E.
G. as aforesaid, then of and in all those etc. commonly called and known by the
name of B. land, or by whatsoever name or names the same is called or known,
containing by estimation, etc. whether the more or less, now in the tenure or
occupation of S. H. or of his Assignee or Assignees, situate, lying and being
in B. aforesaid, and also of and in 5 pieces and parcels of Land, etc. commonly
called and known by the name of K. land, or by whatsoever name or names the
same is called or known, Limitations of uses to the Feoffees upon trust and
confidence that they, upon the erection of a School, shall convey the lands over
toward the maintenance of a Schoolmaster, etc. the School to be incorporated
by such a name, and to be gover fied by such orders as they shall appoint.
containing by estimation, etc. whether more or less, together lying in the
said parishes of B. and R. and which was late in the tenure and occupation of
etc. and now is in the tenure and occupation of I. M. or of his assignee or
assignees, To the use of them the said W. S. R. S. P. M. and P. H. and the
survivor of them, their Heirs and Assigns, to the end, intent and purpose, and
upo^^ special trust and confidence that they the said, etc. or the survivor or
survivors of them, their Heirs and Assigns, shall and do immediately after, and
upon the erection of a Free School to be erected and set up within the Parish
of B. aforesaid, by their good and sufficient conveyance, and assurance in the
Law, convey and assure the said premises for and rewards else maintenance of a
School master to reach in the said School, and his successors for ever; The
said Free School to be incorporated by the name of the Free School of E.G. at
B. and to be ruled and governed by one or more heads and governors, and by
such orders, laws and decrees, as shall by them the said etc. o^ the survivor
or survivors of them, be set down, and though most meet and conveniene; And if
the School shall not be erected during the life of the Feoffor, nor within two
years after his decease, or if the land shall not be conveyed to the maintenace
of a Schoolmaster, etc. then to the use, etc.
and if there be not a School erected and set up within the said Parish of B.
during the life of the said E. G. not within two years next after his Decease,
Or that the said premises be not by the^^ the said, etc. or the survivor of
them, their Heirs or Assigns, convened o^ assured unto the maintenance of a
School master, und his Successors to teach in the said School as aforesaid,
then the said last-recited premises to be to the use and behoof of E. S. Son of
the said R. S. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and after the decease of the
said E. S. as aforesaid, then of and in our Message or Tenement etc. and all
other appurtenances, together with, etc. containing by estimation, etc. whether
more or less, to the said Message or Tenement belonging, and appertaining,
situate and lying in B aforesaid, and now in the tenure and occupation of I. M.
or of his Assignee or Assignees, to the use and behoof of the Executors of C.
aforesaid. Gent. his Executors and Assigns, for and toward the payment of the
Debts of the said E. G. and satisfying his Legacies in his last Will and
Testament specified and contained, Limitation of uses to the Executor as
aforesaid.
and for to discharge such charges as the said Executors has or shall sustein,
or be put unto, in or about the same, and in or about the last Will and
Testament of I. G. deceased, for during, and until the Debts and Legacies of
the said E. G. be fully paid and discharged, and also until he the said
Executor, his Executors, and Assigns, shall have had, levied and received, all
and every such charges and expenses whatsoever, as he shall have laid out,
disbursed, or be put unto, in or about the last Will and Testament of the said
E. G. and in or about the last Will and Testament of I. G. deceased, which he
the said Executor shall not by the last Will of the said I. be allowed, and
afterward to the use of G. H. Son of the said Executor, his Heirs and Assigns
for ever, Proviso, that the cestuy que use, shall pay so much yearly to the
Vicar and Churchwardens of certain Parishes, for the relief of the poor and
impo^ent in the said Parishes, and that they shall distrubute it at such a time.
and after the decease of the laid E. G. as aforesaid, then of and in all that
Tenement or Lodge, together with etc. of land, with the appurtenances,
containing in the whole by estimation etc. whether more or less, to the said
Tenement or Lodge belonging, or appertaining, The which the said E. G. had and
purchased, to him, and his Heirs, of one I. G. of S. aforesaid deceased, and is
now in the tenure and occupation of I. A. or his Assignee or Assignees, and are
situate, and being in R. aforesaid, to the use and behoof of F. G. Son of I. S.
late of R. aforesaid deceased, his Heirs and Assigns, for ever, Provided
always, that he the said F. G. his Heirs and Assigns shall and do yearly after
the decease of the said E. G. at, or upon the Feast of etc. for and toward the
relief, maintenance, and sustenance of the poor aged and impotent people within
the Parishes of B. and R. aforesaid, content and pay, or cause to be contented
and paid, unto the Vicar and Churchwardens of the said Parish of B. or unto any
of them for the time being, and unto their successors for ever, at or in the
Parish Church of B. aforesaid, the sum of etc. of etc. And unto the Vicar and
Churchwardens of the Parish of R. aforesaid, for the time being, or unto any of
them, and unto their successors for ever, at or in the Parish Church of R.
aforesaid, the sum of etc. of etc. The first payment of the said several sums
to begin at and upon the next Feast of etc. which shall first happen after the
decease of the said E.G. to the end intent the Vicar and Churchwardens of the
said several Parishes, shall yearly at and upon the feast of etc. or at and
upon the Lords day then next and immediately following the same, distribute, or
cause to be distributed, the said several sums, unto the poor and impotent
people inhabiting within the said several Parishes; And if the said F. G. his
Heirs and Assigns, do not content and pay, o cause to be contented and paid,
And if the cestuy que use, shall fail of payment, that then the cestuy que use,
etc. shall forfeit so much nomine poenae.
the said several sums of etc. according to the true intent and meaning of the
last proviso in these presents contained, then he the said F. G. his Heir and
Assigns, shall forfeit unto the Vicar and Churchwardens of every of the said
Parishes of B. and R. and their successors for the time being, severally where
any such default shall happen to be, the several sums of etc. nomine poenae,
for every such default, and so often as the same shall happen, and shall not
incur any other penalty or forfeiture, by employed condition, limitation,
Covenant, that in the default of payment of the said sums, the cestuy que use
shall stand seized to the use of the Vicar and Churchwardens until that they
have levied the sums with the nomine poe^ae.
or any other thing in these presents contained; And it is covenanted, granted,
condescended, and agreed, by and between the said parties to these presents,
and every of them, their and every of their Heirs and Assigns, and the true
intent, and meaning of all and every Feoffment, and other coveyance of the last
recited premises made, shall be deemed, and esteemed, and taken to be, That the
said W. I. R. S. P. M. and P. H. and the survivor of them, their Heirs and
Assigns, shall upon default of payment by the said F. G. his Heirs, or Assigns,
of the said several sums of etc. contrary to the purport, intent, and true
meaning of the Proviso before by these presents specified, by the which the
sev^^^ ^^ams are appointed and limited to be paid, stand, and ^^seised of the
said last recited premises unto the use and behoof of the said Vicar and
Churchwardens of every of the said Parishes of B. and R. for the time being,
until that they for the several defaults unto every of them made, shall have
severally had, levied, and received, as well the said several sums of etc.
before by these presents appointed to them to be paid, with all and every their
Arrearages thereof; As also the said several penalties of etc. nomine poenae,
for every default by the said F. G. his Heirs and Assigns made; And lastly,
after the decease of the said E. G. aforesaid, then of and in all that barn and
land, with the appurtenances, commonly called and known by the name of F. and
M. or by whatsoever other name the same is called and known, containing by
estimation, etc. more or less, in the tenure and occupation of one G. G. or of
his Assignee, or Assignees, lying, and being in the Parish of R. aforesaid.

And also of and in that one message or tenement, with the appurtenances,
commonly called or known by the name of G. or by whatsoever other name or names
the same is called or known by, together with 20 acres of land, meadow,
pasture, and wood, whether more or less, to the said message or tenement
belonging, and to the same had, occupied, and enjoyed, now in the tenure and
occupation of S. G. or of his Assignee or Assignees, situate, lying and being
in B. aforesaid, to the use and behoof of E. H. of C. aforesaid Gent. his
Executors and Assigns, for and toward the payment of the Debts of the said E.
G. and satisfying of his Legacies in his last Will and Testament specified and
contained, and for discharge of such charges as the said Executor has or shall
sustein, or be put unto, in or about the same, Limitation of uses to one and
his Executors, as aforesaid, to wards the pament of Debts etc, as aforesaid.
and in or about the last Will and Testament of E. G deceased, for, during, and
until the Debts and Legacies of the said E. G. be fully paid and disharged, and
also until he the said Excecutor, his Excecutors and Assigns, shall have had,
levied, and received, all and every such discharges and expenses whatsoever, as
he shall have laid out, disbursed, or be put unto, in (...) about the last Will
and Testament of the said E. F. and in o^^ (...) the last Will and Testament of
the said I. G. deceased, which (...) said Executors shall not by the last Will
and Testament of the said I. be allowed, and afterward to the use and behoof of
I. G. Son of I. G. of R. aforesaid, his Hei^^ and Assigns for ever. A Proviso,
or power of Revocation upon tender of, etc.
Provided always, and it is covenanted, condescended, concluded, and agreed
upon by and berwees the parties to the these presents, and every of them, their
Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, That if it fortune the abovenamed E. G.
to have any issue of his body lawfully begotten, that then upon the payment and
tender of, etc. of, etc. unto then the said W.I. R.S. P.M. and P. H. or unto
any of them, their Heirs and Assigns, or any of them, at or in the South porch
of the Parish Church of (...). aforesaid, this present. Indenture, and all
clauses, agreements, limitations of use and uses, and all and every other
article whatsoever in the same contained, and all Feoffments, and other
conveyances and assurances is performance of these presents made or execured
(the limitation of the use and uses of the said Land called and known by the
name of B. land, and also the limitation of the use and uses of the said Land
called K. and all the clauses, articles, and agreements in these presents
contained, for and in any fort concerning the said Land, always excepted and
foreprized,) shall be utterly void, determined, and to none other effect or
purpose, and that then, and immediately after, all the said Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, and all other the premises whatsoever in these
presents mentioned, with all every other the appurtenances, shall be, and
remain unto the said E.G. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, in such manner and
form as though these present Indentures and all other conveyances and
assurances upon the same executed, had never been had, nor made. In witness
whereof, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants upon a Marriage.
THIS INDENTURE Tripartite, etc. Between W. P. of, etc. of the one part, I. B.
of, etc. on the second part, and I. H. of, etc. and I. S. of, etc. on the third
part, Witnesses, That whereas there is a Marriage by the grace of God in short
time to be had and solemnized between the said I. B. party to these presents on
the one part, and E. P. Daughter of the abovenamed W. P. on the other part, It
is therefore covenanted, granted, condescended, concluded and agreed upon, by
and between the said parties to these presents, and every of them, in manner
and form following; that is to say, First the said I. B. does for himself, his
Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, Covenant, promise, grant and agree, to
and with the said W. P. his Executors and Administrators, that he the said I.
B. shall and will, before the, etc. next and immediately ensuing the date of
these presents, espouse and take to Wife the said E. P. Daughter of the said W.
P. if she the said E. will thereunto assent, consent and agree, and the Laws of
God and holy Church will it permit and suffer. And the said W.P. as well for
and in consideration of the said Marriage so to be had and solemnized between
the said I. B. and the said E. P. as aforesaid, as also for the better
establishing and settling of the Lands and Tenements hereafter mentioned, to
such uses, and to such persons, as hereafter they are limited and appointed,
and for diverse other good and sufficient causes etc. does for himself, his
Heirs etc. Covenant and grant, Covenant by the Father of the Wife, in
consideration of the Marriage etc. to infeoff, etc. certain persons to certain
uses here expressed.
to with the said I. B. I. H. and I. S. their Executors, and Administrators,
that he the said W. P. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will, before the etc.
next and immediately ensuing the date of these presents, well and sufficiently
by Eeoffment, or other good and sufficient conveyance and assurance in the law,
assure and convey, or cause to be assured and conveyed, unto them the said I.
H. and I. S. their Heirs and Assigns, all and singular those his Messuages,
etc. and the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders thereof, and
all other his hereditaments whatsoever, together with their appurtenances, at
this present demise, and let unto I. B. and R. N. and now in the tenure and
occupation of them etc. called and known by the name of, etc. containing in all
by estimation, etc. set, lying, and being, in the Parishes of etc. in the said
County of K. upon the demean of B. and the said premises do bound and butt in
manner and form following, that is to say etc. And the said Land called B. in
the occupation of R. N. bound and butt, etc. as the meets and bounds thereof
do every one divide and show, which the said Feoffment, and other conveyance
and assurance of the premises before mentioned to be made, and every of them,
shall be, and inure, and shall be deemed, adjudged, esteemed and taken, to be
and inure, And the said I. H. and I. S. and either of them, and the survivor of
them and either of them, their Heirs, and Assigns, and all and every person and
persons seized of the said premises, and all and every part and parcel thereof,
with the appurtenances, shall stand and be seized of the same, and every part
thereof, to the uses, intents, and purposes, hereafter in these other use,
intent, or purpose whatsoever, that is to say, to the use and behoof of the
said E. P. for and during the term of the natural life of the said E. And after
the decease of the said E. P. to the use and behoof of the Heirs Males of the
body of the said E. P. by the said I. B. lawfully begotten. And for default of
such issue, to the use of the Heirs Females of the body of the said E. P. by
the said I. B. lawfully begotten, And for default of such issue, to the Heirs
Females of the said E. P. on her body lawfully begotten, and for default of
such issue, then to the use of the said W. P. his Heirs, and Assigns, for ever.
Provided always, and it is fully concluded and agreed upon, by and between the
parties to these presents, and every of them, their Heirs, Executors, Proviso,
that the c^stuy que uses shall pay such a rent yearly to the Father during his
life, and in default of payment so much nomine poenae.
and Assigns, and every of them, that as well the said I. B. and E. P. during
the natural life of the said E. as also the Heirs Males and Females of the body
of the said E. by the said I. B. or any other lawfully begotten, and every
other person and persons to whom the said premises by these presents are
limited and appointed, shall yearly content and pay, or cause to be well and
truly contented and paid, at or in the Southporch of the Parish Church, of etc.
aforesaid, unto the above named W. P. and his Assigns, for and during the term
of the natural life of the said W. P. one annual rent or sum of etc. of etc.
the said annual rent or sum of etc. to be yearly by even and equal portions
paid at or upon the two most usual and accustomed feasts or days of payment in
the year, that is to say, etc. or within etc. and the first payment to begin
etc. and if the said I. B. and E. P. during the life of the said E or of any of
the Heirs Males or Females of the body of the said E. by the said I. B. or any
other to be begotten, and every other Person and Persons to whom the said
premises by these presents are limited and appointed, do not content and pay,
or cause to be paid, the said annual rent or sum of etc. unto him the said W.
P. and his Assigns, during the term of his natural life as aforesaid, according
to the true intent and meaning of the proviso in these presents before
mentioned, that then the said I. B. and E. during the life of the said E. and
the Heirs of the Body of the said E. by the said I. B. begotten, shall forfeit,
and every other person so making default, unto the said W. P. and his Assigns,
during the natural life of the said W. shall forfeit the sum of etc. nomine
poenae, for every default, Covenant, that in default of payment of the rent,
that the Feoffees shall stand seized to the use of the Feoffor, until that he
has levied the rent, and penalty forfeited.
and so often as the same shall happen; And it is Covenanted, granted,
condescended and agreed, by and between the said parties to these presents, and
every of them, their, and every of their Heirs and Assigns, and the true intent
and meaning of all and every Feoffment, and other conveyance and assurance of
the said premises made, shall be deemed, and esteemed, and taken to be, that
the said I. H. and I. S. and the survivor of them, their Heirs and Assigns,
shall upon such default in payment of the said annual Rent, or sum of, etc.
contrary to the purport, intent, and true meaning of the Proviso before by
these presents specified, by the which the same is appointed and limited to be
paid, stand and be seized of the said recited premises, with their
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the use and behoof of
him the said W. P. his Heirs and Assigns, for, during, and until he the said W.
and his Assigns shall have had, levied, and received, as well the said annual
rent of, etc. before by these presents appointed to him to be paid, with all
and every the arrerages thereof, as also the said penalty of, etc. nomine
poenae, for every such default as aforesaid to be made; Provided always, and
it is concluded, Proviso, that if the Wife die without issue of her body, to
whom the uses were limited, living her Husband, that then her Father shall grant
such a rent to the Husband for his life, and in default of payment, that he
shall forfeit so much, nomine poenae.
etc. by and between the parties to these presents, and every of them, that if
it fortune the said E. P. during the life of the said I. B. to depart this
mortal life, without issue of her body lawfully begotten, that then the said W.
P. his Heirs and Assigns, shall yearly content and pay, or cause to be well and
truly contented and paid, at or in the South porch of the Parish Church of H.
aforesaid, unto the abovenamed I. B. and his Assigns, one annual rent of sum
of, etc. to be yearly by even and equal portions paid, at or upon the two most
usual and accustomed Feasts or days of payment in the year; that is to say,
etc. or within, etc. next after, etc. and the first payment thereof to begin,
etc: which shall next and immediately ensue after the Decease of the said E.
without any issue of her body lawfully begotten as aforesaid; And if the said
W. do not content and pay, or cause to be contented and paid, the said annual
Rent or sum of, etc. unto him the said I. B. and his Assigns, during the term
of his natural life as aforesaid, according to the true intent and meaning of
the Proviso in these presents last before mentioned, that then the said W. P.
his Heirs and Assigns, after the decease of the said E. without issue of her
body lawfully begotten as aforesaid, shall forfeit unto him the said I. B. and
his Assigns, during the natural life of the said I. the sum of, etc. nomine
poenae, for every default and so often as the same shall happen; And it is
covenanted, granted, condescended and agreed, by and between the said parties
to these presents, and every of them, their and every of their Heirs and
Assigns, and the true intent and meaning of all and every Feoffment, and other
conveyance and assurance of the last recited premises made, shall be deemed,
esteemed, and taken to be, That the said I. H. and I. S. and the survivor of
them, their Heirs and Assigns, shall upon such default of payment of the said
annual rent or sum of, Covenant, that in default of payment of the Rent, that
the Feoffees shall stand seized to the use of the Husband, until that he has
levied the rent and penalty forfeited.
etc. according to the purport, intent, and true meaning of the Proviso before
by these presents specified, by the which the same is appointed and limited to
be paid, stand and be seized of the said recited premises, with their
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, unto the use and behoof of
him the said I. R. his Heirs and Assigns, during, and until the said I. his
Heirs and Assigns, have had, levied, and received, as well the said annual rent
or sum, etc. before by these presents appointed to him to be paid, with all and
every the arrerages thereof, as also the said penalty of, etc. nomine poenae,
for every such default as aforesaid to be made; Provided furthermore, and it is
fully condescended, etc. upon, Proviso, that if the wife die, having issue male
or female, being under the age of, etc. that the Husband shall take the profits
of the land, toward the education of such Child, til he or she come to the age
of, etc.
by and between every of the said parties to these presents, their Heirs and
Assigns, that if it happen the said E. P. after the said Marriage between her
and the said I. B. had and solemnized, to depart this mortal life having Heir
of her body Male or Female by the said I. B. lawfully begotten, and that the
said Heir, being a Man-child, fortune to be at the time of such decease of the
said E. under the age of, etc. Or being a Daughter, to be under the age of,
etc. that then it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said I. B. for and
toward the education and bringing up of such Child and Heir, to take, levy,
and receive all and singular the rents, issues, and profits of the said
premises, and every part and parcel thereof, with th'appurtenances, for,
during, and until such Heir, being a Male child shall accomplish the full age
of etc. and if the said Heir be a Daughter, then for, during, and until she
shall accomplish her full age of etc. and that then and from thenceforth the
true intent and meaning of all and every Feoffment, Covenant, that the Feoffees
shall stand seized to the use of the Husband during such time as aforesaid.
and other conveyance and assurance of the premises to be made, shall be
esteemed, adjudged, and taken to be, That the said I. B. and I. S. and the
survivor of them, their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of the
said premises to the use and behoof of the said I. B. during such time, and in
such manner and form, as is before by the said last proviso limited and
appointed, any thing before specified to the contrary notwithstanding, In
witness whereof, etc.

Note, that he which sueth a Replevin, must, before, it be made enter into Bond
of a reasonable etc. with two sureties, conditioned as follows.

Noverint universi per etc. Teneri, etc. T. K. vicecomit. Com K. etc.

THe Condition etc. That whereas the above name T. K. Sheriff of the said
County of K. by virtue of his Office, and upon the complaint of the above
bounden R. T. has delivered and replevied unto the said R. T. two Oxen which
one I. S. late took, and wrongfully withheld, as the said R. T. says, If
therefore the said R. T. do pursue his said action of Replegiare against the
said I. S. for the taking and withholding of the said two Oxen, with effect,
and make return again of the said Cattle, if the return of them be so adjudged
by the Law, And the said Sheriff, his Heirs and Executors, acquit and
discharge, or sufficiently save harmless, against the Commonwealth, and the
said I. S. of and for every thing concerning the premises, That then, etc.

A Grant of an Annuity out of Land, with a Proviso not to charge the Person:
TO all, etc. Know ye, that I, etc. for diverse, etc. have given etc. to T. P.
and T. P. of etc. one annuity or yearly rent, etc. issuing and yearly to be
taken out of one message, etc. containing in the whole by estimation, etc.
more or less, etc. situate, etc. in the Parish of H. aforesaid, and now in the
hands or possession of me the aforesaid I. during the minority of T. C. Son of
the said I. C. deceased, to have, hold, The grant, is during the minority of
one, for and toward the education of of him, and his Sister.
and enjoy, and take the aforesaid annuity, etc. out of the aforesaid Message,
and other the Premises whatsoever, with all and singular the appurtenances to
the aforesaid T. P. and T. P. their Executors and Assigns, until and so long as
the said T. C. natural Son of the said I. C. deceased shall come and attain to
the age, etc. to and cowards the good education and sustenance in all
necessaries as well of the aforesaid T. C. as of one M. C. Sister of the
aforesaid T. to be paid yearly at four usual terms of the year, viz. at the
Feast etc. by equal portions, the first payment thereof to begin at the Feast,
etc. and not before, In default of payment by such a time, power to distrain.
Proviso not to charge the person of the Grantor.
And if it happen the said annuity or yearly Rent etc. or any part or parcel
thereof at any time to be behind or unpaid by the space of etc. after any Feast
of the aforesaid Feasts, in which as aforesaid the same ought to be paid, That
then and to often it shall and may be lawful for the said T. P. and T. P. and
their Executors etc. unto the aforesaid Message, etc. and other the premises
whatsoever, with all and singular their appurtenances, to enter and distrain,
and the said distresses so then and there taken and had, it shall be lawful to
lead and drive away, and with them to retain until the aforesaid T. P. and T.
P. and their Executors, the aforesaid annuity or yearly Rent, with all the
arrerages thereof (if any shall be) be fully satisfied and contented, Provided
always that neither these present writing, nor any thing therein contained, do
no manner of ways extend to charge the person of me the said I. by Writ or
Action of annuity, but only shall be effectual and of value to charge the same
Message, Proviso, that if the Brother and Siser, or either of them dye, during
the monority of the brother, that the grant shall be void.
etc. and other the premises before specified with the aforesaid yearly rent,
and not otherwise: And provided also, that if it happen the aforesaid T.C. the
Son, and the aforesaid M.C. the Sister of the aforesaid T. or either of them,
at any time before the said T. do accomplish, and come to his full age as
aforesaid of one and twenty years to die, and depart this life, that then from
the time of such death, or decease of the aforementioned T. or M. as well this
present Writing, as all in the same contained, shall be a ltogether void, and
of none effect; And that then, and from the time of such death, or decease of
the aforesaid T. or M. this present annuity or yearly rent shall be utterly
void and determined, any thing before specified to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. Of which said annuity or yearly rent, the aforesaid I. have
put the aforesaid T.P. and T.P. into full possession and seisin, Seison given
of the Rent.
by giving to them four pence. In witness, etc.

A General Release made by two.
BE it known, etc. That we R.S. and I.W. of, etc. for diverse, etc. have
remised, released, and quite clained, and do by these presents, for us, our
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, remise, release, and quite claim
unto E. M. of, etc. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all and
all manner of Bills, Bonds, Obligations, Debts, Duties, Arbitrements and Deeds
whatsoever, and all manner of Actions and Suits, which we the said R.S. and
I.W. solely in our own names, or jointly with any others whosoever, now at this
present have depending, or may or can have, or by any way or means either
solely for our-selves, and to our own use, or jointly with any other, are
entitled unto, against the said E. M. as Executors or Admin. in or upon any
Bill, Bond, or other specialty, by him the said E. M., unto us the said R. S.
and I. W. or either of us solely or jointly with any other person or persons
whatsoever, ^t any time heretofore for any cause whatsoever made, and also all
other controversies and debates whatsoever, which we the said R. S. and I. W.
our Executors, Administrators or Assigns, have, may, might, or can have against
him the said E. M. his Executors or Assigns, for any cause or matter
whatsoever, from the beginning of the world until the day of the date of these
presents. In Witness whereof, etc.

A Deed of Feoffment of uses contained in certain Indentures.
TO all, etc. Know ye me the aforesaid E.G. as well to fulfill and perform
certain covenants, grants and agreements specified and declared in certain
Indentures of the date of these presents, between me the aforesaid E.G. on the
one part, and of W.I. Rector of the Parish Church of B.R.S. or, etc. the
aforesaid P.M. of R. and P.H. of B. in the County aforesaid Yeoman, on the
other part made, as for diverse other good Causes and considerations me to this
especially moving have given granted, delivered, infeoffed, and by this my
present Writing confirmed unto the aforesaid W. I. R. S. P. M. and P. H. their
Heirs and Assigns, seven pieces or parcels, etc. with their appurtenances,
situate, lying, etc. and commonly called or known, by the name, etc.
containing, in the whole by estimation, etc. whether more or less; and also
all these five pieces or parcels of Land, etc. with their appurtenances,
situate, etc. in the Parishes of B. and R. in the aforesaid County of K. and
commonly called or known by the name of K. land, or by what other name or names
the same are called or known, containing in the whole by estimation, etc. be
they more or less; And also know ye, that I the aforesaid I. G. for the
consideration aforesaid have given and delivered, etc. to the aforesaid W. I.
etc. his Heirs and Assigns, all that my old house called a Lodge, and 8 pieces
or parcels of Land, etc. with all the appurtenances to the same house called a
Lodge adjoynng, or belonging, containing in the whole by estimation, etc. more
or less, situate, lying and being in the aforesaid Parish of R. in the
aforesaid County of K. and now are in the tenure or occupation of G.A. of R.
aforesaid, or his Assigns, to have and to hold the aforesaid old house, and all
and singular the aforesaid lands, etc. and other the premises whatsoever, with
all and singular their appurtenances unto the aforesaid W. I. R. S. P. M. and
P. H. their Heirs and Assigns, to the use, behoof and intents in the aforesaid
Indentures of the date of these presents, between the aforesaid E. on the one
part, and the aforesaid W. R. P. and P. on the other part made, mentioned, and
expressed, and according to the true intent of the said Indenture, and to none
other use, behoof or intent, whatsoever, In Witness, etc.

An Indenture for assurance of Lands to charitable uses, viz. erection of a
School, are relief of the poor.
THIS INIDENTURE etc. Between E. G. of etc. of the one part, and W. I. Minister
of B. aforesaid, R. S. of the said Parish of B. P. M. of etc. and P. H. of B.
aforesaid, etc. on the other pat, Witnesses, that for and in consideration of
the good and prefect disposing, establishing, and settling of all and every the
lands, tenements, woods, reversion, remainders, and other the hereditaments of
the said E G. with the appurtenances, hereafter particularly mentioned and
expressed, to such good and charitable user, intents and purposes, as hereafter
by these presents are limited and appointed, and to the end, intent, and
purpose that the said good and charitable uses by these presents hereafter
limited and appointed, and to the end, intent and purpose, that the said good
and charitable uses by these presents hereafter limited and appointed, may be
well and truly executed, performed and fulfilled, according to the true intent
and meaning of the said E. G. Covenant to enfeoff, or by other conveyances to
assure certain lands, go the uses following, before such a time.
And for diverse other good and sufficient etc. It is covenanted, etc. by and
between the said parties to these presents, and every of them by these presents
in manner and form following, that is to say, First he the said E. G. does by
these presents for him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and
every of them, covenant, etc. to and with the said W. I. etc. and every of
their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, that he the said E. G.
before the Feast of etc. by his sufficient deed of Feoffment, or by any other
conveyance and assurance sufficient in the Law, shall and will well and
sufficiently convey and assure or cause to be conveyed and assured, unto them
the said W. I. etc. their Heirs and Assigns, all and singular the lands, etc.
and all and every other the Hereditaments, with all and singular their
appurtenances, hereafter in these presents mentioned and set down, That is to
say etc. (expressing the several particulars,) The which the said E. G. had and
purchased to him and his Heirs of one I. F. of S. deceased, and are now in the
tenure and occupation, etc. and are situate etc. which said Feoffment and other
the conveyance and assurance of the premises, before mentioned to be made, and
every of them, shall be and inure, and shall be deemed, adjudged, esteemed, and
taken to be and inure, and also the said W. I. etc. or either of them, and the
survivor of them, and either of them, their Heirs and Assigns, and all and
every person and persons seized of the said premises, and all and every part
and parcel thereof to the uses intents, and purposes hereafter in these
presents expressed, limited, and appointed, and to no other use, intent, or
purpose, whatsoever, that is to say, to the use and behoof of the said E. G.
for and during the term of his natural life, without impeachment for any manner
of wast. And after the decease of the said E. G. then of and in the aforesaid
etc. with their appurtenances, commonly called and known by the name of etc.
containing by estimation etc. whether more or less, in the tenure, etc. and of
and in the aforesaid, To the use of certain persons upon trust for a
Freeschool, to be after erected, and if it be not erected within such a time,
then to other uses.
etc. to the use and behoof of them the said W. I. etc. and the survivor of
them their Heirs and Assigns, to the end, intent and purpose, and upon special
trust and confidence, that they the said W. etc. or the survivor or survivors
of them, their Heirs, and Assigns, shall and do immediately after, or upon the
erection of a Free School, to be erected and set up within the Parish of B.
aforesaid, by their good and sufficient coveyance and assurance in the Law,
convey and assure the said-premises, for and toward the maintenance of a
Schoolmaster, to teach in the said School, and his successors for ever; The
said Free School to be called by the name of the Free School of E. G. at B. and
to be ruled and governed by such Orders, Laws and Decrees as shall be by them
the said W. R. P. and P. or the survivor or survivors of them, set down and
thought most meet and convenient, and if there be not a convenient School-house
for the said purpose built, erected, and set up in the Parish of B. within the
space of, etc. next and immediately, etc. Then the said W. I. etc. the survivor
and survivors of them, their Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, and all and
every other person and persons seized of the said last recited premises, and
every part and parcel thereof, shall stand and be seized of and in the same, to
the use and behoof of R. G. Son of the said E. G. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever. And after the decease of the said E. G. as aforesaid, then of and in all
that the aforesaid Tenement or Lodge, together with the aforesaid etc. with
th'appurtenances, cont eining in the whole by estimation, etc. whether more or
less, to the said Tenement or Lodge belonging or appertaining, sit, and being
in R. aforesaid, to the use and behoof of F. G. of I.G. late of R. aforesaid
deceased, his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

Proviso, that the cesiuy que use shall pay so much yearly to the Vicars of two
Parishes severally, and their Successors for ever, to the intents, that the
several Vicars, and the Churchwardens, shall distribute the several sums to the
poor of the several Parishes upon some day certain.
Provided always, that he the said F. G. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and do
yearly, after the decease of the said E. G. at or upon the Feast of, etc. for
and toward the relief, maintemance, and sustenance of the poor aged and
impotent people within the Parishes of B. and R. aforesaid, content and pay, or
cause to be contented and paid unto the Vicar of the said Parish of B. for the
time being, and unto his Successors for ever, at or in the Parish Church of B.
aforesaid, the sum of, etc. And also unto the Vicar of the Parish of R.
aforesaid for the time being, etc his Successors for ever, at or in the said
Parish Church of R. the like sum of, etc. the first payment of the said several
sums to begin at and upon the next Feast of, etc. which shall first happen
after the decease of the said E. G. to the end, intent, and purpose, that the
Vicar, together with the Churchwardens of the said several Parishes of B. and
R. end their Successors for ever, for the time being, or any two of them within
their several Parishes, shall yearly, at, and upon the said Feast of, etc.
distribute, or cause to be distributed, the said several sums unto the poor
and impotent people inhabiting within the said several Parishes, And if the
cestuy que use etc. shall sail of payment, then to forfeit so much nomine
poenae, to the Vicar where such default shall be.
And if the said F. G. his Heirs and Assigns do not content and pay, or cause
to be paid, the said several sums of etc. according unto the true intent and
meaning of the last Proviso in these presents contained, Then he the said F. G.
his Heirs and Assigns, shall forfeit unto the Vicar of every the said Parishes
of B. and R. and their Successors for the time being, severally and
respectively, where any such default shall happen to be, the several sums of,
etc. nomine poenae, for every default, and so often as the same shall happen,
and shall not incur any other penalty or forfeiture by implied condition or
limitation, or any other thing in these presents contained; and it is
covenanted, etc. by and between the parties to these presents, and every of
them, their, and every of their Heirs and Assigns, and the true intent and
meaning of all and every Feoffment, and other conveyance and assurance of the
last recited premises made, shall be deemed, esteemed, and taken to be, and the
said W. I. etc. and the survivor and survivors of them, their Heirs and
Assigns, shall, upon default of payment of the said F. G. his Heirs and
Assigns, Covenant, that in default of payment, the Feosees or Trustees, shall
stand seized to to the use of the Vicar, or Vicars, where such default shall
be, until that he or they have levied the said several sums, and peins
thereupon forfeited.
of the said several sums of, etc. contrary to the purport, intent, and true
meaning of the Prouiso before by these presents specified, by the which the
said several sums are appointed and limited to be paid, stand, and be seized of
the said last recited premises unto the use and behoof of the said Vicar of
every of the said Parishes of B. and R. and their Successors severally, where
any such default shall happen to be, for during, and until they the said
Vicars and their Successors of every the said Parishes of B. and R. for the
time being, for the several defaults unto every of them made, shall have
severally had, levied, and received, as well the said several sums of etc.
before by these presents appointed to them to he paid, with all and every the
arrerages thereof, as also the said several penalties of, etc. nomine poenae
for every default by the said F. G. his Heirs and Assigns made. In Witness
whereof, etc.

The form of a perpetuity by will, or a Proviso to restrain alienation, etc.
PRovided always, and my full mind and intent is, that if the said F. G. or any
of the Heirs males of his Body lawfully begotten, to whom any estate or estates
of and in the said messuages etc. before mentioned, or any part or parcel
thereof, does accrue, remain, descend, or come by any way or means whatsoever,
shall at any time wittingly or willingly, determinatly and effectually procure
or assent, to or for any act or acts, thing or things, for any bargain, sale,
discontinuance, alienation, exchange or forfeiture to be had, or made of the
said messuages and other the before-named premises, or of any part or parcel of
them, or any of them, to him, them, or any of them, by these presents limited
and devised, whereby any estate of the premises, or of any part or parcel
thereof, may should or might in any wise, or by any means be undone,
discontinued, barred, determined or forfeited, and the same bargain, sale,
discontinuance, alienation, exchange, or forfeiture, or any other effectual
thing or Act, toward the same effect shall attempt, cause, procure command, or
wittingl or willingly assent unto, or suffer to be attempted, gone about to be
executed, performed, prosecuted or put in ure, by the knowledging of any note
or notes, of or for any Fine or Fines to be levied, or by knowledging any
Warrant or Warrants of Attorney or Attorneys, for any Recovery or Recoveries to
be pursued, or entering into warranty by any means whatsoever, or by knowleging
any warrant for the same, or by any purchase of any Writ or Writs, by them, or
any of them, or by any other by their affent or consent, by appearance oi
otherwise to any Writ or Writs, of the premises, or any part and parcel
thereof, or by acknowledging of any deed or deeds, writing or writings, to be
enrolled, or by any other effectual act or acts thing or things whatsoever,
whereof or whereby any bargain, sale, discontinuance, alienation exchange, or
forfeiture shall or may ensue, that then immediately from and after the time of
such procuring, attempting, commanding, willing, assenting, suffering or going
about, in manner and form as is aforesaid, and before any such bargain, sale,
discontinuance, alienation, exchange or forfeiture perfected, executed, or
done, the estate and estates limited and appointed in these presents, unto him
or them, and to as many as so shall attempt, cause, procure, command, or
wittingly assent to, or suffer any such act or acts, thing or things, to be
prosecuted, executed, performed, done, or put in ure, or gone about to be done,
performed, or put in ure, in manner and form before declared, whereupon any
bargain, sale, discontinuance, alienation, exchange, or forfeiture, shall, may,
or might ensue, contrary to the true intent and meaning of these presents, of
in such, or so much of the said messuages, etc. before mentioned, for the which
any the thing or things aforesaid shall be attempted, caused, procured,
commanded, assented or suffered to be executed, performed, done, or put in ure,
or gone about to be done, executed, performed, or put in ure, contrary to the
true meaning of these presents, shall cease, as in respect only, and having
regard to suuch person or persons only so attempting, procuring, causing,
commanding, willingly assenting to, suffering or going about any such act or
acts, thing or things aforesaid, as if such person or persons so attempting,
causing, commanding, or procuring, were naturally dead, and not otherwise, and
that then and in such case it shall be lawful to and for every such person or
persons to whom the possession thereof should come, grow, or be, by the true
intent and meaning of these presents, to enter and enjoy the same, as if such
person or persons, which shall so procure or assent to any such act or thing to
be done or attempted, were naturally dead, and in no otherwise, and of such and
the like estate and estates, and in like manner and form to all intents and
purposes, and with like remainders over, and with like limitations and
conditions as the same should have come, and grown, or been, if the same person
that shall so procure or assent to, or for, any such act or acts, thing or
things, to be done, or attempted, at or immediately before the time of such
procuring or assenting, were naturally dead, and in none other manner, any
thing before in these presents mentioned to the contrary notwithstanding.
Nevertheless it shall and may be lawful to and for the said F. G. or any of
the Heirs males of his body lawfully begotten, to set and lease the said
Messuages, Power to make lease. for 21 years, or 3 lives, reserving the old and
accustomed rent.
etc. and other the premises, for 21 years at the most, or under, or for one,
two, or three lives, upon which several demises, the old, ancient, and
accustomed yearly rent, or the value thereof, or more, shall be reserved and
assured to such person and persons as shall or ought to have by descent or
otherwise, the estate or estates of and in the premises, etc.

A Ioynture made before Marriage.
TO all, etc. Know ye, that I the said T. I. for and in consideration of a
certain Marriage between me the aforesaid I. T. and one A. M. of B. in the
aforesaid County of K. Virgin, Sisler of one I. M. the younger, and G. M. of B.
aforesaid Draper, and for an absolute and perfect Jointure of the said A. M. to
be made, and in recompense, bar, full satisfaction and discharging of all and
singular Dower, and title of Dower, with the said A. M. of, or in any other
Messuages, Lands, Tenements or Here ditaments of me the said T. I. that any way
may happen, have given, etc. to the aforesaid I. and G. their Heirs and
Assigns, the moiety of my one moiety, viz. one third part of one Message, etc.
with the appurtenances thereunto belonging. And also the moiety of my one
moiety etc. viz. the third part, etc. with all and singular their
appurtenances; Which said premises do all contein in the whole, by estimation,
etc. be the same more or less, situate, etc. And also know ye, that the said
T. for the Cause and consideration aforesaid, have given, etc. to the aforesaid
I. M. and G. M. their Heirs and Assigns, all those my, etc. be they more or
less, situate, etc. Which said last premises the said T. I. late had, and
purchaled to him and his Heirs of one R. F. and A. his Wife, as by a certain
Writing to him thereof made more plainly appears; To have and to hold, etc.
with their appurtenances, and all and singular other the premises whatsoever,
with all and singular their appurtenances, to the aforesaid I. M. and G. M.
their Heirs and Assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of me the said T. I.
until the Rites of Marriage between me the aforesaid T. and the said A. M. Be
celebrated, and after those Rites of Marriage are celebrated, then to the use
and and behood of A. M. aforesaid for term of her natural life, and after the
decease of the aforesaid A. M. to the use of me the aforesaid T. my Heirs and
Assigns for ever; To be holden of the chief Lord, etc. And I the aforesaid T.
I. and my Heirs, the aforesaid moiety etc. with their appurtenances, and the
moiety of that my one moiety, viz. the third part aforesaid, etc. with their
appurtenances, to the aforesaid I. and G. their Heirs and Assigns, to the use,
behoof, and intent aforesaid, against me, my Heirs and Assigns, and against all
other men claiming from me, will warrant, Aspecial warranty.
and for ever defend by these present, A special warranty.
In witness, etc.

The Condition of an Obligation, to restrain Tenements intailed, to be aliened
by Fine, Recovery, or otherwise.
THe Condition, etc. that whereas one I. H. of etc. within written,
Daughter-in-Law of the said I. B. has by her sufficient Deed of Feoffment,
being of the date with these presents, given, granted, and infeoffed the within
named I. B. and one G. S. and their Heirs, of and in all and singular the
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of her the said I. H. lying and
being in the Parishes of H. and S. or elsewhere in the said County of K. to the
uses, intents and purposes in certain Indentures being of the date of these
presents, made between her the said I. H. of the one part, and one I. S. of,
etc. and the said G. S. and I. B. of the other part, mentioned, specified,
limited and appointed, and to none other use, intent, or purpose whatsoever.
And whereas by the said recited Indenture the use and uses of parcel of the
said premises in the said Indenture particularly expressed, are mentioned,
limited, and appointed, and it is by the said recited Indenture concluded, that
the said G. S. and I. B. their Heirs and Assign, shall thereof stand and be
seized to the use and behoof of the said I. S. and her the said I. H. and the
survivor of them, for and during the term of their natural lives, and after
their decease to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the said I. S. upon the
body of the said I. H. lawfully begotteen, and for default of such Heirs, by
the said I. S. of the body of the said I. H. lawfully begotten, to the use and
behoof of the said I. S. his Heirs and Assigns, for ever.

And whereas by the said recited Indenture the use and uses of other parcels of
the said premises in the said recited Indenture particularly expressed are
mentioned, limited and appointed, and it is by the said recited Indenture
concluded and agreed, that the said G. S. and I. B. their Heirs and assigns,
shall thereof stand and be seized to the use and behoof of her the said I. H.
and the Heirs of her body lawfully begotten, and for default of Heirs of the
body of her the said I. lawfully begotten, to the use and behoof of M. B. Wife
of the within named I. B. for term of her life, and after her decease, to the
use and behoof of A. B. and I. B. their Heirs and Assigns for ever, as in the
said deed of Feoffment and Indenture, being of the date of these presents, more
plainly and more at large does and may appear.

If therefore the said I. S. shall levy a Fine, or suffer a Recovery, or join
with her the said I. H. in levying of a Fine, or suffering of a Recovery of the
said premises in the said recited Indenture specified, or of any part or parcel
thereof; Or if the said I. S. shall do, suffer or execute, or consent to the
suffering or executing of any act or acts, thing or things, devise or devises
whatsoever, wherewith or whereby the use or uses of the said premises in the
said recited Indenture specified, or of any part or parcel thereof, shall be in
any sort altered, changed or transferred to any person or persons in any other
(manner and form than by the said recited Indenture, the same are limited,
expressed, and appointed.

Or if the said I. S. solely by himself, or jointly with her the said I. H.
shall do or execute, or consent to the doing or executing of any act or acts
whatsoever, be the same by demise for years, for life, or by any other way or
means howsoever, wherewith, or whereby the said premises in the said recited
Indenture specified, and every part and parcel thereof, shall or may not after
the decease of him the said I. S. if she the said I. H. fortune to survive and
over-live him the said I. be and remain unto her the said I. D. in possession,
according to the purport, intent, and true meaning of the said Indenture, That
then etc. Or otherwise.

A Grant of a Rent to others, to the use of the Feoffees for a Jointure before
Marriage.
THIS INDENTURE, etc. Between I. S. of etc. of the one part, and G. S. and I.
B. of etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That whereas the said I. S. is by the
grace of God within short space to marry and take to Wife one I. D. of etc.
aforesaid, Daughter in Law of the said I. B. Now the said I. S. for the
absolute and perfect Jointure of her the said I. D. and for and in recompense,
har, full satisfaction, and discharge of all and singular the Dower, or title
of Dower, which she the said I. D. sall or may be entitled unto in any the
Messuages, etc. of the said I. S. has before marriage between them the said I.
and I. had and solemnized, by the assent, consent, and agreement of her the
said I. D. given, granted, and confirmed, and by these presencs, does give
grant, and confirm, unto the said G. S. and I. D. their Heirs and Assigns, for
and during the term of the natural life of her the said I. D. and to her only
use and behoof, one annuity or yearly rent of etc. of etc. to be issuing or
going out of etc. containing in the whole by estimation etc. of land, meadow,
pasture, and wood-grounds, whether more or less, situate, lying and being in
the Parishes of B. and S. in the said County of K. upon the demeans of S. I.
and M. and now in the tenure and occupation of one I. C. his Assignee or
Assignees. And the said premises bound and butt in manner and form following,
that is to say, etc. as the meets and bounds thereof do divide and show, To
have, levy, perceive, take, and yearly enjoy, and the said Annuity or yearly
rent of etc. immediately from and after the decease of the said I. S. unto them
the said G. and I. their Heirs and Assigns, for and during the natural life of
the said I. D. and unto the use of her the said I. D. and her Assigns, during
the term of her natural life aforesaid, The said Annuity or yearly rent to be
paid, at or upon the said premises at 4 usual Feasts or terms in the year, that
is to say, etc. by even and equal portions, And the first payment thereof to
begin at the first of the said Feasts which shall happen next and immediately
after the decease of the said I. S. and not before.

[Here follows the usual clause of power to enter upon the Land, The usual
Convenants.
and to distrain for the rent behind, As also the clause of giving seisin of
the rent, And after that, the clause, or covenant, that the grantor was seized
in fee of a lawful and indefeasible Estate, of the land out of which, etc. and
that he had full power, in his own right, to charge the said lands: Then
follows the Covenant, that the land shall be overt, liable and sufficient to
the distress of, etc. And that the land is of the clear yearly value of, etc.
over and above all other charges and reprises. And lastly, the covenant of
peaceable and quiet enjoyment of the said rent, etc.

An Indenture to lead the use of a Feoffment, made by a woman before Marriage,
to the use of her, and him that shall be her Husband; with a general Covenant,
that all assurances shall be to these uses.
THIS INDENTURE, etc. Between I. D. of, etc. Virgin of the one part, And I. S.
of, etc. G. S. and I. B. of, etc. of the other part, Witnesses, That whereas
there is a Marriage by the grace of God in short time to be had and solemnized
between the said I. D. party to these presents, on the one part, And the said
I. S. another of the parties to these presents on the other part, it is
covenanted, granted, condescended, concluded and agreed upon, by and between
the said parties to these presents, and every of them, in manner and form
following: First, the said I. D. does for her self, her Executors and
Administrators, covenant, promise, grant and agree, to and with the said I. S.
his Executors and Administrators, that she the said I. D. shall and will before
the, etc. espouse, and take to Husband the said I. S. if he the said I. S. will
thereunto agree, and the Laws of God and holy Church will it permit and suffer;
And also the said I. S. does for himself, his Executors and Administrators,
covenant, promise, and grant, to and with the said I. D. her Executors and
Administrators, that he the said I. S. shall and will before the said, etc.
espouse and take to Wife the said I. D. if she the said I. will thereunto
consent and agree, and the Laws of God and holy Church will it permit and
suffer. And the said I. D. as well for and in consideration of the said Marriage
so to be had and solemnized between the said I. S. and the said I. D. as
aforesaid, as also for the better establishing and settling of the lands and
tenements, etc. [And so use the like form in the precedent form in this Book,
and mention the parcels, with the bounds and butts, etc. with the like
Covenants as before, and] And it is by these presents fully covenanted,
granted, and agreed upon, by and between the parties of these presents, and
every of them, their Heirs and Assigner, Covenant, that all assurances shall be
to these use.
and every of them, that all and singular Fines, Recoveries, Feoffments,
alienations, and all other conveyances and assurances whatsoever of the said
premises, with th'appurtenances, and of every part and parcel thereof, now
made, or at any time hereafter before the Feasts of etc. next and immediately
ensuing the date of these presents to be made, shall be and inure, and are by
these presents appointed, limited, and declaed to be, and inure, to the uses,
intents, and purposes before by these presents limited and appointed, and to
none other use or uses, intents or purposes whatsoever. In witness whereof, etc.

A Grant from her Majesty of the Wardships of the bodies of Coheirs.
THIS INDENTURE made between etc. of the one part, and T. R. of etc. on the
other part Witnesses, That etc. with the advice of the Master and Council, is
contented and pleased to grant, and by these presents does commit and grant,
unto the said T. R. the custody, wardship, and marriage, of F. G. E. G. and G.
G. Daughters, and next Coheirs of G. G. Gent. deceased, without disparagement,
Together with one annuity or yearly rent of etc. to every of the said Coheirs
to be limited and appointed, by the said Master and Council, out of certain
Messuages, etc. in the County of K. being in the hands and possessions of etc.
by the minority of F. G. E. G. and G. G. to be paid yearly to the said T. R. or
his Assigns, by the Feodary of the said County, or by his lawful Deputy for
the time being, for and toward the education and exhibition of the said
Coheirs; And whereas also there does not appear at this time that every parcel
of the inheritance of the said Coheirs, upon the death of their said Father, is
come into the hands and possessions of etc. nor certainty in every parcel of
the inheritance of the said Coheirs what ought to be in his hands and
possession, because of such Dowers, Feoffments and Wills as are declared in the
same, Therefore for that, etc. should not be deceived in that behalf, but that
he should have perfect knowledge and understanding, of all such Manor, Lands,
tenements and hereditaments, which be now descended, or immediately after the
decease of any person or persons, or after years finished or ended, or any
other last will performed, or by any other ways or means shall descend, revert,
remain or come to the Heirs in possession or reversion, with the very best and
uttermost true value of them and every of them by the year, The said T. R. has
delivered a writing hereunto annexed, in the which are contained and specified
all such Manors, Messuages, Lands and Tenements, which be descended, or shall
hereaster come and descend, unto the said Coheirs in possession or Reversion,
with the very best and uttermost true value of them, and every of them by the
year.

And the said T. R. Covenanteth and grants, for him, his Excecutors and
Assigns, by these presents, that one Auditor or Auditors, or any other person
or persons appointed or authorized by the said Master and Council for the time
being, at the costs and charges of the said T. R. or his Assigns, shall search,
view, and value the truth of the same, upon which search, view, and value, if
it can be proved that the said Manors, etc. or any of them, which shall or
ought to descend, revert, remain and come to the said Coheirs in possession or
reversion, as is aforesaid, be omitted and left out in the same writing
indented, or else be found of more large, and better yearly value, than in the
same yearly value is limited, Then the said T. R. his Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, shall content and pay unto etc. or to his Heirs or Successors, as
much money as the overplus of the yearly value of the said Manors, lands, and
other the premises so undervalued, shall amount unto above the yearly value
limited in the same writing indented, if such shall be found upon the said
search, view, and value, after the rate of two years value. And also as much
money as the said T. R. or any other to his use shall perceive and take of the
said Manors, Lands, and Hereditaments, being of the inheritance of the said
Coheirs, left out and omitted in the same writing indented, if any such shall
be found upon the said search, view, and value of the Manors, etc. shall happen
to descend, revert, remain, or come to them, before they come to, and be of
their several ages of etc. and the sald T. R. covenanteth and grants for him
and his Assigns, by these presents, that the said T. R. and his Assigns, shall
not only bring up and entertain the said Coheirs, But also as much as in him
and them lies, shall save and defend all the Manors etc. of the said Coheirs,
from all unlawful intrusions, encroachments, wastes, decays, spoils,
disorders, or expelling of Tenants, and imbesilling, withdrawing, concealing,
or misusing of evidences and writings concerning the inheritance of the said
Coheirs, and if at any time hereafter during the said grant, any unsawfull
intrusion, encroachment, wast, decay, spoil, disorder, or expelling of
Tenements to be done or made upon any part or parcel of the said inheritance,
or if any evidences, mi^^ments, or writing concerning the said Inheritance be
imbezelled, withdrawn, or misused, to the knowledge of the said T.R. or his
Assigns, that then the said T.R. his Executors or Assigns, forthwith after the
knowledge thereof had, shall certify the same to the said Master, and Council
for time being, and receive and prosecute forth their order for the reformation
thereof, to and for the advancement of, etc. his interest and right, and for
the preservation, safeguard, and tuition of the inheritance of the said
Coheirs; And further, if at any time hereafter, during the minority of the
said Coheirs, or before their livery or ouster l' mains be prosecuted and had
out of the hands and possession of the said, etc. or of his Heirs and
Successors, it shall fortune any Manors, etc. whatsoever, to descend and grow
to the said Coheirs, in possession, or reversion, or by any other ways or
means which be not known to the said Master and Council to be descended at the
making hereof, That then the said T.R. his Executors or Assigns, within one
half year next after any such descent fallen or happen, shall certify the same
to the said Master and Council for the time being, (...) they may have sure
information thereof, as well for the preservation of the right and title
thereof to the use of the said Coheirs, and for the good order and custody of
the same during their minorities, and for the true and just answering of all
such rents and profits as shall be found due and payable in the said Court upon
any such descent. And if any Church belonging to the Patronage of the said
Coheirs, happen to be void before they come and be of their full ages of, etc.
That then the said T. R. or his Assigns, shall within one month next after
knowledge to him had of any such descent or vacation, give knowledge thereof to
the said Master and Council, as the said, etc. pleasure may be known for the
order and disposition of the same. Provided always, and the said T.R.
covenanteth and grants, for him and his assigns, shall give, grant bargain
and sell this grant, or the custody of the said Coheirs, to whom the
inheritance may descend or revert, nor to any person or persons without
knowledge or agreement of the said Master and Council for the time being, nor
shall dispose in Marriage, or by any persuasion induce the said Heirs to marry
where any case of disparagement is, or other detriment, annoyance, or disorder
may arise and appear, contrary to the order of the Law; Neither also shall
sequester, demise, limit or grant, the said yearly allowance before set forth
for the education and exhibition of the said Coheirs, to any other use,
intent, or purpose, than toward the said education, during the said grant. And
moreover also, the said T.R. Covenanteth and grants, for him and his Assigns
by these presents, that he the said T.R. or his sufficient Deputy or Attorney,
shall within two months next after the delivery of the Bill of the grant of
the Wardship, signed by, etc. and delivered to the Clark of the said Court of
Wards, prosecute forth Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, and
after th'ensealing thereof bring the same Patent within the said time to the
Auditor General of the said Court, to be enrolled, and upon the inrollment
thereof demand and take the same Patent within the same time from the said
Auditor, after the said inrollment. In witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture of exchange of Lands.
THIS INDENTURE, etc. Between R.D. of, etc. on the one part, and R.H. of, etc.
on the other part, Witnesses, that it is Covenanted, condescended, and agreed
between the said R. D. and R.H. and the said R.D. and R.H. for them and their
Heirs, do covenant, condescend, and agree the one with the oter, their several
Heirs and Assigns, by these presents in form following, that is to say, that he
the said R.H. has given, granted, and by these presents confirmed to the
aforesaid R. D. his Heirs and As. for ever, in free and liberal exchange, all
that, etc. called or known by the name of G. with the appurtenances,
containing, etc. lying, etc. To have, etc. the aforesaid, etc. with the
appurtenances, in exchange as is aforesaid, to the aforesaid R. D. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever. In consideration of which grant, gift, and exchange, the
aforesaid R.D. has likewise given, granted, and by these presents confirmed to
the aforesaid R. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, in free and liberal
exchanges all that etc. with the appurtenances, called etc. containing in the
whole etc. lying etc. To have etc. the aforesaid etc. with their appurtenances,
in free and liberal exchange for the same parcel and pasture called G. to the
aforesaid R.H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever; And the said R. D. for himself,
his Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, does covenant and grant by these presents,
to and with the said R. H. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, that he the said
R.H. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and may for ever hereafter, have, hold and
quietly enjoy the aforesaid Land or Meadow, called E. with the appurtenances,
and every part thereof, without any charges and encumbrances formerly had,
Mutual Covenants by the Exchangers that the land if free from all charges, or
inbrances.
made, or suffered, by the said R.D. and by I.D. Brother of the said R. or any
of them, or by any other person or persons any estate or title having, or
claiming therein, by, from, or under them, or any of them, and the aforesaid
R.H. for himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, does
likewise Covenant and grant by these presents to and with the said R.D. his
Heirs and Assigns, that he the said R.D. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and may
for ever hereafter, have, hold, and quietly enjoy the aforesaid parcel of Land
called G. with the appurtenances, and every part thereof without any former
charges and encumbrances, formerly had, made or suffered, by the said R.H. or
by any other person, or persons any estate, title or interest having or
claiming therein, by, from, or under him the said R.H. In witness whereof etc.

A Lease to try a Title, with direction to execute the same.
THIS INDENTURE etc. Between W. B. of etc. of the one part, and I. B. of etc.
of the other part, Witnesses, that the said W. B. for diverse etc. has
demised, granted, etc. unto the said I. R. his Executors, and Assigns, two
Messuages, together with all and singular edifices, buildings, barns, stables,
orchards, gardens, and other the appurtenances, and also all and singular
lands, tenements, meadows, pastures, and other hereditaments whatsoever,
together with the said Messuages, or either of them, at any time heretofore, or
at this present, had, occupied, used or enjoyed, to them or either of them
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, containing in the whole by estimation,
etc. whether more or less, situate, lying, etc. And all and singular the part
and purpartie of him the said W. of and in the said premises with the
apputtenancies, And also all and singular Messuages, lands, tenements, and
hereditaments of him the said W situate, etc. To have etc. with all and every
their appurtenances, unto the said I. B. his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, from the Feast etc. last past before the date of these presents, unto
the full end and term of etc. from thence next ensuing, and fully to be
completed and ended, yielding and paying therefore yearly during the said term
unto the said W. his Heirs and Assigns, one pepper corn, if the same be
lawfully demanded. In Witness whereof etc.

The Lessor must enter upon the land, and seal and deliver the Indenture as his
Deed, and then endorse.

Sealed and delivered, etc.

And if it be sealed at another day than it bears date, then endorse the
sealing, and delivery accordingly, with the day and year that it was made.

Indorse on the back side of the Lease.

Mem. that the within named W. B. did the day and year within written, enter
into one Orchard, appertaining unto the house in the occupation of W. B. in the
name of all the lands and tenements contained in this Indenture, And immediately
after such his entry, did then and there seal and deliver the said Indenture as
his Deed unto the within named I.B. In the presence of us.

And if there be several occupiers, indorse several entries as aforesaid
accordingly, or in this sort.

Jtem, at the same time he did the like in one parcel of Land in the occupation
of B. B. etc.

An Arbitrament.
TO all Persons to whom this present Indented writing of Award shall come, M.H.
Esquire and E.H. Gent. send greeting, Whereas W.B. and T.B. Executors of the last
will and Testament of R.B. deceased, P.P. and R.W. of etc. have by their mutual
consent and agreement submitted themselves to stand unto, and perform the
award, arbitrament, and judgment of us the said M.H. and E. H. being
Arbitrators indifferently named and chosen, as well on the part and behalf of
the said W.B.T.B. and P.P. as on the part and behalf of the said R.W. to
arbitrate, award, and judge, of and upon all and all manner of Actions, suits,
reckonings, accounts, and demands whatsoever, which at any time before the,
etc. last past, before the date of these presents, have been, as well on the
part of the said R.W. against the said W.B.T.B. and P.P. or any of them, as of
the part of the said W.T. and P. or any of them, against the said R.W. had,
stirred, moved, or depending, for any cause or matter whatsoever, from the
beginning of the world unto the said, etc. last past before the date hereof, So
that the said Arbitrament, award, and judgment of us the said M.H. and E.H.
of, and upon the said premiles, were made, and given up in writing before the
etc, and for the parformance of the said Award, arbitrament and judgment of us
the said Arbitrators, they the said W.B.T.B. and P.P. by their joint and
several Obligations, and I.W. Father of the said R.W. for and on the behalf of
the said R. by his Obligation of, etc. bearing date, etc. last past before the
date hereof, have bound themselves each to other for the performance of the
said Award, arbitrament, and judgment of us the said Arbitrators; Now know ye,
That we the said M.H. and E.H. for the appeasing of all actions, suits,
reckonings, accounts, debts, trespasses, executions and demands whatsoever,
between the said W.B. and T.B. Executors to their Father, and the said R.W. or
otherwise, as between the said P.P. and R.W. and for a final ending between the
said parties of all causes to us submitted, do make our award, order,
abitrement, judgment and determination in manner and form following; And
first, we the said Arbitrators do award, order, and determine, that the said
R.W. shall for his part, at or before, etc. (expressing the cause, etc.) in
witness whereof, we the said M.H.E.H. to this our present award our hands and
seals have put. Dated, etc.

A Recognizance.
MEmoran. That T.R. of G. in the County of K. Esquire (such a day and year) came
before our Lord the King in his Chancery at Westmin. in the County of Midd'
personally constituted, and then and there acknowledge, that he owes to E.G. of
B. in the said County of K. Gent. and S.H. of C. in the aforesaid County of K.
aforesaid Gent. etc. of, etc. to be paid to the said E.G. and S. H. or to their
certain Attorney, Exec. on Assigns, on the Feast, etc. next coming after the
date of these presents; And if he fail in the payment of the aforesaid sum of
money at the Feast aforesaid. That then the said T. R. for himself his Heirs,
Exec. and Assigns, will, and grants that the said sum of money shall be
levied of his lands and tenements, goods and chattels, to the use of the said
E.G. and S. H. their Exec. and Assigns. Witness our said Lord the King at
Westminster aforesaid, the day and year aforesaid.

An Indenture of partition of Lands in Joyntenancy, as also in Copercinery in
Gavelkind.
THIS INDENTVRE, etc. Between G.M. of, etc. of the one part, and H.M. of, etc.
of the other part, Witnesses. That whereas one T.M. late of R. aforesaid
deceased, brother of them the said G. and H. by his last will and testament in
writing, bearing date, etc. did amongst other things concerning, the disposing
of his lands and ten, devise and bequeath unto E.M. Son, of him the said T.M.
all those his lands and tenements in R. aforesaid, which were sometimes T.K.
the Grandfather of him the said T. to have and to hold all the said Lands and
Tenements, with all and singular the appurtenances, to the said E. M. and to
his Heirs for ever, when he should come to the age of etc. and the said T.M.
did by the same his last will and Testament further will, that if his said Son
did fortune to die before he came to his said age of etc. that then his said
will and mind was, that all those his said lands and tenements, should remain
unto them the above named G.M. and H.M. his Brothers, parties to these
presents, to be had and held unto them the said G.H. their Heirs for ever, as
in the said last will and testament of him the said T. M. more plainly and at
large it does and may appear.

And whereas the said B.M. Son of the said T. is sithence the said time, and
before his said age of etc. departed this life without Heirs of his Body, By
reason whereof they the said G. and H. have according to the said last will and
testament of him the said T.M. entered into the said premises unto them devised
as aforesaid, and by virtue of the last will and testament now are and stand
jointly as Joyntenants seized thereof in their demesne, as of Fee, And whereas
also they the said G. and H. are seized in fee as Coperceners in Gavelkind of
other Messuages lands, and tenements, Now therefore unto the end and intent
that a perfect partition may be had and made between them, the said G.M. and
H.M. of all and singular the said messuages, lands, tenements and
hereditaments, to them devised or descended as aforesaid, and that every of
them, their and every of their Heirs and Assigns may from henceforth severally
have and enjoy in severalty, without any impeachment or disturbance of the
other of them, his or their Heirs or Assigns, his and their part and portion of
the said Messuages to them bequeathed or descended as aforesaid, they the said
G. M. and H. M. by their own mutual consent and agreement, and by the mediation
of certain friends indifferently elected and chosen between them, have made
partition and division, and do by these presents for them, their Heirs and
Assigns, make partition and divide the said Messuages etc. to them bequeathed
or descended as aforesaid, in manner and form as hereafter is mentioned (that
is to say) first he the said G. M. shall have for his part and portion of the
said messuages etc. to them the said G. and H. bequeathed or descended as
aforesaid, one message, etc. and other th'appurtenances, together with one,
etc. cont. in the whole by estimation, etc. whether more or less, sit, etc. To
have and to hold the said Message, and other the said premises, with their
appurtenances, unto him the said G. M. his heirs and assigns for ever, in
severalty, and divided from the part and portion of the said H. M. his heirs
and assigns. And the said H. M. shall have for his part and portion of the said
Messuages, etc. to them the said G. and H. bequeathed, or descended as
aforesaid, these several Messuages, etc. following; that is to say, etc.
(mentioning the particulars.) To have, etc. the said Messuages, etc. unto him
the said H. M. his heirs and assigns, in severalty, and divided from the part
and portion of the said G. M. as aforesaid. And the said parties to these
presents, and either of them, do for them and either of them, their heirs,
Mutual Covenants of quiet and peaceable enjoyment, without disturbance, etc.
executors and assigns, Covenant and grant, to and with either of the^, their
heirs, executors and assigns, that they, and either of them, their heirs and
assigns, shall and may quietly and peaceably have, hold, and enjoy his and
their part and portion of the said premises, by these presents unto either of
them limited and appointed, for his or their part and portion as aforesaid, in
severalty, according unto the partition and divisio^ aforesaid, without any
disturbance or impeachment of the other of them, their heirs or assigns. In
witness, etc.

A brief Deed of grant, and assignment of certain goods, chattels, and debts;
with a Letter of Attorney therein contained.
TO all Persons to whom this present Deed poll shall come, R: W: of etc.
sends greeting; Whereas I. W. of C. aforesaid, stands bound together with
me the said R. W. for diverse Debts and sums of money by me the said R. due and
owing. Know ye, that I the said R. for the saving harmless of him the said I.
W. from the said bonds and debts, so far forth as these debts and chattels,
hereafter specified will extend and amount unto, have given, granted, bargained
and sold, and do by these presents for me, mine executors and administrators,
give, grant, bargain and sell, unto the said I. W. his executors,
administrators and assigns, all such goods and chattels, both real and
personal, as are mentioned, expressed, and contained in a certain schedule
hereunto annexed, at such rates and prices as they are therein rated and prized
at; To have and to hold, to him the said I. W. his executors and assigns for
ever. And further know ye, that I the said R. W. for the consideration
aforesaid, do make, constitute, ordain, and in my place and room put the said
I. W. to be my irrevocable, true, and lawful Attorney, giving and granting
unto the said I. W. full power, and lawful authority, irrevocable, for me, and
in my name, and to the use of him the said I. W. his execut. and assigns, to
ask, take, have, receive and levy, all and singular debts, duties, and demands
due, or owing unto me the said R.W. mentioned and contained in the said
Schedule hereunto annexed; And that he the said I. W. his executors,
administrators and assigns, or any of them, shall or may, from time to time,
and at all times hereafter, in the name of me the faid R. W. my executors or
administrators, commence any action or actions, suit or suits, plaint or
plaints, against any person or persons for any the said debts, duties, and
other the premises, and also Attorney and Attorneys for me, and in my name to
make, constitute, revoke, alter, remove and change, and the same suits, actions
and plaints, or any of them, shall or may in the name of me the said R.W. my
executors, administrators or assigns, at the costs and charges in the Law of
him the said I.W. his executors, administrators or assigns, prosecute and
follow, until judgment and execution shall be thereupon had and made, and all
and singular such sum and sums of money as shall be so in the name of me the
said R. received, recovered, had or levied, he the said I. his execut. admin.
and assigns, shall and may have, hold, keep, and retain in his and their hands
to his and their proper use and behoof, without any account or other thing
therefore unto me the said R. W. my executors or administrators: Giving and
granting unto my said Attorney, full power and authority to do and execute all
and every act and acts, thing and things, touching or concerning the said
premises, in as large and ample manner, to all respects, as I the said R. can
or might make, do or execute, if I were personally present at the doing
thereof. In witness whereof, etc.

An Assignment of a Bond by Deed Poll, together with a Letter of Attorney
irrevocable, and usual covenants for the same.
TO all persons to whom this present Deed Poll shall come, R. H. of etc.
sends greeting. Whereas A.M. of etc. I.W. of etc. and R.C. of C. aforesaid,
did by their Obligation bearing date, etc. become jointly and severally bound
unto the said R. H. in the sum of etc. and the condition of the Obligation was,
that if the said A. M. his heirs, executors, administrators or Assigns, or any
of them, did well and truly satisfy, content and pay, or cause to be
satisfied, content and paid to the said R. H. etc. (reciting the whole
condition) as in and by the said obligation and condition thereof more at large
appears. And whereas the said sum of etc. in the condition of the said
Obligation specified, is not paid unto the said R. H. according to the effect
of the said condition. Now know ye that the said R. H. for and in consideration
of the sum of etc. unto him the said R. by P. M. of etc. in hand paid, and for
diverse other good causes and considerations him thereunto especially moving,
has granted, assigned, and set over, and by these presents does grant, assign,
and set over unto the said P. M. his executors and assigns, the said
Obligation, and all sums of money therein contained, together with all such
benefit and commodity as the said R. H. his executors or Administrators can or
may take or receive thereby. And further the said R. H. does by these presents,
The Letter of Atrorney.
constitute, and in this place appoint the said P. M. to be his lawful
Attorney Irrevocable, for him, and in his name, to ask, levy, receive, recover,
take, and have of the said A.M. I.W. and R. C. or either of them, or of the
heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns of them or either of them, all and
singular the said sum or sums of money in the said obligation or condition
thereof specified and contained, and the same to receive, keep, and detain to
the proper use and behoof of the said P. M. his executors, and administrators,
without any account or other thing therefore yielding, rendering or paying, unto
the said R. H. his executors, administrators and assigns, and in default of
payment of the said sum or sums of money, to arrest, sue, or implead at the
costs and charges in the law of the said P. M. his executors or assigns, the
said A. M. I. W. and R. C. or either of them, upon the said Obligation, in any
suit or plaint, in any Court or Courts within the Commonwealth of England, for
and in the name of the said R. H. his executors or administrators, and
judgment, and execution thereupon to take and have, and Attorney or Attorneys
for, in or concerning the said premises, or any part thereof, for or in the
name of the said R. H. his executors or administrators, to make, constitute,
ordain, or appoint, and them also at his and their will and pleasure to alter,
revoke, change, and remove; And further to make, do, execute, and commit, or
cause to be made, done, executed, and committed, in the name of the said R. H.
his executors or administrators, all and every matter and thing, act and acts
whatsoever, meet, necessary, expedient, or convenient for the recovery,
levying, having, or execution making, taking, or having of all or any of the
sum or sums of money, mentioned, or contained in the said Obligation, and
judgment thereupon to be given, or either of them; And all and singular such
sum and sums of money, or other thing as he the said P. M. his executors;
administrators or assigns, shall by reason of the said Obligation and
judgment, or execution thereupon to be had, made, or taken, have, take, levy,
or receive, in the name of the said R. H. his executors or administrators; And
the said R. H. does for him, his executors, administrators and assigns*
Covenant and grant, Covenant, that the Assignee shall have the money to his own
use, without account ^ender etc.
to and with the said P. M. his executors and administrators, that it shall and
may be lawful, to and for the said P. M. his executors, administrators, and
assigns, to have, take, retain, keep and enjoy, all, or any of the said sum or
sums of money, mentioned or contained in the said obligation, and judgment
thereupon to be given; or either of them, to his and their own use, Allowance
of all Acts done by the Assignee, etc. in the name of the Assignor, at his
costs and charges.
without any account or other thing therefore to be yielded, rendered or given;
ratifying and allowing, confirming and avowing, all and every matter and thing,
act and acts whatsoever, which the said P. M. his executors, administrators or
assigns, or any of them shall at his and their costs and charges, do, execute,
or commit, or cause to be done, executed, or committed in the name of the said
R. H. his executors, or administrators, in, about, Covenant that there is no
act done, nor shall be done, whereby to frustrate this grant of assignment.
touching, or concerning the premises, or any part thereof; And the said R.H.
does for him, his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, and every of
them, covenant, and grant, to and with him the said P. M. his Executors,
administrators and assigns, in manner and form following, that is to say, that
neither the said R.H. nor any other pers. or pers. by his or their consent,
privity or procurement, already has not made, done, executed, or committed,
nor that he, his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns, or any of them,
nor any other person or persons by his or their procutement, shall, or will at
any time or times hereafter make, do, execute or commit, or cause to be made,
done, executed, or committed any act or acts, thing or things whatsoever,
whereby the said Obligation, or all, or any of the sum or sums of money therein
contained, or any action or act. suit or suits, plaint or pl. commenced or to
be commenced thereupon, or any judgment or judgments thereupon hereafter to
be given, now be, or at any time hereafter, shall be released, discharged,
discontinued, nonsuted, disallowed, or otherwise hindered, or made void, or
frustrate, or whereby the said P. M. his executors, administrators or assigns,
in the name of the said R. H. his executors, or administrators, shall not or
may not recover and have the said sum or sums of money, in the said Obligation
mentioned, and execution or executions of the said judgment (all and every
such act and acts, thing and things whatsoever, as is wrought by these presents
only excepted and foreprized.) And that he the said R. H. his executors etc.
nor either, nor any of them, Covenant, nor to revoke, nor by any other way or
means to frustrate this letter of attorney, no any thing therein contained.
shall or will at any time or times after the date of these presents, revoke,
countermand, disannul, or make void, or by any other way or means whatsoever
make, frustrate or adnihilate the said Letter of Attorney, nor any liberty,
license, power, authority, or thing in these presents contained, but shall and
will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, justify and allow, uphold,
maintain and avow the same, and every matter and thing therein contained, or
thereby covenanted or granted, and all and every such suit and suits, execution
and executions, act and acts, thing and things, as the said P. M. his
executors, administrators, or assigns, shall and will at his and their proper
costs and charges, take, commence, prosecute and follow, in the name of the
said R. H. his exec. or adm upon or by reason of the said Obligation. In
Witness whereof etc.

A Deed of Feoffment of Gavelkind lands, by an Infant, according to the Custom.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, L.B. of S. in
the County of K. Yeoman, greeting, etc. Whereas T. B. Gent, late of S.
aforesaid deceased, Father of me the aforesaid L. died seized in his demesne as
of Fee, or diverse messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments, with the
appurten. in S. aforesaid, and elsewhere in the aforesaid County of K. which
were in the tenure and nature of Gavelkind, and which after the death of the
aforesaid T. B. to one T. B. I. B. and me the aforesaid L. B. Sons and Heirs in
Gavelkind of the aforesaid T. our Father, by inheritance, according to the
custom of Gavelkind aforesaid, Recital of a partition by Deed inden^pted before
the Feoffment.
descended, and ought to descend: Of which said Message, etc. and other
hereditaments, with their appurtenances, to us the aforesaid T. B. and me the
aforesaid L B. Sons of I. B. aforesaid descended, a division and partition
between us was made; by which division and partition of the Messuages, etc. in
this my Writing indented, hereafter mentioned and speci^ied to me the aforesaid
L. were allowed and assigned unto me for my part and purpart, as by certain
Indentures tripartite between the aforesaid T. B. the Sons on the one part, and
the aforesaid I. B. on the second part, and me the aforesaid L. B. on the third
part, bearing date before the date of these presents more fully is manifested
and appears. And whereas also, according to the custom of Gavelkind, from the
time whereof the memory of man is not to the contrary, has been used and
approved, Recital of the Custom of Gavelkind, whereby the Infant above the age
of 15. may make a Feoffment.
that it should be lawful for an Heir in Gavelkind, when he shall attain to
the age of 15 years, to give and sell the same lands and tenements at their
wills; Know ye now, that I the aforesaid L. B. being of the age of 19 years and
upwards, according to the custom, for, and in consideration of the sum of, etc.
of lawful, etc. to me the aforesaid L. by I. H. of etc. well and truly in hand
paid, have given, granted, and sold unto the aforesaid I. H. his heirs and
Assigns, one message or tenement, with all the edifices, etc. sit. etc. and
now or late in the tenure or occupation of, etc. And also all that my part and
purpart of all and singular messuages, etc. whatsoever, with their
appurtenances, which to me the aforesaid L. B. as Son and Coheir in Gavelkind
to the aforesaid T. B. my Father, descended, or ought to descend, situate or
being in S. aforesaid, or elsewhere in the aforesaid County of Kent, To have
and to hold the aforesaid Message or Tenement, together with all and singular
the premises, with all and singular their appurtenances, to the aforesaid I. H.
his heirs and assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of him the said I. his
heirs and assigns for ever; To be holden of the chief Lord of the Fee thereof,
by the services for the same formerly due, and of right accustomed. In
witness, etc.

An Assignment of an Executorship, with Covenants from the Assignee, to save
harmless, etc. the Assignor; also a Grant of an Annuity.
This Indenture, etc. Between E. G. of etc. and S. H. of etc. Executors of the
last Will and Testament of I. G. Gent. deceased, of the one part, and T. R. of,
etc. on the other part, Witnesses, that whereas there have been diverse suits
and controversies between the said E. G. and S. H. and the said T.R. as well
about the Wardship of F: E. and G:G. Daughters and Coheirs of the said I. G. as
also about the last Will and Testament of the said I. and about certain
Legacies therein contained, and by the same given and bequeathed unto Dame G.
P. now the wife of I. P. Knight, and late the Wife of the said I. G. And
whereas also there is in the said last Will and Testament, a certain clause and
appointment for the giving of an account by them the said E. and S. This grant
was made for the concluding of certain controversies which were betwixt the
parties, as appears by the ^ecital.
unto the said three Daughters of the said I. G. severally at their several
ages of 16 years, and unto the abovenamed T: R. or unto one of them, of the
receipts of the rents, issues, and profits of the lands and tenements of the
said I. as in and by the said Will and Testament, more plainly and at large it
does and may appear. Now, for a final ending and appeasing of all and singular
the said suits and controversies, and for establishing of a perfect agreement
between the said parties, and to the end and intent that the said last Will and
Testam. of the said I. G. and his meaning therein declared may thereby the
better be performed and fulfilled, And also that the said account appointed by
the last Will and Testament of the said I. to be by the said E. and S. as
aforesaid made, may be during the life of all the said parties given up and
discharged, and by means thereof, and for, and in respect that the debts and
legacies of the said I. are at this present almost satisfied, and that it may
and will the better appear what sums of money the said Daughters of the said I.
will be co receive at their several ages according unto the last Will and
Testament of their said Father; It is in and upon the consideration aforesaid,
and diverse others, covenanted, granted, and concluded upon, between the said
parties, and every of them, their heirs, execut. administrators and assigns, in
manner and form following; And first the said E. G. and S. H. for and upon the
consideration aforesaid, and diverse others them thereunto especially moving,
have given, granted, assigned, and set over, and do by these presents, for
them, their executors, administrators and assigns, give, grant, assign, and set
over unto the said T. R. all that Message, etc. and also the reversion and
reversions, remainder and remainders, after the decease of A.G. Widow, late
the wife of H. G. deceased, and Dame G.P. now the wife of I. P. Knight, and
late the Wife of the said I. G. or after the decease of either of them, and the
estate and interest of them the said E. and S. of and in all and singular such
Messuages etc. called the etc. as they the said A. G. and Dame G. P. or either
of them, by devise, conveyance or assurance from H. G. and I. G. or either of
them, have an estate in for term of their lives, or the life of either of them,
the reversion, An Assignment of an Annuity or Annual Rent.
or remainder thereof being by the last Will and Testament of the said I. G.
devised and bequeathed unto them the said E. and S. And furthermore the said E.
G. and S. H. do by these presents give, grant, assign, and set over unto the
said T. R. one Annuity, or annual rent of etc. issuing and going out of certain
lands and tenements, sometimes R.V. situate etc. and all and singular arrerages
of the said annuity or annual Rent, And also the levying, taking, and receiving
of all and singular the rents, issues, and profits of etc. situate, etc. To
have, etc. all and singular the said messuages, etc. issues, revenues, and
profits, and all and singular other the said premises, with all and every their
appurtenances, unto him the said T. R. his executors, administrators, and
assigns, for and during the whole time that the said premises are by the said
last Will and Testament of the said I. G. devised and bequeathed unto them the
said E. and S. their executors and assigns, and so long as, and in as ample
manner and form to all intents and purposes, A grant of an annuity or annual
rent until such a one shall come to the age of etc. and if she die before her
said age, then until by computation, she might have come to her said age, if
she had lived so long.
as they the said E. and S. or either of them, their executors or assigns, are
by the last will and testament of the said I. G. to hold and enjoy the same.
And furthermore, they the said E. G. and S. H. for and upon the consideration
aforesaid, have given, granted, and confirmed, and do by these presents, give,
grant, and confirm, unto the said I. R. one annuity or annual rent of etc. of
etc. to be issuing and going out of the Rectory and Parsonage of M. and out of
all and singular Messuages, glebelands, tithes, pensions, portions, and all
other Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and every their appurtenances, unto
the said Rectory and parsonage, belonging, appertaining, or with the same at
this present, or at any time heretofore, had, used, occupied or enjoyed,
situate etc. To have, levy, perceive, receive, take, and yearly enjoy the said
annuity or annual rent, of etc. unto the said T.R. his exec. adm and assig.
for, during, and until E.G. one of the Daughters of the said I.G. shall or may
accomplish the age of etc. The usual Covenants.
if she so long live, and if she the said E. die before her said age of etc.
for, during, until, and so long, as she the said E. if she had so long lived,
might by computation of time have accomplished her said age of etc. at 2 usual
Feasts and terms in the year, that is to say etc. and the first payment thereof
to begin at or on the Feast etc (A clause if the annu. be behind, to distrain)
A prove. not to charge the persons of the Assig. and that the Assignors put the
Assignee in possession, by delivery of 6d.) A clause that the Assignee
peaceably enjoy the same, without any disturbance or encumbrance whatsoever,
and also that they the said E G. and S H. their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, or one of them, shall and will well and truly content, satisfy and
pay, or cause etc. unto K G. one of the Daughters of the said H. G. Covenant by
the Assignors, to pay certain legacies, given to a certain person, and thereof
to acquit and discharge, or save harm^ess the Assignee.
all and all manner of such legacies, gifts and bequeaths, as are given and
bequeathed unto her the said K. as well by the last will and testament of the
said H.G. as also by the last will and testament of the said I. according unto
the intent, purport, and true meaning of the said several last wills and
testaments of them the said H. and I. and in such manner and form as the said
legacies and bequeaths of them the said H. and I. are limited and appointed to
be paid, and not otherwise, and thereof and every part and parcel thereof shall
acquit, discharge, or otherwise well and sufficiently save and keep harmless
and indempnified, the said T. R. his heirs, executors, administrators, and
assigns.) A clause that the Assignors Covenant to bring before any Judges, all
releases, deeds, wills, Covenant by the Assignors to produce the evidences, and
deliver them to the Assignee.
the Inventory under their hands and seals to deliver unto him the said T. R.
and also all the evidences touching any the Messuages etc. which the Assignors
have in their hands, without suit in Law, and the said Releases etc. shall be
redelivered unto the Assignors, etc. Now the said T. R. for and upon the
consideration aforesaid, and to the intent and purpose that the said E. and S.
their and every of their executors and administrators, may be secured and saved
harmless of all matters, things, suits, actions encumbrances and deeds,
wherewith and whereby they or any of them may be charged and encumbered, as
being Executors of the last will and testament of the said I.G. and for diverse
other causes and considerations him thereunto specially moving, does by these
presents for him, Covenant, by the Assignee to save harmless the Assignors from
all accounts and charges, wherewith the assignors are chargable, by reason of
the last will, etc. And from debts and legacies*
his heirs execut. administrators and assigns, covenant etc. in manner and form
following; that is to say, etc) A clause that the Assignee shall at such times
as the Assignors give up their accounts, well and sufficiently save harmless
the Assignors from all charges, etc. wherewith and whereby they shall be
chargeable for or by reason of the last will of the said I. G. unto any person
or persons whatsoever, or by reason of any account by the Assignors as
executors to be made or given up; And that the Assignee shall save harmless
the Assignors from all legacies, debts etc. whereby the Assignors may be at any
time arrested, etc.) A clause that the Assignee shall not only make in writing
a true account of his rereceipts and disbursements, Covenant, that the Assignee
shall give up a true account in writing, and shall satisfy the arrerages.
unto the Daughters and Children at their several ages, but also shall pay unto
the Daughters and Children the arrerages which shall be upon his account found
to be behind, remaining in his hands, at such days and in such manner and form,
to all intents, constructions and purposes. as the Assignors by the last Will
and Testament of the said I. are limited and appointed, Covenant, that the
assignors shall enjoy all such messuages, etc during ^he time that the
daughters shall remain in ward, without disturbance, etc.
to do and perform the same.) A clause that the Assignors shall enjoy all such
Messu. etc. during the time that the Daughters shall remain Wards, without any
disturbance of the, etc. or his Successors, or of any other person or persons
whatsoever, claiming by, from, or under the, etc. by committment, grant, or
otherwise howsoever, etc. by their procurements; And also that he the said T.R.
his heirs, etc. shall and will, from time to time, and at all times hereafter
well and sufficiently save, and keep harmless and indempnified the said E. G.
and S. H. and either of them, their heirs; executors and assigns, and every of
them, and their goods, chattels, Covenant, to save harmless the Assignors,
their goods and estates, from all actions and encumbrances, by reason of any
account to be made, for the rents and profits of the messuages, etc. devised to
one, and the heirs males of his body.
lands, and tenements, of and from all manner of suits, actions, encumbrances
and demands whatsoever, wherewith, or whereby they the said E. and S. or either
of them, their heirs, executors or administrators, or either of the^, shall or
may, at any time or times herafter, jointly or severally be charged, damnified
or encumbered, for, concerning, or by reason of any account or accounts to be
made unto the Children of the said I. or any of them, or of any other person or
persons whatsoever, of any the rents, issues, revenues, or profits at any time
heretofore had, levied or received, or at any time hereafter, for and during
the wardship of the Daughters of the said I.G. or any of them, to be had,
received, levied or taken, of the said Messuages, etc. by the last Will and
Testament of the said I. G. specified to be limited, devised, and bequeathed
unto the said E. G. and the heirs males of his body; And that he the said E.
his heirs, etc. shall and may, for, Covenant, that the devisee may take the
profits of the land during the wardship of the heirs, without account rendering
to any person whatsoever.
and during the wardship of the said Daughters and heirs of the said I.G. or
any of them, have, take, levy and perceive, all and singular the rents, issues,
revenues and profits of all and singular the said premises by the last Will and
Testament of the said I. G. devised and bequeathed unto the said E.G. and the
heirs males of his body, unto the only and proper use of him the said E. his
heirs, etc. without any account or other answering of the said rents, revenues
and profits by him the said E. his heirs etc. during the time aforesaid, so to
be had, levied and received, unto the Children of the said I. or any of them,
or unto any other person or persons whatsoever, by virtue or reason of the said
last Will and Testament of the said I: G. to be thereof, or therefore made and
given.] In witness, etc.

A Deed Pool, containing a Feoffment of certain parcels of land, which the
Feoffor had, int. alia, assured unto him upon a Common Recovery; with special
warranty.
TO all persons to whom this present Deed Poll shall come, B. B. of, etc.
sends greeting; Whereas P. A. of, etc. and M. his Wife, by their Indenture
bearing date, etc. made between them the said P. and M. on the one party, and
the said B.B. on the on the other party, did vovenant, grant, conclude,
condescend, and fully agree, to and with the said B. B. that he said B. should
and might before the Feast of, etc. then next ensuing the date of the said
Indent, purchase and sue forth out of the Court of Chancery, one Orig. etc.
(reciting the name, with the several parcels) as in and by the said Indent.
more plainly and at large it does and may appear; And whereas in the term of
Easter the said B.B. did recover the said premises, amongst other things by a
writ of entry sur diss^isin in l' post, against the said P. A. and M. his wife,
by the name of the moity of one Message, etc. with the appurtenances in B.
according to the course of common recoveries, to the intent, purpose, and true
meaning of the said recited Indenture, as in and by the said record in the
Court of Common pleas, of Easter term, rotul. etc. more plainly and at large
does and may appear; Now know ye, that the said B. for and in consideration of,
etc. unto him the said B. by T. I. of etc. well and truly in hand paid, whereof
and wherewith he acknowledges himself to be fully satified and Paid, has
granted, enfeoffed, delivered and confirmed, and by these presents, etc. does
grant, enfeoff, deliver, and confirm unto the said T.I. his heirs, etc. the
moity or one half of, etc. with their appurtenances, situate, etc.and also all
and singular the said premises in the said recovery mentioned, by the name of
the moity of one Messuag, etc. with the appur. which said moity of the said
Message, and other the said premises, the said B.B. has and holds in common
together with the said T.I. which said T.I. is lawfully seized in his demean as
of Fee, of and in the other moity of the said Message, and other the premises;
To have and to hold the said moity of the said Message, etc. and all and
singular other the premises whatsoever, with all and every their appurtenances,
unto the said T.I. his heirs and assigns, to the only and proper use and behoof
of the said T.I. his heirs and assigns, for ever. And the said B. B. and his
heirs, the said moity of the said message etc. with the appurtenances, against
him, his heirs and assigns, and against the said P. A. and M. his Wife, their
heirs and assigns, and against all person and persons, claiming in, by, from,
or under them, or any of them, will warrant and defend for ever by these
presents: (A clause that the premises are acquitted from all encumbrances.) And
further that the said P. A. his Heirs and assigns, and M. now his Wife, and
every other person and persons whatsoever, any estate, right, title, interest,
or thing lawfully claiming, having, or lawfully claiming to have, in the said
premises, or any part and parcel thereof, by, from, or under the said B. his
heirs or assigns, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
The usual Covenant to make further assurance.
during the space of etc. next ensuing the date of these presents, upon
reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the law, etc. make better
and further assurance, etc. Be it by Fine, Feoffment etc. So as the said
assurance or assurances contain no further warranty or Covenant of Warranty
than against the said P. and M. his Wife, and so that he be not compelled
further to travel than the said Cities of London or Westminster, for the doing
thereof. In witness whereof etc.

An Assignment from the Committee of etc. of the body, and lands of a Ward.
THIS Indenture etc. Between I.T. of etc. of the one part, and I. A. of etc. of
the other part, Witnesses, That whereas etc. by the advice of the Master and
Council of the Court of Wards and Liveries by his Indenture under the seal of
the said Court of Wards and Liveries, bearing date, etc. was contented and
pleased to grant, and by the same Indenture, did demise, grant, and to farm let
unto the said I. T. parcel of the lands and possessions, late of W. N. Yeoman
deceased, lying and being, etc thereafter in the said Indenture particularly
set forth and declared, with their particular Rents by the year, that is to say
one message or tenement etc. and certain lands tenements and hereditaments
thereunto belonging, with the appurtenances, lying in A. in the said County,
then in the tenure of G. or of his Assigns by the year etc. (reciting the
particulars etc.) All which premises amount in the whole to the yearly value of
etc. and which were in the hands and possession of etc. by the Minority of M.N.
his etc. Ward, Daughter and next heir of W. N. deceased; Except and always
reserved out of the said grant (reciting the exception) rising and growing in
and upon the said messuages, lands, and other the premises with the
appurtenances, or any part thereof; To have etc. the said messuages etc. with
the appurtenances (except before excepted) to the said I. T. his executors and
assigns, from the etc. which was in the year of our Lord etc. (in which the
said W. N. died) during the minority of the said heir, yielding and paying
therefore yearly during the said time, to the Feodary of the said County of K.
or to his lawful Deputy for the time being, to his etc. use, the sum of etc.
At the Feasts etc. by even and equal portions, over and above etc. yearly
allowed to the Auditors Clerk for engrossing the Accounts for the premises,
with diverse other Covenants, grants, and agreements in the said Indenture
contained, as in and by the same more plainly and at large does and may appear.
And whereas also the said etc. with the advice of the Master and Council of the
Court of Wards and Liveries, by his Indenture under the Seal of the Court of
Wards and Liveries, bearing date etc. was contented and pleased to grant by the
said Indenture, did commit and grant unto the said I. T. the custody, wardship,
and marriage of the said M.N. his etc. said Ward, as Daughter and next heir of
the said W. N. deceased, without disparagement, with diverse Covenants, clauses,
grants, and agreements in the said Indenture specified and contained, as in and
by the same more plainly and at large does and may appear; Now this Indenture
Witnesses, that he the said I. T. for and in consideration of a competent sum
of money unto him the said I. T. by the said I. K. in hand paid, Covenant, by
the Assignee, to pay al rents due to the King for the premises, and to save the
Assignor harmless from forfeitures of oblig. made to the King for payment of
money, or performance of Covenants.
has bargained, sold, given, granted, assigned and set over, and does by these
presents etc. unto the said I. A. his executors, administrators, and assigns,
as well all and singular the estate, right, title, interest, possession, and
term which the said. I. T. has, or of right ought to have, of, in, or to all
or any the said messuages etc. and other the said premises, and of, in, or to
all profits, commodities and emoluments to the same belonging, or appertaining;
As also all his estate, right, title, and interest, of, in, and to, the
custody, wardship, and marriage of the said M.N. together with all and singular
the right, title, interest, benefit, profit and commodity which the said I.T.
his exec. or assigns, has by virtue of the said recited Indenture, and of the
agreement from etc. and all other escripts and writings whatsoever concerning
the said premises, Covenant, by the Assignor, that the premises during the
minority of the Ward, are clear from all former bargains, etc.
or any part or parcel thereof, and now in his custody or of any other person
or persons by his delivery, To have and to hold unto him said I.A. his
executors, administrators and assigns, and during the minority of the said M.
N. and for and during all such time and term, and in so large and ample manner
and form, to all intents, constructions and purposes, as he the said I.T. has,
may, should, or of right ought to have, hold, or enjoy the same, by force and
means of the said recited Indenture, writing, Covenant of quiet enjoyment
without expulsion, etc.
and conveyance, or by either of them, or by any other way or means whatsoever;
and he the said I.A. his heirs, etc. do Covenant to pay all rents by the said
recited Indenture payable unto, etc. for the said recited premises, and every
part and parcel thereof, Covenant, that the Assignee shall receive the profits,
and enjoy the wardship, etc. as the Assignor might, And that the Assignor has
not, nor will not do any act, whereby the Assignee shall be ba^red to receive
any benefit, etc.
and to save harmless the assignor from all forfeitures of any obligation unto,
etc. for the payment of any sum of money, for the custody of the said M. or for
the performance of any covenants, etc. mentioned in the said recited Indenture,
etc. And the Assignor does covenant, that the premises during the minority of
the said Ward are clearly acquitted from all former bargains made by the said
I.T. or by his procurement (the rents, grants, covenants and agreements
expressed in the said recited Indenture always excepted and foreprized) and
that the Assignee shall quietly enjoy the premises without expulsion or
interruption of any person or persons whatsoever, from or under the Assignor;
And that the Assignor shall permit the Assignee to receive the profits, etc.
and to enjoy the custody, wardship, and marriage, profit and benefit of the said
M. as the Assignor might or can be entitled, etc. And that the Assignor has
not heretofore don or committed, Covenant, that the assignee at his own
charges, shall defend the premises, and his title therein, against any
prosecution against the Assignor, in the name of the Assignor, in such manner
as the assignee shall direct the same, being not contrary to the Law, nor to
the Covenants in the said recited Indeture, and that the assignor, upon request
will do etc. all lawful acts, in and about the same, as the Assignor shall
direct.
or shall voluntarily or wittingly do, or commit any act or acts, release or
releases, that the assignee shall or may be barred to receive any benefit of
all or any the said premises, etc. contrary to the true meaning of these
presents, and also that he the said I.T. his excecutors, administrators, and
assigns, upon any Bill of traverse, and upon all and every suit and suits to
the hereafter prosecuted against him the said I. T. his exec. admin. and
assigns, for the impeaching and overthrowing the etc. title, in or to the said
premises, shall and will permit and suffer the said I. A. his executors and
assigns, in the name of him the said I.T. his executors and assigns, and at the
costs and charges of him the said I.A. his executors and assigns, to maintain
and defend the same su^e, in such sort and manner as the said I.A. his
excecutors or assigns, shall direct and limit, the same not being contrary or
repugnant to the law, nor the Covenants, grants, nor agrements, mentioned in
the said recited Indenture, and that he the said I.T. his excecutors and
assigns, shall and will in convenient time, after request, and at the costs and
charges in the law of the said I.A. his executors and assigns, do and execute,
and consent to the doing and executing of all and singular such lawful act and
acts, thing and things, in and about the same, as the said I.A. his executors
and assigns shall direct, limit and appoint. In witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture of Grant and Covenant, whereby one may discharge some part of
land, liable to a rent charge, and not discharge the residue, Notabene.
THis Indenture, etc. Between I. S. of etc. on the one part, and S.H. of etc.
on the other part, witnesses, That whereas T. G. the elder, of etc. and P.G
Son and heir apparent of the said T. by their deed indented, bearing date, etc.
did give, grant and confirm, unto one G.A. of etc. one annuity or annual rent
of etc. going forth and to be received of all their lands, tenements and
hereditaments with their appurtenances, situate, lying, and being in etc. or
else wheresoever within the Commonwealth of England, to be had, held, and
yearly received to the said G.A. his heirs and assigns at two terms in the
year, that is to say etc. And the first payment to begin upon the feast of etc.
next following after the date of the said Deed, and that if the said annuity or
annual Rent were behind and unpaid, in part or in the whole, after any of the
said feasts, in which the same was by the said Deed limi^ted and appointed to
be paid, that then, and so often it should be lawful, to and for the said G.A.
his heirs and assigns, into all and singular the said lands, tenements, and
hereditaments, with their appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof to
enter and distrain, and the distress there found, to take, carry away, impound
and detain, until the said annuity or annual rent, and the arrearages thereof,
if any were, with the damages, costs, and charges, by that means sustained,
were fully satisfied and paid, unto the said G.A. his heirs and assigns, as in
and by the said Deed more at large it does and may appear; And whereas also the
estate, right, title, and interest of the said G.A. of, in, and to the said
annuity or annual rent, is by lawful and good conveyance, come conveyed and
assured unto the said I.S. and his heirs; Grant, that if the Assignee of the
rent shall take or cause to be taken, any distress for the Rent, upon the
Lands of S. who purchased parcel of the lands liable to the Rent, that then the
rent should cease and be void.
Now the said I.S. does by these presents, for him, his heirs, executors,
administrators, and assigns, grant unto the said S.H. his heirs, executors,
administrators, and assigns, that if he the said I.S. his heirs, executors,
administrators, or assigns, or any other person or persons claiming, in, by,
from, or under him the said I. S. his heirs or assigns, or by his or their
consent, assent or procurement, shall or do at any time or times after the date
of these presents, distress, or take, cause or procure to be taken, any
distress or distresses for the said annuity or annual rent, or for any part or
parcel thereof, or for any the arrerages of the same, in any the lands,
tenements, and hereditaments of the said S. H. which he the said S. has
heretofore purchased of the said T.G. and P.G. or either, or any of them, that
then the said annuity or annual rent shall cease and be void in the Law, to all
intents, constructions, and purposes; And the said I.S. does further by these
presents, for him his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, promise and
covenant, to and with the said S.H. his heirs, Covenant that neither the
assignee, nor any one claiming under him, nor the first grantee, or any one
claiming under him, or any other, by his or their consent or p^ocurement, shall
take any distress for the said rent upon the lands of the said S. Covenant,
not to take any judgment for costs or damages, or other advantage by ret^^.
^ab^nd. or by nonsu^e or descent of any replevin, now depending, etc. And that
neither the Assignee, nor any other by his assent will prosecute any suit
heretofore depending, for any distress for the said rent.
executors and assigns, that neither he the said I.S. his heirs, executors, or
assigns, or any other person or persons claiming, in, by, from, or under him
the said I.S. his heirs or assigns nor by his or their commandment, assent,
consent or procurement, nor the heirs, executors, or assigns of the said G.A.
nor any other person or persons, claiming, in, by, from or under the said G.A.
his heirs, executors, or assigns, or by their, or any of their assents,
consents or procurements, shall nor will at any time or times after the date of
these presents, distress, or take, or cause, or procure to be taken any
distress or distresses, for the said Annuity or Annual rent, or for any part
or parcel thereof, or for any the arrerages of the same, in any the lands,
tenements and hereditaments of the said S. H. which he the said S. has
heretofore purchased of the said P.G. and T.G. or either or any of them. And
further, that he the the said I.S. his exec. or assigns, neither shall nor will
take any judgment for any costs or damages, or take any other advantage or
benefit by returno habendo, or by any other way or means whatsoever, for any
nonsute or discontent hereafter to be made of any replevin, now depending at
the site of I. H. Lessee of the said S. against the said I. S. or against any
other person or persons whatsoever, for any distress or distresses heretofore,
for the said Annuity or Annual rent, or any part or parcel thereof, or any the
arrerages of the same; and also, that neither he the said I S. his excecut. or
assigns, nor any other person or persons, by his assent, consent, or
procurement, shall or will from henceforth prosecute or cause to be prosecuted
any Suit or Suits heretofore commenced, or depending, for or about any
distress or distresses, heretofore for the said Annuity or Annual rent, or any
part or parcel thereof, or any the arrerages of the same taken. In Witness
whereof, etc.

A Deed Poll of revocation of uses, according to a Proviso by other Indentures;
as also a limitation of new uses.
TO all persons, etc. whereas by certain Indentures, bearing date etc. made
between me the said E.G. of the one part, and W.I. Minister of B. aforesaid,
R.S. of the said Parish of B.P.M. of, etc. and P.H. of, etc. on the other part,
It was for the causes and considerations in the said Indenture specified,
covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed, between the said parties to the said
Indentures, and every of them did covenant, grant, conclude and agree, to and
with the other of them, their heirs, executors and assigns, by the said
Indenture, and amongst other things in manner and form as follows; that is to
say, First, I the said E G. did by the same Indenture, for me, my heirs,
executors, administrators and assigns, and every of them, covenant, grant,
conclude, and agree, etc. (reciting the words in the Indenture specified) In
which Indenture there was also one proviso or condition specified and contained
in these words, or to this effect, as follows; that is to say, Provided always,
etc. as in and by the said Indenture more plainly and at large it does and may
appear. And whereas also for the accomplishment and performance of the
Covenants, grants and agreements, in the said recited Indenture contained, the
said premises in the aforesaid recited Indenture specified, were by one Deed
indented, purporting a Feoffment, bearing date with the said recited Indenture,
conveyed and assured by me the said E.G. unto the said W.I.R.S. P.M. and P.H.
and their heirs, unto the uses, intents, and purposes in the said recited
Indenture mentioned and expressed, and according unto the true intent and
meaning of the said recited Indent. as in and by the said Deed it does and may
more plainly, and at large appear; Now know ye, that for as much as the said
F.G. Son of I.G. late of R.G. deceased, being the party in the aforesaid
recited Indenture, meant, intended, and named, has reformed himself, and that
he the said F.G. has one E. G. his Son, being issue male of his body lawfully
begotten, at the time of the date and insealing and delivery of these presents,
in full life, I the said E. G. according unto the power and authority to me the
said E.G. by the said recited Indenture, and Proviso in the said recited
Indent. specified, limited and given, and by virtue thereof, have by this my
present Deed in writing, under my hand and seal, and delivered according unto
the purport of the Proviso aforesaid, in the presence of two sufficient
witnesses at the least, changed, altered, revoked, and do by these presents
change, alter, and revoke, absolutely in the whole, the use and uses by the
aforesaid recited Indenture unto the said G.H. and his heirs limited and
appointed, of all and singular the said premises, with th'appurtenances, in the
said recited Indent. specified, and of every part and parcel thereof. And I the
said E.G. do further by these presents, in such, and in as ample manner, as by
any proviso or power of alteration, determination or revocation I lawfully may,
or can absolutely disannull, determine and revoke all and singular former
conveyance and conveyances, assurance and assurances whatsoever, heretofore of
the said premises in the said recited Indenture specified, made or executed,
and all and singular the use and uses, by the said conveyances, or any of them,
to any person or persons, of any estate in Fee-simple, Fee-tail, or otherwise
limited or appointed, in such, and in as ample manner, as if the same
assurance, use or uses, or any of them, had never been had, made or mentioned.
And furthermore, know ye, that I the said E.G. for diverse good causes and
considerations me thereunto especially moving, do by these presents, for me, my
heirs and assigns, limit and appoint, Limitation of new uses.
that the said W.I.R.S. etc. their heirs and assigns, and all and every other
Feoffee or Feoffees, of the said premises, in the said recited Indenture
specified and contained, and all and every other person or persons seized of
all or any my messuages, etc. with the appurtenances, or any part thereof,
shall stand and be seized, and that all and singular Feoffments, and all and
every other former assurance or assurances whatsoever, thereof, heretofore
made, shall be and inure, and are by the presents declared to be meant and
intended to be and inure unto the use and behoof of me the said E.G. mine heirs
and assigns for ever, any matter or thing in the said assurance contained to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. In Witness, etc.

An Indenture by Baron and Feme, to levy, and limit the use of a fine of the
Femes lands.
THIS INDENTURE etc. Between I. G. of etc. and I.G. Wife of him the said I. one
of the Daughters and Coheirs, of R.B. late of etc. deceased, of the one part,
and I.D. of etc. on the other part, Witnesses, That it is convenanted,
granted, concluded, condiscended and fully agreed by and between the parties to
these presents, And the said I.C. and I. his wife, for them, their heirs,
executors, administrators and assigns, and every of them, do by these presents
covenant, grant, conclude, condescend and fully agree, to and with the said
I.D. his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, in manner and form
following, that is to say, that if the said I.G. and I. his wife, shall and
will on this side, and before the feast of etc. next ensuing the date of these
presents, before the Justices of the Court of Common Pleast at Westminster,
knowledge the Fine, Sur cognizance de drt. comeceque il ad de lour done unto
the said I.D. and his heirs, with Proclamation, according unto the form of the
Statute in such case had and provided, in due form of Law to be levied of all
that the etc. (reciting the particulars, and with the same words as in former
Presidents for the like cases are mentioned) In Witness whereof etc.

An acknowledgement of the receipt of certain moneys, due upon the sale of
certain lands, and a release of the same, and of all security taken therefore,
and a release of all Covenants in certain Indentures, with a general release.
TO all persons etc. Know ye that I the said A. have had and received the day
of the date thereof, of T. D. of etc. the sum of etc. in full discharge and
satisfaction of all such sum and sums of money, as the said T.D. was to pay
unto the said A. for the Manor, or Capital message of W. in the said County of
^. and the lands, tenements and hereditaments, which the said T.D. lately had
and purchased of me the said A. as by the assurance thereof made more at large
appears. And I the said A. do by these presents, for me, my heirs, executors,
administrators and assigns, remise, release, and quit claim unto the said T.D.
his beirs, executors, and assigns, the said debt of etc. and every part and
parcel thereof, and all and singular Covenants, Recognizances, duties and
deeds, and all other security, and assurances whatsoever by him the said T.D.
unto me the said A. for the payment of the said sum of etc. or for the payment
of any part or parcel thereof, heretofore made, acknowledged, or given. And I
the said A. do further for me, my heirs, Release of Covenants in certain Indent.
executors, administrators, and assigns, by these presents remise, release, and
quite claim unto him the said T.D. his heirs, executors, administrators and
assigns, all and singular Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements on the
part and behalf of him the said T.D. his heirs and assigns, unto me the said A.
mine heirs, executors or assigns, covenanted, granted, concluded or agreed
upon, Release of R^^ogn.
specified and contained in certain Indentures made between the said T.D. on
the one part, and me the said A. on the other part, bearing date, etc. And also
all Becogn. of the sums of etc. entered into by the said T.D. unto me the said
A. and bearing date the etc. And all and singular actions, judgments,
executions, suits, quarrels, debates, debts, duties, and demands whatsoever,
which I the said A. mine heirs, executors and administrators, have, shall, may,
or ought to have, or am, or shall be, A ge^eral Release.
in any sort, entitled unto, in, upon, or by reason of the said Recogn. or of
any covenant, grant, clause, article or agreement in the said recited Indenture
specified or contained. And further also know ye, that I the said A. have for
the consideration aforesaid, remised, released, and quite claimed, and do by
these presents, for me, my heirs, execut. administ. and assig. remise, release,
and quite claim unto the said T.D. his heirs, exec. administrators and assigns,
all and all manner of actions, entries, covenants, grants, agreements, Recogn.
Judgments, executions, suits quarrels, controversies, debates, debts, duties,
and demands whatsoever, which I the said A. my heirs, executors,
administrators, and assigns, have, may, shall or ought to have, or am, or shall
be entitled unto, for any cause or matter whatsoever, from the beginning of
the world, until the day of the date of these presents. In witness whereof,
etc.

A Condition, that the Obligor was lawfully seized of the premises, at the time
of granting of the Annuity, with other usual clauses contained in such Grants.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named T. P. and I.P. by their Deed
Indented, beating date with these presents, have given, granted and by the same
their Deed confirmed unto the within named E.H. his heirs and assigns, a
certain Annuity or yearly rent of, etc. yearly issuing and going out of the
Manor of, etc. with th'appurtenaces, and out of all the lands, tenements, and
hereditaments, belonging or appertaining, or with the same now, or at any time
heretofore held, occupied or enjoyed, sit. etc. And out of all other Messuages,
etc. whatsoever, with their appurtenances of them the said T.P. and I.P. or
either of them in R. aforesaid in the said County of K. under a certain
condition in the said. Deed cont^ined, as in and by the said Deed more at large
it does and may appear; The usual clause that the grantor is seized of a lawful
and indefeasible estate in fee, in his own right, of the premises, out of
which, etc.
If therefore the said T.P. and I. P. or either of them, were at the time of
th'ensealing and delivery of the said Deed, solely, lawfully, and rightfully
seized in his or their demesne, as of Fee-simple, of a good, sure, lawful,
rightful, absolute, and indefeasible estate, and of and in all and singular
the said Manor, etc. with th'appurtenances, and of and in all other the Lands,
tenements and hereditaments, and all other the premises, with th'appurtenances,
out of which the said Annuity or yearly Rent is mentioned to be issuing, And
that the said T.P. and I. P. or either of them, And that he had lawful power
to charge the same.
at the time of the ensealing and delivery of the said Deed, had good, right,
lawful power, and authority, in his or their own right, to charge the said
Manor, etc. and all other the premises, with th'appurtenances, out of which the
said Annuinuity or yearly rent, according to the purport of the said Deed is
mentioned to be issuing, And also if the said Manor, etc. and all other the
premises, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, out of
which the said annuity or annual rent is mentioned to be issuing, Clause, that
after any default in payment, the lands shall be over, liable, and sufficient
to the distress, etc. That the land is, and shall so continue, of the clear
yearly value of, etc over and above all charges and reprizes. And that the
grantee shall peaceably enjoy the rent. The usual clause that the premises are
acquitted, etc. or else shall be sufficiently saved harmless from all former
bargains, sales, etc.
shall from time to time, and at all times from and any default in payment to
be made of the said annuity or yearly rent, or of any part thereof, at any of
the time and times limited for the payment thereof, be overt, liable, and
sufficient, to the distress and distresses of the said E.H. his heirs and
asigns, and that the said Manor, and other the premises, with th'appurtenances,
out of which the said Annuity or yearly rent is mentioned to be granted, now
be, and from time to time, and at all times hereafter, shall continue, remain
and be, of the clear yearly value of, etc. over and above all charges and
reprises whatsoever. And that the said E.H. his heirs and assigns, shall, or
lawfully may, from time to time, and at all times, peaceably and quietly have,
perceive, take and enjoy the said Annuity or yearly rent, according to the
purport of the said Deed. And further, if the said Manor, etc. and all other
the premises, out of which the said annuity or annual rent is mentioned to be
issuing, at the time of th'ensealing and delivery of the said Deed, be, and so
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, shall continue, remain, and be
acquitted and discharged, or else; from time to time, and at all times
hereafter sufficiently saved harmless and indemnified, of and from all and all
manner of former bargains, sales, gifts, grants, alienations, intails, leases,
statutes, judgments, executions, intrusions, and all other interests, titles,
charges and encumbrances whatsoever. That then, etc. or else, etc.

An Assignment of Dower by the Heir, unto the Feme.
TO all persons, etc. T.S. of, etc. Son of T.S. late of H. aforesaid deceased,
sends greeting. Whereas the said T.S. Father of me the said T. was during his
life lawfully seized in his demean as of Fee, and at the time of his death died
so lawfully seized, of, and in diverse lands and tenements, of which M. late
wife of the said T. and now wife of R.G. Citizen of London, was at the time of
his death indowable, and thereof ought to have a full third part, assigned,
limited and appointed unto her for her Dower; Now know ye, that I the said
T.S. in consideration, and for the Dower of her the said M. have assigned,
limited, and appointed, and by these presents do assign, limit, and appoint,
unto the said R.G. and M. now his Wife, Mother of me the said T.S. and late the
Wife of the said T. for the Dower of her the said M. one piece and parcel of
Land, with the appurtenances, commonly called and known by the name of V.
containing in the whole by estimation, etc. whether more or less, situate,
lying and being in etc. and boundeth and butteth, etc. as the meets and bounds
do divide and show, and are well known, to have etc. the said premises with the
appurtenances, unto the said R.G. and M. his Wife, for the Dower of her the
said M. for and during the natural life of M. for and in the name of the
reasonable dower of her the said M. In Witness whereof etc.

A Deed poll of receipt of a sum of money, accorcording to a Proviso contained
in certain Indentures, and an Acquittance thereof.
TO all Persons, etc. P.H. etc. sends greeting, Whereas in one Indenture made
between R.G. of etc. of the one part, and E.H. of etc. ^. I. of etc. R.S.P.H.
and R.G. of etc. of the other part, and bearing date, etc. there was contained
one proviso (amongst other covenants, clauses, and agreements) in these words
following, that is to say, Provided always, and upon condition of etc.
(reciting the Pro^iso verbatim, and then as follows.) As in and by the said
Indenture at large and plainly does and may appear; Now know ye, that I the
said P. H. have the day of the date of these presents, and within the space of
etc. next ensuing after the decease of the said R.G. late of C. in the said
proviso named, had, and received, in the South porch of the Parish Church of B.
aforesaid, of the said R.G. of B. the just and full sum of etc. for and toward
the payment of the debts, legacies, and performance of the last Will and
Testament of him the said R.G. of C. aforesaid, according to the effect,
purport, intent, and true meaning of the said recited proviso in the said
Indenture contained, The receipt of which said sum of etc. I the said P. H. do
by these presents, thereof, and of every part thereof, acquit and discharge the
said R.G. his heir, sexecutors and assigns, by these presents. In Witness
whereof, etc.

A Deed of Gift, of Hay and Corn in Barns, together with the Barns, as also of
Corn standing, with the soil whereupon etc. and of goods in particular.
THis Indenture etc. Between I.B of etc. of the one part, and R.L. of etc. on
the other part, Witnesses, That whereas the said I.B. is and stands debted
unto the said R.L. in the sum of etc. He the said I.B. for and upon the
consideration aforesaid, has given, granted, bargained and sold, and by these
presnts does give, grant, bargain and sell unto the said R.L. his executors,
administrators and assigns, all and singular his Hay, Wheat, Barley, and Oats,
Grant of the Hay and Corn and B^rns.
lying and being in any the Barns or Stacks of him the said I.B. in H. or B. or
elsewhere in the said County of K. The which said premises do by estimation
contain and amount unto the rates and quantities hereafter following, that is
to say, the said Hay does by estimation amount unto the quantity of 42 loads,
or thereabouts, (and so recite the residue) And the said I.B. does for the
consideration aforesaid, grant unto the said R.L. his executors and assigns,
the barns and rooms where the said premises do now lie and remain, together
with free liberty, and also free ingresse, egresse, and regresse, and passage,
in, by, over, and through any the said lands and tenements, now in the tenure
and occupation of him the said I.B. and every, or any part or parcel thereof,
as well to fetch, take, and carry away the said premises, or any part thereof,
with Wayns, Carts, or otherwise, at the will and pleasure of the said R.L. his
executors and assigns. As also to throw out, or bestow, the chaff, straw, or
other things coming thereof, in or upon such part of the said lands as is or
shall be near adjoining unto any of the said barns or places, where the said
premises lie and remain, at any time or times until the Feast day of etc. next
ensuing the date of these presents. And the said I. B does for the
consideration aforesaid, give, grant, bargain and sell unto the said R.L. his
executors and assigns, all and singular the Wheat and crop of wheat of him the
said ^.B. standing or growing in or upon any the lands, now or late in his
tenure or occupation in B. aforesaid, Grant of the Corn growing, together with
the ground.
in the said County of K. containing in the whole 8 acres, whether more or
less, together with the ground whereupon the same does now stand or grow, and
free liberty, ingresse, egresse, regresse, and passage, for him the said R.L.
his servants and workmen, in, by, over and through any the lands or tenements
now in the tenure or occupation of him the said I.B. to cut down, mow, take and
carry away, with carts, wayns, or otherwise, at the free will and pleasure of
the said R.L. or his assigns, the premises or any part thereof, until the
feast of etc. next ensuing the date hereof. And the said I.B. does further for
the consideration aforesaid give grant, bargain and sell unto the said R.L. his
executors and assigns, all and singular the goods, and chattels, Grant of the
goods and chattels; real and personal.
real and personal, of him the said I.B. mentioned, expressed, contained or set
down in a certain schedule indented, unto these presents annexed. To have and
to hold the said Hay, Wheat, goods, chartels, and all and singular other the
premises, with all and every their appurtenances, unto the said R L. his
executors, administrators, and assigns, for ever, to the only and proper use
and behoof of him the said R. his executors and assigns for ever. And the said
R. L. does for him, his heirs, exec. adm. and assigns, covenant and grant, to
and with the said I.B. his executors and assigns, Covenants, by the grantee to
pay unto the grantor, etc. upon request so much as the premises shall amount
unto, above the sum of etc. necessary charges and expenses allowed.
that if he the said R.L. his executors and assigns, shall and do make of the
said premises, before by these presents unto him given, granted, bargained and
sold, above the said sum of etc. allowing unto him the said R.L. his executors,
and assigns, all such charges and expenses which he the said R. his executors,
and assigns, shall be at, in the keeping, ordering, or setting the said
premise, or otherwise be put unto, in, about, or concerning the same, that then
he the said R.L. his executors and assigns, shall and will at all time and
times, upon request unto him the said R. his executors or assigns, by the said
I.B. his executors or assigns, had or made, within the space of etc. next after
such request content or pay, or cause to be contented or paid unto the said I.
B. his executors or assigns, at or in the etc. of H. aforesaid, all such
overplus sum and sums of money as he the said R.L. his executors or assigns
shall make of the said premises, with the allowances aforesaid, above the said
sum of etc. And the said I.B. has put the said R. L. in full and peaceable
possession by deliverry of one Ox, parcel of the premises, before in these
presents mentioned to be bargained and sold. In witness whereof, etc.

The Schedule in this present Indenture mentioned, The schedule.
containing and expressing such goodt and chattels as are meant and intended to
be bargained, sold, assigned, and set over by these presents, to which same is
annexed. Imprimis four Oxen, etc.

A Release of Errors upon a Fine.
TO all Persons to whom these presents shall come, I.P. of, etc. sends
greeting, Know ye, that I the said I.P. for diverse good, etc. have remised,
released, and for me, my heirs, etc. for ever quite claimed, and do by these
presents for me, my heirs and assigns, remise, release, and quite claim unto
I.S. of B. in the said County of K. Gent. his heirs and assigns, all and
singular right, title, use, interest, claim and demand, which I the said I.P.
my heirs, executors and assigns, or any of them have, may, can, shall or ought
to have, challenge or demand, in, or unto the lands, tenements and
hereditaments, with their appurtenances, or any of them, which he the said I.S.
lately had and purchased of me the said I. P. sit. lying and being in S. in the
said County of K. And also all and all manner of actions, and writs of Error
and Errors, and all and every Error and Errors whatsoever, which I the said
I.P. mine heirs, executors and assigns, or any of them, may, can, or might
have, or am, or shall be in any sort entitled unto, in or upon any Fine or
Fines, or otherwise, against the said I. S. his heirs and assigns. In witness
whereof, etc.

A Condition that if the wife survive her husband, that his Executors shall pay
unto the wife, the sum of, etc.
THe Conditions, etc. that if A. M. wife of the within bounded I. M. shall
fortune to survive and overlive him the said I.M. Then if the heirs, executors,
administr. or assigns of the said I. M. shall and do well and truly content,
satisfy and pa^, or cause to be well and truly contented, satisfied and paid,
unto the said A. M. her executors and assigns, the sum of, etc. within, etc.
next after such the death and decease of the said I.M. at or in the, etc.
within written, That then, etc.

A Letter of Attorney, authorizing to enter into certain lands, and after
entry, to seal and deliver a Deed subscribed by the M. by which those lands are
conveyed over, etc.
TO all Persons, etc. W. H: of, etc. sends greeting, Know ye, that I the sa^d
W.H. for diverse etc. have authorized, appointed, and in my place put, and do
by, etc. my loving friend S.B. of etc. my true and lawful Attorney, for me,
and in my name, to enter into certain land and wood-land, commonly called and
known by the name of, etc. or into any part or parcel thereof, and into all and
singular the lands, tenements and hereditaments specified and contained in a
certain writing, being of the date hereof, by me subscribed, and unto these
presents annexed, or into any part or parcel thereof, in the name of the whole,
and after such entry made, to seal the said writing by me subscribed, and to
these presents as aforesaid annexed, and the same as my Act and Deed unto the
said I.B. in the said writing named, or to his certain Attorney in that behalf
appointed, to deliver; Ratifying and allowing by these presents whatsoever my
said Attorney shall do, or cause to be done, in or about the doing of the
premises. In Witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants, to lead the use of a Fine, Feoffment, etc. In
consideration of natural affection.
THis Indenture, etc. Between Sir R.M. of, etc. Knight, of the one part, and Sir
P.W. Knight, and P.W. of, etc. Esquire, and A.T. of, etc. on the other part,
Witnesses, that the said Sir R.M. for and in consideration of the natural love
and affection the which he has and bears unto I. M. his Son and Heir
apparent, and for his advancement, and for the present maintenance of the Heir
of him the said R. and to the intent his Daughters may have convenient portions
to maintain them, and to prefer them in Marriage, And also for the
establishing the Manors, lands, and tenements, and other the hereditaments,
with th'appurtenances, hereafter mentioned, to such uses, intents and purposes
as are hereafter limited and appointed, does by these presents, for him, his
heirs and assigns, covenant and grant, to and with the said Sir P.W. etc. their
heirs and assigns, and every of them, that he the said Sir R M. his heirs and
assigns, shall and will on this side and before, etc. by his sufficient Deed of
Feoffment, Fine, recovery, or other good and sufficient conveyance and
assurance in the Law, well and sufficiently convey and assure unto the said Sir
P.W. etc. their heirs and assigns, all and singular that his Manor of, etc.
(recite the particulars,) with their appurtenances; which said Feoffment. Fine,
Recovery, and other conveyance and assurance, and any and every of them, to be
as aforesaid made, shall be and inure, and is limited, declared, and appointed
to be and inure, And the said Sir P.W. etc. their heirs and assigns, and every
of them, shall, from and after the said Feoffment, or other assurance as
aforesaid made, stand and be seized of the Manor, and all the premises before
intended to be as aforesaid conveyed, with all and every their appurtenances,
and of every part and parcel thereof, to the uses, intents, and purposes
hereafter in these presents expressed, and to none other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever, that is to say, to the use and behoof of him the said Sir R. M. to
the use and behoof of him the said I.M. Son and heir apparent of the said R.
and of his assigns, for and during the term of his natural life etc. (and so
recite the several limitations of uses, as it is to be intended,) And
furthermore it is concluded and agreed, by and between the patties to these
presents, and every of them, their heirs and assigns, and it is the true intent
and meaning of the said Feoffment, Fine and other assurances of the said
premises as aforesaid to be made, The intent of the F^ffment, etc. to be made,
is that the heir of the Feoffor shall have such a rent, during the life of the
Feoffor, out of the premises; and that he may distrain for it, being behind, as
for a rent charge. And to the intent likewise M. one of the daughters of the
Feoffor should have the like rent with distress for the same being behind.
Provided, that if M. marry without the consent of the Feoffor, or if the
Feoffor bestow such a portion upon her in marriage during his life, that the
rent shall cease. Proviso, that if the Feoffor die before his Daughters are
married, or before such as shall be married have received their portion of,
etc. that then the Feoffees shall stand seized to the use of them, until they
have received, etc. Proviso, to determine the uses aforesaid, to the Daughters,
upon payment of their several portions by the heir.
that they the said Sir P.W. etc. and the survivor of them, their heirs and
assigns, shall stand and be seized of the Manor, and all and singular other the
said premises, with their appurtenances, to the uses and intents following,
that is to say, That he the said I.M. and his assigns, shall and may yearly,
during the term of the natural life of the said Sir R.M. have, receive, and
perceive out of the said premises, with their appurtenances, one several rent
of the sum of etc. to be paid unto the said I.M. and his assigns, during the
life of the said R. M. yearly, at the 4 usual Feasts of the year, viz. by even
proportions to be paid, And if the said several rent of etc. or any part
thereof be behind or unpaid, at any of the said Feasts in which it ought to be
paid as aforesaid, that then he the said I.M. and his assigns, during the life
of the said R. shall and may distrain in and upon the said premises, or any
part or parcel thereof, for the same so being behind as for a Rentcharge to
all intents and purposes, and likewise to the use and intent that M.M. one of
the Daughters of the said Sir R.M. shall and may yearly during the life of the
said R. have and preceive out of the said premises, one several rent of etc. to
be paid at the 4 usual Feasts in which it ought to be paid as aforesaid, and
that she the said M. and her assigns, shall and may distrain for the same, upon
the premises or any part thereof, as for rent-charges to all intents and
purposes. Provided always that if the said M. shall during the life time of the
said Sir R.M. happen to marry without the consent of him the said Sir R.M. or
if he the said R. shall, or do, during his lifetime, bestow upon the said M.
in Marriage the sum of, etc. that then and from thenceforth the said annual rent
of, etc shall cease, and be determined to all intents and purposes (and if more
Daughters, then follow the like.) Provided always, and it is covenanted and
agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, and every of them,
their heirs and assigns, and it is the true intent and meaning of the said
Feoffment, Fine, and other conveyance and assurance of the said premises to be
as aforesaid made, that if it shall fortune the said Sir R.M. to dye before
such time as the said M. K. and A. M. or any of them be married, or before such
time as such of them as shall be married shall receive her said protion of,
etc. that then they the said Sir P.W. etc. and the survivor of them, their
heirs and assigns, shall immediately from and after such decease of him the said
R. stand and be seized of all and singular the said premises, with their
appurtenances, to the use and behoof of them the said M. K. and A. and their
assigns, as shall be so unmarried, or as shall not have received the said sum
of, etc. for, during, and until such of the said M. K. and A. as shall be
unmarried and unpayd as aforesaid, have had and received the full of the
several sums of, etc. any matter or thing hitherto specified to the contrary
notwithstanding. Provided nevertheless, that if the said I.M. his heirs and
assigns, shall, and do within, etc. next after the decease of him the said Sir
R. M. content and pay unto every of them, the said M. K. and A. as shall be
then unmarried, the sum of, etc. And to such of them the said M. K. and A. as
shall be married and unpaid, the sum of, etc. That then and from thenceforth,
after such payment, the use unto her and them as aforesaid limited, shall
cease, and be determined to all intents and purposes. Provided nevertheless,
Proviso, that the Feoffor may demise parcel of the premises, for payment of his
debts, and that the Feoffees shall stand seized to the use of such persons to
whom such demise shall be made.
that whereas the said Sir R.M. is indebted unto several persons in the sum of,
etc. to the intents that the said debts may be paid and discharged, it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said R. M. by his Indenture under his hand
and seal, to demise and let all that the said, etc. (reciting the parcels) And
that the said Lease and Demise so to be made, shall be good in Law; and that
for the making of the said Lease as aforesaid, the said Sir P.W. etc. their
heirs and assigns, and every of them, and all and every other person and
persons, then standing, or being seized of the said premises so to be demised,
and every part thereof, shall stand and be seized thereof to the use and hehoof
of every such person or persons, to whom any such Lease or Demise shall be as
aforesaid made, to his and their executors and assigns, according to the
purport, intent, and true meaning of the said Lease and Demise. Proviso, that
the heir may make his wife a Jointure of parcel of the premises, and that the
Feoffees shall stand seized to the use of such wife accordingly.
Provided furthermore, to the intent that the said I. M. may be the better
advanced and preferred in Marriage, that it may and shall be lawful to and for
the said I. M. to make unto such wife or wifes as he shall fortune to marry, or
unto any other person or persons, to the use of such wife or wifes, a Jointure
of so much of the said Manor, and other the said premises, with their
appurtenances, as shall amount unto the yearly sum of, etc. and not above, for
the term of the life of such wife or wifes only, and no longer, and to convey
and assure the same accordingly, and that the said Jointure to be made shall be
good and available in the Law; and that they the said Sir P.W. etc. and every
of them, their heirs and assigns, and every other person and persons then being
seized of the said premises, to be made and conveyed in Jointure, shall stand,
and be thereof seized, to the use and behoof of such wife and wifes to whom the
same shall be conveyed or assured in Jointure as aforesaid, for and during the
term of her life, according to the intent and meaning of these presents, any
matter or thing before specified to the contrary hereof, notwithstanding.
Provided always, that if the said I. M. shall or do contract himself in
marriage, Proviso, that if the heir marry without the consent of the Feoffees
first had in writing, that then the uses of the premises, unto him limited, as
also unto the heirs males of his body, shall cease, and be determined, etc.
or do marry with any person or persons whatsoever, without the consent and
good liking of them the said Sir P.W. etc. or without the consent and good
liking of the said Survivor or Survivors of them first had, and in writing
obtained; That then, and from thenceforth the use of the said premises unto the
said I.M. by these presents limited, and to every of the heirs males of his
body to be begotten, shall absolutely cease and be determined, both in respect
of him the said I. M. and also of every of the said heirs males of his body to
be begotten, to all intents and purposes, as if he or they had never been named
or mentioned in these presents, and that then and from thenceforth they the
said Sir P.W. etc. their heirs and assigns, and every of them, shall stand and
be seized of the said premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, to the
use and behoof of such other person and persons, and with such provisoes and
limitations as is before in these presents limited and appointed, as if the
said I. M. were naturally dead without heir of his body; any clause or matter
before specified to the contrary notwithstanding, etc.

A Release of a Proviso and Condition.
THis Indenture, etc. Between I. S. of, etc. of, etc. of the one part, and R. W.
of, etc. on the other part, Witnesses, that whereas the said I.S. by his
Indenture bearing date, etc. for a certain competent sum of money to him by the
said R.W. before th'ensealing thereof in hand paid, did give, grant, bargain,
sell, and confirm unto the said R. W. his heirs and assigns, etc. (recite the
particulars in the said Indenture) And the said I.S. for the consideration
aforesaid, did by his said Indenture give, grant, bargain and sell unto the
said R.W. all other his lands, tenements and hereditaments whatsoever, situate,
etc. in the said Parish of B. To have and to hold the said, etc. and all other
the premises by the said Indenture mentioned to be bargained and sold, with all
and singular their appurtenances, unto the said R.W. his heirs and assigns, to
the only and proper use and behoof of the said R.W. his heirs and assigns for
ever, as in and by the said Indenture more plainly, and at large it does and
may appear. In which said Indenture there was also amongst other covenants, one
proviso or condition contained to the effect following, That if, etc. (recite
the condition verbatim) as in and by the said Indent. more plainly and at large
amongst other things does and may appear. Now this Indent, witnesses, that the
said I.S. for and in consideration of the sum of etc. unto him the said I.S. by
the said R.W. before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, well and
truly in hand paid, Release of a Condition.
does for him, his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, and every of
them, clearly and absolutely remise, release, acquit and discharge, unto the
said R. W. his heirs, executors, and administrators, as well the said proviso
and condition, as all other provisoes, conditions, covenants and agreements in
the said recited Indenture contained, or therein mentioned or expressed, and
all and all manner of power, liberty, authority, right, title, or demand, which
I the said I.S. his heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, has, or may
have, challenge, or demand, by force or virtue of the said proviso or
condition, or any other proviso or condition in the said Indenture contained.
And that the said I.S. his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, shall
from henceforth be utterly excluded, and disabled to take any benefit of the
said proviso or condition, and that the same from henceforth shall be
absolutely void and determined, And also he the said I. S. does for him, his
heirs and assigns, and every of them, remise, release, and quite claim unto the
said R. W. his heirs and assigns, all and singular right, title, use, interest,
challenge and demand, of, in, or unto the said Messuages, lands, tenements and
all other the said premises in the said Icdenture mentioned or expressed, with
their appurtenances, and of, in, or to any and every part and parcel thereof.

And furthermore he the said I.S. has for and upon the consideration
aforesaid, Bargain and sale of Lands, together with the evidences belonging to
the same in the said recited Indenture mentioned.
given, granted, bargained and sold, and does by these presents, for him his
heirs and assigns, fully, clearly, and absolutely give, grant, bargain and sell
unto the said R. W. his heirs and assigns, the said Messuages etc. and all and
singular other the premises, with all and every their appurtenances, in the
said recited Indenture mentioned, and contained, or therein, or thereby meant
or intended to be bargained and sold, unto him the said R.W. his heirs and
assigns, and also all and singular Messuages, etc. whatsoever, etc. together
will all, etc. profits and commodities thereunto belonging or appertaining,
with all and every their appurtenances of him the said I.S. in B. aforesaid in
the said County; and also the reversion and reversions, remainder and
remainders of all and singular the said premises, and the rents reserved in and
upon any demise or demises thereof made, together with all deeds, etc.
whatsoever, concerning the said premises, or any part thereof; All and singular
which the said deeds etc. escripts, and minuments, or so many of them, as he
the said I. S. or any other person or persons, to his, or by his delivery, have
in his or their custody, which he may lawfully get or come by, without suit in
Law, he the said I. S. does by these presents, for him, his heirs, executors,
administrators, and assigns, and every of them, covenant and grant, to and with
the said R.W. his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, well and truly
to deliver, or cause to be delivered, unto the said R.W. his heirs, executors,
administrators or assigns, before etc. whole, safe, uncancelled and underfaced.
To have and to hold the said Messuages, etc. unto him the said R. W. his heirs,
and assigns, to the only use and behoof of him the said R. W. his heirs and
assigns for ever (A clause that the said R. W. shall enjoy the premises without
any lawful let of the said I. S. his heirs or assigns, Usual clauses in
bargains and sales.
etc. using the usual words of warranties, And also that the said I.S. shall at
all times make further assurance, be it Fine, Feoffment etc. Provided always,
and it is further covenanted, granted, Proviso, that all conveyances made, or
to be made, shall be to the use of the bargainee, and his heirs.
condescended and fully agreed upon, by and between the said parties to these
presents, and every of them their, and every of their heirs executors,
administrators and assigns; And it is the true intent, and meaning of these
presents, that all and singular Feoffments, gifts, grants, fines, recoveries,
and all other assurances whatsoever, of the said premises, with the
appurtenances, or of any part or parcel thereof, by the said I.S. or by the
said I. and A. his Wife, to the said R. W. his heirs or assigns, or to any
other person or persons, by the appointment or consent of the said R. now or at
any time heretofore made, or at any time hereafter to be made, shall be and
inure. and are by these present limited, declared and appointed to be, and
inure; And every such person or persons to whom any such fine, Recoverey,
Feoffment, grant or assurance shall be made, shall stand, and be seized to the
use and behoof of him the said R.W. his heirs and assigns for ever, and to none
other use or uses, intent or purpose whatsoever. In Witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture to declare the use of a precedent Recovery, with a power of
Revocation.
THis Indenture etc. Between R.S. of etc. of the one part, and E.G. of etc. of
the other part, Witnesses, that whereas the said R. S. did heretofore bring a
Writ of entry. Sir desseisin in l' post against the said E. G. retornable in
his Majesty's Court of Common pleas, and thereby did demand against him (recite
the parcels) with their appurtenances in B. as his right and inheritance, and
wherein the said E. did not enter, but after a disseisin, that one H.H.
unjustly, and without judgment, did unto him the said R. within etc. then last
past, unto which said Writ the said E. did appear, and did vouch to warranty,
E. H. the common vouchee, who accordingly did enter into the said warranty, and
did after make default, and departed in despite of the Court, and thereupon
judgment was given, that the said R S. should recover seisin of the tenements
aforesaid with their appurtenances, against the said E. G. and that he the said
E. should recover over in value against the said E. H. and thereupon execution
of the said recovery was had and made, according unto the usual form of common
recoveries in such ca^es used, as by the record of the said recovery remaining
in the Court of Common pleas, and there entered amongst the records of Easter
term last past, before the date of these presents, Rot^ulo 145, does more
plainly and at large appear. And whereas it was, by and between the said
parties to these presents, and either of them meant and intended, and the said
parties to these presents, and every of them do by these presents accordingly
limit, declare and express, that the said recovery was meant and intended, and
shall and does extend and comprehend by such names, number of acres, and
covenants as are therein specfied and contained, the capital Mansion and
Messuages, and all and every the lands, tenements and hereditaments, with their
appurtenances, which late were the inheritance of I. G. Gent. deceased, by the
last will and testament of him the said I. devised and bequeathed unto the said
E. G. and to the Heirs Males of his body, in such manner and form as by the
said will does more plainly appear. Now this Indenture witnesses, that the
said Recovery, and the execution thereupon, was by and between the said parties
to these presents, and every of them meant and intended, and it is by these
presents declared, limited and expressed; to be meant and intended, and it is
by these presents, Covenanted, granted, condiscended and agreed, by and between
the said parties, and every of them, that the same shall be and inure, and that
the said R.S. his heirs and assigns shall stand and be sei^ed of the said
capital Mansion, and all and singular other the said premises, with their
appurtenances, in the said Recovery meetioned, to the uses, intents, and
purposes, in and by these presents, limited and expressed, and to none other
use intent or purpose whatsoever; that is to say, to the use of him the said E.
G. and the heirs males of his body, Proviso or power of Revocation.
lawfully begotten, etc. (Reciting the uses at large.) Provided always that if
the said E. G. party to these presents, shall at any time during his natural
life, intend or be willing to alter, change, repeal revoke, or make void, all
the said estates, uses, remainder and limitations before in these presents
mentioned, or any of them of, etc. in the premises, or any part thereof. And
shall by any writing or writings signed with his own hand and seal, in the
presence of two credible witnesses at the least, signify and declare, that his
intent and mind is to alter, change, repeal, revoke, or make void the said
estates, uses, remainders, and limitations, or any of them, that then, and at
all times after such writing and writings shall be so signed and sealed, all
the said estates, uses, remaiders and limitations, before in these presents
specified and declared, and every, any, or so many of them, as shall be
mentioned in the said writing or writings of revocation to be repealed,
revoked, or made void, of or in the said premises, or any part or parcel
thereof, shall from thence forth cease, determine, and be repealed, revoked,
and utterly void for ever. And that then, and at all times after he the said
R.S. his heirs and assigns, and all and every other person and persons
whatsoever, which shall be then seized of the said premises, with their
appurtenances, or any part or parcel thereof, shall stand and be seized
thereof, or of so much thereof, as shall be mentioned and contained in the said
writing or writings of Revocation, to the only use and behoof of him the said
E. G. his heirs and assigns for ever, or to such other uses, intents or
purposes, as in the said writing or writings of Revocation shall be limited,
declared and appointed, and to none other use, intent, or purpose whatsoever,
any thing before specified to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. In
witness whereof, etc.

An Assignment of a Debt unto, etc.
TO all Christian People, etc. Sir E. H. Knight, sends greeting in our Lord
God everlasting. Whereas J. S. late of H. in the County of K. Esquire deceased, by
the name of J. S. of Lincolns Inn in the County of Middlesex. Esquire by his
obligation bearing date, etc. stands bound unto the said Sir E. H. in the sum
of, etc. for the payment of, etc. to one, etc. upon the, etc. now last past,
for payment whereof to the said I. C. the said E. was bound with the said I. at
the request of the said I. in the sum of, etc. Of which bonds to the said I. C.
the said I. by the condition of his said bond to the said E. was to discharge,
and acquit the said E. at the said day with money not being paid in default of
the said I. the said E. has paid (and so recite other obligations if it so
require, etc.) And whereas W. G. Citizen and Merchant of London, one of the
Farmors of the Customs and Subsidies within the Commonwealth of England and
Dominion of Wales, stands indebted unto, etc. in diverse sums of money, by
reason of the said Farm; Now know ye, that the said Sir E. H. for, and toward
the payment and satisfaction of such sums of money, as the said W. G. does or
shall owe unto, etc. ^^th given, granted, assigned, and set over, and by these
presents does give, grant, assign, and set over, unto, etc. his heirs and
successors, the said Obligations, so to him the said Sir E. H. made as
aforesaid, and the several sums of money in them, Proviso, that if the
Treasurer, Ch^ncellor, etc. shall mislike, or disallow the assignment, and so
declare under their hands in writing, or by order of Court, That then the
assignment shall be void, for so much as is not levied, toward the payment of
the debts of the Farmer, unto the, etc. so that the Farmer have allowance for
so much as is paid, so that the Obligation be in force, and redelivered unto
the Assignor, not cancelled, defaced, or made void.
and every of them contained. Provided, that if it shall happen that the said
several sums mentioned in the said several Obligations, cannot, or be not to be
levied, and had by, etc. his heirs and successors, in such time and sort, as
the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of the Exchequer for the time being,
or any two of them, for any cause hereafter shall mislike, or disallow of the
said assignment, and so declare under their hands in writing, or otherwise
order in the said Court, that it shall not be convenient for, etc. his heirs
and successors, to accept and take the said several sums, contained in the said
Obligation, or any part or parcel of them, toward the satisfaction of such
sums of money, as the said W. G. now does, or shall hereafter owe unto, etc.
his heirs or successors, by reason of the said Farm, and thereupon shall take
order that the same, or any part thereof shall be returned back again to the
said Sir E. H. his executors or administrators; That then and from thenceforth
this assignment, for such of the said several sums, or such part thereof as
either shall be unlevied or unsatisfied to, etc. for and toward the payment of
such sums of money as the said W. G. does or shall owe as aforesaid declared,
or ordered, not convenient to be taken, or continued to, etc. shall be, and
remain void, in such sort as if his Assignment had not been made, accepted, or
allowed of, So at the said W. G. his executors, administrators and assigns, may
have allowance and defalcation out of the said Debts of so much as shall be
before that time of misliking paid, answered, or satisfied to, etc. his heirs
or successors, by reason of the said Assignment, and so also that the said
Obligations, and the interest of them may be in force and effect, and
redelivered unto me the said Sir E. H. my executors; administrat^ or assigns,
not defaced, cancelled, or otherwise made void, any thing herein contained to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In Witness whereof, etc.

Capt. and Recognit. and us^m d^cti Dommi Regis die and Anno infra script.
coram Jacobo Altham milit, unro Baron. etc.

An Indenture by a High Sheriff, deputing one to be his Undersheriff.
This Indenture, etc. Between Sir I.L. of, etc. Knight, Sheriff of the Counties
of Surrey and Sussex. of the one part, and R.K. the younger, of W. in the County
of Surrey, Gent. on the other part, Witnesses, that the said Sir I. L. of
assured hope, and trust that he has, that he the said R K. will honestly,
uprightly, and sufficiently discharge the office and duty of under Sheriff
toward the Commonwealth, and therein discharge him the said Sheriff, and for
the confideration hereafter mentioned, has been pleased and contented to
assign, depute, ordain, constitute and make etc by these presents does assign
depute, ordain, constitute and make the said R. K. his under Sheriff of the
said County of S. authorizing hereby the said R.K. according to the Covenants
and agreements in these presents contained, Convenant, by the Undersheriff,
honestly etc. to execute the office, and to do every thing, which may lawfully
be done by him, withour the presence of the Sheriff; and thereof to discharge
the Sheriff.
to execute, perform and do all that which to the duty and office of under
Sheriff of the said County, of S. shall appertain, or to the Sheriff of the
said County, without the personal presence of the said Sheriff may be executed
and done, and also to receive and take to his own use, all manner of duties and
lawful Fees, commodities, profits, and advantages to the same office
belonging, or in any wise lawfully appertaining, during such time as the said.
I.L. shall continue Sheriff, of the said County, In consideration whereof the
said R. K. for himself, his heirs, executors and administrators, does covenant,
promise and grant, to and with the said Sir I. L. his heirs, executors,
administrators, and assigns, and every of them by these presents, That he the
said R. K. shall and will during such time as he the said Sir I. L. shall
continue, remain, and be Sheriff of the said Counties of S, and S. or either of
them, honestly, truly, and sufficiently execute and do the office and duty of
an Undersheriff in the said County of S. And shall and will well and
sufficiently do and execute, for and in the name of the said Sheriff, all and
every thing and things concerning the office of the said Sher. of the said
County of S. which without the personal presence of the ligh-Sheriff may
lawfully be done and executed, and thereof shall discharge the said
High Sheriff, his heirs, ^exec, and admin. And that neither he, nor his Servant
Deputy etc, will receive or do any thing by color of his office contrany to
the Laws, ^ustoms, or state of the Realm, in prejudice of the Sheriff etc.


And furthermore, the said R. K. for him, his heirs, executors, and
administrators, and every of them, does covenant, promise, and grant, to and
with the said Sir I. L. his heirs, executors and administrator, and every of
them, by these presents, that neither the said R. K. his servant, deputy,
assignee, clark or bailiff, by him to be assigned, shall or will, by color of
his said office, deputation or assi^^^ent, extort, levy, receive any manner of
thing or things, which by the laws, customs or statutes of the Realm are or
shall be prohibited or not allowed, whereby the said Sheriff, his heirs,
executors, or administrators, or any of them, may in any wise, be either in
their persons, goods or lands, lawfully defamed, impeached, Covenant, by the
under Sheriff to appoint sufficient deputies or attorneys in all Cour^s
accuffomed to receive W^ies etc. to do every thing concerning them, and to make
sufficient deputies, in all parts of the County according to the laws and stat.
And that the under Sheriff will give reasonable notice to the high. Sheriff, of
all things to be done by him, in his proper person, and thereto will be
assistant and will bear all charges there of, except man's meat and horse meat.
Covenant, to receive all process, wherewith the high Sheriff is chargeable, and
to collect all fines, issues amerciaments, etc. and to pay the same at such
times as the high Sheriff is chargeable to pay the same, to his Majesty's use,
and thereof to acquit and discharge the Sheriff.
charged, impaired, molested or troubled. And further the said R. K. for
himself his heirs, executors, and administrators, and every of them does
covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said Sir I. L. his heirs,
executors and administrators, and every of them by these presents, That he the
said R. K. shall and will assign and appoint sufficient deputies and attorneys,
in all Courts accustomed, as well to receive writs, warrants, precepts and
Commandments to the said Sheriff to be directed, and to make process thereof,
and to do all thing and things, for the executing, serving, and sufficient
returning thereof, and also shall make and, appoint sufficient number of
Deputies in all parts of the said County of S. according to the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm.

And that he the said R. K. shall and will from time to time, give reasonable
notice and warning unto the said Sir I. L. of all such things as shall be
requisite and necessary for the said Sir I. L. as Sheriff of the said Counties,
or either of them, or by reason of his said offices in his own person to do or
execute, and therein at all times in his own person, or by his sufficient
Deputy shall be ayding and assisting, as well for the doing and executing
thereof, and the returning thereof, As also shall bear and pay all such charges
thereof, as to the said Sheriff, by reason of the said office should appertain
(except Man's meat and Horse mear.) And also the said R. K. for himself his
heirs, executors and administrators, and every of them, does covenant, promise
and grant, to and with the said Sir I. L. his heirs, executors and
administrators, and every of them, by these presents, that the said R. K. his
heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, shall and will well and truly,
from time to time, receive all such extracts and process whatsoever, wherewith
the said Sir I.L. as Sheriff of the said County of S. is or shall be chargeable
to receive, and that he the said R. K. his heirs, executors, administrators and
assigns, shall and will well and truly collect, levy, and gather all Fines,
issues and amerciaments, seisures, Fee-f^rmes, Rents, profits certainties,
Pipe-silver, Chequer-silver, and all manner of debts, duties and demands
whatsoever, wherewith the said Sir I. L. as Sheriff of the said Counties of S.
and S. his heirs, executors, or administrators, their or any of their goods,
chattels or lands, may in any wise be charged or chargeable, and the same to
pay to etc. use at such times as the said Sir I. L. is charged or chargeable to
pay the same, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, to acquit and
discharge as well the said Sir I. L. his heirs, executors, and administrators,
and every of them, as also all and singular their and every of their goods, and
(...) chattels, manors, messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments, And also
that he the said R. K. his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, shall
and will from time to time acquit and discharge, And that he will acquit and
discharge, or save harmless the Sheriff etc. his goods and lands, from all
executions of prisoners, etc. And from all forfeitures, fines, amerciaments
etc. by reason of any misfeasons, or nonfeasons, etc. of him, his deputy,
attorney, etc. And that he will not intermeddle with the execution or returning
of any Letters, etc. from his Majesty or his privy Council, without the
direction of the Sheriff. Covenant safely to keep the Prisoners committed to
his custody, until they are delivered to the Goal, there safely to be kept by
the Jailer till by course of Law they shall be delivered, and to execute
prisoners attainted according to their judgment.
or otherwise sufficiently save and keep harmless, the said Sir I.L. his
heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, And also all his and their goods
and chattels, lands, tenements and hereditaments what soever, of and from all
and all manner of execution or of executions of Prisoners whatsoever, which to
the office of Sheriffwick shall appertain, Forfeitures, Fines, amerciaments,
imprisonments, pains, panalties, or impositions, whatsoever, to be charged,
laid, or imposed upon the said County of S. his executors, administrators or
assigns, his or their or either of their goods, or chattels, lands, tenements
o^ hereditaments, by reason of any misfeasons, or nonfeasson, omissions
default, dely, contempt, or cause whatsoever, of the said R. K. his deputy or
deputies Attorney or Attorneys, Clark or Clarks, Bayiff or Bailiffs, or other
person whatsoever, not doing or insufficient doing, his or their duty
concerning the said Office of the Sheriff, or under Sheriff, And that neither
he the said R. K. nor any his assigns, Deputies, Clarks, or attorneys, shall or
will intermeddle with the execution or returning of any Letters or Commandments
from etc. or any of the Council, without the privity, notice, and direction of
the said Sir I.L. then first had, and the said R. K. for himself, his heirs,
executors, administrators, and assigns, and every of them, does further
covenant and grant, to and with the said Sir I. L. his heirs, executors and
administrators, by these presents, that he the said R. K. shall receive into
his custody all Prisoners to be committed to his charge, and them safely and
honestly shall keep, until they shall be brought and delivered to the Goal or
prison of the said County, there to be kept by the Jailer or Keeper of the said
Goal or prison, until by due course of Law they shall be delivered; And of such
Prisoners as shall be convicted or attainted shall make or cause to be made due
execution, according unto the quality of the judgment, And that he will, within
6 days before every term, deliver a Certificate in writing of all executions
co^^e to his hands, with the name for whom it is to be executed, and the name
against whom, and. and the sums to be levied, and what is don therein.
against every of them to be pronounced.

And that the same R.K. shall and will within 6. days next before the beginning
of every term which shall be during the time of the said Sheriffwick, well and
truly deliver and certify unto the said Sir, I. L. a true Note, or Certificate
in writing, under his hand, of all such Writs of execution whatsoever, as
before the term shall be come to his hands, with the name and surname of the
party and parties, for whom the said execution is to be done, and also the name
and surname against whom the same is to be executed, and the sum and sums of
money thereby severally to be levied, and what is done therein, upon every such
writ or process. In consideration of all which premises, the said I. L. is
contented and pleased, that the said R.K. shall or may, in the name of the said
Sir I.L. assign and set over any bond to be taken in the name of the said
Sheriff, for appearance or discharge of Process to any person or persons, to
the intent thereby to compel the parties to appear, to save and keep harmless
the said Sheriff and Undersheriff of any fine or amerciaments thereby: And
also that the said R.K. may commence or take his action upon any such bond,
Grant, that the Undersheriff may, in the name of the Sheriff, assign over any
bond to be taken, for appearance, etc. to any person, thereby to compel the
parties to appear, and to save harmless the Sheriff, etc. And that the
Undersheriff may commence any action, upon such bonds, to enforce the parties
to appear, to save harmless the Sheriff, and that he will justify all sures
lawfully taken. And that it shall be lawful for him to retein the money
recovered, to his own use, toward his own charges for the not appearance of the
parties, so that he will stand to the order of the Sheriff for the overplus.


for the enforcing the said parties therein bound, to bring forth the party or
parties, for whose appearance they were become bound, thereby to save himself
harmless of such fine and amerciaments, as shall be imposed or laid upon the
said Sheriff for not bringing forth the said party or parties; all which Suits
being lawfully taken for the causes aforesaid, the said Sir I.L. does Covenant
and promise to avow and justify; And that it shall be lawful to and for the
said R. K. his executors and administrators, and also for the said assigns to
retein to their own use, their said sum or sums so to be recovered by reason of
the said Bonds, toward their charges and losses, by reason of the not
appearance of the said parties, so always that they and every of them shall
stand to the orders and directions of the said Sir I. L. his executors or
administrators for the overplus thereof (if any shall be.) And the said R. K.
for himself, his executors and administrators, and every of them, does Covenant
and promise, to and with the said Sir I. L. his heirs, executors and
administrators, to acquit and discharge, or else to save harmless the said Sir
I.L. etc. of and from all and all manner of costs and damages, Covenant, to
save harmless the Sheriff from all costs and damages which may be recovered
against him upon any such suit.
which may in any wise be awarded, adjudged, decreed, or recovered against him
or them, by reason of any such Suit. Finally, the said R. K. for himself, his
heirs, etc. and every of them, does Covenant, promise and grant, to and with
the said Sir I. L. his heirs, etc. and every of them, by these presents, that
he the said R. K. his executors, etc. shall and will, on this side the Feast
day of the Purif. etc. which shall be in the year, Covenant, by the
undersheriff, to pay before such day, all sums due to, etc. wherewith the
sheriff is chargable, by reason of his office, etc. and thereupon within 3
months next after, procure a quietus est in full discharge of his said Office
and account.
etc. well and truly discharge and pay, unto, etc. his heirs and successors,
all such sum and sums of money, Duties, and Demands, as shall be due unto, etc.
his heirs or successors, wherewith the said Sir I. L. shall be charged, or
chargeable as Sheriff, or by reason of the said Office of Sheriffwick of the
said Counties of S. and S. or either of them, and thereupon, within 3 months
next ensuing shall procure unto the said Sir I. L. his heirs, etc. a sufficient
discharge and quietus est, in full discharge of his said Office and Account.
Provided always, that if the said R.K. his Deputy or Deputies, Attorney or
Attorneys, Clerk or Bailiffs, or any of them, at any time during the said
Office, shall commit, do, or suffer to be done any manner of act or acts,
thing or things whatsoever, or shall omit or leave undone, any act or acts,
thing or things whatsoever, belonging to the said Office of Sheriff of the said
County of S. or by color of the said Office, by resaon whereof, the said Sir
I. L. his executors, administrators or assigns, Proviso, that if the
undersheriff, or his deputy, etc. shall do, or leave undone any thing
belonging to the office, whereby to charge the Sheriff above the sum of, etc.
That then it shall be lawful for the Sheriff to grant the office to another.
or his or their goods or chattels, lands, tenements, and hereditaments, or any
of them, may in any wise be charged, or chargable above the sum of, etc. That
then, and from thenceforth, it shall be lawful to and for the said Sir I.L. to
grant, assign, and depute the execution of the said Office of the
Undersheriff, for the residue of the said time then to come, to any person or
persons; And that then and from thenceforth it shall be lawful to and for all
such Assignee and Deputy, to have and take all the Fees and commodities,
profits and advantages, from thenceforth to the said Office belonging, or in
any wise appertaining, this Indenture or any thing therein contained, or any
other matter or cause concerning the assignment or deputation of the said
under-Sheriffwick, in any wise notwithstanding. And the said Sir I. L. for him,
his heirs, etc. does covenant and grant, to and with the said R. K. his heirs,
etc. by these presents, That he the said Sir I. L. his heirs etc. shall or will
deliver, Covenant, by the Sheriff to deliver cancelled to the undersheriff,
all security given by him for the execution of his office; or for the saving
harmless of the Sheriff within three months, after he shall have procured a
quietus est.
all such bonds and obligations wherein any person or persons shall be, or
stand bound, for or in the behalf of the said R. K. to the said Sir I. L. for,
or in respect of the execution of the said Office of under Sheriffwick, or for
the saving harmless of the said Sir I. L. concerning the said Office of High
Sheriff, within three months next after the said R. K. his heirs, etc. shall
procure or deliver to the said Sir I. L. his heirs, etc. a quietus est. out of
the Court of Exchequer for his discharge of his said Office, and the Bond of
the said R.K. to remain for the saving harmless of the said Sir I. L. his
heirs, executors and administrators, of amerciaments, and other impositions
touching the said Office; And whereas by an agreement made between the said
R.K. and one I. M. Gent. whom the said Sir I.L. has appointed Undersheriff
for the County of S. it is acknowledged and affirmed by the said R. K. before
the sealing of these Indentures, An agreement between the undersheriff and one
I. M. by which the undersheriff does acknowledge that he is to pass the whole
account, etc. and to get a discharge for the same, and for that pur^^se the
Sheriff has security, nevertheless, for the better security, the Sheriff does
by these presenss bind the said I. M. etc.
that the said R. K. his executors, administrators, or assigns, is to pass the
whole account of the said Sir I. L. and to execute, levy, gather up, extend,
bring in, and pay all such Seizures, Extents, Process, Chequer-silver, Duties
and Demands, Charges, Sum and Sums of money whatsoever, howsoever, or
wheresoever, as the said Sir I. L. his heirs, executors, or administrators,
shall be in any Court or Courts, place or places, any way charged or chargable
unto, or withal, as Sheriff of the said Counties of S. and S. or of either of
them, at, and according to the place and places, time and times, limited in
these Indentures for the said R.K. to do and perform, and thereupon shall also
accordingly within six months next ensuing the time within limited, procure
unto the said Sir I. L. his heirs or assigns, a sufficient discharge and
quietus est, in full discharge of the said Office and Account; And the said Sir
I.L. has to that end also security of 300 l. from the said R. K. and his
Sureties, for the performance of the like Covenant amongst other Covenants in
the Indenture specified, which are made between the said Sir I. L. and the said
R. K. and yet notwithstanding the said Sir I. L. for his better security does
by these presents bind and tie the said I. M. his executors, administrators, or
assigns, to the doing and performing of the same. Also the said Sir J. L. is
well pleased and contented, and for himself, his Executors and administrators,
does covenant, promise and grant, Covenant by the Sheriff, nor to charge the
said I. M. etc. if he may be re^leved and saved harmless by the under Sheriff
and his sureties.
to and with the said J.M. his executors, and administrators, and every of
them, that if the said Sir I. L. his heirs, executors, administrators, and
assigns shall or may be releeved, saved harmless, or indempnified for, and
concerning the before recited covenants and agreements, by the said R. K. his
executors, and assigns and his sureties, that then he the said Sir I. L. his
executors, administrators or assigns, shall or will not take any benefit or
advantage of the said Covenants and agreements, against the said I. M. his
heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, or any his sureties, or any of
them, In Witness whereof etc.

A Release of a Right to Land.
KNow all men by these presents, That I W. H. of etc. Yeoman, for diverse good
cause etc. and that S. H. of etc. Son I. H. sat of etc. aforesaid, in the said
County deceased, has accepted of the Lands and tenements hereafter mentioned,
Given and bequeathed unto the said S. H. by W.H. Uncle of the said S. by the
last will and testament of the said W. according to a proviso and condition in
the said will expressed, as in and by the said Will bearing date, etc. does
more plainly and at large appear, Have remised, released, and for ever quite
claimed, and do by these presents, for me my heirs, executors, administrators
and assigns, remise, release, and for ever quite claim unto the said S. H. his
heirs and assigns, in his full and peaceable possession and seizin, all and all
manner of right, title, interest and demand whatsoever, which I the said W. H.
my heirs, executors, or assigns, shall have, or may have, challenge or demand,
of, in, or to, (reciting the particulars) with the appurtenances, scit. etc.
late the lands of the said W.H. deceased, so that I the said W. H. my heirs,
executors or assigns shall not, nor will not, at any time hereafter make any
claim challenge or demand, of, in, or to the said premises, with the
appurtenances, or of, in, or to any part or parcel thereof, But shall and will
from henceforth, be thereof, and therein utterly excluded by these presents, In
witness whereof, etc.

A Release of Legacies.
KNow etc. That I S. H. of etc. Son of I. H. late of T. aforesaid, deceased,
for diverse etc and for that I am satisfied of all such Legacies, Accounts, and
all such other duties and demands, due unto me by the last will and testament
of the said I.H. my Father, as also by W. H. my Uncle, late of T. aforesaid,
deceased, have remised, released, and quite claimed, and do by these presents,
for me, my heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, release, and for ever
quite claim unto W. H. of T. Yeoman, executor of the last will and testament of
the said W. H. deceased, his heirs, executors and assigns, all and all manner
of Legacies, accounts, etc.

An Indenture of the Commissioners, for the assessing and levying of the
Subsidy, whereby they make one high Collector of many Hundreds.
THis Indenture etc. Witnesses, That Sir E. H. and Sir W. R. Knights and
Baronets, and E. H. Sergeant at Law, Commissioners amongst others in the County
of K. assigned by virtue of a Commission to them and others directed, for the
assessing and levying of the two first subsidies of the five entire subsidies
granted to, etc. in the last Session of Parliament holden at Westminster in the
year, etc. and the subsidies being by the said Act assigned to be paid into the
receipt of the Exchequer at or before the tenth day of July last, and whereas
the Commission for the taxation of the said subsidies came not to the hands of
the said Commissioners, until after the 10th. day of July by reason whereof
there could be no assessement made before that time, so that the said
Collectors could not collect or gather any moneys before the said time. Have in
the day and year of the date hereof, by virtue and authority of the said
Commission, assigned and deputed W.R. of etc. in the said County, Gent. high
Collector of the hundred of etc. with the Township, of N. so that the said W.
R. shall receive and levy of the subcollectors, here under written, the whole
sums of of their said collection, and pay all the said sums except 6 d. of
every pound to be deducted according to the tenor of the said Act for the fees
of Commissioners and Collectors, to the use of etc. in the Receipt of the
Exchequer aforesaid, within one month next after he has received and gathered
the same. In, Witness whereof the Commissioners aforesaid to these presents
interchangeably have put their Seals, the day and year first above written.
1628.

An Indenture to certain in trust, to uses herein mentioned.
THis Indenture made etc. Between A. R. of M. in the County of K. Gent. and E.
his wife, and I. S. of N. in the County of Middlesex Gent. of the one part, and
E.H. Sergeant at Law, I. H. of H. in the said County of M. Esquire etc. on the
other part; witnesses, that whereas the said A. R. and I. by their Indenture
of bargain and sale, bearing date, etc. did grant, bargain and sell unto the
said E. H. I. H. etc. and their heirs, all that capital Message or Tenement,
etc. (recite all the parcels) as in and by the said Indenture it does and may
more plainly and at large appear; Now this Indenture Witnesses, that the true
intent and meaning of the said assurance and conveyance of the said lands, and
premises in the said Indenture mentioned unto them the said E. H. I. H. etc.
and their heirs to be made, was, and is upon such trust and confidence as
hereafter in these presents is declared, limited, and appointed, and not
otherwise; That is to say, whereas it is intended and meet that the said E. R.
wife of the said A. (in respect she the said E. R. wife of the said A. has at
the request of the said A. and for his benefit sold and past away all her own
lands and inheritance) should have a competency of present maintenance, and
also the inheritance of all and singular the said premises in the said
Indenture mentioned, if she fortune to survive the said A. Therefore the trust
and confidence in them the said E. H. I. H. etc. and their heirs reposed, for,
and concerning the said piece or parcel of land, etc. is, that they the said E.
H. I. H. etc. and their heirs shall permit and suffer the said A. and E. during
their ^o^nt lives, to take and receive the Rents, issues and profits of the
said piece or parcel of land to their own use and benefit; and if she the said
E. shall fortune to survive him the said A. That then she the said E. shall
have and enjoy the said piece or parcel of land, with the appurtenances, unto
her and her Heirs for ever, And if it shall fortune the said A. to survive the
said E. then the said A. to have and enjoy to him and his heirs for ever; and
the trust and confidence in the said E. H. I. H. etc. and their heirs, for and
concerning the said capital Messunge etc. and all the residue of the said
lands, tenements and hereditaments in the said indenture mentioned, with all
and every their appurtenances, is and by these presents is declared to be, That
they the said E. H. I. H. etc. their heirs and assigns, shall permit and suffer
the said E. wife of the said A. to receive and take to her own use, and behoof,
the issues, rents, and profits of the said capital message, and all and
singular the said premises last recited, with every their appurtenances, for
and during the term of her natural life, and if she the said E. shall fortune
to survive and overlive the said A. that then she the said E. shall have and
enjoy the said last recited premises with the appurtenances, to her, and her
heirs for ever, And if it shall fortune the said A. to survive the said E. Then
the said A. to have and enjoy the same, to him, and his heirs for ever.

In Witness etc.

A Grant of a Bayliwick of levying of moneys, and power to make Deputies for
the doing of the same.
TO all Christian persons to whom this present writing shall some, G. of, etc.
sends greeting, Know ye, that I the said G. for diverse good causes and
considerations me hereunto especially moving, have authorized, constituted,
nominated, and appointed, and by these presents do authorize, constitute,
nominate and appoint, my true and well beloved Edward Henden, Sergeant at the
Law, my Bailiff, of all singular my Liberties, within the County of York, to
take, receive, collect and gather all such Issues, Fines, Amerciaments, and
Collections, sum and sums of money, as shall at any time arise, grow, or accrue
unto me the said G. within all or any of the said Liberties, within the said
County of York; Giving also by these presents full power and authority to the
said Edward Henden, to substitute, make, appoint, or nominate any sufficient
Deputy or Depaties, for the receiving, collecting, or levying of any the said
Fines, Issues, Amerciaments, sum or sums of money, or for the due execution of
the same, in as large and ample manner, as if he the said Edward Henden were
present in person for the acting or doing thereof: Ratifying and establishing
by these presents, all and all manner of act and acts, thing and things
whatsoever, the said E.H. his Deputy on Deputies, or any of them, shall do
herein. In witness whereof, I have hereunto put my Hand and Seal, dated at
Lambeth, the 17 day of May, in the 7 year of, etc.

An Indenture declaring the use of a Fine, before levied.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between Edward Henden Sergeant at Law of the one
part, and Sir Francis Harvy Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas, I. H. of H. in the County of Middlesex, Esquire, and E. his Wife,
on the other part, Witnesses, That whereas the faid Edward Henden has
heretofore in the term of Saint Hillary last past, before the date of these
presents, levied one fine in due form of Law, unto the said Sir F. H. I. H. and
E. of all that the Manor of W. with their appurtenances (reciting the other
Lands, if any were.) The which said Fine was levied by such names, number of
acres, and other particulars in the said Fine contained; as by the said Fine,
reference being thereunto had, does and may more plainly appear.

Now this Indenture witnesses, that the use and uses, intent and purpose of
the said Fine is, and is by these presents by the said E. H. declared,
limited, and appointed to be to the use and uses, intents and purposes,
hereafter in these presents limited and appointed, and to no other use or
uses, intent and purposes whatsoever; That is to say, all and singular the said
Manors, Lands and Tenements, with all and every of their apurtenances in the
said. Fine comprised, to the use and behoof of, etc. (and so declare the uses,
as they are limited and expressed.) And the true intent and meaning of the
said Fine further is and by these presents is declared to be to the intent and
purpose that he the said I. H. brother of the said E. party to these presents,
and Susan his Wife, shall and may have, and perceive, for and during the term
of their natural life's, and the longer liver of them, one Annual Rent of the
sum of, etc. one hundred pounds of lawful money, to be issuing out of the said
premises yearly at the Four usual Feasts and Terms of the year, and to begin
at the first of the said Feasts, which shall be next after the decease of the
said E. H. party to these presents; And is the said rent, or any part thereof
be behind, that then they the said I. and S. shall distrain in the said
premises, or any part thereof, as for a rentcharge. And also they the said I.
H. and S. shall have and enjoy one Message, with all the lands of inheritance
therewith used, situate in B. in the said County of K. wherein Doctor K. does
dwell, and was late in the occupation of N. I. for and during their natural
lives, and the longer liver of them. [Here follows a Proviso to revoke the
uses before limited.] In witness whereof, sampc.

A particular Release of a Viccaridge; and all claim thereunto, together with
a general Release of all actions and su^es whatsoever.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, I S. of
London, Doctor in Divinity, sends greeting, in our Lord God everlasting. Know
ye that I the said I S. have remised, released, and forever quite claimed, and
do by these presents for me, my heirs; executors, and assigns, remise
release, and quite claim unto H G. of the Parish of St James Clarkenwell in
the county of Middlesex Clerk, all my right, title, claim, interest, and
demand whatsoever, which I the said I S. have, may, might or ought to have, or
shall have, of, in, or to, the Rectory and Viccaridge of St James Clerken well
in the County of M. or either of them, or of, in, or to, the Parsonage or
Viccaridge of St I C. aforesaid, which all, and all manner of Tithes, and other
their appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Rectory and Viccaridge, or either
of them, in any wise appertaining, and also all actions, suits, debts, duties,
and demands, for any cause, matter or thing whatsoever, from the beginning of
the world, until the day of the date hereof: So as I, the said I S. and my
heirs, and all person and persons, claiming by, from, or under me, shall not,
neither may have, challenge or claim to have any right, title, interest, or
demand, in or to the said Rectory and Viccaridge, or other the premises, with
the appurtenances or either of them, but from the same, and every part and
parcel thereof, and from all actions, suits, and demands whatsoever, as
aforesaid, shall be clearly and absolutely excuded, and debarred by these
presents: In witness whereof, I the said I S. have unto this my present
writing, set my hand and seal dated the first day of November, in the year of
our Lord God, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to receive money upon a Bond.
TO all people to whom this present writing shall come, R N. of B. in the
County of K. Yeoman, and Anne his wife send greeting in our Lord God
everlasting. Whereas V W. of the City of Chester Alderman, by his Obligation
bearing date the 26 day of November 1650, is and stands bound to the said
Anne, by the name of Anne Hamblet of Hackney in the County of Middlesex
Spinster in the sum of 18 l. of lawful money of England, with condition to pay
nine pounds of like money in Watlingstreet in London, on the second day of
February next coming after the date of the said Obligation, as by the said
Obligation and Condition may more at large appear: Know ye that we the said R
N. and A my wife, for diverse good considerations us hereunto moving, have made,
ordained, and in our stead and place put and constituted, and by these presents
do make, ordeine, and in our stead and place put and constitute our well
beloved friend I C. of L. in the County of S. Gent. to be our true and lawful
Attorney, Deputy or Assignee, in our name, and to our use to ask demand, levy
sue for recover and receive by way of composition or otherwise howsoever, of
the said V W. his executors administrators or assigns, the said sum of nine
pounds, in the said condition of the said Obligation mentioned, and all other
sum and sums of money, benefit and advantage by reason or means of the said
Bond to be had, obreined, or gotten, and we give, and by these presents grant
unto our said Attorney, all our full power and authority, in and about the
premises, the said V W. his executors administrators and goods, and every or
any of them, if need shall be, to sue, arrest, attach, seize, sequester
implead, condemn, in prison to put, and out of prison to deliver, and to appear
before all manner of Judges, Justices, and Ministers of the Law, and to
compound, conclude, agree, recover and receive, and after Recovery, receipt, or
upon every composition or other agreement to be made, acquittances or other
discharges in our names to make, seal, and deliver, as our Deeds, and one
Attorney or more, under him to make, substitute or revoke, and generally to
do, execute, perform, and finish all and every other lawful act and acts,
things and things whatsoever, which in or about the said premises, or any part
thereof, shall be needful, necessary, or convenient, as fully and effectually
as we our selves might or could do personally, covenanting and granting by
these presents to hold, ratify and allow for good, firm and effectual all and
whatsoever our said Attorney shall lawfully do, or cause or procure to be done,
in, about or concerning the said premises, or any part thereof, by virtue of
these presents. In witness whereof, We have hereunto set our hands and Seals,
dated the 23 day of May, in the year of our Lord God, 1650.

An Indorsment of livery, and seisin by Attorney.
QUiet and peaceable possession, livery, and seisin of the Message lands and
tenements, with the appurtenances, within mentioned, was had and delivered by
the within named T B. Attorney unto the within named W I. unto the within named
H R. and his heirs, the 12 day of April, Anno Dom. 1634. according to the
purport and effect of these presents, in the presence of, etc.

The Attornement of the Lessee of the Lands conveyed by the Feoffment, upon
livery and seisin.
MEmorandum That I M. Lessee of the within mentioned premises, do consent unto
the livery and seisin above mentioned, And do Attorn unto the within named H R.
according unto the purport of this Indenture, in the presence of, etc.

An Indenture to try a title, upon an ejectment.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between Sir E S. of L in the County of Surry Knight,
of the one part, and I H. of C. in the County of H. Yeoman, on the other part,
Witnesses, that the said Sir E S. for diverse good causes and considerations
him thereunto unto especially moving, has demised, granted and to farm letten,
And by these presents does premise grant, and to farm let, unto the said I H.
his executors, and assigns, One message and two acres of land, with all and
singular the appurtenances, s^ituate, lying and being in the parish of C. in
the said County of H. To have and to hold the said message and premises, with
their appurtenances, unto the said I H his executors, administrators, and
assigns, from the Feast of the Anunciation of our blessed Lady Saint Mary the
Virgin, last past, before the date hereof, unto the full end and term of three
years from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, yielding
and paying therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said Sir E S. his
executors, administrators, and assigns, one Peppercorne, if the same be
lawfully demanded.

Provided always that if the said Sir E S. his executors, administrators, or
assigns, or any of them shall be minded at any time, Proviso to determine the
Lease, upon payment of 12 pence.
during the said term, to determine this present Lease, and f^r that intert
shall pay unto the said I H. his executors, admini^trators, or assigns, the
sum of 12 d. of lawful English money, that then and immediately after such
payment of the sum of 12 d. as is aforesaid, this present Indenture and Lease,
and all and every clause, article, and agreement therein contained, shall be
utterly void, frustrate, and of none effect to all intents and purposes
whatsoever, In Witness whereof, etc.

Letters Patents for making an Alien to be a free Denizen.
TO all or to whom these presents shall come greeting know ye that we of our
special grace and certain knowledge, mere motion have granted, and by these
presents do grant unto Peter le Pipre, of the Town of Armentere in Flanders, or
by what other name he be called or known, that he during his life, be held as a
lawful subject of us and our heirs and sucessors in all things; and so shall
be reputed, called, had, and governed as our lawful Liege within our Kingdom
of England, proceeding, and not otherwise, nor in any other manner. And also
that he shall have, exercise, use, and enjoy, all and all manner of accounts,
suits, and complaints of what kind soever, in every one of our Courts and
Jurisdictions soever, and in the same, plead and be impleaded to answer, and be
answered, to defend, and be defended in all things, and by all things, as any
of our faithful subjects born in our Kingdom of England. And moreover, that
the said Petre may purchase, receive, take, have, hold, buy, and answer lands,
tenements, reversions, and such and other hereditaments whatsoever, within our
said Kingdom of England, and Dominions thereof; and also to use and enjoy, and
give them sell to alien, or bequeath them to any person or persons; whatsoever,
if he please at his own will and pleasure, lawfully, and unpunishable, and
that he shall and may enjoy, have and retain Taverns, Shops, or Houses
whatsoever, for the term of one year or more years, so fully, freely,
quietly, wholly and peaceably as any of our liege people, within oursaid
Kingdom of England proceeding, and that it shall be lawful for any of our
subjects, to let unto the said Petre, and his assigns whatsoever, Tavernes,
Shops, and Houses whatsoever, for the term of one or more years, without any
forfeiture or punishment whatsoever, to be incurred for that occasion: And also
that he the said Petre, all and all manner of liberties, franchises, and
privileges of this Kingdom lawfully, quietly, and peaceably, shall have, and
possess, use and enjoy as our liege people, within our said Kingdom of
England born, without disturbance, hindrance, molestation, vexation, cavil or
grievance of us or our heirs, or of any other whatsoever, any Statute, Act,
Ordinance, or provision to the contrary hereof, before enacted, made, ordained,
or provision, or any other thing, cause, or matter, whatsoever, in anything
notwithstanding.

Provided always, that the said Petre shall unto us Lot and Scot^ as other our
liege people do make and contribute, shall pay and contribute, what is just,
and shall pay to us, our heirs and successors Customs and Subsidies, for his
goods and Merchandises, as Aliens do pay, and have accustomed to pay. Provided
always also, that the said Petre, to all and singular Ordinances, Acts,
Statutes, and Proclamations of this our Kingdom, as well enacted as hereafter
to be enacted, shall keep and be obedient according to the form of the
Statute, in that case made and provided; In witness whereof we have caused
these our Letters to be made Patents etc.

A Release of Errors, upon a Judgment, in Debt, In the COMMON PLEAS.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I Sir R H. Knight, Sergeant
at Law, have remised, released, and forever quite claimed, and do by the
presents, for me, my heirs, executors, and administrators, remise, release,
and for ever quite claim, unto E H. Sergeant at the Law, his heirs, executors,
and administrators, all and all manner of Error and Errors, and also all and
all manner of writ or writs, and action or actions of error and errors, which
I the said R H. my heirs, executors, or administrators, now have, or hereafter
may have, by reason of, or upon one judgment now depending and being against
me the said Sir R H. in the Court of Common pleas at Westminster, of two
hundred pounds debt, and 40 s. costs and damages as by the record thereof,
being and remaining of record in the said Court of Common pleas at Westminster,
amongst diverse other things, does, and may more plainly and at large may
appear; In witness whereof I the said Sir R H. to this present writing, my
hand and Seal have put, the 7 day of February, in the year of our L. G. etc.

A Grant of a reversion, with a proviso to determine it, upon payment of Money.
Nota, that this grant for seven days was made on purpose to save a Livery and
seisin, or other conveyance.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between G S. of, etc. of the one part, and A R. of,
etc. on the other part. Whereas the said G S. by his Indenture bearing date the
29 of September last past before the date of these presents, has bargained and
sold unto T D. of, etc. one message or tenement, one Barn with all edifices
and buildings whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement belonging ^or
appertaining, and also six pieces or parcels of fresh and sa^t marish,
containing by estimation 56 acres with the appurtenances more or less
s^ituate, etc. To have and to hold the said Message, etc. and all and singular
the said premises with the appurtenances, unto the said T D. his executors,
administrators and assigns, from the making of the said Indenture for and
during the term and space of 7 days from thence next coming to be complete
and ended, yielding and paying therefore during the said term, one Pepper
corn, as in and by the said Indenture of demise amongst other things does and
may more plainly and at large appear. Now this Indenture witnesses, that the
said G S. for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. to him the said G S. by
the said A R. before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, well and
truly in hand paid: whereof and wherewith the said G S. acknowledges himself
to be fully satisfied and paid, and thereof and of every part and parcel
thereof, by these presents clearly acquitteth and discharges the said A R. his
heirs, executors and administrators, Has given and granted, and by these
presents does give, and grant unto the said A R. his heirs and assigns, the
said one message or tenement (reciting the parcels) and the reversion and
reversions, remainder and remainders of all and singular the said premises with
the appurtenances, To have and to hold, all and singular the said premises,
with all and every their appurtenances unto the said A R. his heirs and
assigns, for and only to the only use and behoof of him the said A R. his
heirs, and assigns, for ever: [Covenant that the Grantor has full power in
his own right to make this grant; And that the premises are and shall so
continue, discharged, or else saved harmless, from all other bargains, sales,
Feoffments, charges forfeitures, etc. And further, that the grantee shall
peacebly enjoy without interruption etc. Proviso to determine the grant upon
the payment of the sum of etc. The usual Covenant, if the money be not paid of
further assurance etc. and to deliver the writings concerning the premises,
within such a time after default in payment,]

NOTA, Upon this Indenture was this indorsement.

Sealed and delivered by the within named G S. unto the within named A R. in
the presence of, etc.

Also the within named T. D. lessee of the premises within mentioned; The form
of an A^tornment indorsed upon the de^d.
after the ensealing and delivery of these presents the said 24th day of
September, in the year of our Lord God, etc. within mentioned did attorn unto
the within named A R. upon the within mentioned grant of the said premises by
the said G S. unto the said A R. made according to the form and effect
thereof, by the payment of six pence, of lawful money of England, in the name
of Attornement, in the presence of etc.

Memorandum, That a Free simple may be thus conveyed, and an absolute estate of
inheritance pass, without either Fine, Feoffment, or bargain and sale, And
this was done by the advice of E. Henden, Sergeant at the Law, for M. A R.

Condition of a Bond, for performance of Covenants.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such that if the above bounden G S. his
heirs executors, and assigns, and every of them, do from time to time and at
all times hereafter, well and truly observe, perform, fulfill and keep all and
singular the Covenants, grants, articles, provisoes, and agreements, which on
his and their part and behalf are to be observed, performed, fulfilled and
kept, contained, specified and declared in one pair of Indentures, bearing date
with these presents, made between him the said G S. of the one part, and the
said A R. on the other part, according to the purport, effect, and true meaning
of the said Indenture; That then this present Obligation to be void, or
otherwise to stand, remain, and be in his full force, power, and virtue.

A Warrant to the Bayliffe of a Manor, for summoning of Tenants to hold a
Court Baron.
THese are to will and require you, that forthwith upon the receipt hereof you
give notice and warning to all the Tenants of the said Manor of S B. that they
make their personal appearance, Manor de South Bockland.
at the said Court Baron to be holden at the said Manor on Tuesday the
sixteenth day of April next ensuing, by nine of the Clock in the forenoon of
the same day, then and there to pay their several Rents, and do all such suits
and servises, as their several tenures do require. And that you your self be
then and there present, and there make return of all the Tenants names
belonging to the said Manor, in writing, and also of this warrant. And hereof
fail not at your perils. Dated etc.

To Tho Jennings Bayliffe of the said Manor.

per me T. D. Seen sc.

Give notice likewise to all the tenants of the said Manor, that at the Court
to be holden as abovesaid, they enter their lands and services, lest they be
compelled to hold of some other Lords, and by other services. It is a safe
course both for Lord and Tenants, and it shall be no charge to the Tenants.

The Patent whereby Sergeant Henden was made Baron of the Exchequer.
TO all, etc. Know ye that we of our especial grace, certain knowledge, and
mere motion have given and granted, and by these presents do give and grant
unto our beloved and faithful Edward Henden, Sergeant at Law, the Office of
one of the Barons of our Exchequer, and the said Edward Henden to be one of the
Barons of the Coife in our Exchequer, we do make and ordain by these presents,
to have, hold, and occupy the aforesaid Office unto the said Edward Henden, so
long as he pleases us. And also we give and grant unto the said Edward Henden
for the exercise and execution of the Office aforesaid al and singular wages,
fees, annuities, moneys, freedoms, allowances, commodities profits,
emoluments, liberties, privileges, dignities, enjoyments, authorities,
estimations, pre^eminencies, to the said Office of one of the Barons of our
Exchequer aforesaid due or belonging, or to be due or appertaining, to have,
hold, perceive, use, and enjoy the said wages, fees, regards, moneys freedoms,
allowances, commodities, profits emoluments, and all and singular other the
premises to the said Edward Henden by the hands of our Treasuror and
Chamberlaines, and other our Officers or otherwise, to all intents and
purposes, for in and with the Office of a Baron of the Exchequer aforesaid,
whatsoever belongs, or heretofore due, used and accustomed, etc.

A Warrant, to one of the Receivers of the revenues of the Duchy for payment
of 5 l. every term yearly to Sr Edward Henden Knight, one of the Barons of the
Exchequer.

TO our trusly and welbeloved S E. Esquire our general Receiver of the revenues of
the possessions, parcel of our Duchy of Lanc greeting: We will and require
you forthwith, upon receipt hereof, to pay or cause to be paid unto Sir E H.
Knight, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and one of the Judges assistants of
our Court of Duchy of Lancaster at Westminster, the sum of 5 l. of lawful
money of England (in the name of his fee) for every term yearly, during the
time that he shall continue a Judge assistant to the said Court of Duchy, and
not to fail hereof; and for so doing, these Letters shall be unto you the said
Receiver, your heirs, executors, and administrators, a sufficient warrant and
discharge against, etc. for payment thereof from time to time respectively, as
the case shall require, and also unto the Auditor and Auditors of the said
Duchy, to make unto you due allowance thereof, upon your next account to be
made and taken before him or them, in that behalf. Given at Westminster under
the Seal of the said Duchy, the one and twentieth day of February, in the
year of our Lord God, etc.

A Condition to save a surety harmless.
THE Condition of this present Obligation is such, That whereas the above
bounden A B. together with the above named T D. and one I F. Citizen and Mercer
of London, by their Obligation of the date hereof stand jointly and severally
bound unto I W. of London Widow, in one hundred and fifty pounds of good and
lawful money of England; for payment of one hundred and four pounds of like
money, on the twentieth day of June next coming, at the now dwelling house of
R A. S^r. situate on Corne-hill London, as by the same Obligation and
Condition may appear. In which Obligation the said T D. is so become bound, at
the request, and for the only debt of the said A B. If therefore the said A B.
his executors, administrators or assigns, do in discharge of the said recited
Obligation, truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said I W. his executors,
administrators or assigns, that the said sum of one hundred and four pounds,
on the day, and at the place of payment aforesaid; that then, etc. Or else, etc.

ANOTHER.
THe Condition of this present Obligation is such that whereas the within named
T D. at the special instance and request, and for the only debt of the within
bounden E G. stands bound with the said E G. unto one K H. of London
Merchant, in the sum of one hundred and sixty pounds of, etc. by Obligation,
bearing date, etc. with condition for the true payment of the sum, etc. at or
upon, etc. next ensuing the date of the said obligation, at the house of, etc.
as by the said recited obligation and Condition, more at large appears; If
therefore the within bounden E G. his heirs, executors, or administrators, or
any of them do well and truly content and pay, or cause to be contented and
paid, unto the said K H. his executors or administrators or assigns, the said
sum, etc. at the time and place limited for the payment thereof, according to
the purport of the said condition of the said recited Obligation, and thereof,
do from time to time, and at all times hereafter, well and sufficiently save
and keep harmless, and indempnified, the said T D. his heirs, executors,
administrators, and assigns, and his, and their Lands, Tenements, goods and
Chattels, against the said K H. his heirs, executors, administrators, and
assigns; That then, etc. Or else, etc.

The Award of Sergeant Henden, made the 28 day of January 1631. Between R A.
and I C of the Parish of B. in com. Kanc.
TO al persons to whom these present wirtings Indented shall come, E H.
Sergeant at Law, sends greeting: whereas R A. of B in the County of K.
Yeoman, and I C. of B. aforesaid Yeoman, have by their several writings
obligatory, bearing date, etc. Anno Dom. etc. bound themselves each to other in
the sum of 500 l. a piece of lawful English money, Conditioned to stand to,
obey, perform, fulfill and keep, the award, arbitriment, ordinance,
determination and judgment of me the said E H. Arbitrator indifferently named,
appointed elected, and chosen, as well on the part and behalf of the said R A.
as on the part and behalf of the said I C. to arbitrate, award, decree, judge,
rule and determine of, for, upon, touching and concerning all and all manner of
actions, and causes of actions, suits, quarrels, variances, discords debates,
duties, accounts trespasses, claims, controversies and demands whatsoever had,
mo^ed, stirred, commenced, or depending between the said parties for any
matter, cause or thing whatsoever, from the beginning of the world, until the
day of the date of the said Obligation, so that the said arbitrament, ordinance
decree, final determination and judgment, of me the said E H. of and upon the
said premises, were made and given up by the said E H. in writing, under his
hand and seal ready to be delivered unto the said parties demanding the same
on this side, and before the 2 day of February, then next ensuing the date of
the said Obligation, as by the said writings obligatory and the conditions
therein specified, reference being thereunto had, does and may more plainly and
at large appear. Now I the said E H. taking upon me the burden of the said
arbitrament, for a final and peaceable end between the said parties, do by
these presents make and publish my order, award, and arbitrament, concerning al
and singular the said premises unto me as aforesaid submitted in manner and
form following.

Imprimis I do award, arbitrate and order, that the said I C. and his assigns,
shall and may hold and enjoy one house, and the lands therewith used and
occupied with their appurtenances, now in the tenure or occupation of him the
said I C. in B. aforesaid, without paying any rent, or other charge for the
same, until the 19 of May next ensuing the date of these presents, he the said
I C. or his assigns: doing no wast upon the same, nor plowing any other land
then now is allowed. And that the said. I C. and his assigns, shall, at or
before the said nineteenth day of May, next ensuing the date hereof, leave and
yield up unto the said R A. his heirs, and assigns, the quiet and peaceable
possession of the said message, lands and all and singular the said premises,
with their appurtenances and clearly depart, and remove off and from the same,
except such part of the said Land, as is now sown with Corn or grain, the
which he the said I C. shall and may keep and enjoy, until the next harvest;
that he may cut and carry away the said Corn and grain, and that then he the
said I C. shall leave and yield up the quiet possession of such part thereof,
unto the said R A. his heirs or assigns, and wholly depart from the same.

Item, I further award, arbitrate, and order, that if the said I C. and his
assigns, shall and do, at or before the said 19 day of May, next ensuing the
date hereof leave and yield up unto the said R A. his heirs or assigns the
quiet and peaceable possession of the said message land, and premises, with
their appurtenances (except as is before excepted) according to this order and
arbitrament, that then the said R A. his heirs, executors, or assigns, shall
well and truly pay, or cause to be paid, unto the said I C. his heirs,
executors, or assigns, at or upon the three and twentieth day of May next
ensuing the date hereof, in the South porch of the said parish Church of B.
aforesaid, the sum of 50 pounds of current money of England.

Item, I also further order and award, that the said I C. his executors or
assigns shall at or upon the said three and twentieth day of May, next ensuing
the date hereof, by his sufficient deed in writing remise and release, unto the
said R A. his heirs, executors, and assigns all manner of actions and causes
of actions, suits, quarrels, variances, discords, debates, debts, accounts,
trespasses, claims, controversies, and demands whatsoever, had, moved, stirred,
commented or depending between him the said I C. and the said R A. for any
matter, cause or thing whatsoever from the beginning of the world until the
second day of October, last past, before the date of this present award. And
the said R A. his executors or assigns, shall at or upon the said 23 of May
next ensuing the date hereof, by his sufficient Deed in writing remise and
release unto the said I C. his heirs, executors, and assigns, all and all
manner of actions and causes of actions, suits quarrels, varian^es, discords,
debates duties, a^co^pts, trespasses, claims, controversies and demands
whatsoever, had, moved, stirred, commen^ed, or depending between him the said R
A. and the said I C. for any matter, cause or thing whatsoever, from the
beginning of the world until the said second day of October last past, before
the date of this present award; In witness whereof, the said E H. to these
present Indentures, his hand and seal has put, dated the 20 day of January in
the year of our Lord God, etc.

Sealed and delivered by the within named E H. the day and year within written
in the presence of

A sale and confirmation of an estate of a Lease of 100 years, to an assignee
of part of the term.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between T P, of B. in the County of K. Clothier, of
the one part, and T P. of M. fuller on the other part, Witnesses, That the
said T P. for and in consideration of the sum of etc. specified and contained
in one Indenture, bearing date the 20 day of September Ann Dom. etc. made
between him the said T P. of the one part, and the said T P. of the other part,
has given, granted, bargained, sold and confirmed, and by these presents, does
fully, clearly, and absolutely, give, grant, bargain, sell, and confirm unto
the said T P. his executors, administrators, and assigns, all and further
estate, right, title, interest, and term of years, which he the said T P. his
executors, administrators or assigns, or any, or every of them, have of, in or
to one piece or parcel of Land arable and pasture, containing by estimation,
etc. situate, lying and being etc. as the meets and bounds thereof on every
side do divide and show forth; And also all estate right, title, interest, and
term of years, which he the said T P. his heirs, executors, administrators,
or assigns, or any of them, have or has, of, in, or to, all these three
pieces or parcels of Land, containing by estimation etc. lying and being, etc.
and the meets and bounds thereof do divide, and show forth all and singular
which said premises were heretofore demised by two several Indentures of Lease
unto I P. Father of the said T P. party to these presents, the one by E D. of
A. in the said County of K. Esquire, bearing date etc. and the other by R S. of
M. alias M. next S. in the said County of K. bearing date, etc. for the term
of one thousand years, as in and by the said several Indentures; reference
being thereunto had, does and may more plainly and at large appear, To have and
to hold, all and singular the said estate, right title, interest, and term of
years yet to come, and unexpired, of him the said T P. his executors,
administrators, and assigns, of, in, or to the said premises, with their and
every of their appurtenances, or of, in, or to every part and parcel thereof,
unto the said T P. his executors, administrators, and assigns, for, during,
and until the residue of the said term of one thousand years in the said
recited Indenture specified and contained, be fully complete and ended; In
witness, etc.

A grant by the Stewards of liberties, to certain persons, to be their
Bayliffes, and to collect all issues, Fines, and amerciaments, etc.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall, come, T D. of
Graies Inn, in the County of Mid. Gentleman, and W B. of H. in the County of
York Gent. sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas George etc. by
his Indenture bearing date etc. and signed by him the said I, and under his
seal has granted the Stewardship of all and singular his liberties within the
County of York together with all and singular the appurtenances thereto
belonging, unto the said T D. and W B. for the term of their natural lives,
and the longer liver of them, as in and by the said Indenture remaining of
Record in the Court of Exchequer amongst other things it does and may appear.
Now Know ye that we the said T D. and W B. for diverse good causes and
considerations us thereunto especially moving, have authorized nominated,
deputed, constituted, and appointed, and do by these presents authorize,
nominate, constitute, appoint our well beloved W A. and W C. within the said
County of York my Bailiffes, of all and singular the said Liberties of the said
G. etc. within the said County, and to execute the Office of Bailiffes, within
the said Liberties, and to receive, collect, and gather all and every such
issues. Fines, amer^iaments, sum and sums of money, as shall at any time,
arise, grow due, or accrue unto the said G. etc. or unto us the said T D. or W
B. within all or any of the said Liberties, within the said County of York, the
said W A. and WC. giving unto the said G. a just account of all such sum or
sums of money, which they or either of them shall so receive within three
months after they have received the same and to do and perform all and every
such other thing and things whatsoever, belonging and appertaining to the
Office of Bailiffs, within the said liberties, ratifying and establishing by
these presents, all and all manner of lawful and reasonable act and acts thing
and things whatsoever, as they the said W A. and WC. shall do in the premises
within the said Liberty as aforesaid, or for the due execution of the same, in
as large and ample manner, as if we the said T D. W B. were present in our
persons for the acting or doing thereof. In witness whereof we the said T D.
and W B. have hereunto put our hands and seals, the 18 day of July, in the
year of our Lord God, etc.

A bargain and sale to the, etc. of a Prebend, etc.

THis Indenture made the, etc. Between, etc. on the one party, and Sir I M.
Knight, on the other party, Witnesses, That the said Sir I M. Knight, for
certain causes and considerations him especially moving has bargained, sold,
given, granted, and assured, and by these presents does fully and clearly
bargain sell give and grant unto, etc. all that his Prebend of T. in the
County of S. with all and singular his rights, members and appurtenances, And
also the advowson gift, presentation, collation, and right of patronage of the
same prebend, which said prebend the said Sir I M. lately had to him and his
heirs for ever of the gift and grant of, etc. as by his Letters Patents
thereof made under the Great seal of England, bearing date, etc. to the said
Sir I M. amongst other things more plainly appears. And also all and singular
his Lordships, Manors, Messuages, Houses, Buildings, Lands, Tenements,
Meadows, Leases, Pastures, Rents, Reversions, Services, Woods, Underwoods,
Personages, Chapels, Advowsons, Glebelands, Tithes, Oblations, Obventions,
Pensions, Portions, Fruits, Profits, Commodities, Emoluments, and Hereditaments
whatsoever, with their Appurtenances whatsoever, A bargain and sale of the
rents, reserved upon any Leases or grants, of the premises, together with the
deeds and evidences
as well spiritual as temporal, of what kind or nature sover they be, or by
whatsoever names they be called or known, set lying and being, coming, growing
or renewing in the Towns, Fields, Parishes, or Hamblets of T and R. in the said
County of S. and in I. in the County of W. and elsewhere in the said Counties,
or in either of them, or within the Realm of England, in any manner of wise
belonging or appertaining. And further the said Sir I M. by these presents
bargaineth and sells unto our said Sovereign Lady, all the rents. and the
yearly profits whatsoever reserved upon all Leases or grants made of the
premises, or of any part or parcel thereof, together with all and al manner of
Letters Pattents, Deeds, Evidences, Charters, Court-Rols, Terrets, Es^ripts,
Covenant by the bargainer, to deliver the evidences which he has, or may have,
without suit in law, into the Exchequer, or other place assigned by the
Officers of that Court, before such a day.
Indentures, Leases, Writings, and minuments concerning only the said Prebend
Lordship, Manor, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and other the premises, or only
any part or parcel thereof, and as many of the same Letters Patents,
Evidences, Deeds, Charters, Court-Rols Rentals, Terrers, Es^ripts, Indentures,
Leases, Writings and minuments as now be in the hands or custody of the said
Sir I M. or of any other person or persons to his use, and which he may
conveniently get or come by, without suit in Law for the same Sir I M.
Covenanteth and grants by these presents to deliver or cause to be delivered
into the Court of Exchequer, or to such other place or places, as by the
Treasurer and Barons of Officers of the said Court of Exchequer, or any of
them, shall be appointed, to the use of, etc. at or before the Feast of Easter
next coming after the date of these presents; And also all and singular other
evidences, writings, and minuments concerning only the premises, or only any
part or parcel thereof, which at any time after the said Feast shall chance to
come to the hands or possession of the said Sir I M. or his heirs, the same Sir
I M. covenanteth and grants, to and with, etc. by these presents, to deliver
or cause to be delivered into the said Exchequer, or into such other place as
shall be appointed in form aforesaid, to the use of, etc. from time to time as
the same shall chance to come to the hands or possession of the same Sir I M.
or of his heirs; To have and to hold the said Prebend, The usual Covenant
that the bargainer is true owner in fee simple, and had full power to sell the
premises.
Lordship, Manor, and all and singular the said messuages, lands, tenements,
Meadows pastures Leases, rents, reversions, services, advowsons, and other the
premises, with all and singular their appurtenances, to etc. and assigns for
ever to the only use and behoof of the said etc. and assigns for ever. And
the said Sir I M. Covenanteth and grants, to and with, etc. that the same Sir
I M. is very true owner in fee simple of and in the premises and has full power
and authority to bargain and sell the same unto, etc. inform aforesaid. And
also the said Sir I M. Knight, Covenant, that the lands are of such a value.
covenanteth and grants for him and his heirs, to and with the said, etc. by
these presents, That the same Prebend, Lorship, Manor, lands, tenements, and
other the premises, now be of the yearly value of thirty three pounds, or
thereabouts etc.

A Lease of a Prebend.

THis Indenture made etc. between I S Esquire, of, etc. in the County of Sussex
on the one part, and F E. Esquire on the other part, Witnesses, that the said
I S. has demised, granted, and to form set and let and by these presents
demiseth grants, and to farm sets and lets unto the said F E his
heirs, executors and assigns all that his prebend or s^ite of Colivorth
aforesaid, with all rents, services lands leases, and pastures, to the said
prebend, s^ite, or farm belonging or appertaining, and all fines, herriots,
wards, marriages, reliefes, mu^tures, estates, and tithes perquisites of Courts
amer^iaments, escheates, Courts, Court-Barons, emoluments waters pischiaries
fishings, and all other Royalties, commodities, profits, advantages; liberties,
freedoms, and easements whatsoever they be now or at any time hereafter, to
the said prebend, s^ite or Farm of C. aforesaid belonging, or in any wise
appertaining, To have and to hold the said Prebend, site or farm of C.
aforesaid, with all and singular their appurtenances thereunto belonging, as is
before particularly and severally rehearsed and declared, to the said F E. his
heirs, executors, and assigns from the Feast of the Anun^iation of our Lady,
next coming after the date hereof, to the end and term of fourscore years,
from thence next and immediately following, and fully to be complete and ended
yielding and paying therefore yearly unto the said I S. and to his successors
during the term aforesaid, 18 l. of lawful money of England, at two times in
the yeare^ that is to say, at the Feast of the anunciation of our Lad, and St
Michaell the Ar^hangell, by even portions.

And if it fortune the said yearly rent of 18 l. or any part or parcel
thereof, Covenant that it shall be lawful for lesser to enter into the premises
and distraine for the rent behind, and the distress to deteine, till he be
satisfied of the rent.
to be behind and unpaid, to the said I S. or his successors, at any time or
times during the term aforesaid, by the space of 40 days, next after either of
the said Feasts of payment, at which it ought to be paid, the same being
lawfully asked, required, and demanded that then it shall be lawful for the
said I S. and his successors, during the term aforesaid, into the said
prebend, site or farm of C. aforesaid, and into every part and member of the
same to enter and distraine, and the distress so there taken, by the said I S.
or his successors, during the teme aforesaid, to lead, carry, and drive away,
and then to withhold, until the said yearly rent of 18 l. with the arrearages
of the same so behind, if any be, be to the said I S. and his successors during
the term aforesaid, fully satisfied, Proviso, that the Lessor shall keep the
premises necessarily repaired, at his own cost during the term.
contented and paid.

Provided always, that the said I S. and his successors, during the term
aforesaid, shall sustein, uphold, maintain and keep the said Prebend, s^ire, or
farm, and all other edifices, and buildings thereunto belonging, in all manner
of necessary reparations, upon his or their own cost and charges, so often as it
be needful, during the term aforesaid; In witness whereof, etc.

This Lease is confirmed both by, etc. and his, etc.

A Condition of an Obligation, to make a Release.

THe Condition of this Obligation is such, that whereas the above bounden L P.
and F. his wife, have by their Indenture of covenant bearing date with these
presents, together with E O. widow, and G C. Yeoman, and E his wife, A O. S O.
and M O. covenanted and agreed to levy and acknowledge unto the above named A
W. and his heirs, or to such person or persons as the said A W. his executors
or assigns shall nominate or appoint, one fine in due form of law of and
concerning one capital message etc. with their appurtenances, containing by
estimation, etc. lying, etc. and now in the possession of the said E O. or her
assigns, unto the only use and behoof of the said A W. his heirs, and
assigns, and of 7 other messuages, etc. with the appurtenances, lying, etc. to
the use and behoof of the said E O. and her assigns, for and during her
natural life, and after her decease then to the only use and behoof of the
said A W. his heirs and assigns, with this proviso, or upon condition therein
contained; that he pay certain sums of money, as by the said Indenture more at
large appears. If therefore the said A W. his heirs and assigns shall and
may for ever hereafter, quietly and peaceably have, hold, occupy, possess, and
enjoy the said capital message, etc. with their appurtenances, now in the
possession of the said E O. or her assigns, of and from all charges, troubles
and encumbrances whatsoever, had made or done by the said L P. and F. his wife,
and the survivor of them, and the heirs and assigns of them shall, at such
times as the said A W. his heirs or assigns shall pay unto them, or any of
them, the sum of money to them limited to be paid, by and according to the tenor
and effect of the proviso in the said Indenture contained, seal and deliver,
one sufficient release or discharge in writing, testifying the receipt of the
said moneys, the said release of discharge being then made and tendered unto
them by the said AW. his heirs, or assigns, and if that ever after the
payment of the said money to the said L P. and F. his wife, and either of them,
And also if he the said L P. and F. his wife, or either of them, their
executors, or assigns, according to the purport and effect of the said
proviso, he the said A W. his heirs, and assigns, shall and may quietly and
peaceably, have hold, occupy, possess, and enjoy the said other seven
messuages, etc. with their appurtenances, discharged. of, and rom all charges
troubles, and encumbrances whatsoever had, made or done by the said L P. and F.
his wife, or the survivor of them, or the heirs or assigns of either of them,
That then etc. Or else, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants upon Marriage with extraordinary Covenants therein
contained.

THis Indenture made etc. between W M. of etc. and E M. of, etc. of the one
part, and E M. of, etc of the other part, Witnesses, that for, Consideration
of a Marriage
and in consideration of a Marriage of late had and solemnized between the said
E M. and E his now Wife, Daughter of the provisoes, Articles, and Agreements,
that passed and were made upon the conclusion of the same Marriage, and for
reducing of the same into Covenants; and also for the more security for
conveying and assuring of a competent Jointure to and for the said E. of the
inheritance of the said W. and E M. to be and remain to the several uses
intents, and purposes hereafter and herein declared; and for di^ers other good,
just, lawful and reasonable causes, respect, purposes, and considerations, the
said parties hereunto especialy moving: It is covenanted granted concluded,
confirmed, condescended, determined and agreed by, and between the said Parties
to these presents for themselves, their heirs, etc. and to the effect and form
following, viz. First, the said W. and E M. for themselves, their heirs, A
Covenant to make Estates.
etc. do covenant, grant, and promise to, and with the said E M. his heirs
etc. by these presents. That the said W. and E M. or either of them and their
heirs, and the heirs of either of them shall and will at all times hereafter,
and from time to time at and upon the reasonable request, costs, and charge in
the Law of the said E M. his heirs, etc. make seal, deliver, knowledge,
perform, perfect and execute, and cause and procure, and suffer to be made,
etc. unto such person and persons as by the said E M. his, etc. thereunto
nominated and appointed all and every such Estate, Fines, Feoffments,
conveyances, acts things, devises, and assurance in the Law as by the said E M.
his heirs, etc. or his or their learned Council shall be devised orrequired
for the assuring, conveying, passing, and sure making of all and singular those
messuages Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, Habend, for uses.
cumpertinentiis, in, etc. To have and to hold the said Messuages etc. unto the
said Person or Persons to be named and appointed as aforesaid, and his or their
heirs or assigns to the several uses intents and purposes, and upon, with
and under the provisoes and limitations hereafter in these presents expressed
and declared, and to none other use, intent, purpose, Covonant to whose use it
shall be.
limitation or meaning (that is to say) It is covenanted, granted,
condescended, concluded and agreed by and between the said parties to these
presents for themselves their heirs etc. and it is their full meaning,
agreement, purpose and intent. That the said Estate, Fines, Feoffments,
conveyance, and assurances for and touching, etc. shall be, and the said person
or persons to be named and appointed as before aid, and his or their heirs or
assigns shall stand and be thereof seized to the use and behoof of, etc. That
they are true owners, and are seized in Fee, etc.
And the said W M. and E M. for them their etc. do Covenant, etc. and either
of them for and by himself his heirs, etc. That they the said W M. and E M.
and either them, or one of them at the making and executing of the said
conveyances and assurances are true, lawful, and perfect Owner of the said
messuages lands tenements and hereditaments, cum pertinent is; and are thereof
lawfully seized in possession of an absolute Estate in Feesimple, Fee-taile, or
the one of them and are thereof seized in possession for term of his life, with
the immediate reversion or remainder thereof over to the other of an estate of
Inheritance, and shall then have full power, right title and authority to pass,
convey, and assure the premises, cum pertinentiis, to the uses, and according
to the effect aforesaid. And free from encumbrances
And that they the said W M. and E M. and either of them their heirs, etc.
shall and will at al times hereafter acquit and discharge, or otherwise, from
time to time upon reasonable notice and request fully and sufficiently save
harmless as well the said messuages, etc. as also such person or persons to whom
any use or estate is before by these presents limited or appointed of, for,
from, touching and concerning all and all manner of bargains, s^les, gifts,
grants, fines, feoffements, estates, entailes recoveries, executions,
limitations, present contingente, and future uses, statutes, recognizances,
judgments, rents, charges, troubles, leases, extents, entrusions, issues
liveries forfeitures exceptions. And that he the said E M. and E. his wife,
That they shall enjoy.
and the said E M. and his heirs, and the said several sons the heirs of
their several bodies lawfully to be begotten, and all and every other their
heir and heirs to whom any use or estate is by these presents before
mentioned, intended, limited, appointed or declared shall and may quietly and
peaceably, have hold, occupy and enjoy the faid premises, cum pertinentiis,
according to the uses and true meaning before declared, and the assurances
hereafter to be made and passed in that behalf without any let, suit,
vexation, hinderance, expulsion, eviction, interruption or trouble of the said
W.M. or his heirs or assigns, or of any other person or persons lawfully
claiming from, by, or under him or them, or by his or their means, assent
commandments, or procurement, (Exceptions) And that the said W. and E M. nor
either of them, That he shall not do any act to make void the Estates, nor to
disable him to sell.
shall not at any time or times hereafter make, do, attempt assent unto,
knowledge, execute, or willingly suffer any manner of estate, conveyance,
assurance, act, thing, matter or device whatsoever, whereby, or by reason,
whereof the uses and estates before declared, or any of them for and touching
the said Lands and Tenements, or any part or parcel thereof, shall and may be
discontinued cut off, debarred, overthrown or made void, or whereby the said E.
or any of the said sons or any heir of any of their bodies lawfully begotten,
or the heir of the body of the said E M. upon the body of the said E. lawfully
to be begotten, or the said E M. or his heirs, shall or may by any means be
defeated, defrauded, excluded or disinherited of the premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, or of any use or estate hereby to him or any of them
appointed, limited or intended to be contained or mentioned in any of the said
conveyances, or assurances, contrary to the true meaning of these presents, or
whereby or by reason whereof the said W M. and E M. or any of them shall or may
in any sort or degree be disabled perfectly, sufficiently and surely to make
pass, convey and assure the said Messuages, Lands, and Tenements, or any part
or parcel thereof, according to the uses, limitations and true meaning of and
in these presents expressed and declared. And the said W M. and E M. for them,
If the land be not passed before the day, then they to stand to the uses before
declared.
their heirs, etc. and either of them for and by himself, his heirs, etc. do
and does in consideration of the said Marriage, and for and in consideration of
the said natural love, good will, zeal and fatherly affection which the said
W M. has and bears toward the said E M. and for the conveying and assuring
of the said Jointure and for the establishing settling and assuring of the said
Messuages, Lands and Tenements, cum pertinentiis, to the several uses, behoof
and purposes before herein expressed and declared, and for and in respect of
diverse other good causes and considerations them especially moving, grant,
covenant and promise to and with the said E M. his heirs, etc. That if or in
case the said Messuages, Lands and Tenements, or any part or parcel thereof
shall happen not to be by good and sufficient conveyance and assurance in Law
sufficiently conveyed passed and assured to the uses intents, behoofs and
purposes aforesaid within the space of etc. next ensuing the Date hereof; That
then and from thenceforth the said W. and E M. and either of them and their
heirs and assigns, and the heirs and assigns of either of them, and all and
every other person and persons that then shall stand and be seized of, and in
such and so many of the premises as shall not be sufficiently and perfectly
conveyed, passed and assigned to the uses aforesaid shall stand and be thereof
seized to such several uses, respects, purposes, limitations and intents, and
under such provisoes and conditions as are before by and in these presents
limited, expressed, appointed and declared for and touching the same, according
to the true meaning of these presents: Proviso, that if E. die before she be
aged 24 years, without issue living or if it be alive, and live not till she
should have been aged 24 years, if she had lived, then the estate to be void,
and they to stand se^zed to the use of E M. till W M. pay him 500 l. then the
Estate to be to the use of W M. and E M. for her join sure.
Provided always a ditis granted concluded condescended determined and agreed
by and between the said parties to these presents for themselves their heirs
etc. And it is also their full meaning agreement purpose and intent, That if
the said E. shall happen to decease and depart this life before her full age of
24 years without any issue of her body of, and by the body of the said E M.
lawfully begotten then living, or in case she have the issue living, if the
same issue happen to decease and depart this life before such time as the said
E. if she had lived should have accomplished the said age of, etc. That then
and from thenceforth the uses before herein declared and expressed for and
touching the said Messuages, Lands, and Tenements, cum pertinentiis, by and in
these presents limited and appointed tobe conveyed to and for the Jointure of
the said E. shall utterly cease, determine and be void to all intents and
purposes. And that then and from thenceforth, and at al times after the said
estates feoffment, conveyances and assurances for and touching the said Lands
and Tenements, cum pertinentiis shall be, and shall inure, and the said Person
or persons to be named and appointed, as aforesaid, and his or their heirs and
assigns shall stand and be thereof seized to the use and behoof of the said E
M. and his heirs, until the Feast of etc. that the said W M. his heirs etc.
shall well and truly pay, content and satisfy unto the said E M. his etc. at
his now dwelling house s^ituate etc. the sum of, etc. without fraud or covin,
and that from and after such payment, the same appointed estates, feoffments,
conveyances and assurances for and touching the premises limited and appointed
to and for the Jointure of the same E shall be, and the said person and persons
to be nominated and appointed as aforesaid, and his and their heirs and
assigns shall stand and be thereof seized to the use and behoof of the said W
M. and E M. and their heirs and assigns for ever. Anything in these presents
contained or to be contained in the same estates, feoffments, conveyances and
assurances, or any of them to the contrary thereof in any wife notwithstanding:
Provided always, Proviso, that if any of the Feoffees do any act to hinder the
estates, then the estate of them so attempting shall go to the other Feoffees
and it is nevertheless fully concluded, condescended and agreed by and
between the said parties to these presents, and every of them. That if the said
V G. W. G. and R G. or any of the heirs of the body of the said E M. lawfully
begotten shall at any time or times hereafter willingly, advisedly, or actually
attempt, or go about to commit or do, or cause to be done any act or acts,
thing or things whatsoever of the said Manors etc. to be assured or conveyed
or any part or parcel thereof, whereby, or by means whereof any estate, use or
possession above in these presents, limited or expressed, for any of them shall
or may be in any wise discontinued, impeached, charged, hindered, cut off,
barred or extinguished, contrary to the intent and true meaning of these
presents, except such act and acts, thing and things as are in or by these
presents mentioned, licensed, limited or permitted, and except the lawful and
reasonable Dower of such woman or women as are, or shall be, his or their
lawful wife or wives, That then immediately, and from and afterevery such
attempt of the said V G. W G. or R G. or any of them, or any of the heirs
males aforesaid the estate, use remainder and possession of such of them as so
shall willingly advisedly and actually attempt, go about, do commit, or cause
to be done any such act or acts, thing or things, shall cease and determine of,
and in, and for such part only of the said Manors, etc. whereof any such
attempt or going about shall be had or made, as is aforesaid, as though such
person or persons so attempting, or going about were naturally dead; and that,
yet nevertheless, all other several uses estates and remainders now by these
presents limited, and expressed of, and for the same, shall stand and be of and
in the same, and in the like sort as if such person or persons so attempting,
or going about were dead: And, that then and from thenceforth the said
conveyance and assurance shall be, and the said Feoffees and their heirs, and
all other persons to whom any such conveyance or assurance as is aforesaid,
shall be had or made, and their heirs shall stand and be seized of, for and
concerning so much, and such parcel only of the said Manors, etc. so to be
conveyed and assured, whereof any such attempt or going about shall be had or
made to the use and behoof of such other person and persons, as should or ought
to have the same by the intent and true meaning contained in these presents,
next after the death of the said person or persons so going about or attempting
in such sort and manner and of such estate and estates as is aforesaid limited,
and as he or they should or ought to have the same if the said person or
persons so attempting or going about to do any act or thing were then dead:
Any thing in these presents contained etc. notwithstanding. Provided also, that
if the said V G. or any of the Sons of the said V G. lawfully begotten,
Proviso, that if any of the Feoffees marry without the consent of V G then
their Estates shall be to them which ought to have it as if he had been dead.
or any other which then shall be heir apparent of the said V G. shall in the
life time of the said V G. marry or take a Wife, or contract Marriage without
the consent of the said V G. first had and obtained in writing, That then the
estate, use remainder and possession of every such person and persons so
marrying and contracting shall cease, determine, and be void as though such
person and persons so marrying or contracting, were naturally dead. And that
yet nevertheless all other the several uses, estates and remainders now by
these presents limited and expressed of and for the said Manors, etc. shall
stand and be of and in the same, and the like sort, as if such person and
persons so marrying and contracting were dead, and that the said conveyance or
assurance, and the said Feoffees and their heirs and assigns, and all other
persons to whom the said conveyance and assurance as is aforesaid shall be had
or made, and their heirs shall stand and be seized of, for and concerning the
said Manors etc. to be conveyed or contained in the said conveyance and
assurance to the use and behoof of such other person or persons, as should or
ought to have the same by the intent and true meaning of these presents, next
after the death of the same person or persons so marrying or contracting in
such sort or manner and form, and of such estate and estates as is before
limited and as he or they should or ought to have the same, if the same person
or persons so marrying or contracting were then dead Any thing herein contained
etc. notwithstanding. Proviso, that it shall be lawful for V G. to make his
wi^e a Jointure of 100 l. a year, during her life.
Provided always and it is the true etc. that it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said V G. by his writing or writings indented sealed with his
seal, and subscribed by him in the presence of three witnesses at the least or
by his last Will and Testament in writing to be sealed and subscribed by him or
published in the presence of three witnesses at the least, to give, grant,
limit or appoint to every or any woman that is or shall be hereafter his
lawful wife, one annual or yearly Rent not exceeding the sum of 100 l. by
year to any such woman to be severally inssuing and growing out of the said
Manors, etc. so to be conveyed and assured, or any part thereof. Habend. the
said annual Rent to every or any such woman for term of her life, for, and in
the name of her Jointure the same to be paid at the Feasts of, etc. yearly by
even portions; the first payment to begin at such of the said Feasts, as shall
happen next after the decease of the said V G. Provided always and it is in
like manner agreed, Proviso, that it shall be lawful for him to give unto A B
100 l. per annum, in consideration that he is to pay his daughters portion.
etc. ut supra, to give, grant limit and appoint unto A B. and his heirs, one
other annual and yearly rent, charge of 100 l. per annum to be issuing, and
going out of the said Manors, etc. to be conveyed or assured as aforesaid, or
out of such part thereof, as shall be liable and sufficient to, and for the
same. Habens. the said annual rent of 100 l. to the said A B. and his heirs,
under and upon such conditions, limitations trusts and confidence as hereafter
is in these presents contained and expressed, the same to be paid at the Feasts
aforesaid by even portions, and the first payment thereof to begin at such of
the said Feasts as shall happen next after the decease of the said V G.
Nevertheless it is the intent and meaning of the said Parties to these
presents, That the said A B. and his heirs shall have and receive of the said
annual rent of 100l. upon a special trust and confidence, that he and his
heirs, of, and with such sums of money, as shall be had and received thereof,
and thereby shall content and pay, or cause to be paid as well to every
daughter of the said V G. upon the body of the said M. his wife, lawfully
begotten, or hereafter to be begotten, which shall be living at the time of the
decease of the said V G. and not married (except such as shall die if they be
married, the full sum of, etc. apiece for and toward their advancement and
preferment in marriage, or otherwise, as also to such of the said daughters of
the said V G. as shall be married in his life time, and whose marriage-mony
agreed upon by him in his life time, shall be unpaid in part of the whole at
the time of his decease, such sum and sums of money as with such part of the
said marriage money which shall be paid in the life of the said V G. shall
extend to be and for every such daughter 500l. apiece in the whole, the same to
be first paid and discharged according to such Covenants, Bonds and agreements
as shall be made by the said V G. in that behalf, and then the other sums
aforesaid to be lea^ied and paid to every other of the said daughters
successively according to the order and priority of their age and birth.
Provided, Proviso, that it shall be lawful for him to let to lease or lives.
that if shall and may be lawful to and for the said V G. by his deed or deeds
Indented to be sealed with his seal, and lawfully executed to demise, grant,
or let to farm all and every the said Manors, etc. except to any Person or
persons for 27 years, or three Lives or for 21 years, or under in possession
only, and not in reversion or remainder, of for any term of years
determinately, and to be determined upon two or three Lives; so that the
ancient yearly rent and service, or more, be reserved payable yearly upon every
such demise and lease to have continuance during the terms thereof, and so that
no such lease be made without impeachment of waste, by reason of any express
words to be contained in the same. And it is condescended concluded and agreed
upon by and between the said parties to these presents, and every of them, That
it shall be lawful for the Feoffees to distraine if the rent be unpaid.
That the conveyance and assurance, and the said Feoffees and their heirs
shall stand and be seized of and in the said Manors, etc. so to be charged,
eased, and demised to the use intent, and purpose, That every such person to
whom any such grant or rent shall be made, their heirs and assigns shall and
may from time to time for non-paiment of the said sverall rents, enter into the
said Lands and Tenements so to be charged and distraine for the same, and the
arrearage thereof, as in case of a rent-harge, and also to the intent and
purpose, that every such demise and Lease shall be good and effectual in Law
according to the purport and effect thereof; So as the Leassees and their
assigns do from time to time, and all times pay the rent and do the service
reserved thereupon, That it shall be lawful for V G. to revoke the uses.
and perform the Covenants contained in the same Lease. Any thing herein
outained, etc. notwithstanding. Provided always that the said V G. shall and
may by the license and assent of the said E M. under hand and seal of the same
E M. or his heirs first had and obtained in writing, alter, hang, repeal, and
revoke the user or limitation beforementioned, or any of them, and by the
same, or afterward, by any other con. eyan^e, limit or appoint such part of
the said Manors, etc. whereof of any such li^ense shall be had and procured to
be to such uses and of and for such Estates, and for such person and persons
and his or their heirs as the said V G. shall by writing Inden^ed, sealed with
his seal, and tubs ribed by him in the presence of three witnesses at the
least, shall de lare, limit, or appoint. And it is agreed by and between the
said parties to these presents, that the said con^eyan^es shall be, and the
said Feossees and their heirs after such li ense had and ob^eined and such
declaration, limitation and appointment, had and made to such uses and intents
of such Estate and Estates, and of such Per on or Persons as by the said V G.
shall be declared, limited or appointed in manner, and form aforesaid.
Provided, that the said signification or declaration, or any thing before
expressed, touching or concerning the altering, changing repealing, or revoking
of the said uses or any of them, or the said premises, or any part thereof not
withstanding, that yet nevertheless all and every demise and demises, Lease
and Leases in manner and form aforesaid to be made, shall stand and remain, and
be in the several force, strenghts, and effects, according to the true intent
and meaning of the said demise and Lease: Any thing, sc not withstanding.
Proviso, that it shall be lawful for S. t. grant the Lands to any body till R
S pay him 200l.
Provided always, and it is granted covenanted, and agreed by and between the
said pa^ties to these presents for themselves and their heirs, That it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said S. at all or any time or times hereafter
during his ^^e and pleasure either by his last Will and Testament in writing or
by his Deed or Deeds in writing under his hand and seal, to give, grant
assign de^ise dispose or appoint the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Farms
and Takings, or any part or part o^parcell thereof (except) unto any person or
persons, or his or their heirs, Execurors, or assigns, shall or may have take,
receive or leavy of the rents issues, and profits, such sum or sums of money as
shall not in the whole exceed or surmount the sum of 200 l. or else until such
Feast of etc. in the which R S. the Son or the heirs male of his body lawfully
to be begotten, and for default of such issue until the heir of the said R S.
the Father shall or will truly content and pay unto the said person or
persons, or his or their heirs of Assigns, such sum or sums money not
exceeding the laid sum of 200 l. at the most, as the said R S. the Father shall
by such Will, Deed, or Deeds, limit, express, or appoint. And the r^upon it is
covenanted granted, and agreed by and between the said parties to these
presents for themselves and their heirs, That the said estate and assurance
for and touching the said Lands and Tenements that shall be so given, granted,
conveyed, assigned demised, disposed, or appointed as aforesaid, his or their
heirs, etc. according to the true intent and meaning of the said Will, Deed,
or Deeds, until such time as the said person or persons, or his or their
heirs, Executors, or Assigns, shall have, take, receive and leavy of the
Rents, issues, and profits, such sum or sums of money as shall be limited or
appointed of the said R S. the Father or that the said Will, Deed or Deeds, or
until the Feast of etc. in the which the said R S. the Son or the here is males
of his body lawfully begotten, or for default of such issue etc. shall well and
truly content and pay to such person or persons or his or their heirs, etc.
such sum or sums of money as shall be limited or appointed by the said last.
Will Deed or Deeds, according to the true meaning, intent and appointment of
the same last Will Deed or Deeds, and from and after such time or times, as the
said sum or sums of money shall or may be le^^ed, received, or had or otherwise
paid and satisfied, in sort aforesaid the said estates for and touching the
said Lands and Tenements which shall be given, granted, conveyed demised,
disposed or appointed, as aforesaid, shall be; and the said T J. etc. shall
stand and be thereof seized to such uses, be hoose and purposes, and of such
person, and in such Estate, sort, manner and form, as the same should have
been, remained, des ended, reverted or come by, and according to the true
meaning of these presents (if his present proviso had never been) Any thing,
etc. notwithstanding. Provided a wa^es etc. that, it shall be lawful to, and
for the said R. S the Father during his life by writing indented under sea^e,
or by any other conveyance and assurance in writing, or by matter of record, to
grant convey, appoint and assure unto or unto the use of such woman or woman,
etc. ^or Jointure to these and Wife. Provided also, Proviso, that it shall he
lawful ^or R S. to let L^nds in the re^^re of C. B. for a lointure or 3 Loves.
etc. that i^ shall be lawful to and for the said R S. the Father, at all and
every time and times hereafter, and from time to time during his natural life
by writing indented under seal, to demise, grant, let and ^e^ in possession,
and not in reversion so much of the premises, cum p^rtin^^t^is. etc. as are in
the tenure etc. and all the rest and residue of the said Messuages, etc. other
then the premises before appointed for the Jointure of the said etc. So that
the same Lease or grant to be made of the premises in the tenure of, etc. shall
not surmount nor exceed the number of etc. or th^ee Lives from the making there
of. And so, that also the said Leases or ^^rants to be made of the rest and
residue of the premises in the, etc. from the making of them and so as upon
every of the same Lease, there shall be reserved so much annual rent, or more,
as is now unpaid or unanswered for the same, and that then the said Estate for
and touching the premises so to be devised shall be, and the said T J. etc.
shall stand and be thereof seized to the use and behoof of all and every such
person or persons, or his or their Assigns to whom any such Lease or demise
shall be so made for and during the term and terms for which the same shall be
so demised, according to the effect and true meaning of such demises or Leases,
and from and after the expiration and end of such Leases as the same shall
severally end and determine; Then to such further use and uses, and in such
sort, manner, and form, as are before in these presents limited, mentioned, and
declared for and touching the same, That it R S. do declare that the uses
aforesaid shall be void, then they shall stand seized to his use.
any thing etc. not withstanding. Provided also that if the said R S. the
Father, does, or shall at any time hereafter by writing under his hand and
seal revoke, determi^^e, disanull annihilate or make frustrate or void the
uses before declared, for and touching the said closes, etc. and for and
touching of the said Lands and Tenements in the tenure, etc. to be appointed
and set out by the said R S. the Father as shall not surmount not exceed the
clear yearly value of, etc. over and above all charge and reprizes and do or
shall by the same wiring signify declare, notify, and publish that his Will
and determination then shall be that the uses so by him revoked, repealed, or
made frustrate, shall have no longer continuance: And, that then, and from then
eforth the said estate for and touching only the said Lands and Tenements for
and touching which the said uses shall be revoked, repealed determined, and
made frustrate, or so signified, declared; notified or published to haver
olonger continuance and the said T J. etc. shall stand and be thereof sei^ed to
the use and behoof of the said R S. the Father, and his heirs and assigns for
ever, That it R S. be minded to purchase Lands, then it shall be lawful for
him to revoke the uses.
any things, etc. notwithstanding. Provided also, that if the said R S. the
Father be disposed at any time hereafter to buy, purchase, get or obtain in
Fee-simple tail for life lives or years, any Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments,
cum pertinenti^s, within the Lordship of etc. and shall or do hereupon by
writing under his hand and seal revoke, determine, disanull, annihilate, or
make frustrate or void the use of so much of the same Lands and Tenements in
the tenure etc. as the said R S. the Father shall set out or appoint to be
sufficient or convenient to be bargained or sold away for the provision of money
for buying, purchasing, getting or obtaining of the said Lands and Tenements in
the tenure etc. in Feesimple, Fee-taile, for life, lives, or years, aforesaid,
a^^d do or shall also by the same writing signify, declare, notify and
p^^blish, that his Will, pleasure, and determination then shall be that
th^euses so by him revoked repealed or made frustrate, shall have no lon^^er
continuance, That then and from thence forth the uses so revoked r^epealed, or
made frustrate, or so notified, declared, published or sign^^^ed have no longer
continuance, shall for and tou hing only such of the same Lands and Tenements
for or con^erning which the same: use and uses shall be so repealed revoked, or
made frustrate or so n^^ti^ied, declared, signified or published to have no
longer continuance utterly cease determine and be void and that then and from
then^^eforth the said estate for and touching only the said Lands and Tenements
etc. ut s^pra. That R S. shall assure the lands so bought to T J.
And the said R S. the Father does grant, Covenant, and promise for him, his
heirs etc. that he at all times from and after such times as he shall buy,
purchase obtain, or get in Fe^e-simple, Fee-taile, for life, lives, or years,
any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, cum pertinentiis, within the said
Lordship of, etc. as aforesaid, shall and will at the reasonable request of the
said W F. his heirs, etc. convey, pass, grant, and assure all the estate,
right, title, interest, and demand of him the said R S. the Father in and to
the same Lands and Tenements unto the said T J. etc. to such uses, intents,
behoofes and purposes, and with and under such titles, conditions, and
provisoes as are before in and by these presents limited and appointed for and
touching the said Lands and Tenements now in the tenure, etc. as by the said W
F. his heirs, etc. or his or their Council learned shall be reasonably
devi^ed, advised, or required. Proviso, notwithstanding any repeal, the Leases
made by R S. shall be in force.
Provided nevertheless, and it is the ^ull meaning, purpose, intention,
conclusion and agreement of the said parties, for themselves, and their heirs,
that notwithstanding any frustrating, repeal, revocation, alteration or
determination, That at any time or times hereafter shall be made of any of the
uses before mentioned, or of any new limitation or appointment that shall be
made of any new use or Estate of or in the premises, or any part or parcel
thereof, and notwithstanding any proviso, clause, or matter mentioned or
contained in these presents, all and every the Leases and devises to be made by
the said R S. the Father, according to the true meaning of these presents shall
still stand and remain in full power, force, and effect to all intents and
purposes; any proviso or other thing, etc. notwithstanding. And it is further,
etc. that if there shall be more land in quantity contained or comprised in any
of the said Fines then the said Messuages, etc. before mentioned, whereof it is
agreed that a Fine shall be levied at the said next Quarter Sessions, as
aforesaid, do amount unto, That then the said fine or fines for and touching
the overplus and surplusage that shall be, then the said fine or fines more
then the said Messuages, etc. before, especially mentioned, do amount unto,
shall be to such of the said parties and their heirs, as the same did or does
belong unto at the ensealing of these presents.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture for the leavying of a Fine, and to lead the use of a Recovery,
which Recovery is for two several Annuities.

In consideration of a Marriage, and for, etc.
THis Indenture Tripartite made. etc. between R S. of, etc. on the first part,
H S. of etc. on the second part, and T B. of, etc. and R S. of, etc. on the
third part: Witnesses, that for and in consideration of a marriage heretofore
had and solemnized between the said H S. and E. his Wife and for the settling of
the Lands Tenements, and Hereditaments hereafter mentioned in the name and
blood of the said S. in such sort, manner and form, as hereafter in these
presents is limited and appointed. It is covenanted granted, concluded, and
agreed by and between the said parties: And the said R S. does by these
presents for him, his heirs, etc. Covenant grant, conclude, and agree to, and
with the s^id H S. his heirs, etc. That they the said R S. and A. his wife
together with the said H. and E. his Wife, shall and will before the Feast of
etc. next and immediately ensuing the date hereof by fine, Covenant to
acknowledge a Fine.
sur conusance de droit carp, ^ro. Quils ont de dono predict. Henrici and
E^more, in due form of law to be levied before the Justices of our said
Soveralgne, etc. his heirs or successors, of Common Pleas, between the said T
B. and R S. Complainants, and the said R S. and A. his Wife, and the said H.
and E his Wife Defor^iants recognize and acknowledge al^ that the Manor of
etc, with the rights, members, and appurtenances thereof, in the Counties of,
etc and all and singular Mannor-houles; Messuages, Demesne Lands, Lands.
Tenements, Meadows Leasowes, Feedings, Pastures, Woods Underwoods, Commons
Profits, Court leets, and Profits, and Parquisites of Courts and Leets,
Privileges, Advantages, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever scituat,
lying, being, happening, or renewing within the Towneships, Parishes, Hamlets,
Fields, and Precincts of, etc. or any of them is the said Countics of, etc. or
either of them to the said Manor in any wise lying; belonging or appertaining,
or accepted, reputed, called, called, taken or known, as part, parcel, or
member thereof. And all other the Lands, Ten^ments, and Hereditaments, in etc.
in the said Co^n^ies, or any of them, in the which the said R. S. or A. his
Wife, or any of them have, or at any time heretofore had any Estate of
inheritance in possession, reversion, or remainder, with all and singular the
appurtenances by some name or names in the said fine to be contained, to be the
right of the said T B. as those which the sain T. B. and R. S. shall remise and
quit claim from them the said R. and A. H. and E. and the Heirs of the said
R. and H. to the said T. and R. and the Hires of the said T. for ever. And the
said R. and A. H. and E. and the Heirs of the said R. and H. shall als by the
same fine, And to warrant the Lands.
warrant the said Manor and premises with the appurtenances unto the said T.
and R. and the Heirs of the said T. for ever; which sine so as aforesaid, or
in any other manner or form to be leavied or acknowledged by or between the
said Parties, or any of them on this side and before the said Feast, shall be,
and shall enure, and shall be construed, adjudged, and taken to be, and to
enure to the use and behoof of the said T. B. and R. S. and their Heirs, to
the intent and purpose, that the Recovery hereafter mentioned may be had and
leavied against them or the Survivor of them then being Tenant of the premises:
and it is further covenanted, granted, concluded, That they shall suffer a
common Recovery.
and agneed by and between the said Parties and every of them, their and every
of their Heirs, That they the said T. B. and R. S. R. S. and A. his Wife, and
H. S. and E. his Wife, shall and will permit and suffer L. B. and T. F. before
the Feast of etc. hex^ by Writ or Writs of En^re sur disseisin in le pust, to
be sured and obtained out of the high Court of Ohancery, and re^^^nable before
the Justices of the Common Pleas, in the names of the said L. B. and T. F.
Demaundants against the said T. B. and R. S. being Tenants, to recover to them
and their Heirs in due form of Law according to the usual form of common
Recoveries for assu, rance of Land, Ten^em^nts, and Here ditaments, against the
said T. B. and R. S. or the Survivor of them then Tenants or Tenant of the said
Manours and premises, all the said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, with
all and singular their and every of their appurtenances by some name or names
in the said Writ and Recovery to be contained ^in and to which Writ the said T.
B. and R. S. shall (gratis) appear in proper Persons, and enter into warranty,
and vouch over to warrant the said Manours and premises with the said
appurtenances to the said R. S. And shall further do all that to them in the
behalf shall appertain, and the said R. S. shall likewise appear (gratis) in
proper person, and enter into warranty and vouch over to warrant the same
Manours and premises, to the said H. S. and E. his Wife, and shall further do
all that to him the said R. shall in that behalf apperaine. And the said H and
E. shall in lke manner (gratis) appear in proper persons, and enter into like
warranty and vouch over to warrant the said Manours and premises the common
vouch, and shall do also all that to them in that behalse shall be requisite
for the suffering of a good and perfect common Recovery: So, as a good and
perfect Recovery may be had and suffered of the said Manours and other the
premises, and every part thereof; which Recovery so, as aforesaid, or in any
other manner or form to be had or suffered, shall be executed by Writ or Writs
of our said Sovereign Lord, his Heirs or Successor, of hab. facias seisinam:
which Recovery so, as aforesaid, or in any other manner or form to be suffered
and executed, and all Recoveries to be had, suffered and executed of the said
Manours and premises, with the appurtenances, at or before the said Feast of,
etc. shall be and shall enure; and the said Recoverors in and to the said
Recovery and Recoveries shall from the suffering and executing thereof, stand
and be seized of the said Manor and premises, to the uses, intents, That the
Recovery shall be for one annuity of ^ol per (...).
and purposes hereafter specified, expressed, or declared, and to none other
use, intent, or purpose: viz. from and after the execution thereof, that the
same be for one annuity or yearly rent of 20l. by the year, to issue out of
the said Manours and premises to the use of the said H. S. and his Heirs
during the life of the said R. payable at the Feasts of, etc. by even and
equal portions, and to the intent, use, and purpose, that if the said annuity
or yearly Rent be behind and unpaid after any of the said payable Feasts at
which the same ought to be paid, If the annuity be behind, it shall be lawful
for him to distraine.
That then and so often it shall be lawful to and for the said H. and his
Heirs into the said Manor and premises to enter and distraine, and the
distress and distresses there found to take, lead, drive, carry away, impound
and retain until the said annuity with the arrerages thereof, it any be,
fully contented, satisfied, and paid unto the said H. S. his Heirs or
Assigns. And to the further use and behoof of and for the said Manours and
premises with the appurtenances to, for, and of the said R. S. for term of his
life without impeachment to waste, and from and after the decease of the said
R. that the same Recovery and Recoveries before one other annuity or yearly
Rent of 20l. per annum, It shall be for other annuity of 20l. per ^nn.
to issue out of the said Manor and premises to the use of the said A. during
her natural life, payable at the said Feasts by even and equal portions; and
to the intent, use, and purpose, that if the said annuity or yearly Rent of
20l. be behind and unpaid after any of the said payable Feasts, at which the
same ought to be paid, during the life of the said A. after the decease of the
said R. That then and so often it shall be lawful to and for the said A. after
the death of the said R. into the said Manor, etc. ut supra. And from and
after the Decease of the said R. to the further use and behoof of and for the
said Manor and premises with the appurtenances, to be so, as aforesaid,
recovered of the said H. S. and E. and of the Heirs of the body of the said H.
by him on the body of the said E begotten or to be begotten. And for default of
such issue, then to the use of the Heives of the body of the said E. lawfully
begotten; and for default to such issue, then to the use of the Heirs males of
the body of the said R. on the body of the said A. lawfully to be begotten; and
for default of such issue, then to the use of the right Heirs of the said E.
for ever. And the said R. S. etc. does covenant, etc. to, and with the said H.
S. etc. That the said R. S. his Heirs, etc. shall and will from time to time,
and at all times hereafter, acquit, exonerate, and discharge, or otherwise upon
reasonable request to him or them in that behalse made, save, and keep
harmless and indempnified as well the said Manor and premises, and every part
thereof, as also the said H.S. and E. and their said Heirs, of, for, and
concerning the said Manours and premises of and from all and all manner of
former grants, bargains, sales, statutes, recognizances, charges, titles,
troubles, and encumbrances whatsoever had, made, done, knowledged, or suffered,
or hereafter to be had, etc. ut supra, by the said R.S. or any other person or
persons by his means, assent or procurement, (such assurance as the said R.
has heretofore made to, Covenant for further assurances.
and for the use of the said H. and E. or either of them only excepted) And
also the said R.S. does further, etc Covenant, etc. to and with, etc. That he
that said R. and his Heirs shall and will make, do, knowledge and suffer, or
cause and procure to be had, etc. all and every such further and reasonable act
and acts, thing and things, device and devices in the law for the further
assuring and sure making of the said Manor and premises and every part thereof
unto the said H.S. and E. and their said Heirs, to the uses and intents
aforesaid: Be it by fine or fines, recovery or recoveries, feoffements,
release, confirmation, or otherwise, with warranty of the said R. and his
Heirs, against him and his Heirs, or without warranty if it be so required;
As by the said H.S. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their learned Council in
the law shall be devised, advised, and required,

In Witness whereof to one part of these present Indentures tripartite,
remaining with the said H.S. and E. his Wife, the said R.S. and A his Wife.
T.V. and R.S. have put their seals; to another part of the same Indentures
remaining with the said R.S. and A. The said H.S. and E. his. Wife, T.V. and
R.S. have put their seals: and to one other part also of the same Indentures
remaining with the said T.V. and R.S. the said R.S. and A. his Wife. H.S. and
E. his Wife have set their seals. Dated the day and year first above written.

An Indenture of Covenants upon Uses for leavying a Fine, and for the
perfecting of the Estate of the Lessee for years.
THis INDENTVRE made etc. Between I.H. of etc. of the one part, and I.T. of
etc. of the other part: Witnesses, that Sir T.T. Knight, Grandfather to the
said I.H. party to these presents did by his Indenture of Lease, Dated etc.
demise, grant, and to farm let unto the said I.T. all that his houses,
edifices buildings, barnes, stables, orchards, gardens, meadows, feedings,
pastures, closes, moors, mosses, wast ground, woods, under-woods, ways,
waters, common of pasture and turbary, and hereditaments whatsoever in S.
commonly called and known etc. To have and to hold, etc. unto the said I.T.
for, and during the term etc. Yielding and paying therefore yearly during the
said term a certain yearly Rent; As by the said, etc. may appear. Now the
said I.H. for and in consideration of a certain sum of money to him in hand
paid by the said I.T. before the ensealing and sure making of the said Lease
for years unto the said I.T. and his Assigns, and to the end and intent that
the same Lease may be peaceably and quietly occupied and enjoyed according to
the true intent and meaning of the same, without and eviction of the said I.H.
his etc. And the said I.H. etc. does Covenant, etc. That the said T.T. Covenant
to leavy a Fine.
or his Heirs, shall and will at the costs and charges in the law of the said
I.T. his, etc. before the Feast etc. knowledge and leavy a Fine with
proclamation unto I.L. and R.S. and to the Heirs of the said I.H. before the
Justices for the time being of Common pleas to be holden at Westm' of the said
premises demised by the name of, etc (name the things particularly with the
appurtenances:) and for the declaration, uses, and intents of the same time, It
is Covenanted and agreed between the said Parties of these presents, and the
said I.H. etc Covenanteth, etc. that the said Fine so to be levied of the
premises, demised by the number of acres, and names, before mentioned, shall
extend only to the said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, with the
appurtenances of the said I.T. as aforesaid, and to none other Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments in S. aforesaid. And the said Fine so to be levied
to the said dimised premises immediately after the entering and engrossing
thereof. That the Fine shall be to the use of I.F.
And the said I.H. and R.V. and the Heirs of the said I.H. and all other
Persons that from thenceforth shall be seized to the said premises demised,
shall stand and be thereof seized to the use and behoof of the said I.T. party
to these presents, his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

In Witness, etc.

An Indenture of Revocation of Uses, with diverse other Covenants to that
purpose.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing Indented shall come: I
Sir R.B. of etc. Knight, The recital.
send greeting, in our Lord God everlasting. Where by one Indenture bearing
Date, etc. made between me the said Sir R.B. by the name of Sir R.B. of, etc.
on the one party, and etc. on the other party, I the said Sir R.B. as well for
the better advancement and preferment of the Heirs males of my body lawfully
to be begotten, and for the better advancement and preferment of W.B.R.B. and
T.B. Gentlemen, Brothers of me the said R.B. and of diverse other the Kinsmen,
Friends, and Allies, of the name of me the said Sir R.B. and of every the
Person and Persons afterward in the said recited Indenture particularly named,
and of the several Heirs males of their bodies lawfully begotten, and to be
begotten, and for the natural and especial love, favor, and affection which I
the said Sir R.B. did bear unto the said W.B.R.B. and T.B, and to the intent
that all and singular the Manours, Mesnages, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments in the same recited Judenture particularly mentioned or expressed
might remain, continue, and be in the name of the said B. and in the name,
blood, stock, family and kindred of me the said Sir R.B. so long as it shall
please Almighty God to permit and suffer the same; as also for diverse other
good causes and considerations me the said R.B. thereunto especially moving:
Did covenant, promise, and grant, etc. in and by which recited Indenture, it is
provided, Covenanted, granted, condescended and agreed by and between all and
every the said Parties to the same recited Indenture for themselves, their
Heirs and Assigns, In With Indenture there is a Covenant, that it should be
lawful for Sir R.B. to revoake the Uses.
and to the true intent and meaning of them, and every of them, and their
Heirs, as in the same Indenture is, that it should and might be lawful to and
for me the said Sir R.B. and that I the said sir R.B. should have full power
and authority at all times hereafter, and from time to time at my will and
pleasure by any my Deed or Deeds, writing or writings, or by my last Will and
Testament by me sealed and subscribed in the presence of two, or more credible
Witnesses; to alter, change, diminsh, enlarge, revoke, frustrate, cease,
determine, extinguish, and make void all and every or any of the Use and Uses,
Estate and Estates before in the said recited Indenture expressed, limited,
mentioned, declared, or appointed to any person or persons of and in the said
Barony, Manours, Mesuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, or in
any of them, or any part or parcel of them, or any of them; and thereof, or of
any part thereof to create, declare, limit or appoint any other use or uses,
Estate or Estates to any the Person or Persons before in the same recited
Indenture named, or to any other Person or persons whatsoever, in such sort,
manner and form, and for such Estate and Estates, term and terms as I the
said Sir R.B. should think meet and convenient: and that at all times, and from
time to time immediately from and after any such alteration, change,
diminution, enlargement, revocation, determination, or making void of all or
any the use or uses, Estate or Estates before in the said recited Indenture
expressed, limited, mentioned, declared or appointed; and any creaction,
declaration, limitation or appointment of any other use or uses, Estate or
Estates, and that so often as I the said Sir R.B. should make any such
alteration, change, diminution, enlargement, revocation, or determination of
any use or uses, Estate or Estates, and reaction, declaration, limitation, or
appointment of any other use or uses, Estate or Estates, all and every such and
those use and uses, Estate and Estates, of and in the said Bar Man' and prem',
or of and in any part or parcel thereof which I the said Sir R.B. at any time
or times hereafter in or by any such Deed or Deeds, writing or writing, or by
my last Will and testament in writing by me sealed and subscribed in such
presence as is aforesaid, should alter, change, diminish, enlarge, revoke,
determine, extinguish and cease, or make void, And that then, and immediately
from thenceforth, the said before mentioned Fine or Fines, Recovery or
Recoveries, and all and every other conveyance and conveyances; assurance and
assurances in the law whatsoever at any time hereafter to be had or made
between the said Parties to the said recited Indenture, or any of them of the
said Barony, Manours and premises, or of such part thereof, according to the
true intent and meaning of the same Indenture should be and enure, and should
be adjudged, deemed, construed and taken to be and enure: And the said Cognizee
and Cognizees of the said Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries, and the
Survivors and Survivor of them, their, and every of their Heirs, and the
heirs of the survivor of them should immediately from thenceforth stand and be
seized of and in the same premises, whereof any such reaction, declaration,
limitation or appointment of other use or uses, Estate or Estates, term or
terms should be so made, as is aforesaid; to and for such use and uses, Estate
and Estates, intents and purposes, and of such Person and Persons, and in such
sort, manner and form as 1 the said Sir R.B. in or such Deed or Deeds,
writting or writings, or by my last Will and Testament in writing by me sealed
and subscribed in such presence, as is aforesaid, should from time to time
create, declare, limit, express or appoint, and to no other use, purpose or
intent. The said recited Indenture, or any thing, etc. notwithstanding. And
afterward in performance of the Covenants, grants and agreements in the said
recited Indenture mentioned, several Fines and Recoveries were had, levied,
knowledged and executed of, in, and upon, and for and concerning the said
Barony, Monours, Lands, Tenements and premises in the Court of Common pleas at
Westminster, as also before the then Justices in the County of Chester, and
also before the Justices in the said County of F. all and every which Fine and
Fines, Common Recovery and Recoveries were had, levied, knowledged and suffered
to the uses, intents and purposes, and with and under the several provisoes,
conditions and limitations in the said recited Indenture mentioned. After
which, the said R.B. of W. died without issue male of his body lawfully
begotten. In consideration of the Proviso in the recited Indenture.
Now know all men by these presents, that I the said Sir R.B. for diverse causes
and considerations me moving, and by virtue of the said recited Proviso, and
the liberty, power and authority by the said recited Indenture to me reserved,
and according to the true intent and meaning of me the said Sir R.B. and of all
other the Parties to the said recited Indenture, Have altered, changed,
revoaked, determined and made void, and by this my present writing Indented,
The Revocation of the Uses.
being by me signed and fealed in the presence of the Persons undernamed, do
alter, change, revoake, frustrate, cease, determine, and make void all and
every the said use and uses, Estate and Estates created, raised, expressed,
declared, limited and appointed by the said recited Indenture Fine or Fines,
Recovery and Recoveries, and every or any of them, to the faid W.B.R.B. and
T.B. Brothers of me the said Sir R.B.W.B. of etc. R.B.T.G. alias B.I.R. of,
etc. W.B. Brothers of the said J.B. of etc and to all and every the several
Sons and Heirs males begotten on the several bodies of them the said W.B.
and T.B. my Brother W.B. of etc. R.B.T.G. alias B.I.B. of etc. and W.B. his
Brother, and every of them of and in the said Barony of M. Manours, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments in the said recited Indenture mentioned, or any
part or parcel thereof. And further, know all men by these presents, That I the
said Sir, R.B. for the fatherly love and affection that I the said Sir R.B. do
hear to Dame M. E. my only Daughter and Heir apparent, now Wife to Sir R.E.
Knight, and to the Heirs of her body lawfully begotten, do by these presents
by virtue of the said recited Proviso in the said recited Indenture contained,
and the liberty, power and authority therein and thereby to me reserved, as a
foresaid, create, declare, limit and appoint that the said Fine and Fines,
Recovery and Recove^ies, so had, levied, knowledged and suffered of the said
Barony and premises before in these presents mentioned, as aforesaid, and all
and every the Parties thereunto, and all and every Person and Persons and their
Heirs which now be or hereafter shall stand and be seized of and in the said
Barony and premises, or of, or in any part or parcel thereof, shall by virtue
thereof from and after that, every of the said several Uses and Estates limited
and appointed, as aforesaid, of and in the said Baromy and premises to me the
said Sir R.B. and to the said several Sons of the body of me the said Sir R
B. shall be ended, That the said Barony shall be to the use of R.B. and his
Heirs, etc.
expired and determined, stand and be seized of, and in the said Barony and
premises, and of and in every part and parcel thereof to the use and behoof of
the said R.B. my Brother and his Assigns, for, and during the term of the
natural life of the said R.B. my Brother, without impeachment of any manner of
waste. And immediately from and after the death of the said R.B. last named
then to the use of the first Son of the body of the said R.B. last named,
lawfully begotten and of the Heirs males of the body of such first Son of
the said R.B. last named, lawfully begotten. And for default of such inssue, to
the use of him that shall be the second Son of the body of the said R.B. last
named, lawfully begotten, and of the Heirs males of the body of such second
Son of the said R.B. last named, lawfully begotten. And for default of such
issue, etc. ut supra. And for default of such issue, to the use of every other
Son or issue male of the body of the said R.B. last named, lawfully begotten,
which the said R.B. last nemed, shall happen to have above the number of six
Sons, and of the Heirs males of the body of every such other Son of the
said R.B. last named, successively one after the other, as they shall be in
seniority one before the other, so long as there shall be any Son or issue
male of the body of any Son of the said R.B. last named lawfully bebotten
extant. And for default of such issue, to the use of the said T.B. Brother to
me the said Sir R.B. and his Assigns for and during the term of the natural
life of the said T.B. without impeachment of any manner of waste: and
immediately from and after the death of the said T.B. then to the use of him
that shall be the first Son of the body of the said T.B. lawfully begotten,
and of the Heirs males, etc. ut supra. And for default of such issue, to the
use of the said Dame M E. Daughter and Heir apparent of me the said Sir R.B.
and Wise to the said Sir R E. Knight, for and during all the natural life of
the said Dame M. and from and after her decease to the use of R.E. Esquire,
Son and Heir apparent of the said Sir. R. E. and Dame M. his Wife, and of
the Heirs males of the body of the sad R. E. lawfully to be begotten. And for
default of such issue, to the use of S. E. second Son of the body of the said
Dame M. E. lawfully begotten, and of the Heirs males of the body of the said
S. E. lawfully begotten, and fon default of such issue, etc. ut supra. And for
default of such issue, to the use of the right Heirs of the said Dame M. E.
for ever. That if R.B. etc. do any act to hinder the Estates, then their
Estate shall be void.


Provided always, that if the said R.B. Brother of me the said Sir R.B. or any
of the said several Sons of this body begotten, or any Heir male of the
several bodies of the same Sons lawfully begotten, or to be begotten, or if
the said T. B. my Brother, or any of the said several Sons of the body of
the said T. B. or any Heir male of the several bodies of the same Sons
lawfully begotten or to be begotten, shall at any time hereafter resolve or
determine, or advisedly, determinably or effectualy devise, conclude or agree,
or shall enter into any communication, promise, Covenant or agreement, or shall
advisedly and effectually, directly or indirectly attempt, cause, procure, go
about, or assent unto, or for any act or acts, thing or things to be done had,
made or suffered for or concerning any bargain, sale, discontinuance,
alienation, conveyance or assurance to be had or made of the said Barony,
Manours, Landb, Tenements and premises, or of any of them, or of any part
thereof, where by or by reason whereof any Estate or Estates, use or uses of or
in the said Barony, Manours, etc. or of or in any part or parcel thereof, in
use or possession before in these presents limited or declared, shall or may by
any way or means be avoided, dissolved, undone, discontinued debarred,
altered, determined or hindered to take effect, according to the true meaning of
these presents, or whereby the same or any part or parcel thereof shall or may
be charged or incombred otherwise then according to the terue intent of these
presents; and the same bargain, sale, alienation, discontinuance, device,
conclusion, agreement, communication, conveyance or assurance, or any other
open or Court matter, thing or act, shall attempt, go about, cause, procure,
command or wittingly or willingly assent unto, practice, or suffer to be done,
or to be attempted, practiced, or put in use by knowledging of any note or
notes of or for any Fine or Fines to be levied, or by knowledging of any
Warrant or Warrants of Attorney for any Recovery, or any Voucher to be had or
pursued, or by entering into any warranty, or by knowledging of any Warrant for
any such purpose, or by purchasing of any Writ by any of their assents or
agreements, or by consenting unto or appearing unto any Writ of the aforesaid
premises, or any part thereof, or by knowledging of any Deed or writing to be
enrolled, or by any other act or acts, thing or things whatsoever, whereby, or
by reason whereof, any bargain, sale, discontinuance, alienation of forfeture
of the premises, or any part thereof may ensue, or whereby any Estate, us or
possession of the premises, or of any part thereof may not, ought not, or
cannot come, grow, remain, descend and be, in such manner and form as before
in these presents is limited, expressed or declared, and according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents; or whereby the said premises or any part
or parcel thereof, shall, or may he charged or encumbered, otherwise then
according to the true intent of these presents; That then and immediately fro
(...) and after every such time and times of such procurement attempt causing,
commanding willing, assent, practife, ^^pro^nise, or going about in manner and
form aforesaid; and before any such bargain, sale, discontinuance,
alienation, forfeiture, charge or encumbrance shall be had, made, perfected,
executed, committed or done, all and every use and uses, Estate and Estates
before in these presents limited to that person or persons which so shall
attempt, cause, procure, command, or willingly or wittingly assent unto,
practice, suffer, or go about any such act or acts, thing or things to be
prosecuted, executed or performend, put in ure, or gone about, whereby, or by
reason whereof any bargain, sale, discontinuance, aleination, conveyance,
assurance, forfeiture, change, or encumbrance shall be had, made, or ensue
contrary to the true intent of these presents, of, in, and for such and so much
of the said Barony etc. tayled, as aforesaid, for which any of the things or
matters aforesaid at any time or times shall be attempted, gone about, caused,
procured, commanded, assented, practiced, or suffered to be executed,
performed, made, done, practiced, or gone about to be done, performed, or put
in ure, contrary to the true meaning of these presents, should cease, and he
utterly void, only in respect and having regard to such person and persons so
attempting, procuring causing commanding, willingly or wittingly assenting
practicing, suffering, or going about any act or acts, thing or things
aforesaid, contrary to the effect and true intent of these presents: And that
then and from thenceforth the said Recoveries and Fines, and every of them
shall be and enure, and the Recoverers and Congizees therein named, and every
of them, and their, and every of their Heirs shall stand and be seized of
every such parcel of the premises, to the use of such person and persons and
the Heirs males of his and their bodies and body begotten and to be begotten,
to whom the same should be, remain, or come, aften the death of the person so
attempting, procuring, causing, commanding, assenting, practizing, suffering,
or going about any act or acts, thing or things aforesaid, contrary to the
effect and true meaning of these presents in like manner and form, and with
such remainders over and with and under such limitations and conditions as the
same use and uses, Estate and Estates, of the said person and person which
shall so attemt, cause, command, practice, suffer, go about or assent to, or
for any such act or acts, thing or things was subject unto before his or their
said attempt, That if Dame M.E. do disturb and of the Persons, then her Estate
shall be frustrate.
practrise, going about or assent. Provided also, that if the said Dame M.E. or
any of the Heirs of her body at any time after the death of the said Sir R.B.
and of the said several Sons of me the said Sir R.B. and the Heirs males
begotten on the several bodies of the said several Sons of me the said Sir
R.B. shall wittingly or willingly disturb or interrupt, or cause, or procure to
be disturbed or interrupted the said R.B. my Brother, or any of the said
several Sons of the body of the said R.B. or any Heir male of the sevaral
bodies of the same sons lawfully begotten or to be begotten; of the body of
the said T.B. or any Heir male of the several bodies of the same Sons
lawfully begotten or to be begotten, being in possession of the said Barony and
premises, or of any part or parcel thereof, or their or any of their Assignee
or Assigns: That then and immediately from and after every or any such
disturbance or interruption, all and every the use and uses, Estate and Estates
of every person or persons, doing, making, committing, causing, or procuring
such interruption or disturbance before in these presents to her, him, or them
limited and appointed, of, in, and for, or to so much of the said premises
wherein there shall be such disturbance or interruption made and committed,
caused or procured as is aforesaid, shall cease and be utterly void to all
intents, constructions and purposes, as if he or they had never been mentioned,
named or spoken of in these presents. And that then and from thenceforth the
said Recoveries and Fines, and every of them shall be and enure, and the
Recoverers and Cognizees therein named, and every of them; and their and every
of their Heirs shall stand and be seized of every such parcel of the premises,
whereof or wherein there, shall be such disturbance or interruption, made,
done, committed or procured, as aforesaid, to the use and behoof of every such
Person and Persons to whom any Estate or estates, use or uses herein by these
presents limited or appointed respectively, or according to his and their
several Estate and Estates, interest and interests and the use of the Heirs
or Assigns of him or them that shall be disturbed or interrupted: any thing
etc. notwithstanding. That is shall be lawful for Sir R. B to revoke the uses,
and to create new.
Provided likewise, and the true intent and meaning of me the said Sir R.B. is,
That it shall and may be lawful to and for me the said Sir R B. and that I the
said Sir R. B. shall have full power at all times hereafter, and from time to
time at my will and pleasure by any my Deed or Deeds, writing or writings, or
by my last Will and testament in writing by me sealed and subscribed in the
prefence of two, or more credible Witnesses, to alter, change, diminish,
enlarge, revoke, frustrate, cease, determine, extinguish, or make void all and
every, or any the use or uses, Estate and Estates before in these presents
limited, expressed, mentioned, declared, or appointed to any Person or Persons
of and in the said Barony etc. or in any of them, or in any part or parcel of
them or any of them and thereof or of any part thereof; to declare create,
limit or appoint any other use or uses, Estate or Estates to any Person or
Persons aforesaid, or to any other Person or Persons whatsoever in such sort,
manner, and form, and for such Estate and Estates, term and terms as I the
said Sir R. B. shall think meet and convenient: and that at all times and from
time to time immediately from and after such alteration, change, diminution,
enlargement revocation, determination, or making void of all of any the use or
uses, Estate or Estates before in these presents expressed; Jimited, mentioned,
declared or appointed, and creation limitation, determination or appointment of
any other use or uses, Estate or Estates. And that so often as I the said Sr R.
B. shall make any such alteration, change, diminution, enlargement, revocation
or determination of use or uses, Estate or Estates, and creation, declaration,
limitation or appointment of any other use or uses, Estate or Estates, all and
every such and those use and uses, Estate and Estates, of and in the said
Barony, etc. or of and in any part or parcel thereof, which I the said Sir R.
B. at any time or times hereafter in or by any such Deed or Deeds, writing or
writings, or by my last Will and testament in writing by me seal^d and
subscribed in such presence, manner and for me as is aforesaid, shall alter,
change, diminish, enlarge, revoake, determine, extinguish, cease, or make void.
And that then and immediately from thenceforth the said before mentioned Fine
or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries, and all and every other conveyance and
conveyances, assurance and assurances in the law whatsover heretofore had,
made, knowledged or suffered, or at any time hereafter to be had, or made, of
the said Barony, etc. or of any part thereof, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, shall be, and enure, and shall be adjudged, deemed,
construed and taken to be, and enure, and the said Cognizee and Cognizees of
the said Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries, and the Survivors and Survivor
of them, their and every of their Heirs, and the Heirs of the Survivor of
them shall immediately from thenceforth stand and be seized of and in the same
premises, whereof any such creation, declaration, limitation or appointment of
other usue or uses, Estate or Estates, term or terms shall be made, as is
aforesaid, to and for such use and uses, Estate and Estates, intents and
purposes, and of such Person and Persons, and in such sort, manner and form,
as I the said Sir R.B. in or by such Deed or Deeds, writing or writings, or by
my last Will and testament in writing by me sealed and subscribed in presence
as is aforesaid, shall from time to time create, declare, limit, express, or
appoint, and to none other use, intent, or purpose; these presents, or any
thing therein contained to the contrary thereof in any wife notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants of Marriage; and fore repayment of Marriage-money if
either Party die before Marriage: With other special Covenants.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between I.R. of the one part, and R.W. of the other
part. Witnesses, That it is Covenanted, concluded, condescended, and fully
agreed upon by and between the said Parties, In consideration of a Marriage to
be had.
for and in consideration of a Marriage to be had and solemnized between R. R.
Son of the said I.R. and K.W. Daughter of the said R.W. in manner and form
following, viz. First, the said I.R. does Covenant and grant for himself and
R.R. his Son, to and with the said R.W. his Executor, etc. by these presents,
That the said R.R. within twenty days next after the Feast of, etc. shall
Marry and take to his Wife the said K.W. and her Espouse and Wed according to
the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm (if the said K. will thereunto consent
and agree, and the Laws of the holy Church will it permit and suffer.) And
likewise, the said R. W. does Covenant and grant for him, his, etc. to and with
the said I.R. his, etc. by these presents, that she the said K.W. within, etc.
ut supra. In consideration of which Marriage so to be had and solemnized, the
said R.W. at and before the ensealing of these presents, has well and truly
contented and paid unto the said I.R. the sum of etc. whereof and wherewith
(the Acquittance.) And the said I.R. for him his etc. does Covenant and grant
to and with the said R.W. his, etc. by these presents. That if either of them
die before marriage, then I.R. to repay the money.
That if in case it happen the said R.R. and K.W. or either of them to decease
and die before the Feast of, etc. and before the said Marriage had and
solemnized, as aforesaid, That then the said I.R. his, etc. shall well and
truly content and repay, or cause to be contented and repayed to the said R.W.
his, etc. at one whole and entire payment the said sum of etc. within the
space of etc. next ensuing the day of the death of the said R. and K. or either
of them so deceasing, before the said Feast of, etc. and before the said
Marriage had and solemnized. And also the said I.R. does Covenant, That if R.R.
refuse to marry her, then I.R. to repay the money.
etc. That in case it fortune the said R.R. his Son to disagree and refuse to
marry and take to his Wife, or do not marry and take to his Wife the said K.W.
or that any other default, mislike, or impediment, do or shall arise, grow or
happen on the part and behalf of the said R.R. or the said I.R. or either of
them, or by their or either of their assent or procurement, whereby or by
means whereof the said Marriage shall not, or do not take effect between the
said R. and K. in manner and form aforesaid, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents: That then the said I.R. his, etc. shall and will
well and truly content and pay; or cause, etc. unto the said R.W. his, etc.
the sum of, etc. at one whole and entire payment within thirty days next
after the said Feast of, etc. without Covin, fraud, or delay. Proviso, that if
I.R. do pay 100l. then he shall be quit of the two former Covenants.
Provided always, and nevertheless, it is the intent and meaning of these
presents, and of all and every the Parties to the same, That if in case the
said I.R. his, etc. do or shall do at any time hereafter well and truly, and
without all fraud and covin satisfy and pay, or cause, etc. unto the said R.W.
his, etc. the sum of 100l. for or by reason of any breach or not performance
of either or both the said two Covenants or Articles of agreement by these
presents last before mentioned and set down, and for, by reason, or in
consideration of the said two last recited Covenants or Articles, or either of
them, not performed and kept by the said I.R. and R.R. or either of them,
according to the tenor and true meaning of the same: The then and from
thenceforth and in such case, that is to wit, immediately from and after and
upon the true payment of the said sum of 100l. so by him the said I.R. his,
etc to him the said R.W. his, etc. had and made, as is aforesaid, he the said
I.R. his etc. shall stand and be clearly acquitted and discharged against him
the said R.W. his, etc. of and from the said two Covenants and Articles last
above mentioned, and of and from all manner of sums of money, penalties, and
forfeitures, due and to be due by reason of any breach or non performance of
the same Covenants or Articles, or any other clause or Article, or thing in
these presents contained to the contrary, etc. And also the said I.R. does
Covenant, etc. That he the said I.R. shall and will well and sufficiently
maintain, That I.R. shall provide all things for R.R. K.W. and their issue
during R.R. life.
provide for, find, keep and sustain the said R.R. and K.W. his Wife, and all
the issue of their two bodies begotten from time to time, and at all times
immediately from and after the said marriage between them the said R. and K.
so had, and solemnized, as aforesaid, during the natural life of him the said
I.R. with sufficient and convenient meat, drink, clothing, lodging, and all
other necessaries to them belonging, according to their and every of their
calling. Estates and degrees. And further, the said I.R. does Covenant, etc.
And that I.R. shall give unto them the sum of, etc. and other goods.
That he the said I.R. after the said marriage so had between the said R. and
K. as aforesaid, shall and will either in the life time of him the said I.R. or
at the time of his death, leave, give, grant, devise, bequeath or assure,
convey, content and pay, or cause to be truly contented and paid unto the
said R.R. and K.W. or to the said K. if she happen to survive the said R. or if
it happen the said K. to be then dead, then to such issue, Child or Children
between them the said R. and K. begotten as shall then happen to be living, the
sum of, etc. at one whole and entire payment, and also such and so much
implement of household and household stuff, corn, cattle, bedding, instruments,
tools, furniture of husbandry and other necessaries of his own proper goods
and chattels of every sort and kind as shall amount to, and be of the full
value of, etc. or more. That she shall enjoy all that Message, etc during her
life and after her decease then her Children, or else I.R. to pay them 200l.
And moreover the said I.R. does also covenant, etc. That she the said K. and
her Assigns after the said marriage so had and solemnized during her natural
life, and after her decease, such Child and Children as between them the said
R. and K. shall fortune to be begotten, during the life and lives of such
Child and Children, shall and may quietly and peaceably enter into, have,
hold, occupy, possess and enjoy to her and their own proper use and uses all
and singular that Message or Tenement with the appurtenances situate, etc. now
in the occupation of, etc. and all Houses, edifices, orchards, gardens, Lands,
Tenements, leasowes, meadows, pastures, feedings, commons, heathes, and
turbaries, to the same belonging or appertaining, or used and occupied
therewith, or with any part or parcel thereof, immediately from and after the
death and decease of the said I.R. without any let, suit, vexation, expulsion,
eviction or disturbance of any person or persons whatsoever: Or else, that he
the said I.R. his, etc. shall truly content and pay, or cause, etc. unto the
said K W. or her Assigns, or to such Child or Children as shall fortune to be
begotten between the said R. and K. and then be in full life, the sum of,
etc. within two days next ensuing the day of the death of the said I.R. at the
free choice and election of the said K. or of such Child or Children so to be
begotten, and then living as it aforesaid. Provided that M. the Wife of I.R.
shall enjoy the third part of the Lands till she be married.
Provided always, and nevertheless, it is the true intent and meaning of
these presents, and of every the parties to the same, That the said R. and K.
either of them, and the issues of their two bodies, and every of them, at all
times from and after the death and decease of the said I.R. shall permit and
suffer M. now Wife of the said I.R. (if in case she the said M. be then living
and in plain life) quietly and peaceably to enter into, have, hold, occupy,
possesle and enjoy the third part of the said Messuages or Tenement, with the
appurtenances, etc. so long, and for, and during only such time and term as
she the said M. does or shall keep her self sole and unmarried, and of honest
report and same, without interruption of disturbance: Any clause or Article
herein contained, etc. And finaly, the said I.R. does Covenant, For further
assurances.
etc. That he the said I.R. his, etc. from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, upon the reasonable request, cost and charges in the Law of the said
R.W. his, etc, shall and will, do, knowledge, seal, deliver and excute all
and every such further act and acts, thing and things, assurance and assurances
whatsoever as shall be reasonably required and devised by the said R.W. his,
etc. or by his or their Council learned in the Law, for the ratifying,
prosecuting, and sure making of all and singular the Covenants, grants,
clauses, provisoes, payments and agreements before in these presents expressed
and declared, which upon the part and behalf of the said I.R. his, etc. are to
be kept, performed and accomplished, according to the true intent, purport, and
meaning of these presents.

In Witness, etc.

Covenants of Marriage very necessary.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between R.L. of the one part, and T.Y. L.Y. and R.C.
of the other party. Witnesses, That whereas a Marriage is intended by the
permission of God to be had and solemnized between the said R.L. and T.Y. it is
therefore Covenanted, granted, concluded, and condescended, and fully agreed
between the said Parties to these presents, in consideration of the said
Marriage, in manner and form following: And first, the said R.L. for himself
does Covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said T.Y. H.Y. and R.C.
their, etc. and every of them by these presents, That the said R.L. shall and
will before the last day of May next ensuing the Date hereof, lawfully Marry
and take to his Wife the said T.Y. if the said T.Y. do and will assent and
agree thereunto, and the Laws of God and holy Church do and will permit, and
the same suffer. And the said T.Y. H.Y. and R.C. for them and every of them,
do in like manner Covenant, etc. That she the said T.Y. shall and will, etc.
as supra. That R.L. shall stand seized of Lands to uses.
In consideration of which Marriage to be had and solemnized, the said E. does
for him, his, etc. by these presents, Covenant and grant to and with the said
T.Y. H.Y. and T.C. their, etc. That he the said R.L. his, etc. shall and will
immediately after the solemnization of the said Marriage for evermore stand and
be seized of and in one Message, etc. and of and in all other the Lands,
Tenements and Heriditaments whatsoever, whereof the said R.L. now has, or at
any time sithence the death of the said I.L. his late Father had any Estate of
inheritance in possession within the said County of C. or elsewhere within the
Realm of England, descended to him by or from his said late Father, and of and
in all and singular the rents, reversions, commodities and profits, with the
appurtenances to the said Messuages and other the premises, or to any part or
parcel thereof in any wise belonging or appertaining, to the use and uses,
purposes and intents hereafter in these presents mentioned, limited, and
expressed, and to none other purpose or intent: That is to wit, First, To whose
use he shall stand seized.
to the use and behoof of the said R.L. for and during the term of his natural
life, without impeachment of any manner of waste. And after his decease, to the
use of the said T.Y. for and during the term of her natural life, for and in
the name of her Joyntture, if she shall happen to survive and outlive the said
R.L. and from and after the decease of the Survivor of them the said R. and T.
to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the said R. by and upon the body of the
said T.Y. lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such issue, then to the
use of the right Heir of the said R.L. for ever. For further Assurances.
And the said R.L. for him, his, etc. does Covenant, etc. That he the said R.L.
his etc. shall and will at all times, and from time to time hereafter during
the space of, etc. next after the said marriage had and solemnized, as
aforesaid, do, acknowledge and suffer to be done, knowledged and executed at
his or their proper costs and charges upon lawful and reasonable request to him
or them to be made by the said T.Y.H.Y. and R.C. or any of them, their or any
of their, etc. all and every thing and things, device and devices whatsoever
for the further assurance, sure making, and conveying of the premises, and
every part and parcel thereof, to the uses, purposes, and intents, before in
these presents limited, mentioned, and declared, and to none other use, intent,
or purpose, as by the said T.Y.H.Y. and R.C. their or any of their learned
Council shall be reasonably devised or advised. That the said Messuages, etc.
are free from incombrances.
And that the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other
the premises, with the appurtenances in these presents before mentioned, at the
Day of the solemnizing of the said marriage, and at all times afterward, shall
be and continue free, clearly acquitted and discharged, or otherwise
sufficiently saved harmless by the said R.L. his, etc. of and from all manner
of former bargains, sales, Joyntures, Dowers, statutes-Merchants, and of the
staple recognizances, bonds, deeds, obligatory judgments, executions,
intrusions, fines for alienations, fees, annuities, rents and arrearages of
rents, leases, Estate and Estates in tail, and of and from all other charges,
titles, and incombrances whatsoever heretofore had, made, done, committed,
knowledge or suffered by the said R.L. or by any other person or persons by his
means or procurement. The rents and services of old time due and accustomed to
be paid to the chief Lord and Lords of the fee and fees thereof, and hereafter
to become due and payable for the same, and out of the lease of, etc. only
excepted and foreprized. And further the said R.L. does Covenant, etc. If R.L.
buy any Lands, it shall be to the use of him and T.Y. his Wife, etc.
that if the said R.L. or any other person or persons to his use and behoof
shall at any time hereafter happen to purchase any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments of any person or persons whatsoever during the life of the said
T.Y. That then the said R.L. shall cause and procure all such Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments which shall so fortune to be sufficiently conveyed, procured,
and assured to the use of the said R.L. and of the said T.Y. for and during
their two natural lives, and the life of the longest Liver and Survivor of
them. And after their decease to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the body
of the said R.L. by and upon the body of the said T.Y. lawfully to be begotten.
And for default of such issue, then to the use and behoof of him the said R.L.
his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to none other use, purpose, and intent.
And also, that he the said R.L. shall and will permit and suffer all and
singular those his Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the County
of, etc. which R.L. his Uncle, deceased, did in his life time given, grant,
convey and assure to him the said R.L. Party to these presents, lawfully to
descend, come and remain immediately after his decease to the Heirs of his
body by and upon the body of the said T.Y. lawfully to be begotten. And that
the said R.L. Party to these presents, shall not at any time hereafter make,
do, attempt, practice, knowledge, suffer, procure or execute any act or acts,
thing or things, conveyance or assurance whatsoever, whereby the said Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments of the gift and grant of the said R.L. his late
Uncle, deceased, or any part or parcel of the same, shall or may in any wise be
dis-continued, bargained, sold, aliened, transferred, given, granted, devised
or otherwise passed or conveyed away unto any other person or persons
whatsoever, unless it be to the use and behoof of the said R.L. parties to
these presents, and the Heir of the body of the said R. by and upon the body of
the said T.Y. lawfully to be begotten, or to those of him the said R.L. and the
said T.Y. and of the Heir of the said R. for ever. And finally, the said R.L.
does covenant, etc. that if it shall happen the said T.Y. after the
solemnization of the said marriage, to have issue of her body by the said R.L.
lawfully begotten, and afterward to decease in the life time of the said R.L.
that then he the said R. shall and will by his last Will and Testament in
writing give, bequeath and devise to the issue of the said R. and T. lawfully
begotten as aforesaid, the moity of all such goods and chattels as he the said
R.L. at the time of his death, shall have and be possessed of; and also the
moity of all such debts and duties, as shall be payable and due to the said
R.L. at the time of his death, over and above assessements, and sufficient to
answer, satisfy and discharge all such debts and duties, as the said R.L. by
any means shall then, bona fide, without fraud or collusion, be indebted and
bound for, unto any person or persons whatsoever. And if the said R.L. shall
happen to die (living the said T.Y.) That then he the said R. shall leave and
bequeath unto the said T.Y. such and so much of his goods, debts and chattels
(his whole debts, chattels and goods severed and divided into four parts, and
the charge of his funeral, and all his debts and duties due to any others,
fully paid and discharged out of the same) as shall amount in, value to the
three full parts of the same; so that the said T.Y. shall not, nor may not ask,
claim or demand any moity of the said goods, debts and chattels of the said R.
then only the said three parts thereof, as aforesaid. In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants upon Marriage, with special Covenants.
THis, INDENTVRE made, etc. between T. G. of the one part, and Sir W. M. of the
other part. Witnesses, That in consideration of a Marriage, In consideration
of a Marriage to be had.
by the permission of God, to be had and solemnized between the said T.G. of
the one part, and the said Lady W. of the other part; and for the great good
will and affection, the said T. G, has and bears to the same Dame, and also
to the intent all and singular the Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, with the appurtenances of the said T.G. hereafter in these
presents specified, shall and may come, descend, remain and continue to and in
the issue, of the said T. G. in such sort, manner and form, as by these
presents is hereafter expressed, mentioned, limited and declared. It is now
therefore covenanted, granted, condescended, concluded fully by and between the
said parties to these presents, in manner and form following: (That is to say)
The said T.G. for the considerations aforesaid, does Covenant, promise and
grant, for him, his Heirs, etc.to and with the said Sir, W. M. and Sir T. N.
their, etc. by these presents, That he the said T.G. before the Feast of, That
T.G. shall pass an estate in fee simple.
etc. next ensuing the date hereof, shall make, cause or suffer to be made, one
good, sufficient, lawful and indefezible estate in fee simple, to the said Sir.
W. M. and Sir T. N. and their Heirs, of and in the Manors, Messuages, Habend.
to certain uses.
etc. (Recite les tenures par lour several nosmes) To have and to hold the said
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and other the
premises, with the appurtenances (except before excepted) to the said Sir W.
M. and Sir T. N. and their Heirs, to the use of the said T.G. until such time
as the said marriage be had and solemnised, then to the use of the said T.G.
and of the said Dame S. for term of her natural life; and after her decease,
to the use of the said T.G. and of the Heirs males of his body upon the body
of the said Dame S. lawfully begotten, or to be begotten: And for default or
such issue, to the use of the Heirs of the body of the said T.G. lawfully
begotten, and to be begotten: And for default of such issue, to the use of the
right Heir of the said T.G. for ever. And so put down, so that the Lands be
of certain value, and discharged of encumbrances, except Leases, and for other
assurance. And then thus, viz. And for the more security, surety, sure making
and conveyance of all and singular the said Manors, and all other the
premises, with the appurtenances (except before excepted) to the said Dame S.
for term of her life, in manner and form aforesaid. The said T.G. for him, his,
etc. Covenanteth, etc. That he the said T.G. and his Heirs, and the said Sir
W.M. and Sir T.N. and their Heirs, and all and every other person and persons
that now are, or at any time hereafter shall stand and be seized of and in the
said Manors, etc. (except before excepted) shall stand and be thereof seized,
to the use of the said T.G. and D.S. after the same marriage had, for term of
their two natural lives, without impeachment of wast (voluntary wast only
excepted) and to such further uses and intents, as before in these presents are
limited and expressed, and to none other uses, intents or purposes whatsoever.
And that all and every estate and estates, assurance and assurances, conveyance
and conveyances in the Law whatsoever, of the premises, or of any part or
parcel thereof, hereafter to be had and made, shall be only to be said uses and
intents in and by these presents before mentioned, limited and declared: A
proviso that the said T.G. shall not alien nor sell the Lands given her in
Jointure by the former Husband; and then as follows. A Covenant that it shall
be lawful for D.S. to make a Will.
And the said T.G. for him, his Heirs etc. does Covenant, etc. That if it
fortune the said Dame S. after the said Marriage had and solemnized, to die and
decease in the lifetime of the said T.G. then it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said Dame S. at her free will and pleasure, to make, publish and
declare one Will and Testament in writing under her hand and seal, and thereby
dispose, given and bequeath to any her children, servants or friends, for their
preferments and advancements, the whole sum or value of 500l. of the goods and
chattels of the said Dame S. Or if the same goods and chattels in the mean
time shall fortune to be bargined, sold or otherwise put away by the said T.G.
or his Assigns; then of the goods and chattels of the said T.G. as shall
amount to the full value of 500l. as aforesaid, without any let, contradiction
or disturbance of the said T.G. his, etc. and that in as large and ample
manner, as if the said Dame S. were then a feme sole, and unmarried. And that
he the said T S. his etc. after the decease of the said Dame S. as aforesaid,
so dying testate, upon lawful request to him or them to be made, by such person
or persons to whom the said D.S. shall make any such legacies and bequests,
shall and will well and truly content and pay, or cause to be contented and
paid to the same person and persons, all and every the goods and chattels, or
the full value thereof to him or them so given and bequeathed, at such days
and times as the said Dame S. by her last Will and Testament in writing sealed
and subscribed, as aforesaid, shall limit and appoint. And further the said
T.G. Covenanteth, etc. that if it fortune the said T.G. after the said Marriage
had and solemnized, as aforesaid, to die, the said Dame S. then living, and the
son and heir apparent of the said T.G. then being within the age of 21.
years, that then the said D.S. shall have the chief Manor house of D. wherein
the said T.G. now inhabiteth and dwells; together with the warren of Conies,
Dairy house and Dairy close, and all Gardens, Orchards, Dove-houses, Buildings,
Barns, Stables, Ponds, Pools, and all other commodities, profits and easements
to the same adjoining and belonging. To have and to hold the said mansion, and
other there premises, with the appurtenances, last before mentioned, unto the
said Dame S. and her Assigns, during the nonage and minority of the said son,
and Heir apparent of the aforesaid T.G. (if she the said Dame S. so long do
live.) And also, if it happen the said T.G. to die before the said D.S. his
Heir apparent, being of the age of 21 years, or more; That then the said D.S.
shall peaceably and quietly have, hold and enjoy the said chief Mansion house
of D. together, etc. with the appurtenances thereunto belonging and adjoining,
as aforesaid, for and during the space of, etc. next after the decease of the
said T.G. the same year to be accounted from and after the feast of, etc.
which of them soever shall first happen, to come next after the death of the
said T.G. And the said Dame S. for and in consideration of the premises, does
for her self, her, etc. by these presents, frankly and freely give, grant, and
betake to the said T.G. all the Household Stuff, Bedding, Hangings, Plate,
Chattels and Godds moveable whatsoever, within the Realm of E. which the said
Dame S. has and is possessed of, either in her own right, or as Executrix to
any her said late Husbands (except and always reserved to the said Dame S. and
to her own only use and behoof, all her Jewels, Chains of gold, and apparel,
belonging to her person, which she does or has used, or intends to wear) To
have, hold and enjoy all and singular the said goods and chattels, and other
the premises, with the appurtenances, (except before excepted) to the said T.G.
his, etc. to his and their only use and behoof for ever.

In witness etc.

A perfect assurance of a Jointure, after Marriage had, by way of Covenant.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between B.A. of the one part, Consideration
and L.H. and G.H. of the other part, Witnesses, that the said B.A. for and in
consideration of the great and faithful good will, love, favor and affection
that he the said B. bears to and toward D.A. his now Wife, and for and in
consideration of the true performance and accomplishment of all such premises
and agreements had and made by the said B.A. upon the marriage between him the
said B.A. and the said D.A. and for the assuring, conveying and making of a
good and perfect Jointure of the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of the said
B A. unto the said D.A. for and during the term of her life, and to the intent
the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of the said B A. hereafter mentioned,
may be sufficiently conveyed and astured to and for the Jointure of the said D,
and to and in the said B A and his Heirs for ever. He the said B A does
Covenant, promise, That B.A. shall assure Lands to L.H. and G.H.
grant and agree to and with the said L.H. and G.H. and their Heirs, That he
the said B A sahll and will, within the space of, etc, next ensuing the date of
these presents, by good and sufficient conveyance and assurance in the Law,
sufficiently convey and assure unto the said L.H. and G H and their Heirs, or
to the survivor of them, and his Heirs, or to the Heir or Heirs of the
survivor of them, and the Heirs and Assigns of such Heir and Heirs, for
ever; All that his marsh ground or lands, with the appurtenances, called, etc.
lying and being in etc. or in any of them, within the County of E. and also all
other his Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances, in, etc.
aforesaid. And that the said conveyance and assurance so to be had and made
within the space of, etc. next ensuing the date of these presents, shall
remain and be. And the said L H. and G.H and their Heirs, and the suvivor of
them, and his Heirs, immediately from and after scuh conveyance and assurance
so had and made, shall stand and be seized of and in all and singular the said
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and other the premises, with their
appurtenances, to the uses, intents and purposes hereafter in these presents
set down, expressed and declared, and to none other use intent or purpose.
(That is to say) To the use and behoof of the said B.A. and D.A. for and during
the life of the said A. and for the Jointure of the said Dame, To the use of,
etc. for her Jointure.
and in full recompense and allowance of he Dower, and immediately from and
after the decease of the said D.A. to the use of him the said B.A. his Heirs,
etc. forever. Provided always, and notwithstanding, and it is the true intent
and meaning of the said B.A. and of the parties to these presents, that it
shall and may be lawful to and for said B. A. at any time or times hereafter,
Aproviso, that it shall be lawful for him to make Leases for 21 years, or 3
lives, or under.
at his will and pleasure, to demise, grant and make any Lease, or Leases, for
the term of 21 years, or under, or for three lives, or sewer, of all singular
the aforesaid Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and other the premises, with
their appurtenances, or of any part of parcel of the same, which have most
commonly been used to be demised, or to farm-letten, by the space of 20 years
last past before the date hereof; and whereof, at the time of the making of any
such Lease and Demise, there shall not be any former lease in being, and to
have continuance above the term of three years, or one life at the most: so
that the said D. A. be made party to every such Leases and Demises, And so,
that the old accustomed rent and rents, or more, be or shall be reserved upon
all and every the said Leases, Grants and Demises so to be made of the
premises, or of any part thereof, as is aforesaid, to conitnue and be yearly
payable, during every of the same Leases and terms, unto the said B. A. and D.
and the Heirs and Assigns of the said etc. And so always as the said Leases,
or Demises, or any of them, be not in any wise dis-punishable of wast. And that
then, and so after, the said L. H. and G. H. and their Heirs, and the survivor
of them, and his Heirs, shall stand and be seized of and in all and singular
the said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, and other the premises, with
their appurtenances, and of and in any part or parcel thereof, so to be demised
and leased, to the uses and use of all and every such person and persons to
whom the premises, or any part or parcel thereof, shall be demised and leased,
their Executors, etc. for and during such term and terms therein, as shall be
limited upon any such Lease, or Leases, so to be made, as aforesaid: So that he
or they to whom any such Lease, or Lease, shall be made, as aforesaid, their
Executors, etc. do well and truly pay or cause to be paid, such, the same
yearly rents and payments as shall be reserved and appointed to be paid, upon
the making of every or any such Lease or Leases, as aforesaid, to the said B.A.
and D. during the life of the said D. and after her decease, to all and every
such person and persons, to whom, from time to time, and for the time being,
the immediated use, estate, reversion, remainder or interest of and in the
same, or of and in any part or parcel thereof so to be demised or leased, as
aforesaid, shall by and according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, next belong, revert, remain and come or be after the expirations of
such several Demises or Leases: And shall do, and well and truly observe,
perform, fulfill and keep all and singular the Covenants, grants, articles,
conditions and agreements contained and specified in the same Lease, Leases and
Demises, on the tenants part to be observed, performed, fulfilled and kept,
according to the true intent and meaning of every such Lease, Grant or Demise.
And so also, and upon condition, that he or they to whom any such Leases, or
Leases shall be made, his or their Excecutors, etc. do not at any time or times
during his or their several estate or estates of and in the premises, or of and
in any part or parcel thereof, so to be demised or leased, commit or make, or
wilingly or wittingly procure, or assent, or suffer to be committed or done,
any manner of wast, spoil, or destruction in and upon the premises, or in and
upon any part or parcel thereof, which shall amount to the value of 10 s.
without the special license and assent of the said B.A. and D.A. or of such
person or persons to whom the immediate use, reversion, remainder or use
thereof shall for the time being be and appertain. And also, so that he or they
to whom any such Lease or Lease shall be made of the premises, or of any part
or parcel of the same, as aforesaid, shall and do at all times during his or
their estate or estates, of and in the same, well and truly content and pay,
or cause to be contented and paid to all and every such person or persons, to
whom from time to time, and for the time being, the immediate use, estate,
reversion, remainder in interest of and in the same, shall by and according to
the true meaning of these presents, next belong revert, remain, come, or be,
after the expiration or determination of such said several demises, all manner
of rents, services, duties and customs which either upon such several Demises
or Leases so to be made, as aforesaid, shall be reserved, or otherwise due, by
reason of the Lands so to be demised or leased or leased, according to the true
meaning, purport and intent of the said several Demises or Leases thereof, to
be made in manner and form aforesaid. A Covenant, that if he do not convey the
Lands within a year, then the parties seized shall be seized to her use.
And further the said A. B. for the considerations before in these presents
expressed, does for him, and his Heirs, Covenant, etc. That if he the said
B.A. shall not, or do not, within the said space of, etc. next ensuing the
date of these presents, well and sufficiently convey and assure all and
singular the premises, with the appurtenances, unto the said L.H. and G.H. and
their Heirs, as aforesaid; or shall or do leave any part or parcel of the
premises not sufficiently conveyed and assured unto the persons aforesaid, in
manner and form aforesaid: That then immediately from and after the end of the
said one year next ensuing the date hereof, as aforesaid, the said B. and his
Heirs, and all and every other person and persons that shall then stand and be
seized of and in the premises, or of any part or parcel thereof, shall stand
and be seized of and in all such and so much of the premises, with the
appurtenances, as shall be so lest, and not sufficiently conveyed, as
aforesaid, to such and the same uses, intents and purposes, and with and under
such conditions, provisoes, contingents, limitations and liberties, as before
in these presents are mimited, declared and expressed, and to none other use,
intent or purpose.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Marriage already agreed upon, with diverse special Covenants
concerning the same, and other uses to that intent.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Witnessesh, that for and in consideration of a
Marriage already agreed upon (by the grace of God) shortly to be had and
solemnized between the said T P and M G Sister unto the said I G, and in
consideration of the sum of, etc. to be paid unto the said T P in preferment
with the said M to the said marriage, by the said I G well and truly contented
and paid, as hereafter by these presents is declared and appointed: And for
diverse other good and reasonable causes, respects and considerations the said
parties serverally moving, It is now Covenanted, granted, concluded,
condescended, and agreed by and between the said parties, and either of the
said parties does by these presents, Covenant, grant and agree, for himself,
his Heirs, etc. to and with the other of the same parties, his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, and every of them, in manner and form, and to the effect
following: viz. Firsth, the said E P and T P do by these presents, for them,
their Heirs, etc. grant, covenant and promise, and either of them, for and by
himself, his Heirs, etc. does grant, etc. to and with the said I G his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, That they the said E P and T P and either of
them, at all times hereafter, and from time to time, at and upon the reasonable
request, consts and charges in the Law of the said I G his Heirs, etc. shall
and will make, seal, deliver, acknowledge, suffer, perform, perfect and execute
unto such person or persons, or his or their Heir, as the said I G his Heirs,
etc. shall nominate and appoint, all and every such conveyances, estates,
foeffements, fines, recoveries, acts, things, writings, demises and assurances
in the Law, in and upon all the capital Messuages and Tenements, with the
appurtenances, called; etc. situate, etc. and all the Lands, Tenements,
Meadows, Leasowes, Pastures, Woods, Under-Woods, Commons, Rents, Reversions,
Conditions and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the same capital Messuages in any
wise belonging, or now, or at any time herefore, let, used, occupied or enjoyed
to or with the same, or known, reputed, accepted or taken for or as part
thereof: And of, in and upon all that capital Message, etc. called, etc. and
of, and in, and upon all that water corn milne, cum pertinentiis, commonly
called or known by the name of, etc. and all Lands, pools, waters,
watercourse, stagns, ponds, floudgates, streams, profits, maltures,
suit-commodities, customs, easments and emoluments to the same milne belonging
or appertaining, or to or with the said milne occupied or enjoyed; and of, in
and upon all and singular those two several Messuages and Tenements, with the
appurtenances, in, etc. commonly called by the several names of, etc. and all
the Lands, Tenements, Cottages, Meadows, Leasowes, Woods, Pastures and
Hereditaments whatsoever, cum pertinentiis, to the said several Messuages, or
either of them severally belonging or in any wise appertaining; or to and with
the same Messuages, or either of them, now or at any time heretofore occupied,
used or enjoyed: And of, in and upon all those Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, cum pertinentiis, which the said E and T or either of them,
has, or at any time had in, etc. and which now be, or late were in the several
tenures, possessions or occupations of, etc. or any of them, or their
Under-tenants or Assigns, or the Under-tenant or Assignee of either of them:
And of, in and upon all the tithes of corn, grain and hay, and all other tithes
coming, growing, recruing and arising of and within, etc. and the same fields
and grounds compassed, etc. And of, in and upon all courts, profits and
perquisits of courts, waifs, strayes, heriots, reliefs, roylties, and all other
profits and commodities of the same: And of, in and upon all other the
Messuages, Lands, Tenemants and Hereditaments, cum pertimentiis, which the said
E and T have, or at any time had, Habend' to uses.
of or in any state of inheritance, within, and. or any of them. To have and to
hold the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other the
premises with the appurtenances, unto the said person or persons to be named
and appointed as aforesaid, and his or their Heirs or Assigns, to the uses,
behoofs, purposes and intents, and with, upon and under the conditions,
provisoes, liberties and limitations hereafter in these presents limited,
expressed, set down, appointed and declared by the said I G his, etc. or his or
their Council learned; shall be reasonably devised, advised, framed or
required, so as the said E and T nor either of them, shall not be compelled or
driven to go or travel, for the making, acknowledging, suffering or excuting of
the said estates, feoffements, etc. or any of them, out of the County of, etc.
And it is granted, condescended, concluded, accorded, determined and agreed by
and between the said parties to these presents, for them, their Heirs, etc.
That the said estates, conveyances, etc. shall be, and the said person or
persons, and his or their Heirs or Assigns, shall stand and be seized of all
and singular the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all
other the premises, with the appurtenances, to the several uses, intents,
behoofs and purposes; and with, under and upon the conditions, provisoes and
limitations hereafter in these presents limited, appointed, specified,
expressed and declared, and to none other use, intent, purpose or meaning. That
is to say, that the said estates, etc. for, touching and concerning theh said
Messuages and Tenements, cum pertinentiis, called, etc. and the Demeasne Lands
belonging thereunto; and all Lands, Meadows, etc. ut supra, occupied and used
for as Demeasne Lands thereunto belonging, and all Lands, Meadows and
Pastures, or to or with the same, or either of them; and for and touching the
said several Messuages, That it shall be to the use of T. P. and M. for a
Jointure, and to other uses.
Lands and Tenements, with the appurtenances, now or late in the several
tenures, possessions or occupations of, etc. shall be, and the said person and
person, etc. or his or their Heirs or Assigns, shall stand, and be thereof
seized, to the use and behoof of the said T P, and of the said M, for and
during the term of their natural lives, and the longer liver of them, for and
in the name of a Jointure to the same M. without impeachment of wast, during
the life of the said T P: and after their decease, to the use and behoof of the
first son which the said T shall hereafter have of his body upon the body of
the said M lawfully begotten, and to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the
body of the said first son lawfully issuing; And for default of such issue, to
the use and behooof of, etc. And the said estates, for, touching and concerning
the rest and residue of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
cum pertinentiis, whereof no use is before by these presents limited, appointed
or declared, shall be, and the person or persons, etc. and his or their Heirs
or Assigns, shall stand and be thereof seized, to the use and behoof of the
said T.P. for and during the term of his natural life without impeachment of
wast; and after his decease, to the use and behoof of the said T.P. for and
during the term of his natural life, without impeachment of wast; and after
his decease to the use and behoof of the first son and the Heir of his body
lawfully issuing: and for default of such issue etc. If it happen any of the
lands aforesaid to belawfully evicted out of her possession, then she is to be
assured of other lands to their full value.
Provided always, and it is further Covenanted, etc. that if at any time after
the death of the said E P and T P the premises so, as aforesaid, limited or
appointed to or for the Jointure of the said M. or any part or parcel thereof
happen by any way or means to be lawfully evicted or divested by recovery or
entry, or by any other lawful means, out of, or from the possession or seizin
of the said E now Wife of the said E P her Leasee or Assignee, by reason other
Dower, or of any Jointure or estate of the said e at any time heretofore made,
or hereafter to be made: That then, and at all time, after the said estates,
etc. and all other assurance whatsoever, at any time or times hereafter to be
had, made or passed, in performance of any Covenants, grants or articles
comprised in these present Indentures, shall be, and shall endure, and shall be
construed, deemed and adjudged to be and endure: And the parties and persons to
whom the Covenants and assurances, or other assurance of the premises, or any
part thereof, shall be made, and their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be
seized thereof, and in so much of the premises to be chosen out and laid forth
by the said M and her Assigns, at her and their free liberty and pleasure, as
shall and may in every respect fully countervail and be equivalent to the said
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments so to be evicted or divested out of her
possession or seizin, by the said E, or her Leassee or Assignee, unto the use
and behoof of the said M and her Assigns, for and during the natural life any
of the said E and to no other uses before in these presents specified; any
thing aforesaid, or any thing to be contained in the said assurances, estates
and conveyances, or any any of them to the contrary, etc. Provided also, and it
is moreover Covenanted, etc. That after the decease of the said E if sall and
may be lawful to and for the said T at all and every time, times, and from time
to time during his natural life, by Deed indented under his seal, to demise,
grant, set and let the said Messuages, Lands and Tenements, or any part or
parcel theof, unto any person or persons in possession, and not in reversion,
other then and except the premise before by these presents limited and
appointed for the Jointure of the said M and other, then, etc. so as the same
grants, That it shall be lawful for T. after E's, decease, to make Leases.
leases or estates shall not surmount nor exceed the term and number of 21
years, or three lives, from and after the making of such Lease or Lease; and so
as also there shall be reserved upon every such Lease to be yearly paid during
the continuance thereof, such and so much yearly rents, duties and services, as
are now paid or answered for or out of the same, or more. And that then the
said estates, etc. and other assurances to be had, levied, suffered and made by
the said E or T or either of them, of the said premises to be demsed, as
aforesaid, shall be and shall enure, and the said person and persons to be, to
be named as aforesaid; and his or their Heirs or Assigness shall stand and be
seized of the premises to be demised from and after the demising or granting
thereof, to the use and behoof of all and every such person and persons, and
their Assigns, to whom any such demise or demises shall be so made for and
during the term or termers for which the same shall be so demised, according
to the intent, effect and true meaning of such demises, and every of them, so
as the fame person or persons, and his and their Executors, etc. severally and
respectively do and shall well and truly pay, or cause, etc. to such person
and persons for the time being as shall be in the next and immediate reversion
or remainder of the same Lands and Tenements so to be demised, the rents,
duties and services in the said several Leases to be reserved upon every fuch
several days and times in their said Leases next after the same shall be due
and payable, and reasonably demanded by him or them, in the next and immediate
reversion or remainder thereof; and do perform in convenient time, after
request in that behalf to be made, all Covenants and grants in the same Lease,
Leases or grants to be contained, and to be performed on his or their parts and
behalfs, shall not wittingly or willingly commit or suffer any wast above the
value of, etc. in any one Tenement so to be demised or letten: And from and
after such Demises or Leases to be had and made, and as they severally end and
determine, to such further use and uses, and in such sort, manner and form, as
are before in these presents limited, mentioned and declared for and touching
the same, any matter or thing, and ut supra. Provided also, and it is likewise
Covenanted, etc. that after the decease of the said E P it shall be lawful to
and, for the said T P at all times, and from time to time, during his life, by
writing indented under seal, to grant, That it shall be lawful for T. after
E's.decease, to make his other wives Joyntures.
convey, appoint or assure the said Message and Tenement, cum pertinenti is,
commonly called, etc. and the Lards and Demeasnes thereunto belonging, or
therewith used or occupied for or unto the use of such woman or women, as the
said T P sahll hereafter marry or espouse, for and during her or their life or
lives, and no longer, for and in the name of a Jointure, and not dis-punishable
of waft; reserving therefore yearly the annual rent of, etc. to be yearly paid
during the continuance of the same estate, or otherwise by writing indented
under seal, from time to time, at his liberty and pleasure, to demise, grant
and set the same capital Message or Tenement, and the Lands and Demeasnes
thereunto belonging, or otherwise used or occupied unto any person or persons
in possession, and not of nor in reversion for the term of, etc. or under, from
the day of the date of such writing indented. Yiedling and reserving therefore
yearly, the annual rent of, etc. to be yearly paid during the continuance of
such Lease: And that from and after such grants, conveyance, assurance, demise
or setting, so, as aforesaid made or passed, the said estates, etc. before in
these presents mentioned to be made and passed, shall be for and touching the
said capital Message and Tenement, called, etc. and the Lands and Demeasnes
thereunto belonging, or otherwise used or occupied. And the said person and
persons, etc. and his or their. Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be thereof
seized to the use and behoof of the same woman or women, or Leasse or Leasees,
for and during the said term of; etc. or under, so as the woman or women,
Leassee or Leassees, do and will yearly, during the continuance of their
estates or term, content, satisfy and pay the annual rents reserved by or upon
the said writings indented, according to the effect and true meaning thereof,
unto him or them to whom the immediate reversion or remainder of the said
capital Message or Tenement, and the Lands and Demeasnes thereunto belonging,
or therewith occupied or used, shall by and according to the true meaning of
these presents for the time being, belong and appertain; and that for and
touching the reversion or remainder of the same capital Message or Tenement,
and the Lands and Demeasnes thereunto belonging, or therewith occupied or used,
expectant upon such estate for life or years, the said estates, etc. shall be:
And the said person and persons, etc. and his or their Heirs and Assigns, shall
stand and be thereof seized to such other uses, behoofs and purposes, and in
such fort, manner and form, and of and in such form, and of in such estate and
use of inheritance, and of such person and persons as are before in these
presents appointed, named and declared for or touching the same, any thing in
these presents contained, etc. ut supra. Provided always, and it is granted,
That it shall be lawful for him to make annuities.
etc. That is shall and may be lawful to and for the said E P at any time
during his life, by writing under seal, and by matter of record, to grant,
convey, appoint or assure unto the said E P his Son, for and during the term of
his natural life, and no longer, one annuity or rentcharge, not exceeding
22l. at the most, to commence from and after the decease of the said E P, and
to be issuing and going forth and distrainable in, from and out of the said
Messuages, Lands and Tenements, or any part or parcel thereof, other then the
said Lands and Tenements before appointed for the Jointure of the said M, and
that but during life only, and no longer, as to the said E during his life,
shall be thought meet and convenient. And that from and after such grant,
appointment, conveyance and assurance of such annuity or yearly rent of the
said estates, etc. covenanted by these presents to be made, shall be for and
touching such of the said Lands and Tenements as shall be so charged: And the
said person or persons, etc. and his or their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand
and be seized of and in the said Lands and Tenements so charged, to the intent,
trust and use that the said E D shall have, take, perceive, receive, distrain
for and enjoy the said annuity or yearly rentcharge, according to the true
meaning of the said grant, appointment or assurance to be thereof, as
aforesaid, made, without fraud or covin. And yet nevertheless the same Lands
and Tenements being made subject and chargeable to or for such annuity or
yearly rent as are before by these presents appointed, declared or expressed
for and touching the same, any thing in these presents, etc. Provided also,
etc. for liberty to T P to grant annuity for every his younger sons by marriage
for life, not exceeding 6l. a piece. And whereas the said I L has conveyed and
assured unto the said E P and his Heirs (express the Lands)and whereas the
said E P has entered into Bond unto the said I L with condition, that in case
the said I his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, should pay unto the said
E P his Heirs, etc. the sum of, etc. in the porch of, etc. at the Feast of,
etc. in the same Bond contained: That then he the said E P or his Heirs, shall
convey and re-sure the same Lands and Tenements back again unto the said I L
and his Heirs for ever, as by the same Bond and condition thereof made, more at
large appears. It is now provided, granted, etc. that if the said I L his
Heirs, etc at any of the said Feasts, and in the condition of the said Bond
mentioned; or the said E P his Heirs, etc. within, etc. next after any of the
said Feasts, do or shall content or pay unto the said T P or the heir of his
body upon the body of the said M lawfully to be begotten; or in default of such
issue to the Executors or Assigns of the same T P the sum of, etc. That then
and from thenceforth all and singular the uses before specified in these
presents, be they present, contingent or future, for and touching the same
Lands and Tenements which were conveyed and assured unto the said E P by the
said I L as aforesaid, shall utterly cease, determine and be utterly void, to
all intents and purposes. And that then and at all times after the sad estates,
etc. for and touching the said Lands and Tenements, shall be: And the said
person or persons, etc. or his or their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be
thereof seized to the use and behoof of the said I. and his heirs for ever. And
that then and from thenceforth the same Lands and Tenements, nor any part nor
parcel thereof, shall not be subject nor liable, nor the estate thereof alter
or change to or for any other use, intent, purpose or behoof; these presents or
any thing, etc. And the said E P and T P do by these presents covenant, etc.
That the said E P and T P. their Heirs, That E. P. and T. P. shall acquit and
discharge as well M. as also the Lands.
etc. or some of them, shall and will at all times from and after the marriage
had and solemnized between the said T P and M G well and sufficiently acquit,
exonerate and discharge, or otherwise from time to time, upon reasonable notice
and request, full and sufficiently save and keep harmless as well the said M G
and her Assigns, and their said Sons and Heirs of their two bodies lawfully
issuing; As also all and singular the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, with the appurtenances, of, for, from, touching and concerning
all and all manner of bargains, sales, gifts, grants, Joyntures, fines, dowers,
recoveries, feoffments, estates, tails, limitations, uses, leases, morgage,
rents-charge, stature merchants and of the staple, judgments, recognizances,
intrusions, conditions, entries, troubles, titles and encumbrances whatsoever,
at any time heretofore had, made, done, committed, acknowledged, grown,
executed, occasioned, caused or willingly or wittingly suffered or hereafter to
be made, etc. by the said E P and T P, or either of them, or any other person
or persons by their or any of their assent, means, authority, title or
procurement (the rent and services hereafter to grow due to the chief Lord or
Lords of the fee of the premeises, and the Title of Dower or estate in Jointure
of the said E, now wife of the said E D in and to the premises; and all Leases
heretofore made by the said E for 21 years or under, now in being; whereupon
the now rents and services paid or answered for the same or more, are reserved
and shall be yearly due and payable during the same term and terms of the said
Lease and Leases; and all estates, conveyances, grants, leases and assurances
to be made by and according to the true meaning of these presents; and such
condition and title as the I. L. and his heirs have to redeem the premises by
him, as aforesaid, conveyed and assured unto the said E.P. and such Lease as
the said E P has heretofore made and passed unto IC an express Tenant of and
upon the Tenement, etc. for, and during the term of, etc. whereupon there is
reserved and shall be payable during the continuance of the same Lease, then
also only excepted.) And whereas the said E P is possessed for diverse years yet
enduring, of and in the tithes and portion of etc. in etc. of and in etc. Now
the said E P and T P do grant etc. that the same E P and T P. and either of
them, and the Executors and Administrators of either of them, shall and will at
all times hereafter, and from time to time, at and upon the reasonable request,
costs, and charges in the Law of the said E G, his etc. make etc. unto such
person or persons etc: of, in and upon the said tithes, leases for years and
interest, and the Indentures and writings thereof: To have and to hold the same
Tithes, leases, terms, interest, and the Indentures, and writings unto the said
person or persons etc: their etc. to the intent, use, trust and confidence that
the said person or persons, etc. and his or their etc. shall suffer and permit
the said E P during his life, to have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said tithes
and leases, and receive the rents, issues, and profits thereof; and to the
intent, use, trust and confidence that the said person or persons, to be named
and appointed, as aforesaid; and his or their heirs etc. shall and will permit
and suffer the said M from and after the decease of E P for and during her life
to have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the tithes and portion of tithes of
etc. and to the intent, use, trust and confidence that the said person or
persons, etc. shall from and after the decease of the said E P permit and
suffer the said T P and the heirs of his body, upon the body of the said M
lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such issue etc. to have, hold,
occupy and enjoy the said rest and residue of the tithes, farms, and leases;
together also with the said tithes and protion of her, from and after the
decease of the said E P and M G, to take and receive the rents, issues, and
profits thereof, during the rest and residue of the terms and pears of the
said several leases, without fraud and covin. And the said E P and T P for
them, etc. That they the said E P and T P their etc. or one of them, shall and
will at all times hereafter, acquit and discharge, or otherwise upon reasonable
notice and request, fully and sufficiently release the said tithes, farms,
leases and interests, of, for touching and concerning all and all manner
bargains, etc. whatsoever had, made, done acknowledged, caused, procured,
occasioned, willingly or wittingly suffered or hereafter, to be had, etc. by
the said E P and T P, or either of them, or any other, by their or any of their
means, assent, commandment, authority or procurement (The rents, duties,
grants, and covennants contained in the said several leases only excepted and
foreprized.) And that the said M, and the heirs of the body of the said T P
upon her body lawfully to be begotten, shall or may have, etc. the said tithes,
etc. according to the intent and true meaning of these presents, without any
let, suit, etc. of nay person or persons that lawfully claim the premises or
any part or parcel thereof, from, by, or under the said E P and T P or either
of them, or after, or by reason of any forfeiture committed or willingly
suffered by them or either of them (except such interruption, suit, or troubles
as shall be made, done, or committed by the said person or persons to be named
and appointed as aforefaid, or his or their, etc. or any of them.)

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Use for the cutting off Lands entailed in the right of the
Wife, making the same to the use of her Husband for ever.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, A Covenant to suffer a
Recovery.
That it is covenanted, granted, condescended and a greed between the said
parties by these presents. That they the said R F and M, on this side, and
before the Feast of etc. shall suffer the said I S and C R in due form of Law,
to recover against the said K and M, and their heirs and the heirs of them and
either of them in the Court of Hastings, of L. holden in the Guild hall of the
same City, according to the custom of the same City, the Mayor and Sheriffs of
the same City aforesaid two Messuages, etc. with all and singular shops etc. by
the name of etc. set, lying and being, etc. and to have and take execution
thereof accordingly. And it is further covenanted, That the Recovery shall be
to the use of R. F.
etc. and the said R C. and I S for them, etc. That immediately from and after
the Judgment and execution had of the same recovery, as well the said R C and F
S and their heirs shall stand and be seized of the premises, as also of the same
Recovery in form aforesaid to be had and sued for, the two Messuages shall be
to the use and behoof only of aforesaid R F and of his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, and to no other use, purpose or intent.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of a Lease of a Water-House, and Engines, penned by Council.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, That whereas the Mayor and
Commonalty, and Citizens of the City of London, The grant from the Mayor and
Commonalty to T. P. of the Cistern.
by their Indenture of Lease under their common Seal, bearing Date, etc. for
the consideration therein specified; have demised, etc. unto T P of etc. all
that Cisterne or Cisternes to our place of store or receipt for Water, at or
near unto the place called, etc. aforesaid, the ground thereof containing in
measure, etc. or thereabouts, and all those Engines, buildings, and
Watercourse at or near unto the Wharfe aforesaid before that time made or
erected by B B of etc. or. by his Assignee or Assigns, or by his or their
appointment, or by any others for conveyance of Water into certain places
within the City of, etc. and the liberties thereof, out of the River of Thames;
which cisterne, tower or place of store or receipt and engines, buildings, and
water works, then were in the tenure or occupation of the said T P, or of his
Assignee or Assigns, together with free egresse and regresse to and from the
said water works, and place of store or receipt for water. And whereas the said
Mayor and Commonalty and Citizens by the said recited Indenture of Lease, have
for them and their Successors given and granted full power, license and
authority to the said T P his, etc. and every of them, at all convenient times
during the time and term in the said Indenture of Lease limited by them, their
Servants, Laborers and Workmen, Deputies and Assigns to lay and convey any
pipe or pipes of lead, as well within the said River of Thames, as in the said
Wharfe called, etc. for the bringing of water to the said Cisterne or
Cisternes, Engine or Engines, as also in any other place or places in any the
streets or common passages or other places of the said City of London, and the
Liberties thereof wheresoever the said T. P. his Executors, Assigns, Servants,
Deputies or Work men shall think good, for the bringing and conveyance of the
water from the said Engine or Engines to any house or houses, or any other
place or places within the said City or Liberties, as the said T P, his
Executors, Assigns, Servants, Deputies or workmen shall think good (and the
same not being hurtful or noyous to the pipes, vaults, or buildings of or
within the said City, nor any of them, nor to be done without reasonable notice
before given to the Chamberlain of the said City, for the time being) to the
end he may first consider of such hurt or noyance, and so as it be not through
any man's house or ground against the good will of the Tenant or Occupier
thereof. And whereas also the said Mayor and commonalty, and citizens (as much
as in them did lie) have by their said Indenture of Lease for them and their
Successors, Demised, letten and granted to the said T P his etc. all that place
or plot ground containing by estimation, etc. or thereabouts, where the said
Cisterne or Cisternes, Engine or Engines, building and Waterworks are
employed, built and erected, together with free liberty of access, ingresse,
egresse and regresse to and from all and every the premises, to have and to
hold for the term of, etc. commencing from the Day of the Date of the said
recited Indenture of Lease, for and under the yearly Rent of, etc. payable as
in and by the said recited Indenture of Lease (whereunto relation being had
amongst diverse Covenants, Grants, Articles, provisions and agreements therein
contained) more at large appears. The recital of the grant from T. P. to
diverse Persons of the pipes of lead.
And whereas the said T P has since the said original Indenture of Lease to
him in form aforesaid, made and granted, made diverse and sundry Leases and
Estates of diverse pipes of lead parcel of the premises conveying water to the
several houses of diverse persons in the City of London and Suburbs thereof, The
grant from T. to C. E. and T. F. of the whole.
and thereupon has reserved diverse and sundry Rents. And whereas also the said
T P. by a certain Deed indented, bearing Date, etc. acknowledged to be enrolled
in the high Court of Chancery, Has bargained, sold and assigned to C.E. of
etc. and T f of, etc. all his estate, interest, and term of years of and in
the premises. And where the said C E and T f by certain Deeds indented bearing
Date, From C.E and T.F. to Sir G.A T. H. etc. by parts.
etc. Have bargained, sold and assigned to the said Sir G. A. his Executors and
Assigns one equal twenty fourth part of all and every the said Cisterne or
Cisternes, tower, place or store for water-engines, waterworks, plat of
ground, benefits profits, commodities and premises, the same into twenty four
equal parts, being, or to be divided. And to the said T H. four equal twenty
fourth parts of all and every the said Cisterne or Cisternes, Tower, place or
store for Water Engines, Waterworks, plat of ground, benefits, profits,
commodities and premises, the same into twenty four equal parts, being or to be
divided, as aforesaid. And to the said E.B. one eual twenty fourth part, and
the moiety or half of a twenty fourth part of, etc. ut supra. And to the said
C A four equal twenty four parts of all and every etc. ut supra. And to the
said S A one equal twenty fourth part of all, etc. ut supra. And to the said A
H one equal twenty fourth part of, etc. ut supra. And to the said E W the
moiety or one half of one equal twenty fourth part of all, etc. ut supra. And
to the said G. Forman one equal twenty fourth part of all and every the
premises (the same into twenty four equal parts being or to be divided, as
aforesaid.) As in and by the said Deeds indented, bearing Date, etc. more
plainly appears; by force whereof the said Sit G A. T H. E B. C A. S A. A H.
E W. and G F, are at eh ensealing of these presents lawfully interessed and
possessed of all the said Cistern and Cisternes, Tower, place of store, or
receipt of Water-Engines, Waterworks, plat of ground, privileges, commodities,
and other the premises. Now this Indenture further witnesses, The
consideration.
That the said G A. T H etc. for and in consideration of the Rent, Covenants,
payments and sums of money here-under severally and respectively reserved and
mentioned to be paid, done and performed by the said H H his etc. and for and
in consideration of the sum of 300 l. of etc. hereupon conditionally assured to
be paid at several days after the Feast day of, etc. next ensuing the Date of
these presents according to the conditions of several obligations: The Demise
to H.H.
Have demised, betaken and to farm letten, and by these presents do, etc. unto
the said H H, all their said Cisterne or Cisternes, tower, place or store for
water, and the use of all and every the said Engines, buildings and waterworks
at or near the said Wharf, called, etc. heretofore made and erected by the said
B B. or by his Assignee or Assigns, or by his or their appointment, or by any
other for conveying of water into certain places in the said City of London,
and the Liberties thereof our of the said River of Thames, as abovesaid, and
free egresse and regresse to and from the said water works and place of store
and receipt for water, and all the said place and plat of ground, containing by
estimation, etc. where the said Cisternes, Engines and Waterworks are
employed, built and erected, and the use of all and every other the premises,
with the appurtenances in and by the said original Indenture of Lease to the
said T. P. granted as aforesaid, together also with all and singular other the
authorities, privileges, preheminences, matters, liberties, powers and things
whatsoever granted, passed or conveyed to the said T P by the said original
Lease in as large and ample manner to all intents and purposes as they the said
Sir G A. T H. etc. may or might have, use, exercise or enjoy the same by force
of the said Original Lease and mean Assignements aforesaid, and the reversion
and reversions of the premises and of every part thereof, for the term only
these presents demised, and expressed, and all rents yearly profits whatsoever
reserved upon any whatsoever under-Lease, Demise or Grant made of the
premises, or of any part or parcel thereof before the ensealing of these
presents: To have and to hold the said Cisterne and Cisternes, Habend' for 400
years.
tower, place of store, or receipt for water, and the use of the said Engines,
Buildings, Waterworks, and the said place or plat of ground aforesaid where
the said Tower is erected, and all benesits, authorities, privileges, powers,
profits and commodities, and all and every other the premises, with the
appurtenances by these presents mentioned and intended to be demised unto the
said H.H. his, etc. from the Feast day of, etc. next coming after the Date of
these presents, unto the end and term of 400. years from thence next ens^ing,
and fully to be complete and ended: Yiedling and paying for the year of the
said term of, Yiedling and paying
etc. unto the said Sir G.A. T.H. etc. or their Assigns, one corn pepper at
the feast of, etc. (if it be lawfully demanded) And also yiedling and paying
yearly every year during the other 399 years residue of the said term of,
etc. unto the said Sir G.A. his, etc. at the fore-doore of the said tower,
place of store or receipt for water, the yearly rent or sum of, etc. at two
Feasts or terms in the year, that is to say, at the Feast of, etc. or within
forty days next ensuing either of the same Feast Days by even and equal
portions. And also yielding and paying yearly and every year during the said
399 years residue of the said term of, etc. unto the said T.H. his, etc. at
the place aforesaid the yearly rent or sum of, etc. or like money at the said
two last mentioned Feasts in the year, or within the like space of forty days
next, etc. by even and equal portions. And also yielding and paying yearly and
every year during the said 399. years residure of the said term of, etc.
unto the said, etc. ut supra; and so for all the Grantors. Provided always,
Proviso for non-payment to re-enter.
that if it shall happen the said several yearly Rents above by these presents
reserved and mentioned to be paid, as abovesaid, or any of them, or any part or
parcel of them, or any of them to be behind or unpaid by the said space of
forty days next over or after any Feast Day or payment thereof above mentioned
(being lawfully demanded at the place of payment above specified:) That then or
at any time after it shall any may be lawful unto and for the said Sir G.A.
T.H. etc. their Executors, etc. and every or any of them into the said Cisterne
or Cisternes, tower, and all other the premises hereby Demised, and every or
any part thereof wholly to re-enter, and the same to have again, retain and
repossesse as in their and every or any of their first and former Estate. And
that then from and after such re-entry made, this present Lease and the demise
and grant of the premises shall cease, determine and be utterly void and of
none effect to all intents and purposes as though the same had never been had
nor made: Any thing whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding. And the said H
H for himself, his, etc. and for every of them, A Covenant that H H shall pay
two Annuities.
does Covenant, etc. to and with the said T H. E B, and C. A. their, etc. by
these presents, that he the said H H. his, etc. shall and will from henceforth
yearly and every Grants or annuities of 51. per annum, made by the said T P,
the one to R P. T H. R H. f G. E C. and L M of, etc. by Indenture, bearing
Date, etc. and the other to E G. W W. W M. C S. R D and f A. of, etc. by
Indenture, bearing Date, etc. well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto such
Person or Persons as ought to have or receive the said two annuities, the sum
of, etc. at four Feasts or Terms in the year, that is to say, at, etc. or
within twenty two days next ensuing every of the same Feast Days by even and
equal portions. And of and for the said Annuities and the payment thereof, and
of and for all actions and demands concerning the same, shall and will at times
hereafter clearly acquit and discharge the said T H. E B, and C A their, etc.
and every of them. And the said H H for himself, his Heirs, etc. and for
every of them does Covenant, etc. to and with the said Sir G A, Covenant that H
H shall pay the Rent, and perform the Covenants in the original Lease.
T H, etc. and every of them by these presents, That he the said H H his, etc.
or one or some of them at his or their own charges shall and will from time to
time, and at a all times during the continuance of the said term of 400.
years, hereby Demised, well and truly pay, bear, discharge and perform all
and every the Rents, Covenants, clauses, conditions, Articles, agreements,
matters and things in or by the said original recited Indenture of Lease,
reserved, mentioned and expressed, which on the part and behalf of the said T P
his, etc. or any of them, from henceforth are, should or ought to become due,
paid and performed, according to the purport, true intent and meaning of the
said recited original Lease (except the conditions, provisoes and agreements
in the said recited original Indenture of Lease, mentioned on the part and
behalf of the said T P his, etc. specified to be done only, for, touching or
concerning the payment of the sum of, etc. the same sum of, etc. being now
truly and fully paid, as it does and may appear in the Office of the Chamber of
the City of London) and thereof, and of and from all actions, suits, damages
and demands, which in any wise shall or may happen to come, grow or arise
touching or concerning the same, or any of them (except before excepted) shall
and will at all times hereafter save and keep harmless the said Sir G A T H,
etc. their, etc. and every of them. And further, the said H H for himself,
his, etc. and for every of them. does Covenant, etc. to and with the said Sir G
A. T H, etc. their, etc. and every of them by these presents, in manner and
form following; that is to say, That he the said H H, his, etc. or one or some
of them, Covenant for reparations.
shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during the
continuance of the said term, well and sufficiently repair, support, sustain,
amend, preserve and keep all and every the Cistern and Cisters, Workhouse and
works, Engine and Engines, Buildings, Pipes of lead, Waterworks and all and every
other the premises in and by these presents mentioned to be demised (or such
other new Engine or Engines, or other Waterworks as shall happen to be erected,
made and raised in or upon the premises, or any part thereof, in stead
thereof, as good or better, for conveyance and plentiful serving of water, as
the said Buildings, Engines and Waterworks now in being are) in and with such
sufficient reparations as the same shall convey, keep and serve water into the
Pipes and Conduits into the City of London, heretofore accustomed to be served
from the same, as plentifully and sufficiently as the same works now in being
to serve, and usually have served. And moreover, that he the said H H his, That
H H shall not commit any act to forfeit the original Lease.
etc. or any of them, shall not at any time during the continuance of the said
term, do or commit, or cause to be done or committed, any wilful and willing
act or acts whatsoever; by reason or means whereof, the said original Indenture
of Lease shall be forfeited, avoided or incombred (except of and for the
payment of the said sum of, etc. and every or any part thereof) Provided also,
A proviso, that if H.H. take up any Pipe, then to re-enter.
that if the said H.H. his, etc. or any of them, shall at any time hereafter,
during the said term, take up or carry away any main Pipe or Pipes, now laid,
or hereafter to be laid, in any the streets or lanes of the said City, or
liberties of the same, or in any other place or places of the said City, or the
liberties of the same, for conveyance of water into the said City, other then
for repairing thereof; or to lay new, and those of the like goodness, in the
place or places of such of them, as are or shall be decayed: That then, or at
any time afterward, it shall and may be lawful unto and for the said Sir G. A.
T. H. etc. their, etc. into the said demised premises, with the appurtenances,
wholly tore-enter; and that then, from and after such reentry made, this
present Lease and Demise shall cease and determine, any thing herein contained
to the coutrary notwithstanding. And furthermore, A Covenant, that he shall
leave them in good repair.
the said H.H. for himself, his, etc. and for every of them, does Covenant.
etc. to and with the said Sir G.A.T.H. etc. their, etc. and to and with every
of them by these presents, that he the said H.H. his etc. shall and will at the
end or determination of this present Lease and Demise howsoever, leave and
yield up unto the said Sir G.A.T.H. etc. their, etc. the said Citerne or
Cisternes, Tower or store place for receipt of water, Engines, Buildings, Water
works, Pipes of lead, and all other the premises hereby mentioned, or intended
to be demised, in as good case and condition as the same now are (reasonable
use and waring thereof in the mean time excepted) or for such of them as shall
be wanting, altr^d or changed, as good or better, for plentiful conveyance and
serving of water, as the same now are, to be set up and remaining within any
place or places of the said Tower, where to him the said H.H. shall seem good.
And that he shall not take above one years rent for any fine.
And that be the said H.H. his etc. or any of them, shall not at any time
during the said term of, etc. hereby demised, receive or take of any person or
persons for the fine of any underlease or grant, leases or grants by him the
said H.H. his, etc. or any of them, to be made, done or granted of the
premises, or of any pare thereof, above the value of one years rent, which
shall be reserved by or upon any such under-lease. And that if the said H H his
etc. or any of them, shall be minded at any time during the said term of, etc.
hereby alien, assign or set over this present Lease, and the interest and term
hereby demised, to any person or persons other then to I G and S G or to such
person as the said H H shall nominate, to the intent to convey back the same to
the said H H, I G and S G or any of them: And if he be minded to put it away,
then they are to have the proffer thereof.
That then they the Sir G A, T H etc. shall or may have the same before any
other: Giving and paying therefore unto the said thereof to them the said Sir G
A, T H etc. or some of them, so much lawful English money, at such days and
times, and in such manner and form as any other will (bona fide) give or pay
for the same. Provided further, Proviso, if he do not perform all the Covenants
in the original Lease, then they to re-enter.
that if the said H H his, etc. or some of them, shall not well and truly
hold, fulfill, perform and keep all and singular the Covenants, grants,
articles, clauses and agreements contained and mentioned in the said recited
original Indenture of Lease made unto the said T P as aforesaid, whereupon any
clause, or provision, or forfeiture, or re-entry is limited, expressed or
reserved (except for and concerning the payment of the said sum of, etc. which
is now satisfied and paid, as aforesaid) that then and in every such case, it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said Sir G A, T H etc. their, etc. into
the said premises hereby demised, and every part thereof, wholly to re-enter,
and the same to have again, retain and re-possesse, as in the first and former
astate: And that then, from and after such re-entry made, this present Lease,
and the Demise and Grant of the premises hereby made, shall be void and of none
effect to all intents and purposes, any thing, etc. notwithstanding. Provided
moreover, Proviso, if H.H. be willing to leave it, then this Lease to bevoyd.
and it is coditioned, condescended, concluded and fully agreed upon by and
between all the said parties to these presents, that if at any time before the
Feast day of, etc. he the said H H his, etc. shall be minded to leave the said
demised premises, or to assign, to grant or surrender this present Lease, and
all his or their interest, term and demand of, in and to the same, unto the
said Sir G A. T H etc. their, etc. and of such his or their mind or
determination, shall upon the said Feast day of, etc. or at any time within one
month next before the said Feast day of, etc. give or leave notice in writing
unto or for the said Sir G A. T H etc. their Executors, etc. at the now
dwelling house of the said S A commonly called or known by the name or sigh of,
etc. situate, etc. That then (at and upon the Feast day of, etc. next after
warning or notice so given or left in writing, at or before the said Feast of,
etc. as aforesaid) and from thenceforth this present Demise, Lease and Grant of
the premises hereby made, shall cease and be determined, and be delivered up
unto the the said Sir G A. T H, etc. to be cancelled; and that the counterpart
thereof shall also be redelivered unto the said H H his, etc. to be likewise
cancelled. And the said Sir G A. T H, etc. severally and respectively each one
of them for himself only, and for each one of the several and respective
Executors and Administrators of each one of themselves only, and not jointly
the one for the other of them, nor for the acts, deeds, matters or things, the
one of the other of them does Covenat, etc. to and with the said H H his, etc.
by these presents, That he the said H H his, and. paying all and every the said
several yearly rents by these presents reserved, and performing all and
singular the Covenants; articles and agreements in these presents mentioned on
his and their, and every or any of their parts, to be performed, according to
the purport, true intent and meaning of these presents, shall or may during the
said term of, etc. peaceably and quietly hold and enjoy the said Cisterne or
Cisternes, Tower or store-place for receipt of water, and all other the
premises hereby mentioned to be demised, without the lawful let, trouble,
eviction or expulsion of the said Sir G A. T H, etc. or any of them, their,
Covenant that they shall show forth the original Lease, if need be.
etc. And it is agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents, that
they the said Sir G A. T H, etc. their, etc. shall and will do their best
endeavor at all times hereafter during the continuance of the said term of
years hereby demised, at and upon the reasonable request of the said H H. his,
etc. to produce and show forth in any Court or Courts whatsoever, and before
any Judge or Judges when need shall require, as well the said recited original
Indenture of Lease, as also all the said mean conveyances thereupon made; and
suffer the same and every or any of them to be read, seen, and perused in the
custody of said Sir G A. T H, etc. their Executors or Assigns, or some of them
for the defense and maintenance of the Title and Interest of the said H H his
Executors and Assigns, of, in and to the said premises.

In witness, etc.

A Lease of a House, and for non-payment of a sum of Money at certain days
therein mentioned, the Lease to be void.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, that the said A B, as well
for and in consideration of, etc. to him in hand before the ensealing and
delivery hereof by the said C D well and truly paid, Consideration of money to
be paid.
the receipt whereof by these presents, as also for and in consideration of the
sum of, etc. to be paid unto him the said A B his Executors, etc. in manner
and form following, that is to say, on, etc. (name the days of payment) in
full payment and satisfaction of the said sum of, etc. Has Demised, granted,
and to frame letten, and by these presents does Demise, grant and to farm let
unto the said C D all that Message or Tenement wherein the said Dame D S
lately dwelt, and which is now in the reture or occupation of the said A B, and
all that garden or garden plat lying behind the same Message or Tenement as
the same is now fenced in, walled and enclosed, and all lights, easments and
commodities to the said Message or Tenement, and premises now belonging or
appertaining, which said demised pemisses are situate, lying and being in, etc.
Except and always reserved out of this present Demise, Exceptions
Lease and Grant of the premises unto the said A.B, his, etc. one Celler next
adjoining to the Message or Tenement wherein one T.G. now dwells, and one
Room or Chamber wherein G H. lately used to lie, which has a Door leading to
the Message or Tenement of the said T.G. and one little Chamber to the said
last mentioned Chamber adjoining, and one piece or plat of ground lying near
and also adjoining to the said Celler on the East and South-sides thereof,
containing in length etc. or thereabouts, and in breadth at the North end, etc.
of assize, or thereabouts; and in breadth at the West end, etc. of assize, or
thereabouts And also except and always reserved out of this present Demise
unto the said A.B free liberty and access, of ingresse, egresse, regresse,
way, course and quiet passage for him, his Servants and familiar Friends to
enter, go, or come into, out of, and from the said Garden or Garden plat above
by these presents mentioned to be hereby demised, there to walk and by, and
also to dry clothes at his and their free wills, liberties and pleasures from
time to time and at all convenient times during the term hereunder granted, of
the said A.B. do so long live and keep the Message and Tenement now in the
occupation of the abovenamend T.G. in his own occupation; and also free
liberty of ingresse, egresse and regresse unto and for the Servants of the said
A. B. his, etc. to enter, go and come unto and from the house of office or
witdraught there standing and being, as also to go and come through the same
Garden to cast dust and other things over the brick wall toward the street,
not doing any annoyance to the said A. B. his, etc. nor to the said Garden
abovementioned, for their and every of their use from time to time, and at all
times hereafter during the term of years hereby granted: Habend' for years.
To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, Garden or Garden-plat and
all and singular other the premises above by these presents Demised (except
before excepted) unto the said C.D. his, etc. from the Feast Day of, etc. next
coming after the Date hereof unto the full end and term of, etc. from thence
next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended: Yiedling and paying therefore
yearly every year during the said term unto the said A B his, etc. one pepper
corn on the Feast of, etc. only, if it shall be demanded. And the said C D for
himself, his, Covenant for reparations.
etc. and for every of them, covenanteth, etc. to and with the said A B his,
etc. by these presents in manner and form following, that is to say, That he
the said C D his, etc. or some of them, shall and will at his and their, or
some of their own proper costs and charges well and sufficiently repair, amend,
maintain, uphold, sustain and keep all the abovedemised premises (except
before excepted) in, by and with all manner of reparations necessary, when, and
as often as need shall require during the said term of, etc. hereby granted,
and in the end, expiration, forfeiture, surrender or determination of this
present Lease, shall and will peaceably and quietly leave and yield up all the
above demised premises unto the said A B his, etc. well and sufficiently
repaired, amended, upholden and kept. And also, To view tl reparations.
that it shall and may be lawful as well to and for the said A B. his, etc. as
also to and for all others the Leasors or Grantors of the said demised
premises, their, etc. or any of them, with their or any of their Servants,
Deputies, or Workmen, in their or any of their Company, sour times in every
year yearly during the said term into the said demised premises, and into
every or any part or parcel thereof to enter, then and there to view, search
and oversee what needful reparations are then and there to be done, and upon
every default found to give warning unto the said C D his, etc. to repair and
amend the same within two months always next ensuing any notice or warning to
be therefore give or left in writing at the said demised premises; within
which time and space of two months the said C D for himself, his, That is shall
be lawful for T.C. to set up any buildings for the bettering of the premises.
etc. does covenant and grant to repair and amend the same accordingly. And
further, the said C D for himself, etc. covenanteth, etc. to and with the said
A B his etc. by these presents, That it shall be lawful unto and for Sir T C
Knight, his, etc, or any of them to build, set up and repair any erectments or
buildings on the North side of the premises hereby demised, and to employ the
same to his or their own use and uses during the term here-under granted. So
always that the same erectments and buildings so to be erected and built may
be for the enbettering of the premises hereby demised, and not otherwise.
Proviso, if C.D do not pay the money according to the times then this Lease to
be void.
Provided always and nevertheless upon condition, that if the said C D his
etc. do not or shall not well and truly content and pay, or cause to be
contented and paid unto the said A B his etc. the sum of etc. in such manner
and form as is herein above mentioned, limited or appointed for payment
thereof; That then and from thenceforth this present Indenture of Lease, and
every Covenant, grant and Article herein contained on the part and behalf of
the said A B his etc. or any of them to be performed and kept, shall cease,
determine and be utterly void to all intents and purposes in the Law
whatsoever. And that then and from thenceforth it shall be lawful unto and for
the said A B his etc. or any of them into the said demised premises, and into
every or any part and parcel thereof wholly to re-enter, and the same to have
again, retain, enjoy and repossesse in his or their first and former Estate or
Estates; and the said C D his etc. and all other the Occupiers and Possessors
of the same demised premises, or of any part thereof, thereout and from thence
utterly to expel, put out and amove; this present Indenture, or any thing
herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And the
said A B etc. covenanteth etc. to and with the said C D his etc. by these
presents, Covenant for peaceable enjoying.
that he the said C D his etc. and every of them, paying and performing all and
every the covenants, grants, payments and agreements herein above mentioned, in
manner and form above limited and appointed to be paid, performed and kept
according to the purport and true meaning of these presents, shall or may
peaceably and quietly have, hold, possess and enjoy the said Message or
Tenement and all other the premises above by these presents demised (except
before excepted) without any let, trouble, expulsion, forfeiture, recovery or
interruption of or by the said A B his etc. or of or by any other person or
persons by his or their means, default or procurement during the said term of
etc. above by these presents granted. And that A.B. shall pay the Rent on the
original Lease.
And also that he the said A B his etc. shall and will yearly every year during
the said term of etc. hereby granted, truly pay or cause to be paid unto Sir A
P Knight, his heirs or Assigns, all such rent and sum and sums of money as is
mentioned and reserved to be paid in and by the Original Indenture of Lease,
whereby or by means whereof the said A B now holds the premises hereby
demised (amongst other things) and thereof and of every part and parcel
thereof, and of and from the payment of the same, or of any part thereof, and
of and from all such distresses, losses and damages as the said C D his etc.
either in body or in goods shall or may incur or sustain by means, or reason of
the non-payment thereof in any manner or wise shall or will from time to time,
and at all times hereafter clearly acquit and discharge, or sufficiently save
and keep harmless the said C D his etc. goods and chattels against all and
every person and persons whatsoever.

In Witness, etc.

A Lease of a House and Goods, Indenture.
with diverse necessary and special Covenants therein contained.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc Witnesses, That the said A B for and
in consideration of the Rent, Covenant, Articles and Agreements hereunder in
these presents mentioned on the part and behalf of the said C C. his etc. well
and truly to be paid, performed and kept according to the purport and true
meaning of these presents, Has Demised, Demise of the House and Goods.
etc. unto the said C D. all that Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances
lying and being in, etc. and all Houses, Orchards, Gardens, Yards,
Washing-houses and Well springs thereunto belonging, as the same do lie jointly
enclosed, walled and pailed in such and so ample manner and form as the same
now is in the tenure or occupation of the said C D, and all lights, casements
and commodities to the same Message or Tenement, and premises belonging or
appertaining, together with all such goods, and implements of household stuff
as are specified and expressed in a Schedule or Inventory indented to these
presents annexed, all which premises are bounden East and South upon a Meadow
close, now, or late in the tenure or occupation of R W, and West upon the
Northend of, etc. and North upon the Lands of T B. To have and to hold,
Covenant for reparations.
etc. yiedling and paying therefore yearly, etc. And the said C D. for himself,
his etc. Covenanteth, etc. to and with the said A B his, etc. and to and with
every of them by these presents, in manner and form following; viz. That he the
said C D his, etc. or some of them, shall and will at his and their, or some of
their own proper costs and charges from time to time, so often and when as need
shall be or require during the said term of, etc. hereby granted, or within the
time and space of, etc. next after notice or warning shall be therefore given
or left, as hereafter is mentioned, well and sufficiently repair, uphold,
maintain, amend and keep the said Message or Tenement, and all other the
premises above mentioned to be hereby demised, in, by and with all manner of
needful and necessary reparations and amendments whatsoever. And the same
premises, together with all the said goods, implements and household stuff,
mentioned in the said schedule hereunto annexed, so well and sufficiently
repaired, upholden, amended and kept, shall in the end of the said term, or
other sooner determination, surrender or forfeiture of this present Lease,
peaceably and quietly leave and yield up unto the said A B his, etc. And the
said C D etc. covenanteth, To view.
etc. to and with the said A B his etc. that it shall and may be lawful as well
to and for the said A B his etc. as all others the Grantors or Leasors of the
premises, their, etc. or any of them, with their or any of their Servants,
Deputies or Workmen, in their or any of their company or companies, four times
in every year yearly, during the said term, into the said demised premises,
and into every or any part and parcel thereof, to enter, and then and there to
view, search and oversee what needful reparations are then and there to be
done; and upon every default found, to give warning unto the said C D his etc.
to repair and amend the same within, etc. always next ensuing every such
warning to be given: Within which time and space of, etc. the said C D for
himself, his etc. does covenant and grant to repair and amend the same
accordingly. And the said C D, etc. Covenanteth, etc. by these presents to and
with the said A B his, etc. that if at any time hereafter during the said term
of years hereby granted, Covenant, that if the Landlord be minded to surrender
his Lease to the intent to take a new Lease, then the Tenant shall surrender
his.
the said A B his etc. shall be minded to surrender his said Lease and estate
which the said A B now has of and in the premises, to the intent to take a
new Lease of the same premises, and shall thereof give or leave notice at the
above demised premises, to or for the said C D his, etc. by writing under the
hand of the said A B his, etc. That then within one month next after such
notice given, the said C D his, etc. shall likewise surrender unto the said A B
his, etc. this present Indenture of Lease, and his estate and term of years
then to come, by virtue of these presents: So that the said A B his, etc. upon
such surrender hereof made, do give reasonable and sufficient security unto the
said C D his, etc. (requiring the same) that the said C D his, etc. paying the
said yearly rent aforesaid in manner and form as is herein above reserved, and
performing the other Covenants herein mentioned on his or their parts to be
peformed, according to the true meaning of these presents, shall or may
nevertheless peaceably and quietly have, hold and enjoy the said demised
premises, and every part and parcel thereof, until he the said A B his, etc.
shall have made and re-granted a new Lease of the same premises hereby
mentioned to be demised, and which shall be so surrendered for such and so many
years of the said term of, etc. hereby granted, as according to the tenor and
true meaning of this Indenture shall then appear to be to come, and not
expired; and for and under such rents, covenants and conditions, and in such
manner and form, as in these present Indentures are contained and mentioned.
And also that he the said A B his etc. shall and will at his and their own
charges, within, etc. after such surrender to be made by the said C D his etc.
make, feal and deliver unto him or them, such a sufficient new Lease as herein
last before mentioned is specified and expressed. Proviso, that if he refuse to
do it, then he to re-enter.
Provided always, that if the said C D his etc. shall refuse to surrender this
present Lease upon request or notice given, as aforesaid: That then and from
thenceforth this present demise and Lease of the premises shall cease,
determine and be utterly void to all intents and purposes in the Law
whatsoever, any thing, etc. notwithstanding. Proviso, that if C.D. dislike to
hold the premises, and give thereof one quarters warning, then this Lease to
be void.
Provided furthermore, that if it shall happen the said C D his etc. or any of
them, at any time hereafter, during the said term of etc. to dislike to have
and hold the said Message or Tenement, and other the premises before demised,
or mentioned to be demised, unto the full end of the said term of etc. for and
by the payment of the said yearly rent of etc. before reserved, as aforesaid:
And of such his or their dislike, do and shall give unto the said A B his etc.
notice or knowledge on the 24 day of december, 24 day of March, 23 day of June,
or 28 of September, at any time, or in any year during the said term by these
presents granted, at the now dwelling house of the said A B situate and being
in, etc. and do and shall from time to time, after notice or knowledge given of
such dislike, as aforesaid, permit and suffer the said A B his, etc. and all
and every such person and persons that will offer to take the said Message or
Tenement, and other the premises hereby demised, or any part thereof, to enter
and come into the said Message or Tenement, and every part thereof, to view
and see the same. And also, if the said C D his etc. do or shall in the end of
the said one quarter of a year above limited for warning to be given as
aforesaid, pay or cause to be paid unto the said A B his etc. such sum or sums
of money as shall be then due for rent of the premises hereby demised for the
said quarter of a year then to be expired: And do then also pearceably and
quietly leave, surrender and yield up unto the said A B his etc. this present
Indenture of Lease, and the premises hereby demised, well and sufficiently
repaired, glazed and amended; and all the said goods, implements and household
stuff in the said schedule mentioned (in as good state and condition as the
same now be, reasonable use and wearing in the mean time only excepted.) That
then from and after one quarter of a year next after notice or warning given of
such dislike, as aforesaid; this present Demise, Lease nd Grant for all the
residue of the said term of etc. then to come, and the said rent of, etc.
hereby reserved from thenceforth to be payable, shall cease, be void, and no
longer endure or continue, this Indenture, etc. notwithstanding. And likewise,
the said C D etc. covenanteth, A Covenant, that it shall be lawful for A. B. to
have liberty to improve the, water.
etc, to and with the said A B his, etc. in form following; viz. that it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said A B his, etc. at all times hereafter, and
from time to time, during and until the Feast day of, etc. to have free liberty
of ingresse, egresse, regresse, way and quiet passage for him the said A B, his
Executors, Servants, Workmen, and Assigns, to pass, go and come to or from
the water or Wellspring, lying and being in the Yard or Orchard hereby
demised, there to do and execute all and every such acts and things as the said
A B his etc. shall think good to have done and executed, and which may be and
redound to the commodity and benefit of the said A B his etc. And that if the
said A B his etc. Servants or assigns, before the Feast day of, etc. do any
act or thing whereby, or by means whereof, any profit, gain or commodity may or
shall be raised or had out of or by the said Wellspring above mentioned; That
then he the said A B, his Executors, Administrators, Servants and Assigns, and
every of them, shall and may at all times convenient, and from time to time,
during the term of years hereby demised, have free liberty of ingresse,
egresse, regresse, way and passage with his or their horses, carts and
carriage, to go and come unto and from the same Wellspring and water, by and
through the yard above demised, to fetch and carry away water from the same,
without any let or contradiction of the said C D his etc. or of or by any other
person or persons by his or their means, assent, or procurement; so always,
that there be water sufficient reserved for the necessary use and spending of
the said C D his etc. in and about the said demised premises. And the said A B
etc. Covenant for peaceable enjoying.
Covenanteth, etc. to and with the said C D his etc. by these presents, in
manner and form following; viz. That he the said C his, etc. and every of
them, paying the said yearly rent of, etc. hereby reserved in form aforesaid to
be paid, and under and according to the Covenants, grants, conditions and
agreements herein contained on his and their part and behalf to be paid, done
and performed, shall or may peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess
and enjoy all the said Message or Tenement, and premises, with the
appurtenances hereby demised, and every part thereof, for and during all the
said term of, etc. in and by these presents limited or granted, without any
let, trouble, denial, eviction, disturbance or interruption of or by him the
said A. B his etc. or of or by any other person or persons lawfully claiming,
or which at any time hereafter shall pretend, claim, challenge or demand any
estate, right, title or interest of, in or to the said premises, or any part
thereof, by, from or under him, or them, or any of them; or by, through, or
under his or their or any of their act, means, right, title, forfeiture or
procurement. And also that he the said A B his etc. And that A.B shall
discharge the rent to the Incad Landlord.
shall and will yearly, every year during the said term of, etc. hereby
granted, truly pay or cause to be paid unto T G of etc. his Heirs and Assigns,
all such rent and other sum and sums of money as is reserved and mentioned
in and by the original Indenture of Lease; whereby, or by means whereof (and of
other mean conveyances thereupon made and passed) the said A B holds the
premises hereby demised (amongst other things;) and thereof, and of every part
thereof, and of and from the payment of the same, or of any part thereof, and
of and from all such distresses, costs, charges, losses or damages as the said
C D his etc. either in body or goods, shall or may incur or sustain by means
or reason thereof, in any manner of wise, shall and will from time to time, and
at all times, clearly acquit and discharge, or sufficiently save and keep
harmless the said C D his, etc. and goods and chattels, as well against the
said G T his Heirs and Assigns; as also against all and every other person and
persons whatsoever. Covenant, that if A. B. do get a new Lease, then he is to
make C. D. a Lease for 21. years
And further, the said A B for himself, his, etc. does Covenant, etc. to and
with the said C D his, etc. That if he the said A B his, etc. do or shall at
any time or times hereafter, during the term of years hereby granted, procure,
obtain or get a new Lease of the same premises hereby demised, for any longer
term of years then he now has of and in the same: That then he the said A B
his etc. shall and will within one month next after such surrender to be made
of this present Lease, make, seal and deliver unto the said C D his, etc.
(requiring the same) a new Lease of the same premises hereby demised, for the
term of, etc. over and besides the residue and remainder which shall be then to
come, and not expired, of the said term of, etc. hereby granted; and for and
under such rent, convenants and conditions, as in these present Indentures are
mentioned and expressed. If there be any profit got by the Well, then C. D. is
to have half, paying half charges.
And also, if the said A B his, etc. do or shall on or before the said Feast
of, etc. do nay act or thing, whereby, or by means whereof, any profit, gain or
commodity shall or may be raised, had or gotten out of or by means of the said
Wellspring above mentioned: That then he the said A B his, etc. shall permit
and suffer the said C D his, etc. to have, receive and take the one half of all
such benefit, profit, gain or advantage that shall arise, come or grow by
reason or means of the same water or Wellspring so to be improved, as
aforesaid, from time to time, during all the remainder of years, and other time
which shall be then to come and unexpired of the said term of, etc. hereby
granted: He the said C D. his, etc. allowing and paying unto the said A B his,
etc. the one moity or half part of all such charges and expenses, as shall be
then disbursed and laid forth, and which at all time and times then afterward
shall be disbursed and laid forth by the said A. B. his, etc. about or by
reason of the same Wellspring and water in any manner of wise. Proviso for
non-payment, to re-enter.
Provided also, that if it shall happen the said yearly rent of, etc. to be
behind, unpaid, in part or in all, contrary to the form above limited for
payment thereof (the same being lawfully demanded at the above demised
premises) Or it the said C. D. his, etc. do not or shall not at all and every
time and times hereafter, during the term of years hereby granted, well and
truly observe, perform, fulfill and keep all and every the Covenants, grants,
articles, provisoes, conditions and agreements in these presents contained on
his and their parts and behalfs to be observed, performed, fulfilled, and kept,
according to the tenor and true meaning of these presents: That then and from
thenceforth, in any such case or cases, it shall and may be lawful unto and
for the said A. B. his, etc. or any of them, into the said demised premises,
and into every or any part or parcel thereof, in the name of the whole wholly
to re-enter, and the same to have again, retain, enjoy and re-possesse, as in
his or their first and former estate or estates. And the said C. D. his, etc.
and all others occupiers or possessors of the said demised premises, or of any
part thereof, there-out and from thence utterly to expel, put out and amove;
This present Indenture, or any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof,
in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.

A Lease of Lands, with a special Proviso.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, That the said A. B, for
and in consideration of, etc. Demise.
Has demised, etc. unto the said C. D. all and singular those meadows,
pastures, feedings and sheep-walks, as the same is now severed, enclosed and
divided, lying and being in the Parish of, etc. commonly called or known by the
name of, etc. pastures, and which last were in the tenure or occupation of T.M.
etc. or of his Assignee or Assignees, and for which the said T. paid to the
said E. 190 l. Haben^t
yearly rent. To have and to hold the aforesaid meadows, pastures, feedings
and sheep-walks, and every of them, together with all and singular the herbage,
hay, mowing-crop, profit, commodity and advantage whatsoever, thereof growing,
coming or accrewing, with all the rights, members and appurtenances to the same
belonging, or in any wise appertaining (as the same have heretofore been
farmed, used or occupied, with preservation of the fences and enclosures
thereof) unto the said C. D. his, etc. from the Feast of, etc. unto the end and
term of, etc. from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended.
Reddend.
Yielding and paying therefore yearly unto the said A. B. his, etc. viz. for
every of the first three years of the said term, one penny sterling, at the
Feast of, etc. if it be lawfully demanded, and for the fourth or last year of
the said term, the sum of, etc. on the last day of the said term of four years,
at one whole and entire payment, at the now Mansion House of the said C. D.
situate in, etc. And the said A. B. for himself, his, etc. Covenant for
peaceable enjoying.
and for every of them, does Covenant, etc. to and with the said C. D. his,
etc. by these presents, That he the said C.D. his, etc. for and under the
yearly rents above in these presents mentioned and reserved to be paid in form
aforesaid, shall and may lawfully and quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy all
and every the premises by these presents demised, with the appurtenances,
without any lawful let, disturbance or interruption of him the said A. B. his,
etc. and of every other person or persons, any thing lawfully claiming in the
said premises, by, from or under the said A. B. his, etc. or by, from or under
R. S. of, etc. his Heirs or Assigns, And that it is free from all incombeances^.
or by, from or under them, or any of them, during the said term of, etc. by
these presents granted: And that the said meadows, feedings, grounds and
sheep-walks above recited at the time of the making of these presents, be, and
so shall from henceforth continue unto the said C. D. his, etc. free, clear and
clearly acquitted and discharged, or otherwise from time to time sufficiently
saved and kept harmless of and from all former bargains, leases, grants and
incombrances done or to be done by the said A. B. his, etc. or by any other
person or persons, claiming by, from or under the said A. or by, for, from or
under the said R S their Heirs or Assigns, or the Heirs or Assigns of any of
them, or by their or any of their assent, consent, act, means or procurement,
during the said term of four years hereby granted. Provided always, and it is
the true intent and meaning of the parties to these presents, that if the said
A B or his Assigns in his lifetime, shall hereafter at any time during the
said term of, etc. either by word or writing, manifest, declare and give one
whole years warning to the said C D his, etc. that his purpose or intent is to
take the said demised premises into his own hands, or otherwise to dispose of
the same. And also do, at or before the end of the said term, after declaration
and warning so made and given, as aforesaid, repay or cause to be repaid unto
the said C D his, etc. so much of the said fine of, etc. as shall or may be
justly and ratably demanded by the said C D his, etc. for the residue of the
said term of, etc. that sahll be then to come and not expired, of and in the
said demised premises, reckoning and allowing for every year a just and equal
portion: That then at the end of the same year, after such declaration and
warning so made and given, and re-payment made of the said fine, as aforesaid,
it shall be lawful to the said A and his Assigns during his lifetime, into
all the aforesaid premises to re-enter, and the same to have again: And that
then and from thenceforth, this present Demise and Grant shall be utterly void,
and of no force, any thing, etc. notwithstanding. But if the said A or his
Assigns, do not pay so much of the said fine as is before mentioned, according
to the said last recited Covenant: That then he the said A his, etc. within
twenty days next after the end of the said year, after warning given, as
aforesaid, shall pay or cause to be paid unto the said C D his, etc. the sum
of, etc. in recompense of the loss hindrance that may happen to the said C D
his, etc. by reason of the non payment of the residue of the said fine
according to aforesaid Covenant.

In Witness, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants in form like a Lease, for the enjoying of Lands in
reversion.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between, etc. Whereas E S the elder of, etc. being
seized for term of his life of all that capital Message or Tenement, commonly
called or known by the name of, The recital of the former Deed.
etc. situate and being in, etc. with all and singular Houses, Edifices,
Barnes, Stables, Orch^rds, Yards and Gardens to the said capital Message or
Tenement belonging, or in any wise appertaining; and also all and singular such
Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Closes, and other Hereditaments, with their and
every of their appurtenances as are contained, specified and terried forth in a
terrer or Schedule Indented, annexed to a pair of Indentures made between the
said E S the elder of the one party, and the said E M of the other party:
bearing date, etc. and also of all ways, commons, profits, commodities and
advantages whatsoever to the said capital Message or Tenement, or to any part
or parcel thereof belonging, or in any wise appertaining. Did by the said
recited Indentures, demise and grant unto the said E M all that the said
capital Message or Tenement, and other the before recited Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, with their and every of their appurtenances (except as in
the same Indenture is mentioned to be excepted) To have and to hold the said
capital Message or Tenement, and other the beforementioned premises (except
as before is mentioned to be excepted) to the said E M his, etc. from the Feast
of, etc. last past before the date hereof, unto the end and term of, etc. from
thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, if the said E S the
elder live so long: Yiedling and paying therefore yearly during the said term
(if the said E S the elder live so long) the sum of, etc. at such days and
times, and under such Conditions, Covenants, Grants and Agreements, as in and
by the said recited Indentures, etc. appears. And whereas also the said E. S.
the younger is to have all the aforementioned premises for the time and term
of 21 years next ensuing after the Death of the said E. S. the elder. Now
witnesses these presents, That the said E S the younger, for that it is the
intent and meaning of all the said parties, that he the said E M should have
all and singular the beforementioned premises (except as before is mentioned
to be excepted) for the term of, etc. from the said Feast of, etc. last past
thence next ensuing fully to be complete and ended, under such yearly rent,
conditions, covenants, grants, and agreements as are contained and specified in
the said recited Indentures, does by these presents grant unto the said E M.
That if the said E S the elder shall happen to die before the end and expiration
of the said 18 years, Then the said E M his, etc. shall have and hold the said
Message or Tenement, That if E S the elder die before the expiration of the
former Grant, then E M shall have it for the residue
and all other the premises mentioned in the sai^ recited Indenture (except as
in the said Indenture is mentioned to be excepted) for so long time and for so
many years as at the time of the death of the said E S the elder shall be to
come and unexpired of 18 years from the said Feast of, etc. last from thence
next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, and for no longer time.
Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the continuance of the residue of
the said 18 years, as shall at the time of the death of the said E S the elder
be unexpired, unto the said E S the younger, his, etc. the sum of etc. at two
usual Feasts or Terms in the year; viz. (name the Feasts, etc.) which of them
shall first happen next after the death of the said E S the elder, by even and
equal portions. And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent of, etc. or any
part thereof to be behind and unpaid by the space of, etc. next over or after
any of the said Feast days in which the same ought to be paid, as aforesaid, it
being lawfully demanded, That then and from thenceforth it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said E S the younger, his, etc. into the premises, and
every part thereof wholly to reenter, and the same to have again and
re-possesse, as in his and their former Estate, this Indenture, etc.
notwithstanding. And the said E M for himself, his, etc. covenanteth, etc. to
and with the said E S the younger, Convenant for reparations.
his etc. by these presents, that he the said E M his, etc. at his and their
own proper costs and charges, the aforesaid capital Message or Tenement, and
all other the Edifices in, with and by all manner of reparations well and
sufficiently shall repair, sustain, support and maintain from time to time as
often and when as need shall require during the said residue of the said 18
years, and that at the end or other determination of the said 18 years shall
leave and yield up the same unto the said E S the younger, his etc. well and
sufficiently repaired, sustained, maintained and amended, as also all the
hedges, ditches, fences and gates in and about the said mentioned premises,
well and sufficiently made, hedged, ditched, senced and amended, together with
all the doors, locks, keys, bolts, glass, casements and shelves now
remaining, being fixed or used, or that hereafter shall be remaining, being
fixed or used in or about the before mentioned premises, or any part thereof. A
Covenant that E M shall not demise part of the premises, nor of his estate to
any except it be of the whole not shall not plough up, etc.
And also the said E. M for him, etc, does Covenant, etc. to and with the said
E S the younger, his, etc. by these presents, that he the said E M his, etc.
without the consent of the said E S the younger, his, etc. in that behalf first
had and obtained in writing under his or their hands and seals, shall not will
not make any Grant or Demise of the beforementioned demised promises, or any
part thereof, nor of the interest which he has in the same by virtue of these
presents to any person or persons whatsoever, unless it be of the whole
Demised premises, and for all the term which he has or ought to have by virtue
of these presents; neither shall nor will within three years next before the end
or determination of the said term of eighteen years, plow, ear or dig up any
of the ground within the before mentioned Schedule to the said recited
Indenture annexed, set down under the name or title of Meadow-ground, or shall
within seven years next before the end or other determination of the said
eighteen years, lop, pole or shred any the Trees of Apples, Pears, Plums or
Crabs now growing, or which during the continuance of the said residue of the
said term of eighteen years shall grow in or upon the before mentioned
premises, A Covenant, that E M after the felling of the woods shall keep them
from sp^yl of Beasts.
or any part thereof. And further, the said E M for him, his, etc. does
covenant and grant to and with the said E S the younger, his etc. by these
presents, that from and after such time as he the said E S the younger, his
etc. shall upon the felling of any the woods, underwoods or hedgrowes which are
excepted in the said recited Indentures have sufficiently fenced and enclosed
the same woods, under-woods, or hedgrowes, That then and from thenceforth he
the said E M his, etc. the same woods, under-woods or hedgrowes, so felled and
fenced, as aforesaid, shall well and sufficiently keep, preserve and maintain
from all wilful hurt and spoil of Beasts and Cattle until the next felling of
the said wood, under-wood or coppice, so felled as aforesaid; and also if any
clay, loame, or other earth shall, during the continuance of the said residue
of the said term of eighteen years be dug in or out of any of the said
mentioned premises where there is no pit, by the said E M his, etc. or by his
or their sufferance, commandment or procurement. Then the said E M his, etc.
the place whence the said clay shall be so dug shall fill up again and
level, or else the same make fit and conveninent for the keeping and
maintaining of fish. A covenant, the E M shall have plough-boot-timber, etc
upon the premises, by the appointment of E S
And the said E S the younger, for him, his, etc. does covenant etc. to and
with the said E M his, etc. by these presents, That it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said E M, his, etc. from time to time during the continuance of
the said residue of the said term of eighteen years, to have and take by the
appointment of the said E S the younger, his, etc. sufficient plough-boot if it
shall be there to be had, to be spent in and about the premises, as also
sufficient rough-timer for the necessary reparations in all things (lath only
excepted) of the premises. And that is shall it shall be likewise lawful to and
for the said E M his, etc. during the said residue of the said term of
eighteen years, to have and take sufficient hedgboot and fire-boot to be spent
in and upon the premises about the necessary uses of household, to be had and
taken from time to time during the continuance of the said residue of the said
term of eighteen years, out of the bushes growing or to be growing in and upon
the premises, and out of the lopps, poles, and shredings of such Trees as have
heretofore been usually lopped, poled or shred, and of such other Trees as the
said E S the younger, his, etc. shall hereafter appoint to be lopped, topped,
or shred; which said Trees so hereafter usually lopped, or shred, or which
hereafter shall be lopped, poled or shred, the said E S the younger for him,
his etc. does Covenant, etc. to and with the said E M his, etc. shall not by or
with the consent, allowance or privity of him the said E S the younger, his
etc. be felled or cut down during the continuance of the said residue of the
said term of eighteen years (unless it be for the reparations or new
buildings of or upon the premises, or other the houses or Lands of the said E S
the elder, his, etc.) And further, the said E S the younger, for him, A
Covenant that E. M. shall have the herbage and feeding of the woods, not making
wast, and that E. S. shall pay all Quit-rents.
etc. Covenanteth, etc to and with the said E M his, etc. by these presents,
That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said E M his, etc. to have and
take the herbage and feeding of all the woods, under-woods, and hedgrowes
beforementioned to be excepted, not making any wilful hurt or spoil; as also
he the said E S the younger, his, etc. during the said residue of the said
term of eighteen years, shall and will discharge and pay all the Quit-rents
issuing or going out of the beforementioned premises, or any part thereof.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Lease, with diverse special Covenants in a very good Form.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, Demise.
That the said P H for diverse good causes, etc. Has Demised, etc. unto the
said W B his, etc. All that Easter most parcel of ground, containing in length
13 foot, etc. or thereabouts, and in breadth 18 foot or thereabouts, set, lying
and being in, etc. in a certain place there called, etc. between the High way
leading between the Court-house-row and the same row, called, etc. on the North
part, and the rest of the bays on the East, and upon the Highway leading
between the row called, etc. on the South, and the ground of the said P H on
the West, and whereupon there is now standing certain Old buildings, being used
for Boothes, together with free egresse, ingresse and regresse in and to the
same, though all the Gates now used into the Cloth-fair (Except, and always
reserved out of this present Demise, Exception.
Lease and Grant of the premises unto Sir H R of, etc. his Heirs and Assigns,
during the continuance of these presents, all and every such pipe or pipes of
lead as now are or lie within the ground or soil of the said parcel of ground
by these presents mentioned and intended to be Demised, or which the said Sir H
R his, etc. shall be pleased and think good to lay in the same parcel of
ground, together also with the layer of the said Pipes, during the time
aforesaid; and also except and always reserved unto the said Sir H R his, etc.
free liberty of ingresse, egresse and regresse to and for the said Sir H R his,
etc. and to and for his and their Servants, Laborers, and Workmen, with
stuff and other things necessary at all time and times, and from time to time
during the continuance of these presents, so often as need shall require, to
come into or upon the premises, or any part thereof, and to break the ground
and soil of the premises or any part thereof, for the amending and repairing
of all such pipe and pipes of lead as shall, during the continuance of these
presents, happen to be in decay or need to be repaired (the said ground to be
made up again at the costs and charges of the said Sir H R. his Heirs and
Assigns.) To have and to hold, etc, yielding and paying, Habendum.
etc. the first payment thereof to be made at the Feast day of, etc. And if it
happen the said yearly Rent of, etc. That then and from thenceforth it shall
and may be lawful to and for the said P H his, etc. into the above-demised
premises and every of them wholly to re-enter, and the said W B his, etc. to
expel, remove and put out, and the same to have again, re-possesse and enjoy,
as in his former Estate, This Indenture, etc. notwithstanding. And the said W B
for himself, his etc. does Covenant and grant, etc. to and with the said P H
his, etc. by these presents, that he the said W B his, etc. shall and will at
his and their own proper costs and charges (in all things) make, erect, set up
and finish, or cause to be made, etc. before the Feast of, etc. upon the said
ground and soil by these presents mentioned to be demised one good and
substantial building of timber, brick; A Covenant that W. B. shall build a
fair House on the ground Demised.
or stone, to be framed and made into one Tenement of three stories high,
besides the garret, from the ground sills thereof, to the razons; the lower
story thereof shall be nine foot high at the least, the next story over that
shall be eight foot high at the least, and the third story to the razons shall
be seven foot high at the least, and shall jet the first and second stories:
the summers, joysts, sparrs, razons, ground-sills and the timber thereof shall
be as big in scantling and thickness at the least as those are which are in
the building at the new Courthouse which is now set, standing and being, in,
etc. and shall and will make or cause to be made to every Room thereof two
Imbowed transome Windows of Carpenters work, brick or stone, of six foot wide
every Window at the least, and shall and will glaze all the said Windows, and
shall and will seele and proget all the floores over head with lyme and hair
without any loame, and shall and will sufficiently lath and proget with lyme
and hair only all the outsides of the said Buildings, and shall and will make
convenient Dormer-windowes to all the Garrets of the said Tenement, and shall
tyle over all the said Building, and lay the tyles with lyme and sand, and dry
hang none, and shall and will make convenient Doors, hooks, hinges, locks and
keys to all the Rooms of the said Building, and shall floare with Inch-board
in all the floares, and nail them with eight penny nails, and make convenient
chimnies, with brick, lyme and sand to the said Tenement, and shall and will
make one convenient celler throughout all the said Building, and pave the
celler with brick, and a vault of brick for the said Tenement for a privy, and
the vault so to be carried up into the Garret of the said Tenement, and shall
and will pave with good stone half the allies or streets on both sides of the
said building. And that he shall repair it and make it fit for a Subsidie^^an
to inhabit in.
And the said W B his, etc, shall and will from time to time, and at all times
during the said term of, etc. when and as often as need shall require, at his
or their proper costs and charges, repair, uphold, maintain and keep all the
said Building and Tenement so erected and finished in and by all manner of
necessary reparations; and the Building and Tenement so repaired, upholden and
kept in good and sufficient reparations, shall and will so leave and yield it
up with all Doors, Windows, Casements, Locks and Keys belonging to the said
House, well tyled and glazed, and stone set, at the end, expiration, and all
and every other determination of this present Lease. That it shall and may be
lawful as well to and for the said P H his, etc. as also to and for all others
the Grantors or Leasors of the said Demised premises, their Heirs, Executors,
Servants or Officers thereunto appointed, to come into and upon the said
Building and Tenement at his and their free-wills and pleasures, to view the
Decaies thereof, and that the said W. B. his, etc. shall sufficiently amend and
repair the Decaies thereof within three months after notice given unto him,
his Executors, etc. of the Decaies thereof by the said P H his, etc. or by any
other Leasors or Grantors of the premises, their Heirs or Assigns. And that
the same Tenement so erected and builded shall be fit and convenient for a
Subsidy-man to dwell in, whereby the said P. H. etc. and the said building
shall or may be saved or kept harmless for or against every penalty, or
penalties, or damage, that the said P H his, etc. or the said Tenant may
incur or sustain by the building thereof by reason of any Proclamation or
Statute heretofore at any time had or made, or hereafter to be had or made in
that behalf. And that the said W B his, And that he shall keep no Inmates, nor
keep Victualling, and shall pay all charges
etc. shall nor will not at any time or times during the said term have above
one Household or Family in the said Tenement, and no Inmate or Inmates within
the Tenement to inhabit there as an Inmate, and that the said' W B his, etc.
shall not Victual nor keep any Victualling within the said Tenement at any time
during the said term, without the special license of the said P H his, etc.
first had and obtained in writing, and that the said W B his etc. shall and
will from time to time during the said term, bear and pay all such Weekly,
Monthly, Quarterly, Yearly charges as he or they, or the said Tenant or
Inhabitants there shall be set and rated at by the said Sir H R his, etc. or
his Officer or Officers toward watch, candlelight, Scavengers, Gate keepers,
ladders, buckets, and contribution for bringing of water into the Cloth-fair
for their general good according to the rate of the other Inhabitants there.
And furthermore the said W B does in and by these presents for him, etc.
covenant, grant, conclude and agree to and with the said P H his etc. That he
the said P H etc. and all and every other person or persons which he the said P
H his, A Covenant, that P H may enjoy the Booths or Low rooms every year for
seven days.
etc. in that behalf shall nominate, assign and appoint, shall and may from
time to time yearly and every year during the continuance of this present Lease
or Demise, on the Feast day of, etc. and three days next before and three
days next after the said Feast, have, occupy, possess and enjoy the said
Boothes, and all the benefit, profit and commodity of them during the term
aforesaid until the said Building in these presents formerly mentioned be had
and made, and that after the said Buildings be had and made, he the said P H
his etc. and all and every such other person or persons as the said P H his,
etc. in that behalf shall assign and appoint, shall and may from time to time
yearly every year during the continuance of these persents on the Feast
aforesaid, and by the space of three days next before the said Feast, and
three days next after the said Feast, peaceably and quietly have, hold,
occupy, possess and enjoy the lower Room or Chamber which shall be next the
lower floar and groundsil of the said Dwelling House, so to erected, to be used
and employed for Boothes on the said Feast day, and by the space of three days
next before the said Feast, and three days next after, without any allowance
to be made to the said W B his, etc. for the use of the said Room; and that he
the said P H his, etc. shall and may have, receive and take to his and their
own proper use and behoof all such sum or sums of money, and other
benefit, profit, commodity or advantage which shall or may be had or made by or
for the use of the said room during the time aforesaid, and that the said room
shall be laid open during the time aforesaid, and that the said P H his, etc.
and all and every person or person which he the said P H his, etc. in that
behalf shall substitute, authorize and appoint, shall have free liberty of
ingresse, egresse and regresse into the said Chamber and Room, and there to
remain and abide, during the term aforesaid, without the let, trouble,
disturbance, molestation or eviction of the said W B his, etc. or of any other
person or person claiming by, from, or under his or their Estate or Estates, or
by his or their title, A proviso, that if W. B. do not perform the last
Covenant, then Lease to be viod.
assent, or procurement. Provided always and upon condition, that if the said
W B his Executors or Administrators shall not well and truly perform, fulfill,
and keep in all things according to the true intent and meaning thereof, the
said Covenant in these presents last above mentioned, That then and from
thenceforth, the Estate, interest, possession and term of years of the said W
B of and in the premises, and of and in every part and parcel thereof, shall
cease, determine, and become utterly void; and then and from thenceforth it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said P H his, etc. into all and singular
the premises to re-enter, and the same to have again as his or their former
estate, any thing in these presents, etc. notwithstanding. Provided always, and
it is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and between the said
parties, A Proviso, that if he do not finish the Building before, etc. then the
Lease to be void.
that if the said W B his, etc. or some of them do not before the Feast day of,
etc. at his own costs and charges make, erect, set up, and in substance and
effect finish the said building (in all things to the said Building belonging)
as the said W B has before in these presents Covenanted to do: That then and
from thenceforth this present Demise and every Article, Clause and Agreement in
these presents contained and comprised to be frustrate and of none effect; and
the Estate hereby conveyed to the said W B to cease and determine, and be
utterly void, to all intents, constructions and purposes whatsoever. And the
said P H does for himself, his, etc. covenant, grant, conclude and agree to
and with the said W B his etc. and to and with every of them by these presents,
that he the said W B his, etc. shall and may etc. (Covenant for peaceable
enjoying.) And lastly, the said W B for him, his, etc. covenanteth, etc. to and
with the said P H, A Covenant, that he shall raise the streets so, that the
soil be carried away without any annoyance.
his, etc. That he the said W B his, etc. at his and their own proper costs and
charges (in all things) shall and will raise and heighten the ground where the
said new building shall be made in such good and sufficient manner as that the
water and soil which shall fall, come, or be made from or in the said
Building, shall or may avoid, run and be carried away without nuisance into the
Common-sewer, down along by the reft of the said Boothes, and so into Long
lane to the end the said Building may be kept sweet and wholesome for the
Inhabitants which shall there dwell and inhabit. And whereas there is a purpose
and intention that one or more Pump or Pumps, Well or Wells, and other
provision for water is had, or shall be made, had, built, erected or provided
in some convenient place or places within the precinct of the said Cloth-fair,
to and for the general good of the whole Inhabitants of the said Cloth-fair;
The said W B does in and by these presents, for him, his, etc. covenant, etc.
to and with the said P H his, A Covenant, that W B shall pay all charges for
water.
etc. that he the said W B his, etc. or some of them shall and will from time to
time and at all times hereafter, during the continuance of these presents, pay,
satisfy, discharge and defray all such sum or sums of money as are or shall be
reasonably taxed or assessed upon them the said W B his, etc. by the said Sir H
R his Heirs or Assigns, or by J J of, etc. within three days next after
notice given unto the said W B. his, etc. of the said assessement and taxation,
as well for the use and purpose aforesaid, as also for the amending and
repairing of the said Pump or Pumps, Well or Wells, or other provision for
water whatsoever. And in respect thereof the said W B his, etc. shall have for
his necessary use the benefit of the said Pump or Pumps, Well or Wels, or other
provision of water whatsoever in common, together with such other of the
Inhabitants as are or shall be dwelling within the precinct of the Cloth-fair,
and be controbutary toward the chargethereof, in manner and form as the said W
B is in and by these presents chargeable and liable unto.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Lease for three lives, with special Covenants.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, That the said T.C. and A
his wife, by a mutual assent and consent, for diverse good causes them
thereounto moving, Demise from T C and A his Wife.
and chiefly for and in consideration of 30 l. 13s. 4d. of, etc. well and truly
paid, etc. Have demised, granted, set, let, and to farm-betaken, etc. unto the
said T T all these several percels of Land hereafter named: viz (name the
Lands) All which said Lands, premises and appurtenances were late the
inheritance of I H of, etc. Father of the said A, situate, lying and being
within, etc. and now in the holding, tenure or occupation of, etc. or his
Assignee or Assignees: Together with all crops of trees, under-woods, waters,
commons, out-lets, ways and easements to the said demised Lands, or any part
thereof, lying, belonging or appertaining, with all and singular the
appurtenances; together also with all such houses, edifices, buildings,
orchards and gardens as shall hereafter be erected, planted, builded and made
in and upon the said premises, or any part thereof. To have and to hold,
Habend' for three lives.
occupy and quietly enjoy the said parcels of Lands, and all other the said
demised premises, with the appurtenances, and every part thereof to the said T
T, his etc. from the day of the date hereof for and during all the natural
life and lives of the said T T, E now his Wife, and H G Son of R G of etc.
aforesaid, brother of the said E, and for and during the life natural of the
longest liver of them the said T, E and H, to all profits and commodities
whatsoever, (wilful waste only excepted) Yiedling and paying therefore yearly,
Yielding and paying 40 l. per annum, and two days averrage, or reaping in
harvest; and two Capons, etc a Heriot, at the decease of every Tenant, dying
Tenant in possession.
during the said term, unto the said T C and A his Wife, and to the Heirs and
Assigns of the said A, the full sum of etc. at the Feasts of etc by equal
portions; together also with two days averrage, called reaping in harvest
time, with sufficient persons upon lawful demand: and also two Capons at the
feast of etc. yearly, during the said term. And also yielding an Heriot at the
decease of the said T T, and every other his Assign, dying principal Tenant,
Occupier of the premises by force of these presents. And also paying after the
rate of 5 s. for all taxes and lays that may belevied out of the premises for
and during the said term. If it happen the rent be unpaid, and no distress to
be found, then to re-enter.
And if it happen the said yearly rent of etc or any part thereof to be behind
and upaid by the space of etc. next enensuing the said Feast days on which the
same ought to be paid, and the same being lawfully demanded, and no sufficient
distress for the said rent in or upon the said premises, or any part thereof
can or may be found: That then and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said T C and A his said Wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of the
said A, into the said Lands, and other the said demised premises, and every
part thereof, with the appurtenances, to re-enter, and the same to re-possesse,
enjoy and have again, as in his or their former estate; and this present Demise
and Grant from thenceforth to be utterly void, frustrate and determined, any
thing in these presents, A Covenant, that T. T. may dig up by the roots any
trees, etc.
etc. notwithstanding. And the said T C and A his said Wife, for themselves,
their, etc. do Covenant etc. to and with the said T T his etc. and every of
them by these presents, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T
T his etc. and every of them, for and during the said term, to stock and rid
up by the roots all manner of bushes and underwoods growing in and upon the
premises (except in hedges and fences.) And also, ditch, quick-set and divide
the premises at the will and pleasure of the said T T, his etc. And also, to
make marle-pit or pits upon the premises, for the better manuring thereof. And
the said T T, A Covenant, that T. T. shall build two baies of houses within
three years.
for himself, his etc. does Covenant etc. to and with etc. by these presents,
That he the said T T, his etc. or some of them, shall and will within three
years next ensuing the date hereof, erect and build two sufficient bays of
housing, or more, in and upon the Lands lying in etc. or upon some other
convenient place of the said demised premises: and the same houses so erected
and builded, shall from time to time repair, keep, and maintain in good
reparations for and during the said term: and in the end of the said term, the
same being sufficiently repaired and tenantable, In consideration whereof, they
shall allow him timber.
shall leave and yield up: In consideration the said T C and A his Wife, their
Heirs and Assigns, shall and will, upon lawful demand, give or deliver, or
cause to be delivered unto the said T T, his etc. sufficient Timber for the
building of the said two bays or more, A Covenant, that they shall leavie a
fine.
at the choice of the said T T, his etc. And further, the said T C and A his
said Wife etc. do Covenant, etc. to and with etc. by these presents, That he
the said T. C and A shall and will at the next general Sessions to be holden
within the said County of etc. in due form of Law, knowledge and leavie a Fine,
sur co^^sance de droit come ceo cil ad de lour done, to be recorded and
engrossed, with proclamations according to the Stature in such case made and
provided, unto the said T T, his etc. or to such other person or persons as he
or they shall appoint, of, in, and upon all the said several parcels of Lands,
and other the premises, with the appurtenances, for better and sure making of
the said Premses in manner aforesaid, for and during the said term, as by the
learned Council of the said T T his, etc. or by any of them, shall be
reasonably devised or required; so that the said T T his, etc. allow and pay
the fourth part of the charges of the said fine. And the said T C, and A his
said Wife, does, A Covenant, that they shall save harmless the premises.
etc. to and with the said T T his, etc. and every of them by these presents,
That they the said T C and A his said Wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of the
said A, all the said demised Lands and premises, housing and appurtenances, and
every part thereof, to the said T T his, etc. for and during the said term, in
manner and form aforesaid, against them the said T, and A his said Wife, their,
and either of the Heirs, etc. and against all and every other person and
persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming the said Message or Tenement, Lands and
other the premises, or any part thereof, in, by, from or under them the said T,
and A his said Wife, or either of them, their Heirs and Assigns, shall and
will warrant, acquit, discharge or otherwise sufficiently save and keep
harmless and defend by these presents. And moreover, A letter of Attorney to
deliver possession.
the said T C and A his said Wife, have ordained, constituted, deputed and
made, and by these presents in their place have put their Well-beloved in
Christ, P D, and R D their true and lawful Atturneyes, jointly and severally,
for them, and in their names, stead and place, to enter into the said Lands,
premises and appurtenances, or into any part thereof, and possession, livery
and seisin thereof to take; and after such possession, livery and seisin so
thereof had and taken, the same to deliver over to the said T T or to his
certain Attorney in that behalf, according to the form, effect and true
meaning of these presents; ratifying, confirming and allowing all that, and so
much as their said Atturneys, or either of them, shall do in and about or
concerning the executing of the possession, livery and seisin in manner
aforesaid by these presents.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Lease for three lives, of a Tenement, with special Covenants.
This INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, That the said T C and A
his said Wife, for and in consideration of, Demise.
etc. Have demised, pranted, etc. unto the said R H and his Assigns, all that
one Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, situate, lying and being in,
etc. late in the tenure or occupation of, etc. or of her Assigns; together with
all and singular Houses, Barnes, buildings, backsides, gardens, yards and
curtilages to the same premises belonging, and four pieces or parcels of Land
thereunto adjoining, called and known, etc. and all Lands, leasowes, pastures,
closes, woods, waters and commons to the same Message in any wise belonging or
appertaining, or with the same usually occupied at any time heretofore; and
also one daymath or meadow Land, lying in a meadow, called, etc. now of late in
the occupation of H D or his Assignee or Assignees. To have, hold, occupy and
quietly to enjoy the said Message or Tenement, Habendum for three lives.
and all other the premises with the appurtenances, unto the said R H and his
Assigns, immediately from the executing of these presents, for and during the
natural lives of the said R H, M his Wife, and A C Daughter of the said T and
A; and for and during the life and lives of every of them longest living, to
all tenantly commodities and profits whatsoever (wilful waste only excepted)
Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said term, unto the said T C
and A his Wife, and to the Heirs of the said A 40 s. of etc. at the Feast of,
etc. and also the best Beast, or movable good at the decease of the said R H
only, for and in the name of an Heriot (if it be required.) And if it happen,
etc. that then, etc. ( as in the former) And the said R H, Covenant for
reparations.
etc. does, etc. to and with, etc. by these presents, That he the said R and
his Assigns, shall and will not only repair and keep the said Message or
Tenement, houses, barns, buildings, and other the premises, in good and
sufficient reparations, from time to time, during the lives of the said R, M
and A, and the longest liver of them: but also at the time of their deceases so
repaired, tenantably shall leave up. That there shall but one Heriot be paid.
And the said T C and A his said Wife, etc. does. etc. to and with, etc. by
these presents; That there shall no other Heriot be paid or asked in respect of
this Demise, but only at the decease of the said R H. And also, the said T C
and A his said Wife, etc. does, A Covenant, that R.H. shall have timber on the
premises, and have a kneeling place in the Church.
etc. does, etc. to and with etc. by these presents, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said R H and his Assigns, during the said term of the
said R, M and A, and the longest liver of them, to take and have convenient.
Timber upon the said demised premises, for the necessary reparations of the
aforesaid Message or Tenement, houses, barnes and buildings, as occasion shall
require; and also to dig and make marle pit or pits in any convenient part of
the premises; and the same marle there gotten, to expend and bestow upon the
premises or any part thereof, and not elsewhere during the lives of the said
R, M and A, and the longest liver of them. And also the said T C and A his said
Wife, shall have a covenient seat, or kneeling place in the Church of etc.
aforesaid, during all their said term, at the costs and charges of the said T
and A their etc. And furtr, the said T C and A his said Wife. etc. does etc. to
and with etc. by these presents. That he the said T C and A his said Wife, and
the Heirs and Assigns of the said A, all the said Message or Tenement,
houses, barns, buildings, and all other the demised premises with the
appurtenances, to the said R H his etc. for and during the aforesaid term, in
manner and form aforesaid, against them the said T and A his Wife, A Covenant,
that they shall warrant the premises.
their and either of their Heirs and Assigns, and against all other person and
persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming the faid Message or Tenement, Lands,
orther there premises, or any part thereof, in, by, from or under them the said
T. and. A his Wife, or either of them, their Heirs and Assigns, shall and
will warrant, acquit, discharge or otherwise sufficiently save and keep
harmless and defend by these presents.

In witnesss, etc.

An Indenture of Lease for term of three years; and after the three years, from
year to year, until one half years warning be given of dislike, with special
Covenants.
This INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, That the said I E, for
and in consideration of etc. Demise.
Has Demised etc. unto the said J C these several Rooms and premises next
hereafter mentioned: That is to say, etc. (name the Rooms) together with free
liberty of ingresse, egresse, regresse, way and quiet passage unto and for the
said J C, his Executors, Administrators, Servants and Assigns, to go and come
unto and from the said demised premises, through the yard belonging to the
said Message or Tenement, called or known by the name or sign of the etc.
siture, lying and being in etc. from time to time, and at all times during the
term hereunder granted: All which said premises are situate, lying and being in
etc. aforesaid, and are parcel of the said Message, Tenement or Inn, commonly
called or known by the name or sign of etc. Habendun for three years, and
after from year to year, til one half years warning of dislike be given by each
of them: Giving always one quarters rent beforehand.
and now are in the tenure or occupation of etc. or his Assigns. To have and
to hold, etc. from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended; and
from and after the end and expiration of the said term of etc. from year to
year, until such time as one half years warning of dislike shall be given by
either of the said parties to the other of them, his etc. Yielding and paying
therefore yearly, during the continuance of this present Lease, unto the said J
E, his etc. the rent or sum of etc. whereof the said I C has paid unto the
said I E said I E one quarters rent beforehand, at four Feasts or terms of the
year, viz. etc. by even portions: That is to say, one quarters rent always
beforehand, during the continuance of this present Lease. And the said J C. A
covenant for reparations.
for himself, his etc. does Covenant etc. to and with the said J E, his etc. by
these presents, That he the said I C. his etc. or some of them, at his or their
or some of their own proper costs and charges, the said several rooms and
premises by these presents demised, shall and will from time to time, during
the continuance of this present Lease, well and sufficiently repair, support,
sustain, amend, amend and maintain, and against wind and rain shall make and
keep defensible, when and as often as need shall require: and the widraught,
privy and pavements belonging and appertaining to the said premises, shall
likewise cleanse, pave, scour and amend, when and as often as need shall
require; or else always within the time and space of etc. next after any
notice or warning shall be therefore given or left in writing at the said
demised premises, to or for the said J C. his etc. And the same premises at
the end and determination of these presents, shall peaceably and quietiy leave,
surrender and yield up unto the said J E his etc. in as good state of
reparations as the same now are in every respect. And further, And for view.
that it shall and may be lawful as well to and for J D of, etc. his etc. as
also unto and for the said J E. his etc. and every or any of them, four times
in every year yearly, during the continuance of this present Lease, at their
and every of their free wills and pleasures to enter and come into and upon the
said premises above mentioned to be demised, with the appurtenances, and every
part and parcel thereof, there to view, search and see whether the reparations
of the same premises be well and sufficiently made, repaired and kept, as the
same ought to be, or not: And of all such defaults of reparations as then and
there upon any such view shall be found, to give or leave notice or warning in
writing unto or for the said J C, his etc, at the above letten premises, for
the repairing and amending thereof within the time and space of etc. then next
after, as aforesaid. And moreover, the said J C, for him, his, etc. Covenanteth
etc. to and with the said I E his etc. and to and with every of them by these
Present, A Covenant, that I C. shall pay all duties.
That he the said I C, his etc. at his and their, and some of their own proper
costs and charges, shall and will from time to time, and at all times, when and
as often as need shall require, during the continuance of this present Lease,
bear, pay and discharge all such taxations and duties as shall be taxed,
assessed or due to be paid by means or reason, or in respect of the aforesaid
premises; and thereof, and of every part thereof clearly acquit and discharge,
or sufficiently save and keep harmless the said I E his etc. And likewise the
said I C for him, A Covenant, that he shall not do any act to forfeit I. E. his
estate, nor out any of the principal Timber, nor use the art of brewing in the
premises.
his etc. does Covenant etc. to and with the said I E his etc. by these
presents, That he the said I C his Executors, Administrators nor Assigns, nor
any other person or persons, by his or their means or procurement; shall at any
time hereafter during the term hereby granted, do or procure, or cause to be
done any act or thing whatsoever, whereby to prejudice or forfeit the estate,
right or title which the said I E has and holds of and in the premises, or
any part thereof. And also that he the said I C his etc. shall not at any time
hereafter saw or cut any of the principal Timber, posts or joysts of or
belonging to the above letten premises, or any part thereof, without the
special license and consent of the said I E, his etc. first had and obtained in
that behalf. And likewise, that he the said I C, his etc. shall not at any
time during the term aforesaid, use or exercise the art of Brewing in the said
demised premises, or in any part thereof: And that he shall bake in his own
Oven, and deliver all such household stuff as was delivered him.
And likewise, that he the said I C, his etc. shall permit and suffer the said
I E, and one P W of etc. their Executors, Servants and Assigns, to bake any
bread or other things in the Oven in and belonging to the said demised
premises, as often, and when as need shall require, during the said term,
without any let, disturbance or contradiction of the said I C, his etc. And
also, that he the said I C, his etc. shall at the end of the said term, or
other sooner determination of this present Lease, deliver or cause to be
delivered unto the said I E, his etc. all such bedding, household stuff, and
other things which the said I E has delivered unto the said I C at the
ensealing and delivery to these presents, and which he the said I E shall at
any time or times hereafter during the continuance of this present Lease,
deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said I C. his Executors, Servants or
Assigns, in as good state and condition as now they or any of them are
(reasonable use in the mean time only excepted.) And further, That he may wash
his clothes in the Kitchen.
that he the said I C his, etc. shall and will permit and suffer the said I E
and the said P W their Executors, Servants and Assigns, to wash his and their
clothes in the Kitchen, or in some other convenient room belonging to the
abovesaid demised premises, once in every fortnight, without any let or
interruption of the said I C his, A Covenant, that I. C. may have the benefit
of three rooms all the day.
etc. And the said I E for himself, his, etc. does Covenant, etc. to and with
the said I C his, etc. by these presents, That he the said I C his, etc. paying
the said, etc. (the Covenant for peaceable enjoying) And also that he the said
I E his, etc. shall and will at all times hereafter, and from time to time
during the continuance of this present Lease, peaceably and quietly permit and
suffer the said I C his, etc. to have and enjoy the use and benefit of the two
Parlours below the stairs, and one Chamber over the Buttery above demised, from
time to time, on the day time, for his Guests to eat and drink in: That is to
say, from the time that his Guests shall rise in the morning, until they go to
bed at night: He the said I C his, etc. keeping the said rooms sweet and
handsome, and paying and allowing unto the said I E his, etc. all such sum
and sums of money as shall from time to time grow due to be paid for Guests
lodging in the said two Parlours and Chamber above specified, at all times upon
request to him the said I C his, etc by the said I E his, etc. to be therefore
made, Proviso for the rent.
Provided always, that if it shall happen the said yearly rent or sum of,
etc. to be behind, or unpaid in part or in all, contrary to the form above
limited for payment thereof, being lawfully demanded at the said demised
premises. That then and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful unto and
for the said I E his, etc. into the said several rooms abovementioned to be
demised, and into every or any part thereof, in the name of the whole wholly to
re enter, and the same to have again, retain, enjoy and re-possesse, as in his
or their first and former estate or estates. And the said I C his, etc. and all
other Occupiers or Possessors of the said Demissed premises thereout, and from
thence utterly to expel, put dot, and amove; this Indenture or any thing
therein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Co-partnership between two Brewers, penned by Council.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between R J. of etc. of the one part, Whereas they
are jointly possessed of a Brew House, and other things.
and M. B. of, etc. of the other part. Whereas the said R J and M B do stand
jointly interessed and possessed of and in one Message or Tenement, with the
appurtenances, and of and in one Brew House situate within, etc. late in the
occupation of H B (for diverse years yet enduring) and also of and in one
Copper, and diverse and sundry Brewing-vessels, Tons, Goods, Implements and
Householdstuffe, by virtue of one Indenture of Lease, bearing date, etc. made
between the said H B on the one part, and the said R J and M B on the other
part: whereunpon the yearly Rent of, etc. is reserved to be paid, which said
Copper, Tonnes, Brewing vessels, Goods, Implements and housholdstuffe are
particularly expressed and specified in a Schedule or Inventory Indented to the
said Indenture of Lease annexed. And likewise and possessed and interessed of
and in certain grounds stables, hay-losts, hog-sties, and other rooms now used
with the said Brewhouse, as part and appertinent to the same for certain years
also enduring, by virtue of one other Lease to them made by the said H B
bearing Date, etc. at the yearly Rent of, etc. As by the said two several
Indentures of Lease, whereunto relation being had more plainly may appear.
Witnesses, For the love and affection they are agreed to be Copartners.
that the said Parties to these presents, for the love and affection which
either of them has and does bear each of them to the other; And to the intent
and purpose that the same Parties may (by Gods grace) the better increase in
stock, and be the better enabled to maintain themselves and their Families,
have concluded, condescended, and agreed together, and by these presents do
conclude, condescend and agree to make between themselves as Fellowship or
Company, and to become and continue Co-partner, together in the mystery or
trade of Brewing of Beer and Ale in the said Brew House, immediately from and
after the Day of the Date hereof, for and during the term and time of, etc.
from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended (if does the said
Parties shall so long live.) And to that intent and purpose the said R J for
his stock, part and portion, And for that intent they have put in a joint stock
of 200 l. apiece.
has put in the sum of 200 l. of, etc. And likewise the said M. B. for his
stock, part and portion, has put in the sum of 200 l. of, etc. to be used
and employed in the said Co-partnership. It is now Covenanted, granted and
agreed upon by and between the said Parties to these presents; and either of
them for himself, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns respectively,
does Covenant and grant to and with the other of them, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, by these presents, That they and either of them
their several Executors, Administrators and Assigns, A Covenant, that they
shall have their equal shares of their stock, and the gains and other things
jointly.
shall be alike interessed, and have, retain and assume to their own several
uses, equal shares, parts and portions, of, in, and to the said several stocks
by them severally put in, to be employed in this Co-partnership; and of all and
every such other sum and sums of money as thereunto hereafter shall be
added or put; and of, in, and to all the gains and profits and increase to come
or grow thereof, or of any part thereof, or by any yeast, grains, lock wash,
or any other commodities thereof coming or arising by the said Co-partnership
partible between them. Whereupon, for the sure and more effectual proceedings
in the said Co-partnership to the most mutual benefit and advantage of the
said several parties to these presents, either of the same Parties for himself
and his several Executors, Administrators and Assigns respectively, does
Covenant, promise and grant to and with the other of them, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns by these presents, in manner and form following, A
Covenant, they shall be true one to another.
that is to say, That every of them shall and will from time to time during the
said term be true and faithful, one of them to the other of them, in every
thing in and about the said mystery and trade of Brewing, and all other things
which shall concern the said Co-partnership, and shall do and perform his and
their best endeavor from time to time during the said Co-partnership to the
best of their wit, knowledge, power and skill in brewing of Ale and Beer, or
either of them in the said Brewhouse, and in uttering and selling of the same,
and in all other things necessary to be put in ure touching or concerning the
said Co-partnership and joint occupying for the bringing in of gains, as (as
much as in them lies) for the avoiding of loss. And that all losses and
damages as shall happen to come either by evil or bad Debtors, And that all
charges shall be equally paid out of their gains and stock.
or other casualties howsoever (so as it be not by or through the wilful
negligence or deceit of either of the said Parties.) And that all Subsidies.
Taxes, and other provisions, impositions and loanes to be charged or imposed
upon the said Parties or any of them by reason of this Co-Partnership and Joint
trade, and all other charges for Rents of the said Brew House, and the said
Message or Tenement, and other houses and grounds which are and shall be used
with the said Brew House; and all charges of reparations to be done by the
Covenants in the said several Leases or either of them, and other about other
houses and grounds as are now used and employed, and which shall be used and
employed to and with the same Brew House, and all other necessary charges to be
expended in housekeeping at the said Brew House, and all payments and
necessary charges of corn, coals, hops, vessels, utensils, Servants wages,
candles, and all other necessary provisions whatsoever in and about the said
trade of Brewing during this present Co-Partnership, shall be equally and
indifferently sustained, borne, paid and discharged by and between the said
parties out of their several parts of the gains or stock, part and part like as
Copartners. A Covenant, that neither of them shall take any of the stock or
gains, without the others consent, and he that does so shall enter it into a
Book.
And also it is mutually agreed upon by and between the said parties to these
presents, that neither of them shall at any time or times during the said
Co-partnership withdraw or take out of, or from the said principal stock or the
gains thereof, or any sum or sums of money other then for the necessary
uses aforesaid, without the mutual consent and agreement of the other of them
first had and obtained: And such of them as by such consent as is a foresaid,
shall at any time take out the same, shall immediately enter into a Book for
that purpose to be kept, the quantity so to be taken out, to the end that the
other of the said parties may take notice thereof. A Covenant, that they shall
keep true Books of Account, and make Account one to another every Quarter of
all their joint dealings.
And it is further covenanted, granted, concluded, and fully agreed by and
between the said parties to these present. That they and either of them shall
(as near as they may) from time to time keep or cause to be kept, true, just,
and perfect Books of Accounts or Reckonings in writing to the uttermost of
their several knowledge of all the payments, receipts, and debts to or from
them due, or owing, gains, losses, and all other necessary things touching
their joint trade and dealings in this present Co-partnership; which Books
shall be extant from time to time, and at all times convenient for the said
parties or their Assigns, to peruse and examine. And that once in every
Quarter of a Year at the least, during the said Co-partnership, that is to
say, at the Feasts of of. etc. or within twenty days next after every of the
said Feasts (or oftener if need shall be) upon request made by one of the said
parties, to the other of them, they the said parties shall join in reckoning
together, and make and deliver either of them to the other of them, to the best
of their several knowledge, true, plain. and perfect Account or Accounts in
writing, of, for, and concerning the principal stock, and all other things in
Partnership between them, and of the gains, losses and debts to them due or
owing, and by and from them to be due and owing to any person or, persons, and
of all the receipts, payments, dealings, and doings in or concerning the said
Brew House, or otherwise touching or concerning this their Joint trade and
dealings, without any voluntary concealment, with drawing or unjust detaining
of any of the said principal stock, or of any gain, profit or commodity which
should or ought in any wise come to the equal share of the said Parties to
these presents by the true meaning of these presents. A Covenant, that all such
money as shall be found due upon the foot of any account shall be equally
divided between them.
And moreover it is agreed between the said parties, That whatsoever sum or
sums of money at or upon the foot of any account or accounts concerning this
Co-Partnership shall be found to be remaining in the hands of any Clerk or
Clerks, or in the hands of any the said Copartners, or of any of their
Assignee or Assigns not expended about the business of the said Joint trade
and Co-partnership, and before not accounted for by the said Co partners, shall
be forthwith from time to time equally and indifferently divided between the
said Copartners part and part alike, or run and be continued in stock as the
said parties can best agree concerning the same. And it is further covenanted,
granted, and fully agreed by and between the said R J and M B, and either of
them severally and respectively covenanteth, grants and agrees for himself,
his Executors and Administrators, to and with the other of them, his Executors
and Aministrators in manner and form following; that is to say. A Covenant,
that if either of them dye, then (because no advantage shall be taken by the
Survivor) the stock and all things whatsoever in their joint trade shall be to
his Executors or Administrators, as if he had been living.
That if it shall fortune that either of the said parties to dye or decease
during the time of this Co-partnership, before any separation or division shall
be made between them of their said stock and common dealings (the other of them
surviving.) In that case no advantage by the Survivor of the said parties, his
Executors or Administrators in right, or in respect of his Survivorship, shall
hold or take place, or be by him or them challenged, taken or demanded, but
that such part and portitions, of, in and to the said principal stock, and the
gains and increase thereof, and also of the aforesaid Messuages and Tenements
which is or shall be due or belonging to such party of the said parties so
deceased, at the time of his death, shall come and be paid to the Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, of the said deceased Copartners in such like, and
in so large, ample and beneficial manner, as the same should or ought to have
grown due, or be paid or satisfied unto the said deceased Co-partner himself,
if he had been living at the surcease or determination of this Co-partnership.
And moreover, it is covenanted, granted. and agreed by and between the said
parties to these presents, and either of the same parties for himself, A
Covenant, that upon the end of the co-partnership, howsoever they shall choose
four men to praise the Goods, and that they shall cast lots to take or refuse
the same.
his several Executors, Administrators and Assigns respectively Covenanteth
and grants to and with the other of them, his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, by these presents, That within the space of six Months next after the
end or giving over of this Co partnership, intended the these presents, be it
upon the expiration of the said term of six years, or by the decease of either
of the said parties, or otherwise howsoever, the said parties (if they be
living) or if either of them shall happen to be deceased, then the Survivor of
them, and the Executors and Administrators of the Deceased Co-partner shall
consent and agree together, and shall upon reasonable request to be made by the
one to the other of them, make choice and election of four indifferent Men,
whereof two shall be chosen by the said R J his Executors or Administrators,
and other two by the said M B his Executors or Administrators, to make and set
down and indifferent appraisement and valuation of all and singular the goods,
implements, and chattels, which then shall be and remain in Partnership
between them (if otherwise between themselves they cannot agree thereof) (the
goods, Coppers brewing-vessels, implements, and house, holdstuff, which are
expressed in the said Schedule or Inventory, annexed to the said Indenture of
Lease only excepted) and that upon the appraisment thereof the Co-partner
surviving, and the Executors, Administrators or Assigns of the Deceased
Co-partner shall make and cast lots between them to take or resuse the said
Goods so to be appraised at such rate as the same shall be valued. or that he
or they of them to whose lot the same shall happen to fall, his or their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall accept, receive, and take the
same: And also shall within six months then next following, satisfy, and pay,
or cause to be satisfied or paid unto the other of them the said Co-partner,
his Executors or Assigns, the moiety or half part of all such money as the
said Goods shall be valued and praized, at or within the Brew House above
mentioned, without aany fraud or covin, and shall also make equal Division
between them of the money then in cash belonging to the said Co-partnership,
and also of the Debts then owing to the said Copartners, for or in respect of
the said partable trade or stock, and of all and singular other the things now
intended or expressed by these presents to be partable and divided between the
said parties to these presents, in respect of the said Co-partnership; or
otherwise thereof to deal and dispose as they then shall find to be most
behoofful for them. And that after the end of it, they shall give a true
Account to each other.
And further, that within convenient time after the giving over, ending or
determination of this Co-partnership intended by these presents, the said
parties, or the Survivor of them, his Executors and Administrators, shall and
will upon reasonable request therefore to be made, make and deliver the one of
them to the other of them (if they be both living) or (if either of them shall
be deceased, then) to the Executors or Administrators of the said Party
deceased, a true, just, plain, and perfect account in writing of the said whole
stock, gains, debts, credits, and all other things which shall be then in
Co-partnership between them, or belonging to the said partable stock or trade:
and within six weeks next after the end, determination, or expiration of the
intended Co-partnership (be it howsoever) shall make an equal and indifferent
separation and division of all the said partable stock, gains, debts, and other
the said premises intended or expressed to be in Co-partnership, and assign,
allot and allow, or cause to be assigned allotted and allowed one of them to
the other of the said parties, or (if either of them be deceased, then) unto
the Executors, Administrators or Assigns of the deceased Co-partner, the
moiety of the aforesaid Messuages or Tenements, and so much of the said whole
part and portion of the said stock and gains, and of all and singular other
the premises which are expressed or meant to be in Co-partnership as to any of
the said Parties shall be due and appertaining, or of right belonging for his
part, purport, and portion, of and in the same, according to the true meaning
of these presents, (defaulking and deducting first so much as shall and may
satisfy the Debts which they the said Parties, or any of them shall owe or be
indebted for and in respect of the said partable trade or dealings:) and that
the Survivor of the said Parties, his Executors, and Administrators shall do
his and their best endeavor and endeavonrs to call and gather in all the Debts
which were or shall be owing to the said Copartners, or any of them, in
respect of the said partable, stock or trade; and after defalcation made of so
much either in goods, stock, money, or otherwise, as shall suffice to satisfy
and pay the Debts which shall be then truly owing by them, or either of them,
in respect of the said partable stock, trade, and dealings, shall, as the same
Debts, or any part thereof shall be had or received, make payment of one
half-part thereof (necessary charges ensuing for the getting of the same,
deducted, rebated and allowed) to the Executors, Administrators, or Assigns of
such of the same Partners as shall first happen to Decease. And that the said
Survivor, his Executors, and Administrators, (if it be requested of him or
them) for all the residue of debts and things whatsoever, which are or shall be
owing or belonging to them, or any of them, according to the true meaning of
these presents, in respect of the said intended Co-partnership, whereof the
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns of the said Co-partner first Deceased,
as is aforesaid, shall not have, had, and received, his and their part, shall
and will make and deliver to the Executors, Administrators, or Assigns of the
first deceased Co-partner at his or their own proper costs and charges, such
assignment, conveyance and assurance of such part thereof as to the Executors
or Administrators of such Co-partner so first deceased in true meaning ought to
belong, as by the Executors, Administrators, or Assigns of the said first
deceased Partner, or the learned Council in the Law, of them, or any of them
shall be reasonably devised or advised. A Covenant, that all things shall be
bought in both their names, and that all Bonds shall be in both their names.
And moreover, it is Govenanted, granted, and agreed by and between the said
Patties to these presents, That all such malt, hops, coals, beer and other
thing and things whatsoever which at any time or times hereafter shall be
bought or sold, used or employed in or about the said Joint trade or occupying,
shall be had and done by the Joint consent of the said Parties (if conveniently
the same may be done) and not otherwise. And that all and every person and
persons that shall hereafter become Debtor or Debtors, or indebted to and for
the said principal stock, or for any part thereof, or for any Beer or other
thing that shall arise, come, grow, or increase thereby, or be sold out of, or
for the same, or the proceed thereof, shall be made Debtors for the same to
both the said parties to these presents, according to the true meaning of these
presents. And that all Bonds, Bills, Assurances and sureties that shall be made
or taken for any Beer, debts or duties, or any of them, or of, for or
concerning the true or good service of any Clerk or Clerks, or other servant or
servants which shall be put in trust to serve in the affairs of the said
Brew House or trade of Co-partnership shall be made and taken to both the said
parties, and in both their names, and shall be delivered and safely kept to
both their uses, and that neither of the said parties, their Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns, without the consent of one of them to the other of
them, or without the consent of the Executors, Administrators, or Assigns of
him that shall happen first to die, shall make, seal, or deliver any
acquittance or acquittances, release or releases, discharge or discharges
whatsoever to any person or persons, their Executors or Administrators, which
is or shall be Debtor or Debtors for the said whole stock or any part thereof,
or for any other money thereunto to be added or put, or the increase that
thereupon or by means thereof shall arise, come, or grow of, for, or concerning
any Bonds or assurances, as aforesaid, to be taken in the names of the said
parties to the said partable use, or for any thing appertaining, or which shall
appertain to the said Co-partnership, whereby to defeat or defraud the other
Co-partner, his Executors or Administrators of his or their just part, or of
any part thereof, or for any lesser or smaller sum or sums of money, then
the person or persons so indebted shall truly owe, or stand charged to pay
(reasonable compositions and abatements of and for debts due or to be due,
owing or appertaining to the said parties in respect of their said Joint trade,
or for leaking or returns of Beer musty, or naughty Beer, and such like, to
be made without fraud or covin. And no further disadvantage or profit of the
one Co-partner, his Executors or Administrators, then of the other, only
excepted) but shall do his or their best endeavors for the recovery and
getting in of the same; and after the same so recovered, shall deliver the
moiety thereof (all reasonable costs and charges deducted according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents) to the Executors, Administrators or
Assigns of the party deceased. And finally, A Covenant, that if it happen they
disagree between themselves, then they shall refer the matter to four men and
stand to their award.
for as much as the said parties to these presents, are minded and intended to
be Brewers, and the knowledge of all matters concerning the said trade and
mystery is best acquainted to Men of the said Trade, they do Covenant,
conclude, and agree together for them, their Executors, and Administrators, by
these presents, That if at any time or times hereafter any controversy or
debate shall happen to arise or grow between them for, or touching the
premises, or any part thereof, or any thing herein contained or specified, That
then and so often as any controversy shall happen, the said Parties, their
Executors, and Administrators, and every of them, shall show the cause of their
griefs (before any Suit in Law shall be commenced touching the same) unto four
honest discreet men whom they shall nominate, appoint and make choice of to
hear and determine such variances, doubts and controversies as shall happen to
fall between them: and shall stand to, abide, perform, fulfill, and keep all
and every such award, ordinance, order, final end and judgment, as in that
behalf shall be set down by the said four men so to be nominated, chosen and
appointed by and between them, to have the hearing and determination of such
controversies; so as they do order, judge and give up their award thereupon in
writing under their hands and seals within forty days next after the same
cause shall be to them showed and committed. And that they the said Copartners,
their Executors and Administrators, shall not sue or complain elsewhere for or
touching the premises, or any thing herein contained at any time or times
hereafter, so long as such four men so to be nominated by the said Copartners,
shall be ready and willing to order and judge between them.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Co-partnership between Pewterers.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between A B of D. etc. of the one party; and F B
of, etc. of the other party, For the love he bears to F B he has put in a
stock of 20 l. to be Partners for 31 years.
Witnesses, That whereas the said A B for and in respect of the love, favor
and good affection which he bears unto the said F B, and for his better
preferment and advantage in his trade and profession, has before the ensealing
and delivery hereof, disbursed and delivered unto the said F B the sum of,
etc. to be used, laid out and employed by the said F B in the said art, trade
or profession of a Pewterer, in buying, of Pewter, and other things needful to
be used in or about the said art, trade or profession of a Pewterer, and in
buying, casting, soldring, vending and selling of all such wares, goods and
merchandises (incident to the said art, trade or profession of a Pewterer) as
by the said A B and F B shall be thought meet and convenient, in a shop or shed
for that purpose to be made ready at the costs and charges of the said F B in
or about the now Message, Tenement or Yard of the said F B, set and being in D
aforesaid, from the day of the date of these present Indentures, unto the full
end and term of 31 years, from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete
and ended, (if the said F B do and shall so long live.) In consideration
whereof, the said F B for himself, A Covenant, that F B shall carefully employ
himself in the trade of a Pewterer.
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does covenant, grant and agree to
and with the said A B his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and
with every of them by these presents, in manner and form following: That is to
say, That he the said F B shall and will at all times hereafter, and from time
to time, during the said term of 31 years above mentioned, (if he the said F B
shall so long live) diligently and carefully employ himself, and do his best
endeavor, to be uttermost of his power and skill, in and about the buying,
vending, selling, casting, soldring and finishing of all such works, wares,
goods and merchandises as are incident, or belonging to the Art, Trade or
Profession aforesaid. And in doing, executing and performing of every other
thing which shall be necessary to be done and put in ure in and about, or
concerning the said Art, Trade or Profession of a Peweterer, And that the
gains shall he divided equally.
for the bringing in of gains (and as much as in him lies, for the avoiding
of loss.) And that all such gains, profit and increase as shall come, grow or
arise, or be had, gotten or received by the said F B, his Servants or Assigns
by means or reason of using and exercising the said Trade or Profession of a
Pewterer, or by buying, vending, selling, casting and soldring of Pewter (new
or old) or any other goods, wares or merchandises belonging to the said Art,
Trade or Profession asoresaid, shall be equally shared, parted and divided in
halves between the said parties, their Executors and Assigns in such manner
and form as hereafter is mentioned; that is to say, The said A B his Executors
or Assigns, shall have and receive the one moiety or half part thereof; and the
said F B his, etc. shall have and receive the other moiety or half part
thereof. Whereupon for the more sure and effectual proceedings in the said
affairs and businesses above specified, to the most mutual benefit and
advantage of the said parties to these presents, their several Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, Either of the same parties for himself, A
Covenant, that neither of them shall take out any sum of money, but they
shall have the others consent; and enter it into a Book.
and for his several Executors and Administrators respectively, does Covenant,
promise and grant, to and with the other of them, his, etc. by these presents,
in manner and form following, that is to say, That they, nor neither of them,
shall not at any time or times during the said term of years above specified,
withdraw or take any sum or sums of money, or other goods or merchandises
whatsoever, out of or from the said stock of, etc. above mentioned, or out of
or from any sum or sums of money, which shall be thereunto hereafter added or
put without the consent and agreement of the other of them, his Executors or
Assigns first had and obtained in that behalf. And that such of them as by
such consent, as is aforesaid, shall at any time or times take any thing out of
or from the said stock of, etc. or other sum or sums of money thereunto to
be added or put, or the proceed thereof, shall immediately enter into a Book
for that purpose to be kept, the sum or quantity by him or them so taken out;
and the day and year when they took the same, to the end that the other of the
said parties, his Executors of Assigns, may take notice thereof. And that all
charges shall be equally paid between them.
And also that all such sum and sums of money, as shall be from time to
time hereafter, during the term of 31 years abovementioned, be laid out or
disbursed by the said A B and F B or either of them; or by either of their
Executors or Assigns, in* about or concerning the buying and providing of
coals or any other firing to be spent (only in or about the trade or profession
aforesaid,) And that all such charges and expenses as shall be expended or laid
forth in and about the keeping and maintaining of any servant or servants,
horse or horses, to be employed only about the Art, Trade or Profession
aforesaid, for the equal benefit and advantage of the said parties to these
presents, their several Executors or Assigns, shall be equally laid out and
disbursed by and between the said A B and F B, their Executors or Assigns,
part and portion like. And that all osses shall be qual^ly borne, so that it be
not by negligence of either of them.
And that all losses and damages which shall happen to come or grow either by
evil or bad debtors, or by any other casualty howsoever, (so as it be not by or
through the wilful negligence or deceit of either of the said parties, or of
either of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns;) And all taxations,
impositions, and other duties to be charged or imposed upon the said parties,
or either of them, or either of their Executors or Assigns, by reason or
means of this their joint trade and dealing, shall be equally and
indifferently born, paid and discharged by and between the said A B and F B,
their Executors or Assigns, out of their several parts of the gains and
profits hereafter from time to time to be gotten by means of using the Art,
Trade or Profession aforesaid (part and portion-like.) And likewise the said A
B and F B and either of them, A Covenant, that they shall keep true Books of
Accounts, and reckon once a quarter; and that all gains shall be equally
shared between them.
for himself, his several Executors, Administrators and Assigns respectively;
does covenant, promise, grant and agree to and with the other of them, his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these presents, in form following:
that is to say, That they and either of them shall and will (so near as they
may or can) from time to time during the term of years above specified, keep or
cause to be kept, true, just, and perfect Books of Account and reckonings in
writing to the uttermost of their several knowledges, of all the payments,
receipts, and debts to and from then due, or owing, gains, losses and all other
things touching or concerning this their joint Trade and Dealings, which Books
shall be ex^ant from time to time, and at all convenient times, for the said
parties, or their Assigns, to peruse and examine at their and either or any of
their free wills and pleasures. And that once in every quarter of a year at the
least, during the said term above mentioned; that is to say, at the Feasts of.
etc. (or oftener, if need shall be, upon request to be made by the one of the
said parties to the other of them in that behalf) They the said parties shall
join in reckoning together, and make and deliver up either of them to the
other of them, to the best of their several knowledge, true, plain, and
perfect Account or Accounts in writings, of, for and concerning the said sum
or stock of, etc. and all such other sum or sums of money as shall be
thereunto hereafter added or put, and of all other things in joint Trade and
Dealings between them: and of all gains, losses and debts to them due or owing,
and by and from them to be due and owing; and of all receipts, payments, doings
or dealings in or concerning their said joint trade and dealings, without any
voluntary concealment, withdrawing or unjust detaining of any of the said
principal stock, or of any other sum or sums of money thereunto to be put,
or of any gains, profit or commodity which should, or in any wise ought to
come, to the equal uses of the said parties, by the true meaning of these
presents. And that upon every such account and accounts so from time to time in
form aforesa^d to be made and passed, all clear gains, profit and increase
which shall be found upon the foot of any such Account or Accounts, shall be
immediately shared, parted and divided into halvs between the said parties,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns; that is to say, The said A B his
Executors or Assigns, shall have and receive the one moiety or half part
thereof; and the said F B his Executors of Assigns, shall have and receive the
other moiety or half part thereof. A Covenant, that if either of them dye,
(because no advantage shall be taken by the Survivor) then the gains and other
things in joint trading shall be to the Executors or Administrators of the
Parties deceased, as well as if he had been living.
And it is further accorded and agreed by and between the said A B and F B, and
either of them severally and respectively covenanteth, grants and agrees for
himself, his several Executors and Administrators, to and with the other of
them, his Executors Administrators, and Assigns, That if it shall fortune
either of the said parties to dye or decease during the term of years above
specified, before any separation or division shall be made between them of
their said joint dealing, (the other of them surviving) that in such case no
advantage by the Survivor of the said parties, his Executors or Administrators
in right or in respect of his Survivorship, shall hold or take place, or be by
him or them taken, challenged or demanded. But that such part and portion of,
in and to the said principal stock, and the gains and increase thereof, which
is or shall be due or belonging to such party of the said parties so deceasing,
at the time of his death, shall come and be paid to the Executors,
Administrators or Assigns of the said deceased party, in such like, and so
large, ample and beneficial manner and form, as the same should or ought to
have grown due or been paid or satisfied unto the said deceased party
himself, if he had been living at the time of the surceasing or determination
of these presents. And the said F B for himself, etc. does covenant, A
Covenant, that F B shall deal truly, and shall not take any wares upon trust,
nor shall not trust out any thing without consent.
etc. to and with the said A B his, etc. by these presents, in manner and form
following; that is to say, That he the said F B shall and will at all times
hereafter, and from time to time, during the said term of years above
specified, deal uprightly, faithfully and truly with the said A B his
Executors and Assigns, in all respects touching and concerning the using and
exercising of the Art, Trade or Profession aforesaid. And further, that he the
said F B shall not at any time or times hereafter during the term of years
before specified, take up of credit or for time, any Goods, Wares, or
Merchandises to be used or employed in or about the said Art, Trade or
Profession of a Pewterer, without the consent and agreement of the said A B his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns first had and obtained in that behalf.
Neither that he the said F B or his Assigns, shall at any time or times
hereafter during the term of years aforesaid, lend or credit out to any person
or persons whatsoever, any Wares, Goods or Merchandises which shall be incident
to the said Art, Trade or Profession of a Pewterer, and which shall be
belonging to their said joint dealings, without the like consent and agreement
of the said A B his Executors or Assigns first had and obtained in that
behalf. And furthermore that he the said F B his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, shall and will at the end and expiration of the said term, of 31
years, And that F B shall at the end or expiration hereof, not only make a
general account, but also pay unto A B all such money as shall be found due
upon the foot of the account.
or other sooner determination of these presents, not only make or cause to be
made unto the said A B his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, a true, just,
perfect and general Account and Reckoning in writing of his whole dealings,
buying and selling whilst he shall have the use of the said sum or stock, of,
etc. or of any other sum of money thereunto by the said A B to be added or
put: and also, of all gains, profit and increase that shall come and arise by
reason of using and exercising his said Art, Trade or Profession, (and not
before accounted for and satisfied) but also upon the same account making,
shall and will well and truly deliver or cause to he delivered unto the said A
B, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, all such moulds and other tools,
as shall be then belonging to their said joint Trade and dealings: And shall
and will then also truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said A R his, etc.
the said sum or stock of, etc. and all such other sums of money as shall be
thereunto hereafter added or put by the said A B his, etc. and the moiety or
one half part of all the gains, profits and increase that shall be so risen and
grown by reason of using the said Art, Trade or Profession of a Pewterer; and
which shall not before that time have been accounted for and satisfied, as
aforesaid. And moreover, that he the said F B shall and will at all times
hereafter, and from time to time during the said term of, etc. above specified,
at and upon the reasonable request of the said A B after the best manner that
he can or may, to the uttermost of his knowledge or skill, teach and instruct
the said A B perfectly to do and execute every thing which in any wise
belongs to his said Art, Trade or Profession of a Pewterer. If either be
minded to leave histrading, then upon half a years warning to give over and
make a perfect general Account, and to pay all such money as shall be due.
Provided always, and it is covenanted, granted, and mutually agreed upon by
and between the said parties to these presents; and the said F B for himself,
his, etc. does covenant, grant and agree to and with the said A B his, etc. by
these presents. That if it shall happen at any time hereafter during the said
term of 31 years above specified, that the said A B his, etc shall grow in
dislike, or shall be minded to give over and discontinue his joint trading and
dealings with the said F B. And that the said A B his, etc. do or shall give
half years warning of such his intent and purpose unto the said F B his, etc.
in the presence of two or three witnesses at the least: That then and from
thenceforth all the Covenants, Grants and Agreements herein contained on the
part and behalf af the said A B his etc to be performed and kept, shall cease,
determine and be utterly void and of none effect, to all intents, constructions
and purposes in the Law whatsoever. And that then also he the said F B his,
etc. shall and will at the end of the said six months so limited to be given
for warning, as aforesaid, make and give up unto the said A B his, etc. such a
true, just, perfect and general Account as is above mentioned: and also upon
the fame Account making, shall and will well and truly deliver, or cause to be
delivered unto the said A B his, etc. all such moulds and other tools as shall
be then belonging to their said joint Trade and dealing: and shall and will
then also truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said A B his, etc. the said
sum or stock of, etc. and all such other sumes of money as shall be thereunto
hereafter added or put by the said A B his, etc. and the moiety or one half of
all the gains, profit and increase that shall be so arisen and grown by reason
of using the said Art, Trade or Profession of a Pewterer, and which shall not
before that time have been accounted for and satisfied, as aforesaid.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Co-partnership between Drapers.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between R. B. of etc. of the one part, and A.G. of,
etc. of the other part. Witnesses, That whereas on the day of the making of
these presents, it is accorded, covenanted and condescended by and between the
said parties, and either of them by himself covenanteth to the other, That they
and either of them shall and will jointly as Partners, occupy together (by the
grace of God) from the 21 day of etc. for and during the whole time and term of
ten years from thence next and immediately ensuing, as well in buying as in
selling all manner of Goods, Wares and Merchandises, concerning the Trade of a
^^nnen Draper, during which time of their said Co-partnership either of the
said parties shall be just, faithful and true to the other in buying and
selling, and otherwise, as aforesaid* And that neither party shall buy any
goods, wares, or Merchandises, at any time or times, during the said term,
without consent of the other, that shall amount to above the sum of etc. And
all such lucre, profit, increase gain, That all gains shall be equally divided.
advantage, and winning as shall come and grow in buying and selling any goods,
wares or merchandises, as aforesaid, during their said Co-partnership, shall be
equally parted and divided between the said parties; so that either of them
shall have his just and true portion of the gains aforesaid, according to the
true intent and meaning of these presents, and at all times within the said
term of ten years from the said 21 day of, etc. when it shall please either of
the said parties to give admonition or warning to other, then either of them to
make other a just and true reckoning and account of the buying and selling of
all manner of Wares, Goods, Merchandises, and otherwise, as is aforesaid, and
of the increase and advantage that shall come and grow of the same at the foot
of all and every such Account and Accounts, to charge their several private
Books for that purpose so he kept, If any loss happen to be equally born.
and to set each hand to others Book. And also, it is covenanted and agreed
between the said parties, that if the said parties at any time or times within
the said term of ten years happen to lose by debts, casualties, or otherwise,
in their joint trading, any part or parcel of the buying and selling of any
Goods, Wares and Merchandises, or otherwise, debts and credits in manner and
form as is aforesaid, so that it be not by negligence, color, or feigned
pretense, and that proved, both the said parties shall equally bear loss
between them. And it is also agreed, that neither party at any time or times
during the said term shall lend or trust out any money, Wares, Goods or
Merchandises to the value to 40 s, without the consent of the other. And it is
also agreed between the said parties, That one may not give a release.
That neither of them shall, during the said term, at any time or times give
any release or discharge of any debt, duty or sum of money, or of any part of
any debt, duty or sum of money to them owing, without the consent and
agreement of the other first had and obtained, unless it be by receiving the
said debt or debts, and every such part thereof, to the use of them both. And
also at the end of the said term, or before, To make a true account.
if the said parties shall discontinue their joint trading, they shall make a
just and true account and reckoning one with the other, of, for, and concerning
all matters, and neither party shall give discharge to any Debtor or Debtors of
any debt or debts that shall be allotted to the share and portion of other,
without the consent and agreement of the other first had and obtained in
writing under hand and seal. And also that during their said Co-partnership,
Not to be surety for any.
neither of the said parties shall at any time or times enter in Bill, Bond,
pass his word, nor become Bail or Surety for any person or persons whatsoever
for above the sum of 40 s. without the like consent of the other first had
and obtained. And further, it is agreed by the said parties, That they, and
either of them, shall well, truly and diligently, during the said term, bestow
and employ their diligent, best and true studies and endeavors for their best
profit, lucre and advantage in their said Trade and Traffic. And the said A G
for him, his, etc. covenanteth and grants to and with the said R B his etc.
by these presents, That he the said A G shall and will yearly every year during
the continuance of this Co-partnership truly pay or cause to be paid unto the
said R B or his Assigns the sum of, etc. a year, for and toward the
maintenance of an Apprentice by him the said R B to be kept. If any Apprentice
be taken, to be to both their uses.
And it is accorded and condescended between the said parties to these
presents, That if any other Apprentice or Apprentices to be taken during the
continuance of this Co-partnership, and living together, shall be taken and
bound to one of them, yet nevertheless jointly and severally to both their
uses, and the money given with such Apprentice or Apprentices to be taken and
converted to their joint use and behoof. A joint stock.
And for the managing of which affairs and business the said parties are to
make a joint stock of 200 l. viz. The said A G 100 l in ready money, and the
said R B as much cloth as shall amount unto the sum of 100 l. at the prizes
as they shall then cost. And it is agreed between the said Parties to these
presents. That if either party shall make a greater stock or portion to begin
withal the other lacking, shall during such time of lack or want, or until a
competent stock be made for the joint trading, as aforesaid, allow to the other
after the rate of 8 l. for the 100 l. per annum, for so much as shall be over
the parties lacking. And for the more better accomplishing the work and
business aforesaid, the said R B has taken a House and Shop in or upon
Cornhill within the said City of London, now in his occupation. And the said R
B for him, his, etc. does Covenant and grant to and with the said A G his, etc.
by these presents, That he the said A G paying and allowing to the said R B the
sum of 40 l. yearly to be raised out of the joint stock and gains of them
both in their said trading during the said term of ten years by even portions,
at four Feasts or terms of the year, viz. at the Feasts of, etc. shall and may
peaceably and quietly have, hold, and enjoy the joint possession and use of the
said Shop with the appurtenances only for their joint occupation and trading.
And the said R B his, etc. to pay the yearly rent going out and payable for the
same from time to time during the said term of ten years, and to pay and
discharge all Subsidies, Fifteens, Church-duties, Scavengers, wages, and other
taxations and impositions due and payable for the same during this
Co-partnership. For dislike.
And it is further covenanted and agreed by and between the said parties to
these presents, That if it shall fortune the said A G to grow in dislike, or
shall be minded to give over his joint trading with the said R B. That then he
the said A shall and will give the said R six months warning of such his
determination in writing, and at the end of the said six months shall and will
make a just and true account and reckoning to and with the said R. B. of and
for all such wares, merchandises, ready money, credits and debts as shall be
then unreckoned for: and that the said R B shall have the wares then remaining
in their hands at such rate as they cost, and the present money and good debts
then owing unto them, he putting in good security to the said A G to pay him so
much money as his stock and portion shall amount unto, the one half at six
months, and the other half at six months then after; the said R B also, paying
to the said A G his, etc. so much lawful English money at the said twelve
months end at 10 l. per centum by the year as his whole stock and portion shall
amount unto for nine months, and also it is agreed that at the time of such
parting the desperate debts to them jointly owing shall be divided, as
aforesaid. And further, To turn over their Apprentices to the other.
the said A G according to the custom of the City of London, at such time of
division, shall turn over such Apprentice and Apprentices as shall then dwell
with them for and during the remainder of the years that shall be then to serve
and unexpired unto the use and behoof of the said R.B. But if the said R B
shall refuse to accept of the same Apprentices, or either, or any of them, Then
it is agreed that the said R B shall at his own charge see him or them so
refused, placed elsewhere* and that then also, the said A G shall peaceably and
quietly leave, surrender and yield up the possession of the said Shop with the
appurtenances, to the said R B his, etc. in such plight, as if these presents
had never been had nor made: and that then also the said yearly payment of 40
l. to cease and determine, any thing abovesaid to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding. And it is further agreed between the said parties, and the
said A G does covenant and grant to and with the said R B, That he the said A
G, during the space of one whole year next after such parting or division had
or made, shall not trade for nor sell nor cause to be sold within the said City
of L* any commodity that shall belong to the same Trade of a Linen Draper.
That Survivorship shall take no place.
And lastly, if it shall fortune the said R B to die or depart out of this
mortal life before the end or expiration of the said term of ten years, That
then the said A G his etc. within one month next after lawful request to him
or them to be made by his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns of the said R
B shall not only make and declare to the same Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, a true and just account in writing of all the said Estate of this
occupying and Co-partnership, whereby the names and s^rnames of all and every
Debtors and Creditors, and the quantity of Goods, Wares, Money or Merchandises,
then being or belonging to his joint occupying, shall and may plainly appear;
but also make a perfect delivery and assignment to the said Executors or
Administrators of the said R B of so much of the Goods Wares, Money and Debts,
as upon the said Account shall appear to be remaining to the said
Co-partnership, over and besides such debts as shall then owing by the said
Copartners, by reason of their trading jointly, in as large and ample manner
as if the Co-partnership had been ended, and the said R B remaining alive: and
that the Assignment of such debts as shall be allotted to the said Executors or
Administrators of the said R B shall be made and assured to the same Executors
or Administrators of the said R B in such manner, and by such reasonable act
and assurance or conveyance as by the learned Council in the Law of the same
Executors shall be devised or advised. And likewise it is convenanted, etc.
(the same that is from G to B) and that then also he the said R B shall
peaceably and quietly suffer the said A G to enjoy the said Shop with the
appurtenances during the remainder of the said term of ten years then to come
and unexpired for the yearly rent of 40 l. to be paid at the usual Feasts
aforesaid, the said R. B giving the said A G good security to enjoy the same
against all persons; and the said A G is then to give good security to the said
R B well and sufficiently to repair the said Shop; and in the end of the said
term of ten years the said A G shall peaceably and quietly leave, surrender and
yield up the possession of the said Shop with the appurtenances to the said R B
his etc. well and sufficiently repaired. And further it is agreed etc. (the
same that is from G to B not to use the Trade of a Draper:) and it is
condescended and agreed by and between the said parties in manner and form
following, viz that he the said A G shall on the said 22 day of, etc. well and
truly pay or cause to be paid to the said R B, the said sum of 100l, and for
the same shall have, accept and enjoy in joint trading so much of the Wares and
Merchandises as then shall be in the same Shop at such rates and prizes as the
said R B then shall have paid or undertaken for the same: and the surplusage of
the said wares and stock in the said shop then being the said A G shall accept
in joint trading, in as good sort and full plight as if the same were then in
present money put in stock by the said R B. And the said A G to allow unto the
said R B for the said surplusage in Joint trading after the rate of 8 l. in the
100 according to the true intent and meaning before expressed and declared. And
lastly, it is aggreed between the said parties, than if they shall fortune to
give over or part trading before the end of the said term of ten years, then
the party continuing trading shall give to the party that shall so give over,
good security to discharge and pay all the debts then jointly owing by them to
any person or persons for and in respect of their joint trading, as aforesaid.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Co-partnership between two of the Art or Profession of
Cottening of Fustians, etc. penned by William Noy, of Lincolns-Inne Esquire
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between N S of the one part; and C H of the other
part. Witnesses, That the said parties of and for the mutual good will, favor
and affection which either of them has and hears unto and toward the other
of them, and for the better increase of their stocks and substance (if it hall
so please God) have concluded, condescended and agreed to make between
themselves a Fellowship or Company, and to become and continue Copartners
together in the Art, Trade or Profession, of Call^^dring and Cottening of
Fustians, Cloth, (...), and other Wares and Commodities in (...) Workhouse of
the said N S (...) and being in, etc. (...) the Feast day of, etc. last past
before the date (...), for and during the (...) and time of, etc. from (...)
and fully (...) be ended (if the said N S do and (...) so long (...) Delivery
of tools and implements belonging to the Art, by the one to the other.
And to that end and purpose the said C H has (...) the ensealing of these
presents, disbursed and delivered into the hands of the said N S the sum of,
etc. for and toward the buying and providing of (...) and implements as are
incident, belonging (...) to be used in the said Art, etc. aforesaid the
receipt whereof the said N S does acknowledge and confess by these presents.
Covenant to be equal sharers of the profits arising by the labor of either of
them, or by their or either of their servants, etc.
And it is mutually co^^manted, granted, condescended and agreed upon by and
between the said parties to these presents; and either of then for himself,
his etc. respectively, does covenant, promise and grant, to and with the other
of them, his etc. by these presents, That they and either of them, their
several, etc. shall be alike interessed, and have, retain and assume to their
own several uses, equal shares, parts and portions of all such clear gains
profit and increase as shall grow and arise by reason or means of the labor
and pains to be taken by the said parties, or either of them in the Art, etc.
aforesaid, or by any Servant or Servants, Apprentice or Apprentices as shall be
had and kept by the said parties, partners, or either of them, and be employed
in the said Art etc. of a Callender and Cottener or ^uf^rans, Cloth, Stuff, or
any other Wares or Commodities as is a foresaid during the continuance of this
Co-partnership. To pay equal shares in the charges, rents, etc.
And that all such charger and expenses as shall from time to time hereafter,
during the continuance of this Co-partnership be exp^nded and laid forth in and
about the amending, repairing and buying hew of any to (...), implements or
necessaries incident or belonging to the Art etc. aforesaid, or for or in
respect of the buying, keeping and maintaining of any work-horse or
work-horses, and for the portage of any kind of Wares and for (...) as shall
grow payable or due to be paid for or ^work^ respect of the Work house above
mentioned, shall be equally born, paid and discharged between the said parties,
partners, their Executors or Assigns, part and portion like; that is to say,
The said N S his, etc. shall pay and discharge the one moiety or half part
thereof; and the said C H his, etc. shall pay and discharge the other moiety or
half part thereof. And the said N S for himself, his, Covenant by one for
himself and his Servants to use his best endeavor for the advance of the
benefit of this co-partnership.
etc. does covenant, etc. That he the said N S, and all Servant or Servants,
Apprentice or Apprentices as he the said N at any time during the continuance
of this Co-partnership, shall have and keep, shall and will at all times
hereafter, and from time to time, during the continuance of this
Co-partnership^, wholly apply and employ him and themselves, and do his and
their best endeavor and endeavors respectively, to advance the benefit of
this Co-partnership. And also, And to keep so many Servants during the
co-partnership necessary and able for the work.
that be the said N S shall and will at all times hereafter, and from time to
time during the term of years above mentioned (if the said N shall so long
live) keep and maintain at his own proper costs and charges, such and so many
Servant or Servants, Apprentice or Apprentices, as shall be sufficiently able
(with his own help) Work-man-like to discharge, perform, and do all such work
as shall from time to time, during the continuance of this Co-partnership, come
or be brought to the said Workhouse, or to any other Workhouse or place where
the said N shall keep to be dressed, Callendred, Cottened, and finished. And to
keep a Book of Accounts of all their dealings, and for entry of all sums
received
And further, the said N S does, etc. That be the said N his Executors,
Servants and Assigns, or some of them, shall and will at all times hereafter,
and from time to time, during the continuance of this Co-partnership, keep or
cause to be kept one fair Book of Accounts of all his and their dealings and
proceedings in this present Co-partnership; in which Book shall be truly
written, Covenant for the one to enter upon the Workhouse of the other, and to
copy out the said Books of Accounts.
entered and see down all such sum and sums of money as shall be from time
to time taken for any work, by them or any of them to be done during the
continuance of this Co-partnership. And than it shall be lawful to and for the
said C H, his, etc. from time to time, and at all time convenient, during the
continuance of this Co-partnership, at his and the free-wils and pleasures,
without any let or interruption of the said N S or of any other, to enter and
come into and upon the said workhouse, or any other which the said N shall in
that time have and keep, there to view, peruse, examine and copy out the said
Book or Books of account. To give an account quarterly upon request
And likewise that he the said N ^, his etc. shall and will at all times
hereafter, and from time to time, during the continuance of this
Co-partnership, once in every quarter of a year quarterly, upon reasonable
request to him or them by the said C H his, etc. in that behalf to be made,
make, yield and give up unto him the said C, his, etc. a true, just, plain and
perfect occompt and reckoning in writing of all his and their dealings and
proceedings in the said art, etc. aforesaid, without concealing any part
thereof: and that upon every such account and accounts so from time to time in
form aforesaid to be made and passed: All the profit that shall be made, to be
equally shared.
All the clear gains, winnings, profits and increase that God shall send, and
which shall be found upon the foot of any such account or accounts, shall be
equally shared, parted and divided in halves between the said Parties,
Partners, their, etc. That is to say* The said N S his, etc. shall have and
receive the one etc. ut supr^, Neither Master nor Servant to give credit
swithout conent of the other not for above the sum of, etc.
And further, that he the said N S nor any of his Servants or Assigns, shall
not at any time or times hereafter, during the continuance of this
Co-partnership, give credit or trust to any person or persons whatsoever;
whereby, or by means whereof, any one person shall be indebted for any thing
touching or concerning this Co-partnership, above the sum of, etc. without
the special license and consent of the said C H his, etc. first had and
obtained in that behalf. Covenant to give a general account at the expiration
of the Co-partnership of all the gain and profit that shall be made.
And moreover, the said N S for himself, his, etc. That he the said N S his,
etc. shall and will at the end, expiration, or any other sooner determination
of this present Co-partnership, not only make or cause to be made unto the
said C H his, etc. a true, just, perfect and general account of all his and
their whole dealings and proceedings in this present Co-partnership, whilst he
shall have the use and occupation of the said sum of 30 l. and also all the
clear gains, profit and increase that shall in any wise come, grow or arise by
reason or means of the using and exercising his said Art etc. aforesaid; and
which shall not be before the time accounted for* But also upon the same
account making, well and truly pay, or cause, etc. unto the said C H his, etc.
as well the said sum of 30 l. so in form aforesaid by him before hand
received of the said C H; as also the moiety or half part of all the gains,
profit and increase that shall so arise or grow by reason or means of the using
or exercising his said trade, as aforesaid, which shall be found due upon the
foot of the said general account, so to be made and passed as aforesaid. C H
his, etc. Covenants, that upon performance of the Covenants aforesaid, to pay
to N S the sum of, etc. quarterly, during the said Co-partnership.
And the said C H for himself, etc. That he the said C H his, etc. or some of
them, in consideration of the performance of the Covenants above expressed on
the part and behalf of the said N S to be performed and kept in form above
expressed, shall and will well and truly content and pay, or cause, etc. unto
the said N S his etc. yearly and every year during the continuance of this
Co-partnership, the sum of etc. per annum, at the four most usual Feasts or
Terms in the year, viz. at the Feasts of etc. or within 24 days next ensuing
every of the said Feast days, by even and equal portions.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Co-partnership between two Brewers; penned by William Noy
Esquire.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between, etc. Witnesses, That the said I V and W H
for the great love, zeal, and affection that the one of them bears to the
other, and to the intent that the said parties may (by Gods grace) the better
increase their stocks, the said I V and W H mind and intend to make between
themselves a Fellowship and Company, and jointly to use and occupy together the
Mystery or Trade of a Brewer within the Message, Tenement or Brew House, and
such other rooms as are now used and employed therewith, now in the occupation
of the said I V, situate and being in, etc. And to that end and purpose the
said parties and parting Fellows have laid in a joint stock of 400 l. viz. the
said I V for his part has put in 200 l. and the said W H has put in for his
part other 200 l. thereof, to the intent that the said whole stock shall be
used, occupied and employed by both the said parties, their Servants and
Assigns, in the Mystery or Trade aforesaid, in the buying of Corn, Grain,
Malt, Hops, Horses, Cattle, and all other such Goods and things whatsoever
incident or appertaining to the Mystery or Trade of a Beer-Brewer, or brewing
of Beer, to the joint uses, benefit and profit of the said parties in the best
manner that they or either of them, their Servants or Assigns can or may, from
the Feast of, etc. last past before the date hereof, unto the end and term of,
etc. from thence next ensuing, etc. (if both the said parties shall so long
live.) And whereupon it is covenanted, Covenant that the stock that shall be
put in by the Copartners shall be faithfully employed in the mystery aforesaid
granted, concluded, and fully agreed between the said parties, and either of
the same parties for himself, his, etc. covenanteth and grants to and with
the other of them, his, etc. in manner and form following; that is to say, That
the said whole stock of 400 l and all other sum and sums of money that the
said parties within the term aforesaid, shall put into the said Joint stock,
shall be by said parties faithfully occupied and employed with the said whole
stock in the mystery or trade aforesaid, and not otherwise. That the said
parties and their Factors, shall use their best knowledge and skill from time
to time, during the term aforesaid, for the best benefit of their
Co-partnership. That all Debts that shall be made within the said term, and
the gains and profits thereof shall be to the joint and equal uses of the said
parties.
And further, that the said parties and either of them, their Factors and
Assigns, shall and will to the best of their power, knowledge, and skill, from
time to time, during the term aforesaid, apply themselves to use and occupy the
whole stock and all other sum and sums of money thereunto hereafter to be
put in the mystery or trade aforesaid, and to and for the most benefit, profit,
and commodity, that they or either of them can or may, to the intent and equal
uses of the said Copartners, according to the true meaning of these presents.
And that all such debts and duties as shall within the said term grow to be
made by means of using or exercising the said mystery of Brewing, and the
gains and profits thereof coming and arising, or of any other commodities or
things whatsoever bought or to be bought with the said whole stock or any part
thereof, or any other sum or sums of money thereto^ to be put, as is aforesaid,
during the said term, shall be to the joint and equal uses of the said
parties, their, etc. And that all Debts that shall be made for any cause
concerning the said copartnership, shall he taken jointly to the said parties,
and delivered to both their uses.
And that all and every person and persons that shall owe and be indebted in
the same, or any part thereof, for any cause or substance concerning the same
Co-partnership, shall be made Debtors to both the said parties for the same and
every part thereof. And that all Sureties, Bills, Bonds, Specialties, and
Writings, that shall be made or taken for the said debts and duties, or any of
them, for, touching or concerning any matter, cause, or thing whatsoever
incident or appertaining to the said Joint Trade or occupying shall be made and
taken jointly to the said parties, and shall be delivered to both their uses.
And that neither of the said parties shall give any Acquittance to any Debtor
or Debtors whereby to defraud the other.
And that neither of the said parties shall make, seal or deliver any
acquittances, discharge or discharges to any person or persons, being Debtor or
Debtors, or which shall be Debtor or Debtors for any part or parcel of the said
whole stock, or any other money thereunto to be put, or the increase that
thereupon, or by means thereof shall arise, come, or grow, whereby to defeat
or defraud the other party of the same, or of any part thereof. Covenanted,
that all manner of Merchandise that shall be bought during the said term with
the said joint stock, and all other moneys taken up for the said
co-partnership for their supply of the stock, shall be to the joint uses of the
said parties.
And further, it is covenanted etc. that is to say, That all manner of malt,
hops, goods, wares and merchandises whatsoever, bought, or which at any time
hereafter, during the term aforesaid, shall be bought with the said Joint
stock or any part thereof, or any other money thereunto hereafter to be put.
And all mon^y that shall be taken up by the said parties during this present
Co-partnership, for the supply or furnishing of the said Joint stock or Trade,
shall be used, occupied, and employed in the said mystery, to be joint uses and
commodities of both the said parties, their, etc. and not otherwise. And that
the such hops, goods, wares and merchandises so bought, or to be bought, shall
be laid and housed from time to in such places which the said I V now uses and
occupies for such purposes within the rooms appertaining to the said
Brew House. Covenant, that all profit and loss in any manner wise, during the
said term, shall be equally born between the said parties, part and portion
alike,
And moreover, it is covenanted, etc. That all such casualties of Debts and
Debtors, and all other dangers, losses, misfortunes, and perils whatsoever that
shall happen, come, or fall to the said whole stock, or any thereunto to be
put, or any part thereof, or the increase or gain thereof coming, arising or
growing, or any goods, wares or merchandives therewith, or with any part
thereof to be bought, meat, drink and wages of Servants, and all other
reasonable costs, charges, and expense disbursed or laid out, or to be
disbursed or laid out, for any manner of cause, lawful or reasonable,
concerning the said Joint occupying or Co-partnership, shall be borne, paid,
and sustained by and between the said parties, part and portion alike, during
the said term. And that the said parties during the said term, shall keep a
true Book of Accounts and Reckonings touching their dealings, and in the said
Book shall be truly entered down from time to time what shall be bought, be and
for the said joint stock, with the true prices at large, and the parties names,
bought of and sold to.
And also, that the said parties shall and will, during the said term, keep or
cause to be kept, just and true Books of the Accounts and Reckonings for and
touching the dealings and proceedings of this Co-partnership; in which said
Books shall be truly written and set down from time to time all such Goods,
Wares, and Merchandises as shall be either bought or sold, belonging to their
said Joint Trade or Co-partnership, after the buying, selling or delivery
thereof, with the days and times of the buying and selling thereof, with the
true prizes what the same cost, and for what they shall be sold, and the
persons names of whom or to whom the same shall be bought, sold, delivered, and
received; together also, with all such Debts and sums of money, payments, and
receipts from time to time as shall concern this present Co-partnership. And
that either of them, their Servants and Executors shall have access to the
Book, to view, cast over or copy out without let of the other.
And that either of the said parties shall permit and suffer the other of them,
his Excutors, Servants, and Assigns, not only to be resident in and about the
said Brew house, and all other Rooms as to the same does or shall appertain,
to deal in all matters touching or concerning Co-partnership; but also to have
free access to the same Books, and every of them to view, peruse, cast over
and copy out the same, or any part thereof, at their, or any of their liberties
and pleasures, without let or denial in that behalf. Not to conceal any
dealings one from the other during the Co-partnership.
And also that the said parties their, etc. shall from time upon reasonable
request by him or them to be made by the one of them to the other of them* his,
etc. make privy the one of them to the other of them, of his and their dealings
in this Co-partnership, without concealing any part of their dealings. That the
said parties shall every week, upon the request of either of them to the other,
make a just and perfect Account of the said stock and other moneys thereunto
added and put, with the gains and profit.
And also, that the said parties shall and will every week weekly during the
said term, upon request by either of the said parties to the other of them to
be made, make, yield, and give one of them to the other of them a good, true,
just, plain and perfect Account and reckoning of the said whole stock of 400
l. and of all other sum and sums of money thereunto, to be, as is
aforesaid, thereunto added or put, and of all the gains, profits and increase,
that thereof shall come, arise, or grow, or shall be arisen or grown by means
of the using and employing of the said whole stock and other money thereunto to
be put, or any part thereof, or of the increase thereof come or grown. And upon
every such account, charges and expenses being deducted and allowed, the profit
shall be equally divided between them, and the gains so divided shall be
taken out of the stock, and used as to them shall seem mere.
And that upon every such account and accounts, so from time to time in form
aforesaid to be made and passed, all the gains, winnings, profits and increase
that God shall send, and which shall be found at the foot of any such account,
the aforesaid charges, costs and expenses being first deducted, ^ebated and
allowed, shall be parted and divided between the said parties part and part
alike: that is to say, The said I V his, etc. shall have the one moiety or half
part thereof, and the said W H his, etc. shall have the other moiety or half
part thereof: and that the said gains and increase being parted and divided,
shall be by them taken out of the stock, and employed and used as them shall
seem meet Also no person or Servant to be hired without the ^onsent of the
^^her.
And also that neither of the said Copartners shall during this Co-partnership
and joint occupying take or hire any Servants or other persons to be employed
in the said trade or mystery without the privity, consent and agreement of the
other of them. That they ^t the expiration of the said term shall make a true
Account of the whole stock and other moneys, with all the profit made within
the time aforesaid. And also shall subscribe the said final account, and take
order to pay the Debts that shall be truly owing unto Creditor; and upon such
account, charges being deducted, shall make equal partition of the said stock.
Convenanted, that if either party die within the said term of Co-partnership,
then the Survivor to make a true and just Account to the Executors and
Administrators of the deceased.
And moreover, that the said parties, their Executors Admi^^^rators shall and
will at the end and expiration of the said term of, etc. and afterward, until
division shall be made of the pr^mises, not only confer together of and for
all their dealings and proceedings touching this joint occupying. And shall
also make between them a good, true, just, plain and perfect account and
reckoning of all the said whole stock and other money thereunto put: and of all
such goods, money, debts, Wares and merchandises therewith or with any part
thereof, or of the increase and profit thereof arising, come, grown or gotten
within all the term and time aforesaid. And also shall subscribe the said final
account, and thereupon take order to pay the Debts which shall be truly owing
unto the Creditors touching the said Co-partnership without any fraud, color,
or covin in any wise; but also immediate at and upon such account and reckoning
so had, made and passed, the aforesaid, costs, charges and expenses being first
deducted, rebated and allowed, shall make equal partition and division between
them of the said whole stock of 400 l. and all other sum and sums of money,
that thereunto during the said term shall be put; and of all the increase,
winnings, gains, profits and advantages that thereof, or by means thereof
before that time has arisen come or grown, and before that time not accounted
for: and that the said I V his, etc. shall have the one moiety thereof
whatsoever the same shall then consist and be* and the said W H his, etc. shall
have the other moiety thereof, what ^ever the same shall then be and consist.
And moreover, it is covenated, etc. That if it shall happen either of the said
parties to dye or depart this present life before the end and expiration of the
said term of, etc. (as God forbid) That then the party of the said parties
surviving, and the Executors of Administrators of the party of the said parties
so happening to decease shall and will within the space of, etc. next after such
decease of either of the said parties, reckon and account together of and for
the said whole stocks, and all other money thereunto put: and all the increase,
gains, winnings, profits, losses, costs and charges thereupon arisen, come or
grown; and a good, true, just, plain and perfect account and reckoning between
them, then shall make, or cause to be made: and the same so made, as well the
said stock of 400 l. and all other such money and sums of money thereupon put,
as also the increase, profits and gaints that thereof before that time shall
have arisen, come, or grown, all manner of charges losses, expenses, and
damages whatsoever expended born, sustained and laid out, arisen or grown
touching or concerning the said whole stock, or any other money thereunto put,
and the increase thereof at any time before and not accounted for, being first
deducted, rebated and allowed, shall be truly divided and parted between the
said party of the said parties surviving; and the Executor or Administrator, or
Executors or Administrators of the party of the said parties so happening to
decease, part and part alike; that is to say, The party of the said parties
surviving, his, etc. shall have the one moiety or half part thereof; and the
Executors, Administrators or Assigns of the party of the said parties so
happening to decease, shall have the other moiety or half part thereof: and that
no benefit or advantage shall be had or taken by party of the said parties that
shall survive (by virtue of Survivorship.) Agreed that neither of the said
parties during the said term and time aforesaid shall leave the mystery or
trade aforesaid without the express will and consent of the other; but jointly
continue except by mutual consent.
And further, it is agreed between the said parties, that during the term and
time aforesaid, neither of the said parties shall leave off the Mystery or
Trade aforsaid, or of being Copartners or parting fellows together in the
said Mystery or Trade without the express will, consent and agreement of the
other of them first had and obtained in writing: but during the said term,
shall jointly continue and occupy together as loving Friends and Fellows;
except it be by the mutual consent and agreement of both the said parties. And
that neither of the said parties shall take up goods upon credit without
consent of the other.
And further, that neither of the said parties shall not at any^time or times,
during this Co-partnership, take up of credit for time any money, malt, goods,
wares or merchandises to be used or employed in or about the mystery or trade
aforesaid, without the consent and agreement of the other of them first had and
obtained. And it is a greed that if any variance shall happen between the said
parties during the said term, and cannot end it between themselves, then the
party grieved upon his request to the other, shall and will commit the hearing
to four honest men to arbitrate and determine the same.
And finally it is agreed, etc. That if any time hereafter, during the said
term of, etc. before a final end and division shall be had and made between the
said parties, any ambiguity, doubt, question, variance, strife or controversy
shall come, grow, happen, arise or be moved between the said parties or either
of them, for or concerning any cause or thing in or about this present
Co-partnership, which is not before in these presents plainly expressed and
declared, and which the said parties cannot between themselves decide and agree
upon, that then the said parties and either of them, their etc. upon the
reasonable request of the party grieved in this behalf, shall and will commit
the hearing, explanation, examination and determination of all such doubts,
controversies and questions, unto four honest, discreet persons to be chosen by
them indifferently: that is to say, either of them two. And they the said
parties, their Executors and Administrators, shall not only to the best of
their power endeavor, and use all other lawful means to them the said
Arbitrators to hear and determine the same with all convenient speed, without
delaying or hindering the same; but also shall and will stand to, abide, perform
and keep such award, order, end and determination as they shall make and set
down in writing under their hands in that behalf.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Co-partnership about the begging of Letters Patent for
setting up of a Beacon; penned by Council.
F B and R B joint Petitioners to, etc. for the setting up of a Beacon, and to
get Letters Patent therefore; and also a certain yearly pension to be paid by
all Ships and Vessels, both English and Strangers, for the maintenance thereof.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, That whereas the said F B
and R B have united and conjoined themselves to be joint Suitors and
Petitioners together by Petition unto, etc. for the obtain^ng of
Letters Patent to be granted unto them from, etc. under the Great Seal of
England, for the erecting and setting up of a Beacon upon, etc. thereby to give
light unto all Ships, as well strangers as others, in the night time, whereby
many dangers of Shipwreck may be avoided, and many men's lives preserved: And
also for the obtaining and getting of a certain yearly pension to be granted
unto them by, etc. out of every Ship, Hoy, and other Vessels, as well strangers
as English, and have a rate assessed and set down what every Ship, Hoy or other
Vessel shall give, allow and pay unto them upon every Voyage, as well outward
as inwards bound, toward the maintenance of the same Beacon and light. Now
know ye, that it is Covenanted, granted, concluded, Covenanted that R B shall
do his best endeavor in geting of the said Letters Patent, and a rate to be
assessed upon every Ship, and not to do any thing whereby to hinder or make
void the said F B of or in the obtaining of the said suit.
condescended and mutually agreed upon by and between the said Parties to these
presents; and the said R B for himself, his Executors etc. does Covenant,
promise and grant, etc. That he the said R B shall and will labor and travel,
and use all the best means that possibly he the said R B as well by himself, as
by his Friends, can or may, for the procuring and obtaining of Letters patents
to be granted from, etc. unto them the said F and R for the erecting and
setting up of a Beacon upon, etc. and for a rate to be assessed upon every
Ship, Hoy and Vessel, what every Ship, Hoy and Vessel shall pay them upon every
Voyage to be obtained, shall be passed by Letters Patent under the Great Seal
of England, in the names of the said R B and F B, after the best and surest
manner, that by learned Council in the Law on both Parties equally to be chosen
between them, shall be devised or advised: And that he the said R B, not any
other person persons by his means, notice, practice or procurement, shall not
directly nor indirectly practice, procure, or use any means to hinder or make
void the said F. B. of or in the abtaining of the said suit. And also, that all
writings, petitions and assurances that shall be made concerning the said
Letters Patent shall be effectually made and passed jointly to them the said R
and F.
And further, that all writings, Petitions, and assurances whatsoever, which at
any time or times hereafter shall be made, drawn or passed touching or
concerning the suit, to the effect above-expressed, to be preferred unto his,
etc. and for the enjoying of such Grant as, etc. shall make and pass
concerning the erecting and setting up of a Beacon upon, etc. aforesaid, shall
be effectually granted, made and passed jointly to them the said R and F. and
in both their names without any fraud or deceit. Covenant that F B shall not
use any means by himself, or any other person, to hinder the said R B in
procuring or obtaining the said suit.
And further, the said F. B. for him, his, etc. does Covenant, promise and
grant, etc. That he the said F B nor any other person or persons by his means
or procurement, shall at any time hereafter cause or use any means by
himself, or any of his Friends or Acquaintance, whereby to frustrate or hinder
the said R B in the procuring, or obtaining, or getting of the aforesaid suit
to be preferred to etc. so far forth as the said R. shall deal justly,
faithfully and truly with the said F. in all his and their proceedings, to
procure, obtain and get the same, without giving any notice or knowledge
thereof, or of their or any of their intents concerning the substance of the
same suit. Covenanted and agreed between the said Parties, and their
Executors, that they shall deal faithfully with each other in all things held
by them in Letters-patent, and that the said Parties shall make privy, the one
of them to the other, of their proceedings in the said suit, without concealing
any thing the one from the other.
And furthermore, it is Covenanted, granted, concluded and mutually agreed upon
by and between the said F B and R B. and either of them for himself, his,
etc. does Covenant and grant to and with the other of them, his, etc. by these
presents, That either of the said Parties, their Executors and Assigns, shall
and will deal justly, faithfully and truly one of them with the other of them,
his, etc. in all things which shall be holden and granted by Letters Patent
under the Great Seal of England, from, etc. unto them, concerning the aforesaid
suit to the preferred unto him. And that either of the said Parties upon
request to be made by the one of them to the other of them, shall and will make
privy, And all such money as shall be assessed and paid for the maintenance
thereof, shall be to the equal benefit of the said Parties. and all charg^ that
shall a^^^^ in the maintenance of the said Beacon, shall be equally born
between them; and also shall give to each other a true and just account of all
such sums of money which shall be from time to time received during the
continuance of the said Letters Patent, and all such moneys as shall appear
by the said accounts to be received: Charges to be deducted shall be equally
divided between them.
the one of them to the other of them, all his and their dealings and
proceedings in and about their said suit, without concealing any part of their
dealings concerning the said suit, which had and shall be passed under the
Great Seal. * And further, that after such time as the Grant from, etc. shall
be had and obtained for the Beacon to be erected upon, etc. aforesaid: All such
sum and sums of money as, etc. shall assesse and grant to be paid for the
maintenance thereof, shall enure and be to the equal benefit and advantage of
both the said Parties, their Executors, etc. part and part alike: And also,
that all such expenses, payments and charges as shall be from time to time
hereafter expended, disbursed and laid forth in and about the erecting,
repairing and maintaining of the said Beacon, and for the light to be used,
shall be equally expended, disbursed, paid and laid forth by and between the
said Parties, their etc. part and part alike. And that the said Parties, their,
etc. shall and will from time to time hereafter, upon reasonable request to be
made by the one of them to the other of them, not only make, yield and give
up, one of them to the other of them, a true, plain, just and perfect account
and reckoning of and for all such sum and sums of money which shall be from
time to time, during the continuance or force of the said Grant to be passed by
his Majesty (if any happen to be) But also upon such account to be passed,
shall truly satisfy, pay and deliver, one of them to the other of them, the
moiety or half part of all such sum and sums of money as upon the foot of such
account to be made, shall appear to be had and received (the charges and
expenses which shall be laid out in and about the erecting and setting up of a
Beacon upon etc. aforesaid, and all other charges which shall be expended in
maintaining the light of the said Beacon being first defaulked and deducted.)
And the Survivor of them shall not put in ure, thereby to defraud the other
their Executors etc but that the Executors of the Patty deceased shall have and
enjoy the benefit of the said Grant as fully as if he were living.
And further, the Survivor shall not take place, or be put in ^re thereby, to
defeat or defraud either of them the other of the said Parties, their Executors
or Administrators, but that the Executors, etc. of the Party first deceasing,
shall have and enjoy the benefit, profit and advantage of the said Grant, as
fully and amply in all respects, as the Party deceasing should or ought to have
had and enjoyed if he had lived, during the continuance of the said
Letters Patent to be granted; any Covenant, Grant or Article to be comprised
within the Letters Patent to be granted from, etc. concerning the premises, in
any wise notwithstanding. Proviso, that if the said Letters Patent be not
granted, that then the said R B shall not at any time hereafter discover the
suit to any person whatsoever, nor go about the practicing the geting thereof,
but the same shall cease, and never more be revived.
Provided always, and it is finally agreed by and between the said parties,
and the said R B for him, his etc. does Covenant, etc. That if a Letter-patent
under the Great Seal of E. shall not be had or granted from, etc. for the
erecting of a Beacon upon, etc. That then he the said R shall not nor will not
at any time or times hereafter discover or make known to any person or persons,
the suit which is to be preferred to etc. in the names of them the said R and
F, for the obtaining of the premises as are above expressed, neither shall
detract any time in the putting of the said suit unto etc. and if that etc.
will not be pleased to grant their suit concerning the said Beacon to be
erected, and other the before mentioned premises, That then the said R, nor any
other person or persons with him, for him, or for their joint or several uses
or behoofs, shall not at any time or times presume or go about to work or
practice any ways or means for the obtaining of the said suit to him or
themselves: But that the said shall cease and never more be by him the said R
B, or any other by his institution, assistance, means, knowledge or procurement
revived or proceeded in or by any manner or ways or means whatsoever.

In Witness, etc.

An Indenture of Co-partnership between Ironmongers, in a very good form,
penned by William Noy, Esquire.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between R S, of the one part; and W I of the other
part. Witnesses, That the said Parties in consideration of the fidelity, truth
and good opinion that the one of them has and reposeth in the other, do by
the grace of God intend to join them in one Society, fellowship or Company, and
to be Partners together in the doings and trade of buying, uttring and selling
of all manner of Iron, and such other commodities wherein they or either of
them have knowledgd or skill; and to that intent and purpose they have not
only taken a Shop and certain rooms together, in, etc. parcel of the
Message called, etc. and certain Implements therein remaining: A stock of
money laid down, and wares by Copartners, in the house where they dwell, the
which they hold jointly by Lease.
But also have laid down together in a stock in money and wares within the
rooms aforesaid, wherein they now dwell, and which they hold jointly by
conveyance to them jointly made of a Lease thereof, the sum of, etc. being
the whole stock of both the said Parties. Covenanteth each to other, that they
shall jointly, as Partners, and as a parting Fellow, use their best endeavor,
knowledge and credit that they can or may in trading with the said stock from
the feasts, etc. and either of them to be just and true to the other.
And are condescended, accorded and fully agreed in and upon the Covenants,
articles, conditions, clauses and agreements hereafter ensuing: viz. Either of
the same Parties by himself, and for his own part, Covenanteth, etc. and him,
his, etc. binds to the other Party, his, etc. That he shall jointly as
Partners, and a parting-Fellow, occupy together within the rooms aforesaid
the said sum or, etc. being their said whole stock, in the trade and
traffic aforesaid, to the uttermost of their power, cunning, knowledge and
credit that they can or may, from the Feast day of, etc. unto the end and term
of, etc. from thence, etc. being the full remainder and residue of the years
to come and un expired, mentioned in the said Lease, to them conveyed, as is
aforesaid: during which said term and space, either of the said parties shall
be just, true and faithful to the other, as well in buying and selling, as in
all other their traffic and doings whatsoever. A Book of account to be kept
between them, where all the moneys, goods and debts shall be truly entered
during their Copartnership.
And the said Parties do Covenant, etc. and either of them severally does
Covenant, etc. for him his, etc. to and with the other his, etc. by these
presents, in manner and form following: viz. That there shall be between them
kept one Book of accounts, wherein shall be contained, written and plainly
and truly set down from time to time as well all such wares, money, goods and
debts, as to their said occupying shall appertain and belong: As also the just
particulars of all such debts and sums of money as they shall owe to any
person or persons by reason of their Copartnership; unto which Book either of
the said Parties shall and may have access and recourse from time to time
during the said space of the Co-partnership. And all profit that shall be made
to be equally divided amongst them.
And that all such lucre, profit, winning, increase, gain and advantage as
shall come or grow, or that God shall send in buying, selling, uttring and
employing any of the goods wares or merchandises aforesaid, or otherwise by
reason of their said stock and occupying, shall be parted and divided equally
between the said Parties, their, etc. without any denial or contradiction of
the other Party, And that either of them shall call the other to account as
occasion shall serve for their buying and selling.
his etc. And also, that at all and every time and times within the said term
and space of their Co-partnership, when it shall please either of the said
Parties to give monition or warning to the other, that within the space of,
etc. then next ensuing, either of the same Parties shall make and give up to
the other a true, good, just, perfect and plain account and reckonning of all
accounts and reckonings then not received nor accounted between them (as well
of the buying and selling of all manner of Iron and other such wares) as also
of all the increase, profit and advantage that shall come and grow of and by
the using and occupying of the said stock; upon the making of which said
account, either of the same Parties shall subscribe the same. Covenanted, that
what loss shall happen, during the said Co-partnership, so it be not by
negligence, shall be equally borne between them.
Moreover the said Parties Covenant, etc. and either of them Covenanteth, etc.
to and with the other by these presents, that if any loss shall happen at any
time within the space of this Co-partnership by evil Debtor, or Debtors,
Servants, or other casualties whatsoever, of the said principal stock, or of
the increase or gain of the same, or of any part or parcel thereof; so that it
be not by negligence, color, feined pretense, or other subtle means of
either of the said Parties, That then the same loss and losses shall be borne
equally between the said Parties out of their said stock, and of the increase
of the same. That all Bonds, Bills, and other specialties, during the said
term shall be made in both their names, and to be delivered to both their uses.
And it is further agreed between the said Parties, that all such Specialties,
Bonds, and Debts, as at any time during their said joint occupying, shall be
made, come and grow to the said Parties as Copartners of this said stock, or
the increase thereof, shall be made in the names of both the said Parties, That
is, in the names of R W, and W I at Copartners, and the Bonds and Specialties
delivered to both their uses. Agreed that they shall be jointly bound to any
person or persons concerning their joint trading.
And further, it is accorded between the said Parties, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for either of the said Parties to bind the other his, etc. to any
person or persons for any sum or sums of money touching or in any wise
concerning their said joint occupying, to be paid at such time and times as to
the same Parties to whom the same Bond or Bill shall be made, it shall seem
good and expedient. And if either Party shall at the end of the said term, or
before be disposed to su^cease and leave off joint trading, then either of the
Parties giving warning to the other, shall make atrue account between them of
what justly to them belongs, and enjoy alike equal portions.
And that if either of the said Parties at the end of the said term of, etc.
or at any time before shall be disposed to surcease and leave off their joint
occupying, and no longer continue as Copartners; then either of the said
Parties upon warning thereof given by the one of them to the other shall make
to the other a just, true and plain account and reckoning as well of the whole
stock as of the increase, profit and gain of the same then not divided, and of
all such implements and goods as shall then jointly to them belong, as it shall
then be in ready money, wares, goods, and debts, upon which account so made,
either of the said Parties shall have, take and enjoy alike equal portions and
part thereof (all such charges and debts as then shall be answerable out of the
said stock and gain first deducted and allowed.) And that all charges
whatsoever (except wearing-apparel, shall be born equally between them out of
the joint stock.
And futher, it is, etc. that all manner of costs charges and expenses
whatsoever that shall be disbursed or laid out, as for house-rent, reparations,
meat, drink, Servants-wages, and for any other cause reasonable for or
concerning their joint occupying (except the proper array and apparel of the
bodies of either of the said Parties) shall be borne and paid between the said
Parties out of the said whole stock, and of the increase of the same, during
their said joint occupying: and that no private occupying shall be had or used
by any of the said Parties, but only in the said Rooms abovementioned, and
such other place and places as shall be by them jointly agreed upon to both
their uses. A Proviso, that they shall not lend out nor trust out of the joint
stock to any Person or persons without consent of both Parties.
Provided always, and it is agreed between the said Parties, that it shall not
be lawful to either of the said Parties, their Servants, or Assigns, or to
any of them at any time or times, during this Co-partnership, to lend out or
impart any part or parcel of the said whole stock, or of the gains and
increase of the same to any person or persons, or by any manner of ways or
means, or color, without the special consent and agreement of the other
party, unless the same be to and for the use, commodity and profit of this
society and Co-partnership. And that neither shall stand bound by suretiship
for any person, but to and for the use of the said partnership, above the sum
of, etc. without consent.
And that it shall be lawful to neither of the said Parties at any time, during
this their said consortment to become Surety, stand bound or charged to any
person or persons for any suretiship sum or sums of money, or for any other
cause or occasion whatsoever (but to and for the use of both the said Parties)
above the sum and value of 40s. without the special license, consent, and
agreement of the other party first had and obtained in writing; which said
sum of 40s. shall be borne and paid out of the part and portion of the said
stock and gains thereof, of him of the said parties that so shall stand bound.
Proviso, that if either Party die, during the said term, then the survivor to
make a true and just account to the executors and Administrators of the
deceased, and deliver the moiety or one half of the foresaid stock, and
profit, in as good manner as if he had lived.
Provided also, and it is condescended, etc. That if either of them at any
time, during, etc. shall happen to die and depart this life, then the
Executors, etc. of the party so dying within, etc. next ensuing such his
decease shall truly without fraud or guile, make a good, just, and plain
account, payment and delivery to the other party overliving of such of the
said goods, stock, wares, ready money, and other things a appertaining to the
said company or Co-partnership as then shall be or remain in the bands, use,
and possession of the said Executors, etc. And that then the party so living
having possession of the said stock, wares, money, and other things belonging
to this society, shall within, etc. then next ensuing, make and yield to the
Executors, etc. of the party so dying, a true perfect and pain account,
payment and delivery of the moiety or one full half of all the aforesaid stock,
and of the gain, profit and increase of the same, and of all other things
appertaining or in any wise belonging to this consortment or society, in such
like manner and form, as he should have done to the party deceased (as if he
had lived) without fraud, contardiction or delay. And that the survivorship
shall take no place, any clause, matter or thing whatsoever. etc.
And also that survivorship in this their said society or consortment shall take
no place; any clause, matter, Article, or other thing whatsoever, etc. And if
it shall happen either of the said Parties, during the Co-partnership to die,
such party so dying before his death may declare and make his last Will and
Testament of the one half of the stock and profit.
And that if either of them, during this their said Co-partnership shall
fortune to die and depart this life. such of them so dying shall and may before
such his death declare and make his last Will and Testament in writing or
otherwise, and by the same, shall or may give, bequeath, and dispose at his
will and pleasure the just moiety and half-part of the said stock and goods to
this occupying belonging, and of the increase of the same: And that the same
person and persons to whom the same moiety and half-part of the aforesaid stock
and gains thereof shall be so given and bequeathed, shall or may enjoy the
same without any let, disturbance or contradiction of the other party (as if a
just and equal portion and partition between the said parties thereof had been
made:) any thing above in these presents expressed to the contrary, etc.

In Witness, etc.

An Indenture of Bargain and Sale, and Copartnership between Barge-men: Penned
by William Noy, Esquire.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, that the said N A, for and
in consideration of etc. has bargained, etc. unto the said W C one moiety or
half-part of all that Barge, Recital of the furniture belonging to a Barge.
called, etc. of the burden of etc. or thereabouts, and of all and singular
apparel, sacks and furniture to the same Barge belonging, or in any wise
appertaining: To have and to hold the one moiety or half-part of the same
Barge, and of all and singular the apparel, sacks and furniture thereto
belonging, as aforesaid, unto the said W C his, etc. to the only and proper
use and behoof of the said W C his, Covenanteth, that the premises are clear
from all incombrances whatsoever.
etc. forever. And the said N A for himself, etc. That all and singular the
same premises above by these presents bargained and sold, or mentioned to be,
etc. the Day of these presents, and also at the ensealing and delivery hereof,
are, and so from henceforth for ever shall be and continue unto the said W C
his, etc. clearly acquitted and discharged, or otherwise by him the said N A
his, etc. always saved and kept harmless of and from all and singular former
bargains, sales, gifts and incombrances whatsoever had, made, committed, or
done by him the said N A, or any other by his means or procurement. And that
the he said N A is sole and proper Owner of the other moiety or half-part of
the same Barge and premises. A Covenant to continue Parties during life if the
same Barge shall so long continue.
And it is mutually Covenanted, granted, and agreed upon by and between the
said Parties; and either of them, for and by himself, his Executors and
Administrators, does Covenant and grant to and with the other of them, his,
etc. by these presents, That they the same Parties shall and will continue and
remain Copartners together of and in the same whole Barge-apparrel, malt-sacks
and furniture thereunto belonging: and of and in the buying, vending, and
carriage of all and singular wheat, malt, corn, grain, and other things to be
carried or transported, with, by, or in the same Barge, and of and in all
gains and benefit thereby to accrue or increase from the Day of the Date
hereof, during the natural lives of the said N A and W C (if the same Barge
shall so long continue meet to carry malt, corn, etc. as aforesaid.) And it is
further mutually Covenanted, granted, etc, and either of them for himself,
his, etc. does Covenant, etc. That each of the same Parties shall and will
exonerate and discharge the same Barge-apparrel, malt-sacks and furniture of,
and from all and singular debts, trespasses, actions of debt, and actions of
trespass to be moved or depending for any debt or duty owing or to be owing,
or due to any person or persons whatsoever by the same Party covenanting. And
that each of them shall hereafter discharge his debts and duties as that the
said Barge shall not be arrested for the same, or any part thereof, nor any
money, debts, duties, wares or commodities incident to this Co-partnership,
shall be in any wise attached for the debt of the other Party.
And that each of the same Parties shall and will at all times hereafter and
from time to time pay and discharge his debts and duties in such sort as the
said Barge shall not be arrested for the same, or any part thereof. And that no
sum or sums of money, debts, duties, wares or commodities incident to this
Co-partnership, shall be in any wise attached or condemned for the debt of the
other of the same Parties, his, etc. Mutually Covenanted between the said
parties, that either of them shall discharge the same Barge; and all furniture
thereunto belonging from all debts and actions depending.
And it is likewise mutually Covenanted, etc. That each of them the same
Parties shall and will bear and pay the one moiety or half-part of all and
singular such costs and charges as shall be at any time hereafter necessarily
disbursed or laid out, in, for, or about the reparing or amending of the said
Barge, or any other Barge wherein the said Parties shall hereafter be
Copartners, or any thing thereto incident or belonging, or to be incident
during the continuance of this Co-partnership. And that each of them the said
Parties shall and will do and perform his best endeavor for the advancement
and benefit of the said Co-partnership. And that neither of them the same
Parties, or their Assigns, shall and will credit or trust any of the goods,
wares, or commodities incident to this Co-partnership, That they shall bear
equal charge, or the one half of all costs and charges that shall be laid out
in repairing the said Barge, during the Partnership* And each of them to do
their best endeavor for the benefit of the said partnership.
nor give respite for payment of any sum or sums of money to be due for
freight to both the said Copartners by reason of this Co-partnership, to any
person or persons prohibited by the other of them to be credited or trusted at
any time or times hereafter during this their said joint trade. That neither
Party shall not at any time give respite for payment of any money to any person
due to the Co-partnership; without consent, shall no acquit or discharge any
Debtor and Debtors of any Debt so owing.
And that neither of them said Parties shall or will at any time or times
hereafter without the license or consent of the other of them the said Parties
or his Assigns, acquit or discharge any Debtor or Debtors of any Debt or duty
which shall be due or owing to the said Copartners, or incident or belonging
to the said Co-partnership for any less sum or sums of money then sall be
so due or owing; neither shall without the license and consent of the other of
them, the said Parties give respite of time for payment of any such debt or
duty. That all the benefit and profit shall be equally divided and distributed
between the said Parties.
And further it is Covenanted, etc. that all and singular the benefit, profit
and commodity arising, growing or accrewing, and to arise, etc. of or by the
said Co-partnership, shall be from time to time, during the continuance of this
Co-partnership equally distributed and divided unto and amongst the same
Copartners, their, etc. part and portion alike. And that they sall Weekly and
every Week make and yield to the other a true and just account of their dealing
and receipts, and also make one of them to the other true payment of such money
as shall be due.
And that each of them the same Parties shall and will Weekly and every Week,
during the continuance of this Co partnership, make, yield, and deliver the one
of them to the other, upon request in that behalf to be made, a true and just
account of all their doings, dealings, and receipts touching their said joint
trade. And also make one of them to the other of them true payment of all such
sum and sums of money and duties as by the same account shall appear to be
due and owing by the one to the other of them the same Parties. And that
neither of the said Parties without the consent of the other, sell or make away
his moiety or half part of the (...) B^rge. And if either of the said Parties
shall during this Copartnership buy any other Barge or Barges, that then the
Barge or Barges shall be to the joint Partnership, so that the other party pay
the one half part for the same.
And that neither of the same Parties shall without the consent of the other of
them either directly or indirectly by any ways or means whatsoever, bargain,
sell, give, or otherwise do away any his said moiety or half-part of the same
Barge, or other the premises, or any part or parcel thereof. And further, that
if either of the said Parties shall at any time or times hereafter, during the
continuance of this Co-partnership, buy, obtain, or get any other Barge or
Barges, That then the same Barge or Barges, with the furniture thereto
belonging, shall be employed to the joint use and commodity of the same
Copartners; so as the other of them the said Copartners shall and will bear
and pay the one moiety or half part of all and sigular such costs and charges
as the other of them the said Copartners shall (bona fide) disburse or be
liable to pay in or about the same. That if either party dye, and have debts
owing him in the said co-partnership, that then the same Debts upon reasonable
request after receipt of the same to be paid to his Executors, etc.
Provided always, that if it shall happen either of them the same parties to
dye or decease this transitory life at any time hereafter whilst any debt or
duty shall be due or owing to the said Co-partnership, that then the part or
portion of the same Debts due to the deceased at the time of his death, shall
upon reasonable request, after receipt or recovery of the same, be paid to the
Executors or Administrators of the deceased so fully and amply as should have
been paid or payable to the same deceased (as if he had been still living.)
Covenanted, That what debts shall be owing at the time of dissolution of the
Co-partnership for any wares or commodities for the said Barge, shall and will
save each the other from the payment of one moiety thereof.
And it is mutually covenanted, granted, etc. That each of them the same
parties shall and will well and truly bear and pay the one moiety or half part
of all and singular such debts and duties as by the same Copartners shall be
jointly owing at the time of dissolution of this Co-partnership for Wares or
Commodities employed or incident to this Co-partnership or for the same Barges
hereafter to be bought, or workmanship in or about the same in any wise: And of
the same moiety or half part of all Actions and Suits, charges and damages
concerning the same, shall and will clearly acquit and discharge or save
harmless the other of them the same parties, his Executors, Administrators,
goods and chattels by these presents.

In Witness, etc.

An Indenture of Co-partnership concerning the buoying and getting up of Ships,
etc. penned by Council.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between, etc. Witnesses, That the said parties, of
and for the mutual good will and affection which each of them has and bears
unto and toward the other of them; and for the better increase of their state,
Recital of buoying of Ships, and other Vessels.
stock and substance, Have united and conjoined themselves Copartners in the
Art, Trade, Science or Mystery of buoying, weighing and getting up of Ships,
Hoyes, Barks, Carvels, Cra^ers, ^^ghters, Boats and all other Vessels
whatsoever, which now are, or shall be hereafter sunk, cast away or spoiled in
the Seas, or within the River of T, or in any other Rivers, Waters, Ports,
Havens, Creeks or Places whatsoever and wheresoever; and of and in the winning,
obtaining and getting of all Lands, Wharfs and Grounds which shall be won,
got or obtained out of any Rivers or Waters; And of mending, and repairing of
all Breaches and Invasions of Waters, etc.
And of and in the repairing and amending of all Breaches and Invasions of
Waters; and of and in all other Waterworks; and of and in all gains, profit
and increase which shall or may accrue, be gotten, grow due or arise touching
or concerning the same Art, Trade, Science or Mystery, or any other thing or
things thereunto incident, from the day of the date hereof, during, and until
the full end and term of, etc. from thence, etc. (if the said C shall so long
live.) A stock of money for that purpose put by W P into the hands of C G,
And to that end and purpose the said W P has employed into the hands and
custody of the said C G at the ensealing and delivery hereof, 60 l. of etc. as
a stock by him the said C to be from time to time, during the continuance of
this Co-partnership, employed in the said joint Trade or Mystery. That all
profit that shall arise, shall be equally divided between them.
And therefore it is mutually covenanted, granted and agreed by and between the
same parties, and either of them for himself, his, etc. does covenant and grant
to and with the other of them, his, etc. by these presents, That all and
singular the gains, profit and increase which shall or may accrue, be gotten,
arise, grow due or increase, in or by the same joint Trade, Art, Science or
Mystery, and in and by all Letters Patent, Commissions, and Licenses to be
granted by or from, etc, or the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty of E. or
any others, unto the said C G for or touching the said Trade, etc. or any thing
touching or concerning the same, shall be equally distributed and divided unto
and between both the same parties, their, etc. part and portion like: that is
to say, The one moiety or half part thereof shall be and remain unto the said
C G his, etc. and the other moiety or half part thereof unto the said W P his,
etc. And that all charges whatsoever shall be equally borne between them.
And that all and singular the charges of Work-manship, and finding of
Messengers between the same parties, and all other charges touching or
concerning the same Co-partnership, shall during the continuance of the same
Co-partnership, be equally borne and paid by and between both the same parties,
their part and portion like. C Covenanteth during the said Co-partnership,
wholly to employ himself and his endeavor to the best benefit of this
Co-partnership; and also from time to time to give a just account to W P
touching the said co-partnership of the gains and benefit to be due.
And the said C G for himself, etc. That he the said C G shall and will from
the day of the date hereof, always, and from time to time, at meet and
convenient times, during the said Co-partnership, wholly apply and employ
himself, and do his best endeavor to advance the benefit of this
Co-partnership. And also shall and will upon every reasonable request in that
behalf to be from time to time made, well and truly account with, and a true
reckoning make unto the said W P his, etc. of and for all the doings, receipts
and dealings of the said C his, etc. of, in and by the said joint trade, etc.
and all things touching or concerning the said Co-partnership; and the part and
portion of the gains or benefit to be from time to time due unto the said W P
his, etc. shall and will truly pay to the said W P, his, etc. without fraud or
covin. And at the end of the said term, the said C G will render the moiety or
half part of all the instruments employed unto the said W P then left and
remaining.
And further, That in the end of the said term of, etc. or upon reasonable
request next after any sooner dissolution of this Co-partnership; that is to
say, in which of the said days or times shall first or next happen to come or
be, he the said C his, etc. shall and will well and truly deliver or cause,
etc. unto the said W P his, etc. the one moiety or half part of all and
singular such instruments as shall be employed in this Co-partnership, and then
left and reserved. And at the end of the said term aforesaid, or within the
space of, etc. will render the full residue of the said stock put in by W P.
And also in the end of the said term of, etc. or within the time and space of,
etc. next after any sooner dissolution of this Co-partnership: That is to say,
in which of the same days shall first or next happen to come or be, shall
truly pay unto the said W P his, etc. the full residue of the abovesaid stock
or sum of, etc. so in hand reposed, into the custody of the said C G at the
ensealing and delivery hereof, as abovesaid. A Covenant, for Survivorship.
And it is mutually covenanted, etc. That if it shall happen either of them the
said parties to dye or decease (the Covenant for Survivorship.) And that
neither of them the said parties, his, etc. shall at any time hereafter,
without the special License and consent of the other of them, his, etc. acquit
or discharge any person or persons which shall be indebted unto this
Co-partnership for any less sum or sums of money then shall be duly owing.
A Covenant, that if any contract or other assurance hereafter shall be made or
given touching the said Joint trade shall be made in the names of both the
copartners.
And furthermore, it is mutually covenanted, etc. That all Covenants,
Contracts, Obligations and other Assurances whatsoever, which shall at any time
hereafter be made, taken or given touching or concerning the said joint trade,
or any matter or thing thereto incident, shall be made and done in the names of
both the said Copartners.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Co-partnership between Promooters, in a very good form.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, That it is covenanted,
condescended, concluded, and agreed by and between the said parties, in manner
and form following; viz. That the said R and I shall and will be and continue
Partners together concerning the matters hereunder mentioned, from the day of
the date of these presents, during the space of, etc. from thence next and
immediately ensuing, etc. (if the said R and I shall so long naturally live in
this world.) And first, Covenanteth to put all informations against any person
or persons transgressing any the Laws and Statutes in the said Courts of, etc.
the said R Covenanteth by these presents, etc. That he the said R shall and
will put and exhibit into any and every of the Courts of Records, as due
occasion shall serve, all and every such information and informations as shall
be requisite to be put and exhibited into the said Courts, or any of them, for
any matter or occasion that shall be gathered by the said R R and I M, or
either of them, against any person or persons whatsoever, for transgressing any
of the Laws and Statutes of the Commonwealth of E. or for or concerning any
forfeitures or seizures touching of the same Statutes, And covenanteth to
follow the same with effect until they shall be determined.
always to be had or made from time to time during the time abovesaid; and
that immediately upon good and due instructions and notice had and given by
either of the said Parties in that behalf. And also, that he the said R R shall
prosecute and follow all and every the same informations with effect, until
they and every of them shall be fully finished and determined, according to the
order of the Laws, or until the Parties which shall be had in suit shall be
fully agreed with the Officers of, etc. and with the said R and I or either of
them concerning the same informations, or other the premises accordingly.
Covenant, that R R shall not compound or agree with any person or persons
against whom the said I. shall exhibit any information in any of the Courts of
Record, without the consent of I M first had.
And the said R R Covenanteth, etc. That he the said R, nor any other for him
or in his behalf, shall not at any time or times hereafter during the term
abovesaid, compound or agree with any person or persons against whom the said R
and I, or either of them, shall exhibit or cause, etc. any information or
informations in any of the Courts of Records, as is aforesaid, or concerning
the forfeitures or seizures aforesaid, or any of them, without the consent and
agreement of the said I M first had and obtained in that behalf. And I M
Covenants the same. Covenants to be at the charges that shall arise in
prosecuting equally between them.
And likewise, the said I M for his part, Covenanteth etc. (the same that the
other is) And the said R R Covenanteth, etc. That he the said R shall for his
part bear, pay and discharge the moiety and half of all and every such costs
and charges, sum and sums of money as shall be requisite to be born, paid
and discharged either in and about the prosecuting and following of all and
every the informations aforesaid, or other the premises, according to the order
of the Law in any of the said Courts of Record, or in riding or traveling
about the same informations, forfeitures or seizures, or in searching or
seeking for matters or occasions that shall concern the same informations,
forfeitures, seizures or any and every of them, viz. Pound for Pound, Shilling
for Shilling, and Penny for Penny, And also to give a true and just account each
to other of their proceedings.
as due occasion shall serve in that behalf. And also, that he the said R R
shall and will render and give unto the said I M a just and true account of all
his doings and proceedings in and about the premises, and shall make even and
pay the said I, or at the least agree with the said I concerning the payment to
be due upon all the reckonings which shall pass between the said R and I
touching the premises, once every half year at the least, during the term
abovesaid* And likewise (the same Covenant from I M to R R.) And further,
Covenant to share equally between them what shall be received upon any
information, forfeiture, or seizures to be exhibited.
the said R R covenanteth, etc. That he the said R R shall render and pay unto
the said I M or his Assigns, the just moiety or one half of all such sum and
sums of money as shall arise, come and grow, and be received by order of Law, by
reason of all and every or any information or informations, forfeitures or
seizures to be exhibited by the said R and I or either of them, as is
aforesaid, or that shall be obtained or gotten by any agreement to be made
concerning any of the informations, forfeitures or seizures (the portion of
etc. being reserved and deducted) and that the said moiety of the premises so
to be due to the said I M, shall be delivered to the said I M or his Assigns, by
the said R or his Assigns, always within the space of, etc. next after the
said R shall have recovered, received or obtained the said sum or sums of money,
or any of them by order of Law, or by agreement, without fraud or covin.
Covenanteth not to deal with any other person in their co-partnership during
life.
And the said R R covenanteth, etc. That he the said R R shall not meddle nor
have to do with any other person or persons, but only with the said I M for or
concerning any information or, etc. by him the said R R to be exhibited, or
willed, or moved to be, etc. during the aforesaid term of etc above specified
(the like Covenant from I M to R.) Furthermore, whereas the said R R has
already exhibited an information in the Court called, etc. against one R F of
etc. as by the Records of the same Court appears. Now the said R R is
contented and does covenant, etc. That he the said I M shall have the just
moiety or one half of all such sum or sums of money as shall arise, come or
grow, Covenant that I M shall have half the profit of one information already
exhibited by R R, if I M will pay half the charges already disbursed, and
after. Agreed that I M shall put into the hands of R R the sum of, etc. for
maintenance of suits, until the next account.
and be received by order of Law, by reason of the said information, or that
shall be obtained by any agreement to be made concerning the same (the portion
of, etc. being reserved and deducted;) so that the said I M will bear and pay
the one half of the charges to be sustained by reason of the said information,
according as he has covenanted to pay for the other informations without fraud
or covin. Also it is covenanted, etc. That he the said I M shall deliver into
the hands of the said R R at the ensealing of these Indentures the sum of etc.
which shall remain in the hands of the said R for and toward the maintenance
of the aforesaid suits, until the next account to be had and made between the
said R and I concerning the premises: And so upon the accomplishment of the
said account, and other accounts to be made between the said parties during the
said term, the said I M shall always deliver unto the said R R 5 l. of etc.
before hand toward the maintenance of the aforesaid suits. Provided always, A
Proviso, that all informations exhibited in the E. and Upper Bench, shall be to
the only use of R R against any person in such a Town, etc.
and it is agreed etc. That in case it shall happen the said R R to exhibit any
information against any person or persons dwelling in etc. in any Court or
Courts (except it be sued in the E. the Crown Office or the Upper Bench) That
then all the benefit and commodity, with all such sum and sums of money as shall
come, arise or grow by reason of every such information or informations which
shall be so sued in the said Town of, etc. and not elsewhere, at the proper
costs and charges of the said R R, shall be wholly employed to the proper use of
the said R and his Assigns; any thing etc. Moreover, it is covenanted, etc. (
the Covenant for Survivorship.

In witness, etc.

A Defeazance upon a Judgment.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, That whereas the said T W
has one recovery or judgment against the said H G in the Court of Upper
Bench, for 100 l debt, 4 l. costs of suit, as by the Records in the said Court
of Upper Bench in Michaelmas Term last past before the date hereof, it does and
may appear. Nevertheless it is agreed between the said Parties, and the said T
W does for himself, his Executors and Administrators, Covenant, promise and
grant to and with the said H G his Executors and Administrators by these
presents. If the said H G his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of
them, shall and do well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said T W
his, etc. the full sum of, etc. at the now dwelling house of, etc. on the etc.
That then the said T W. his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, shall and
will at the proper costs and charges of the said H G his Executors,
Administrators or Essignes, acknowledge satisfaction upon Record of the said
recovery or judgment of a 100 l. debt, and 4 l. costs of suit, Covenant upon
satisfaction to seal a Release.
as aforesaid. And the said H G does Covenant, etc. That he the said H G. his
Executors or Administrators, shall and will presently upon satisfaction
acknowledged, as aforesaid, make, seal, and as his Deed, deliver to the use of
the said T W his Executors or Administrators, a release of errors for or
concerning the recovery or judgment aforesaid.

In witness whereof, the said Humfrey Gother, etc.

An Indenture of Bargain and Sale of Manors, Lands, etc. Demised by fourth
parts to the Grantor, and others; penned by Will. Noy Esquire.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between, etc. Whereas Sir Henry Harrington by his
Indenture of demise, under his hand and Seal, for the considerations therein
mentioned; has demised, granted, and to farm letten unto G W of etc. the said
T G by the name of T G of, etc. R G of etc. R M etc. and B W of etc. All those
the Manors, Towns, Villages and Hamlets, lying and being within the Lordship,
Country, Territory or Circuit of Land called or known by the name of, etc. now
being in the County of Wicklow, and sometimes being in the County of Dublin,
and lying in the Country called the Birnes Country; that is to say, the Manors,
Recital.
Towns, Villages or Hamlets, called by the name of, etc. or by what other name
or names the same be called or known by, and also all the said Lordship,
Country, Territory and Circuit of Land, called or known by the name of, etc.
in the said County of Wicklow, and in the said County of Dublin, or in either
of them. And also, all and singular Manors, Messuages, Grants, Cottages, Mills,
Castles, Fortillages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Moors,
Heathes, Groves, Woods, Underwoods, Free Warren, Mines and Minerals of what
kind soever, Markets, Faires, Tolls, Court-leets, view of Franks pledge,
Customs, Wards, Marriages, Reliefs, Rents, Reversions, Services, Privileges,
Jurisdictions, Profits, Commodities, Advantages, Emoluments, and all other
Hereditaments whatsoever within the said Lordship, Country, Territory and
Circuit of Land, called, etc. or to the said Manors, Towns or Castles,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other the above recited
premises, and every or any of them, belonging or in any wise appertaining, or
with them or any of them at any time heretofore used or enjoyed, accepted,
reputed, taken, known, or esteemed as part, parcel, member or appertinent of
or to them or any of them, and the Reversion and Reversions, remainder and
remainders of all and singular the premises, and every part and parcel thereof:
Habendum.
To have and to hold one quarter and full fourth part of all and singular the
said Lordship, Country, Territory and Circuit of Land, called etc. and of the
said Manors, Towns, Villages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and of all
and singular other the premises above mentioned to be demised, granted and to
Farm letten in and by the said recited Indenture of Lease (into four parts to
be divided) unto the said G W his, etc. from the Feast of, etc. last past
before the date of the said recited Indenture of Lease, unto the end and term
of, etc. from thence next ensuing fully to be complete and ended, (without
impeachment of or for any manner of waste.) And one other quarter or full
fourth part of all and singular the said Lordship, Country, Territory and
Circuit of Land, called, etc. and of the said Manors, Towns, Villages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, and of all and singular other the premises above
mentioned to be demised, granted and to Farm letten in and by the said recited
Indenture of Lease (into four parts to be divided) unto the said T G his, etc.
from the Feast of, etc. last past, before the date of the said recited
Indenture of Lease, unto the end and term of, etc. thence next ensuing fully
to be complete and ended (without impeachment of or for any manner of waste:)
and one other quarter or full fourth part of, etc. ut supra. And whereas also
the said Sir H H for the consideration in the said Indenture mentioned has for
him, his, etc. given, granted bargained and sold unto the said G W, T G, R G, R
M. and B W their etc. All and singular trees, timber trees, woods and
underwoods whatsoever now standing or growing, or which at any time hereafter,
during the said term of, etc. shall stand and grow in and upon the premises
before mentioned to be demised, granted, and to farm letten, in and by the
said Indenture of Lease, and in and upon any part or parcel thereof, in manner
and form following; That is to say, one fourth or quarter part of all and
singular the said trees, timber trees, woods and underwoods, unto the said G W
his etc. (without impeachment of any manner of waste) to the only use and
behoof of him the said G W, his etc. for ever with free liberty at their will
and pleasure to take and carry away the same trees timber trees, woods and
underwoods. And one fourth or quarter part of all and singular the said trees,
timber trees, woods and under-woods unto the said T G his, etc. (without
impeachment of any manner of waste) to the only use and behoof of him the said
T G his, etc. for ever, with the liberty at their will and pleasure to take and
carry away the same trees, timber trees, woods and underwoods. And one other,
etc. ut supra, Reddendum.
Yiedling and paying therefore yearly, during the said term of, etc. unto etc.
the sum of 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. of current money of Ireland to be paid unto the
hands of the Vice-Treasurer or General Receiver, of the Kingdom of Ireland
(for the time being) for and in discharge of the free Rent reserved, or with
which the premises are already chargeable to the use of etc. at the receipt of
the Exchequer there, at the Feast of, etc. or within two Months next after
either of the said Feasts, by even portions. And also yiedling and paying
therefore yearly, Reddendum.
during the said term of, etc. unto the said Sir H H and to his Heirs, or to
such other person and persons to whom the immediate Reversion and Remainder of
the premises shall descend or come, either in use or possession, the sum of
40 l. of etc. at the Feasts of, etc. as by the said recited Indentures of
Lease, wherein also diverse other Covenants, Grants and Agreements are
contained, relation being thereunto had, more plainly and at large it does and
may appear. Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said T G, Consideration.
as well for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. to him in hand before
the ensealing and delivery hereof by the said T G, well and truly paid, the
receipt whereof the said T G does acknowledge and confess by these presents. As
also, for and in consideration, that the said T G at the request and for the
only debt of the said T G stands obliged and bound together with the said T
G and others in and by didivers several obligations bearing several Dates, in
sundry sums of money therein contained, to several parties therein particularly
named, and which are expressed in a Schedule indented hereunto annexed; and
that the said T G has promised and undertaken the payment of the same at the
days of payment on which the same by the tenure of the several obligations in
the said Schedule mentioned are and ought to be paid, and also in consideration
that the said T G has promised and undertaken the payment of the sum of, etc.
which came to the hands of the said T G as Executor of the last Will and
Testament of M W late of etc. deceased, and is a part of the filial portion of
A W, B W and C W daughters of the said M, to them given and bequeathed by the
said last Will and Testament of the said M their mother, and to be paid by the
said Executor T G unto them the said A B and C on the days of their Marriage,
and for diverse others good causes and considerations him the said T G thereunto
moving; Grant.
Has granted, bargained, sold, aliened, assigned and set over, and by these
presents does, etc. unto the said T G, as well the aforesaid one fourth or
quarter part (into four parts to be divided) to the said T G demised or
granted, or mentioned to be demised or granted by the Indenture of Lease above
recited, of and in the aforesaid Lordship, Country, Territory, and Circuit of
Land, called, etc. and also of the said Manors, Lordships, Towns, Castles,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Woods, Wood-ground and Hereditaments, and of all
other the premises in or by the said recited Indenture of Lease, demised or
mentioned to be demised or granted, and of every part and parcel thereof. And
the one fourth or quarter part of all and singular the said trees,
timber trees, woods and underwoods in and by the said recited Indenture
granted, and one quarter or fourth part of all and singular such trees, timber
trees, woods, and under-woods, and other profits whatsoever as have been
felled, made, levied or received of the premises, or any part thereof since the
Feast day of etc. last past before the Deed Indented, above recited. As also
all the Estate, right, title, interest, use, possession, rents, reversion and
reversions, term of years to come, claim, and demand whatsoever, which he the
said T G has, or in any wise may, might, should or ought to have of, in, and
to the said one fourth or quarter part (into four parts to be divided) as
aforesaid, of all and singular the premises by the said recited Indenture of
Lease demised and granted, and therein mentioned, to be thereby demised or
granted; and of all the said trees, timber trees, woods and underwoods, and
other the aforesaid profits, and of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof
by force and virtue of the said Indenture of Lease above recited, or any thing
therein contained, or otherwise howsoever; together with all the right,
interest, and property of him the said T G of, in, and to the said recited
Indenture of Lease, and of, in, and to all other Deeds, Escripts and Writings
concerning the premises, or any part or parcel of them, or any of them: To
have and to hold all the said one fourth or quarter part of all the said
Lordship, Habend.
Country, Territory, and Circuit of Land, called, etc. and of all the said
Manours, Lordships, Towns, Castles, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Woods,
Wood-ground and Hereditaments, and of all other the premises by the aforesaid
Indenture of Lease Demised and granted, or mentioned to be thereby Demised or
granted, and all the said term and estate of him the said T G of, in, and to
the same, and all other the premises by these presents bargained and sold,
assigned and set over, or herein mentioned or meant to be hereby bargained,
sold, or assigned, and every part and parcel thereof unto the said T G his
Executors, etc. from the ensealing and delivery of these presents forthwards,
for and during all the residue of years and term which by course of time are
now to come and unexpired of the said term of, etc. in and by the said recited
Indenture of Lease granted or mentioned. Free from all incombrances.
And the said T G for himself, his Exec. etc. does Covenant and grant to and
with the said T G his Executors, etc. by these presents in manner and form
following, That is to say, that all the aforesaid one fourth or quarter part of
all and singular the the said Lordship, Country, Territory and Circuit of
Land, called, etc. and of all the said Manours, Lands, Tenements, Woods,
Wood-grounds, Trees, Timber Trees, Underwoods, and Hereditaments, and the said
estate, term, and interest of him the said T G, of and in the same, and all
other the premises by these presents mentioned to be granted, bargained, sold,
or assigned, and every part and parcel thereof at the ensealing of these
presents are and be, and so at all times hereafter, during the residue of the
said term of, etc. by course of time now to come and unexpired, shall continue
and be unto the said T G, his, etc. clear and free, and clearly acquitted,
exonerated, and discharged, or by the said T G his Executors, etc. sufficiently
saved and kept harmless of and from all and singular former bargains, sales,
grants, surrenders, arrerages of Rents, cause and causes of forfeiture and
re-entry, and of and from all other troubles, charges, and incombrances
whatsoever had, made, committed, done or wittingly suffered or assented unto by
the said T G before the ensealing and delivery of these presents (the yearly
Rents, Covenants, charges and agreements in the said recited Indenture of Lease
reserved or mentioned on the Leassees or Tenants part hereafter to grow due to
be paid, done and performed, according to the purport and true meaning of the
said Indenture of Lease, always excepted and foreprized.)

In witness, etc.

An Assignment Tithes, in a very good form.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between Sir E G of etc. Knight, T S of etc. and E B
of etc. of the one part, and F C of etc. and W B of etc. of the other part.
Witnesses, That the said T S and E B by and with the consent, and at the
request of the said Sir E G, and for and in consideration of a competent sum
of, etc. to them the said T S and E B in hand at and before the ensealing and
delivery of these presents by the said F C and W B well and truly paid, whereof
and wherewith they the said Sir E G, T S, and E B acknowledge themselves fully
satisfied and paid, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof do
clearly acquit and discharge the said F C and W B. Have granted, Grant.
bargained, and sold, and by these presents for them and their Heirs do fully,
clearly and absolutely grant, etc. unto the said F C and W B their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, All those their Tithes of G, alias C and V, and in either or
any of them in the County of Worcest, to the late Monastery of P in the said
Country of W lately dissolved, sometimes belonging and appertaining, and
parcel of the possessions of the said late Monastery sometimes being. And also
all and singular houses, edifices, buildings, barnes, stables, lands,
tenements, ways, paths, passages, waft commons, tithes of corn, grain, sheaf,
and hay, wool, lamb, flax, hemp, and all other tithes whatsoever, as well
great as small oblations, obventions, fruits, profits, rents, reversions,
services, rights, jurisdictions, franchises, privileges, commodities,
advantages, emoluments and hereditaments whatsoever, with their appurtenances
whatsoever, of what nature or kind soever they be, or by whatsoever names they
are known, named, or called, situate, lying and being, coming, growing or
renewing within the Hamlets or fields of, etc. aforesaid, or in either or any
of them to the said tithes of C and V aforesaid, or either of them, or to any
part or parcel thereof belonging, or in any wise appertaining, and the
reversion and reversions, remainder and remained whatsoever of all and singular
the same tithes and other the premises in G etc. aforesaid, and of every part
and parcel thereof, and the Rent and yearly profits whatsoever of all and
singular the same premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, as fully,
freely and wholly, and in as large and ample manner and form as, etc. by his
Letters Patent under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster. the,
etc. Did give and grant the said tithes and other the premises hereby
mentioned, meant, or intended to be granted, bargained and sold, and every
parcel thereof with the appurtenances amongst other things, unto the Right
Honorable G. etc. H I etc. T R etc. their Heirs and Assigns, in Fee Farm for
ever, and as fully, freely, and wholly, and in as large and ample manner and
form as the said G H and T, by their Indenture of bargain and sale, dated etc.
and enrolled in the high Court of Chancery, did grant, bargain and sell the
same tithes and other the premises, with the appurtenances, unto the said T S
and E B their Heirs and Assigns for ever. Except notwithstanding, Exception.
and out of this present grant, bargain, and sale, always reserved the Rectory
of A. with the appurtenances in the said County of Worcester, and all, and all
manner of tithes whatsoever in A aforesaid, with the appurtenances heretofore
granted, bargained, and sold by the said T S and E B unto, etc. their Heirs
and Assigns in Fee Farm for ever, by Indenture, Dated, etc. To have and to
hold the said tithes of G etc. Habend.
aforesaid, and all and singular other the premises herein before mentioned,
meant or intended to be hereby granted, bargained, and sold, and every part and
parcel thereof with the appurtenances (except before excepted) unto the said F
C and W B their Heirs and Assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of them
the said F C and W B, their Heirs and Assigns for ever, to be holden of the
said, etc. as of the Manor of East-Green-with in the County of Kent by fealty
only in free and common socage, Reddend.
and not in chief, nor by Knights service: Yielding and paying yearly unto etc.
for the premises with the appurtenances in G. etc. aforesaid, in the said
County of Worcest. 2 s and 6 ds of etc. at the receipt of the Exchequer, at
Westm', or to the hands of the Bailiffs or Receivers of the premises for the
time being, at the Feasts of, etc. by even and equal portions to be paid for
ever. And the said, etc, Covenant for peaceable enjoying.
do covenant, etc. to and with the said, etc. his, etc. That they the said,
etc. their Heirs and Assigns, and every of them shall, or lawfully may at all
times hereafter, and from time to time peaceably and quietly have, hold, use,
occupy, possess and enjoy the said Tithes, and all other the premises with the
appurtenances in G etc. aforesaid, and every parcel thereof (except before
excepted) without any let, trouble, interruption, eviction, denial, or
disturbance of etc. their heirs or Assigns, or of any other person or persons
lawfully claiming in, by, from or under him, them, or any of them, or by his,
their, or any of their act, means, consent or procurement, free, clear, and
clearly acquitted, exonerated, discharged, saved, or kept harmless of and from
all former or other bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases, assignments,
morgages, surrenders, statutes, recognizances, judgments, extents, executions,
rents, arrerages of rents, and of and from all other charges, estates, titles,
troubles and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed or done by them the
said etc. or by any other person or persons by their, either or any of their
act, means, consent or procurement. The rent, covenants, clauses and agreements
by, and in the before mentioned Letters Patents for the premises reserved or
mentioned, and from henceforth in respect of the same premises to be paid, done
and performed, only except and fore-prized.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Partition, with good Covenants, in a very good form; penned by
William Noy Esquire.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between H T of etc. of the one part, and H H of etc.
of the other part. Witnesses, That whereas Dame D S of, etc. Widow, by
Indenture of Lease, Grant.
bearing date, etc. Has for the term of, etc. commencing from the Feast day
of, etc. and for the yearly rent of, etc. thereby reserved to be due, and
payable at four Feasts or Terms in the year: That is to say, etc. or within
six days next ensuing every of the same Feast days by even and equal
portions, demised, granted, and to farm letten unto the said H T and H H their
Executors and Assigns; All that piece or parcel of ground or garden-plat, set,
lying, and being in, etc. as it was then agreed to be severed and divided
containing in length, from North to South, etc. and in breadth from East to
West, etc. which said piece or parcel of ground lies near, and adjoyneth also
unto, etc. And also all buildings made or set up in or upon the said piece or
parcel of ground or garden-plat, or any part thereof; and all profits,
commodities and appurtenances whatsoever to the same premises, and every or any
part thereof belonging or appertaining: Together with free ingresse, egresse
and regresse in and through the highway, there only unto and from the said
piece, or parcel of ground; as by the said recited Indenture of Lease, wherein
also diverse other Covenants, grants, articles and agreements are contained,
whereunto relation being had, more plainly may appear. Division.
And for that the said piece or parcel of ground or garden-plat does now by
force and virtue of the said recited Indenture of Lease remain as the proper
goods of the said H T and H H in common, without any partition or division,
which is not the meaning of them and either of them: But contrariwise, that
they and either of them, to the only and proper use and behoof of them and
either of them, and either of their Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
should and shall from henceforth be and remain sole and proper owners of
either of their several parts of the said piece or parcel of ground or
garden-plat, and such Edifices and buildings as now are thereupon erected,
built and set up, at the equal charges of the said H T and H H. And the said H
T and H H are contended and agreed, that a perfect partition and division shall
be made of the said piece or parcel of ground and premises by the said recited
Indenture of Lease demised; and such Edifices and Buildings as are thereupon
erected, built and set up, in such manner and for me as hereunder is expressed:
that is to say, That the said piece or parcel of ground, and such Edifices and
Buildings, as thereupon are erected and set up, shall be divided in the midst
by a strait line directly from the North to the South; and that the said H T
his, etc. shall have and enjoy all that Easternly half part of the said ground
and buildings, which is situate and being toward, etc. And that the said H H
his etc. shall have and enjoy all that Westernly half part of the said piece
or parcel of ground and buildings, which is situate and being toward, etc. and
free ingresse, egresse, regresse, course, recourse, passage and way unto and
from the same by and through the Gate there standing and being on the East part
of the said piece or parcel of ground at the North end thereof, and so directly
overthwart the ground above mentioned and appointed to be belonging to the said
H T from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during, and until the end,
expiration and accomplishment, or other determination of such and so many
years, and other time, as are now to come and unexpired of the said term of,
etc. in and by the said recited Indenture of Lease mentioned to be granted as
aforesaid. And the said H T etc. does covenant, etc. to and with the said H H
his, A Covenant, for quiet and peaceable enjoying the Westernly parcels of
ground and buildings.
etc. and to and with every of them by these presents, in manner and form
following; that is to say, That he the said H H his etc. shall and may
peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy all and singular
the said Westernly parcel of ground and buildings above by these presents
mentioned and allotted to be belonging unto the said H H, from the day of the
date hereof, for, during and unto the full end, expiration and accomplishment
of all such and so many years and other time, term and space, as are now to
come, and unexpired of the said term of, etc. in and by the said recited
Indenture of Lease granted, as aforesaid, without any let, suite, trouble,
denial, expulsion, forfeiture, recovery or interruption of or by the said H T
his, etc. or of or by any other Person or Persons lawfully claiming, or which
at any time hereafter shall pretend, claim, lawfully challenge or demand any
estate, right, title or interest of, in or to the same, by, from or under him,
them or any of them, or by his or their or any of their assent, consent, right,
title, means, sufferance or procurement. And the said H H, for, A Covenant, for
quiet and peaceable enjoying the Easternly parcels of ground and buildings.
etc. does Covenant, etc. to and with the said H T his, etc. by these presents,
in manner and form following: That is to say, That he the said H T, his, etc.
shall and may peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy all
and singular the said Easternly parcel of ground and buildings above by these
presents mentioned and allotted to be belonging unto the said H T from the day
of the date hereof, forthwards, for, during and unto the full end, expiration
and accomplishment of all such and so many years and other time, term and
space, as is now to come and unexpired of the said term of, etc. in and by the
said recited Indenture of Lease granted, as aforesaid, without any let, suite,
trouble, denial, expulsion, forfeiture, recovery or interruption of or by the
said H H his, etc. or of any other person or persons lawfully claiming, or
which shall at any time hereafter pretend lawful claim, challenge or demand any
estate, right, title or interest of, in or to the same, by, from or under him,
them or any of them, or by his, their or any of their assent, consent, right,
title, means, suffrance or procurement. And further, the said H H etc. does
covenant, A Covenant for reparations
etc. to and with the said H T etc. by these presents, That he the said H H his
etc. or some of them at his and their, or some of their own proper costs and
charges, shall and will from time to time, and at all times times hereafter
during the term of years abovementioned to be granted by the said recited
Indenture of Lease, well and sufficiently repair, uphold and maintain all that
part and portion to him allotted of the said piece or parcel of ground
abovementioned, and thereof shall acquit and discharge the said H T his, etc.
And also, that he the said H H his, And that H H shall pay the yearly rent
reserved for and in respect of his part of rent.
etc. shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter during the
term of years abovementioned, satisfy and pay, or cause to be satisfied and
paid unto the said H T his, etc. the yearly rent of, etc. at four Feasts or
Terms in the year most usual: That is to say, etc. or within the time and
space of, etc. by even and equal portions, for and in respect of his part of
the rent reserved in and by the said recited Indenture of Lease. And further, A
Covenant, that H H. shall pay half charges about mending of the Bridge leading
out of Lyther-lane to the premises. A Clause of re-entry upon non-payments of
the rent.
that he the said H H his, etc. or some of them, shall and will at all times
hereafter, and from time to time, during the term of years above-specified,
bear, pay and discharge a ratable and proportionable half part of all such
charges and expenses as shall be expended, disbursed and laid forth in and
about the repairing, making up and amending of the Bridge leading out of
Lyther-lane into the abovementioned premises. And if it shall happen the said
yearly rent of, etc. or any part thereof, to be behind, unpaid, in part or in
all, contrary to the form abovesaid, being lawfully demanded. That then, and at
all times after, it shall and may be lawful unto and for the said H T his,
etc. and every or any of them, into and upon all that part and portion of the
said parcel of ground above allotted and appointed to be belonging to the said
H H, and into every part thereof wholly to re-enter, and the same to have,
hold, and for ever enjoy to his, and their own proper use and behoof; and the
said H H, his, etc. and all others Occupiers of the premises, from thence
utterly to expel, put out and amove; this Indenture, etc. A Covenant for
reparations of the aforesaid Bridge.
And the said H T. for himself, his, etc. does Covenant. etc. to and with the
said H H. his, etc. in manner and form following: (viz.) That he the said H T.
his, etc. or some of them, at his and their, or some of their own proper costs
and charges, shall and will from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
during the term of years abovementioned to be granted by the said recited
Indenture of Lease, well and sufficiently repair, uphold and maintain all that
part and portion to him allotted of the said piece or parcel of ground
abovementioned, and thereof shall acquit and discharge the said H H, his, etc.
And also, that he the said H T. his, etc, shall and will at all times
hereafter, and from time to time during the term of years above-specified,
bear, pay and discharge a ratable and proportionable half part of all such
charges and expenses as shall be expended, disbursed and laid forth in and
about the repairing, making up and amending of the Bridge leading out of, etc.
into the abovementioned premises. A Covenant to pay money toward the
finishing of a Well.
And further, that he the said H T. his, etc. shall and will satisfy and pay,
or cause to be paid unto the said H H. his, etc. the sum of, etc. in lieu and
full satisfaction of all such sum and sums of money as the said H H. for
his part has disbursed or shall lay forth in and about the making and
finishing of the Well standing on the East side of the abovementioned parcel
of ground. Covenant to pay the Rent.
And the said H T. for himself, etc. does Covenant, etc. to and with the said
H H. his, etc. by these presents, That he the said H H. his, etc. shall and
will from time to time, and at all times hereafter, satisfy and pay, or cause
to be paid unto the abovenamed Dame D S. her, etc. Rent-gatherers or Assigns,
the yearly rent of, etc. at four Feasts or Terms in every year, viz. etc. or
within the time and space of, etc. next ensuing every of the same Feast days,
by even and equal portions. A Clause of re-entry for non-payment of the rent.
And if it shall happen the said yearly rent of, etc. to be behind, unpaid, in
part or in all, contrary to the form aforesaid, being lawfully demanded, and
that the said H H. his, etc. shall not be then found in arrearages for
non-payment of his aforesaid rent of, etc. or any part thereof: That then and
at all times after, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said H H. his,
etc. and every or any of them, into and upon all that part and portion of the
said parcel of ground above allotted and appointed to be belonging unto the
said H T, and into every part thereof wholly to re-enter, and the same to have,
hold, and for every enjoy to his and their own proper use and behoof; and the
said H T. his, etc. and all others Occupiers of the premises, from thence
utterly to expel, put out and amove: this Indenture, etc. And it is
Covenanted, granted, A Covenant, that if the said H T. and H H. their, etc. or
either of them severally for himself and his, etc. that if either of them be
minded to demise, let or set, or otherwise do away their whole estate of their
several parts of the ground to them severally allotted, shall or will give
notice in writing to the other of them, to the intent that he may have the
first refusal thereof.
concluded and mutually agreed upon by and between the said Parties; and H T.
and H H. for themselves, their several Executors and Administrators, and
either of them severally for himself, his Executors and Administrators
respectively, does Covenant and grant to and with the other of them, his
Executors and Administrators by these presents, in manner and form following,
viz. That if they the said H T. and H H. or either of them, or the etc. of
them, or either of them, shall at any time hereafter be minded to demise, let,
set or otherwise do or put away their whole estates of their several parts of
the said piece or parcel of ground to them above severally allotted, or any
part thereof: That then he or they of them, his or their, etc. being so minded
to put away his or their parts of the said piece or parcel of ground so
allotted to them or either of them, as aforesaid, shall or will give notice in
writing of such his determination to the other of them, his, etc. to the intent
that the other of them, his, etc. may have the refusal thereof before any
other: Giving or paying unto him or them that shall be so minded, as aforesaid,
so much lawful English money as any other will (bona fide) give or pay for the
same.

In witness, etc.

An Assignment of a Lease of Lands, made by the etc. which were seized for a
Debt due to etc. by Obligation. Penned by William Noy, Esquire.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, That whereas, etc. by
Letters Patent, with the advice of his Council, W. Baron of, etc. and Sir W
M. Knight, Chancellor of the Court of Exchequer at Westminster, and the Barons
of the same Court. Has amongst other things Demised, Grant.
granted, and to farm let unto the said A B. two Messuages or Tenements, and
diverse Lands, Meadows, and pastures, with the appurtenances, set, lying, and
being in, etc. within the Connty of, etc. upon the yearly rent of, etc. parcel
of the Lands, Tenements, and Possessions of one E F, of etc. with the
appurtenances, lately seized into the hands of, etc. by F G. Esquire, then
Sheriff of the same County, the fourteenth day of, etc. for the Debt of, etc.
which the said E F. yet stands indebted unto, etc. in the aforesaid sum, as
by his Obligation, Dated, etc. may appear. (Except, Exception
and always reserved out of the said Grant and Demise unto, etc. all great
timber trees, woods, underwoods, mines and quarries of the premises. Habend.
) To have and to hold all those the said two Messuages or Tenements and other
the premises, with all and singular their appurtenances in, etc. aforesaid
(except before excepted) to the said A B. his, etc. from the Day of the Date
of, etc. for and during so long time as the same shall remain and be in the
hands of, Reddend.
etc. Yiedling and paying yearly for the said two Messuages or Tenements, and
other the premises with their appurtenances unto; etc. the full and whole sum
of, etc. at the Feasts of, etc. at the receipt of the Exchequer at Westminster,
or to the hands of the Sheriffs of the said County for the time being, by even
and equal portions: As by the said Letters Patent, bearing Date at
Westminster, etc. may appear. This Indenture now further witnesses,
Consideration.
that the said A B. for and in consideration as well of, etc. as also for
diverse and sundry causes and considerations him thereunto especially moving:
Grant.
Has bargained, sold, assigned, and set over, and by these present Indentures
does, etc, unto the said C D. his Executors, etc. all and singular the said
premises, and all the estate, term, right, title, interest, and demand which he
the said A B has, may, might, should, or of right ought to have of, in, or to
the said two Messuages or Tenements, and other the premises, with their
appurtenances of the ^^^^ments and other the premises, with their
appurtenances, of the said E F in and by the said Letters Patents demised and
granted, or mentioned to be demised and granted to the said A B as is
aforesaid, in as large and ample manner and form, as the said A B now has and
enjoys, or may have and enjoy the premises by force or in respect of the said
Letters Patents to him granted. Habend.
To have and to hold the said two Messuages or Tenements and other the premises
with their appurtenances, and all the said estate, right, title, term,
interest and demand of the said A B in and to the same unto the said C D his
etc. to his and their own only use and behoof, from the day of the date of
these presents, as amply in all respects, and for so long time as the said A B
has, might, should or ought to enjoy the same by virtue of the said Letters
Patents, or otherwise. And the said A B etc. covenanteth, etc. to and with the
said C D his, etc. by these presents, That all and singular the said two
Messuages or Tenements, and other the premises now be, and at all times from
henceforth shall continue, remain, and be, during all the continuance, force
and effect of the said Letters Patents, to the said C D his etc. and every of
them clearly acquitted, discharged and sufficiently saved harmless of and from
all former bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases, forfeitures, charges and
incombrances at any time heretofore had, made, or done, or hereafter to be had
made or done by the said A B, or by any other by, from, or under his term,
estate, title, interest, means or procurement, since the date of the said
Letters Patents. And also the said C D etc. does covenant, A Covenant, to save
harmless from all rents hereafter to grow due, and all other duties and
demands.
etc. to and with the said A B etc. the he the said C D his etc. and every of
them shall and will at all time and times hereafter, and from time to time, as
well discharge, save and keep the said A B his etc. against etc. of and from
all, and all manner of rent and rents hereafter to grow due and payable. As
also of and from all and all manner of other debts, duties and demands
hereafter to grow thereby due and paiable for and on the part and behalf of the
said A B his etc. in and about the said demised premises, or any part or parcel
thereof in these presents, mentioned, bargained, sold, granted or demised unto
the said C D or his Assigns. Provided always, and nevertheless the said C D
for himself, A Proviso, that if the money be paid at the day then this
Assignment, bargain and sale to be void.
his, etc. does covenant, etc. to and with the said A B his, etc. by these
presents, That if the said A B his etc. or any of them, do well and truly
satisfy, content and pay, or cause to be satisfied, contented and paid unto
the said C D his etc. within Graies-Inne-hall, etc. the said sum of etc. at
and upon etc. next ensuing the date hereof, between the hours of etc. next
ensuing the date hereof, between the hours of etc in the afternoon of the same
day: That then upon the full and true payment of all the said sum of etc. the
said A B his, etc. shall have again to him and them re-delivered the said
Indenture of Lease, with all the whole estate, right, title and interest of and
in the premises, and in as full force without any encumbrance made by the said
C D as the same now is the day of the date hereof: And that then and from
thenceforth this present grant, assignment, bargain and sale shall be to all
purposes in the law clearly void and of none effect; any thing before mentioned
in these presents to the contrary, etc. A Covenant that A B at the request of C
D shall show forth and deliver to any person or persons in all and every place
and places for the further perfect defending of the said demise, grant and sale.
And the said A B for himself, etc. does further covenant, etc, to and with
the said C D his Executors, etc. by these presents, That upon reasonable
request at all times hereafter shall and will show and deliver forth the said
Letters Patents to all person and persons in all and every place and places as
the said C D his, etc. or any of them shall reasonably desire or require the
said A B his etc. or any of them, A Covenant, that if C D shall sell or assign
the premises for more than the sum to the said A B before hand paid, that all
such sums so received shall he paid to the said A B.
for the further perfect defending of the said demise, grant and sale of the
premises made by the said A B to the said C D and his Assigns. And it is
further covenanted, condescended, concluded and agreed by and between the said
parties to these presents, That if the said C D shall before, etc. sell,
assign and convey away the premises herein demised for more then the said
sum of etc. to the said A B before hand paid, that all and every such sum
and sums of money so taken and received above the said sum of etc. by the
said C D shall be answered and paid to the said A B his, etc. any thing herein
contained, etc. A Covenant, that if the demised premises, or any part thereof
within the space of, etc. next ensuing, with all charges be paid unto C D to be
evicted from the possession of the said C D. And if the money due unto. etc.
shall be satisfied, by reason whereof the possession of C D be avoided, then the
said A B shall pay the said C D the said sum.
And it is also covenanted, concluded and agreed by and between the said
parties to these presents, That if it shall happen the before demised premises
or any part or parcel thereof at any time hereafter within the space of, etc.
next ensuing the date hereof, and before the said, etc. with all charges be
fully contented and paid unto the said C D his, etc. to be evicted from the
possession of the said C D or his Assigns: Or if it shall fortune that the
said money due unto etc. shall be within the said time satisfied and paid, by
reason whereof the possession of the said C D and his Assigns be avoided and
defeated, that then the said A B shall satisfy, content and pay unto the said C
D the said sum of, etc any covenant, article, clause or agreement to the
contrary notwithstanding.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture where, etc. by Letters Patents to I C of certain Lands for term
of three lives, and afterward by another Letter Patent demised the same to J C
in reversion, now the said J C sells his interest by this Indenture. Penned
by learned Counce^.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, That whereas, etc. by
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at Westm', etc.
for considerations in the said Letters Patents mentioned, Demise.
Has demised granted, and to Farm letten unto the said A B, amongst other
things in the said Letters Patents mentioned, All those Messuages, Lands and
Tenements, with all their appurtenances, situate, Recital.
lying and being in etc. parcel of the Manor of etc. to the late dissolved
Priory of, etc. sometime belonging, to the Duchy of Cornwall now annexed; and
which to the said I C and M his wife, and to C C and their Assigns, by Letters
Patents bearing date etc. for term of their lives, and for the yearly rent of,
etc. is demised and granted. (Except notwithstanding always out of the same
grant, and always reserved all great trees, Habend.
woods, underwoods, mines and quarries of the premises.) To have and to hold
all the aforesaid Messuages or Tenements with the appurtenances (except before
excepted) unto the said A B his, etc. after the death of the said I C, M his
wife, and C C longer living, or other determination of their Estates, unto the
end of the term, and during the term of etc. from thence next ensuing etc.
Yiedling and paying therefore yearly from thence, Reddend.
to, etc. the said yearly rent of, etc. in such manner and form as in and by
the said Letters Patents thereof amongst other things made, as aforesaid, unto
the said A B. whereunto relation, Consideration.
etc. Now this Indenture further witnesses, that the said A B, for the
consideration of etc. has bargained, sold, given, granted, aliened, assigned
and set over, and by these presents does fully and absolutely bargain, etc.
unto the said I C and to his Assigns as well all and singular the said
Messuages, Lands, and Tenements, with the appurtenances, so by the Letters
Patents formerly demised and granted unto the said I M and C (except before
excepted) as also all and singular the right, estate, title, interest,
reversion, property, claim, term of years and demand whatsoever of the said A
B, of, in and to the same. To have and to hold all and singular the said
Messuages, Habend.
Lands and Tenements, with the appurtenances aforesaid, (except before
excepted) and all and singular the right, estate title, interest, reversion,
property, claim, term of years and demand whatsoever of the said A B, of,
in, and to the same, unto the said I C his etc. from the day of the decease of
the longer, liver of them the said I, M and C, or from any other determination
of their estates, for, during and unto the end and term of, etc. in and by the
said Letters Patents granted, as aforesaid. And the said A B. etc. Covenanteth,
A Covenant, that the premises are free from Encumbrances whatsoever.
etc. to and with the said I C. his, etc. viz. That all and singular the
premises above by these presents bargained, sold, given, granted, alienated,
assigned and set over or mentioned or meant hereby to be bargained, etc. and
every part and parcel thereof (except before excepted) the day of the date of
these presents, and also at the ensealing and delivery hereof are and be, and
so from henceforth shall or may continue during all the said term and time
granted by the said Letters Patents unto the said I C, his, etc. clearly
acquitted and discharged, or otherwise by him the said A B. his, etc. saved and
kept harmless, of and from all and all manner of former bargains, sales,
gifts, grants, leases, writings and incombrances whatsoever had, made,
committed or done by the said A B. his, etc. or by any other person or persons
whatsoever by his, their, or any of their means, assent, consent, right, title
or procurement: (The yearly Rent aforesaid, and Covenants in the same Letters
Patents expressed, which on the part and behalf of the Leasee and Farmer of the
premises are or ought henceforth to be paid and performed for and in respect
only of the same premises, only except and foreprized) And the said I C. for
him, I C. Covenants to pay and discharge the rent and all arrerages, and save
and keep harmless the said A. B according to the meaning of the Letters
Patents.
etc. does Covenant, etc. to and with the said A B, his, etc. by these
presents, in manner and form following, viz. That he the said I C. his, etc.
after the commencement of the said term of, etc. shall and will well and truly
pay and discharge, or cause to be paid, according to the tenor and true
meaning of the said recited Letters patents so made and granted, unto the said
A B the said yearly rent of, etc. and of the said yearly rent of, etc. and of
all arrearages thereof shall and will at all times, and from time to time well
and sufficiently acquit and discharge, or save and keep harmless the said, A.
B his, etc. and every of them against, etc. according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents.

In witness, etc.

An Assignment of Letters Patents for a Water-mill, from etc. and made over for
the assurance of a Marriage-portion, with other Covenants. Penned by Council.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, That whereas, etc. by
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster,
etc. Has demised, etc. unto R T, of, etc. all that Water-mill called, etc.
with all their appurtenances in her said County of, etc. Recital of the
premises.
and all those three roods of meadow with the appurtenances lying and being on
the South part of the said Mill: and all that parcel of Land, called, etc. and
also all those nine acres of Land by estimation with the appurtenances lying on
the East part, and also all those dales and hills of land as the same were
enclosed from the Ferry called, etc. unto the Mill aforesaid, and also all
those nine acres of land and pasture called, etc. with the appurtenances, and
all those two acres of meadow by estimation with the appurtenances, lying in,
etc. and also all those tithes of the same Mill and Lands, or of any parcel
thereof from time to time growing or arising, with all and singular their
appurtenances, then or late before that in the tenure or occupation of, etc. or
his Assigns to the late Hospital of, etc. in England, sometime belonging or
appertaining, and parcel of the possessions thereof sometime being, and also
all and singular Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barnes, Stables, Dove-houses,
Orchards, Gardens, Tofts, Crofts, Curtilages, Lands, Mildammes, Pools,
Fishings, Waters, Watercourse, Streams, Sea banks, Walls, Ponds, Pools,
Fishings, places and fishing in the water called the Thames, suit to the Mill,
toll, profits, commodities, advantages, emoluments and hereditaments
whatsoever, with all and singular their appurtenances, to the said Mill, and
other the premises, or any parcel thereof by any manner of means belonging,
appertaining, happening, or accrewing (except one small Tenement or Cottage
wherein one, etc. lately inhabited, and one acre of ground thereto
appertaining, and all great trees, woods, underwoods, mines and quarries of the
premises) for the term of, etc. commencing from, etc. last past, before the
Date of the same Letters Patents, whereupon the yearly rent of, etc. R T.
declared his Will, and made his Son Executors, whereby they were possessed of
the premises, and by them conveyed to W. L. and W. L. conveyed the same to R.
B. A Marriage is intended between ^ H. and M. S. Daughter of R. B Moneys
deposited into the hands of R. B. by T P for the stock of C. H and for and in
consideration thereof, and for the Portion of M.S. R.B. does promise to
surrender the premises to the use of C. H and M.S. and their Heirs, according
to the custom of the Manor.
is reserved payable at the Feasts of, etc. at the receipt of the Exchequer, to
the hands of the Bayliffe or Receiver of the premises for the time being, as by
the same Letters Patent, etc. Which said R T. afterward declared by his
Testament or last Will, thereby ordaining R T. and R T, his Sons Executors
thereof, and died, By virtue of which said Testament or last Will, and the
probate thereof, they the said R. and R. were lawfully possessed to the same
premises; the whole ^^-state, right, title and interest of which said R T. and
R T. was by Indenture of bargain and sale, dated, etc. lawful conveyed and
assured unto W L. of, etc. and the estate, right, title, interest, property,
use, possession, reversion, term of years, claim and demand whatsoever of
which said, W L. of, in and to the same Letters Patent, conveyances and
premises, is by Deed Indented, Dated, etc. lawfully conveyed and assured unto
the said R B. And furthermore, whereas Matrimony is intended between C H. of,
etc. Son-in-law of the said T P. of the one part, and M S. Daughter of, etc.
and Daughter in-law of the said R B, of the other part: And whereas the said T
P. has paid and imposed into the hands of the said R B. before the ensealing
hereof, the sum of, etc. by and with the consent of the said C H. as his
stock. And whereas the said R B has in consideration thereof, and lieu and
satisfaction of another, etc. being the portion of the said M S. now also
resting in the hands of the said R B. promised, that he the said R B, his, etc.
shall and will at his and their own charges, at the next Court Baron to be
holden at and for the Manor, etc. cause and procure. I H, of, etc. or his
Heirs, to make or cause to be made to the use of them the said C H. and M S.
and the Heirs of the two bodies lawfully to be begotten, and for default of
such issue, to the Heirs of the said C H. for ever, a good, lawful, and
absolute surrender and assurance, after and according to the custom of the
laid Manor, of all that Message or Tenement, customarily called, etc. within,
etc. and of all and singular Barns, Stables, Dove-houses, Edifices and
Buildings thereto belonging, or to or with the same now or at any time
heretofore used or occupied as parcel thereof; and of all those customary
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, as well a^able as pasture and meadow,
within, etc. containing by estimation, etc. or thereabouts, be they more or
less, holden by the said Manor of, etc. sometime in the occupation of I H. or
of his Assigns, and now in the occupation of the said R B. or of his Assigns,
and of all other the customary Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments within, etc.
aforesaid, holden of the same Manor, which late were in the occupation of R H.
Father of the said I H. and which to him the said I. by right of inheritance,
as Son and Heir unto the said R H. are descended, with all and singular their
appurtenances for ever, without any condition or other limitation. R.B
promises to assign a recognizance of 400 l in nature of a Statute staple, and
also to become bound in an Obligation to C H ^n the sum of, etc. not to revoke
the said assignment.
And that he the said R B. his, etc. shall on or before, etc. also at his and
these like costs and charges, convey and assign unto him the said C H. one
Recognizance in the nature of a Statute of the staple of 400 l. taken and
acknowledged the 19th day of, etc. before, etc. Knight, Lord chief Justice of,
etc. payable unto the said R B. And that he the said R B. shall also on or
before the said, etc. become bound by obligation unto the said C. in the sum
of, etc. not to revoke the same assignment, nor to receive the said debt of,
etc. or any part thereof; nor thereof, nor of any part thereof, to acquit and
discharge the said I H. his Heirs, etc. of the same Recognizance. And R B. and
one S. P. shall also convey and assure unto H. and S. a decimal Portion or
Pension with the appurtenances belonging to the Monastery of, etc. and that H.
and S. shall receive the rent thereof, until default of such surrender
aforesaid limited upon the solemnizing of the said Marriage for the full
satisfaction of the aforesaid stock for H. and portion for M.
And furthermore, that he the said R B. his, etc. or one S P. of etc. shall
also at his or their like charges, on or before the said, etc. enfeoffe,
confirm and assure unto the said C. and M. and the Heirs of their two bodies
lawfully to be begotten; and for default of such issue, to the right heirs of
the said C for ever, all that Pension or decimal Portion, with the
appurtenances, lying and being in, etc. sometimes belonging to the late
dissolved Monastery of, etc. and late parcel of the possession thereof: And
that he the said C his etc. shall have the rents and benefits of the same
customary Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and of the same Pension or Decimal,
from the day of the date hereof, during and until the said etc. Or that in
default of such surrender, conveyance and assurance within the time above
limited, as before is expressed, shall truly pay unto the said T P his, etc. on
the etc. to the use of the said C and M their etc. (if Marriage shall be in the
mean time between them solemnized) the sum of etc. in full satisfaction as
well of and for the said stock of etc. so paid into the hands of the said R. As
also in satisfaction of the said portion of, etc. due unto the said M. Or no
such solemnization of Marriage between them, being then or in the mean time
had, shall truly unto the said T P. his etc. to the use of the said C H his
etc. the said sum of etc. in full satisfaction and discharge of the said
sum of etc. by the said T P imposed or paid into the hands of the said R B.
Now this Indenture further witnesses, that the said R B, in consideration of
the premises, Consideration and Demise.
and for other good considerations him moving; Has bargained, sold, etc. unto
the said T P, as well the said Letters Patents, and all and singular the
premises thereby demised, and conveyances thereupon made and passed, as
aforesaid; as also all and singular his right, estate, title, interest, use,
possession, reversion, property, claim, term of years, and demand
whatsoever, of, in and to the same. To have and to hold the said Letters
patents, and premises thereby demised, Habend.
and conveyances aforesaid, and all and singular his right, estate, title
interest, use, possession, reversion, property, claim, term of years and
demand whatsoever, of, in and to the same, unto the said T P his etc. from the
day of the date hereof, forthwards, during and until the full end, expiration,
and accomplishment of all the residue yet to come and unexpired of the said
term of, etc. in and by the said Letters patents granted. R B covenants, that
upon breach or default the premises are to continue unto T P clear from all
other and former bargains, and also to be saved harmless from all
incombrances whatsoever.
And the said R B for himself, his, etc. Covenanteth, etc. to and with the
said T P his etc. by these presents. That all and singular the premises above
by these presents bargained and sold, or mentioned, or hereby to be bargained
and sold the day of the date of these presents, and also at the ensealing and
delivery hereof, are and be, and in the day wherein breach or default shall be
made of or in performance of the promise aforesaid, or in some part thereof,
shall be and continue unto the said T P his etc. clear and clearly acquitted
and discharged, or otherwise by him the said R B his, etc. saved harmless of
and from all and singular former bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases,
forfeitures, morgages, re-entry, cause and causes of forfeiture and re-entry,
and of and from all other charges, titles, troubles and incombrances
whatsoever, had made, committed, omitted, done or suffered, or to be had, made
committed, etc by the said R B his, etc or any other person or persons
whatsoever, The Rent reserved to be paid by the Leassee. Rent reserved upon
two Indentures for default of payment also to be and continue to T P upon the
first breach of any part of the same.
by his or their means, assent, consent; or procurement (the yearly rent
aforesaid, and all and singular the Covenants in the same Letters patents
contained which on the part and behalf of the Leassee or Farmor of the premises
shall be henceforth due and performed. And one Indenture of Lease, dated, etc.
of five Messuages or Tenements adjoining together, parcel of the same premises,
then or late in the several tenures or occupations of, etc. with certain dales
and hills of Lands thereunto adjoining; one other parcel of ground, late also
in the tenure of etc. containing by estimation, etc. or thereabouts, and a Lyme
kiln thereupon erected, for the term of etc. commencing from the Feast of St.
Michael etc. next ensuing the date of the same Indenture of Lease, whereupon
the yearly rent of etc is reserved; and one other Indenture of Lease made unto
I H, of etc. dated etc. of the Easternmost of the said two Water-mils called
etc. and the Oatmeal mil over the same, and certain Rooms, Lands and other
things therein particularly named, for the term of etc. commencing from etc.
whereupon the yearly rent of, etc. is reserved: (All which rents which shall
from and after the first breach of any part of the same proviso, continue due
and payable unto the said T P his etc. only excepted and fore-prized.) Proviso,
that if R B shall truly perform the aforesaid promise, then this present
Indenture of bargain and sale to be void, and the Letters patents shall be
re-delivered by the said T P to R B.
Provided always, and it is nevertheless covenanted, granted and agreed upon
by and between the same parties; and the said T P for him, etc. does covenant,
etc. to and with the said R B his etc. by these presents, in manner and form
following; that is to say, That if the said R B his etc. do and shall well and
truly perform the aforesaid promise according to the tenor and true meaning of
these presents; That then and from thenceforth, that is to say, from and after
the day wherein the same promise shall be fully performed, this present
Indenture of bargain and sale shall be void and of none effect. And that then
also, or at any time hereafter, upon the reasonable request of the said R B his
etc. to be unto him the said T P his etc. in that behalf made, the said Letters
patents and conveyances shall be re-delivered unto the said R his etc. safe and
uncancelled, and without alteration of the property thereof, or of the premises
thereby demised, or any part thereof, in the mean space to be done by the said
T P his etc. in any wise, and the counter-part of the these presents to be
cancelled. Covenant, that the said R B shall receive the profits of the
premises until breach shall be made in the promise aforesaid.
And further, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R B his etc.
to have and enjoy all and singular the premises by the same Letters patents
demised, and the rents and profits thereof, to his and their own use, to
receive and take during and until some breach or default shall be made of or in
the promise aforesaid, without any let or trouble of the said T P his etc. any
thing before in these presents contained etc. And furthermore, that upon due
performance of the promise above mentioned, they the said C and M their etc.
shall make, enseal, and as their Deed deliver unto the said R B and unto E his
wife, late the Wife and Administratrix of the above named I S, one acquittance
of the money, goods and chattels to her due. Also agreed, that upon payment of
100 l. and the Marriage also solemnized, that the^ all Writings and Assurances
by the said, R B or by the said I H and S P. or either of them concerning the
premises, shall be delivered to the said, R B and his heirs for ever, without
any incombrance.
And finally, that upon payment of the said sum of etc. on or before etc.
according to the same promise (such marriage as is before mentioned being then
in the mean time solemnized) or the payment of the said sum of 100 l. on or
before etc. according to the promise abovesaid, such marriage being during the
said time unsolemnized: That then and from thenceforth all Writings,
Conveyances and Assurances by the said R B his etc. or by the said I H or S P
or either of them, their or either of their, etc. touching the premises, or any
thing thereto incident, shall be delivered to the said R his etc. and shall be
and enure to the only use and benefit of the said R his, etc. for ever, without
any incombrance to be had, made, or done by the said C and M or either of them,
or the heirs of the said C or any of them in any wise.

In witness, etc.

Bargain and Sale of Tithes, for three years; Penned by William Noy Esquire.
The Grant.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between, etc. Witnesses, That for the consideration
hereafter mentioned, the said R W has given, granted, bargained and sold, and
by these presents does clearly give, etc. unto the said I W all that his three
years Tyths of corn and grain, The sorts of Grain.
viz etc. ( name the corn) belonging to the said Parsonage, growing, renewing,
arising or being within the said Parish of B. and all the tytheable places of
the same Parish, in such and as large and ample manner and form as they have
been usually heretofore paid to the said Parson (except and reserved to the
said Parson all the straw coming of all the wheat and rye, and also all the
tithes of those parcels of ground, hereafter particularly mentioned and
recited, viz (name the ground etc.) A Covenant, that the said tithe corn shall
be enjoyed without the let or hindrance of any Person or Persons, and have
haife the Barn to use, called the Great barn next the tithe barn, for term
of three years, if the Parson shall so long live.
And the said Parson for him, etc. does covenant, etc. to and with the said I W
his, etc. in form following, viz. That he the said I W his etc. shall and may
lawfully have, take, gather, receive and for ever enjoy all the said tithe Corn
before given and granted (except before excepted) without any lawful let,
eviction, recovery or interruption of any person or persons whatsoever (if the
said Parson shall live until the said tithe corn (except before excepted) shall
or conveniently may be gotten into the Barn.) And that he the said I his, etc.
shall and may have the free and peaceale use and occupation of all the whole
Tythe-barn, and the moiety or one half of the great barn, which half is next
the tithe barn belonging to the now dwelling house of the said Parson in B
aforesaid, and of the whose lower barn commonly called, etc. therein to lay and
bestow corn and grain, lately in the occupation of etc. and also of two lofts
in the now dwelling house of the said Parson severally with lock and key,
therein to lay and bestow the said tithe corn and grain, being likewise lately
in the occupation of etc. and free and quiet access, way and passage with his
horse, cart and carriages into and from every of the said barns, by and through
the usual ways and passages now used and accustomed to the same, and free and
quiet access and recourse for and from the said lofts at all lawful and due
times and hours, at all times and from time to time hereafter until the Feast
of, etc. without any lawful let or interruption of any person or persons
whatsoever (if the said Parson shall so long live, or that his Executor or
Assigns shall or may so long have, hold, occupy and enjoy the aforesaid now
dwelling house of the said Parson.) And also, Covenant, that if any the tithe
be detained, the Parson at his costs and charges shall sue for the same, and
free the Leassee from the said charge, and what shall be obtained by suit, is
to be paid the Leasee or his Assigns.
that if any of the Tithes (except before excepted; And also, except the tithe
of the ground belonging to the Vicar or Church which one W P now occupies)
shall be detained, and not duly set forth and paid as they ought, then the said
Parson at his own proper costs and charges shall with all convenient expedition
attempt and commence suit against all and every the Deteiner and deteiners of
the same Tithes (except before excepted) and shall effectually without fraud,
covin or delay, prosecute all and every such suit and suits to an end, and shall
do his endeavor to obtain and get all that which by any Indenture or Sentence
shall be given to him in recompense of the said Tithes so detained in every and
any such suit and suits. And shall truly pay unto the said I his etc. all and
every such sum and sums of money as shall be paid unto him by reason of any
such suits, or of any order or composition made or taken for the same Tithes
from time to time within four days next after the receipt or attaining
thereof; so that due, The consideration to be paid for the said Tithes, and the
uses of payments.
just and lawful proof be made thereof by the said I or his Assigns. In
consideration whereof he the said I W his etc. covenanteth, etc. to and with
the said Parson, his etc. in manner and form following viz. That he the said I,
his etc. shall and will well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said
Parson, his etc. at or in, etc. the sum of etc. in form following, viz. (name
the days, etc.) without fraud or delay. And that he the said I his etc. shall
lay and bestow all the tithe wheat and rye in the said lower Barn, called etc.
and not elsewhere, and shall from time to time after the same shall be inned,
thresh out all the said wheat and rye as he shall be thereunto required by the
said Parson, and as the same may conveniently be done, without the prejudice or
hurt of the the said I W. Covenant, that I W shall rid the barn by such a day.
And further, that his Executors or Assigns shall not only at and before the
said Feast of etc. rid and clear the said Barnes and every of them of all their
corn, straw, and stuff; but also well and sufficiently repair and amend all such
hurts, harms, spoils, wafts and decays as shall happen to come and be made or
done to the said barns or any of them, by, through, for or in the default,
negligence or means of the said I his, Covenant to repair the barn during the
time I VV shall hold it.
etc. And also that he the said I W his etc. shall at his or their own proper
costs and charges well and truly deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the said
Parson, his etc. for his or their own proper provision of house out of the best
of the Tithe corn as it rises indifferently, eight quarters of wheat with
heaps to every quarter, at the price of etc. and six quarters of rye at the
price of etc, whereof seven quarters of wheat, and four quarters of Rye after
the time of harvest, shall be delivered at all times when the same shall be
demanded, or whenever the same seven quarters of wheat, and four quarters of
rye shall be ready to be delivered; and the other quarter of wheat, and three
quarters of rye to be delivered as the said Parson shall spend and demand the
same. Covenant to deliver thirty quarter of barley to the Parson so soon as
that can be threshed out.
And also shall and will deliver, or cause to be delivered at the place and barn
aforesaid, thirty quarters of barley, with heaps to every quarter, with as
convenient speed as the same may be threshed, to the hands of the said Parson,
his etc. so as the said Parson, his etc. shall well and truly repay unto the said
I W his etc. the like quantity of thirty quarters of barley within as
convenient time as he the said Parson or his Assigns shall thresh the said corn
out of his barn at home. And further, that he the said I W, his etc. shall at
his or their like proper costs and charges upon reasonable request made,
provide for the said R W his etc. so much seed or seed-rye of the best,
Covenant that the said I W. shall provide so much seed-rye of the best, with
pease and tares paying so much as I W shall lay out for the same corn, to sow a
certain piece of ground.
as will sow so much Land at Woodcock as the said I W, H M and I did lately sow
together with pease and tares, the said R paying so much money as the said I
shall give, disburse and lay out for the same. Proviso, that if the Parson shall
die and depart this life before I W shall have inned his said tithe, that from
thenceforth the payments shall cease; and the Executors and Administrators of
the said Parson shall pay to the said I W the charges of so much as is inned
and gathered in.
Provided always, and it is plainly and expressly meant, covenanted, granted,
conditioned and agreed by and between the said parties, That if the said Parson
shall dye and depart this world, before the said I his etc. shall or may
lawfully and conveniently have gathered, taken away or inned all the said tithe
corn before given and granted, (except before excepted) That then and from
thenceforth all and every the payments of the said sum of, etc. shall cease and
not be paid, this Indenture and every covenant and article herein mentioned
(except the covenant hereunder mentioned) shall be utterly void and of none
effect, any thing, etc. And the said Parson for him, etc. does covenant to and
with the said I W his etc. by these presents, That if the said Parson shall die
and depart this world before all the said Tithe corn (except before excepted)
shall or may conveniently be gathered or inned, that then the Executors or
Administrators of the said Parson shall and will well and truly pay or cause to be
paid to the said I W his, etc. all the charges for the inning and gathering so
much thereof as then shall be inned or gathered, upon a true account thereof to
be delivered to the said Executors or Administrators of the said Parson,
without fraud or covin.

In witness, etc.

A bargain and sale of some Lands, as also a Lease of other; as also a Letter
of Attorney irrevocable for receiving the profits of other Lands, for
satisfaction of debts.
Recital of the Bond or Obligation wherein A B is bound for C C.
THis INDENTVRE made etc. Between, etc. Witnesses. That whereas the said A B
at the special instance and request, and for the only Debt of the said C D
stands, obliged with the said C D and one R D of etc. in the sum of, etc.
to one T A of etc. for the payment of etc. to the said T A, on etc. next
ensuing, as by the obligation thereof made bearing date etc. may appear. And
whereas also the said A B, at the like special instance and request, and for
the only debt of the said C D stands obliged with the said C and the said R
D in the sum of, etc. to one, E R etc. for the payment of etc. on etc. next
ensuing, as by the obligation thereof made, etc. ^^^t supra. Certain sums of
money due to A B from C D.
And whereas also the said C D is likewise truly indebted and does owe unto him
the said A B diverse several sums of money ^ent by the said A B to the said C
at several times, amounting in the whole to the sum of etc. And also for that
the said A B, instantly before the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
has paid, satisfied and delivered the sum of, The consideration to save A.
B. harmeless.
etc. in ready money to the said C D. Now this Indenture further witnesses,
that as well for and in consideration of the discharge of the said several sums
of money due and owing by the said C to the said A B, as also for and toward
the satisfaction and discharge of the said several bonds whereby they the said
C, A and R stand severally obliged, at the request, and for the only debt of
the said C, and by and through which they the said A and R were and are like to
be damnified: The Grant.
The said C D has given, granted, bargained, sold, aliened and assigned, and
by these presents does, etc. unto the said A B his etc. all that Message or
Tenement, with the appurtenances, called etc. situate, etc. now or late in the
tenure or occupation of, etc. And likewise for the consideration aforesaid, he
the said C. D. has granted, And also for the consideration aforesaid, has
further granted.
demised and to farm letten, and by these presents does, etc. unto the said A.
B. his, etc. all that Message or Tenement, Garden and Orchard, with the
appurtenances, situate, lying and being in, etc. late in the tenure, bolding
or occupation of, etc. Habend.
To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement, and all singular the
premises, with the appurtenances, to him the said A. B. his, etc. for and
during all the time and term of, etc. fully to be complete and ended (if I.
Wife of the said C. do so long live:) A Letter of Attorney to A. B. from C. D.
for to receive and enjoy the premises to his own proper use, and to let and set
the premises according to the custom of the said Manor.
And the said C.D. for the consideration aforesaid, does hereby authorize,
constitute and appoint the said A. B. his true and lawful Attorney,
irrevokable, to take, receive, perceive and enjoy to his own proper use and
behoof, all and singular the rents, profits, commodities and emoluments
whatsoever, yearly, and from time to time coming or arising, of all or any the
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hered^^^^nts, cop^-hold, and free hold,
situate, etc. now or late in the several tenures of etc. or either of them,
with free liberty and authority for him the said A. B. to convert, dispose and
employ the premises, or any part thereof, to his own use, or by leasing or
demising the same yearly, or otherwise, for any number of years whatsoever, to
others according to the custom of the Manor wherein the same lies, will
permit and suffer Covenant that C.D. shall suffer the said A. B. to enjoy
premises; without any let or hindrance, or adnulling any authority given.
And the said C. D. etc. does Covenant, etc. to and with the said A. B. etc.
That he the said C.D. shall and will from time to time permit and suffer the
said A.B. to enjoy the same premises, and every part thereof, without revocation
or adnullation of any authority given by these presents. And C. D. Covenanteth
to do all things fitting for the perfecting a good estate.
And shall at all times, and from time to time make, do and execute all and
every other matter and thing for the assuring and perfecting a good estate in
the premises, or any part thereof, to him the said A. B. for the whole term of,
etc. or any other term of years, (if I. the Wife of the said C. so long live:)
And the said C D. for the consideration aforesaid, has granted, etc. unto the
said A.B. and his Assigns, all and singular the goods, plate, bousholdstuffe,
and other things whatsoever of him the said C. D. and I. his Wife, or either of
them in the said Message or Tenement, called, etc. or elsewhere abiding,
resting or remaining, contained, mentioned and expressed in a Schedule or
Inventory to these presents annexed. To have, hold and enjoy the same, and
every part thereof, to him the said A B. his, etc. to his and their sole proper
use and behoof. And the said C. D. etc. Covenanteth, etc. to and with the said
A. B. etc. that it shall and may be lawful for him the said A. B. at all times
convenient, into the said Message or Tenement, called, etc. to enter, and the
said goods and chattels before-bargained, to take and seize to his use, without
interruption of him ^he said C. his etc.

In witness etc.

A Bargain and Sale of a Message, with the appurtenanees, in Fee-Farm. Penned
by William N^y, Esquire with very good Covenants.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between, etc. Witnesses, That the said A. B. for
diverse and sundry causes and considerations him moving, Consideration.
and especially for and in consideration of, etc. to him the said A.B. by the
said C.D. well and truly contented and paid, in manner and form as hereafter in
these presents is and shall be expressed and declared; that is, to wit, 200 l.
parcel of the said sum of, etc. before the ensealing and delivery of these
presents; which said sum of 200 l. he the said A.B. for himself, his, etc.
does by these presents acknowledge and confess himself to have received by the
hands of the said C.D. and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, does
exonerate, acquit, and discharge the said C.D. his, etc. by these presents, and
the residue of the said sum of, etc. to be by him the said C.D. his, etc. to
him the said A.B. well and truly contented and paid in manner and form as
hereafter in and by these presents is and shall be expressed, set down and
declared. Grant.
Has given, etc. and to perpetual Fee-Farm demised, and by these presents
does, etc. unto the said C.D. his Heirs and Assigns all that his Message or
Tenement with the appurtenances now or late in the tenure and occupation of,
etc. or of his Assigns situate, lying and being in, etc. together with all and
singular Barns, Stables, Kilnes, Ox-houses, and other edifices and buildings,
orchards, gardens, courts, yards, lands, tenements, meadows, leasowes,
pastures, feedings, woods, underwoods, waters, commons, heaths, turbaries,
mores, marshes, fishings, fishyards, rents, reversions, services, liberties and
hereditaments whatsoever, with all and singular their appurtenances to the said
Message or Tenement, etc. belonging or in any wise appertaining, or demised,
leased or occupied together with the same Message or Tenement, or known,
reputed, accepted or taken to be part, parcel, or member thereof of whatsoever
nature, quality, or degree, the same or any of them be, or by what name or
title soever the same or any of them be named, called, or known, situate,
lying and being in, etc. or elsewhere within the said County of, etc. together
with all and singular deeds, charters, writings, escripts and mynuments
whatsoever concerning the said Message or Tenement, and other the premises,
with their appurtenances, or any part or parcel thereof which he the said A.B.
now has, may have, or at any time hereafter lawfully come by without suit in
law: To have and to hold, Habend. in Fee-Farm.
occupy and enjoy all and singular the said Message or Tenement, with the
appurtenances, together with all and every the said barns, stables, kilnes,
hey-houses, and other edifices and buildings, orchards, etc. ut supra, and
other the premises, with all and singular their appurtenances, as it aforesaid,
together with all and every the said deeds, charters, writings, escripts and
mynuments whatsoever concerning the same premises, or any part or parcel
thereof unto the said C. D. his, etc. to his and their own only proper use and
behoof in prepetual Fee-Farm for ever. Reddend.
Yielding and paying therefore yearly unto the said A.B. his, etc. the sum
of, etc. at the Feast of, etc. or within 10 days after either of the said
Feasts next and immediately following by equal portions for all and all manner
of suits, services, customs, duties, charges, exactions, impositions and
demands whatsover. And if it happen the said yearly rent of, etc. to be behind
and unpaid in part or in all by the space of, etc. That then it shall and may
be lawful to and for the said A.B. his, For non-payment of the rent to re-enter
and distrain.
etc. into the said Message or Tenement, and other the premises with the
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof to enter and distrain, and the
distress there found to lead, drive and carry away, and with him or them to
detain and keep until he or they be of the said yearly rent with the arrearages
thereof (if any be) well and truly satisfied and paid. And if the Rent shall be
the space of, etc. behind and unpaid, being lawfully demanded, and no
sufficient distress to be found, then the said C.D. his, etc. shall pay unto
A.B. the sum of, etc. in the name of a penalty for every such default.
And if it happen the said yearly rent of, etc. to be behind and unpaid in part
or in all by the space of; etc. after either of the said Feasts in which it
ought to be paid, as aforesaid, and the same being at the capital Message or
Tenement aforesaid lawfully demanded, and no sufficient distress in or upon
any part or parcel thereof can or may be found: That then and so often he the
said C.D. his, etc. shall or will content and pay, or cause to be contented and
paid unto the said A. B. his, etc. the sum of, etc. over and besides the said
yearly rent and the arrearages thereof for and in the name of a penalty for
every such default or non-payment of the same yearly rent so being behind and
anpaid by the space of, etc. after either of the said Feasts, as is aforesaid.
A.B. Covenateth, and E. his Wife, and all other Persons claiming hereafter any
Estate to his or their uses within the time and space of, etc. next ensuing, at
and upon the request of the said C. D. his, etc. and at his costs and charges
in the law of the said C. D. shall and will do what may be done for the better
assurance of the premises by any means whatsoever; so that the warranty do not
ex^end any further then herein is expressed.
And the said A.B. for him, etc. Covenanteth, etc. to and with the said C.D.
his, etc. and every of them by these presents, That be the said A.B. his, etc.
and E. his Wife, and all and singular other Person and Persons whatsoever any
estate having, pretending, or claiming to have to his, their, or any of their
use or uses at all and every time and times hereafter within the time and space
of, etc. next ensuing the Day of the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
and at and upon the reasonable request and demand of the said C.D. his, etc.
and at and upon his and their proper costs and charges in the Law shall and
will do, make, knowledge, execute, suffer, perfect and perform, or cause to be
done, etc. all and every such further act and acts, thing and things, devise
and devises, conveyance and conveyances, assurance and assurances whatsoever
lawful and reasonable as shall be reasonably and lawfully devised or advised by
the said C.D. his etc. or by his or their learned Counsel, etc. for the further
and better assurance and sure-making of all and singular the said Message or
Tenement with the appurtenances, and of all and singular other the premises,
and every part or parcel thereof to him the said C.D. his etc. in manner and
form aforesaid; be it by fine, feoffment, warranty, deed or deeds introlled, or
by the inrolment of these presents, or by all or any the ways and means
aforesaid, or otherwise howsoever; so that the said warranty do not extend any
further, nor against any Person or Persons, or their Heirs, other then against
him the said A.B. his, etc. and R.R. of, etc. and the Heirs and Assigns of him
the said R.R. and against R. C. of, etc. and G. C. Son and Heir apparent of
the said R. C. and the Heirs and Assigns of him the said R. R. and against R.
C. of, etc. and G.C. Son and Heir apparent of the said R.C. and the Heirs and
Assigns of either of them, and against all and singular other person and person
whatsoever, and their Heirs, any right, title, estate or interest, having,
pretending, or claiming to have of, in, or to the same premises, or any of
them, by, for, from, or under them the said A.B. R.R. R.C. and G. C. or any of
them in or by any manner of way or means whatsoever. A.B. Covenanteth that the
premises at the sealing hereof are clearly discharged and saved harmless from
all former bargains and sales, and all other engagements whatsoever.
And moreover the said A.B. for himself, etc. covenanteth, etc. to and with the
said C.D. his, etc. by these presents, That all and every the said Message or
Tenement, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, etc. and other hereditaments, and all and
singular the premises with their and every of their appurtenances at the time
of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, stand and be at all times
hereaster and from henceforth shall be, stand, remain and continue clearly
exonerated, discharged, acquitted and saved harmless of and from all manner of
former gifts, grants, bargains, sales, feoffements, alienations, entailes,
wills, uses, leases, joyntures, dowers, recognizances, statutes merchant,
statutes staple, eligits, obligations, covenants, promises, judgments,
executions, issues, fines, amerciaments, forfeitures, penalties, entries, title
of entries, entrusions, conditions, annuities, rents, rents charges, rents
secks, arrearages of rents, suits, services, heriots, duties, taxes, customs,
impositions, and all other charges, demnads and encumbrances whatsoever
heretofore had, made, knowledged, procured, caused or suffered, or hereafter to
be had, made, done etc. by or by the means or consent of them said A.B. R.R. or
either of them, or any other person or persons, or their Heirs, any estate
having, claiming or pretending to have of, in, or to the said premises, or any
part, etc. by, for, from or under them the said A. B. and R.R. or either of
them, or any other Person or Persons (the said yearly rent of, etc. in and by
these presents above expressed, limited, and reserved to be paid yearly, and
payable to him the said A.B. his, etc. in form aforesaid, and one lease or
demise heretofore made, etc. by Indenture Dated, etc. for and during the term
of, etc. them and from thenceforth next and immediately following, and the
several sums of money in and by these presents hereafter mentioned, limited
and appointed to be paid to said A. B. his, etc. for the whole, clear and
absolute purchase of the said Message or Tenement, and other the premises,
with the appurtenances in manner and form aforesaid only excepted and
foreprized.) A. B. Covenants to save and keep harmless the said premises with
the appurtenances, as also the said C. D. his, etc. their and every of their
Lands, Goods and Chattels, not only against the aforesaid, etc. but also
against the, etc. of, etc. or by what name soever they be called, from all
rent-services, etc.
And further, the said A. B. for himself, his, etc. That he the said A. B. his,
etc. shall and will from time to time, and at all and every time and times
hereafter, and from henceforth, clearly exonerate, acquit, discharge and save
harmless as well the said Message or Tenement, and all and singular the
premises, with the appurtenances; as also him the said C. D. his, etc. and his
and their and every of their Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, not only
against the aforesaid, etc. his, etc. but also against, etc. of, etc. by
whatsoever name or names they the said, etc. now are, is, or shall be called,
named or incorporated, as well of and from all and singular rents, services,
arrearages, suits of Courts, Heriots, reliefes, duties, customs and demands
whatsoever, at any time or times hereafter due, payable or demandable, or to be
claimed and demanded as due out of, for or by reason of the same premises, or
any part or parcel thereof, by him the said C. G. his, etc. and them the said,
etc. of, etc. or any of them; as also all and all manner of distresses,
penalties, forfeitures, entries, titles of entries, actions, suits, judgments,
executions, troubles, costs, charges and other encumbrances whatsoever, of, for
or by reason of any such rents, services, arrearages, suits of Courts, Heriots,
reliefs, duties, customs or demands, or any of them whatsoever. In
consideration whereof, In consideration C.D. covenanteth to pay to A. B. the
sum of, etc. on the Feasts, etc. in full discharge of the purchase of Messuages,
etc.
the said C.D. for himself, his, etc. does Covenant, etc. to and with the said
A.B. his, etc. by these presents, That he the said C.D. his, etc. shall and
will well and truly content and pay, or cause, etc. unto the said A. B. his,
etc. the sum of, etc. in manner and form following, viz. at or on the Feast,
etc. next coming after the date hereof, between the hours of, etc. in the
afternoon of the same day, within, etc. or at or in the place where the said
outer Pentice now stands, the sum of, etc. or at or on the Feast, etc.
which shall be in, etc. between the like hours of, etc. in the afternoon of
the same day, and within or at the place aforesaid, the sum of, etc. for the
last payment and residue of all and singular the fame sum of etc. and in full
satisfaction, discharge and entire payment of the same, for and in
consideration of the full, clear and absolute purchase of the said Message or
Tenement, and other the premises, with all and singular their appurtenances, in
manner and form aforesaid, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents. Proviso that the said A. B. shall seal and deliver at the request of
C.D. and at the costs of the said C.D. in the Law, as the Deed of him the said
A.B. unto the said C.D. upon every payment, a good and lawful acquittance in
writing under his hand and seal, testifying the payment of the same.
Provided always, and nevertheless the said A. B. for him, his, etc.
covenanteth, etc. to and with the said C.D. his, etc. by these presents, That
he the said A. B. his, etc. shall and will at and upon the request and demand
of the said C. D. his, etc. seal and deliver, and lawfully tender and offer to
seal and deliver as the Deed of him the said A.B. his, etc. unto him the said
C.D. his, etc. at and upon every payment, or other sufficient satisfaction and
discharge of every of the said sums of, etc. so to him the said A. his, etc.
to be had or made by him the said C.D. his, etc. as is aforesaid, one good,
sufficient and lawful acquittance in writing, subscribed with the hand, and
sealed with the seal of him the said A. B. his, etc. so receiving the said
sums, as is aforesaid, testifying, acknowledging and averting the payment and
receipt of the same: These Indentures, or any thing, clause, article, covenant,
proviso or sentence therein contained to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstnading. Proviso, and agreed by the saia Parties, that if default of
payment be made by C.D. and A. B. tendering and offering acquittance or
acquittances in writting, testifying the payment and receipt of the same: that
then it shall be lawful for the said A. B. and his, etc. to re-enter, and the
same to have again and enjoy as in their former right, any thing in these
presents notwithstanding.
Provided always, and it is, also Covenanted, granted and agreed by and
between the said Parties, and the said C. his, etc. does Covenant, etc. That if
default of payment be hereafter had or made of or in any of the said payments
of any the said several sums of money last before mentioned, at any of the
said several Feastd-ayes in which the same, or any of them, are by these
presents above limited and appointed to be paid, or otherwise, if the said
sums or any of them, be not duly and fully satisfied and discharged according
to the true intent and meaning of these presents, and he the said A. B. his,
etc. tendering and offering unto him the said C. D. his, etc. such sufficient
and lawful acquittance or acquittances in writing, testifying the payment and
receipt of the sum, as in these presents is above-expressed and declared:
That then and at all times from thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful to and
for him the said A.B. his, etc. into all and singular the said Message or
Tenement, and all other the premises, with their appurtenances, wholly to
re-enter, and the same to have again, repossesse, and re-enjoy, as in his or
their former right or title and estate: This Indenture, or any thing, clause of
covenant therein, etc. notwithstanding. Provided finally, and moreover it is
the true intent and meaning of these presents, and of the said Parties to the
same; and the said A. B. for him, etc. does covenant, A. B. Covenanteth, that
if the said C.D. his, etc. shall by any manner of menas be outed of the
premises by any person to be recovered or lawfully evicted out of the
possession of the said C. D. by due course of Law, then the said A. B. upon the
reasonable request of the said C.D. his, etc. at such Days and Feasts in these
presents expressed, shall truly content and pay to the said C.D. all such sum
and sums of moneys received by the said A.B. before the said eviction decree.
etc. That if in case it fortune the said Message or Tenement, and other the
premises, or any of them, or any part or parcel thereof, at any time or times
hereafter to be by any person or persons whatsoever, recovered, or otherwise
lawfully evicted from against, or out of the possesion of him the said C.D.
his, etc. by due order or course of Law, of, in or to the same premises, or any
of them. Or if it happen any Decree in or upon any Bill of Complaint, or any
Judgment or Verdict in any suit, writ or action, real, personal or in plea
whatsoever to pass or be given against him the said C.D. his, etc. or any of
them, or against his, their or any of their rights, titles or interests of, in
and to the same premises, or any part thereof, is or shall be disposed,
avoided, adnulled, defeated or undone, without fraud o^ covin. That then and in
such case, he the said A.B. his, etc. or some of them within, etc. next after
such recovery, eviction, decree, judgment or verdict so to be had, given and
passed, as aforesaid, at and upon the reasonable request and demand of the said
C.D. his, etc. and at such days, times and Feasts, and in such manner and
form, as in and by these presents shall be hereafter expressed, limited and
appointed, shall and will well and truly content, satisfy and pay, and cause
to be satisfied, contented and repaid unto him the said C.D. his, etc. all and
every such and the like sum and sums of money as he the said A. B. his, etc.
shall then before, that is, Judgment or Verdict of the said C. D. his, etc. in
consideration of the said purchase.
to wit, before any such recovery, eviction, decree, judgment or verdict, as is
aforesaid, have had or received of, at or by the hands of him the said C.D.
his, etc. or any of them, for or in consideration of the said purchase of the
said Message or Tenement, and other the premises so as is before said; that
is, to wit, by such like payments, portions, and several sums, as he the said
A.B. his etc. shall have had or received the same: The first payment to be made
within, etc. next after recovery, eviction, decree, judgment or verdict so to
be had, pass, or given, a^ the second payment at, etc.
The first payment thereof to be had and made within, etc. next after such
recovery, eviction, decree, judgment or verdict so to be had, passed or given,
as aforesaid, at or within the outer Pentice, etc. and the second and next
payment thereof to be had, etc. and made in and upon the Feast Day of, etc.
then next and immediately following, between the hours of, etc. in the
afternoon of the same day, and at or in the place aforesaid, and so forth
yearly at the like days of, etc. and between the like hours of, etc. in the
afternoon of every such Feast day of, etc. and at or in the place aforesaid,
until every such or the like sum or sums of money as he the said A. B. his,
etc. or any of them, shall so then before any such recovery, eviction, etc.
have had or received at, of or by the hands of him the said C.D. his, etc. or
any of them, for or in consideration of the said purchase of the said Message
or Tenement, and other the premises, as is aforesaid, be or shall be by him the
said A. B. his, etc. unto him the said C.D. his, etc. well and truly satisfied,
contented and paid, without fraud, covin or delay: This Indenture, or any
thing, clause, proviso, covenant or matter therein contained, or any other
matter or thing whatsoever to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

In Witness, etc.

An Indenture of a Lease of a House in London. Penned by Robert Mason, Esquire.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between, etc. Witnesses, That whereas E. A., of,
etc. by his Indenture of Lease, Consideration. Grant.
or Deed indented, bearing date, etc. for the consideration therein mentioned,
did demise, grant and to farm let unto the said A. M. all that Message, House
or Tenement, with all and singular Cellers, Recital.
Sollars, Chambers, Yards, Lights. Watercourses, Sinks, Gutters, Easements,
Commodities and Appurtenances whatsoever thereunto belonging or appertaining,
set, lying near, etc. abutting next and upon, etc. on the North, and upon the
Tenement there, then in the occupation of, etc. on the East; and the Alley or
way there, leading to the Churchyard aforesaid, on the West; together with
free ingresse, egresse and regresse, course and recourse into and from the Well
in the alley belonging to the said Message or Tenement of the said E. A. there
at all times, and from time to time during the said term by the said Indenture
demised. To have and to hold, Habend. and Reddend. The Confirmation of the Wife
for the sale of the said Lease for the term of years to come by the said
Indenture, and under the Covenants and Articles in the said Indenture appears.
etc. Yielding and paying, etc. as by the said Indenture, amongst, etc. may
appear. And whereas also the said E. A. and M. his Wife, by a certain writing
or poll-deed, Dated, etc. acknowledged by the said E. A. and M. before W. F.
Sergeant at Law, and Recorder of the City of London, and H. P. Alderman of the
same City, the said M. being solely thereupon examined, according to the
custom of the same City, did confirm, ratify, and allow unto the said A. M.
his, etc. the said Grant, Demise and term of years, and all things in the said
Deed indented contained or specified, and the whole estate, interest and term
of years that the said A.M. then had, or he, his Executors, etc. or any of
them, then after should or might then have to come in the said Message, House
or Tenement, and other the premises, with the appurtenances, by any means, by
reason of the said Grant, Demise or Lease made by the said E. A. to the said A.
M. To have, hold, A. M. since lawfully seized of the premises, and sithence
come unto D. L. by virtue of the Will made by A. M. and is lawfully possessed
thereof.
possess and enjoy the same for the term of years then to come in the said
Indenture of Lease, under the Reservations, Covenants and Articles in the same
Indenture of Demise; as by the said poll-deed, or writing of Confirmation, more
at large may also appear; the estate, interest and term of years to come, of
which said A. M. of and in the said premises is sithence lawfully come unto the
said D. L. by virtue of the execution of the last Will and Testament of the
said A. and the said D. L. is now lawfully possessed thereof. T.W. stands
bound for D. L. and also is otherwise indebted unto T.W. and in consideration
thereof, and for saving the said T.W. harmless from the sa^d Obligation, and
for the same payment thereof, has granted the said Message or House, with all
the goods, Implements and household stuff to the said T. W. with all the
estate, right and title of the said D. L.
And whereas also the said T.W. at the request of the said D. L. and for her
debt, together with her, by one Obligation bearing date, etc. stand jointly and
severally obliged and bound unto S.R. and M. his Wife, in the sum of, etc.
with condition endorsed for the payment of, etc. upon the, etc. at or within,
etc. as by the said Obligation, etc. may appear. And where also the said D. L.
is duly indebted unto the said T.W. in the sum of, etc. Now this Indenture
further witnesses, That the said D. L. as well for and in consideration of the
indemnity and saving harmless of the said T.W. of and from the said
Obligation of, etc. as also for the security and sure payment of the sad sum
of, etc. Has given, etc. unto the said T.W. the aforesaid Message, House or
Tenement by the said Indenture of Lease demised, and all the goods, implements,
hangings and housholdstuffe of the said D. now remaining and being within or
about the said Message or Tenement, and also all the estate, right, title,
interest, use, possession, reversion, claim, property, demand and term of years
whatsoever, which she the said D.L. or any other Person or Persons to her use,
may, can, should, might or ought to have, claim or demand of, in or to the said
Message, House or Tenement, and all other the premises, with the
appurtenances, by the said Indenture demised, by virtue of the said Indenture
of Lease and Deed of confirmation, or by force of the last Will and Testament
of the said A. M. or otherwise howsoever, together also with the same Indenture
of Lease and Deed-poll, Habend. the right and title whatsoever of the said D.L.
in the said house, with the goods, unto the said T. W. during the time to come
with the said Indenture of Lease.
or writing of confirmation. To have and to hold the said Message, House or
Tenement, with the appurtenances, and all the said estate, right, title,
interest, use, possession, reversion, claim, property, demand and term of years
whatsoever, of her the said D.L. of, in and to the said Message or Tenement,
and premises, together with the same Indenture of Lease ann poll-deed
aforesaid, unto the said T.W. his, etc. from the day of the date hereof
forthwards, for and during so long time, and such residue and so many years as
are yet to come and unexpired of the said term of, etc. in and by the said
Indenture of Lease granted: And to have and to hold all the said goods,
implements, hangings and housholdstuffe of the said D.L. now remaining or being
in or about the said Message or Tenement, unto the said T.W. his, etc. to his
and their own proper use for ever. D.L. Covenants, that the said Indenture of
Lease is at the sealing of these presents a good and sufficient Lease in Law,
and in full force, and that she the said D. L. is lawfully interessed, and has
full power to grant and sell the same.
And the said D.L. for her, etc. Covenanteth, etc. to and with the said T.W.
his, etc. by these presents, in manner and form following, viz. That the said
Indenture of Lease the day of the date hereof, and at the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, is a good, sure and sufficient Lease in the Law,
and stands in full force and effect; and that she the said D.L. the day of
the date hereof, at the ensealing and delivery hereof, is lawfully interessed
in the said Lease, and premises thereby demised, and has full power, good
right, and lawful authority to grant, bargain and sell the said Indenture of
Lease, and all other the premises by the said Indenture mentioned to be
demised, or hereby mentioned to be bargained and sold, in manner and form
aforesaid. And also, the said D.L. for her, etc. D. L. Covenants, That the
premises are free and clear from all former bargains, and free from all
encumbrances, the said yearly rent of the premises reserved.
Covenanteth, etc. to and with the said T.W. his, etc. by these presents, That
the same Indenture of Lease, and the said Message, House or Tenement, with the
appurtenances, and all other the premises hereby mentioned or intended to be
bargained and sold, at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, are and
be, and so shall continue during the residue of the said term of, etc. yet to
come, free, clear and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged of and from
all and all manner of former bargains, etc. (that is is free from encumbrances)
(the said yearly rent of, etc. by the said Indenture reserved, and all other
the Covenants and Agreements in the same Indenture contained on the Tenants
behalf, from henceforth to be paid and performed, only excepted and
foreprized. Proviso, That if D.L. shall on the, etc. pay unto the said T.W. the
sum of, etc. then the bargain, sale and assignment to be void and if default be
made in the payment of the said sums, then T.W. is to enjoy the said premises
without the (...) disturb^n^^ of the said (...) or her. etc.
Provided always, and it is agreed by and between the said Parties to these
presents, that if the said D. L. her, etc. or any of them, do well and truly
pay or cause to be paid, etc. That then this present bargain, sale and
assignment of the said Lease, and other the premises, shall be to all intents
and purposes void and of none effect. And further, the said D. L. for her, etc.
Covenanteth, etc. to and with the said T. VV. his, etc. That he the said T.VV.
his, etc. from and after default of payment shall be made in any the several
sums of, etc. shall and my peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy
the said Message, House or Tenement, with the appurtenances, and perceive,
receive and take the issues and profits of the premises hereby mentioned to be
bargained and sold, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents,
without the let, trouble, disturbance, or molestation, or eviction of the said
D. L. her, etc. or any of them, or of any other Person or Persons whatsoever.
And further, upon the payment of the said sum, etc. unto the said T.W. by D.L.
the said T. W. shall and will deliver up unto the said D. L. her, etc. the said
Indenture of Lease or writing of confirmation, safe, whole and uncancelled,
together with the counterpart of these presents, and one Obligation of the date
thereof, wherein D. L. stands bound for performance of Covenants, and true
payment of the rent.
And the said T.VV. for him, etc. Covenanteth, etc. to and with the said D. L.
her, etc. that she the said D. L. her, etc. until desault shall be made in
payment of the said several sums of, etc. or either of them, the said Message,
House or Tenement, with the appurtenances, and the rents and profits of the
premises, shall and may peaceably and quietly have, hold, possess and enjoy,
without any let, trouble, disturbance, molestation, eviction or expulsion of
the said T.VV. his, etc. this Indenture, etc. notwithstanding. And further,
that upon such full payment of the said several sums of, etc. the said T.VV.
his, etc. shall and will re-deliver, or cause to be re-delivered unto the said
D.L. her, etc. the said Indenture of Lease and poll-deed or writing of
confirmation, safe, whole, uncancelled and undefaced, together with the
counterpart of these present Indentures of assignment under the hand and seal
of the said D.L. and one Obligation of the date hereof, wherein the said D.L.
stands bound for performance of the Covenants contained in these presents, to
be cancelled and made void. And lastly, the said D.L. etc. Covenanteth to and
with the said T. VV. his, etc. that she the said D.L. her, etc. shall and will
well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said E. A. his, etc. the said
yearly rent of, etc. by the said recited Indenture of Lease reserved, and also
shall perform all other the Covenants and Agreements in the said Indenture
comprised, according to the tenor of the same Lease, until default shall be
made in payment of the said several sums of, etc.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Assignment of an Obligation, with a Letter of Attorney for the
recovery of the sums of money contained in the said Obligation and Condition
thereof. Penned by R. Mason, Esquire.
E.K. and L.B. stand bound unto R. W. by Obligation, in the penalty of 100 l.
for the payment of 55 l. on, etc. and no payment is made by either of them of
the same, R.W. has made over the said Obligation, with all his right and
interest thereto, unto T. M. with a Letter of Attorney for recovery of the said
debt.
THis INDENTVRE, etc. Witnesses, That whereas E.K. together with one L. B. of
London, Gent. by one Obligation, Dated, etc. became jointly and severally
bounden unto the said R. VV. in the sum or penalty of 100 l. of, etc. with
condition thereupon endorsed for the payment of, etc. on the, etc. at the, etc.
as by the said Obligation and Condition, etc. And whereas the said 55 l. nor
any part thereof, was not paid by the said E. K. and L. B. nor either of them
to the said R.VV. at the day and place limited in the Condition of the said
recited Obligation for payment thereof, and thereby the same Obligation became
to be forfeited. Now know ye, that the said R.VV. has granted, assigned and
set over, and by these presents does grant, assign and set over the said
Obligation above-rehearsed, and all and every sum and sums of money in the said
Obligation and Condition therein contained, and all his estate, right, title,
interest, property, remedy, profit, advantage, claim and demand of, in and to
the same, and every part thereof, to the only use and behoof of the said T.M.
his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns for ever. And for the better
recovery and enjoying of the premises, the said R.VV. has assigned, made,
ordained, deputed, and in his place and stead, and by these presents does
assign, ordain, constitute and make the said T. M. his Executors and Assigns,
his true and lawful Attorney and Atturneys irrevokable, for and in the name or
names of the said R.VV. his Executors or Administrators, (but nevertheless to
and for the only use and behoof of the said T. M. his Executors and Assigns)
to sue for ask, leavy, recover, demand and receive of the said L. B. his
Heirs, Executors or Administrators, all and every such sum and sums of
money whatsoever as are due and payable unto the said R.VV. or which shall or
may be lawfully had or received by the said R. VV. his Executors or
Administrators, upon or by force, virtue or means of the Obligation aforesaid,
or by reason, force or means of any lawful action, suit, process, judgment,
execution or proceeding thereupon hereafter to be commenced, attempted,
prosecuted, obtained or had in any manner of wise: Giving and by these presents
granting unto the said T.M. his full power and lawful authority touching the
premises, for and in the name or names of him the said R. VV. his Excecutors or
Administrators, by all lawful ways and means whatsoever to the use aforesaid,
to do, say, sue, implead, prosecute, pursue, seize, sequester, arrest, attach,
imprison and to condemn; and out of Prison to deliver, and to reckon, receive,
compound, agree, release, acquit and discharge one Attorney or more under him or
them, to substitute and make, and at his or their pleasure the same to revoke.
And further, to do, follow, execute, end and determine all and every other act
and acts, thing and things whatsoever that shall be meet, needful and requisite
to be had, made or done in or about the recovery, receipt or execution of the
premises, as amply in every respect as the said R.VV. his Executors or
Administrators, or any of them, might or could do if the said R.VV. his
Executors or Administrators were thereat from time to time present, and did the
same personally. And whatsoever the said T. M. his Executors, Substitutes or
Assigns, or any of them, shall lawfully do, or cause, or procure to be done in
or about the premises to the use aforesaid, he the said R. VV. his Executors
and Administrators, do and will ratify, confirm and allow the same irrevokable
by these presents. And the said R. W. for him, his Executors and
Administrators, does, etc. in form following; That the said R. W. shall not
revoke the said Letter of Attorney, nor any power thereby given.
viz. That neither he the said R. W. his Executors or Administrators, nor any
of them, shall or will at any time hereafter revoke, recall, frustrate or make
void this present writing, or Letter of Attorney, or any power, authority or
Atturneyship herein or hereby given or granted, in any manner of wise. And that
neither he the said R.VV. his Executors or Administrators, or any of them,
shall or will at any time hereafter, do, commit or willingly suffer to be done
any act, deed or thing either by non suit, retraxit, release or otherwise,
whereby or by means whereof, the said T. M. his Executors or Assigns, shall be
hindered, let, debar^ed or delayed in or from the recovery, receiving,
getting in or obtaining of the said premises, or any part thereof, contrary to
the true meaning of these presents: But that he the said R. W. That the said R.
W. shall justify any act lawfully done by the said T. in the recovering of the
said debt.
his Executors and Administrators, shall and will justify and maintain with
effect all and every lawful action, suit, process and proceeding which shall
be lawfully attempted, prosecuted or proceeded in by the said T. his Executors
or Assigns, for the recovery or obtaining of the said premises, or any part
thereof. And that he the said T. M. his Executors and Assigns, shall and may
lawfully sue for, recover, obtain and enjoy the said premises according to the
intent and true meaning of these presents, without any let, denial or
interruption of or by him the said R.VV. his Executors or Administrators, or
any of them, or any other Person or Persons by or through their or any of their
consent, means or procurement, and without any account or reckoning therefore,
or for any part thereof, to the said R.W. his Executors or Administrators, or
any of them, to be made, yielded or given. And further, And that the said R.W.
at the request of the said T.M. and at the cost of the said T. M. shall make
and perform any other act and thing that shall be needful for the recovery of
the said debt.
That he the said R.VV. his Executors and Administrators, shall and will at any
time hereafter, upon the reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in
the Law of the said T. M. his Executors and Assign, do, make, execute and
perform all and every such further act or acts, deed or deeds, thing or things
(be it by making any further Letter or Letters of Attorney, or otherwise) for
the better enabling of the said T. M. his Executors and Assigns, in and for
the recovery, obtaining and enjoying of the premises to his or their own use
and uses, as aforesaid, according to the tenor and true meaning of these
presents, as by the said T. M. his Executors or Assigns, or his or their
Council learned in the Law, shall be lawfully and reasonably advised, devised
and required. And the said T.M. for him, his, etc. That be the said T.M. his
Executors or Administrators, shall and will acquit, discharge or otherwise save
or keep harmless, or suffiently recompense the said R.VV. his Executors or
Administrators, and every of them, of and from all losses and damages
whatsoever, which shall at any time or times hereafter happen to be had,
recovered or obtained against the said R. W. his Executors or Administrators,
for, by reason or in respect of any suit or suits hereafter to be prosecuted or
pursued in the name or names of the said R. his Executors or Administrators, or
any of them, upon the Obligation before recited in any manner of wise.

In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Asignment of part of a House and Land, and other Covenants
there inserted. Penn's by R. Mason, Esquire.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between, etc. witnesses, That whereas the said I.
L. by the name of I. L. of, etc. Yeoman, by Indenture of Lease bearing date,
etc. Has demised, Demise.
granted, betaken and to farm-letten unto H. S. of, etc. Butcher, parcel of his
Mansion House or Tenement, called, etc. Recital of all the promises.
That is to say, one Kitchen, three lower Chambers or Rooms, two upper Chambers
or Lofts in the East end of the said Mansion House, one Hop-yard, one
Barn-yard, one Kitchin-yard, half the Garden, as the same is now enclosed; and
all the Lands, Meadows and Pasture-grounds to the said Mansion House or
Tenement belonging, as the same were then in the tenure or occupation of the
said H. And also the Herbage and Feeding of one little Wood, parcel of or
belonging to the said Tenement, containing by estimation one acre, Except all
timber trees, woods and under-woods to the said I.L. to cut, fell and carry
away at all times at his pleasure.
or thereabouts: Except and always unto the said I.L. his, etc. reserved all
the timber trees, gross trees, woods and underwoods growing or to be growing
in or upon the said demised premises, or in or upon any part or parcel thereof,
with free ingresse, etc. into and from the said premises, and into and from
every part and parcel thereof, to fell, cut down and carry away the said
timber trees, etc. at all times, and from time to time, during the said
Demise). And except and unto the said I.L. his, Also one room in the Kitchen
reserved to the said I. L. to brew and bake in, and to lay Wood.
etc. reserved as well sufficient room in the said Kitchen to brew and to bake;
as also sufficient and convenient room in the said Kitchen-yard to lay such
wood and other fuel there, as he or they shall have occasion to use and spend
at the said Mansion House, with free ingresse, etc. unto him and them, and
their Servants, to do their said necessary business there from time to time
during the said term. To have and to hold all the said premises, Habendum.
with the appurtenances (except before excepted) unto the said H. S. his, etc.
from the Feast of, etc. next ensuing the date of the same Indenture of Lease,
unto the end and term of, etc. from thence, etc. Whereupon such yearly rent is
reserved, Rent reserved as by the Indenture. Consideration.
as in and by the same recited Indenture of Lease is expressed. Now this
Indenture further witnesses, That the said I.L. for and in consideration of
the hearty good will, natural zeal and Fatherly affection which he bears unto
and toward the said I. his Daughter; and also of the entire good will which he
bears toward the said VV. A. and for diverse other good causes and
considerations him especially moving: The recital of the premises, with the
yearly rent reserved.
Has bargained, etc. and by these presents does, etc. unto the said I.L. and
VV.A. the counterpart of the said recited Indenture of Lease, sealed with the
seal of the said H.S. and delivered as his Deed; and they yearly rent thereby
reserved for the rent of the premises thereby demised, and every part and
parcel thereof, due and to be due, and all the profits, commodities and
advantages to him the said I.L. or his Assigns, accrewing or to accrue by
reason of the said Indenture of Lease, or any thing therein contained; and all
the right, estate, etc. of him the said I.L. of, in and to the same, and every
or any part or parcel thereof. Habend.
To have and to hold the same yearly rent by the same Indenture reserved (and
the counterpart of the same recited Indenture of Lease) as the same is and
shall grow due, and all other the premises, with the appurtenances, and every
part and parcel thereof, and all the right, etc. ut supra, unto the said I.L.
and VV.A. their Executors, etc. from the day of the date hereof, forthwards,
during all until the full end, expiration and accomplishment or the whole
residue yet to come and unexpired of the said term of, etc. by the said
Indenture of Lease granted. Consideration. Demise of the premises aforesaid.
And the said I.L. for the consideration aforesaid, Has demised, etc. and by
these presents does demise, etc. unto the said I.L. and VV. A. All that the
same Mansion House or Tenement, called, etc. with all Cellers, Sollers,
Chambers, Rooms, Lights, Easements, Profits, Commondities, Yards, Back-sides,
Barnes, Gardens, Orchard, Hoppe-yard, Lands, Meadows and Pasture-grounds in
the said former Indenture of Lease mentioned; and also the Herbage and Feeding
of the said little Wood abovementioned; and also free ingresse, etc. into and
from the same premises, and every part and parcel thereof, by the ways and
passages thereto and from the same, now and heretofore used and accustomed. To
have and to hold the said Mansion House or Tenement, with all Cellers, etc.
unto the said I.L. and VV.A. their Executors, etc. in as large, ample and
beneficial manner and form, to all intents, constructions and purposes as the
said I. L. or his Assigns, at any time heretofore held and enjoyed the same
premises, or any part thereof, from the day wherein the same Lease above
recited shall expire, extinguish, determine or otherwise grow void, until the
end and term of, etc. from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and
ended. Reddendum to be paid; The first payment at the same Feast that shall
first happen to come after the expiration or determination of the said recited
Indenture
Yielding and paying, etc. The first payment whereof to begin and to be made in
which of the same Feast-daies shall first or next happen to come or be, after
the expiration, extinguishment or determination of the said recited Indenture
of Lease made from the said I.L. unto the said H.S. as aforesaid. And upon
default of non-payment of the rent, to enter and distrain, and carry away the
same.
And if it happen the said yearly rent, etc. That then, and at all times after,
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said I.L his, etc. into and upon all
and singular the same demised premises, with the appurtenances, to enter and
distrain; and the distress and distresses there so taken, to lead, drive and
carry away, and the same with him and them to detain and keep until the said
yearly rent of, Convenant to attorne Tenant to I. and W. for the premises for
the term to come and unexpired.
etc. with the arrearages of the same (if any be) shall be unto the said I.L.
his, etc. fully and truly contented and paid. And the said I.L. for himself,
his, etc. does Covenant, etc. to and with the said I.L. and VV. A. and either
of them, their and either of their Executors, etc. by these presents, That the
now Holders and Occupiers of the premises abovesaid, shall and will by or
before the Feast Day of, etc. next coming after the date hereof, attorn and
become Tenant unto the said I. and W. their, etc. of and for the same premises,
during the residue then to come and to be unexpired of the said term of, etc.
in the Habend. of the said first recited Indenture of Lease expressed. In
paying the rent may freely and peaceably, enjoy the premises.
And that from and after the expiration or other determiation of the said term
of, etc. by the same Indenture granted, they the said I. and W. their, etc. for
the payment of the said yearly rent of, etc. in manner and form abovesaid,
shall and may peaceably, lawfully and quietly have, hold, etc. (Clause for
peaceable enjoying.)

In Witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of a Message, with the appurtenances in Fee-Farm, with
good Covenants, in a very good Form. Penned by Robert Mason, Esquire.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between, etc. Witnesses. That the said I. H. for
diverse and sundry causes and considerations him moving, Consideration in money,
part in hand, and part at time to be paid.
and especially for and in consideration of the sum of, etc. to him the said
I. H. by the said R. H. well and truly contented and paid, in manner and form
as hereafter in these presents is and shall be expressed and declared (viz.)
100 l. parcel of the said sum of, etc. before the ensealing and delivery of
these presents: which said sum of 100 l. he the said I. H. for himself, his
Heirs, etc. does by these presents acknowledge and confess himself to have
received by the hands of the said R.H. and thereof, and of every part and
parcel thereof, does exonerate, acquit and discharge the sard R. H. his, etc.
by these presents, and the residue of the said sum of, etc. to be by him the
said R. H. his, etc. to him the said I. H. his, etc. well and truly contented
and paid in manner and form as hereafter in and by these presents is and shall
be expressed, The recital of the premises sold.
set down and declared: Has given, granted, and to perpetual Fee-Farm demised,
and by these presents does bargain, etc. unto the said R.H. his, etc. all that
his Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, now or late in the tenure and
occupation of the said R. H. or of his Assigns, situate, lying and being in,
etc. aforesaid, in the said County of, etc. Together with all Barns, Stables,
Kilnes, Ox-houses, and other Edifices and Buildings, Orchards, Gardens, Courts,
Yards, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Leasowes, Pastures, Feedings, Woods,
Under-woods, Waters, Commons, Heaths, Turbaries, Moors, Marshes, Fishings,
Fish-yards, Rents, Reversions, Services, Liberties and Hereditaments
whatsoever, with all and singular their Appurtenances to the said Message or
Tenement belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or demised, leased or
occupied, together with the same Message or Tenement, or known, reputed,
accepted or taken to be part, parcel or member thereof, of whatsoever nature,
quality or degree the same or any of them be, or by what name or title soever
the same or any of them be named, called or known, situate, etc. or elsewhere
within the said County of, etc. Together with all and singular Deeds, Charters,
Writings, Escripts and Minuments whatsoever concerning the said Message or
Tenement, and other the premises, with their appurtenances, or any part or
parcel thereof, which he the said I.H. now has, may have, or at any time
herafter lawfully come by without suit in Law. Habendum in perpetual Fee-Farm.
To have, hold, occupy and enjoy all and singular the said Message or
Tenement, with the appurtenances, together with all and every the said Barnes,
etc. ut supra, and other the premises, with and singular their appurtenances,
as is aforesaid; together with all and every the said Deeds, Charters,
Writings, Escripts and Minuments whatsoever concerning the same premises, or
any part or parcel thereof, unto the said R. H. his Heirs, etc. to his and
their own only proper use and behoof in perpetual Fee-Farm for ever. Reddendum
at four Feasts by equal portions, and for non-payment to distrain and carry
away the same, and keep till the same be paid with the arrearages.
Yielding and paying therefore yearly unto the said I.H. his, etc. the sum of,
etc. at the Feasts of, etc. or within ten days after either of the said Feasts
next and immediately following, by even portions, for all and all manner of
suits, services, customs, duties, charges, exactions, impositions and deeds
whatsoever: And if it happen, etc. That then it shall and may be lawful to and
for the said I.H. his, etc. into the said Message or Tenement, and other the
premises, with the appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, to enter
and distrain; and the distresses there found, to lead, drive and carry away,
and with him or them to detain and keep, until he or they be of the said
yearly rent, with the arrearages thereof (if any be) well and truly satisfied
and paid. And if it happen the said yearly rent of, And if it shall be behind
forty days after any of the said. Feasts, and no distresses to be found, for
every such default to pay 20 s. over and besides the yearly rent for and in the
name of a penalty.
etc. to be behind, unpaid, in part or in all, by the space of forty days
after either of the said Feasts in which it ought to be paid, as aforesaid, and
the same being at the capital Message or Tenement aforesaid lawfully demanded,
and no sufficient distress in or upon any part or parcel thereof can or may be
found: That then and so often he the said R. H. his, etc. shall and will
content and pay, or cause, etc. unto the said I.H. his, etc. the sum of 20 s.
of, etc. over and besides the said yearly rent, and the arrearages thereof, for
and in the name of a penalty for every such default or not payment of the said
yearly rent so being behind, and not paid by the space of forty days after
either of the said Feasts, as is aforesaid. And the said I. H. for himself,
his, etc. does Covenant, etc. to and with the said R.H. by these presents, That
he the said I.H. his, etc. and E. his Wife, and all and singular other Person
and Persons whatsoever, any estate having, pretending or claiming to have, to
his, their or any of their use or uses, at all and every time and times
hereafter, within the time and space of three years next, etc. ( A Convenant to
make further assurance, so that the warranty does nor extend further then
against the said I. H. and R.H. the Father, and G.C. Son and Heir apparent of
R. C. and their Heirs and Assigns.
Covenant for further assurance) So that the said warranty do not extend any
further, nor against any person or persons, or their Heirs, etc. other then
against him the said I.H. his, etc. and R. H. Esquire, Father of him the said
I. H. and the Heirs and Assigns of him the said R. H. and of R.C. late of VV.
etc. deceased; and G.C. Son and Heir apparent of the said R. H. and their
Heirs and Assigns, and the Heirs and Assigns of either of them, and against
all and and singular other Person and Persons whatsoever, and their Heirs, any
right, title, estate or interest, having, pretending or claiming to have, of,
in or to the same premises, or any of them, by, from or under them the said
I.H. R.H. R.C. and G.C. or any of them, in or by any manner, way or mean
whatsoever. I. H. Covenants, that the premises at the time of the sealing
hereof, are free and clear from all manner of former bargains, gifts and
grants, and shalf so stand, remain and continute.
And moreover, the said I.H. for himself, his, etc. does, etc. ut supra, that
all and every the said Message or Tenement, Lands, etc. and other
Hereditaments, and all and singular the premises, with their and every of their
appurtenances, at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
stand and be, and at all times hereafter, and from henceforth, shall be, stand,
remain and continue clearly exonerated, discharged, acquitted and saved
harmless of and from all and all manner of former gifts, grants, bargains,
etc. heretofore had, made, knowledged, done, procured, caused or suffered, or
hereafter to be had, etc. by or by the means and consent of them the said I.H.
or R.H. or either of them, or any other Person or Persons, or their Heirs, and
estate having, pretending or claiming to have, of, in or to the said premises,
or any part, etc. by, for, from or under them the said I.H. and R. H. or either
of them, The yearly rent reserved to be yearly paid I. H. and also one Lease or
Demise bearing date, etc. and several sums of moneys appointed to be paid to
the said I. H. for the whole, clear and absolute purchase of the said Mesuage,
with the appurtenances.
or any other Person or Persons (the said yearly rent of, etc. in and by these
presents above expressed, limited and reserved, to be yearly paid and payable
to him the said I.H. his, etc. in form aforesaid; and one Lease or Demise
heretofore made, etc. by Indenture bearing date, etc. for and during the term
of, etc. then and from thenceforth next and immediately following, and the
serveral sums of money in and by these presents hereafter mentioned, limited
and appointed to be paid to the said I.H. his, etc. for the whole, clear and
absolute purcharse of the same Message or Tenement, and other the premises,
with the appurtenances, in manner and form aforesaid, only excepted and
foreprized. I. H. Covenants for him, and his, etc. to save harmless the said
Message, with the appurtenaces, and also the said R.H. and his, etc. their
Lands, Goods and Chattels, not only against G.C. but also against, etc. from
all services, rents, arrearages, suits of Court, and all other things
whatsoever, for or by renson bf the premises by him the said G.C. his, etc. and
the said, etc. or Assigns, and all other penalties whatsoever.
And further, the said I.H. for himself, his, etc. shall and will from time to
time, and at all and every time and times hereafter, and from henceforth,
clearly, exonerate, acquit, discharge and save harmless as well the said
Message or Tenement, and all and singular the premises, with the
appurtenances, etc. as also him the said R.H. his, etc. and his and their and
every of their Lands, Tenements, Goods, and Chattels, not only against the
aforesaid G.C. his, etc. but also against the, etc. of, etc. and their, etc. by
whatsoever other name or names they the said, etc. now are, is or shall be
called, named, or incorporate, as well of and from all and singular rents,
services, arrearages, suits of Courts, heriots, reliefs, duties, customs and
demands whatsoever at any time or times hereafter due, payable or demandable,
or to be claimed and demanded as due, out of, for, or by reason of the said
premises, or any part or parcel thereof by him the said G.C. his, etc. and them
the said, etc. of, etc. or any of them, as also of and from all and all manner
of distresses, penalties, forfeitures, entries, titles of entries, actions,
suits, judgments, executions, troubles, costs, charges, and other encumbrances
whatsoever, of, for or by reason of any such rents, services, arrearages, suits
of Courts, heriots, reliefs, duties, customs or demands, or ann of them
whatsoever. R. H. Covenants upon consideration thereof that he will pay (...)
unto I. H. on the, etc. the sum of, etc. in full discharge of the purchase.
In consideration whereof the said R.H. for himself, his, etc. does Covenant,
etc. to and with the said I. H. his, etc. by these presents, That he the said
R.H. his, etc. shall and will well and truly content and pay, or cause, etc.
unto the said I.H. his, etc. the sum of, etc. in manner and form following,
That is to say, at or in the Feast Day of, etc. next coming after the Date
hereof, within the Utter Pentice of the City of Chester, or at and in the place
where the said Utter Pentice now stands, the sum of, etc. or at or in the
Feast Day of, etc. which shall be in the year, etc. and within or at the place
aforesaid the sum of, etc. for the last payment and residue of all and singular
the same sum of, etc. and in full satisfation, discharge, and entire payment of
the same, for and in consideration of the full, clear, and absolute purchase of
the said Message or Tenement, and other the premises, with all and singular
their appurtenances in manner and form aforesaid, according to the true intent
and meaning of these presents. Covenants by Proviso That I. H. will seal and
deliver as his deed unto R.H. upon every payment a sufficient discharge and
acquitance.
Provided always, and nevertheless, the said I. H. for him, his, etc. does
Covenant, etc. to and with the says R.H. his, etc. by these presents, That he
the said I.H. his, etc. shall and will at and upon the request and demand of
the said R.H. his, etc. and at and upon the proper costs and charges in the Law
of the said R.H. his, etc. seal and deliver, and lawfully tender and offer to
seal and deliver as the Deed of him the said I H. his, etc. unto him the said
R. H. his, etc. at and upon every payment or other sufficient satisfaction and
discharge of every the said sums of, etc. so to him the said I.H. his, etc. to
be had or made by him the said R. H. his, etc. as is aforesaid, one good,
sufficient, and lawful Acquittance in writing, subscribed with the hand, and
sealed with the seal of him the said I.H. his, etc. so receiving the said sums
as is aforesaid, testifying, acknowledging and averring the payment and receipt
of the same: These Indentures or any thing, Clause, Article, R.H. Covenanteth,
That if default be made of any of the payments on the several Feast-dayes, and
I. H. tendering an acquittance, that then is shall be lawful for I.H. into the
said Messuages and premises to enter, and the same to have and enjoy again as
in his former right.
Covenant, Proviso or sentence therein contained to the contrary, etc. Provided
always, and it is also Covenanted, etc. by and between the said Parties; and
the said R. his Executors, etc. does Covenant, etc. That if default of payment
be hereafter had, or made of or in any of the said payments of any the said
several sums of money last before mentioned at any of the said, several
Feast-daies in which the same or any of them are, in, and by these presents
above limited and appointed to be paid; Or otherwise if the said sums or any of
them be not duly and fully satisfied, and discharged, according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents; And he the said I.H. his, etc. tendering
and offering unto him the said R.H. his, etc. such sufficient and lawful
Acquittance and Acquittances in writing, testifying the payment and receipt of
the same, as in these presents is above expressed and declared, That then and
at all times from thenceforth if shall and may be lawful to and for him the
said I.H. his, etc. into all and singular the said Message or Tenement, and
all other the premises with their appurtenances wholly to re-enter, and the
same to have again, re-possesse, and enjoy, as in his or their former right, or
title, and estate. (this Indenture or any thing, clause, etc. ut supra)
Provided, that if the said Messuages and premises at any time hereafter to be
to any Person or Persons whatsoever recovered, and the said R.H. evicted out of
possession by due order and course of law, or by any decree, or otherwise. That
then in such case the said I.H. shall within three years pay unto the said R.
H. all such moneys as he received of the said R. H. for the purchase of the
premises: The moneys to be paid at several payments, as in the Deed is
expressed.
Provided finally, and moreover it is the true intent and meaning of these
presents, and of the said Partics to the same; and the said I.H. for him, his,
etc. does, etc. to and with, etc. That if in case it fortune the said Message
or Tenement, and other the premises, or any of them, or any part or parcel
thereof at any time or times hereafter to be by any person or persons
whatsoever, recovered, or otherwise lawfully evicted from, against, or out of
the possession of him the said R.H. his, etc. by due order and course of Law,
of, in or to the same premises, or any of them; or if it happen any decree in
or upon any Bill of Complaint, or any Judgment or Verdict in any suit, writ or
action, teal, personal, or mixed, whatsoever to be passed or given against him
the said R.H. his, etc. or any of them, or against his, their, or any of their
rights, titles, or interests, of, in and to the same premises, or any part or
parcel thereof, is or shall be disposed, avoided, adnulled, defeated or undone
without fraud or covin, That then and in such case he the said I.H. his, etc.
or some of them within three years next after any such recovery, eviction,
decree, Judgment or Verdict, so to be had, given and passed as is aforesaid, at
and upon the reasonable request and demand of the said R.H. his, etc. and at
such days, times, and feasts, and in such manner and form, as in these
presents shall be hereafter expressed, limited and appointed, shall and will
well and truly content, satisfy and pay, or cause, etc. unto him the said R.H.
his, etc. all and every such and the like sum and sums of money as he the
said I. H. his, etc. shall then before, (that is to say) before any such
recovery, eviction, decree, Judgment or Verdict as is aforesaid, have had or
received of, at, or by the hands of him the said R. H. his, etc. or any of them
for and in consideration of the said purchase of the said Message or Tenement,
and other the premises so as is before-said, That is to fay, by such like
payments, portions, the several sums as he the said I. H. his, etc. shall
have had or received the same; the first payment thereof to be had and made,
within one half year next after any such recovery, etc. so to be had, passed,
or given, as aforesaid, at or within, etc. and the second and next payment
thereof to be had, etc. in and upon the Feast Day of, etc. then next and
immediately following, at or in the place aforesaid, and so forth yearly at the
like Day of, etc. and as the place aforesaid, untlil all and every such, or the
like sum or sums of money as he the said I.^. his, etc. or any of them shall so
then before any such recovery, etc. have had and received at. of, or by the
hands of him the said R.H. his, etc. or any of them for or in consideration of
the said purchase of the said Message or Tenement, and other the premises, as
is aforesaid, be or shall be by him the said I. H. his, etc. unto him the said
R. H. his, etc. well and truly satisfied, contented and paid without fraud,
covin, or delay: These Indentures, etc. to the contrary, etc.

In Witness, etc.

An Assignment of diverse Estates, in a very good Form: Penned by R. Mason,
Esquire.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, Consideration.
I R.G. of, etc. do send greeting: Whereas R. VV. of, etc. by his Indenture of
Lease, bearing Date, etc. for the consideration therein expressed: Rent
reserved.
Has (for the term of, etc. commencing from, etc. last past before the Date of
the same Indenture of Lease; and for the yearly rent of, etc. thereby reserved
to be due and payable quarterly by even portions) Demised, granted, and to Farm
letten unto W.C. of, etc. one piece or parcel of ground set, Demise of a piece
of ground.
lying, and being in, etc. aforesaid, as the same was then appointed and agreed
upon to be well and sufficiently fenced and enclosed to contain from East to
West, etc. (name the abutting) As by the same Indenture of Lease amongst diverse
other Covenants grants, and agreements therein contained, whereunto relation
being had more plainly may appear. Consideration.
And whereas also the said R.VV. by the name of R.W. of, etc. by another
Indenture of Lease bearing date, etc. for the consideration in the said
Indenture specified: Rent reserved. Demise of a piece of ground.
Has (for the term of, etc. commencing from, etc. last past before the date of
the said recited Indenture of Lease, and for the yearly rent of, etc. thereby
reserved to be due and payable quarterly by even portions) demised, etc. unto
the said W.C. All that piece or parcel of ground lying and being in, etc.
containing in length, etc. (ut supra) then in the occupation of the said R. W.
abutting on, etc. toward the South; and upon the Tenement of, etc. toward the
North; and free liberty of ingresse, egresse and regresse into and from the
same piece or parcel of ground, in, by and through the ways and passages
thereunto then used and accustomed, as by the said last recited Indenture, etc.
may appear. R.W. bound by Obligation to perform Covenants.
And whereas also the said R.VV. by his certain Obligation or Writing
Obligatory, bearing date, etc. is and stands bound unto the said W.C. in the
penalty of, etc. with Condition (in effect) if the said R.VV. his Executors,
etc. and every of them, shall well and truly observe, perform, fulfill and keep
all and singular the Covenants, Grants, Articles and Agreements in the said
last recited Indenture of Lease contained, which on his and their part and
behalf are or ought to be performed and kept; as by the same Obligation or
Writing Obligatory, and the Condition, may appear. Consideration. Grant of the
several recited-Indentures of Lease.
And whereas the said W C. by his Writing or Deed-poll, bearing date, etc. for
the considerations therein mentioned: Has granted, bargained, sold, aliened,
assigned and set over unto me the said R. G. my Executors, etc. as well the
said several recited Indentures of Lease, and several premises thereby
severally demised; as also all the estate, right, title, interest, several
terms of years, use, possession, reversion, benefit, profit, claim and demand
whatsoever which he the said VV.C. or any other Persons to his use or behoof,
had, might, should or ought to have, or might have in or to the same premises,
by force, virtue or means of the said several recited Indentures of Lease, or
either of them, or any thing in them or either of them containd, or otherwise
howsoever. The Obligation also assigned over unto R.G. with the penalty therein.
And by the same Writing or Deed-poll, has likewise assigned and set over unto
me the said R.G. my Executors, etc. the said recited Obligation, and the sum or
penalty of 10 l. therein contained; and also all his estate, right, title and
interest, of, in and to the same. And further, by the same Writing or
Deed-poll, R.G. grants all his goods and housholdstuffe, of what kind soever
unto the said RG.
has granted, etc. unto me the said R.G. my Executors, etc. all and singular
his Goods, Chattels, Housholdstuffe, Brass, Pewter, Linen, Woollen, Bedding,
Anvil, Tools and all other things whatsoever of him the said VV. C. remaining
or being in or about his then dwelling house, situate and being in, etc. or
elsewhere abiding, resting or remaining, contained, mentioned and expressed in
a Schedule or Inventory indented to the same Writing or Deed-poll annexed, and
all his estate, right, title and interest of, in and to the same, as by the
same Writing or Deed-poll, R.G. in consideration of a sum of money, has
granted and assigned unto B. G. the before recited Indentures of Lease, with
all his estate, right and title to the same, and term of years yet to come, and
also the Obligation above recited.
etc. may appear. Know ye now, that I the said R.G. in consideration of a
certain sum of lawful money of England to me in hand well and truly paid before
the ensealing and delivery hereof by B.G. of, etc. whereof I do confess the
receipt, and whereof I hold my self fully satisfied and contented: Have
bargained, sold, assigned, conveyed and set over, and by these presents I do
fully and absolutely bargain, etc. unto the said B.G. his, etc. to his and
their own only use and uses, as well the said two several Indentures of Leases
above rehearsed, as also all the estate, right, title, interest, term and terms
of years yet to come, benefit, profit, property, reversion and reversions, use,
possession, claim and demand whatsoever, which I the said R. G. or any other
Person or Persons to my use or behoof, have, has, may, might, should or ought
to have, or may claim of, in and to the abovesaid premises by the said several
Leases severally demised, as is aforesaid, by force and means of the said
Writing or Deed-poll, or otherwise howsoever; together also with the same
Writing or Deed-poll above rehearsed. And moreover, I do by these presents
assign and set over unto the said B.G. his, etc. the Obligation above
rehearsed, wherein the said R.VV. to the said W. C. stands bound in the said
sum of 10 l. and all mine estate, R. G. for the consideration aforesaid, does
bargain and sell unto the said B. G. all the aforesaid goods mentioned.
interest claim and demand of, in and to the same. And also, I the said R.G.
(for the consideration aforesaid) do by these presents bargain, etc. unto the
said B.G. his, etc. to the uses abovesaid, all the said Goods, Chattels, Stuff
of Household, Tools and other things in the said Schedule or Inventory to the
said Writing or Deed-poll annexed, mentioned, as aforesaid; and all my estate,
right, title, interest, claim and demand of, in and to the same, and every part
thereof: To have and to hold the same Goods, Chattels, Stuff of household and
things unto the said B. G. his, etc. for ever warranted against my self, my
Executors and Administrators. That R G. has not made any former bargains of
the premises.
And I the said R.G. for my self, etc. do covenant and grant to and with the
said B.G. his, etc. by these presents, That l the said R.G. by any means or
procurement, have not made any former or other bargain, sale or encumbrance of
the abovesaid premises, or any part thereof, by these presents bargained, sold,
or assigned. And moreover, R. G. assigns an Obligation, wherein W.C. stands
bound in the sum of, etc. with a Letter of Attorney unto the said B.G.
irrevokable for the recovery of the said sum of, etc.
I the said R.G. for the consideration above in these presents expressed, do
assign and set over unto the said B.G. his, etc. a certain Obligation or
Writing Obligatory, bearing date, etc. now last past, wherein the said VV.C. to
me stands bound in the sum of, etc. with a Condition thereon endorsed; and
the said sum of, etc. therein mentioned, being due and forfeited unto me. And I
do assign, ordain, make and coostitute the said B.G. his, etc. to be my true
and lawful Attorney and Atturneys irrevokable, touching the premises, for me,
and in my name, but to the only use of my said Attorney and Atturneys, to ask,
sue for, recover and receive of the said VV. C. his, etc. the said sum of,
etc, and every part thereof. Giving and granting hereby unto my said Attorney
and Atturneys, all my full power and authority in the premises, to say, do,
execute, conclude, agree, determine and finish all and every act and acts,
thing and things which shall or may be requisite or needful to be had, made or
done in or about the premises, for the recovering, receiving and discharging
thereof, as I my self might or could do if I were present in mine own person.
And I the said R.G. for my self; etc. and every of us do covenant, etc. That I
the said R.G. my, etc. and every of us, from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, at and upon the reasonable request, and at the only costs and
charges of the said B. his, etc. shall and will make, do, knowledge, seal,
deliver and execute all and every such lawful and reasonable act and acts,
assurance and assunances, devise and devises touching the premises, by these
presents bargained, sold and assigned, and every or any part thereof, to be
assured, conveyed, recovered, received and enjoyed to and by the said B.G. his,
etc. to his and their own use and use absolutely, without any account to me, my
Executors or Assigns, as by him or them shall be reasonably devised, advised
or required, with warranty only against me the said R. G. my, etc. And so as
I, my Executors or Administrators for the doing thereof, be not compelled to
travel any further then the Cities of, etc.

In witness, etc.

A Deed-poll in a very good Form.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing or Deed of bargain and
sale shall and may hereafter come: G.P. of, etc. Administrator of all and
singular the Goods, Chattels, rights, implements and stuff of household
whatsoever, any ways heretofore late due, and in right belonging to R.P.
deceased, sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know ye, Consideration.
that I the said G.P. for and in consideration of, etc. as also for diverse
other good causes and Considerations me hereunto moving, Has bargained, sold,
given, granted, aliened, assigned and set over, and by these presents does,
etc. to the said I.G. and N D. all that his quarter of fourth part of the good
Ship, called the, etc. of the portage and burden of eighty tun or
thereabouts, whereof L.VV. is both Master and Part-owner, riding, lying and
being in, etc. or elsewhere in the River of Thames, all whatsoever his part or
parts, share or shares of the Ship or Carvel, called, etc. of the Portage and
burden likewise of eighty tun, or thereabouts, whereof F.K. is both Master
and Part-owner; which Ship or Carvell is now on a Voyage at Seas, expected
every day her return; and of all his part, share or venture of goods in the
good Ship, called, etc. now likewise at Seas, whereof I.VV. is now Master, with
all and singular his part or parts, share or shares, quarter, half quarter or
sixteenth part, interest, right or title whatsoever to the said Ships, or to
either of them, Masts, Sales, Sale-yards, Anchors, Cables, Ropes, Tackle,
Ordnance, Munition or Furniture, Instruments and Apparel needful, necessary,
fitting and belonging to all the said Ships, or to any of them. And also know
ye, For the consideration aforesaid, has bargained and sold a Message or
Tenement to N.D. and I.G. with Plate and housholdstuffe. And also another
Message, commonly called, etc. with Wines, Plate, Bedding, Linen, and all
other furniture whatsoever standing in the said House.
that the said G.P. for and in consideration aforesaid: Has bargained, etc. to
the said N. D. and I.G. their, etc. the House, Tenement, or Message, commonly
called, etc. situate, standing and being in, etc. now in the tenure of, etc.
or his Assigns; which House, the Lease thereof was heretofore sold and granted
to the said R.P. his, etc. by one I.S. for many years yet to come and
unexpired, with all and singular plate, implements and stuff of household there
resident, being and remaining, which were late in right due and belonging to
the said R. P. in his lifetime, and so consequently due to the said G. P. by
his Letters of administration, had, taken and granted, together with the said
Lease and term of years therein yet to come and unexpired. All that his
Message or Tenement, commonly called, etc. situate, standing and being in,
etc. aforesaid, now in the tenure of, etc. or his Assigns, with all and
singular Wines, Place, Bedding, Linen, Woollen, Brass, Pewter, Bedsteads,
Tables, Stools, Wooden ware, and all other implements and stuff of household
whatsoever in the said Message or Tenement now standing, resident and being,
which were late due and belonging to the said R.P. deceased, and so
consequently to the said G. P. deceased, by his Letters of administration, as
aforesaid, and whereof the said G.P. stands and is now possessed: All that
his other Tenement adjoining to the said King's Head, now in the tenure, etc.
Which two Tenements the Lease thereof was heretofore sold, bargained and
granted to the said. RP. his, etc. from W.C. for many years yet to come and
unexpired; all that his house, etc. ut supra. Habendum to N.D. and I. G. for
ever.
To have and to hold all and singular the afore-recited premises, and every
part and parcel thereof, beforementioned to be bargained and sold unto them
said N.D. and I.G. their, etc. as their own proper Goods and Chattels, and to
their own proper uses from henceforth for ever; of all and singular which
premises, the said G.P. has put the said N D. and I.G. in full and lawful
possession and seizin, by the gist and delivery of, etc. at and before the
ensealing and delivery hereof. And the said G.P. does Covenant, That the day of
the date hereof by virtue of his Letters and Administration, is the sole and
lawful Owner of the premises.
And the said G. P. does Covenant, etc. That he the said G.P. on he day of the
date hereof, and at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, by virtue of
his Letters and Administration, as aforesaid, is the very sole, lawful and
rightful Owner of all and singular the afore-recited premises, and of every
part thereof; and now has full power, good right and lawful authority to
bargain and sell the same ot the said N. D. and I. G. their, etc. As also, that
they the said N.D. and I. G. their, etc. and every of them, shall and may by
force and virtue hereof, have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy all and
singular the afore-recited premises, and every part thereof, without any the
molestation, vexation, disturbance, hindrance or trouble of him the said G. P.
his, etc. or of any of them, or of any other Person or Persons whatsoever, by
or through his or their means, assent, consent or procurement.

In witness, etc.

A Mortgage of a House in Fee-simple for indempuification, in a ^ury good Form.
Penned by Robert Mason, Esquire.
TO all People to whom this present Writing shall come to be seen, heard, or
read, I N.K. of, etc. and A. my Wife send greeting in our Lord God everlasting:
In consideration of indempuity, and discharge.
Know ye, us the said N.K. and A. my Wife, as welf for the more indempuity and
discharge of N.V. of, etc. and I.I. of, etc. and either of them, and the
Executors, etc. of them, and either of them against all manner of Person and
Persons of and for all and every sum and sums of money as they or either of
them stand bound in, or is charged or chargeable for, with us the said N. K.
and A. my Wife, or with or for either of us to any Person or Persons Whatsoever
by Bill, promise, specialty, obligation, or otherwise howsoever: As also for
diverse other special good causes and considerations us hereunto moving, Grant.
have granted, bargained, sold, enfeoffed and confirmed, and by these presents
do fully and plainly give, grant, etc. unto the said N.V. and I.I. and to
either of them, and to the Heirs of either of them for ever: Recital of the
premises to be Mortgaged.
All those two Messuages or Tenements in, etc. in or near the Street there
called, etc. and all the houses, edifices and buildings, yards, orchard,
gardens and hereditaments, to the said Messuages or Tenements, or any of them,
belonging, or appertaining, or at any time heretofore therewith used or
occupied, with all and singular their appurtenances whatsoever: And one parcel
of Land or Garden-plot thereto adjoining, with a Well in the same as they now
be scituatin^ and lying in, etc. between the Messuages or Tenements n^ or late
of T.P. (and so express the bounds.) Except and a ways reserved, And for the
consideration aforesaid, the said N.K. and A. his Wife, have granted N.V. and
I.I. all their estate in the premises, with all writings and evidences
whatsoever.
etc. And further, I the said N.K. and A. m^ Wife, for the consideration
abovesaid, have also by these presents, given, granted, bargained and sold unto
the said N.V. and I.I. and to either of them, and to either of their Heirs for
ever, all the estate, right, title, interest, reversion and reversions,
remainder and remainders of and in the said Messuages or Tenements, and other
the premises, and of, in, and to every part and parcel of the same (except
before excepted) together with all and sigular deeds, evidences, charters,
writings, escripts, Minuments, transcripts of fines and exemplification
touching or concerning the said premises, any part or parcel of the same. To
have and to hold the said Messuages or Tenements, Habendum, to them and their
Heirs, for ever, except before excepted.
houses, edifices, buildings, and all other the premises before by there
presents bargained and sold, or mentioned to be bargained and sold, with all
and singular their appurtenances (except before excepted) unto the said N.V.
and I. I. and either of them, and to either of their Heirs, to the only and
proper uses and behoofs of them the said N. V. and I. I. and either of them and
to either of their Heirs and Assigns jointly and severally for evermore.
Proviso, That if the said N.K. and A. his Wife, shall pay and discharge all
such Debts as N. and I. stands bound and is changed for them to any Person or
Persons, and do alwai^s after save and keep hamlesse the said N. and I. and
their Goods from all manner of trouble, then this bargain and sale to be void.
Provided always and nevertheless upon condition, That if I the said N.K. and
A. my Wise, or either of us or the Heirs, etc. of us or either of us, do
satisfy, content and pay, or cause, etc. unto all and every such Person or
Persons whatsoever, as the said N. and I. or either of them stand bound unto,
for us, or either of us such sum or sums, or other thing or things
whatsoever as the said N. and I. or any of them stands bound in, or is
charged or chargeable with or for us the said N.K. and A. or either of us to
any such said Person or Persons what soever by Bill, promise, specialty,
obligation, or otherwise howsoever, according to the intent, true meaning and
limitation of such matters and things as they stand so charged for, is or ought
to be observed, performed. fulfilled and kept. And do also at all times
hereafter discharge, and save, and keep harmless the said N.V. and I.I. and
either of them, and the Heirs, Executors, etc. of them and either of them, and
their and either of their bodies, goods, chattels, lands and tenements, and
every of them of and from all and every such said Person and Persons, as
aforesaid, and every of them, and of and from all and all manner of suits,
troubles, damages, costs and charges as shall be commenced, had, gotten or
received against them or any of them by any such said Person or Persons as they
or either of them stand bound unto, or is charged or chargeable by any ways or
means whatsoever with or for us the said N. K. and A. my Wife, or either of us
as aforesaid; That then and from thenceforth this present Deed of bargain and
sale, and the possession, livery and seizin of the said bargained permises
made, taken, and delivered, shall be utterly void, frustrate and of none effect
to all intents and purposes. And that upon the request made to N. and I. or
either of them, they or either of them shall re-deliver all Deeds and evidences
concerning the premises to the said N. K. and A. his Wife, whole and
uncancelled.
And that then upon request made to them the said N.V. and I.I. or either of
them, they or either of them shall and will re-deliver or cause to be
re-delivered back again to the said N. K. and A. his Wife, or either of them,
their Heirs or Assigns, all and singular the said Deeds, evidences, charters,
escripts, mynuments, transcripts of fines and exemplifications of records
touching or concerning only the above-bargained premises, or any part or
parcel of the same, and now remaining in the hands, custody, or possession of
the said N.V. whole uncancelled and undefaced. But upon non performance of the
said proviso, and upon default made, then this Deed to stand in full force and
effect.
But if default in any thing of or in performing of the aforesaid proviso,
contrary to the tenor and true meaning thereof: That then after such default
made, this present Deed to stand and abide in full force and effect to the said
N.V. and I.I. and either of them, and either of their Heirs for ever, so
fully, wholly, and absolutely, as if the proviso aforesaid had never-been
mentioned or meant; any thing before in these presents contained, etc. And all
the aforesaid bargained premises to be clear and clearly discharged, and by us
the said N. K. and A. and our Heirs, etc. unto them the said N.V. and I.I. and
to the Heirs of either of them clearly and freely discharged and saved
harmless of and from all and all manner of former bargains, sales, gifts,
grants, arrearages, and all other encumbrances whatsoever before suffered,
committed, or done, or hereafter to be, etc. by us or any of us, (the services
and customs due afterward to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee of the
premises only excepted.) And further, I the said N.K. and A. my Wife, And that
the said N. K. and A. his Wife, upon the request of N.V. and I.I. shall make
fuch further assurance in Law as shall be thought fit by Council.
and our heirs, etc. shall and will upon request of the said N. V. and I. I.
or either of them, or either of their Heirs, at any time or times hereafter
make, do, suffer and knowledge such act and acts, thing and things, device and
devices as they by the learned Council in the Law of them the said N.V. and
I.I. or either of them or their Heirs or Assigns shall be devised, advised,
or required.

In witness, etc.

The right form of a Mortgage: Penned by R. Mason, Esquire.
TO all Chirstian people to whom this present writing shall come, Consideration.
R. T. of, etc. sends greeting: Whereas Sir H. R. of, etc. Knight, by his
Indenture of Lease under his hand and seal, bearing Date, etc. for the
considerations in the same Identure of Lease specified: Demise.
Has demised, granted, set, and to Farm-letten unto the said R.T. his,
Recital.
etc. all that parcel of groound containing, etc. To have to hold the said
piece or parcel of ground, Hebendum.
etc. Yielding and paying, etc. at by the said recited Indenture of Lease,
wherein also diverse other Covenants, Consideration.
etc. may appear. Now know ye, That the said R.T. for and in consideration of,
etc. by S. P. of, etc. well and truly paid, Grant.
etc. Has granted, bargained, etc. unto the said S.P. his, etc. as well the
said recited Indenture of Lease and premises, with the appurtenances therein
and thereby demised; together with all such erectments and buidings as are
erected, built and set upon the said parcel of ground by the said Indenture of
Lease demised, or upon any part or parcel thereof by the said R. T. his Workmen
or Assigns: as also all the estate, right, title, interest, use, possession,
reversion, benefit, profit, property, claim, term of years to come, and demand
whatsoever, which he the said R. T. his, etc. or any other Person or Persons to
his use or behoof have or has, may, might, should or ought to have or claim
of, in, and to the same premises by force, virtue or means of the said recited
Indenture of Lease, or any thing therein contained, or otherwise howsoever.
Habend. for the term to come and unexpired.
To have and to hold as well the said recited Indenture of Lease and premises,
with the appurtenances therein and thereby demised; together with all such
erectments and buildings as are thereupon erected, as aforesaid: as also all
the said estate, right, title, interest, use, possession, reversion, benefit,
profit, property, term of years to come, claim and demand whatsoever of him
said R.T. his, etc. of, in and to the same unto the said S. P. his, etc. from
the day of the Date of these presents forthwards for and during all such
remainder of years and other time as are now to come and unexpired of the said
term of, etc. in and by the said recited Indenture of Lease granted. And the
said R.T. for himself, etc. and for every of them does Covenant, etc. to and
with the said S. P. his, etc. and for every of them by these presents, in
manner and form following, That he has full power and right title to the
premises, and may lawfully sell the same and every part thereof.
That is to say, that he the said R.T. at the time of the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, has in himself and in his own name and right, full
power, true title and lawful authority to grant, bargain and sell the same
premises above mentioned to be hereby bargained, and every part thereof to the
said S. P. in such manner and form aforesaid. And that the premises shall
remain and continue unto the said S.P. his, etc. freely and clearly discharged,
and by him the said R.T. sufficiently saved and kept harmless from all
troubles and encumbrances.
And also that the said recited Indenture denture of Lease and premises with
the appurtenances therein and thereby demised, and all other the premises above
mentioned to be hereby bargained and sold, as aforesaid, on the day of the Date
hereof, ^re and be, and on the 7. Day of, etc. shall be. And so from enceforth
during all the residue and term of years which shall ^e then to come and
unexpired of the said term of, etc. in and by the said recited Indenture of
Lease granted shall continue, remain, and be unto the said S. P. his, etc. free
and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted and discharged, or otherwise by him
the said R.T. his, etc. sufficienty saved or kept harmless of and from all and
all manner of former or other bargains, sales, leases, grants, rents,
arrearages of rents, cause and causes of forfeiture and reentry, and of and
from all other charges, titles troublet and encumbrances whatsoever had, made,
committed or done, or to be committed, etc. by him the said R.T. his, etc. or
by any other Person or Persons whatsoever by his or their means, assent,
forfeiture or procurement: (The yearly rent and Covenants in and by the said
recited Indenture of Lease reserved and contained, which from and after the
said 7. Day of, etc. on the Tenants or Leasees part and beholf shall grow due
to be paid, done and performed in respect of the premises in and by the said
recited Indenture of Lease demised only excepted and foreprized.) Provided
always, Proviso, That if R. T. his, etc. do well and truly pay unto S. P. the
sum of, etc. that then this present writing to be void, and the said S. P.
shall truly deliver all Deeds and Writings concerning the premises uncancelled
and undefaced, and this present Deed-poll to be cancelled.
and yet nevertheless, and the said S. P. for himself, etc. covenanteth, etc.
to and with the said R. T. his, etc. by these presents, That if the said B. T.
his, etc. do orshall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said S.
P. his, etc. the sum of 1651. of, etc. at or in, etc. on the 7. Day of, etc.
without any fraud or covin: That then and from thenceforth this present
Deed-poll or writing of assignment, and every Covenant, grant and article
herein contained, tending to the benefit and advantage of the said S. P. his,
etc. shall be utterly void, frustrate, and of none effect ot all intents and
purposes whatsoever: and that then also he the said S. P. his, etc. shall and
will well and truly redeliver or cause, etc. unto the said R. T. his, etc.
(requiring the same) the said recited Indenture of Lease uncancelled and
undefaced, without altering or changing the property thereof in any manner of
wise: and shall then also deliver or cause, etc. unto the said R. T. his, etc.
this present Deed-poll or writing of assignment to be cancelled and made void.
But if default be made in the payment of the said sum of, etc. in part or in
all, that then this Deed or writing shall stand in full force to the use and
benefit of the said S. P. and his, etc.
And the said R. T, for him, etc. does Covenant, etc. That if default shall
happen to be made of or in payment of the said sum of 165 l. in part or in all
contrary in any wise to the form above-expreessed for payment thereof: That
then and from thenceforth this present Deed or writing of assignment, and every
Covenant, grant, and article herein contained tending to the benefit and
advantage of the said S.P. his, etc. shall be, remain adn continue in full
power, force and virtue. And that then and from thenceforth he the said S.P.
his, etc. for the said yearly rent of 40 l. and under, and according to the
other Covenants, grants, articles and agreements contained in the said
Indenture of Lease from thenceforth on the Tenants part to grow due to be paid,
done and performed, shall or may peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy,
possess and enjoy the said piece or parcel of ground, and all other the
premises with the appurtenances abovementioned to b hereby bargained and sold,
without any let, trouble, or interruption of or by him the said R. T. his, etc.
or any of them, and without any lawful let, eviction or expulsion by their or
any of their means, assent, forfeiture or procurement during all the residue
of the said term of, etc. then to come and unexpited.

In witness, etc.

A Bargain and Sale of a Bark or Ship.
TO all those to whom this present Writing shall come, I J. H. of, etc. do send
greeting: Know ye, That I the said J. H. for and in consideration of, etc. Have
bargained and sold, and by these presents do bargain and sell unto the said
T.R. all that my Bark or Vessel called, etc. of the burden of, etc. or there
abouts now surging at anchor in, etc. And all and singular the mast-sales,
sale-yards, anchors, cables, cock or boat, tackle, furniture, munition and
apparel to the same Bark or Vesse belonging or in any wise appertaining. To
have and to hold the same my Bark or Vessel, and all and singular the masts,
etc. ut supra, thereunto belonging or appertaining, as aforesaid, unto the said
T. R. his, etc. for ever. And I the said J. H. for my self, my, etc. do
Covenant, etc. to and with the said T. R. his, etc. That I the said J. H. have
in my self, and in my own name rightful power and lawful authority to bargain
and sell all and singular the same Bark or Vessel and premises unto the said T.
R. his, etc. in such manner and form, as aforesaid. And that all and singular
the same premises now are and be, and so from henceforth shall for ever
continue, remain, and be unto the said T. R. his, etc. clear, free, and clearly
acquitted, exonerated adn discharged, or otherwise by me the said J. H. my,
etc. well and sufficiently saved harmless of and from all and singular former
bargains, grants and encumbrances whatsoever. And further, that I the said J.
H. my, etc. all the same premises unto the said T. R. his Executors, etc.
against all people shall and will warrant and defend by the space of, etc. now
next ensuing, according to the Laws of Oleron (fire, water, and enemy only
excepted.) And I the said J. H. have put the said T. R. in full and peaceable
possession of all and singular the same premises by the delivery of, etc. at
the ensealing and delivery hereof sixed in the seal to these presents.

In witness, etc.

A Condition that a Churchwarden shall give an Account.
COnditions, That whereas the within named A.B. together with the other
Parishioners of the Parish of, etc. have before the Date within written of one
assent, consent, and agreement elected and chosen the within-named C.D. to be
Churchwarden of the said Parish for one whole year now next ensuing to receive
and pay all such sum and sums of money and other things as in any wise
shall or may concern the said Church of, etc. or belong to the Poor of the said
Parish, and for the oversight and ordering of all such business as belongs
to a Churchwarden. If therefore the said C.D. do at all times during his
continuance in the said office of Churchwarden keep a true, just and perfect
account in writing of the receipts and payments of all such sums of money and
other things whatsoever as shall in the mean time come to his hands, charge or
custody in the right of the said Church or poor of the said Parish: And do not
in the mean time lay out or expend upon any occasion whatsoever for any one
particular business above the sum of 40 s. without the consent of the said
A.B. and some other of the Parishioners of the said Parish whom the said A.B.
shall appoint to consider thereof. And further, if the said C.D. his, etc.
after the end of one whole year now next ensuing upon demand of the said A. B.
and other the Parishioners of the said Parish do make and deliver up to such
Auditors as for the same purpose shall be appointed, a true, just and perfect
account of the receipt and payment of all such sums of money and other things
as shall come to his hands, as aforesaid, and upon such account made and
delivered up, as aforesaid, do well and truly pay and deliver unto the said
Auditors, or to such other Person as shall be appointed in that behalf, all
such sum and sums of money and other things whatsoever as then shall remain in
the hands upon the foot of his said account, and be in his charge and custody
in the right of the said Church: at the time of such account delivered up, that
then this Obligation shall be void, etc.

An Annuity to be taken and receeived after the death of him that grants that
which is upon trust for a woman's use: Penned by Robert Mason, Esquire.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between, etc. Witnesses, That the said T.G. the
elden, for diverse good and reasonable causes and considerations him thereunto
moving: Has given, granted and confirmed, The Grant.
and by these presents does, etc. unto the said R.G. and H.C. one annuity or
yearly rent of, etc. issuing and going our of all and singular the Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, being freehold of the said T.G. situate, lying
and being in, etc. To have, take, Habend'.
receive and enjoy the said annuity or yearly rent of, etc. to the said R.G.
and H.C. their Executors, etc. from and after the decease of the said T.G. for
and during all the term of the natural life of D.G. Wise of T.G. they younger,
of, etc. Gentleman, aforesaid, after the decease of the said T.G. the elder,
the said annuity or yearly rent of 6 l. to be paid yearly during the said term,
at the Feasts of, etc. or within 28 days next after either of the said Feasts,
by even portions, at or in, etc. And the first payment of the said annuity or
yearly rent to be made at such of the said Feasts as shall first and next
happen after the decease of the said T.G. the elder, or within 28 days then
next following; which said annuity or yearly rent of 6 l. the said T.G. the
elder, has given, granted and confirmed to the said R.G. and H.C. as
aforesaid, upon special trust and confidence, that they the said R.G. and H.C.
their Executors, etc. Limitation of the use.
shall from time to time, as they or any of them shall have received the said
annuity or yearly rent, or any part thereof, in form aforesaid, pay and deliver
over the said annyity or yearly rent, and every part thereof, to the said D. G.
to her own proper hands, and to her own proper use, for and during the term of
her natural life. And the said T. G. the elder, for him, his Heirs, etc. does
Covenant, etc. to and with the said R.G. and H.C. and either of them, their
Executors, etc. by these presents, That if it shall happen the said annuity or
yearly rent of 61. or any part or parcel thereof, Distress for non-payment.
to be behind and unpaid, contrary to the purport and true meaning of these
presents (being lawfully asked at the abovementioned Mansion House) That then
and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful to and for the said R. G. and
H. C. their Executors, etc. into all and singular the said Lands, etc. or any
part thereof, to enter and distrein; and the distress and distresses there
taken, lawfully to lead, bear, drive and carry away, and the same with them or
any of them to retain and keep to the use of the said D. until the said
annuity and the arrearages thereof (if any be) shall be unto the said H. C. and
R. G. their, etc. to the use of the said D. A Covenant to make further estates.
fully satisfied and paid. And moreover, the said T.G. the elder, for him, etc.
and for every of them, does Covenant, etc. to and with the said R.G. and H. C.
their, etc. by these presents, That he the said T. G. the elder, and his
Heirs, shall at all times hereafter, and from time to time during the space of
etc. next coming after the date of these presents, upon every reasonable
request, and at the costs in all things of the said D. R. G. and H, C. or some
of them, do, make, knowledge and execute, or cause to be done, etc. all and
every such act and acts, assurance and assurances for the further and more
better assurance, surety and sure making of the said annuity or yearly rent of
61. to the said D. or to her use, for and during the term of her natural life,
after the decease of the said T. G. the elder, as by the said D. R. G. and H.C.
or any of them, their or any of their Council learned in the Law, shall be
reasonably devised, of advised and required.

In witness, etc.

An Annuity made to the use of the poor People in certain Parishes: Penned by
Council.
TO all People to whom this present Writing shall come, I. C. of, etc. send
greeting in, etc. Know ye, that I the said I.C. of mine own good will,
benevolence and mere motion for and toward the relief and maintenance of the
poor People, which for the time hereafter being, shall inhabit and dwell in
the several Parishes of, etc. in the County of B. Have, given and granted, and
by this my present Writing indented do give, etc. unto I.C. R.C. and T.T. of H.
aforesaid, Yeomen; and unto H.S. and R.B. of H. aforesaid, Husbandmen; and
R.F.W.S. I.B. etc. of L. aforesaid, Yeomen one annuity or yearly rent of, etc.
to be yearly issuing, going our, bad and taken of all those my two Messuages or
Tenements, Shops, Cellers, Sollers, Warehouses, Edifices, Buildings,
Hereditaments and Appurtenances, set, lying and being at, nigh or upon
Fresh-Wharfe, in or near, etc. now in the several tenures and occupations of,
etc. and their Assigns. To have, leavy, receive, Habend.
perceive and yearly take the aforesaid annuity or yearly rent of 51. unto the
said, etc. their Heirs and Assigns, from and after the decease of me the said
I C. for ever, Limitation of the use.
at two Feasts or Terms in the year, viz. at the Feasts of, etc. or within,
etc. next after every of the same Feasts, by even portions, to the use and
behoof, and to be bestowed, employed and disbursed in manner and form
following; viz. on the first Sunday which shall first and next happen and come
after the first payment and receipt of the said annuity or yearly rent, or of
any part or parcel thereof, the sum of, etc. thereof to be bestowed in good and
wholesome penny wheaten bread, and the same bread to be equally distributed and
given to 24 of the poorest Inhabitants of the aforesaid Parishes of etc. for
the time being, at the discretion of the Churchwardens and some of the ancient
Inhabitants of the aforesaid Parishes of etc. viz. to every of the said
Parishes 12 d. and on the Sunday then next and immediately ensuing the
aforesaid first Sunday, the like sum of 2 s. of the said annuity or yearly
rent, to be likewise bestowed in good, etc. ^st supra: And so in like manner
for ever, the sum of 2 s. to be bestowed in bread, as aforesaid: And the same 2
s. in bread to be given and distributed to 24 of the said Inhabitants of the
said two Parishes, as aforesaid, orderly and indifferently; viz. to either of
the said Parishes 12 d. in bread, Distress for non-payment.
in form as is above declared. And if it shall happen the said annuity or
yearly rent of, etc. to be behind, unpaid, in part or in all, after any Term or
Feast of payment thereof aforesaid, in which the same ought to be paid by the
space of, etc. being lawfully demanded at, etc. by the said, etc. or any of
them, or by their or any of their Heirs or Assigns, or by any other Person or
Persons by them or any of them, lawfully authorized in that behalf: That then
and from thenceforth, and so often, it shall be lawful to and for the said,
etc. their Heirs, etc. or any of them, into all and singular the said two
Messuages or Tenements, and other the premises, or any part or parcel thereof,
to enter and distrain, and the distress or distresses then and there bad and
taken, lawfully to lead, bear, drive and carry away, detain and keep until
they or some of them of the said annuity, etc. being behind and unpaid, and the
arrearages thereof (if any be) and of their costs and charges in that behalf,
to be reasonably expended and disbursed, shall be fully satisfied, contented
and paid. And further know ye, That none of bad living shall receive any of
this annuity.
that the intent and meaning of me the said I.C. and of these presents is, That
no Person or Persons being a Blasphemer of Gods holy Name, and open or
notorious evil Liver, shall be allowed of or admitted to have any part or
parcel of the aforesaid weekly payments in bread, any thing, Churchwardens.
etc. And therefore I do by these presents require and straightly charge the
Churchwardens and Inhabitants of the said two several Parishes for the time
being, that they (so much as they may) see that my good meaning herein be not
in any wife frustrated or defrauded. And lastly, know ye, When all the Feoffees
are dead saving four, the Survivors shall assure the same to others.
that the will, intent and meaning of me the said I. C. and of these presents
is, That from time to time for ever, within, etc. next after, the aforesaid
Persons to whom I have by these presents granted the aforesaid annuity or
yearly rent of, etc. to the uses aforesaid, their or any of their Assigns or
Grantees thereof shall be all deceased save four, that those four surviving
shall grant and assign over, by due form of Law, the aforesaid annuity or
yearly rent, and their estate and interest therein, to ten or twelve others of
the honest and most substantial Inhabitants of the said Parishes of, etc. for
the time being, and their Heirs for ever, to the use and intent before by me
mentioned and declared, whereof five or six be Inhabitants of the one of the
said Parishes, and the residue and so many of the other Parish. And my will, So
often as the said Feoffees die, the said Grant shall be revived.
intent and meaning is, and so I require the same, That in the same Grant and
Assignment so to be made by the said Survivors of the said Grantees, that this
my present Gift and Grant, and my full and whole intent and meaning herein,
shall be briefly and summarily recited, and of and in that manner; I will the
said yearly rent to be granted and conveyed from time to time for ever
hereafter, as often as all the Grantees of the same annuity or yearly rent for
the time being shall be deceased. And I do futher friendly require and
straightly charge the said, etc. their Heirs and Assigns, The Feoffeces
charge.
that they perform likewise, and further my intent and trus meaning in the
premises, as much as in them shall lie, as they will answer the same before the
Judgment Seat of Almighty God, at the dreadful day of Judgment. In witness
whereof, to every part of these tripartite Indentures, as well I the said I.C.
and, etc. as the said I.C. etc. have set to our hands and seals the, etc. and
in the, etc. whereof one part of the said Indentures remain and be safely kept
in the Parish Church of H. aforesaid, for ever, by the Churchwardens of the
Aforesaid Parish Church for the time hereafter being, to the use aforesaid; and
one other of the said parts of the said Indentures to remain and be safely kept
in the Parish Church of L. aforesaid, by the, etc. ut supra. And the third part
of the same Indentures to remain to me and mine Heirs for ever.

A Grant of an Annuity.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between A. B. of S. in the County of C. Esquire, of
the one part; and A.R. of London, Widow, the relict of T.R. late of B. in the
Parish of N. in the said County of C. deceased of the other part: Witnesses,
In consideration of a Surrender of a Lease of 21. years, and in consideration
of 200 l. in hand, paid at the ensealing hereof, and for and in consideration
of a perfect assurance to be made of an Annuity of 50 l. per annum, in lieu of
a Dowry for the natural life of A.R. and for diverse other considerations.
That the said A.B. for and in consideration of a Surrender to be made by the
said A.R. unto the said A.B. of one Lease for the term of one and twenty years
heretofore made by the said A. B. to the said A. R. of the capital Message
called B. and or certain Lands to the same belonging, lying in the Parish of L.
in the said County of C. And for and in consideration of the sum of two hundred
pounds of lawful money of England to the said A. B. in hand paid before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents by the said A. R. whereof and
wherewith the said A. B. acknowledges himself to be fully satisfied, contented
and paid, and thereof and of every part and parcel thereof does fully, clearly,
and absolutely exonerate, acquit and discharge the said A.R. her Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these presents: And for and
in confideration of a good and perfect Assurance and Estate to be made by the
said A.B. to the said A. R. of one Annuity or Rentcharge of fifty pounds by
the year to continue for and during the natural life of the said A.R. instead
and lieu of her Dowry of, in and to the Manor of D. in the said County of C.
And for diverse other good causes and considerations the said A. B. thereunto
especially moving: Grant of the 50 l. per ann. to A.R. out of the Manor of S.
with all the rights, members and appurtenances thereunto belonging to the said
Manor or Lordship of S. aforesaid, and out of all other Manours or Lordships
belonging to the said A. B. whatsoever whereof the said A. B. has or may have
possession or occupation in the Parish of S. or else within the said County of
C. etc.
Has given, granted and confirmed, and by these presents does for him and his
Heirs fully, freely, and absolutely give, grant and confirm unto the said A.R.
one Annuity or yearly Rentcharge of fifty pounds of good and lawful money of
England to be going, issuing, and payable out of all and singular that the
Manor and Lordship of S. in the said County of C. with the rights, members,
and appurtenances thereof. And out of all and singular Manours, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Woods, Under-woods, Copy-holds,
Rents, Reversions, Services and other Hereditaments whatsoever to the said
Manor or Lordship belonging or appertaining, or together with the same had,
holden, occupied, used, demised, letten or enjoyed, or reputed, taken or known
as part, parcel or member of the said Mauour or Lordship, set, lying and being
within the Parish of S. aforesaid, or elsewhere within the said County of C.
And out of all other the Manours, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments whatsoever of him the said A. B. or whereof the said A. B. has
or may have the possession or occupation lying and being within the Parish,
Village, Hamlets, Territories or Fields of S. aforesaid, or elsewhere within
the said County of C. To have, hold, receive, Habend. to A.R. to receive and
take the said annuity of 50 l. per ann. during her l^fe, to be paid at the four
most usual Feasts in the year by even and equal portions. Clause of
distress. At such dai^^ and places limited for payment thereof.
perceive, take and enjoy the said Annuity or yearly Rentcharge of fifty
pounds, and every part and parcel thereof unto the said A.R. and her Assigns
from the Day of the Date of these presents for and during the natural life of
the said A. R. the same to be yearly paid at or within the common Dyning. Hall
of the Middle Temple near Fleet street, London; at the four most usual Feasts
or Terms in the year, (that is to say) at the Feasts of the Annunciation of our
blessed Lady the Virgin Ma^y, etc. or within ten days next after every of the
said Feasts by even and equal portions. And that it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said A.R. for and during her natural life into the said Manor or
Lordship of S. Messuages, Lands, Tenements and into all other the premises, or
into any part thereof to enter and distrain for the said yearly rent of fifty
pounds, and the Arrearages thereof if any shall happen to be behind and unpaid,
and the Distress and Distresses there so had and taken, to take, drive, carry
away and impound, and in pound to detain and keep until the said A. R. and her
Assigns, and every of them, shall be of the said Annuity or yearly Rent of
fiffty pounds, and of the Arrearages thereof, and of all damages, losses and
expenses sustained by non-payment thereof fully contented and paid. And the
said A.B. does for himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
and for every of them, covenant, grant and agree to and with the said A.R. her
Executors and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents. In case
the said Annuity or Rentcharge happen to be behind and unpaid, then a nomine
paenae, and a distress for that also.
That if it shall happen the said Annuity or yearly Rentcharge of fifty pounds
at any time or times hereafter during the life of the said A.R. to be behind
and unpaid in part or in all after any of the said days of payment in or at,
which the same ought to be paid, (as aforesaid) That then the said A.B. Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns shall and will forfeit, lose and pay unto
the said A.R. and her Assigns the sum of twenty shillings of lawful money of
England, nomine paenae, for every day that the same or any part thereof shall
happen to be behind and unpaid after the days of payment above limited. And
then also and so often it shall and may be lawful to and for the said A. R. and
her Assigns into the said Manor or Lordship, and into all and singular other
the premises with their appurtenances, Nomine paena, of 20 s. and the
Arrearages thereof if any happen to be forfeited, and the Distress and
Distresses to drive and take away and keep until the nomine paenae and the
Arrearages be fully satisfied and paid.
and into every or any part or parcel thereof to enter and distrain for the
said nomine paena, of twenty shillings, and the Arrearages thereof if any shall
happen to be forfeited and unpaid, and the Distress and Distresses there had
and taken, to take, drive, carry and bear away, and the same to impound, and in
pound to detain and keep until the said A.R. and her Assigns of the sum of
twenty shillings so to be forfeited, Nomine paenae toties quoties, and of all
Arrearages of the same, and of all such damages, losses and expenses as the
said A. R. shall or may bear or sustain thereby, shall be fully satisfied,
contented, and paid. Covenant, that the Grantor is seized in Fee, without any
remainder or reversion in the, etc, of an absolute and indefeisable estate.
And the said A.B. does for himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, Covenant, grant and agree to and with the said A.R. her Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents,
That he the said A.B. the Day of the Date of these presents, is the lawful and
true Owner of the premises, and of every part thereof, and is lawfully seized
in his Demesne as of Fee-simple of and in the same to the use of him the said
A. B. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, without any remainder or reversion in,
etc. and without any use, condition, proviso or limitation, to alter, change,
revoke, or determine the same. Covenant, that the Land is of such a value,
hesides charges, etc.
And further, That the said Manor of Lordship, and other the premises, with
their appurtenances, now are and so shall continue and remain (during the
natural life of the said A.R. of the clear yearly value of one hundred and
forty pounds by the year over and above all charges and reprises.) And that
the Land shall be overt, etc. to the Distress.
And that the said premises and every part thereof are and shall be from time
to time during the natural life of the said A. R. overt and liable to the
Distress and Distresses of the said A. R. so the said annuity or yearly
Rentcharge of fifty pounds; and the said Nomine paenae, if the same or any
part thereof shall hereafter happen to be behind and unpaid at the days, time
and place above-limited for the payment thereof. Covenant to pay the said
Annuity at the times and places appointed.
And the said A.B. does further for himself, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, covenant, grant and agree to and with the said
A.R. and her Assigns, that he the said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns shall and
will from to time well and truly content, satisfy and pay, or cause to be well
and truly satisfied and paid unto the said A.R. and her Assigns (during her
natural life) the said Annuity or yearly Rentcharge of fifty pounds at the
place and days of payment before limited and appointed for the payment
thereof, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents. Covenant
for further assurance upon request, as shall be advised by Council.
And that he the said A.B. his Heirs and Assigns at his or their own proper
costs and charges in the Law shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter during the space and term of three years now next ensuing the Date
hereof upon every reasonable request in that behalf to be made to the said
Edmund, alias A.B. his Heirs, or Assigns by the said A.R. her assigns, do
make, execute and perform all and every such further assurance and coveyance of
the premises or any part thereof for the better assuring, settling, and
conveying of the said Annuity and yearly Rentcharge of fifty pounds in the
said A. R. to continue during her natural life, as by the Council learned in
the Law, of the said A.R. shall be reasonably devised, advised or required, be
it by Fine, Feoffment, Recovery with double or singular Voucher or Vouchers, or
by any other lawful ways or means whatsoever.

In witness whereof, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to enter and to deliver a Deed as Attorney, the same
being first sealed and signed by the Party.
TO all Christian People of whom this present Writing shall come, I Jo.T, of C.
in the Co. of M. Gent. send greeting in our Lord God everlasting: Know ye, that
whereas I the said J.T. have signed and sealed the writing of grant and
assignment hereounto annexed, but have not delivered the same as my act and
deed: Know ye, that I the said J.T. have constituted, ordained, autho^ized, and
in my place and stead put my welbeloved in Christ, N.E. of VV. in the County of
^lou^. Clerk, and E.B. of the same Town and County, Yeoman, my lawful Atturneys
jointly or severally for me and in my name to enter into the Manor of VV. and
the hereditaments in the said writing under my hand and seal mentioned, or in
any part or parcel thereof in the name of the whole according to the right
conveyed unto me by Sir VV.B. Knight, and thereof, or of any part thereof, to
take poflession for me and in my name; and after such possession thereof taken,
to deliver the Writing hereunto annexed unto Sir M.E. Knight, therein named, or
to his certain Attorney or Atturneys, or to any other Person or Persons to his
use, as my Act and Deed: Ratifying, allowing, approving and confirming all and
whatsoever my said Atturneys, or either of them, shall do in the premises,
according to my right, According to a Decree in Chancer^.
and the direction of a Decree or Order of the high Court of Chancery, dated
the 24. of January last past before the date hereof; and holding the same as
firm as if I my self had been personally present, and done the same.

In Witness, etc.

A Deed of Covenant of stand seized to uses, according to former Articles of
Agreement upon Marriage in tail, and for part of a Jointure.
THis INDENTVRE tripartite made, etc. Between Sir W.B. of D. in the County of
B. Knight, of the first party; N.S. of London, Esquire, of the second party:
and H.B. Esquire, Son and Heir apparent of the said Sir W. B. and A.S. sole
Daughter and Heir apparent of the said N.S. of the third party. Witnesses, For
and in consideration of part of performance and accomplishment of Articles and
Agreemennts made between Sir W. B. of the one part; and N.S. on the other part;
and in consideration of a Marriage to be solemnized between H. B. and A. S. and
for and in consideration of a Jointure to be made to A. S. in case ^^^^e
survive H. P.
That for and in part of performance and accomplishment of the Covenants and
Agreements comprised and contained in one pair of Articles of Agrrements
indented, had, made and concluded upon the sixth day of March last past before
the date hereof, between the said Sir W. B. of the one party, and the said N.
S. of the other party. And for and in consideration of a Marriage shortly
hereafter, by the grace of God, to be had and solemnized between the said Sit
H. B. and A.S. and for and in considertion of a Jointure to be ^ad and m^de
unto the said A. S. in case the said Marriage shall take effect; and that the
said A. shall happen to survive and over-live the said H.B. And for and toward
some provision of part of a livelihood and maintenance to be had and made unto
the said H.B. and A. S. during the natural lives of the said Sir W. B. and of
the said Lady M. his Wife; and for the continuance of the Manours, Lordships,
Capital Messuages, Farme^, Lands, Tenements and ^e^^ditaments hereafter
mentioned in the name, blood and kindred of the said Sir VV.B. and of the said
H.B. his said Son and Heir apparent, so long as it shall pleuse Almighty God,
Sir W.B. Covenants for him, his, etc. to and with N.S.H.B. and A.S. That he the
said Sir. W.B. his Heirs, etc. now standing or being seized of and in all and
singular the Manours, Capital Messuages or Farms, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Services and Hereditaments, etc. being freehold and inheritance of
the said Sir W. B. and of and in all and singular Messuages, Houses, Edifices,
Building, etc. in which the said Sir W. B. now has any estate of inheritance,
shall and will stand and be seized thereof, to the uses, intents and puroses
hereafter in this present Indenture at large expressed.
And for diverse other good and reasonable caused and consideration, him the
said Sir W. B. to these presents especially moving: It is Covenanted, grated,
concluded and fully agreed by and between the said Parties to these presents,
in manner and form following; That is to say, First, the said Sir W. B. for
himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators does covenant, promise and
grant by these presents, to and with the said N. S. H. B. and A. S. and to and
with every of them, their and every of their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, That he the said Sir W. B. and his Heirs, and all and every
other Person or Persons, and their Heirs, now standing or being seized, or
which at any time hereafter shall stand and be seized of and in all and
singular the Manours, Capital Messuages or Farms, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reyersions, Services and Hereditaments, with their and every of their
appurtenances of or in R. or elsewhere in the County of S. now or late being or
reputed the freehold and inheritance of the said Sir W. B. And of or in all and
singular Messuages, Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barnes, Stables, Orchards,
Gardens, Farms, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Woods,
Underwoods, Rents, Reversions, Services, Royalties and Hereditaments
whatsoever, with all and singular their and every of their appurtenances in R.
aforesaid, or elsewhere in the said County of S. of or in which the said VV. B.
now has any estate of inheritance: And of or in all and singular Rents and
yearly profits reserved due or payable out of or for the premises, and every o^
any part or parcel thereof; And of or in the reversion and reversions remainder
and remainders of the premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, shall and
will stand and be seized thereof, and of and in every part and parcel thereof,
to the uses, intents and purposes hereafter mentioned: That is to say, to the
use and behoof of the said Sir W. B. and his Heirs, until the said Marriage
had and solemnized between the said H.B. and A. then to the use of H.B. for and
during his natural life, without impeachment of wast; and after his decease,
theu to the use of A. for term of her natural life; And from and after the
decease of the Survivor of them the said H. and A. then to the use of the
Heirs males of the body of H. S. on the body of A. lawfully begotten: and for
default of such issue, then to the use and behoof of the Heirs males of the
said H. B. lawfully begotten: and for default of such issue, to the use and
behoof of the said Sir W. B. for and during his natural life; and after his
decease, to the use and b^hoof of R. B. second Son of Sir W. B. and of the
Heirs of the said R. lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue, then to
the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said W. B. for ever.
That is to say, to the use and behood of the said Sir W. B. and of his Heirs,
until the said Marriage shall be had and solemnized between the said H. B. and
the said A.S. and from and after the said Marriage had and solemnized between
the said H.B. and the said A. then to the use and behoof of the said H.B. and
of his Assigns, for and during the term of his natural life, without
impeachment of or for any manner of wast; and from and after his decease, then
to the use and behood of the said Ann^, and of her Assigns, for and during the
term of her natural life; and from and after the decease of the Survivor of
them the said H. and A. then to the use and behoof of the Heirs males of the
body of the said H.B. on the body of the said A. lawfully to be begotten: and
for default of such issue, then to the use and behood of the Heirs males of
the body of the said H.B. lawfully to be begotten: and for default of such
issue, then to the use and behoof of the said Sir W.B. and of his Assigns, for
and during the term of his natural life: and after his decease, then to the use
and behoof of R. B. second Son of the said Sir VV, B. and of the Heirs males
of the body of the said R. lawfully to be begotten: and for default of such
isse, then to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said Sir VV. B. for
ever. Covenant that the Lands are discharged, etc. or shall be saved ^^armel
^^^e from all inca^^brances.
And the said Sir VV. B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
and for every of them, does by these presents Covenant, promise and grant to
and with the said. N. S. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every o^
them, That the said Manor, etc. and all and singular other the premises, with
their apputenances before mentioned, now are and be, and so at all times
hereafter, and from timo to time, shall be, remain and continue unto the uses,
intents or purposes, before in or by these presents limited expressed or
declared, free and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted, exonerated and
discharged, or othetwise well and sufficiently saved and kept harmelesle of and
from all and all manner of Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Joyntures,
Dowers, Ules. Wills, Intailes, Fines, Feoffements, Recoveries, Statutes,
Merchant and of the Staple, Recognizances, Judgments, Executions, and of and
from all other charges, titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever, be or
shall be had, made, committed or done by the said Sir VV. B. or by any other
Person or Persons by his means, Excepeing certain Leases, etc. made by, etc.
the true Copies of Counterparts, whereof are now delivered by Sir W. B. to N. S.
consent or procurement. All such Leases, estates and interests as the said Sir
VV. B. has heretofore made, or caused or suffered to be made to any Person or
Persons of or concerning all and singular the said Manours, Capital Messuages
or Farms, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and other the premises, or any part
or parcel of them, by any Deeds, Indentures or Writings: the true Copies or
Coanterparts, whereof be now delivered by the said Sir VV. B. unto the said N.
S. (only exceptd and foreprized.) The usual Covenant for further assurance,
with every such further lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things,
device and devices in the Law whatsoever, for the more perfect and better
assurance of the said Manours, etc. to remain to such uses, intents and
purposes as are before in the presents limited.
And also, that he the said Sir VV. B. and his Heirs, shall and will at all
times hereafter, and from time to time at and upon the reasonable requests, and
costs, and charges of the said N. S. his Heirs or Assigus do, make,
knowledge, execute and suffer to be made and done all and every such further
lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things, device and devices, in
the Law whatsoever for the further, more better and perfect assurance, sure
making and conveying of the said Manours, etc. and of every part and Parcel
thereof to be and remain to such uses, limitations, intents and purposes, as are
thereof before, in, or by these presents limited, declared or appointed: Be it
be Recovery or Recoveries with one or more Voucher or Vouchers over, Fine or
Fines, with or without Proclamations, Feoffment or Feoffements, or by any other
ways or means whatsoever: as by the said N. S. his Heirs or Assigns, or by
his or their Council learned in the Law shall be reasonably devised, advised
required.

In witness whereof to one part of these present Indentures remaining with the
said N. S. the said Sir W. B. H. B. and A. S. have set their hands and seals.
To one other part of the said Indentures remaining with the said H. B. and A.
S. the said Sir W. B. and N. S. have set their hands and seals. And to one
other part of the same Indentures remaining with the said Sir W. B. the said N.
S. H. B. and A. S. have set their hands and seals: Given the Day and Year
first above written, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants to levy a Fine, and suffer a Recovery, for increase
of a Jointure.
THis INDENTVRE quadrupartice made, etc. Between Sir W. B. of D. in the County
of B. Knight, Lady Mary his Wife, and H. B. Esquire, their Son and Heir
apparent, of the first party: N. S. of London, Esquire of the second party: Sir
H. M. of Little E. in the County of E. Knight, W. G. of Westminster. in the County
of M. Esquire R. B. Citizen and Grocer of L.VV.G. and J.J. of Land. Esquire For and
in consideration of part of performance and accomplishment of Articles and
agreements made between Sir W. E. and N.S. the 6. of M. and for the assurance,
and increase of a Jointure for the Lady M. in case she sutyive Sir W.B. And
afor and in consideration of a Marriage to be had: between H. B. and A. S.
only Dughter of N. S. In recompente of Jointure and Dower.
of the third party: and G.S. of London Gent. and S. M. of the fourth party:
witnesses, that for and in part of performance and accomplishment of the
Covenants and agreements comprised and contained in one pair of Articles of
agreement indented, had, made and concluded upon the sixth day of M. last before
the Date hereof made between the said Sir VV. B. of the one party, and the said
N. S. of the other party: and for further assurance and increase of a Jointure
unto the said Lady Mary in case she shall happen to survive the said Sir VV. B.
her now Husband. And for and in consideration of a marriage shortly hereafter
by the grace of God to behad and solemnized between the said H. B. and A. S.
now the only Daughter and Heir apparent of the said N. S. And for and in full
satisfaction and recompense of such Jointure and Dower as she said A. shall or
may have or challenge out of, in or to all or any of the Manours, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments of him the said. H. B. (in case the said A. do
survive and outlive the said H.B.) And for the continuance of the Manor,
Lordship, Lands. Tenements, Hereditaments hereafter mentioned in the name,
blood, and kindred of the said Sir W. B. and of the said H. B. his said Son and
Heir apparent so long as it shall please Almighty God. And for other
considerations the said Sir W. B. does Covenant with the said parties to these
presents, That he the said Sir W. B. for him, his Heirs, etc. does Covenant,
etc. to and with the said N. S. his Heirs, etc. That he the said Sir W. E. the
L. Mary his Wife, and H. B. at or before the, etc. now next ensuing the date
hereof, shall and will by Fine or Fines in due form of Law in the Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, there to be recorded, with Proclamations according to
the Stature: convey and assure unto the said G.S. and S. M. and their Heirs,
all the Manor and Lordship of D. and Capital Mestuages, with all the rights
members and appurtenances thereof in the County of B. with all land, meadows,
pastures, feedings, etc.
And for diverse other good and reasonable causes and considerations him the
said Sir VV. B. to these presents, especially moving. It is Covenanted,
granted, concluded and sully agreed by and between the said parties to these
presents in mannet and form following, (that is to fay) the said Sir VV. B. for
him, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators does covenant, promise, and grant
by these presents, to and with the said N.S. his Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, That he the said Sir VV. B. the Lady Mary his Wife, and the
said H. B. at or before the, etc. now next ensuing the Date of these presents,
shall and will by Fine or Fines in due form of Law to be levied in the Court of
Common Pleas usually holden at VVestm' there to be recorded, with Proclamations
according to the Stat or one of them in that behalf made and provided in such
sort, as is commonly used in the same Court, convey and assure unto the said G.
S. and S. M. and their Heirs, or to the Heirs of one of them. All that the
Manor and Lordship of D. etc. and Capital Message, etc. with all the rights
members and appurtenances thereof in the said County of B. and all lands
meadows, pastures, feedings, moors, marshes, fenny grounds and hereditaments
to the said Capital Message belonging or appertaining, or therewith used,
occupied, or enjoyed. Advowson, donation, gift, free dispontion and right of
patronage of the Rectory, and Parish Church of D. aforesaid, with all lands and
meadows, pastures, etc. called or known by the name of etc. And all the
Copyholds and customary Mestuages and Tenem. parcel or holden of the said
Manor of D.
And also all the Advowson, Donatiou, gift, free disposition and right of
Patronage of the Rectory and Parish Church of D. aforesaid in the said County
of B. And all those meadows, lands, pastures, woods, and hereditaments called
or known by the name of, etc. And all Messuages, Granges, Milnes, Lands,
Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Commons, Wastes, Woods and Underwoods
to the said Manor belonging or appertaining, and the soil and ground of the
said Woods and Underwoods. And all the Copyhold and customary Messuages, Lands
and Tenements parcel or holden of the said Manor of D. And all rents and
services as well of Freeholders as of Copyholders, and all other Rents
reserved upon all and every Grant and Grants, Demise and Demises made of the
premises, or of any part or parcel thereof, and all and every their or any of
their Reversion and Reversions of the said premises, or any of them. And all
other commodities, profits, emoluments, and hereditaments whatsoever, with
their appurtenances, situate, lying and being in D. aforesaid, in the said
County of B. or elsewhere within the Commonwealth of England, to the said
Manor, Lorship, Capital Messuages and premises, or any of them belonging or in
any wise appertaining, or as part, parcel or member of the said Manor,
Lordship, etc. and other the premises, or any of them, at any time heretofore
had, known, accepted, used, demised, letten or reputed. Court Barons, Court
Leets, etc.
And all and all manner of Court Barons, Court Leets, views, of Frank-pledges,
Law-dayes, perquisits and profits of Writs, All perquisites and goods of
Felons, etc.
and all that to any such Courts which do or may belong or appertain, goods,
and chattels wayved goods and chattels of Felons and Fugitives, Felons of
themselves and put in exigent, or by any other ways or means convicted,
condemned; or attainted, Free Warrens, Franchises and Royalties, etc.
Knights fees, free-warrens, liberties, franchises, privileges, jurisdictions,
Royalties, the assise of bread, wine and ale, fayres, markets, tolls, profits,
commoditles and emoluments, whatsoever to the said Manor, Lordship, Capital
Message, and all other the premises, and every or any of them belonging or in
any wise appretaining; and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and
Remaiders of all and singular the premises, and every part and parcel thereof.
And also all that Message, Tenement or Farm, and all the Lands, Meadows,
Pastures and Underwoods to the same belonging, situate, lying and being in D.
aforesaid, in the said County of B. called or known by the name of D. And all
and singular other the Manours, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments whatsoever of the said Sir W. B. lying and being within the
Parish of D. in the said County of B. or elsewhere within the said County of B.
And to the intent that G. S. and S. M. may be perfect Tenants of the freehold,
that one or more Recovery or Recoveries may be there of had and pursued by the
said Sir H. M. W. G. etc. or some of them: whereupon the said Sir W. B. Lady M.
his Wife, and H. B. shall be vouched in such manner, with such and so many
Vouchers as by the said N. S. his Heirs, etc. or by his Council learned in the
Laws shall be reasonably devised, or advised, and required.
To the intent and purpose that they the said G.S. and S.M. shall lor may be
the full and perfect Tenants of the Freehold of the premises in such sort as
that one or more Recovery or Recoveries may be thereof and of every of them had
and pursued by the said Sir H.M.W.G. To. B. W. G. and F. J. or some of them;
whereupon the said Sir W.B. Lady M. his Wife and H. B. shall be vouched in such
sort and manner, and shall so therein demean themselves that one or more
Recovery or Recoveries shall or may be had, with such and so many Vouchers as
by the said N. S. his Heirs, Executors or Administrators, or by his or their
Council learned in the Law shall be reasonably devised, or advised and
required. The which shall be executed accordingly, before the Feast Day of,
etc. now next ensuing. And it is fully concluded and agreed by and between all
the said parties to these presents, That as well the said fine, the said
Recovery and Recoveries, and the execution and executions thereupon to be had,
and all other Fines and Recoveries to the uses, intents and purposes hereafter
mentioned, shall be, and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be, and she
Recoverers and every of them, and their Heirs shall and will stand and be
seized, and be adjudged, deemed and taken to be sejzed of the said Manor and
premises, and of every of them to the uses, intents and put poses hereafter
mentioned, To the only use and behoof of the said Sir W. B. his, etc during
his natural life: and after his decease, to the use of the L. M. his now Wife,
and her Assigns, during her life, in recompense of her Jointure and Dower, and
after her decease, and after the Marriage had between H. B. and A. S. then of
and concerning all those Lands, Tenemants and Hereditaments, with the
appurtenances called 5. To the only use and behoof of H. B. and his Assigns
during his life, without impeachment of waste; and after his decease, then to
the use and behoof of the said A. and her Assigns for and during her life, and
in full satisfaction and recompense of the Jointure and Dower of the said A. of
and in all and singular the Lands, etc. of the said H. B. and after the decease
of the Survivor of the said H. and A. then to the use of the Heirs males of the
body of H. B. on the body of A. lawfully begotten; and for default of such
issue, to the Heirs males of H. B. and for default of such issue, then to the
use of R. B. second Son of Sir W. B. and of the Heirs males of the body of the
said R. lawfully begotten; and for default of such issue, then to the use of
the third Son of the body of Sir W. B. upon the body of the said Lady M.
lawfully begotten or to be begotten, and for default of such issue, then to the
use of every other Son and Sons of the said Sir W. B. successively and in order
as they be in seniority of age, and of the Heirs males of their several bodies
lawfully begotten: and for default of such Son and issue male, then to the use
and behoof of the Heirs females of the body of the said Sir W. B. upon the body
of the said La. M. lawfully begotten: and for default of such issue, then to
the use and behoof of the Heirs males of the said Sir W. B. lawfully begotten:
and for default of such issue, then to the right Heirs of the said La. M. for
ever.
(that is to say) To the only proper use and behoof of the said Sir W. B. and
of his Assigns for and during the term of his natural life without impeachment
of or for any manner of waste. And from and after his decease, then to the
only use and behoof of the said Lady Mary now his Wife, and of her Assigns for
and during the term of her natural life in part of satisfaction and recompense
of her Jointure and Dower. And from and after the decease of the Lady Mary: and
after the said Marriage, had and solemnized between the said H. B. and the said
A. S. then of, for, and concerning all those Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, with their appurtenances commonly called S. etc. to the only
use and behoof of the said H. B. and of his Assigns for and during the term of
his natural life without impeachment of or for any manner of waste: And from
and after his decease, then to the use and behoof of the said A. and of her
Assigns for and during the term of her natural life, in full satisfaction and
recompense of the Jointure and Dower of tue said Aunt; out of, in and to all
and sigular the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of the said H. B. And from
and after the decease of the Survivor of the said H. and A. Then to the use and
behoof of the Heirs males of the body of the said H. B. on the body of the said
A. lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such issue, then to the use of
the Heirs males of the body of the said H. B. lawfully to be begotten. And for
default of such issue, then to the use and behoof of R. B. second Son of the
said Sir W. B. and of the Heirs males of the body of the Son R. lawfully to be
begotten: And for default of such issue, then to the use and behoof of the
third Son of the body of the said Sir W. B. upon the body of the said L. M.
lawfully begotten or to be begotten: and of the Heirs males of the body of the
said third Son lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such issue, then to
the use and behoof of all and every other Son and Sons of the body of the said
Sir W. B. upon the body of the said La. M. lawfully to be begotten,
successively and in order one after the other as they shall succeed and be in
seniority or of age, and of the Heirs males of the several bodies of all and
every such other Son and Sons lawfully to be begotten. And for default of all
and every such Son or issue male, then to the use and behoof of the Heirs
females of the body of the said Sir W. B. upon the body of the said La. M.
lawfully begotten or to be begotten: And for default of such issue, then to the
use and behoof of the Heirs males of the body of the said Sir W. B. lawfully to
be begotten. And for default of such issue, then to the use and behoof of the
right Heirs of the said La. M. for ever. And for and concerning the rest and
residue of the said Manours of D. and other the Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and premises, with the appurtenances in the said County of B.
whereof no use or uses are limited, declared or appointed from and after the
decease of the said Sir W. B. and La. M. and of the Survivor of them shall be
adjudged, deemed, and taken to be seized of the rest and residue of the said
Manor of D. aforesaid, to the uses hereafter mentioned; to the use of the said
H. B. and of the Heirs males of his body on the body of A. lawfully begotten:
and for default of such issue, then to the use of the Heirs males of the body
of H. B. lawfully begotten; and for default of such issue to the use of R. B.
second Son of Sir W. B. and so for default to the third Son, and of the Heirs
of the third Son lawfully begotten; and for default of such issue, then to the
use of all and every Son, as in the former is expressed.
And of, for and concerning all and singular the rest and residue of the said
Manor of D. and other the Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditamenes, and
premises with the appurtenances in the said County of B. whereof no use or uses
is or are before in or by these presents limited declated, or appointed, from
and after the decease of the said W. B. and La. M. and of the Survivor of them:
That then the said Recovery and the execution thereupon to be had and executed
shall be and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be, and the Recoverers and
every of them, and their and every of their Heirs shall and will from and after
the decease of the Survivor of the said Sir W. B. and La. M. stand and be
seized, and be adjudged, deemed and taken to be seized of the rest and residue
of the said Manor and premises in D. aforesaid and of every of them to the
uses, intents and purposes hereafter mentioned, (that is to say) To the use and
behoof of the said H. B. and of the Heirs males of the body of the said H. B.
on the body of the said A. lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such
issue, then to the use and behoof of the Heirs males of the body of the said H.
B. lawfully to be begotten; And for default of such issue, then to the use and
behoof of the said R. B. the second Son of the said Sir VV. B. and of the Heirs
males of his body lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such issue, then
to the use and behoof of the third Son of the body of the said Sir W. B. upon
the body of the said La. M. lawfully to be begotten, and of the Heirs males of
the said third Son lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such issue, then
to the use and behoof of all and every other Son and Sons of the body of the
said Sir VV. etc. (as in the former.) And the said Sir VV. B. for himself, his
Heirs, The said Sr. W. B. for the considerations aforesaid, does further
Covenant for him, his, etc. to and with the said N. S. his, etc. that he the
said Sir W. B. and his Heirs, and every other Person and Persons and their
Heirs now standing or being seized or hereafter shall-stand and be seized in
all those Messuages, Tenements or farms, lands and hereditaments of J. H. and
H. in the County of M. whereof Sir W. B. now has any estate of inheritance,
and of and in all lands, etc. whatsoever to them or any of them belonging or in
any wise appertaining: And of and in the Reversion or Reversions, Remainder or
remainders of the same shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter stand and be seized thereof, and of every part thereof to the uses,
intents and purposes hereafter declareds
Executors and Administrators, and for every of them does for the
considerations aforesaid further covenant, promise and grane by these presents
to and with the said N. S. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every
of them, that he the said Sir VV.B and his Heirs, and all and every other
Person and Persons and their Heirs now standing, or being seized, or which at
any time hereafter shall stand or be seized of or in all these Messuages,
Tenements, or Farms, Lands, Tenements and Hereditamonts in J. H. and H. in the
said County of M. whereof or wherein the said Sir VV. B. now has any estate of
inheritance, and of and in all lands, meadows, pastures, feedings, commons,
woods, under woods, rents, and hereditaments wharsoever to them or any of them
belonging or in any wife appertaining, or now or late used, occupied or enjoyed
to or with the same serveral Messuages or Tenements, or any of them as part,
parcel; or member of the or any of them. And of and in the Reversion and
Reversions, remainder and remainders of the same, or any of them shall and will
from time to time and at all rimes hereafter stand and be seized thereof, and
of every, part and parcel thereof to the uses, intents, and purposes hereaster
in and by these presents limited, To the oncly use and behoof of the said Sir
W. B. and his Assigns, for term of his life, without impeachment of waste: and
after his decease, to the use of the said La. M. his Wife and her Assings, for
her ise, in full saltisfaction and recompense of her Join ture and Dower of and
in all the Monours, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of the said Sir W. B her
Husband: and from and after the decease of the said La. M. and after the said
Marriage solemnized between R. B. and A. S. then to the use of the said H. B.
and of the Heirs males of the body of H. B. on the body of A. S. lawfully
bagorten: and for default of such issue, then to the uses, as aforesaid.
expressed and declared (that is to say) To the only proper use and behoof of
the said Sir VV. B. and of his Assiges, for and during the term of his natural
life, without impeachment of or for any manner of waste^^ and from and after
his decease, then to the only use and behoof of the said La. M. now his Wife,
and of her Assigns, for and during the term of her natural life, in full
satisfaction and recompense, and a further increase of her Jointure and Dower,
of, in, out of and to all and singular the Manours, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments of the said Sir VV. B. her Husband; and from and after the
decease of the said La. M. and aster the said Marriage had and solemnized
between the said H. B. and the said A. S^ then to the only use and behoof of
the faid H. B. and of the Heirs males of the body of the said H. B. on the body
of the said A. S. lawfully to be begotten: and for desanlt of such issue, them
to the use and behoof of the Heirs males of the body of the said H. B. lawfully
to be begotten: and for default of such issue, then to the use and behoof of
the said R. B. second Son of the said Sir. VV. B. and of the Hein males of the
body of the said R. B. lawfully to be begotten: And for default of such issue,
then to the use and behoof of the third Son of the said Sir VV. B. upon the
body of the said La. M. lawfully begotten or to be begotten, and of the Heirs
males of the body of the said third Son lawfully to be begotten; and for
default of such issue, then to the use and behoof of all and every other Son
and Sons of the body of the said Sir W. B. upon the body of the said La Mary
lawfully to be begotten: successively and in order one after the other, as they
shall succeed and be in Seigniority or in age and of the Heirs males of the
several bodies of all and every such other Son and Sons lawfully to be
begotten: and for default of all and every such Son or issue male, then to the
use and behoof of the Heirs females of the body of the said Sir W. B. upon the
body of the faid L. M. lawfully begotten or to be begotten: and for dufault of
such issue, then to the use and behoof of the Heirs males of the body of the
said Sir W. B. lawfully to be begotten: and for default of such issue, then to
the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said La. M. forever. Provided
always, and it is Covananted, granted, Covenant that if he shall se^le other
lands of the like estate, and in lieu of the former, then the estate limited in
the firsty Lands to cease, etc.
concluded and fully agreed by and between all and every the said Parties to
these presents, and it is the true intent and meaning of these presents, and of
the said Parties to the same, That if the said Sir W. B. or the said H. B. or
either of them, shall at any time hereafter during the natural life of the said
A. S. convey and settle, or cause or procure a good, perfect, and inde^eisible
estate in the Law, to be s^^led and conveyed in and to the said A. or to her
use and behoof in any other Manor or Manours, Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments within the Commonwealth of England, of the clear yearly value
of, etc, of lawful money of England, or more, over and above all charges and
reprizes for term of the life of the said A. to and for the only use of the
said A. to begin and to take effect in Possession immediately upon the
deceasing of the Survivor of the said Sir W. B. La. M. his Wife, and H. B. in
lieu and recompense of such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and other the
premises in. D. aforesaid, as are before in or by these presents intended or
agreed to be conveyed and assured unto the said A. S. for and during the term
of her natural life, in such manner and form as is aforesaid: Then the estate
for life hereby limited and appointed to or for the said A. of, in and to the
said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all and singular other the
premises in D. aforesaid, shall cease; determine and be utterly void, frustrate
and of none effect: and then and from henceforth the said recovery and
recoveries, with the execution thereupon to be had and obtained, shall be and
shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be: And the said Recoveters, and every
of them, their and every: of their Heirs, shall and will stand and be seized,
and be adjudged, deemed and taken to be seized after the decease of the
Survivor of them the said Sir VV. B. Dame M. and H. B. of and in such and so
much of the said Lands and Tenements, and other the premises in D. aforesaid,
as is limited or appointed before in or by these presents, to or for the use of
the said A.S. the Daughter, for term of her life, as is aforesaid, to the
only use and behoof of the Heir males of the body of the said H. B. on the
body of the said A. the Daughter lawfully to be begotten: and for default of
such issue, then to such further use and uses, behoofs, intents and purposes as
be thereof before in, or by these presents limited, expressed or declared, and
to none other use or uses, intents or purposes whatsoever (any thing before in
these presents meniioned or contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.) Provided also, Proviso, to make Leases not exceeding ^1. year.
and it is further Covenanted, granted, concluded and fully agreed by and
between all and every the said Parties to these presents, and every of them,
and it is the true intent and meaning of these presents, and of the Parties to
the same, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Sir W. B. at all
and every time and times hereafter, when and as often as it shall please him by
any Writing or Writings to be sealed and subscribed by and with the hand and
seal of the said La. Ma. as by and with the hand and seal of the said Sir W. B.
in the presence of three or more sufficient Witnesses, and not otherwise. And
also, that it shall and may by lawful to and for the said Sir W. B. at any time
after the decease of the said La. M. his Wife, or by any Writing or Writings by
him to be sealed and subscribed in the presence of three or more sufficient
Witnesses, and not otherwise, to make any Lease or Leases, Demise of Demises of
so much of the said Manor of D. and other the premises in D. aforesaid, as is
limited or appointed to or for the Jointure of the said A. or of any part or
parcel thereof, to any Person or Persons for any term or term of years not
exceeding the term of one and twenty years, to take effect immediately from the
making of such Lease or Leases, Demise or Demises; So as upon such Leases, as
much rent the reserved as the Land is worth.
So as upon every such Lease or Leases so as is aforesaid, to be made, such and
so much yearly rent or rents, or more, shall be reserved for every parcel or
parcels of the premises so to be demised, as is mentioned or expressed in a
Writing indented, bearing date with these presents, to one part whereof the
said Sir W. B. has set his hand and seal, and to the other part whereof the
said N. S. has set his hand seal, the said premises so meant or intended to be
demised, be rated and valued at to be yearly worth. And also, that it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said Sir W. B. and La. M. his Wife, at all and
every time and times hereafter during the term of their natural lives, when and
as often as it shall please them, by any Writing or Writings by them to be
sealed and subscribed in the presence of three or more sufficient Witnesses, to
make any Lease or Leases, Demise or Demises of so much of the said Manor of D.
and other the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises in D. I. H. and
H. aforesaid, as are not limited or appointed to or for the Jointure of the
said A. Covenant that the Recoverees and Recoverers shall stand seized to the
use of such Leases.
to any Person or Persons, etc. (as in the former last Proviso.) And for the
further and better fortification, surety and sure making of all and every the
said Lease and Leases, Demise and Demises to be had and made according to the
true meaning of these presents; It is further provided and fully Covenanted,
granted, concluded and agreed by and between the said Parties to these
presents, and every of them, That at all times from and after the said Lease
and Lease, Demise and Domises so to be had and made, as it aforesaid, the said
Recovery and Recoveries before mentioned, shall be, and shall be adjudged,
esteemed and taken to be: And the said Recoveries and their Heirs, and all and
every other Person and Persons, and their Heirs, then standing or being
seized, or which at any time from thenceforth shall stand or be seized of or in
so much of the said Manor and premises, as shall so happen from time to time
to be Leased or Demised in manner and form, and according to the true meaning
of these presents, shall from thenceforth stand and be seized thereof, and of
every part and parced thereof to the use and uses of all and every such Person
and Persons to whom any such Lease or Leases, Demise or Demises shall be so had
or made, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for and during the
continuance of all and every the said Lease and Leases, Demise and Demises; and
that in all things arccording to the true intent and meaning of all and every
the said Lease and Leases, Demise and Demises, so long as the said Leasee and
Leasees, So long at the rent shall be paid.
Demisee and Demisees, their Executors and Assigns, shall and do well and truly
satisfy and pay the rents reserved in and by the said Lease or Leases, And
after the expiration of such Leases, then to the uses limited by this Deed.
Demise or Demises. And from and after the expiration of all and every the same
Lease and Leases, Demise and Demises to be had and made, as aforesaid, and as
they shall severally end and determine: Then and from thenceforth, to such
further use and uses, purposes and intents, as be thereof before in these
presents expressed and declared, and as by the true intent and meaning of these
presents they should or ought to have done if no such Lease and Leases, Demise
or Demises had been thereof at any time had or make (any matter or thing herein
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. The usual
Covenant to free from encumbrances
And the said Sir W. B. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
and for every of them, does by these presents Covenant, promise and grant to
and with the said N. S. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of
them, that the said Manours, Capital Messuages or Farms, Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Reversions, Services, Heredicaments, and all and singular other the
premises, with the appurtenances, now are and be, and so at all times
hereafter, and from tine to time, shall be, remain and continue unto the uses,
intents and purposes before in and by these presents limited, expressed, or
declared, free and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted, exonerated and
discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved and kept harmless of and from all
and all manner of former and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases,
Joyntures, Dowers, Uses, Wills, Intailes, Fines, Feoffements, Recoveries,
Statutes Merchant, and of the Staple, Recognizances, Judgments, Executions, and
of and from all other charges, titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever,
had, made, Excepting certain Leases, etc. made by, etc.
committed or done by the said Sir W. B. or by any other Person or Persons by
his means, confent or procurements, (all such Leases, Estates Interests as he
the said Sir W. B. has heretofore made to any Person or Persons of or upon the
said Manours, Messuages, Farms, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and other the
premises, or of or upon any part or parcel of them; upon which Leases there is
reserved the old and accustomed yearly rent or rents, or more, which shall
continue yearly due and payable, according to such limitations and appointments
as are thereof before in or by these presents expressed or declared, only
excepted and foreprized.) And also, The usual Covenant for further assurance.
that he the said Sir W. B. the said La. M. his Wife, and the said H. B. and
every of them, their and every of their Heirs, shall and will at all times
hereafter, and form time to time, during the space of, etc. now next ensuing,
at and upon the reasonable request, and costs and charges in the Law of the
said N. S. his Heirs or Assigns, do, make, knowledge, excecute and suffer to
be made and done, all and every such further lawful and reasonable act and
acts, thing and things, device and devices in the Law whatsoever, for the
further, clearer, more perfect and better assurance, sure making and coveying
of the said Manor, Capital Messuages or Farms, Lands, Tenements, Here
ditaments, and other the premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, to be
and remain to such uses, limitations, intents and purposes, as thereof before
in or by these presents limited, expressed, declared or appointed; be it by
Recovery or Recoveries, with one or more Voucher or Vouchers over, Fine or
Fines, with or without Proclamations, Feoffment or Feoffments, or by any other
ways or means whatsoever, as by the said N. S. his Heirs or Assigns, or by
his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised, or
advised and required; so as the estates and uses hereby limited, appointed and
intended to and for the said Sir W. B. and La. M. be not thereby forfeited,
impeached, determined, impaired or encumbered.

In witness whereof, to one pair of these present Indenoures remaining with
the said Nicholas S. the said Sir W. B. Lady M. his Wife, H.B. Sir. H.M. W.G.
R.B. W.G. F.I. G.S. and S.M. have set their hands and seals. To one other pair
of these same Indentures remainin with the said Sir H.M. W.G. R.B. W.G. and
F.I. the said Sir W.B. Lady M. his Wife, H.B. N.S. G.S. and S.M. have set their
hands and seals. To one other pair of the same Indentures remaining with the
said G.S. and S.M. the said Sir W.B. Lady M. his Wife, H.B. N.S. Sir H.M. W.G.
R.B. W.G. and F.I. have set their hands and seals. And to one other pair of
Indentures remaining with the said Sir W.B. Lady M. his Wife, and H.B. the said
N.S. Sir H.M. W.G. R.B. W.G. F.I. G.S. and S.M. have set their hands and seals:
Given the day and year first above written, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants to levy a Fine, and for the payment of an Annuity,
etc.
THis INDENTVRE tripartite, made, etc. Between I. C. of B. in the County of S.
Esquire, and Dame W. his Wife, of the first part; VV. B. Son and Heir apparent
of the said Dame W. and K. his Wife, of the second part; and W. Q. of, etc. L.
D. and R. W. of the third part. Witnesses, A Covenant to levy a Fine before
the Feast of Easter next coming, at the costs and charges of W. B. and as shall
be devised or advised by the Council learned in the Law of the said I. C. and
W. B. acknowledge and levy unto the said W. Q. L. D. and R. U. one fine, sur
conusance de droit, etc. of all that Lordship and Manor of L. with the
appurtenances, in the County of W. and all Houses, Buildings, Meadows,
Pastures, etc. and all other the premises in these presents mentioned.
That it is covenanted and agreed by and between the said Parties to these
presents, and each of them for him and themselves, and every of them, their and
every of their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, do Covenanr and grant to
and with the other of them, their and either of their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators in manner and form following, (That is to say) That they the
said I. C. Dame W. W.B. and K. before the Feast of Easter now next coming,
shall and will at the costs and charges of the said VV. B. and as shall be
reasonably devised or adsived by the Council learned in the Law of the said I.
C. and W. B. acknowledge and levy unto the said W. Q. L.D. and R.W. one Fine,
sur conusance de droit, cum ceo que il a de son done, Of all that the Lordship
and Manor of L. with the appurtenances in the County of Worcester; and of all
Houses, Buildings, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Leasowes, Pastures, Commons,
Woods, Under-woods, Waters, Fishings, Rents, Reversions, Services and
Hereditaments whatsoever in the said County of W. to the said Lordship and
Manor, or to either of them, belonging or appertaining, or accepted, used or
reputed as part, parcel or belonging to the same. And of all such other
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments whatsoever
of the said I. C. and Dame W. or of either of them, with the appurtenances,
situate, lying and being within the Towns, Parishes, The Fine so to be levied,
shall be and the said W.Q. L.D. and R.W. their Heirs, etc. by force thereof,
stand seized to the uses, intents and purposes hereafter expressed.
Hamlets or Fields of L. aforesaid, which sometimes were the inheritance of Sir
T.L. Knight, Father of the said Dame VV. and of Dame A. his Wife, or either of
them. Which Fine so to be had and levied, or in what manner or form soever the
same shall be had and levied, shall be; and the said W.Q. L.D. and R.W. their
Heirs and Assigns, shall by force thereof stand and be seized of the said
Lordship, and all other the premises, to the uses, intents and purposes, and
upon condition and limitation hereafter in these presents limited, expressed,
and declared: That is to say, To the intent that such a one shall have such a
rent.
First, to the intent and purpose that the same Dame W. and her Assigns, shall
and may yearly, during her natural life, lawfully and peaceably have, perceive
and take out of the said Lordship and Manor, and all other the premises, one
annual rent of, etc. of lawful English money, at two Days of Feasts of the
year (that is to say) at the Feasts of, etc. by even and equal portions to be
paid yearly during the life of the said Dame VV. by the said W. B. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in manner and form aforesaid, at or in
the Middle-Temple-Hall near Fleet Street, London. And further, And to the
intent and upon condition, that if the rent be behind and unpaid by, etc. then
to re-enter.
to the intent, use and purpose, and upon condition, That if it shall happen
the said yearly rent, or any part thereof, to be behind, or unpaid at the place
of payment aforesaid, by the space of fourscore and ten days next after any of
the said days of payment; That then it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said Dame W. and her Assigns, into the said Lordship and Manor, and all other
the premises, to re-enter, and the same to have and hold for the term of her
life, as in her now present and former estate and right. And to and for that
purpose it is agreed by and between all the said Parties to these presents, And
after such default in payment, the said Fine to be to such uses.
for them, their Heirs and Assigns, that after such default of payment, the
said Fine shall be, and shall be deemed and taken to be to the use of the said
Dame VV. and her Assigns, for the term of her life, without impeachment of or
for any manner of waste, and in as large beneficial sort and manner as the said
I.C. and Dame W. and as in right of the same Dame VV. now have or ought to have
and hold the same (the said Fine, or any other matter or thing in these
presents to the contrary in any wife notwithstanding.) And it is moreover
agreed by and between all the said Parties to these presents, for them, their
Heirs and Assigns, that the said Fine shall be to the further use, intent and
purpose, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Dame WJ: and her
Assigns, at all time and times, when and as often as the said yearly rent, or
any part thereof, shall happen to be behind or unpaid at the place of payment
aforesaid, by the space of 28 days next after any of the said Feasts of
payment. To have, perceive and take out of the said Lordship and Manor, and
other the premises, or any part thereof, Nomine poenae for non-payment of the
Rent. Clause of distress.
10 l. of lawful English money, Nomine poenae. And that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said Dame W. and her Assigns, at all time and times into
the said Lordship and Manor, and other the premises, to enter and distrain, as
well for the said sum of money so to be forfeited, Nomine poenae, as for the
arrearages of the said rent which shall so happen to be behind or unpaid. And
the distress and distresses there taken or found to impound, and in pound to
detain and keep until the said arrearages of the said yearly rent and sums so
to be forfeited nomine poenae, as aforesaid, shall be according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents satisfied amd^paid. And further, it is
also agreed by and between all the said Parties to these presents, for them,
their Heirs and Assigns, The Fine to other parts to be to such uses.
that the said Fine as to the said Lordship and Manor, and all other the
premises before mentioned, to be hereby conveyed or assured to the said VV. Q.
L.D, and R.VV. shall be to the use of the said VV.B. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, under, upon, and subject to the payments, charges, forfeitures,
conditions, re-entries, limitations, intents and purposes in these presents
formerly mentioned and expressed, and according to the intent and true meaning
of these presents, and not otherwise. And the said VV. B. for himself, his
Heirs, Covenant, to pay the said Rent.
and Administrators does Covenant and grant to and with the said J.C. and Dame
VV. their Executors, Administrators end Assigns by these presents, That he the
said VV. B. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns shall and will
well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said J.C. and Dame VV. their or
either of their Assigns during the joint lives of the said J.C. and Dame VV.
and after the death of the said J.C. to the said Dame VV. (if she survive the
said I.C.) and to her Assigns, the said yearly sum of, etc. in manner and form
aforesaid, and according to the purport, intent, and true meaning of these
presents: So long as the Land shall be enjoyed without eviction, etc.
So long as be or they shall or may have and enjoy the premises mentioned to be
conveyed by the said Fine, without lawful eviction, and lawful expulsion of or
by the said I.C. and Dame VV. or of either of them. And also that he the said
VV.B. his Heirs or Assigns so long as he or they shall or may in like fort
have and enjoy the said premises mentioned to be conveyed by the said Fine,
Covenant, to day 80 l. per an. besides the former Rent.
without the lawful eviction, and lawful expulsion of the said I. C. and Dame
VV. or of either of them upon any good, lawful or just title, other then for or
by reason of any default of any of the payments aforesaid, or of any part
thereof, shall and will yearly well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the
said Dame W. and her Assigns for and during her natural life, the yearly sum
or rent of 80 l. of lawful money of England, over and besides the said yearly
rent of, etc. at the place of payment aforesaid, and at the said Feasts of,
etc. yearly by even and equal portions, or on the 19. day next after each of
the said Feasts: For the payment of which said 80 l. the Party binds himself in
a thousand marks.
To and for the payment of which said Dame W. at the said Feasts and days of
payment aforesaid, according to the purport, true intent and meaning of these
presents. The said VV. B. and L.D. do by these presents bind them and either of
them, their and either of their Heirs, Executors and Administrators unto the
said Dame VV. in the sum of one thousand marks of lawful English money.
Provided nevertheless, Provided, that if there shall be a re-entry for
non-payment of the Rent, and the Land be of such a value, unless through any
act or thing of the Re-enterer, and shall so remain without eviction, etc. then
no benefit to be taken of the Covenant for the payment of the 80 l nor of the
penalty of one thousand marks.
and the true intent and meaning of these presents, and of the Parties to the
same is, That if contrary to the purport, true intent or meaning hereof, or of
the Parties to the same any default of payment shall happen to be of the said
yearly rent or sum of, etc. or of any part thereof at any of the said Feasts of
payment, and at the 19 day then next following, for which or whereupon the said
I. C. and Dame W. or either of them, their or either of their Assigns, during
the joint lives of the said I. C. and Dame VV. or the said Dame W. or her
Assigns after the death of the said I. C. shall re-enter into the said Manor
and other the premises, or into any part thereof, and the said Manor and other
the premises before mentioned to be conveyed by the said Fine, shall be at the
time of such re-entry of the clear yearly value of 360 l. of lawful English
money over and above all charges and reprises; and so unless it be through any
act, deed, thing or evil husbandry of the part of the said Dame VV. or her
Assigns, shall remain, be and continue unto the said Dame W. and her Assigns of
that clear yearly value during the life of the said Da. VV. without any manner
of eviction, trouble or expulsion of or by the said VV.B. his Heirs or Assigns,
and of all and every other Person and Persons claiming by, from or under the
said VV.B. his Heirs or Assigns, or by reason of his or their title or estate,
or otherwise by reason of any tenure or seigniory, that then neither the said
I. C. and Dame VV. or either of them, their or either of their Executors or
Administrators shall have or take any benefit or advantage of or by the said
last mentioned Covenant for payment of the said yearly sum of 80 l. not of or
upon the said Obligation or penalty of one thousand marks for the performance
thereof, (any thing in these presents to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.)

In witness whereof the said Parties to these presents have to every part
thereof set their hands and seals the Day and Year first above written.

An Indenture of Covenants to levy a Fine.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between P.Y. of B. in the County of S. Yeoman, and
K. his Wife of the one part: and J.Y. of B. aforesaid Father of the said P.Y.
and R.N. of C. in the said County of S. Gent. of the other part. Witnesses,
That it is Covenanted, granted, concluded and fully agreed on by and between
the said Parties to these presents. And the said P.Y. for himself and for the
said K. and for their Heirs and for every of them does Covenant, P. and K. and
their Heirs and the Survivor of them covenant for the levying of a Fine before
the Feast of S. Joh^ Baptist next ensuing at the proper costs and charges of
the said P.Y. to be pursued with Proclamation according to the form of the
Statute in that behalf made, provided unto them the said J.Y. and R.N. of all
the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of the said P. and K. and either of them
situate in the Towns, Villages, and Hamlets of M. K. and W. or in any or
either of them in the County of S. by the name of the moiety of seven
Messuages, seven Gardens, etc.
promise, and grant to and with said I. Y. and R. N. their Executors and
Administrators, and every of them by these presents, That they the said P. and
K. and their Heirs, or the Survivor of them, and his or her Heirs shall and
will before the Feast of Saint John Baptist next ensuing the Date hereof, at
the proper costs and charges of the said P.Y. in due form of Law levy and
acknowledge one Fine to be pursued with Proclamations according to the form of
the Statute in that behalf made and provided unto them the said F.Y. and R.N.
of all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of them the said P. and K. and
either of them situate, lying or being, rising, growing, renewing or coming
out of, in or within the Towns, Villages, Parishes, Fields, Precincts,
Liberties and Hamlets of M.K. and VV. or in any or either of them in the said
County of S. By the name of the Moiety of seven Messuages, seven Gardens, seven
Orchards, and of one hundred and fourscore Acres of Land, thirty Acres of
Meadow, forty Acres of Pasture, and of Common of Pasture for all Beasts, with
the appurtenances in M.K. and VV. in the said County of S. or by such other
name or names as by the Council learned in the Law of the said I.Y. and R.N.
shall be devised, advised and required. By which Fine they the said P.Y. and K.
shall acknowledge the said moiety of the said seven Messuages, etc. in M.K. and
W. aforesaid, to be the right of the said I.Y. as those which the said I. and
R. then had of the gift of them the said P. and K. and the same moiety and
Common of Pasture aforesaid by the said Fine shall remise, release and quit
claim from them the said P. and K. and their Heirs unto them the said I.Y. and
R.N. and to the Heirs of the said I.Y. for ever. By which Fine the said P. Y.
and K. shall acknowledge the said moiety of the said seven Messuages to be the
right of the said I.Y. and his Heirs for ever.
And further, they the said P.Y. and K. shall by the said Fine grant for them
the said P.K. and their Heirs of the said P.K. to warrant to them the said
I.Y. and R.N. and to the Heirs of the foresaid I.Y. the moiety of the Tenement
aforesaid and Common of Pasture aforesaid, with the appurtenances against them
the said P. and K. and the Heirs of the said P. for evermore. Which said Fine
so to be levied, had and acknowledged in manner and form as is aforesaid, or in
any other manner or form. And all and every other Fine and Fines of the
premises or of any part of parcel thereof to be levied or acknowledged by or
between the Parties aforesaid or either of them before the said Feast day of
Saint John Baptist now next ensuing shall be, And all and every other Fines or
Fine acknowledged by and between the Parties aforesaid shall be deemed,
adjudged and construed to be to the uses hereafter mentioned, that is, to the
only benefit and behoof of the said P.Y. and K. (...) V^^fe, and of their
Heirs and Assigns ser ever.
and shall be deemed, adjudged, expounded and const^ued to be to such only
uses, intents and purposes as are and be hereafter in and by these presents
mentioned, limited and expressed (that is to say) to the only benefit and
behoof of the said P.Y. and of the said K. his Wife, and of the Heirs and
Assigns of the said P. for ever; and to none other use, behoofs or purposes
whatsoever.

In witness whereof the Parties abovesaid to these present Indentures
interchangeably have either to other set their hands and seals, even the day
and year first above written.

Covenant to levy a Fine to settle by way of Intail, with diverse Covenants upon
Marriage.
THis INDENTVRE tripartite made, Sir G.G. drawn by Sir Tho. H. In consideration
of a Marriage to be solemnized between R.H. and K.G.
etc. Between Sir G.G. Knight, on the first part: T.H. of H. in the County of
L. Esquire, of the second part: and Sir R.M. of S. in the said County of L.
Knight, and W.H. of H. in the said County of L. Esquire on the third part:
Witnesses, That for and in consideration of a Marriage by Gods help to be
solemnized and had between R.H. Son and Heir apparent of the said T.H. and K.G.
one of the Daughters of the said Sir G.G. Knight. It is Covenanted, granted,
concluded, condescended and fully agreed by and between all the said Parties to
these presents, in manner and form following: Covenanted: and agreed by and
between the said Parties, That the faid R.H. shall before the Feasts of, etc.
next ensuing the Date hereof marry and take to Wife K.G. if she the said K.
will thereunto consent and agree.
And first the said T.H. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
does Covenant, grant and fully agree to and with the said Sir G.G. Knight, his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators by these presents, That the said R.H. Son
and Heir apparent of the said T.H. shall before the Feast of Saint Michael the
Archangel next ensuing the Date hereof (by Gods permission) marry and take to
Wife the said K.G. if she the said K. will thereunto consent and agree, and the
Laws of the holy Church the same will permit and suffer, And the like Covenant
that K.G. shall before the Feast of, etc. next ensuing the Date hereof take and
marry to her Husband the said R.H. if he the said R.H. thereunto consent.
And in like manner the said Sir G.G. Knight, for himself, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, does Covenant, grant, and fully agree to and with
the said T.H. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators by those presents, that
she the said K.G. shall and will (by Gods permission) before the said Feast of
S. Mich. next ensuing the Date hereof, marry and take to her Husband the said
R.H. if he the said R. will thereunto consent and agree, and the law of holy
Church the same will permit and suffer. In consideration of which Marriage to
be had and solemnized in manner and form aforesaid, In consideration of which
marriage it is Covenanted, and agreed between the said Parties in manner
following, That the said T.H. for himself does Covenant to, and with the said
Sir G.G. and his Heirs, etc. that he the said T.H. before the Feast of, etc.
next ensuing the date hereof, shall and will at the Costs and Charges in the
Law of the said Sir G.G. and T.H. by Fine, with Proclamation in due form of
Law, covey and assure unto Sir R.M. and W.H. and to the Heirs of one of them,
or to the Survivour of them and his Heirs, All and singular those his several
Manors, etc. with the Appurtenances in the County of L.
It is covenanted, granted, concluded, and fully agreed by, and between all the
said Parties to these presents in manner and form following. And first, the
said T.H. for himself does Covenant and Grant for him, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, to and with the said Sir G.G. Knight, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns by these presents, That he the said T.H. on this
side, and before the first day of M. next ensuing the date hereof, shall and
will at the equal Costs and Charges in the Law of the said Sir G.G. Knight, and
T.H. by such Fine, with Proclamations in due form of Law to be had and levied,
as shall be devised or advised by the said Sir G.G. Knight, his Heirs,
Executors or Assigns, or their Council learned in the Law, convey and assure
unto the said Sir R.M. Knight, and VV.H. and to the Heirs of one of them, or
to the Survivor of them and his Heirs, All and singular those his several
Manours and Lordships of H. etc. with the Appurtenances in the said County of
L. etc. And for the true explanation of the several uses and intents of the
several Fines so to be had and levied of all and singular the said Manours,
etc. and other the premises before in, and by these presents mentioned, with
the appurtenances as aforesaid, and of the intent and true meaning of all the
Parties to these presents touching the same; It is covenanted and agreed
between the said Parties to these presents, and by them fully condescended, and
declared in and by these presents. The Fine and Parties to stand seized to such
uses as hereafter at large is expressed.
And the said Sir G.G. Knight, and T.H. for themselves and either of them,
their and either of their Heirs or Assigns, do Covenant, grant, conclude, and
sully agree to and with the other by these presents, That the said several
Fines so to be levied, and had of the said Manours, Messuages, etc. and other
the premises, with the Appurtenances before in these presents specified; and
of every, or of any part and parcel thereof, and the Estate, Right, Title,
Interest, and possession of them the said Sir R.M. Knight, and VV.H. and their
Heirs, and every of them and his Heirs, of in and to the said premises, and
every part thereof shall be; and that the said Sir Richard M. Knight, and VV.H.
and their Heirs, and the Survivour of them and his Heirs, and all and every
other Person and Persons, and their Heirs and shall stand or be seized thereof,
or of any part thereof, shall after the said several Fines so levied, stand and
be seized of all the said Manours, Messuages, etc. and all and singular other
the premises, with the appurtenances before in these presents mentioned;
whereof the said Fine or Fines before by these presents are covenanted or
mentioned to be had and levied as aforesaid, and of every part and parcel
thereof to the several uses, intents, purposes, agreements, limitations,
payments and provisoes, and upon the conditions hereafter in the by these
presents expressed, mentioned and declared, and to none other use or uses,
intents or purposes: That is to say, of, in and upon all the said Manor of H.
with the Appurtenances whatsoever in H. aforesaid, whereof the said Fine or
Fines before by these presents is mentioned or covenanted to be levied by the
said Sir G. G. Knight, as aforesaid, to the use and behoof of the said Sir G.
G. and his Heirs until the said Marriage shall be had and solemnized: and
after the said Marriage had and solemnized, then to the use and behoof of the
said T.H. and of his Assigns for and during the term of his natural life
without impeachment of waste. And after the death of the said T.H. then to the
use and behoof of the said R.H. and K.G. and the Heirs males of the body of
the said R. upon the body of the said K. lawfully begotten, and to be begotten.
And for default of such Issue, then to the use of the said Rich and of the
Heirs males of his body lawfully to be begotten, etc; And for default of such
Issue, then to the use and behoof of the right heirs of the said T. H. party
to these presents for ever. And also of and in one capital Message and
Tenement, etc. And also of and in all Houses, Edifices, etc. unto the said
capital Message, etc. or to any part or parcel thereof belonging or
appertaining, being parcel of the said premises, whereof the said Fine or
Fines before by these presents are covenanted to be levied by the said T.H. as
aforesaid, and of the Reversion and Reversions of the same: to the use and
behoof of the said T.H. until such time as the said Marriage shall be had and
solemnized by and between the said R.H. and K. G. as aforesaid, and immediately
after the Feast of St M. etc next ensuing the solemnization of the said
Marriage between the said R. and K. as aforesaid, then to the use and behoof of
the said R. and K. and their Assigns, and of the Survivour of them for and
during the term of the natural life of the said T.H. for and in the name and as
parcel of the Jointure of the said Ka. without impeachment of waste. And of the
said Message, etc. and all other the said last recited premises, (limited for
parcel of the Jointure of the said K. as aforesaid) immediately after the death
of the said T.H. to the use and behoof of the said K.H. and of the Heirs males
of the body of the said R. lawfully begotten and to be begotten, etc. (as
before) And of all and singular the rest, residue of the said Manours, etc. and
of all other the said premises, whereof the said Fine or Fines before by these
presents is Govenanted to be levied by the said T.H. as aforesaid, other then
such only, whereof the several estates and uses before by these presents are
severally expressed, limited and declared to the use and behoof of him the said
T.H. the Father, party to these presents, and of his Assigns for and during the
term of his natural life without impeachment of waste, and to be charged and
chargeable with such yearly Rents, sums of Money; or Rents and Distresses for
the same as shall be hereafter in these presents limited or expressed according
to the true intent of these presents, and after the decease of the said T.H.
the Father, then to the use and behoof of the said R.H. and the Heirs males of
the body of the said R.H. lawfully begotten, and to be begotten, charged and
chargeable as aforesaid: And for default of such Issue, then to the use and
behoof of the said W.H. second Son of the said T.H. the father, party to these
presents, and of the Heirs males of his body lawfully begotten and to be
begotten, charged and chargeable with such several yearly Rents and payments as
be hereafter in these presents expressed, etc. And for default of such Issue,
then to the use and behoof of the right heirs of the said T.H. the Father,
party to these presents for ever. Provided always, Proviso.
and for the further explaining of the true intent and meaning of all the said
Parties to these presents, Covenanted to make certain payments, and the Fines
to be to the same uses.
It is further covenanted, granted, concluded, condescended and fully agreed by
and between the said parties to these presenss, And nevertheless the said T.H.
the Father, for himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
does further Covenant and Grant to and with the said Sir G.G. Knight, his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to, and with every of them
by these presents, That the said Fine and Fines to be levied of the said
Manours, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, with the
Appurtenances, or any part thereof shall be, and that the said Sir R.M. Knight,
and W.H. and their heirs, and the Survivour of them and his heirs shall stand
and be seized of and in the said Lordship and Manor of H. etc. being of the
yearly value of 250 l. as well to and for the assurance of such Rents and
Payments as hereafter in these presents be expressed, as also to and for such
use and uses, intent and purpose as well that if the said T.H. party to these
presents during the term of his natural life, and his Assigns shall not or do
not yearly, well and truly content, satisfy, and pay unto the said R. and Ka.
or their Assigns at, etc. the whole and just sum and yeatly rent or payment of
50 l. of good and lawful Money of England at two Feasts or Days in the year,
etc. by even and equal portions without further delay; the first payment
thereof to commence and begin at such of the said Feast days as shall be next
ensuing the said Marriage to be had and made as aforesaid, That then, and so
often as the said rent or yearly payment of 50 l. or any part or parcel thereof
shall so fortune to be behind and unpaid, The usual clause of distress.
It shall and may be lawful to and for the said R.H. and K.G. or either of
them, after their said inter-marriage as aforesaid, their and either of their
Assignee or Assignees, their lawful Deputy or Deputies in that behalf, by them
or either of them lawfully authorized at all times during the life of the said
T.H. Party to these presents into all and singular the said Manor of H. with
the appurtenances, etc. and into every, or any part and parcel thereof to enter
and distrain as well for the said yearly rent or payment of 50 l. or any part
thereof so to be behind and unpaid as aforesaid; and for every part and parcel
thereof, as also for the arrearages of the same, and of every or any part
thereof, if any shall fortune to be behind and unpaid as aforesaid. And the
distress and distresses so there taken, to lead, drive, take, carry away,
impound, and with them, or either or any of them to detain and keep until such
time as the said yearly rent or payment of 50 l. and every part and parcel
thereof so to be behind and unpaid, as aforesaid, and the arrearages thereof
(if any shall happen to be behind and unpaid) be unto them or some of them
fully contented, Proviso, that the covenanter to levy a fine; may make a
Jointure to his Wife, for her life only, of a third part, or less, except such
a Manor.
satisfied and paid. Provided also, and it is covenanted and agreed by and
between the said Parties to these presents, That it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said T.H. the Father; at any time or times hereafter during his
life by his last Will and Testament in Writing, or otherwise by his Deed in his
lifetime lawfully executed to assure, appoint, limit and convey to any lawful
Wife or Wives, which the said T.H. the Father shall hereafter fortune to marry
for term of life only of such Wife or Wives, or to any other Person or Persons
to the use of any such Wife or Wives, for term of life only of such Wife or
Wives for and in the name of the Jointure or Joyntures of such Wife or Wives. A
full third part or less, or so much as shall amount to a full third part or
less of all his Manours, Messuages, etc. (so that the said Manor of H. etc.
be not or parcel thereof. And that he may grant and assure to his younger Sons
for life, such a yearly Rent, with distress, out of certain Lands, so that the
said Rent exceed not 20 l. per ann. a pecce.
) And also that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T.H. the Father,
Party to these presents, at any time during the term of his natural life by any
Deed or Deeds in writing under his hand and seal, or otherwise by his last Will
add Testament in writing to grant, assure, limit, devise and convey to every or
any the younger Sons of the said T.H. the Father, Party to these presents of
his body lawfully begotten or to be begotten for term of life, only of every
such younger Son and Sons, such yearly Rentcharge or Rent-charges, with a
clause of distress for every such Rent as unto the said T.H. the Father shall
be thought meet and convenient to be yearly issuing and going as well out of
the said Capital Message, etc. from and after the decease of the said T.H.
party to these presents, as also out or out of all or any part of the other
Manours, etc. whereof the said Fine or Fines before by these presents is
covenanted or mentioned to be levied (as aforesaid) by the said T.H. the
Father, or any part of any of them from the time of every such Grant, Devise or
Conveyance, or from any other time or times: So that the said Rentcharge and
Rent-charges to any such Son or Sons, do not exceed the sum of 20 l. a piece
yearly for any such sum or sums. And further also, And that he may make Leases
to his younger Sons for 21 years, or one, two or three lives, charged or
chargeable, with such rents as before.
that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T.H. the Father, Party to
these presents, at any time or times, and from time to time during his natural
life, to make any Lease or Leases unto every or any of his younger Sons for the
term of 21 years or under, in possession or reversion, or for the term of one,
two or three lives in possession or reversion, of all or any part or parcel of
the said Manours, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises,
whereof the said Fine or Fines before by these presents is covenanted or
mentioned to be lived (as aforesaid) by the said T. H. or any part thereof,
charged and chargeable, with such rents, sums of money and payments, as before
or after in these presents are appointed, declared or limited to be bad, levied
or issuing out of the same, or any part thereof, in such sort as in these
presents in mentioned and declared: The said Lands so demised, not to exceed
the ancient rent of 6 l. 13. s. 4 d.
So that the same Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments so to be demised and
leased to any the younger Son or Sons of the said T. H. the Father, as
aforesaid, do not exceed the ancient rent by the year of 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. for
every or any his younger Sons to whom any such said Lease or Leases shall be
had or made, The ancient rents to be reserved, and services.
as is aforesaid: And so that upon every such Lease and Leases so to be had and
made, as aforesaid, the old and accustomed yearly rents, boons, arrearages,
customs and services or more, be reserved to be yearly payable and done during
the continuance of every such Lease or Leases, at the days and times, in
manner and form at the same have been heretofore during the most part of 20
years last past, used and accustomed to be paid and done. No lease to be made
without impeachment of waste.
And so that the same Lease and Leases, and every or any of them so to be made,
as aforesaid, be not made without impeachment of waste. Power to make Leases to
any person for 21 years, or three lives, of the waste Grounds, Moors and
Commons, etc.
And further also, that it shall and may be likewise lawful to and for the said
T.H. the Father, at any time or times hereafter during the term of his natural
life, at his will and pleasure, as well to make any Demise or Lease to any
Person or Persons for the term of 21, years, or under, or for the term of one,
two or three lives from the making of such said Lease or Leases of all, every
or any the waste Grounds, Moors and Commons, parcel of the Manours, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, whereof the said several fines, or either of them,
are Covenanted to be levied, as well such as be already improved, as such as
hereafter at any time shall be improved: The ancient boons and services to be
reserved and payable as accustom^d. Power to make Leases, as before, of any the
Manors, etc. charged or chargeable, as aforesaid (except, etc.) as Tenant in
tail may lawfully do by the Statute of 32 H. 8 not otherwise.
So as such yearly rents, boons and services as heretofore has been reserved
and paid for any such of the said Wastes as heretofore has been letten, be
reserved payable yearly during the continuance of every such Lease to be made
of any part of the said Wastes so heretofore letten at the days accustomed. As
also to make any Lease or Leases for term of 21 years, or under, or for the
term of one, two or three lives, of any part or parcel of the said Manours,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, with the
appurtenances, whereof the said Fine is before covenanted or mentioned to be
levied, as aforesaid, by him the said T. H. the Father, charged and chargeable
with such rents, sums of money and payments as before or after in these
presents are appointed, limited or declared to be had, levied or issuing out of
the same, or any part thereof, in such sort as in these presents is mentioned
and declared (other then the said chief and capital Message, etc.) before by
these presents appointed and limited in use, to and for, and as parcel of the
Jointure of the said K. in and after such order, manner and sort, as Tenant in
tail may lawfully do by the Statute made in the Parliament of the late King
Henry the eight, holden at Westminster. in the two and thirtieth year of his reign,
and not otherwise; so that every such Lease and Leases be made of Lands and
Tenements usually letten to farm by the most part of 20 years last past.
Provided also, and it is further covenanted, And that he may grant to any his
Servants rent-charges for life only, out of certain Lands, so that all the
said rents exceed not above 20. l. yearly.
granted and agreed by and between all the said Parties to these presents, That
it shall and may be likewise lawful to and for the said T. H. the Father, at
all time and times hereafter, by his last Will and Testament in writing, or
otherwise by his deed or deeds in his lifetime, to assure, convey, limit or
appoint to every or any his Servant or Servants, such annuity or yearly
rentcharge for term of life only of every or any such said Servant or
Servants, the same and every of them, and the Grant of Devise thereof to be
made with sufficient clause of distress to be therein contained for
not-payment thereof, as unto the said T. H. shall be thought meet and
convenient to be issuing, going out and payable of and out of the said Capital
Message, etc. from and after the decease of the said T. H. Party to these
presents; and out of all or any part of any other the said Manours of H. etc.
whereof the said Fine or Fines before by these presents is Covenanted or
mentioned to be levied, as is aforesaid, by the said T. H. As also of and out
of all the said Messuages, etc. or any part or parcel of them, from the time of
making any such Grant, or from any time after (other then the said Manour-house
and domain Lands of H. etc. appointed and limited to be charged and chargeable
to and for the payment of the said yearly rent of 200 l.) so that the said
rentcharge of several rent-charges do not exceed in all together above the sum
of 20 l. Power to make Leases or other conveyance to any Person or devise, for
such time as they might have taken of the profits such sums of money, not
exceeding 500 l. yearly to be taken, as shall suffice (without fraud, etc) to
pay such just debts or payments as he shall owe, not exceeding 500 l.
yearly. And further also, that it shall and may in like manner be lawful to
and for the said T. H. the Father, Party to these pressents, by his Deed or
Deeds in writing in his life time, or otherwise by his last Will and Testament
in writing, to give, will devise, limit, appoint or lease the said Capital
Message, etc. and every or any part thereof, to begin from and after the
decease of the said T. H. Party to these presents, and any part or parcel of
the residue of the said Manours, etc. whereof the said Fine or Fines, or either
of them, is before in and by these presents Covenanted or mentioned, as
aforesaid, to be levied, as aforesaid, or any part or parcel of the premises
chargeable, as aforesaid (other then the said Manor of H. etc. as in the last
Covenant) to any Person or Persons whatsoever, and to his or their Heirs, or
otherwise, for and during such term or time, and until such time only as such
Person or Persons to whom any such gift, devise, limitation, appointment or
Lease shall be made (as aforesaid) their Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
shall or may, or otherwise might have levied, raised, had, perceived or taken
of the rents, issues, revenues and profits thereof, such sum and sums of money,
not exceeding the sum of 500 l. yearly to be taken, as shall and may suffice,
without any fraud, covin or collusion, to satisfy and pay all such just and
lawful debts and sums of money as the said T. H. the Father, the day of his
decease, shall without fraud or covin owe, or otherwise be indebted unto any
Person or Persons whatsoever, not exceeding the sum of 500 l. as aforesaid. And
likewise also, Power to give by Will or Deed, or to Lease, the lands of which
the Fine is to be levied, (except, etc.) not exceeding the ancient rent and
value yearly of 50 l. for the raising of such sums for Daughters portions.
that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T. H. the Father, in like
manner by his last Will and Testament, or otherwise by his Deed or Deeds in
writing, in his lifetime, to give, will, devise, limit, appoint or Lease the
said Manors, Lands, Tenements, etc. and other the premises, whereof the said
Fine and Fines, or either of them, is before in and by these presents
covenanted or mentioned to be levied, as aforesaid, or any part or parcel of
the said premises chargeable, as aforesaid, (other then the Domain Lands of H.
etc. appointed and limited to be charged to and for the payment of the said
yearly rent of 200 l. to the said K.) not exceeding the ancient yearly rent and
value of 50 l. for the levying of the sums hereafter mentioned, yearly to be
taken thereof to any Person or Persons whatsoever, and his or their Heirs, or
otherwise, so long, and for and during such term and time, and until such time
only as the said Person and Persons to whom any such gift, devise, limitation,
appointment or Lease shall be made, as aforesaid, their or any of their Heirs
or Assigns, shall or may, or otherwise might have levied, raised, had,
perceived or taken of the rents, issues, revenues and profits thereof, such sum
and sums of money as shall and may extend, amount unto and suffice without
fraud, covin or collusion, to content, satisfy and pay as well unto Ka. H.
Daughter of the said T. H. the Father, the sum of 1000 l. of current English
money, or so much thereof as the said T. H. by his writing sealed and delivered
in his lifetime or by his last Will and Testament in writing shall limit,
assign or appoint to, for, or in consideration of the marriage of the said the
K. H. As also unto M. H. one other of the Daughters of the said T. H. the sum
of 1000 l. of current English money, etc. And likewise also such other sum and
sums of money as shall and may suffice over and above the payments of the said
several sums of 2000 l. aforesaid to be paid to the said K. and M. as
aforesaid, to content, satisfy and pay unto every other Daughter and Daughters
of the said T. H. the Father, of his body lawfully begotten or to be begotten,
which at the time of the death of the said T. H. the Father, shall be in full
life, and not preferred in marriage the full, whole and just sum of 500 l.
apiece of good and lawful money of England (any thing before mentioned to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.) Covenant, that such part of the
Land as is liable to the payment of. etc. shall be chargeable to the distresses
of, etc.
And the said T. H. does covenant and grant for him, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to and with the said Sir G.G. Knight, his Heirs,
Executors, Admistrators and Assigns by these presents, That the said Manours,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises of or out of which the
said sum of 200 l. is before assigned, limited, or appointed to be had, levied,
or taken by the said K.G. as aforesaid, or so much thereof as shall or may be
sufficient to bear, answer and pay yearly the said sum of 200 l. shall be and
continue liable and chargeable to and for the Distress and Distresses of the
said K. during her life according to the true intent of these presents: And
that the said Lands out of which, are not, nor shall not be encumbered. But tha
notwithstanding such encumbrances the Land shall be of sufficent value, besides
the charges to answer the same.
And that he the said T.H. heretofore has not charged or encumbered the same
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments before mentioned to be charged with the said
Rent or sum of 200 l. nor hereafter shall charge or incumber the same. But that
notwithstanding any such charge or encumbrance the same shall or may continue,
and after the deceases of the said T.H. and R. H. for and during the life of
the said K. sufficient and of sufficient value over and besides all charges, to
bear, pay and answer yearly to the said K. during her life the said sum of
200 l. and the arrearages thereof, and the said sum of, etc. appointed for a
penalty, as aforesaid, and the arrearages thereof if any shall happen. Provided
likewise, and it is further Covenanted, granted, concluded and fully agreed by
and between the said Parties to these presents; And nevertheless, the said
T.H. the Father, for himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns
does covenant and grant to and with the said Sir G.G. Knight, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents,
That the said Fine and Fines to be levied of the said Manors, etc. with the
appurtenances, or any part thereof shall be. And that the said Sir R. M.
Knight, and W. H. and their Heirs shall stand and be seized of and in the
moiety or one half of all the Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of
the said T.H. in the Parish of A. etc. being of the yearly value of 120 l. over
and above all yearly charges and reprises and for such use and uses, to and for
such intent and purpose, That if the said R. after the said marriage had and
solemnized between him and the said K. shall fortune to die during the life of
the said T.H. the Father, and then to have Issue one or more Daughters of his
body lawfully begotten upon the body of the said K. then being in full life,
and not before that time preferred in Marriage, and then also that if after the
death of the said T. H. the Father, the Heirs males of the body of the said R.
H. and every such other Person and Persons to whom the next and immediate
possession or remainder of the said premises shall next and immediately from
time to time appertain and belong, or some of them shall not, nor do not well
and truly content, satisfy, and pay unto such Daughter and Daughters of the
said R. H. so to be living and unpreferred, as aforesaid, and unto every of
them the whole and just sum of 400 l. apiece of good and lawful money of
England for and toward their preferment in marriage, as aforesaid, after the
rate of 60 l. yearly, at the Feasts of, etc. by even and equal portions, at or
in etc. That then from and after such default of payment thereof had and made
in manner and form aforesaid, they the said Sir R. M. Knight, and W.H. and
their Heirs, as also all other Persons that shall be seized of the said last
recited premises, shall stand and be seized of the said last recited premises
with the appurtenances, and of every part a parcel thereof until such time as
the said Sir R. M. Knight, and W. H. and their Heirs shall or may have
received, levied, raised, had or taken of the Rents, Issues, Revenues, and
profits thereof to the use of such Daughter or Daughters so not preferred in
marriage, as aforesaid, such sum and sums of money as shall and may suffice and
amount to pay unto such said Daughter and Daughters of the said R. H. and unto
every of them the said sum and sums of 400 l. apiece for and toward their
preferment in marriage and otherwise as aforesaid. And after the levying of the
said several sum and sums of money before in these presents mentioned to be
levied of the Rents, Revenues or profits of any parts of the premises in manner
and form aforesaid: Then to such uses, intents and purposes, and to the use of
such Person and Persons, and for such title, estate ad estates, and under such
Provisoes and Conditions as in these presents are of the said premises
expressed, limited, mentioned and declared: Any thing before in these presents
mentioned to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. Covenant, that the Fines to
be levied, and that the Parties to whom, shall stand seized of all such Lands,
etc. chargeable with any rent, sum of money or payment, or which shall be
bequeathed, granted, leased etc. to the use of such Persons. etc. to the intent
that they may have, take, receive, enjoy, and distrain for the same, according
to the limitation and appointment, etc.
And it is further covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed by and between the
said Parties to these presents, That the said Fine and Fines so to be levied
and had as aforesaid shall be, and that the said Sir R.M. Knight, and W.H. and
their Heirs, and the Survivor of them, and his Heirs shall stand and be seized
of all such Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, parcel of the said premises,
which are in these presents limited or appointed to be charged with any rent
sum of money, or payment to any person or persons, or which shall be hereafter
bequeathed, granted, Leased, demised or charged with any rent or payment
bargained, sold, granted, assigned or conveyed to any person or persons,
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, and according to
the power, Liberty or authority left, permitted, or allowed in these presents,
as well to the use of such Person or Persons, to whom any parcel of the said
premises in these presents hereafter shall be so limited, appointed, devised,
bequeathed, demised, leased, bargained, granted, assigned or conveyed of such
estate and for such term and time, as is in these presents mentioned, limited,
appointed, or intended; As also to the use and intent, that every Person and
Persons to whom any rent, Sum of money, receipt, or payment before in these
presents is assigned, limited, or appointed, or to whom any Rent, Sum of Money,
or payment shall be hereafter assigned, limited, or appointed, according to the
true intent and meaning of these presents, and acording to the power, liberty
and authority left, permitted, or allowed in an by these presents, shall and
may have, receive, levy and take the same, and Distrain for such Rent, sum and
sums of money, behind and not paid, according to the true intent and meaning of
these presents, for which any Distress is assigned, limited or appointed, or
intended in these presents to be taken for and during such term and time, and
in such sort manner and form as is mentioned, limited or appointed by these
presents, or shall be hereafter limited, assigned or appointed, according to
the Agreements, Liberties, and allowances before mentioned: And to the intent
also that the rents, boons, customs and Services to be reserved upon any Lease
hereafter to be made by the said T.H. party to these presents, according to the
agreement, Liberty or authority limited, permitted or allowed to the said T.H.
and of the Reversion and Reversions, remainder and remainders of the Lands so
to be Letten to the use of such Person and Persons, to whom such Land and
Tenements so Letten, should, or shall appertain or belong by the true intent of
these presents, and of such Estate and Estates as before are mentioned or
intended in these presents, and to the intent that such Person and Persons may
Distrain for the said Rent and Services, and the arrearages thereof, (if any
be.) And the said T. H. Party to these presents, for himself, The usual
Covenant that the Manours, etc. shall continue to the uses discharged, or else
saved harmless from all encumbrances.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does covenant, grant,
conclude and fully agree to and with the said Sir G. G. Knight, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents,
That the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and all other
the premises, with all and singular their appurtenances, and every part and
parcel thereof, whereof the Fine or Fines before by these presents is mentioned,
or Govenanted to be Levied by the said T. H. as aforesaid, now are, and at the
time of the levying of the said Fine to be levied as aforesaid, shall be,
remain and continue to the uses, intents, provisoes, limitations, conditions,
purposes, agreements, and things aforesaid free, and clearly acquitted,
exonerated and discharged, or otherwise, upon reasonable request, sufficienty
saved and kept harmless, of and from all and all manner of gifts, grants,
estates, Statutes Merchant and of the Staple, and all other Acts and charges,
titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever, before the Levying of the said
Fine, by the said T. H. had, made, done or suffered, (one estate made to the
use of A. now the Wife of the said T. H. etc.) And all Leases heretofore made
by the said T. H. for three Lives or 21 years or under, Certain former
interests and estates, as also some to be made excepted.
of Lands usually letten, whereupon the accustomed Rents and Services, or more
are reserved, and shall or may be payable during the continuance of every such
Lease or Leases: And the lawful Dower of A. now Wife of the said T.H. always
excepted and foreprized. And likewise the said Sir G.G. Knight, And the said
Sir G.G. covenanteth for him, his Heirs, etc. to and with the said T.H. That
the said Messuages, Lands and Hereditaments, and all other the premises, with
the appurtenances, whereof the said Fine or Fines, etc.
for himself, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, Covenanteth
and grants to and with the said T.H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, by these presents, That the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and all other the premises, with all and singular their
appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, whereof the said Fine or
Fines before by these presents is Covenanted or mentioned to be Levied by the
said Sir G.G. Knight, and Dame B. his Wife, or any of them, of the said
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises in G. as aforesaid, now
are, and at the time of the levying of the said Fine thereof, and at all, and
every time and times thenceforth shall be, remain and continue to the several
uses, intents, purposes, conditions, provisoes, limitations, agreements, and
things before in these presents expressed and declared free and clearly
acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or otherwise upon reasonable request,
sufficiently saved and kept harmless, and losselesse, of and from all and all
manner of gifts, grants, estates, acts, things, charges and encumbrances
whatsoever, had, made or done, or to be had, made or done, by the said Sir G.G.
Knight, before the levying of the said Fine. (Leases made for 21 years, or
three lives before the 25 day of September in the Year of our Lord God, etc.
whereupon the old and accustomed Rents, Duties, and Services, or more is
reserved, and shall continue yearly payable, During the continuance of every
such Lease and Leases, only excepted and foreprized.)

In witness whereof, to the first part of these Indentures, remaining with the
said Sir G.G. Knight, the said T.H. Sir R. M. Knight, and W.H. have set their
hands and seals: and to the second part remaining with the said T.H. the said
Sir G.G. Knight, Sir R.M. Knight, and W.H. have set their hands and seals. And
likewise unto the third part remaining with the said Sir R.M. Knight, and W.H.
the said Sir G. G. Knight, and T.H. have set their hands and Seals, even the
day and year first above written.

A Mortgage at 10 l. in the 100 l. Protempore.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between Sir VV.W. of B. in the County of E. Knight,
of the one part: And Sir I.M of C. in the County of S. Knight, Sir Ed. C. of W.
in the County of S. Knight, and M. VV. of W. in the County of Y. Esquire of the
other party. Witnesses, In Consideration of 600 l.
that the said Sir W.W. for and in Consideration of the sum of six hundred
pounds of, etc. to him the said Sir W. W. by the said Sir I.M. Sir Ed.C. and
M.W. in hand before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, well and
truly contented, satisfied and paid, whereof and wherewith the said Sir W.W.
acknowledges himself fully satisfied and paid, and thereof and of every part
and parcel thereof does clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge the said Sir I.
M. Sir Ed. C. and M. W. their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
Grant of the Manor of Wenden, with all the Houses, Buildings, Orchards,
Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, with the
Appurtenances, etc.
and every of them by these presents; Has aliened, granted, bargained and
sold, And by these presents does aline, grant, bargain and sell unto the said
Sir I.M. Sir Ed. C. and M.W. their Heirs and Assigns for ever: All that the
Manor or Lordship, of Great Wenden, alias Wenden, with all the Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Orchards, Yards, Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Meadows,
Leasowes, Pastures, Feedings, Woods, Underwoods, Rents, Reversions, Services,
Profits of Courts, Liberties, Royalties and Hereditaments whatsoever with the
Appurtenances in Great Wenden, alias Wenden, N.P. L.E. A. N. and C. or in any
of them in the said County of E. to the said Manor or Lordship belonging or
now used or occupied with the same, with all and every their Appurtenances,
situate, lying, and being within the Parish and Fields of W. in the said
County of E. To have and to hold the said Manor or Lordship called W. with the
Houses, Edifices and Buildings, and all and every other the premises to the
same belonging, or now used or occupied with the same, and by these presents
Bargained and Sold, or mentioned to be Bargained and Sold, with all and every
their Appurtenances unto the said Sir I. M. Sir Ed. C. and M. W. their Heirs
and Assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of the said Sir I.M. Sir E.C.
and M. W. their Heirs and Assigns for ever. And the said Sir VV.VV. does
Covenant for him, The usual covenant, that the Bargainer for any act done, or
to be done, by him or any one claiming under him, had good right and full power
to make this conveyance.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them to
and with the said Sir I.M. Sir E.C. and M.W. their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and with every of them by these presents, That he
the said Sir VV.VV. for any act done or hereafter to be done, committed, or
voluntarily suffered by him or any other, claiming by, from, or under his Title
or right, has good right, full power, and lawful authority to grant, bargain
and sell the foresaid premises; and every part and parcel, thereof in manner
as the same before in these presents are granted, aliened, bargained or sold:
The usual Covenant that the Lands are free, or shall be saved harmless from
all encumbrances.
and that the said premises and every part thereof now be, and from the
ensealing of these presents, shall stand and be free, or shall from time to
time sufficiently be saved harmless by the said Sir VV.VV. or by his Heirs,
Executors or assigns of and from all and all manner of former bargainer, and
former sales, gifts, grants, Lease, Leases, Dowers, Joyntures, estates,
intailes, forfeitures, penalties, titles, troubles, charges and encumbrances
whatsoever had, made, done or suffered, or hereafter to be had, made, done or
suffered by the said Sir VV.VV. or any other Person or Persons whatsoever (the
rents and services hereafter due and payable to the chief Lord and Lords of the
Fees from time to time only excepted and fore prized.) The usual covenant for
further, assurance.
And the aforesaid premises with the appurtenances, he the said Sir VV.VV.
against him and all others shall warrant and defend. And the said Sir VV.VV.
for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns does covenant and grant to and
with the said Sir I.M. Sir E.C. and M.VV, their Heirs, Executors and Assigns
by these presents, That he the said Sir VV.VV. and his Heirs shall and will at
all times within ten years next ensuing the Date hereof, when and so often as
he or they or any of them shall be thereunto required by the said Sir I.M. Sir
E.C. and M.VV. or any of them, their Heirs or Assigns, and at the costs and
charges in the law of them the said Sir I.M. Sir E.C. and M.VV. their Heirs or
Assigns, do, make, execute, acknowledge and suffer all such further lawful and
reasonable act and acts, device and devices in the law, be it by Fine or Fines,
Recovery or Recoveries with single or double Voucher or Vouchers, Feoffement,
Release, Confirmation, or by all or any other such ways or means with like
Condition or Proviso, as hereafter in these presents is mentioned and
contained, and according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, as
shall be reasonably devised and advised by the said Sir I.M. Sir E.C. and M.VV.
their Heirs or Assigns, or by their Council learned in the law, for the
better and more perfect assuring and sure making of the aforesaid Premises to
the said Sir I.M. Sir E.C. and M.W. and to their Heirs and Assigns. The
usual Covenant that the Bargainer shall enjoy the lands and take the profits,
upon condition, and so long as he shall pay such a yearly sum, which is the
use of the money.
And the said Sir I.M. Sir E.C. and M.VV. as well for and in Consideration that
the premises hereby bargained or sold, or mentioned to be bargained and sold,
are now in Lease, As also for that the same do lie fit and convenient and near
unto the Lands and possessions of the said Sir W.W. as also for diverse other
good causes and considerations the said Sir I. M. Sir E. C. and M.W. for them,
their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them do
Covenant, grant, promise and agree to and with the said Sir W.VV. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these
presents, That the said Sir VV.VV. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns shall or lawfully may quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy
the aforesaid Manor and premises before in these presents bargained and sold,
or hereby mentioned to be bargained and sold, or take the rents and profits
thereof without any account thereof to be given or made to the said Sir I. M.
Sir E.C. and M.VV. the Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns: and
without the lawful let, disturbance or interruption of the said Sir I.M. Sir
E. C. and M.VV. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns; upon condition and
so long as the said Sir W. W. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or any of them shall yearly and every year now hereafter following
well and truly content and pay, or cause to be well and truly contented and
paid unto the said Sir I.M. Sir E.C. and M.VV. their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or their or any of their lawful Attorney or
Deputy thereunto assigned or deputed: The full sum and yearly Rent of 60l. by
the year, of good and lawful money of England at two several Days of payment
by even and equal protions,(that is to say) at, in or upon the 14. Day of May,
and the 14 Day of November, or within fourteen days next after either of the
say Days at or within the Church of the Inner Temple, London: situate in or
near Fleet Street, in or near London within the County of Middlesex. Provided
always, Proviso, that this conveyance shall be void upon notice given in
writing of tender, and payment of the principal money.
nevertheless, and that it is fully Covenanted, granted, concluded, and agreed
by and between the said Parties to these presents, and every of the said
Parties do by these presents, Covenant, grant and agree for them, their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them respectively, That if
the said Sir W.W. his Heirs, Executors, or any of them shall be hereafter
minded and determined to pay to the said Sir I.M. Sir E. C. and M. W. their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the sum of Six hundred pounds
of good, etc. and of such his or their mind, intent and purpose shall in any
year hereafter at any the Days before mentioned and appointed for the payment
of the said yearly Rent of 60l. deliver and leave a plain and perfect notice
and warning by writing under his or their, or any of their hand and seal, or
hands and seals either unto the hands of the said Sir I.M. Sir E.C. or M.VV.
their Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, or to the
hands of such Person or Persons as shall be lawfully interessed in the then
present possession and interest of the said Manor, Lands and Tenements, and
other the premises herein mentioned to the bargained and sold; and in the same
writing of notice so to be left or delivered, express mention shall be made
and contained, that he the said Sir VV. VV. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or some or one of them, or some other Person or
Persons for him or them shall and will pay the said sum of Six hundred pounds
upon the next Day of payment of the said sum or yearly Rent next ensuing
after the day wherein the said writing of notice shall be delivered. And also
the said Sir VV.W. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of
them, at such of the Days of payment of the said sum or yearly Rent as in and
by the said writing of notice so as aforesaid to be delivered shall be
mentioned, expressed and appointed for the payment of the said sum of six
hundred pounds, do and shall well and truly satisfy, content and pay, or cause
to be well and truly satisfied, contented and paid to the said Sir I.M. Sir
E.C. and M.W. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at one whole and
entire payment, as well the said sum of Six hundred pounds of etc. and the said
sum or Rent of 60 l. and nomine poenae, or so much thereof as shall be then
due, and all the arrearages of the same yearly Rent of 60 l. if any shall be
then due to the said Sir I.M. Sir E.C. and M.W. their Heirs or Assigns
unpaid, that then and immediately from and after the said payments so due and
truly answered and paid according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents: This present grant, bargain and sale shall cease and be utterly void
and of none effect, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary
notwithstanding. And that the said Sir I.M. Sir E.C. Covenant, That the said
Sir I.M. Sir E.C. and M.W. and their Heirs from and after the payment of 600 l.
principal money, and 60 l. yearly Rent, and the arrearages thereof; as before
in these presents is mentioned, shall stand and be seized of the said Manor of
Wenden, with all the premises before mentioned, to the only proper use of the
said Sir W.W. and of his Heirs for ever.
and M.W. their Heirs or Assigns from and after the payment of the said sum
of 600 l. and the said yearly Rent of 60 l. and the arrearages thereof in
manner and form as before is mentioned, shall stand and be seized of the said
Manor of Wenden, alias, W. with all other the Premises before mentioned to be
granted, bargained and sold, for and to the only proper use and behoof of him
the said Sir W.W. and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to no other use,
uses or intents.

In witness whereof, the Parties, etc.

A Deed of Covenant to lead the use of a Fine, Feoffement or Recovery, etc.
with special Covenants therein contained.
THis INDENTVRE made the, etc. Between Sir J.C. the elder, of C. in the County
of C. Knight, and Sir J.C. the younger, Son and Heir apparent of the said Sir
J.C. the elder; and Dame A.C. Wife of the said Sir J.C. the younger, of the one
part: And Andrew Huddleston of F. in the County of L. Gent. of the other part.
Witnesses, That the said Sir J.C. the elder, For the consideration of 4470 l.
and Sir J.C. the younger and Dame A. his Wife, and every of them, for diverse
good causes and considerations them and every of them thereunto moving, and
especially for and in consideration of the sum of 4470 l. of good and lawful
money of England, 600 l. whereof is in hand well and truly satisfied and paid
by the said A.H. unto the said Sir J.C. the younger before the ensealing and
delivery of these presents; of which said sum of 600 l. the said Sir J.C. the
younger, does acknowledge the receipt by these presents, and of the same sum
of 600 l. has and does hereby exonerate, acquit and discharge the said A.H.
his Heirs, Executors and Assigns by these presents; and the residue of the
said sum of 4470 l. amounting to the sum of 387 l. of like lawful money of
England, is agreed to be well and truly satisfied, contented and paid by the
said Andrew Hunddleston, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or
some of them, unto the said Sir J.C. the younger, his Executors or
Administrators, or some of them, in manner and form following, (that is, to
wit) in or upon the tenth day of December, now next and immediately following,
after the day of the date of these presents, Several times limited for the
payment of part of the consideration-money.
the sum of 400 l. of good and lawful Money of England; and in or upon the
first day of June next ensuing after the day of the date of these presents, the
sum of 1700 l. of like lawful money of England, and in or upon the first day
of November next ensuing the day of the date of these presents, the sum of
177 l. of like good and lawful money of England, residue, being the last
payment of the said whole sum of 4470 l. agreed upon, as aforesaid; and all
and every the said several mentioned payments, and every of them to be had and
made, as aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid, at or in the common receipt
of the Royal Exchange, London, between the hours of ten of the Clock in the
morning, Covenant to levy a Fine, suffer a Recovery or make a Feoffement, etc.
before such a day.
and four of the Clock in the afternoon of every of the said several days
of payment thereof before mentioned, for themselves and every of them, their
and every of their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them, do
Covenant and grant to and with the said A.H. his Heirs, Executors
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these presents, That they the
said Sir Jo.C. the elder, and Sir Jo.C. the younger, and the said Dame A.C.
Wife of the said Sir Jo.C. the younger, and Heirs of the said Sir Jo.Cuts the
elder, and Sir Jo.Cuts the younger, and every of them, shall and will on this
side, and before the Feast day of Saint Andrew the Apostle next ensuing after
the day of these presents, at and upon the reasonable request or requests,
costs and charges in the Law of the said A.H. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators of Assigns, or any of them by Fine of Fines with Proclamations
in due form of Law to belevied, Feoffement or Feoffements, Recovery or
Recoveries, with Voucher or Vouchers over, or by any such good and sufficient
means, conveyance or assurance in the Law whatsoever, as by the said A.H. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, or their or any
of their Council learned in the Law, shall be in that behalf lawfully and
reasonably devised or advised, convey and assure, or cause to be conveyed and
assured unto Humphrey D. of G. in the County of M. Esquire, and T.E. of B. in
the County of E. Gent. and their Heirs and Assigns for ever, All that and
those the Manor, Lordship and Borough of Tha^t^ed; all that and those the
Manours of Hoham S.Fee, and Coldam^ Fie, and the Park called Lorham Park,
situate, lying and being in the County of Essex, with their and every of their
appurtenances, and all and singular the Messuages, Houses, Edifices, Buildings,
Parkes, Gardens, Orchards, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Woods,
Under-woods, Commons, Ways, Waters, Fishings, Knights Fees, Advowsons of
Churches, Chauntries, Chapels, Warrens, Courts, Courts leet, view of
Francke-pledge, Liberties, Waifes, Strayes, Heriots, Rents-charge, Rents-secke,
Reversions, Services, Wastes, Custom, Liberties, Franchises, Profits,
Commodities, Royalties, Hereditaments and Emoluments whatsoever, with the
appurtenances, to the said Manor, Lordship and Borough of T. and unto the said
Manours of H. S. Fee, and C. Fee, and to the said Park called H. Park, and to
every or any of them, or to any part or parcel thereof, or of every or any of
them now belonging or in any wise appertaining, or at any time within the space
of four years last past, being occupied, taken, had, known or reputed as
part, parcel or member of, or as appertaining to the said Manor, Lordship and
Borough of T. and of and to the said Manor of H.S. Fee, and C. Fee, and the
Park called H. Park, and every or any of them, with their and every of their
appurtenances, and all other the now Manours, Messuages, Cotages, Lands,
Tenements, Rent-charges, Rents, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments
whatsoever, with the appurtenances of the said Sir Jo. C. the elder, and Sir
Jo. C. the younger, and Dame Anne his Wife, or either or any of them, situate,
lying, issuing, growing, renewing or being within the Fields, Parishes, Towns
or Hamlets of T. H. C C. etc. and every or any of them in the said County of
Essex; and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders of all and
singular the said Manours, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Premises, and every
of them, and of every part thereof, with the appurtenances; And also all and
singular Deeds, As also to deliver the Deeds and Writings by a day.
Evidences, Escripts, Minuments and Writings whatsoever; touching and
concerning only the said Hereditaments and Premises, or only any part
thereof: All and every which said Deeds, Evidences, Escripts, Minuments and
Writings aforesaid, or such or so many of them as now are, or be in the hands,
custody or possession of the said Sir Io.C. the elder, and the said Sir Io. C.
the younger, or either of them, or of any other Person or Persons whatsoever,
by their or either of their delivery, or to their or either of their use or
uses, or which they or either of them can or may obtain, come by or get without
suit of Law: As also true Copies of such as concern the Lands to be conveyed.
And also true Copies of all such Deeds, Evidences, Escripts, Minuments and
Writings whatsoever, as do touch or concern the said Manours, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Premises, or any of them, or any part thereof, together with any
other Messuages, Lands and Hereditaments, and which now are or be in the hands,
custody or possession of the said Sir Io.C. the elder, and Sir Io. Cuts the
younger, or either of them, or any other Person or Persons by their or either
of their delivery, or to their or either of their use or uses, and which they
or either of them can or may obtain, come by or get without suit in Law, as
aforesaid; and the same Copies to be copied, had and made at and upon the
proper costs and charges of the said Andrew H. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or some of them: They the said Sir Io. C. the
elder, and Sir Io. C. the younger, and either of them for themselves and either
of them, their and either of their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and
every of them, do Covenant and grant to and with the said Andrew Huddl^ston,
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these
presents, to deliver or cause to be delivered unto the said A. H. his Heirs or
Assigns, or some of them on this side, and before the Feast day of Saint
George, next ensuing after the day of the Date of these presents, at and upon
their, or any of their request or requests thereof, whole, safe, uncancelled,
and not defaced: to have and to hold the said Manours, Lordships, Habendum to
the said H. D. and T. H. and their Heirs for ever, to and for the uses,
intents, and purposes and upon the provisoes, Conditions, and agreements
hereafter mentioned.
and Borough, Park, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments aforesaid,
and all other the Premises aforesaid, and every of them, and every part
thereof, with the appurtenances unto the said H. D. and Tho. E. their Heirs
and Assigns for ever, to and for the uses, behoofs, intents, and purposes, and
under, and upon the provisoes, Conditions and agreements hereafter, herein
following, and to no other use, intent or purpose, That is (to wit) to the use
and behoof of the said Andrew Huddleston, his Heirs and Assigns for ever,
under and upon (nevertheless the Proviso or condition and agreements herein
hereafter mentioned or contained, and to no other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever.) And the said Sir Jo.C. the Elder, Covenant for peaceable enjoyment.
and Sir Jo.C. the Younger, and either of them; for themselves and either of
them, their and either of their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and
every of them, do Covenant and grant, to and with the said A.H. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them; by these presents,
That he the said A. H. his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, under, and
upon, (nevertheless the Proviso or Condition, and agreements before mentioned,
and hereafter in these presents contained, or specified, shall or may from time
to time, and at all times for ever hereafter, peaceably and quietly have, hold,
occupy and enjoy all and singular the said Manours, Messuages, Borough, Park;
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other the premises and every of
them, and every part thereof, with the appurtenances, without the let* suit,
trouble; molestation, disturbance, interruption, or eviction of the said Sir
Jo. C. the Elder, Sir Jo.C. the Younger, and Dame A. Wife of the said Sir Jo.C.
the Younger or any of them: And without any laws fuller, suit, trouble,
molestation, disturbance, interruption, or eviction of the Heire^ or Assigns
of the said Sir Jo.C. the Elder, and Sir Jo.C. the Younger, or either or any of
them) And further also, that the said Manours and Lordships, To free from
encumbrances.
Borough, Park, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, and all other
the premises and every of them, and every part thereof, with the appurtenances
now are and be^ and so at all times for ever hereafter, shall or may remain,
continue, and be unto the said A.H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, in manner
and form aforesaid, free, clear and clearly acquitted, exonerated and
discharged, or otherwise within convenient time, next after reasonable request
in that behalf made, well and sufficiently saved or kept harmless, of, for,
from and concerning all and every former and other bargains, sales, gifts,
grants, leases, estates, Joyntures, Dowers, titles of Dowers; Statutes;
Recognizances; Judgments, executions, condemnations, and of, for, from and
concerning all and every other charges, titles, troubles and encumbrances
whatsoever hereto fore committed, had, made, knowledged, levied, wittingly and
willingly suffered or executed, or hereafter to be committed, had, made, done,
knowledged, levied, wittingly or willingly suffered and executed by the said
Sir Io. C. the elder, and Sir Io. Cuits the younger, and Dame A. his Wife, or
any of them, their or any of their Assignee, or Assignees, or by the Heirs or
Assigns of the said Sir Io.C. the elder, and Sir Io.C. the younger, or of
either or any of them, or by any Person or Persons whatsoever having or
lawfully claiming to have any estate, right, title, interest, claim or demand
whatsoever of, in or to the same, or of, in, or to any part thereof by, from,
or under them, or any of them, the yearly sum or Fee-farm Rent of 57l. 10s.
hereafter to grow or accrue due and payable for the premises, or for some part
thereof unto, etc. Excepting certain Fee-farm rents and estates made.
And the Rents and Services to be from henceforth due or payable for the
premises, or for any part thereof unto the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or
Fees thereof (if any such there be) and one Lease for one and twenty years
heretofore made by the said Sir Io.C. the younger, to S.S. whereof there are
not above seventeen years to expire by effluction of time; and whereupon the
yearly rent of 17 l. 13 s. and 3 d. is reserved; and which said yearly rent,
notwithstanding any act done, or to be done by the said Sir Io. Cutts the
younger, or his Heirs, shall from henceforth continue payable unto the said
A.H. his Heirs and Assigns under and upon (nevertheless the proviso and
condition in these presents expressed;) And a Grant or Patent of the
Stewardship of the Courts of the Manours of T.H. S.C. and the Fees aforesaid
made and granted by the said Sir I.C. the younger, to the said S. S. for term
of years not expired: And all Copies and Copyhold estates heretofore granted
of any the premises according to the custom of the said Manours, or any of
them by the said Sir Io.C. the younger, or his Steward for the time being, to
any Person or Persons (and the proviso or condition herein, hereafter mentioned
and contained, and every of them; and all and every the re-entry and re-entries
hereafter to be made, or made oy reason or means of any breach or
nonperformance of the same proviso or condition only excepted and
foreprized.) Fot further assurance.
And further also, that they the said Sir Io.C. the elder, Sir Io.C. the
younger, and Dame A. Wife of the said Sir Io.C. the younger, and every of them,
and the Heirs of the said Sir Io C. the elder, and Sir Io.C. the younger, and
every of them, Sir D.D. Knight, and Dame M D. his Wife, Sir Tho.C. Knight, and
Dame D.C. his Wife, and the Heirs of the said Dame D. and every of them, shall
and will from time to time, and at all times, during and within the space of 5
Years now next ensuing, at and upon the reasonable request or requests, and
Charges in the Law of the said A. H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or any of them, do, make, knowledge, levy, suffer, and execute, and
cause to be done, made, knowledged, levied, suffered, and executed all and
every such further, and other lawful act and acts, thing and things, devise and
devises, Conveyance and assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the further,
better, and more assured surety, sure making, conveying and assuring of all and
every the said Manours, Lordships, Borough, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and all other the premises aforesaid, and every of them, and
every part thereof, with the appurtenances unto the said H.D. and Tho. E. their
Heirs and Assigns for ever, in manner and form aforesaid, by, under, and
according to the proviso and condition hereafter expressed, till all the
payments in these presents limited, are paid and performed: And after the
performance thereof, absolutely and without condition, according to the tenor
and true intent and meaning of these presents; As by the said A. H. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, or by their or any of
their Council learned in the Law, shall be in that behalf lawfully and
reasonably devised, or advised, be they by Fine or Fines, with proclamations in
due form of Law to be levied, Feoffement or Feoffements, Recovery or
Recoveries, with Voucher or Vouchers over, deed or deeds, enrolled or not
enrolled, Release with warranty, as for and concerning the said Sir Io.C. the
Father, and Sir Io.C. the Son, for them and their Heirs, against the said Sir
Io. C. the elder, and Sir Io.C. the younger, and Dame A. his Wife, and the said
Sir D. D. and Dame M. D. his Wife, Sir Tho. C. and Dame D. his Wife, and the
Heirs of the said Sir Jo C. the Elder, and Sir Jo.C. the Younger, Sir D.D. and
Dame Mary D. his Wife, Sir Tho.C. and Dame D. his Wife, and every or any of
them, and as for and concerning the said Dud. D. and Dame M. his Wife, against
them and the Heirs of the said M. and of and concerning the said Sir T.G. and
Dame D. his Wife, against them and the Heirs of the said D. or otherways
without warranty at the election and choice of the said A.H. his Heirs,
Executors, or Assigns, or any of them, Confirmation by all, or any of the said
ways or means, or by any lawful ways or means of assurance whatsoever, with
such warranty only as aforesaid, or otherways without warranty at such the
election and choice as aforesaid: and for the doing, making, knowledging and
levying, suffering or executing whereof they the said Sir Jo.C. the Elder, and
Sir Jo.C. the Younger, their or either of their Heirs, or any of them, shall
not be enforced to travel above the distance of ten miles from such place or
places where they or any of them then respectively shall be abiding or
dwelling, nor the said other Person and Persons so agreed to make any further
assurance from his and their several and respective place of his and their
usual abode, or at the time or times of such request or requests so to be made,
as aforesaid. Provided nevertheless and upon condition, Condition that if the
several sums be not paid at the times appointed, the uses and intended
assurances to be void.
That if the said A. H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or
some or one of them shall not, and do not well and truly satisfy and pay, or
cause to be paid unto the said Sir Jo.C. the Younger, his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or some or one of them the said full sum of 387 l.
of good and lawful Money of England, being the rest and residue of the said
mentioned sum of 4470 l. before specified, at, in, or upon the several days
of payment hereafter herein in that behalf specified, and in manner and form
following, according to the tenor and true intent and meaning of these
presents, That is (to wit) the sum of 400 l. of good and lawful money of
England, in and upon the tenth day of December, next following after the Day of
the Date of these presents: and the sum of 1700 l. in or upon the first day
of June next also following after the Day of the Date of these presents: and
the sum of 1770 l. residue in and upon the first day of November, which shall
be in the Year of our Lord God, etc. And all end every the said several
payments of the said sum of 3870 l. and every of them to be respectively had
and made in and upon all and every the said several Days of payment thereof
before specified, at or in the common receipt of the Royal Exchange, London,
between the hours of ten of the clock in the morning, and four of the clock in
the afternoon of every of the said several Days of payment thereof before
specified, That then and immediately from thenceforth as well the use, estate
and interest of the said A.H. and his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them,
of, or in the said Manours, Lordships, Borough, Park, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, and every or any of them by force and
means of the said Covenanted or intended conveyances, and assurances, and of
these presents, and every or any of them shall absolutely cease, end and be
merely and utterly frustrate and void, as also that the said Covenanted or
intended conveyances or assurances, and every of them, so, or in any manner to
be had, made, knowledged, levied or executed by the said Sir Io.C. the Father,
Sir Io.C. the Son, and Dame A. his Wife, Sir D.D. and Dame M. his Wife, Sir
T.C. and Dame D. his Wife, or any of them, their, or any of their Heirs of or
in the said Manours, Lordships, Borough. Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and other the premises with the appurtenances, and every or any
of them, or of any part thereof, shall be, and so for ever hereafter shall be
adjudged, construed and taken to be to and for the only use and behoof of the
said Sir I.C. the younger, And to be to other uses.
his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and to none other use, intents or purposes
whatsoever: And furthermore, And the Partics to stand seized to those uses.
that all and every other Person and Persons, and his and their Heirs, and
every of them to whom any of the said Covenanted or intended Conveyances or
Assurances, or any of them shall be so had or made as aforesaid by force
thereof, and of these presents shall stand and be seized of, and in all and
singular the said Manours, Lordships, Borough, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and every of them, and of every part thereof, with the
appurtenances to the only sole and proper use and behoof of the said Sir Io.C.
the Younger, and the Heirs of the said Sir Io.C. the younger for ever, and to
none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever: And also, that then and from
thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Sir Io.C. the
younger, and Dame A. his Wife, and the Heirs of the said Sir Io.C. the
younger, and every of them into all and singular the said Manours, Lands,
Tenements and Premises, and every of them to re-enter, and the same and every
part thereof to retain, repossesse, and have again as in his and their former
Estate: Any thing in these presents contained, or otherwise to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding. And the said Sir Io. C. the Younger is
contented and agreed, and for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, does Covenant and Grant to and with the said
A. H. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them by these
presents, not only upon every payment of every several sum, parcel of the said
3870 l. to seal and deliver a particular acquittance unto the said Andrew
Huddleston, his Executors or Assigns, acknowledging thereby the receipt of
such sums, so then well and truly paid according to the agreement thereof: But
also they the said Sir Io. Cutts the Elder, and Sir Io. C. the Younger, for
themselves, their Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, do Covenant and Grant to and
with the said A.H. his Heirs and Assigns, that if the said A.H. his Heirs
Executors or Administrators, or any of them shall and do well and truly
satisfy and pay, or cause to be satisfied and paid unto the said Sir Io.C. the
Younger, his Executors or Aministrators, or any of them the said sum of 3870
l. residue of good and lawful Money of England at the said several days and
times, and in manner and form as in that behalf, is formerly in or by the
proviso or condition aforesaid mentioned or specified, and according to the
tenor and true intent and meaning thereof, and of those presents, That then,
and at all times from thenceforth as well the said Sir Io. C. the Elder, and
Sir Io. C. the Younger, and either of them, their and either of their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them shall and will, at
and upon the reasonable request or requests, costs and charges in the Law of
the said Andrew Huddleston, Covenant not only to give particular acquittances
of the Moneys received.
his Heirs or Assigns, do, make, and execute, and cause to be done, made, and
executed unto the said A. H. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
or any of them: All and every such release and releases, acquittances or other
discharges of and concerning the said 3870 l. above mentioned: And of and for
the said Conditional proviso, Limitation, Clause of Re-entry, or limitation of
use or uses unto the said Sir Jo. C. the Younger, his Heirs or Assigns formerly
in, or by these presents comprised or contained. But to make such Releases or
other discharges of the gross sum, and Condition, etc. and such other
further assurance as shall be advised by Counsel.
As also that the said Sir Jo. C. the Elder, Sir Jo C. the younger, and the
Heirs of the said Sir Jo. C. the elder, and Sir Io. C. the younger, and every
of them, shall and will at all times thenceforth, at and upon the like request,
cost and charges in the Law of the said A. H. his Heirs or Assigns, or any of
them do, make, and execute, or cause to be done, make and executed unto the
said A. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all and every such further and
other act and acts, conveyances and assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the
further, better, more absolute and assured surety, sure making, conveying and
assuring of the said Manours and Lordships, Borough, Park, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, and every of them, and every part
thereof, with the appurtenances, and of all and every their, and every of their
Title, Interest, claim and demand whatsoever of, or in to the same, or any part
thereof unto the said A.H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, absolutely and
without any condition or limitaion whatsoever: As by the said Andrew H. his
Heirs and Assigns, or any of them, or by his and their Council learned in the
Law, shall be in that behalf lawfully and reasonably devised or advised (So as
the said parties to the said assurance be not enforced to travel other then is
before expressed respectively:) And so as the same do not extend to any further
warranty then only against the said Sir Io.C. the elder, and A. his Wife, Sir
D.D. and Dame M.D. his Wife, Sir Tho.C. and Dame D. his Wife, and their or some
of their Heirs; and all persons lawfully claiming in, by, from or under them,
or any of them, or in, by, from or under their or any of their Titles: And the
said Andrew H. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every
of them, does Covenant and Grant to and with the said Sir Io.C. the elder, and
Sir Jo.C. the younger, and either of them, their and either of their Heirs,
Executors and Administrators by these presents; Covenant that if there shall be
default in payment, to re-deliver the Evidences.
That if any default shall happen to be made by the said Andr. H. his Heirs,
Executors or Administrators, of or in the payment of the said sum of 3870 l. or
any part thereof at any the days and times in that behalf limited, mentioned
or appointed, in or by the Proviso or Condition before in these presents
contained, contrary to the Tenor and true intent and meaning thereof, and of
these presents, That then, and at all times thenceforth, he the said A.H. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or some of them shall and will,
at and upon the reasonable request or requests of the said Sir Jo. C. the
younger, his Heirs or Assigns, or any of them re-deliver, or cause to be
re-delivered unto the said Sir J. C. the younger, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or to some of them: All and every such the Deeds,
Evidences, Minuments and Writings whatsoever touching or concerning the said
Manours, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, or any of
them as shall be by the said Sir J.C. the elder, and Sir Jo.C. The younger, or
either of them, delivered to the said A.H. his Heirs or Assigns, or any of
them, as aforesaid, whole, safe, uncancelled and not defaced; and in such
manner, case and plight, as the same shall be delivered by or from the said Sir
J.C. the elder, and Sir Jo.C. the younger, or either of them, their or either
of their Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns unto the said A. H. his
Heirs, Executors or Administrators, or any of them: As also to reassure the
Land as shall be advised.
And that the said A.H. his Heirs and Assigns shall and will after such
default, at and upon the Request, Costs and Charges in the Law of the said Sir
Jo. C. the younger, his Heirs or Assigns do, make, and execute such act and
acts, assurance and assurances for the re-assuring and conveying, surety and
sure making of all and singular the premises to the said Sir Jo.C. the younger,
his Heirs and Assigns to the sole and only use and behoof of the said Sir Jo.
C. the younger, his Heirs and Assigns, as by the said Sir Io. C. his Heirs or
Assigns, shall be reasonably devised or advised. So as the said A. H. his
Heirs nor Assigns be not compelled to travel from the place of their abode at
the time of such request made for the doing and executing of the same: And so
as the same include no other or further warranty then against the said A. his
Heirs and Assigns. Covenant by the Vendee to pay a Fee-Farm Rent of, etc.
payable to, etc.
And A.H. for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators does Covenant
and Grant to and with the said Sir Io. Cutts, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, That he the said A.H. his
Heirs or Assigns, or some of them, shall and will at all times, and from time
to time for ever hereafter pay and satisfy to, etc. the said Fee-Farm Rent, of
57 l. 10 s. before mentioned, hereafter to grow due and payable at the times
therefore usual: And all Quit-rents and Out-rents issuing out of all or any the
premises, or due or payable for or in regard, or by reason of the premises to,
etc. as the same shall hereafter grow, And in default of payment, then the
Vendee within 3. Months after notice, shall pay the Arrearages, and in default
thereof, upon like notice and request shall satisfy the Damages sustained by
the Vendee for nonpayment.
or become due and payable; And in case of non payment of all or any the same
arrearages on any of the said usual days of payment, then and from
thenceforth, respectively upon reasonable notice and request, of such
arrearages to be made or given to the said A. and H. his Heirs or Assigns, by
or from the said Sir Io. Cutts the younger, his Heirs or Assigns, The said
A.H. his Heirs or Assigns, or some of them respectively within three Months
next ensuing such notice and request, shall well and truly from time to time,
pay all and every the same arrearages: And in default thereof, then and from
thenceforth respectively, well and truly upon like request, shall and will well
and truly from time to time recompense and satisfy to the said Sir Io. C. his
Heirs and Assigns, all such damages and losses as they or any of them shall
in any wise sustain, by or by reason or occasion of the non-payment of the said
Fee-Farm Rent, or any of them, as aforesaid.

In witness, etc.
Covenants for a Fine and recovery to cut off an Intaile.
THis INDENTVRE made, etc. Between E. B. of S. in the County of B. Esquire, E.
his Wife, and I.C. of A. in the said County of B. Yeoman, on the first part:
I.T. of M. in the County of N. Yeoman on the second part: and E.W. of A.
aforesaid, Yeoman, on the third part: E.B. stands seized at the ensealing of
these prefents of an estate-taile to him and his Heirs males of his body, with
diverse remainders over, etc.
Whereas the said E. B. at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is and
stands seized of an Estate-taile to him and the Heirs males of his body,
with diverse remainders over, of and in the said Manor, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments hereafter in these presents mentioned. For and in consideration
of the said estate-taile, and for the settling of an absolute estate of
Inheritance in Fee-simple in the said E.B. to the intent he may be enabled to
make a perfect assurance to any person that shall purchase the said Manor,
Lands and Hereditaments, etc.
Now witnesses this Indenture, that for and in Consideration of the barring of
the Estate-taile and all the remainders thereupon depending: And for the
settling of an absolute estate of Inheritance in Fee-simple in the said E. B.
whereby he may be enabled to make and good and perfect assurance of such person
and persons and their Heirs as have agreed, or hereafter shall agree with him
the said E.B. to purchase the said Manor, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
or any part or parcel of them. It is mutually and respectively concluded, and
fully agreed upon by and between all and every the said parties to these
presents: E. B. Covenants to leavy a Fine before Easter Term next ensuing, sur
Conusance de droit, etc. in the Court of Common Pleas in Westminster, with
Proclamations, etc. to the said I. T. and his Heirs of all his Manor and
Manours in the Country of B. and of all other the Inheritance of the said E. B.
in S. aforesaid, or elsewhere in the Parish of B. and County of B. with diverse
Messuages, and other the Premises with 26 s. 8 d. rent, with the Appurtenances
is S, and P. aforesaid.
And the said E. B. does covenant and agree, That he the said E. B, and E. Wife
shall and will on this side and before Easter Term now next ensuing, Levy one
fine, Sur conuzance de droit, come ceo que, il a de lear done, before the
Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, with Proclamations
thereupon to be pursued, according to the usual course in such cases used and
accustomed, to the said I. T. and his Heirs of all his Manor and Manours in
S. in the said County of B. and of all other the Messuages Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments whatsoever, which are or are reputed to be any part or
parcel of the inheritance or possession of the said E. B. in S. aforesaid or
elsewhere, in the parish of B. in County of B. by the name or names of the
Manor of S. and of nine Messuages, four Cottages, one water-mill, one
Dovehouse, thirteen Gardens, nine Orchards, four hundred Acres of Land, forty
Acres of Meadow, one hundred and threescore Acres of Pasture, and twenty six
shillings eight pence rent, with the appurtenance in S. and B. before said, or
by such other name or names, or by such other content or number of Acres, or in
such other manner and form as to the said E.B. his Heirs or Assigns shall
seem fit and convenient. By which said Fine to be levied by the said E. B. and
E. his Wife before Easterterm aforesaid, is to be, and shall be to the use of
the said I.T. and of his Heirs and Assigns to the intent the said I.T. shall
stand and be adjudged a perfect Tenant of the said Manor, Lands, etc. until a
perfect recovery may be had and executed.
Which said Fine, and all and every other Fine and Fines heretofore levied, or
hereafter on this side, and before the end of Easter Term aforesaid, to
belevied by the said E. B. and E. his Wife unto the said I. T. is agreed by all
and every the said parties to these presents to be, and shall be to the use of
the said I. T. and of his Heirs and Assigns: To the only intent and purpose
that he the said I. T. shall stand, and be, and shall be adjudged a perfect
Tenant of the said Manor, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, whereof the said
Fine is agreed to be levied as aforesaid, until a perfect recovery shall and
may lawfully be had and executed of the said Manor, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments aforesaid against the said I.T. I.T. Covenanteth
and agrees that he will before the end of Trinity Term next permit and suffer
the said E.B. to prosecute one Writ of Entry Sur disseisien, etc. against the
said I. T. whereby the said E. B. shall demand against the said Manor, Lands,
etc. unto which Writ the said I.T. shall appear in person and vouch to warranty
the said E. E. whereby a perfect Judgment may be given and had for the said E.
E. against the said I. T. for the recovery of the said Manor, Land, etc. and
the said I. T. to recover in value against the said E. B. so that a good and
perfect recovery may be had with double voucher accordingly, and after the
manner and course of Common recoveries in such case use
And it is further concluded and agreed, and the said I.T. does Covenant and
agree, that he shall and will before the end of Trinity Term now next also
ensuring, permit and suffer the said E. B. to commence and prosecute one Writ
of Entry Sur desseisien in le post, retournable before the Justices of the
Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, aforesaid, against the said I. T.
whereby the said E.B. shall demand against I.T. the said Manor, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments by such name and names, number and content of Acres
as by the Council learned in the Law of the said E. B. shall be devised or
advised: unto which Writ of Entry so to be brought, the said I. T. shall appear
in proper Person, and shall vouch and call to warrantie the said E.B. who shall
appear and vouch to warrantie the common Vouchee, who shall appear, imparle,
and after make default whereby a perfect Judgment may be had and given for the
said E.B. against the said I.T. for the Recovery of the said Manor, Lands,
Tenemen^s and Hereditaments, whereof such Writ of Entry shall be brought and
prosecured, as aforesaid. And it is agreed between the said Parties that
immediately after the perfecting of the said Recovery and Fine covenanted to be
levied, as aforesaid, of the Manours, Lands, and Hereditaments shall be and
enure, and taken to be and enure to the sole and only use and behoof of the
said E.B. and I. C. and of the Heirs and Assigns of the said E.D. for ever.
And for the said I.T. to recover in value against the said E.B. So as a good
and perfect Recovery may be had with double Vouther accordingly, and after the
manner and course of common Recoveries in such or the like case use and
accustomed. And it is fully and absolutelly concluded, condescended, and agreed
by and between all and every the said Parties, to these presents, for them, and
every of them, their and every of their Heirs, That immediately from and after
the perfecting of the said Recovery, as well the said Fine and Recovery so
Covenanted to be levied and suffered, as aforesaid, as also all and every other
Fine and Fines, Recovery and Recoveries whatsoever heretofore levied or
suffered, or hereafter on this side and before the end of the said Term of
holy Trinity now next ensuring to be levied or suffered of the said Manor,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, or of any of them by or between all or any
of the said Parties to these presents, shall be and enure, and shall be
adjudged, construed, esteemed and taken to be and enure to the sole and only
use and behoof of the said E.B. and I.C. and of the Heirs and Assigns of the
said E.B. for ever.

In witness whereof to each part of these presents, every of the said Parties
have set to their hands and seals the Day and Years first above written.
A Letter of Attorney to make Livery, and a Covenant to stand seized to the
Uses, in default of Livery, and due execution of the Feoffement.
ANd the said Robert O. for the better executing of this present Deed of
Feoffement does by these presents constitute, ordain and make, and in his place
put his welbeloved Friends C.M. and C.A. his true and lawful Attorney jointly
and severally for him and in his name, to enter into the Manor of R. and the
moiety of the Manor of Y. and into all other the Messuages, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments in R.Y. H. and G. and other the premises with their
appurtenances before, in, and by these present Indentures mentioned, or into
any part thereof in the name of all, and thereof, or of any part thereof in the
name of all, for him and in his name to deliver quiet and peaceable possession,
and to make livery and seizin unto the said W.P. and T.J. or either of them,
their or either of their Attorney or Attourneys in that behalf authorized
according to the true meaning of these presents: Giving unto his said
Attourneys jointly, or unto either of them severally, full power and authority
to do all and every such act and acts for the execution of livery and seizin,
according to the purport of these presents, as he himself might do if he were
there personally present. Covenant, to stand seized to the same Uses in the
Deed of Feoffement limited, in default of livery, or due execution thereof.
And the said Robert O. does further for him, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, Covenant, promise and grant to
and with the said Thomas J. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and every of
them by these presents, That if it shall happen the said Deed of Feoffement not
to be lawfully executed with livery and seizin, according to the due form of
Law; or to be imperfectly executed for any default or want of livery and seizin
or attournment, before the Feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin next
ensuring the Date of these presents: whereby the uses before appointed, shall
not be raised upon this Feoffement as they are meant, That then, from and after
the said Feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin next ensuring the Date
of these presents, he the said Rohert O. his Heirs and Assigns for the
considerations aforesaid, shall stand and be seized of the said Manor of R.
and of the moiety of the said Monour of Y. and of all other the Messuages,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in R.Y. H. and G. aforesaid, to the uses,
limitations and purposes before in these presents expressed and declared in
such manner and form as the same are meant to be raised upon the execution of
this Deed of Feoffement.

The End.

