A Perfect NARRATIVE OF THE ROBBERY AND MURDER Committed near Dame Annis so
Clear, on Friday night, the second of July, 1669. Upon the Person of Mr. John
Talbot: QUONDAM, Preacher to a Regiment of His Majesty's Forces in Portugal,
and lately, since his return, Curate of Laindon in ESSEX.

Who at that time, Was stripped to his shirt, had his throat cut, and was
stabbed into the throat, by six Men and a bloody Woman, whereof three Men and
the bloody Woman were miraculously Apprehended, and upon Friday, the Ninth of
July, were Condemned at Justice-Hall in the Old Bailey; two of the Men and the
Woman being Executed for the said Fact, on Wednesday, the Fourteenth of July,
1669.

Together With their EXAMINATIONS, TRIAL, and CONFESSIONS.

London, Printed by William Godbid, MDCIXIX.

A Narrative of the Robbery and Bloody Murder of Mr. John Talbot, etc.
SUch is Almighty Gods most wonderful providence in the continued sustentation
of his Creation, especially in the preservation of mankind, the Image of
himself; that no Atheist hitherto could Justly accuse his most righteous
Dispensation, relating to his government of the Universe, or more particularly
any wicked Men triumph in their desperate attempts, to destroy Man on Earth,
his most noble Creature: It Is true, that iniquity (especially in this age) has
so prevailed, that many Giants in sin, have in both kinds dared as far as they
either were permitted, or prevailed with by the Devils instruments, to assault
the being of all beings, and others endeavoring to execute that in Effigy,
which they cannot reach or accomplish, in respect of his inaccessible essence;
but whilst the bold Atheist spends his quivers of arrows against Heaven, at
length he experiences the fall of his own weapons, to his at once (I censure
not whether too late) apparent conviction, and inevitable destruction; and
whilst the Murderer most maliciously enterprises to extirpate humane nature by
his most desperate practices, he frequently in killing another enlivens
himself; so that guilt hereupon multiplies witnesses as well of his bloody
actions, as perpetuates a memorial of divine existence in Judgment ordering all
affairs here below.

To pass by at present what relates to the increase and condition of Atheists,
howsoever, it is highly suspicious that Murder is a branch sprouting from this
stock, nay probably grows very near the root. Also, not upon this occasion to
rehearse what others have wrote concerning this horrid impiety, and how that
their punishment has been mistructive to the then present and after ages of
Gods especial regard to humane nature, in his unsearchable ways discovering
such offenders, bringing them to receive rewards suitable to their inhumane
designs and practices; as a further addition to what on this subject has
already been made public, that all people may avoid both the occasion and fate
of Murderers, it is not unmeet that a true and faithful Narrative be exposed
to view of the late execrable Murder of Mr. John Talbot late a Minister. This
Gentleman as I am informed, was Chaplain to one of his Majesty's Regiments in
Portugal, where he continued in the discharge of his Office, till the recalling
of the said Regiment; when he arrived at London, he preached 3. Months at St.
Alphage in the Wall.

But before this accident, he was Curate at a Town called Laindon in Essex; the
occasion of his coming to London (as he often wrote) was upon the account of a
Law-sute between him and some persons of that Parish. The morning before this
disaster, he applied himself to his Lawyer, and had some intimation that his
adversaries designed to Arrest him; hereupon he was shie whether he went and
with whom he conversed, but soon after he took notice of six Men and one Woman
that dogged him whither soever he went; after many shiftings from place to
place in order to his avoidance of them; he betook himself to Grayes-Inne,
whither some or all of these persons followed him, so that he took full and
accurate notice of them.

Whence he sent by the hands of two Gentlemen belonging to that Innes of Court,
one or two Letters requesting some of his acquaintance and friends to come to
his assistance, all this while he only suspected an Arrest.

They failing, he applied himself to a Gentleman's chamber at Grayes-Inne, where
staying till he supposed all cause of danger was over; after a short
refreshment, as he informed me, steered his course the back way through
Old-street, over the fields toward Shoreditch; not long after he came into the
fields he perceived the same persons which before dogged him to pursue him;
whereupon in this straight, it being late, near Eleven of the Clock, he sought
to make his escape, (breaking through a Reed hedge) to a Garden House, before
he could reach his designed shelter, one or more seized him, and first picked
his pockets, where they found about 20 shillings, and his knife, with which one
attempted to kill him; the cut in the Collar of the Doublet signifies, that
they endeavored to cut his Throat before they stripped him; but the Wound
seems to inform that they first pulled of his Coat and Doublet, and then
executing their so long waited for intention on him.

As to the manner and form of his Wound, whether it was because the knife was
broad pointed, (and so it was judged) that it might not by stabs do full
execution, or that these pretended to an exquisite skill in butchering Men,
they first cut out a piece of his Throat about the breadth of a Crown piece,
but missed the Winde-pipe; then in the dependant part of the Orifice they
stabbed him with the knife, the point whereof reached near unto the Lungs; but
so providence did order their cruelty, that they missed the recurrent Nerves,
by which he had been silenced, as also the Jugular Veins and Arteries, by the
opening of which he had remediless bled to death, and possibly no such
discovery had been made of the Murder.

It must not be omitted that whilst they strove, and this Barbarous fact was
committed, that the Dogs in the garden opened much; and by their fierce barking
awakened some persons, who in regard of the light, supposeing it day break,
came down to look after their marketing; whereupon the Murderers left their
prey, and Mr. Talbot although Mortally wounded, crept after them through the
same breach he had made at his entrance into the Garden; fearing least he might
not be found and perish for want of help if he continued there, he went not far
before he fell down in that place where he was found lying. Before I proceed,
besides the barking of the Dogs, he observed, that the Beasts did very much
bellow, as if God had caused this cruelty of the Dogs to be some kind of
occasion of Mercy to the wounded Man, and to reproach the more destructive
fierceness of these Murderers, and had opened wide the mouths of the Beasts of
the field, to amaze and affright them from this slaughter of an Innocent; but
because the voice of these Creatures seemed not loud enough to deter these
assaylants from prosecuting their bloody attempt, soon after the Heavens spoke
terribly in Thunder, which possibly did so astonish these wretches, that they
escaped no farther from the place where they did this Horrid exploit. And as if
these occurrences were not sufficient to the end for which they were appointed,
a great shower of rain fell, which drew the Brick-makers out of their Hutts and
Lodgings, to save their Bricks from the Rain, by covering them with Straw. By
some of these Mr. Talbot was espied, lying in his shirt and drawers bloody:
Notice hereupon was given to the rest, and when they came to him he being
raised up, and cherished with a little strong water, immediately pointed which
way the Murderers went. The watch near Shoreditch, having notice of the Murder,
some persons of them went out, as well to take care of the Wounded Gentleman,
as also to find out and apprehend the Offenders: One of these fearing also an
Arrest, kept in the search aloof off and he first discovered a Man lying
amongst the Nettles, whom he supposed likewise to be killed; but calling his
companions, this Person appeared by the bloody knife lying on one side of him,
and the Ministers doublet on the other, to be guilty of the Murder, and
accordingly he was seized; at first he feigned himself asleep, but being well
awakened, he attempted to make his escape; a pewter pot being found near him,
the mark newly scraped out, one of his guard brake his head with it, and so he
became more quiet and tractable. In the mean time Mr. Talbot by the great care
of the Officers and people watching that night, was conveyed to the Star Inn at
Shoreditch Church, and put to bed, a Chyrurgeon immediately sent for to dress
him. When this Eaton was brought before him, he straightways knew him, and by
writing declared, he was the person that cut his Throat, and that five more and
a bloody Woman were his associates. He being (upon his request) a second time
brought before him, then continued his former accusation of him; whereupon he
was carried before Justice Pitfield, and by him after examination committed to
Newgate; it was not long before the Woman was found, pretending her self
likewise to be asleep, and when the Officers brought her before Mr. Talbot, he
presently knew her, and inquired of the Constable whether her name was not
Sarah, for he had heard one of her Comrades say in Holborn, Shall we have a
Coach Sarah? She being asked her name, and not suspecting the reason, said her
name was Sarah: Shortly after another person was taken, whom likewise he knew,
and a fourth, who were committed to Newgate, as the several following witnesses
both before the Justice, and at the Prisoners Trial declare; which evidence I
shall now set down, only craving liberty to prefix a true Copy of a Letter,
which the said Mr. Talbot sent to a person of quality on the Wednesday
following.

Sir,
ON Friday last walking in Holborn, a Gentleman, a very stranger to me, bid me
to look to my self for I was dogged by Knaves, and so God knows it proved to my
sorrow, yet know I not for what cause I was thus pursued: I moved to Gray's Inn
till I thought this malice might have been over, after this I was still
pursued, and God knows that I knew none of their Faces, Houses, Streets,
Highways, all was one; thus for above seven hours I was dogged, till I was
almost dead with weariness; at last, striving to get to my Inn, I went a new
way, thinking to escape them, but could not; for at Eleven of the Clock that
night, six men and one bloody woman first cut my throat, and then stabbed me in
the throat. I was found and brought by the Officers of the Parish of
Shore-ditch, where I am carefully provided for; an able Doctor, Dr. Hodges, and
a Chyrurgeon, one Mr. Leichfeild, take care of me. I can eat nothing, neither
can I speak any thing but I and No. There are three of my bloody Enemies in
Newgate, at Hicks-Hall these three are Cast, to day they are to be at the
Old Bailey.

Your Humble Servant, J. TALBOT.
From the Star-Inn in Shor. ditch, July 7, 1669.
Mr. John Talbot's Account of his wandering from one place to another, when he
was dogged by several Persons.
THe reason why I could not escape them was this, into what Place, House,
Alley, or corner soever I came, I was watched and dogged by several Persons; I
took sanctuary in Counselor Prichards Chamber of Grayes-Inn a certain time,
out of his Chamber I had liberty to go into the Walks, in the very Walks I was
dogged; I returned again into the abovesaid Chamber, afterward I walked in the
upper Gallery there, till I thought all was well, then it was past Three of the
Clock in the Afternoon, then I went into the Lane, I thought the People had
been mad, they pursued me bloodily; at Five of the Clock I housed, and got a
Cup of Beer, but immediately I was forced to fly; then I was pursued till I was
stabbed by six Men and one bloody Woman.

I am so sick I can write no more.

The Attestation of James Kynoin, concerning Mr. Talbot.
UPon the second day of July, about Twelve of the Clock at Noon, there came
into Mr. Prichards Chamber in Gray's Inn, a Gentleman in the habit of a
Minister, who seemed to be very much frighted, which induced me to ask him, Why
he looked so ill? his answer was, That he had been dogged by several Persons
for three or four hours, but knew not why. Then I asked him, If he thought them
not Bailiffs? says he, I am confident they cannot be such, for I owe no man a
penny; or to that effect. Having rested himself a while, he begged a pen, ink,
and paper, that he might write a line or two to a Friend, which he did,
subscribing his name thus, Jo. Talbot. Which Note (being open) he sent to his
Friend, who lived in Charter-house-Lane, requiring him (as I remember) if he
ever did any thing for him, to meet him somewhere, for he had something of
importance to acquaint him with; this Note he sent by a Servant of Mr.
Prichards, and in the mean time while he stayed to expect an answer, showed me
some of those Persons which he suspected were of the Confederacy in dogging
him, neither of which, I verily believe, were either Rodes or Prichard, two of
those who are now Condemned for the Robbery and Murder of the said Mr. Talbot.

James Kynoin.

The Attestation of John Savil Headborough of Shoreditch.
SAturday. Morning, a great shower of Rain falling, the Brick-makers were
necessitated to rise, to cover their Brick with Straw, to save it from the
Rain; one of them saw a Man lying in the field stripped to his shirt and drawers
all wet, hereupon being frighted he ran and told his fellow Workmen what he had
seen; they all came to see whether the man was killed, they finding life in
him, came and called me up out of my Bed, between two and three of the Clock,
and said there was a man either Killed or Robbed in the fields; with that, I
came and went with them, finding life in the Gentleman, I sent for strong
waters. At Mrs. Whites (at the Garden House of Dame Annis so Clear) he drank
it; then I sent for a Trusse of Straw, then the Brick-makers put their Coats
about him, and their Wifes put their Hankercheifs about his Neck, to keep the
Air from his wounds; he drank strong waters three times, and was so well
comforted with it, that he made signs for Pen, Ink and Paper, and then Wrote,
(see Mr. Went's first Attestation.) We then brought him to the Watch-house in
a Handbarrow, one of our Company fearing an Arrest, crossing the fields to go
home, found a Man lying on the backside of the Garden where the Murder was
committed; he calls to me, signifying that there was another Man Murthred, as he
thought; So I made thither, and took this Man, whose name afterward proved to
be Stephen Eaton a Journy-man Confectioner in Barbican, (pretending himself to
be asleep) and Mr. Talbots Doublet with the Collar thereof bloody, was found
lying on one side of him, and Mr. Talbots Knife on the other side, with which
he was stabbed in the throat:) I gave my Men charge to search him, and they
found about him four pieces of Tape, whereof one piece of white Tape was
bloody; I brought him to Mr. Talbot, and he made signs for a Pen and Ink, and
wrote, That that was his bloody Enemy that cut his Throat; and that at the
Instant of time the Beasts of the field bellowed. I secured him a while in the
stocks, after which I said to my partner, I would go down into the Garden and
see for Mr. Talbots other Clothes, but I could find none; As I went I saw a
poor Woman coming out of a Shade, and I asked her, what she did there? She
said, she was about her employment, (which was to gather Rags,) and whether
there was any body in the Shade? She answered, there was a Woman snoring; I
went in and took her asleep, (her name being Sarah Swift, as afterward
appeared) I asked her what she did there? She told me she wanted a little rest,
and she came there to sleep. I demanded of her where she lived? She answered, at
Cow-Cross; and then I brought her before Mr. Talbot, and he made signs for Pen
and Ink, and wrote, She was the bloody Woman, that said, Kill the Dog;
afterward these persons were carried before Justice Pitfield who committed
them to Newgate.

The Mark of Jo. Savill.

The Attestation of Thomas Hutchins Silk-weaver of Holloway-lane in Shoreditch.
SAturday, July 3. (the Morning being wet) between seven and eight of the
Clock, I coming over Hogsdon fields toward Dame Annis so Clear, perceiving a
Man lying in a ditch, not above two stones throw from the place, where the
Ministers Throat was out: Meeting another Man on the path, requested him to go
with me to see what he was, so we went: We asked him why he lay on the wet
ground? He answered, for no harm; we asked him again, why he lay there seeing
such a Robery was committed, and the man Mortally Wounded, and that we
suspected him to be one in the Fact? Whereupon he would willingly have been
gone; I stepped to him and told him he must go before an Officer to clear
himself, by Confessing where he was last night, otherwise I would make him go:
Then I with him that was with me brought him to Mr. Edward Banister
Headborough: Witness my hand

Thomas Hutchins.

The Attestation of Edward Banister Headborough, living at the Red Lion in
Halloway Lane.
The suspected person being brought unto me, I examined him where he lived? He
told me, he lived in Cloth-Fair, at one Thomas Sutton's house: I asked him
again, where he was the last night? he told me he had been in his Lodging, and
had not been out all the day before: Then I asked him what Trade he was? he
said he was a Tailor, then he told me he wrought for this Sutton, then I had
him to the Star to Mr. Talbot, who was asked whether this was one of the
parties? He looked very earnestly upon him and made signs for Pen, Ink and
Paper, and it was given him by Mr. Daniel Dod Clark of the Parish, whereupon he
wrote, I think this is one of the knot that lay him down to dog me in the
Ruins below Shoo-lane, pray ask him if a Boy brought him (the said Henry
Pritchard) a flagon of drink yesterday about 4 or 5 of the clock: I mean not
the flagon at the Garden, but in the Ruins below Shoo-lane, 6 men and one
bloody woman dogged me full seven hours, his Associates will say (that is deny
it) as the man did this day that had my Doublet: So I carried him before
Justice Pitfield, who examined him, but he would not confess any thing of the
fact, but told him that he was in his Lodging that night, and came not forth
till 7 a clock that Saturday morning. The Justice asked him, where he was
yesterday? he answered at Mr. Sutton's: Then the Justice desired me to go to
Mr. Suttons with him, when I came there, I asked Mr. Sutton's Wife whether she
knew this man? she said she did, and she had known him about this half year:
then I asked her, whether he lodged there last night? she answered, she had not
seen him in a fortnight: Then her husband coming down stairs affirmed the like;
Then I brought him back to Justice Pitfield, who Examined him, but he would not
confess any thing, whereupon his Mittimus was made.

The first Attestation of Master Went Constable of Shoreditch Parish. Saturday
July the 3d. 1669.
BEtween two and three of the clock in the morning, I was called up by a
company of Brick-makers, to go and take care of a man (whose name afterward I
learnt to be Mr. John Talbot) whom they said lay speechless, if not dead in the
fields; and as they thought, stripped and robbed of his clothes, in that he
there lay naked to his shirt and drawers: whereupon I made what provision and
speed I could to go with them: but not going down immediately to them, they
being very diligent and industrious, went and called up the Beadle and a
brother-Officer and went again to the aforesaid Mr. Talbot: whereas it being
then daylight, they saw him lying in his blood, with a terrible gash and wound
in his throat: but perceiving life in him, they sent for strong waters and gave
him, which did very much revive him; and thereupon they covering him with their
Coats, brought him to me to take care and charge of him: but as they were
bringing the said Master Talbot to me, one of the Brick-makers espying a
Bailiff in the fields and fearing an arrest by him, withdrew himself from the
rest of the Company to go another way: and in his passing up a Laystall hill,
he espied something lying under the side of a Garden: to which he presently
approaching, found it to be the doublet of Mr. John Talbot, it being bloody
about the Collar, and therefore being in a maze, and looking about him, he
espied a man, namely, one Stephen Eaton, lying in the Nettles very near the
doublet; whereupon he called again to the Company that were carrying away
Master Talbot, bidding them come to him; saying, there was another man killed,
and lay dead there by him: the said Stephen Eaton hearing this started up, and
would have gone away, which the Brick-makers likewise perceiving, seized on
him, and stayed him on the place till the Officer and his Guard came up to
them: who taking the said Stephen Eaton into his custody, and looking about the
place, found a knife all bloody, which afterward proved to be the knife of
Master Talbot, with which his Throat was cut and stabbed: and farther looking
thereabout, and searching him, found in a Ditch by him a Quart Pot, and in his
Drawers four pieces of Tape, one whereof was broken, the rest of them being
whole pieces, and some of them bloody; all which giving great suspicion of him,
they brought him to the wounded man; who presently made signs for a Pen and
Ink, and wrote that, that man (namely Stephen Eaton) was his bloody Enemy, and
that he with five men more and a bloody woman, had dogged and persued him seven
hours, and thereupon securing him in the stocks, whilst I went to provide a
Lodging for the wounded man, and to get a Chyrurgion and other necessaries for
him: I desired my Partner, the Officer that had before brought Master Talbot
out of the fields, and taken the said Stephen Eaton, to go again and search the
Fields and Garden, near where this Eaton with the knife and doublet were taken:
because Mr. Talbot had wrote that there we might have some farther information:
but this said Officer, finding nothing neither in the Fields or Garden that
could give any farther discovery; again coming forth of the Garden, espied over
the Highway a shed door opened, a woman coming forth with an old pair of
bodies in her hand, whom he questioning, and finding it to be her Trade to
gather Rags, let her pass, demanding of her, if any other person were in the
Shed? to which she answered, there was a woman, upon which he going in, found
her snorting, either being or pretending to be asleep: which he with his Guard
soon roused up, and finding her somewhat suspicious, brought her to the wounded
man whom I had gotten to bed, and was by this time very much revived with
necessaries that I had likewise procured for him: and therefore taking the
woman into the room to him, I did by writing demand of him, if that was the
bloody woman, that he had before in several papers wrote of to me? to which he
presently wrote this Answer:

Is not this woman called by the name of Sarah which yesterday wanted a Coach,
and pretended she had a Bastard lately: Whereupon I presently before any
information was given on either side, more than what passed between Mr. Talbut
and my self in Writing. I took her aside and demanded her name, which she told
me was Sarah, but denied that she wanted a Coach, or any ways pretended she had
a Bastard the day before, which I likewise told Mr. Talbut; but he still
affirmed, That she was the very Woman which with the six men so long dogged and
pursued him, and cried to her Companions, Kill the Dog, when they first began
to set upon him. Then I presently caused her to be taken away and secured in
the Watch-house near the Stocks, wherein the said Stephen Eaton was all this
time secured: Whilst I made provision for the conveying of them to a
Magistrate, in the mean time questioning with Mr. Talbut whether he were
certain that the persons I had then in custody, namely Stephen Eaton and Sarah
Swift were guilty of wounding and stripping of him? He still asserted, That
they were both of them guilty of his wound and blood. Then I presently caused
both of them to be pinioned, and in going to have them to a Magistrate, Stephen
Eaton desired of me that I would first permit him to see and speak once more to
Mr. Talbut, which accordingly I granted, and went my self up with him, and
coming into the room to Mr. Talbut, he fell upon his knees, lifting up his
hands, and spoke these words to Mr. Talbut, Sir, I desire you to consider, what
you do in charging me with this grievous and bloody crime of wounding of you,
which I am altogether clear and innocent of; and therefore I pray the Lord to
make a speedy discovery of the persons that were the Actors of it: And you Sir,
speaking to Mr. Talbut, be pleased to clear me that am innocent. To which Mr.
Talbut, so well as he could, cried no, no, making signs that he was the man
that wounded him, and that I should take him away; so guarding him with Sarah
Swift directly to a Justice, they were by several circumstances besides what
Mr. Talbut had wrote about them, both of them suspected guilty; yet they both
denied it, or that they ever saw Mr. Talbut till that morning that they were
brought before him; but near the end of their examination, and the hearing of
the evidences that came against them and first found them, when their Mittimus
was about to be made by the Justice, there came in one Mr. Porter, who dwells
in the Garden near which these persons were both taken, declaring that in his
Garden there lay a Coat and Breeches which he suspected to be the wounded man's,
and therefore desired that an Officer would go and take charge of them, which
accordingly I did, leaving my Partner the other Officer that first took them,
to receive the Mittimus from the Justice and convey them to Newgate: So when I
came to the Garden, I found as Mr. Porter before had told me, the Coat and
Breeches of Mr. Talbut, with the sheath of his knife lying by them, which I
took up before several persons that being there went into the Garden with me; I
searched his pockets, finding therein a leather case with some papers and
writings in them, and an Almanac with a pair of Gloves and a pocket
Handkerchief, and a leather purse with a half Crown and a groat, and a brass
half penny in it; all which things I presently carried to Mr. Talbot, who wrote
that they were all his, and that he had lost one pound ten pence, with two gold
rings, besides the money that I had found; and that one of the rings was a
Portugal ring with a stone in it; and the other was a plain English ring with
this Posey in it, Love as I, or I die: Therefore by the way all persons are
desired to make a discovery of such persons that shall at any time tender such
rings to their view or sale.

But to return to our business, I then began to question Mr. Talbot how he
thought his clothes should come into the Garden, and what occasioned him to be
about that place so late, he having before declared that they set upon him
about eleven a clock on Friday night; to which he gave this answer: That as he
was on Friday seeking for one Mr. John Pell in Holborn, a Shopkeeper, being a
stranger to him, bid him look to himself, for he was dogged by many Knaves:
whereupon he fearing an arrest from some people of Laindon in Essex, he betook
himself to Gray's Inn, where by some Lawyers he was civilly entertained,
declaring to them his condition, and withal sent for some of his acquaintance
to come to him, but they not being at home, he waited there for their coming
till it was very late, thinking thereby that those persons which before had
followed him, and had there been seen to wait for him, would for that time have
given over their hopes and expectations of taking him, and so have drawn off
from waiting any longer that night for him; and therefore when he and the
Gentlemen with whom he was thought it convenient for him to depart, they
advised him to go the privatest way he could to his Lodging, which was in
Bishopsgate-street, which accordingly he did; but withal soon perceived that he
was still dogged, though they made no attempt to assault or come upon him; and
at last, as he thought he had quite lost them, and had been quite escaped from
them, he having for some time no perceivance of them, till as he was going
along the Highway, leading from Oldstreet to Shorditch, they made fresh suit
after him, crying out to the bloody Woman with them, Sarah, Sarah, a Coach, a
Coach; which as he apprehended was to carry him away, till such time as he
heard her as she followed them, cry out to them, Kill the Dog; and thereupon he
run out of the Highway into the fields, and from thence into the Garden,
thinking thereby to have got to the house therein, and so have escaped their
bloody design; but they being so resolute and violent in the pursuit of him,
that they entered the Garden after him, and just within the hedge of it sezied
him, laying him on the ground, clapping some of their hands to his mouth,
others kneeling on his breast whilst one took him by the throat, and with his
own knife that they had taken out of his pocket, cut away a great piece of his
skin and flesh closs to the windpipe, to the breadth of a six pence, stabbing
him likewise in the same place; which done they stripped off his Coat, Doublet
and Breeches, but by some strange providence, as yet not certainly known to us;
they were so prevented that they were constrained to leave both him and most of
his clothes in the Garden, save only his Knife and Doublet, with the two gold
rings and one pound ten pence in money, as before mentioned. And this he
several times asserted to me and several others, to be the only ground and
cause of his being in such a place and at such a time of the night: Now if this
be true, as we are charitably to judge it is, it being almost the last words
and writing of a dying man, it may then serve to confute and reprehend the many
false and various constructions and apprehensions of many persons concerning
the said Mr. Talbot, who so far as I can perceive have causlessly aspersed him
with being conversant amongst these people the day before, as if he had been
naught with Sarah Swift; and so by that means was surprised with her, and fell
into the hands of his barbarous and bloody enemies; but this accusation
carries nothing of weight or certainty with it, for as much as this Sarah was
so pitiful a scrubbed, lousy creature, that I think it should have loathed him
or any man to come near to her.

The second Attestation of Mr. Went a Weaver, Constable; living near
Shoreditch-Church.
I Going to Newgate on the Lords day after the Robbery, to learn what I could
of Sarah Swift, I had information from a prisoner in Newgate, That one George
Rhodes, came to him and took him by the hand thorough the Grate, and told him
that Sarah Swift was had before a Justice, for being suspected to be guilty of
cutting the throat and robbing one in Shore-ditch, and told him he was sorry
for her, and wished she might get well off, and withal trembled, the while he
had him by the hand, and was so amazed, he could not tell how to go down
stairs; Then the Prisoner bid him go fetch two or three pennyworth of That
same, (it being an usual term with them) whereupon he jumped down stairs,
telling him he was going to take horse to ride out of Town. As we came from
Newgate, we called in at Cloth-Fair, where we had directions how to find him:
but his Parents being both dead, we heard he was an Apprentice in Long-Lane
with a Broker, coming thither to look for him, his Master told me, That he had
been gone from him a Fortnight, but he would come again to morrow, whereupon I
told him I would come to morrow to speak with him, and accordingly I did, but
he was not then come; thereupon I acquainted his Master with the reason of my
coming, desiring him to secure and bring him forth, that he might be Examined
touching the Crime that he was suspected Guilty of; who the same day came along
with him to my house to Shoreditch, but I being not within, he was by Mr. Dod
our Parish-Clark, accompanied to the wounded man.

The Attestation of John Chapman Headborough of Shoreditch, follows.
AS soon as he came, the wounded person made sign for Pen, Ink and Paper, and
writes thus; Mr. Dod, pray ask him what he made on Friday in Gray's Inn, walking
so long time up and down, here and there, I met him and he looked grim on me, I
cannot attest he was one that cut my throat, But I am sure he was one that
dogged me: So he gave Mr. Dod the paperbook, and made signs for it again, and
writes, Send for an Officer: The Broker asked him, what time of the Day he saw
him in Gray's Inn? and he called a third time for the Book, and wrote; The hour
I cannot tell being in so much fear and trouble, but I am sure he was one that
dogged me, with that there was an Officer sent for, which was my self, I did
apprehend him in in a low Room in the House, accompanied with his Master and
two more, besides Mr. Dod the Clark: I asked his Master some questions, and he
told me, he had absented himself from him this Fortnight, and that he came and
bought out his time, that Morning, for five pound for three years to come. He
denied the Fact for the which he was apprehended; so I carried him before
Justice Pitfield: After his Mittimus was made, there was three persons made
Affidavit, that the said George Rhodes going before the Justice, kicked the
Dust, and said, He valued not his life, for if he were hanged he would hang
five more.

The last Note Mr. Talbot wrote, was on the day before he Dyed.
Mr. Went
PRay get some to speak to the Ordinary to enquire of Eaton who employed him or
hired him.

If so, let Eaton give their names of their place of habitation: Or whether any
of Lainedom people did abett, consent, or contribute to his bloody fact.

Whereupon Mr. Went upon the Execution day, repaired to Newgate, and obtained
the following Attestation from a Chaplain that was present with the Prisoners,
not meeting with the Ordinary.

The Chaplain Attested, that before that time, he had some conference with
Eaton, and went in again to him with the Note I had of Mr. Talbot, questioning
Eaton about it, who utterly denied it, as he should answer it before an Eternal
Judge, and that he is altogether clear and innocent of the Crime laid against
him, and that he never saw the face of Mr. Talbot, till he was on Saturday
morning brought before him, which said Gentleman likewise questioning Sarah
Swift the day before Execution, concerning her being guilty, and urging her to
confess the bloody fact: she answered, she would burn in hell before she would
confess any thing.

An account of the proceedings at the Sessions house, in the Old Bailey,
concerning the Robbery and Murder committed by three men and one woman on Mr.
Talbott at a place called Dame Annis so clear in Moorefields.
The Prisoners being brought to the Bar, a bloody knife was produced, they all
denied that they ever saw it, and and that they knew the person wounded, or any
thing of the said Murder or Robbery. But many witnesses were called which were
at the taking of these said Offenders; But especially one person who was the
first that found the said wounded man Mr. Talbott, did declare these words, (or
words to the like effect) that first finding of the said wouned man, he viewed
him and found that his throat was cut, whereupon he called for help, (being the
first man that found the said Mr. Talbot) and thereupon walking about the place
where he lay, he espied a bloody doublet, and approaching near to it, he saw a
man lying as it were a sleep between the said doublet and the said bloody
knife, but calling at the man, awaked and rose up, thereupon he laid hold on
him, and endeavoring to escape, he gave him a knock over the head, and broke
the skin, whereby did issue forth a little blood, and afterward searching the
pockets of the said person, whose name was Stephen Eaton, he found four pieces
of tape, one of which said pieces of tape was bloody, besides some money and
other things, which being asked how he came by them could not at present give
any possitive answer: but at the Sessions house being asked how that tape came
bloody, answered it was occasioned by his bloody head, but the witness swore
'twas impossible, there being not so much blood as would wet his hair.

But the main evidences against the said Offenders were the subscriptions of
the said M. Talbott, when any of the said Offenders were brought before him, he
writ down that such an one had robbed him, and also in his writing much
exclaiming against one Sarah, mentioning her to be the bloody woman, that
cried, kill the dog.

The Offenders names are
1. Stephen Eaton a Confectioner. 2. Sarah Swift. 3. Hen. Prichard a Tailor. 4.
George Roades a Broker.
These being all persons of a loose life and not able to give any good account
of their habitations and behavior, were by the Jury brought in, guilty of the
said Robbery and intended murder of the said Mr. Talbot: for they could not
prove where they were after 6 of the clock the night before the said murder was
committed.

We have been the briefer in this part of the Narrative to avoid the Repetition
of what has been before at large set forth in the Attestations of the several
persons concerned.
Midd. ss.
THe Information of Thomas Lichfield, of the Parish of St. Buttolph's
Bishopgate, London, Surgeon, taken and acknowledged the thirteenth day of
July, in the one and twentieth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord King
Charles the second, Annoq. Dom. 1669.

This Informant says, That he being sent for, as a Surgeon, to take care of
one John Talbott, who was wounded in his throat: This informant at his coming,
searched his throat, and found a wound therein of the depth of three inches,
and of the breadth of two inches, which penetrated into his Longes, which as
this Informant verily conceives was done with a knife, he this Informant
applied several Medicines for the cure thereof, but found the same to be
mortal. And the said John Talbott dyed on Monday the twelfth day of July
instant, about one of the Clock in the morning, and farther says not

Tho. Lichfield.

Here follows the Attestation of the Ordnarie of Newgate.
Henry Prichard having the favor of a Repreive.
I was in the Cart at the Executing of three of those persons condemned for the
Murder of Mr. Talbott, and intending to examine them about it, I was told and
assured by two Ministers then present, that they would confess nothing of it,
and therefore I thought it not needful farther to enquire but presently went to
Prayer.

Henry Gerrard, Minister of Creechurch, and Ordnary instituted.


The extraordinary care of the Officers, both Churchwardens, Constable, and
other private persons, was eminently remarkable and desirous to be recorded as
a worthy example to others, whenever any such accident shall happen. As the
care of his wound was committed to Mr. Lichfeild, a neighboring Chyrurgion,
who diligently attended him, and skilfully managed his business; so that
nothing might be omitted which might conduce to his recovery, a Physician was
likewise called, Viz. Dr. Hodges, who was one of the two Physicians employed by
the City dureing the late dreadful Visitation; and at the request of Dr.
Thiscrosse Minister to the Charter House: Dr. Rigely sometimes met there by
whose joint direction he seemed in a hopeful way of Cure. From Monday morning
till the Sabbath following no ill Symptom appearing, either upon account of
the wound or otherwise; for although he was taken up very wet, and lay in the
open air some hours; yet through their experienced abilities he was secured
from a Feavour: Several Chyrurgions, Viz. That ancient Master in his Art
Alderman Arris, Mr. Pierce, and others, did freely and cheerfully afford their
assistance, about noon on Sabbath day he was dressed, the wound well
conditioned, a very laudable digestion appeared, and he seemed more cheerful
then formerly, but so it pleased Providence, within two or three hours after, a
violent fit of Coughing seizeing him, a branch of the Jugular brake; if not the
Jugular it self, and in a short space, before any one could come in to his
assistance, the effusion of blood was so great, that he fainted, and his
extreme parts were cold; after the Flux was stopped upon caughing, he bled
again, and the third time, till his condition became deplorable; about one or
two that morning he sent for Dr. Atfeild Minister of Shoreditch and whereas
before he said little else, then I, or No, being requested by his Physicians
and Chyrurgions not to put those parts upon a great relation, but rather to
write his mind; he spoke freely to the Doctor, who desired him to declare his
judgment, in relation to justification; which he freely did, saying, that he
hoped to be saved by the merrits of Jesus Christ only; and the Doctor pressing
him to signify whether he was fully satisfied to his accusation of the persons
condemned; he readily answered that he was well assured that he was not mistaken
in what he had done, relating to that business, being inquired of, whether he
could freely forgive them; he replied, that he prayed for the welfare of
their Souls; but desired that the law might pass on their bodies, in short, he
submitted to that dispensation of Providence toward him, and resigned himself
up when the Doctor prayed with him, and within two hours expired, during his
languishment; He was very much composed, and seemed devout; howsoever some
persons were pleased to censure him, and to prejudge his condition. Thus much
must be said, that many spoke concerning him, what they knew not: He seemed so
charitable as not to concern himself with their aspersions; 'Twere desirable
if men would be of a more Christian and charitable temper, because such false
Defamations wound more effectually then Murderous hands.

1. That we may escape the snares of bloody and deceitful Men: The Church of
England, has taught us in the Letany to pray for the deliverance from Murder.

And this upon Scripture foundations that sets forth that the Lord has even
changed the wicked minds and intentions of Men.

Thus the heart and will of Esau, upon Jacobs prayers was changed from hatred,
to favor toward his Brother Jacob: see Genesis chapter 32. and 33.

Thus David in 2. Samuel chap. 15.31. Prayed the Lord to turn the counsel of
Achitophel into foolishness, so in Prove. 16.7. When a man's ways please the
Lord, he makes even his Enemies to be at peace with him.

Ier. 10.11. The Lord said verily it shall be well with thy remnant, verily I
will cause the Enemy to entreat thee well in the time of evil, and in the time
of affliction.

Ier. 19.23. O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in
man that walks to direct his steps.

2. To avoid such dangers shun evil company there is a promise annexed thereto,
2. Cor. 6. ver. 16.17.18.

3. If such mischeifs befall us, consider the rod, and who has appointed it or
in his wise providence permitted it.

Luke. 12.27. The hairs of our head are numbered. Math. 10.29. Not a Sparrow
falls to the ground without Our Father.

1. Kings. 22.24. An Arrow shot at random must take place.

4. Even in the worst of calamities, consider that God many times delivers his
People thereby, from a vain transitory world, to a habitation eternal in the
heavens not made with hands.

Psalm. 63.3. Thy loving kindness is bettter then life.

And those that will bear with comfort the pangs of death, must labor to dye
in faith, that is they must lay hold of the promise of God touching the
forgiveness of sins, and life everlasting by Christ, and then we may say with
Job. chap. 5. ver. 21^ Thou shall not be afraid of destruction when it comes:
Death be it never so bitter or painful, shall not be able to separate us from
the love of God. Romans 8. ver. 28.38. St. Stephens violent death was but a sweet
sleep. Acts 7.60. John 11.11. It is but a sleeping in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
The Grave is called a bed of rest: Isaiah 57.2. Prove. 14.32. The righteous has
hope in his death, it delivers them from sin and sorrow, from temptations of
the Devil, the opposition and vexation of the world and flesh, and is an inlet
or passage to immortality.

As we have showed by the Testimony of holy writ that the Scripture affords
consolations to the faithful, under their greatest afflictions, so it
denounces wrath and damnaation against Murderers.

That these kind of persons are reported to have a Canting Language amongst
themselves; as when they say take Coach, is meant cut a Throat; take Horse,
take a Purse; Mill a Gruntling, steal a Pigg, etc.

Enough has been said to show the accomplishment of the Psalmists Commination:
Bloody and deceiptful men shall not live out half their days, Psalm. 55.23. And
he there renders the reason: For thou O God shall bring them down into the Pit
of Destruction, in thee will I trust.

Instead of Errata's, I must acquaint the Reader, that some Relations have been
Printed concerning this Murder; in which are so many notorious misttakes and
falsities, that I hope every page of this narrative may correct them and appear
it self free from such faults, which occasion much mischief in giving people an
opportunity to, and instructing them in the Art of lying.

FINIS.

