An Affidavit made by JAMES PERCY Claimant to the Earldom of NORTHUMBERLAND.
WHereas Adlard Welby Gent. is Attourny for John Blackston Esquire Def. this
Deponent James Percy on the 21 h. instant, went to Mr. Welby, and offered an
Agreement: And whereas Cost of 70 odd l. is demanded of me the Plaintiff, the
Deponent demanded 90 l. which was but tendered into Court upon my Lord Chief
Justice Scrogs's promise that the Lord of Essex would not insist upon
Privilege, and that the Deponent JAMES PERCY should have a fair Trial: the
Money was not intended for the L. of Essex really, but it ought to have been
remanded back again to the Plaintiff JAMES PERCY; for that 90 l. costs
pretended for Mr. Clark, was Sued for by Capt. Biggerstaff that married the
Relict of Mr. Clark; And that 90 l. Cost ought to have been set aside upon
their own Demurrer; therefore Mr. Welby Replied, I must complain in Court: The
Writs of Error ought to have been heard, debated, and determined by the Right
Honorable Lords in Parliament; But it was blown over, as by the Printed
Complaint, (prepared to present to the Honorable House of Commons appears) But
it is hoped the Writs of Error may be Re-manded back into Parliament, to have a
fair Hearing: Or if the Plaintiff and Deponent be forced to pay the 70 odd
Pounds Cost; then the 90 l. ought to be Refunded to the Deponent,

JAMES PERCY.
Jurat. 22. die Jan. 1680.

John Hoskins.



IT is very hard for a man to be kept out of Possession, and his Opponents
manage all their Suits at Law against him with his own Estate; and that will
not serve their turns, but they covet to get from the Claimant by Fraud, so
that they may totally Ruin and disable him from prosecuting his Birthright.

JAMES PERCY, (the true and lawful Heir-male to the Percy's Earls of
Northumberland,) has found more Injustice and Hardships here in England, than
the Children of Israel found in Egypt, when they made Brick, and were forced to
gather their own Straw to burn them.

When Joseph's good Works were forgot, then his Brethren suffered; But now the
PERCY'S good deeds are forgot, their lawful Successor suffers in Prison; And
therefore earnestly prays for a speedy Deliverance. My great Pains, and Charge
in Printing, is really intended rightly to inform the world, thereby to remove
Oppression, and to revive justice.


