To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty, the Right Honorable Lords, Spiritual and
Temporal; and to the Noble and Worthy Commons of England, Assembled in
Parliament.
THis outside Sheet was really prepared to add to this Book, to undeceive
King, Parliament, and People; and to unmask the cunning Contrivances of
Politicians, who Published the Claymant, James Percy, in the Gazet, to be an
Impostor; setting forth a Pedigree of the Claymant's younger Brother, Mr.
William Percy; pretending to undeceive the People: But their real Design was,
to wildernize the true Heir, and amuse the World. Notwithstanding, the Claymant
has at the last, proved himself the next Heir, as by a Judgment and Verdict;
and recovered Cost, as by the Verdict exemplyfied under the Seal of his
Majesty's Court of King's- Bench: And therefore, with Courage, and a clear
Soul, demands the Place and Seat of his Ancestors, as the true Heir-Male of the
Percies, and Earls of Northumberland. And therefore, the Lord Ogle (that
Married the Lady Elizabeth Percy) ought not to Assume the Name of Percy, nor
have any Settlement of the Lands, which attend the Title. For the Agents did
put in a Bill to the Right Honorable Committee of the House of Lords, to be
made an Act of Parliament, for the Settlement of the said Lands: And also,
pretended to Indemnify the Trustees, But it is rather judged, the real
Contrivance of the Trustees, was merely to bring themselves off, from giving an
Account of the main Profits, and the great Wastes, that have been Committed ever
since the Death of Josceline, the late Earl of Northumberland; which on the
Twenty-First of May next, will be Ten Years. Not many of the Persecutions have
been of that long Continuance.

An Act of Parliament may be sooner stopped; but will be hard to Reverse, though
never so Illegally obtained.

This first Sheet, added to this Book, contains the last Petition to the King,
and a short Abstract of the several Trials.

The Last Sheet was an Account to one, that desired to be satisfied, by reason
the Agents had misinformed him: But now he is really Convinced.

The Second Sheet was likewise prepared for the last Session of Parliament, and
sets forth the several Petitions, Reasons, and Transactions in the Late
Parliament. Page 1, 2, and 13, 14.

The Three Sheets containing the middle of the Book, wherein he Petitioned the
the House of Commons for their Aid; not any ways intending to Relinquish his
Right in the House of Peers.

A Narrative of the several Trials and Proceedings in the King's- Bench, before
my Lord Chief Justice Hayles, and the Lord Chief Justice Rainsford. Page 3.

The double Trial, before the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs. Page 5.

A short Abstract of the Claymant's proceedings, ever since the Death of
Josceline Percy, late and Eleventh Earl of Northumberland. Page 9.

The Pedigree of James Percy, which proves him to be Cousin, and next Heir-Male
to Josceline, the late Earl, and Heir-Male of the Body of Henry Percy, the
Fifth Earl of Northumberland; Descended from Sir Ingleram Percy, his Younger
Son, who was Innocent, and his Issue remains untainted to this Day. Page 12.

THere was a Petition presented to the King and Council: But the Result of the
Board was, The Cause lay not before them, but before the Parliament.

And the Kings most Gracious Answer to the Claimants first Petition, was, God
forbid, we should hinder an Heir, but that he should have the Benefit of the
Law.

And now, his Majesty's further Gracious Answer is, to this Last following
Petition, Presented into his Majesty's sacred Hand, the 21st. of September,
1679. as Sir John Birkenhead did inform the Petitioner, this 24th. Instant.

1. As to the Writ of Summons, to Sit in the House of Peers, His Majesty
replies, He cannot Grant it; by reason the Cause had been before the House of
Lords: And that it must be Determined by them, before his Majesty could Grant
the said Writ of Summons.

2. As for that Act of Parliament, the Lord Ogle was indeavoring to obtain; His
Majesty was further pleased to say, That they Petitioner might put in a
Proviso, that there might be a Saving to the Petitioner, and to his Heirs; as
the Counsels learned in the Law, should Advise.

To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty. The Humble Petition of James Percy.
Shows,
THat Your Petitioner has these Nine Years, industriously Prosecuted his Claim
to the Titles, Honors, Privileges, Manors, and Lands, etc. that of Right
descend to him, as Cousin and next Heir-Male to Josceline Percy, late and
Eleventh Earl of Northumberland.

That there was a Bill presented to the Right Honorable Committee of Lords, the
last Session of Parliament, for the Settling all those Lands by an Act of
Parliament, that of right attends the Title and Name of your Petitioner, upon
the Lord Ogle, who Married the Lady Elizabeth Percy, and would have Assumed her
Name: Which Act would have cut off the Right of the Heir-Males of the Percies
for ever.

Notwithstanding, Your Petitioners clayming the said Honors and Lands, etc. as
aforesaid; although his Claym has not been determined these Nine Years, as
abovesaid; and now going on in the Tenth Year of his Claym.

May it therefore please Your most Excellent Majesty, to give Command for Your
Petitioner's Summons to this present Parliament; by reason Your Petitioner has
proved himself the next Heir-Male in Blood, to the Percies of Northumberland,
as by a Judgment and Verdict exemplyfied under the Seal of Your Majesty's Court
of King's- Bench. Moreover, The Extremes of the Law, which Your Majesty was
Graciously pleased to refer Your Petitioner unto, and the Potency of the
Defendants is such, that it forces your Petitioner to fly to Your Royal Majesty
for Justice.

And he shall ever Pray, etc.
A short Abstract of the several Trials is here-unto Annexed, to satisfy Your
Majesty.
WHereas Your Majesty was Graciously pleased, to leave Your Petitioner to the
Law; therefore, the Petitioner humbly Presents these few Lines, to show what is
proved by the Law.

First Trial in the Year 1674. The Petitioner was Plaintiff, against John
Clark, Esquire Defendant, who was the Lady Elizabeth Percies Agent, for scandalous
Words he had spoken against the Plaintiff: At which Trial, Judge Hales
declared, That James Percy, the Claymant and Plaintiff, had proved himself a
true Percy; Legitimate by Father and Mother, Grandfather and Grandmother; and
of the Blood and Family of the Percies of Northumberland: And he did verily
believe, that Your Petitioner was Cousin, and next Heir-Male to Josceline
Percy, the late and Eleventh Earl of Northumberland; only he was afraid, he had
taken his Descent a little too low.

Second Trial, was upon an Ejectment for Cannington-Lands in Somersetshire;
which Lands of Right, fell to the Heirs-Males of the Percies, after the
Heirs-Males of the Rogerses was Extinct: Doubtless, it was by Misinformation,
that Your Majesty was mistaken in Your Gift. And at that Trial, the Pedigree of
Your Petitioner was fully proved; and the Plaintiff ought to have had a Verdict
for the same: But Sir John Coppleston being made Defendant in the Case,
obtained 80 l. Cost; and does violently Prosecute the Claymant and Plaintiff,
Lands, and receives the Profits; and preserved themselves all along by
Privileges, for many Years; to the utter Ruin of Your Petitioner, if not
timely prevented by Your Sacred Majesty.

Third Trial, Your Petitioner proved himself Legitimate again; And not the Tyth
of the Plaintiff's Witnesses was Heard at that Trial; by reason Judge Raynsford
stood up, and said, The Pedigree was sufficiently proved by the Former Trials;
as by the Judgment and Verdict exemplyfied under the Seal of Your Majesty's
Court of King's- Bench.

Fourth Trial, the Plaintiff was forced to pay 90 l for Clark's Cost, before
the Lord of Essex's Privilege could be got off, to go on to Trial: And then
the Defendant's Council did declare in Court, That they did own the Plaintiff's
Pedigree and Title; and yet would not suffer the Plaintiff's Writings to be
Read, nor his Witnesses to be Heard; which prevented the Plaintaiff from
recovering the 10000 l. Damages, which was laid in the Declaration: And for
want of Justice, the Plaintiff lies under the Burden of an Hundred Marks
Costs. Which Trial ought to be Reviewed, and the Plaintiff Relieved.

He therefore Prays, and humbly Beseeches Your most Excellent Majesty, to
remember Your own Troubles; how God delivered You out of the Oppressor's Hand:
And even so be pleased to deliver Your oppressed Petitioner, out of the Hands
of his Powerful Opponants; so that, at last, he may enjoy his Birthright in
Peace, according to Justice.
And if the Petitioner be delayed longer, he must humbly pray Your Majesty for
Maintenance, as is usual in such Cases, to support him, till he has Recovered
his Right, Title and Inheritance. And Your Petitioner shall further Pray, etc.

IT is Hoped, that Your Majesty will never Condescend, that the Lord Ogle shall
assume the Name of Percy; nor that the Percies Lands shall be settled upon him,
by Act of Parliament: For the Lady Lucy gave all her Lands to the Heir-Males of
the Percies for ever. God forbid, that ever such a Fraud should be Committed in
this Nation! Especially, when the true Heir-Male has proved his Pedigree.

Moreover, Your Petitioner remains Unmarryed: And further hopes, that by God's
Providence, and Your Patron-like Care, such a Match may be obtained, that will
support the Title, and raise the Percies Name to its former Splendour.

The Proroguing the Parliament, till the Thirtyeth of October next, forces the
Claymant to make this further Complaint: For its Consequence is as prejudicial,
as Privileges have been to the Plaintiff; and as much for the Advantage of the
Agents and Defendants: Who by Privileges, Delays, and Oppression, still keeps
Possession; and the true Heir still under Persecution. For this Prorogument
falls out as pat for the Defendants, as if it had been by their own
Appointment. Had the Parliament held to Sit on the 17th. Day, then had the
Claymant had time to have put in his Petition, in Obedience to the King's
Gracious Answer and Direction, to the Right Honorable House of LORDS, to have
been called into that Right Honorable House of PEERS; To have taken the Place
and Seat of his Noble Ancestors, Earls of Northumberland, according to his
Birthright and Title; which would have been a Means to have prevented the Act
of Parliament, for the settling Percies Lands upon the Lord Ogle, that Married
the Lady Elizabeth Percy, and that he should not Assume the Name of Percy; and
that the Fraud intended, might be prevented. But now, the Oppressors have
gained this following Advantage; The Term will be a Week old, by that time the
Parliament Sits: so that, they hope, in that time, to contrive the Claymant
into a Prison; so that he shall not be able to attend the House, when they Sit:
If they obtain their Aims, then will the Claymant further Complain to the LORDS
and COMMONS, by fresh Petitions. And in the mean time, he has prepared these
Prints, to pre-admonish the World: And that Just Men may know, that James Percy
is the true and lawful Heir; and of right, ought to enjoy the Earldom of
Northumberland: and that the Estate must attend the Title. But cruel Oppression
still keeps Possession; which forces the Claymant, to cry out aloud, again,
again, and again, for Justice: and that Property, and Right, may be preserved.
For if his Innocent, and Just Cause, should be now neglected, your Children,
and Children's Children, may be Rejected another Day. I pray God, to direct our
King, Parliament, and People; that they may foresee Things so, as to preserve
the Good, and prevent the Evils, to come.

AMEN.

