THE MYSTERY OF THE Gospel Unvailed:

Wherein is plainly showed and proved, That the Man CHRIST JESUS has honored
all the Perfections of GOD more than Adam and all his Posterity could have
done, had they continued in their Primitive State of Innocence.

First Preached, and now Published BY SAMVEL PACK.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, in the Year MDCXCI.

TO His much Honored and Esteemed Good Friends Captain William Thompson, Esquire;
AND TO Mrs Katharina His Virtuous Consort, Samuel Pack wishes all Happiness in
this World, and Eternal Felicity in the World to come.
My Honored Friends,
I Have been strongly induced by these following Reasons to present you with
this unpolished Discourse.

First, To show my thankfulness unto God for engaging of your Hearts, that have
the great things of this World, to look after the great and good things of the
World to come; for though not many mighty, and not many noble are called, yet
it is a mercy that God has made some great ones good ones, for the
encouragement of those that move in a lower Sphere.

A Second Reason that induced me to this boldness in prefixing your Names to
this Work, was to give some Demonstration of my thankfulness to your selves for
your kindness toward me when I was with you under much bodily weakness; and if
a Heathen could say, That we need charge a Man with no greater Crime than
Ingratitude, it would look with an evil aspect in a Christian especially a
Minister, to be guilty thereof: For as Ingratitude toward God was the sin of
the first Adam, so Ingratitude toward Man is a fruit of the Old Adam.

A Third Reason why I present you with this Discourse is, because of that
favorable acceptance that it found when you had it in your Ears, which
encourages me to hope, that it will find the same acceptance with you when you
have it in your Eyes.

A Fourth Reason why I have prefixed your Names to this Work is, because I
would encourage others to imitate you, in owning the ways of God, as you did in
the worst of times, and in the greatest of Dangers, when none could so depart
from Iniquity as to follow the Lord fully, but they made themselves a Prey to
Diabolical Informers.

The Last Reason I shall give of this Attempt, in presenting you with this
Demonstration of my thankfulness to God and your selves, is, because I have no
better thing to present you with; for the truth is, the Subject is glorious,
and that which is rarely treated on; for had I seen this Work managed by abler
Pens, this Work had never come abroad to the World.

But now it is published, it is the earnest desire of my Soul, that the Lord
will be pleased to make it serviceable to your selves, and to all that will be
pleased to give it the Reading.

Now the Blessing of the Great God, Father, Son and Spirit, abide in and upon
your Souls and Bodies, with your Offspring; which is and shall be the hearty
Prayers of him who is

Your Servant for Jesus sake, SAMUEL PACK.

THE MYSTERY OF THE Gospel Unvailed, etc.
ROMANS IX. V. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh
Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen.


IN the second and third Verses of this Chapter we have the Apostle Paul giving
great Demonstrations of the strength of his Affection to his Countrymen the
Jews, partly by his sorrow of Heart for them, and partly by his willingness to
be accursed from Christ for their sakes. And in the next Verse he gives us a
Reason of his love toward them, which was those Spiritual privileges with
which God had been pleased to dignifie them above all other Nations; and in the
words that I have read, he is climbing the highest Pinnacle of their honor,
which was, That according to the Flesh Christ came of them, which was as great
an honor as could be conferred upon a Nation; which the Apostle does
illustrate by an aggregation or heaping up of words; First, assuring of us that
Christ is over all; that is, over all Creatures, which is his right; because he
was before all things, and by him all things consist; ^^l. 1.17.
and all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that
was made; ^^hn 1.3.
and as Christ is God over all, so he is a blessed God, ^im. 6.15.
and the Fountain of all belssedness; which blessedness was essential to him,
as God over all. And Christ is not only a blessed God over all, but he is
eternally a blessed God over all; for so long as Christ remains God over all,
which will be to all eternity, so long he will remain an eternally blessed God,
that he may be an eternal blessing to his Saints. And, Lastly, the Apostle
confirms all with an Amen, which comes of that great Hebrew Verb (...): he
nourished faithfully, because that Christ, the Amen, the faithful and true
Witness, does nourish the Faith and Hope of his Saints, by an exact performance
of the Promises which are in him Yea, and in him Amen

Having thus opened the words, I shall present you with the Doctrine that does
naturally arise from them; which is, That Christ is over all, God blessed for
ever. ct.
And for as much as I hope there are no Socinians here, I shall not spend that
little time and strength I have, to prove the Point, which is the very words of
my Text, but give you some Reasons why it was needful that Christ, as our
Redeemer, should be God over all, belssed for ever.

1. Because that we had sinned againist God over all; for as it was needful
that Christ should be a Man, that satisfaction might be made in the same nature
that did offend; so it was needful that he should be God over all, that there
might be an equality between the Offense and the Satisfaction; that as God over
all was sinned against by Man, so God over all might in Man's Nature make
Satisfaction to the Justice of God over all.

2. Because that in order to the Satisfaction of the Justice of God over all,
it was of absolute necessity that the Wrath of God over all, should be bore in
Man's Nature, which could not be but by him who is God over all. Now for as
much as there is more Wrath due to us for the least sin, than all the Rocks and
Mountains in the World are able to bear, it was utterly impossible that Christ
could have bore up under all the Wrath of his Father, which was due to all the
Elect for all their sins, had he not been upheld by the Power of God over all;
for though the Godhead of Christ was as incapable of suffering as the Manhood
was to bear the sufferings that lay upon it, yet it was the Godhead that did
uphold and support the Manhood.

3. It was needful that Christ should be God over all, that the Godhead might
make the sufferings of the humanity infinitely meritorious, for the
Satisfaction of the Justice of an infinite God over all; for though I am not of
the mind of Osiander and his Followers, that we are justified by the imputation
of the essential Righteouss of Christ as God, yet it was the essential
Righteousness of the Godhead of Christ, that did make the Active and Passive
Obedience of his Manhood, infinitely meritorious, as being in personal Union
therewith; for which cause the Blood of Christ's Humanity is called God's
Blood. Acts. 20.28.


4. It was needful that our Redeemer should be God over all, that he might be a
suitable good to our Souls, which are the very Breath of God over all; and
whose vast desires are such, that none but God over all can satisfy them. The
World is empty of what it promises, and enticing with what it has, and
therefore a wicked Man's desires after it are enlarged as Hell, but can find no
real satisfaction therein, because they are below the excellent nature of his
Soul; but when God's Jehosaphats have a great confluence of outward Enjoyments,
God comes in the Creatures, and so cures them of their emptiness, and he come
with them and cures them of their enticing property; and, between both, he
makes them Blessings to us, and they yield unto us sweet satisfaction. As the
Spirit of the Living God enables us to make a sanctified use of them, to the
Glory of God, from whom we do receive them; and besides, as the Soul of Man is
a Spiritual Substance, it is only Christ who is a Spiritual Good that can be a
suitable Good unto it; and as the Soul of Man is an immortal Being, so Christ
is a suitabl^ Good unto it.

5. It was needful that our Redeemer should be God over all, that he might
exalt our nature which was debased by sinning against God over all; for,
however, our first Parents were honorable Creatures as they came out of God's
Hand, having his Image stamped on them, yet Man in precious honor lodged not a
Night, (...) Psalm 49.12. but fell the same Day upon which he was created, and
by his Fall he made himself but little better thanthe Devils, who was made but
little lower than the Angels: For in our first Creation there was such serenity
in our Understanding, that we knew the greatest Dimensions of our Maker's Will,
so far as was needful for our acknowledgment of his Sovereignty, in our
universal Obedience to his revealed Will; and there was such a degree of
Sanctity in Man's Will, that it was ready to command that good to be done which
the Understanding did dictate to be good, and the Affections were ready to
embrace that good which the Will commanded, and the sensitive Soul, which takes
up its Residence in the Organical parts of the Body (through which it issues
forth by several Acts, and receives in from several Objects) were so sanctified
as to make a Spiritual use of whatever was presented unto them. But, alas! Man
cannot be known by any Description that might have been given of him in his
State of Innocence; for now his Understanding is clouded with gross Egyptian
Darkness, and his Will is filled with Stubbornness and a Contumacious Spirit
against the Lord, and his Affections are irregularly set upon wrong Objects; so
that Man cannot be known in his lapsed State by any Description that might have
been given of him before his Fall; for which cause the Lord was please to say
concerning Man, that Man is as one (...) from him; that is, one from the Devil,
through whose Temptation Man fell: for (...) ever denotes the third Person
singular, and is so used four times in one Verse, Zech. 10.4. whereas (...)
denotes the first Person plural. Now forasmuch as the Masterpiece of God's
Tetrestrial Workmanship had by Sin debased it self below the perishing Beast,
it was of absolute necessity that his Redeemer should be God over all, to exalt
his degraded Nature.

6. It was needful, that Man's Redeemer should be God over all, that he might
procure for us a new Covenant-right in God over all; for by our Fall we lost
not only our right in the Creature, but that wherein our greatest loss did
principally consist was, that we lost our right and propriety in God: now God
being a Blessing of infinite worth, it was neeful that a Person of infinite
worth should, by the merits of his Blood, procure it for us.

7. It was needful that our Reedeemer should be God over all, because he had
such Enemies to conquer for us, that none but God over all could conquer; for
we had the Wrath of God, the Curse of the Law, and all the powers ofDarkness
against us; all which could never have been conquered but by God over all: And
had not these Enemies of our Souls been conquered by our Persons, which could
not have been expected, but by a Redeemer in our nature, we had been miserable
for ever; but to the eternal praise of God's Grace, he was pleased to lay help
upon one that was mighty, who led Captivity Captive, by conquering all his and
our Enemies in our Nature.

Thus having showed why it was needful that our Redeemer should be God over
all, I shall proceed to the Application.

1. It may inform us of that Personal Union that is between the Father, ^^l.
2.2.
Son and Holy Ghost; ^^h. ^.7.
for the Father is God over all, and the Son is God over all, and the Holy
Ghost is God over all; and yet there are not three Gods over all, but one God
over all, each Person in the Godhead having the whole essence of the Godhead in
himself.

2. If Christ be God over all, then see from hence the infinite love of God the
Father in giving to us such a Redeemer who is God over all: If Jacob could say
he was unworthy of the least of God's Mercies, how are we obliged to him for
Christ, who is the greatest Mercy that he could have bestowed on us? On which
account we may say, concerning the Love of the God of Knowledge, as Job said
concerning the knowledge of the God of Love, That it is as high as Heaven: what
can we do? it is deeper than Hell. What can we know? the measures thereof are
longer than the Earth, and broader than the Sea.

3. See the infinite love of Christ to sinners; for if Christ had not been God
over all, his Death would have signified nothing for our comfort; and being God
over all, John 3.16. Gal. 2.20.
there could be no compelling of Christ to assume our nature; but as God the
Father did freely give his Son for sinners, so God the Son did as freely give
himself up unto Death for us.

4. If Christ be God over all, this may inform us of the Humility of Christ,
that he was pleased to take our Nature into a Personal Union with his Godhead,
after we had greatly degraded it by sin. Oh what infinite Humility did Christ
manifest when he took upon him our Nature! that he whom the Heaven of Heavens
could not contain, to be circumscribed in the Womb of a Virgin! that he who
dwells in inaccessable Light should be contented to be nine Months in utter
Darkness: Oh the condescending Grace of God over all! that he who was from
everlasting should be born in time! That he who roles up the Heavens as a
Scrole, should himself be wrapped up in Swadling-bands; that he who feeds all
Creatures by his Providence, should suck the Breast of a Woman for his
maintenance; that he who bares up the whole Fabric of Heaven and Earth by his
Power, should be carried in the Arms of a Woman; that he who is attened upon by
Angels, should be carried up and down by the Devils, Luke 4.5, 9. that he who
is the Fountain of Joy, should be contented to be a Man of Sorrows, Isai. 53.3.
that he who is to be the Judge of Quick and Dead, should be adjudged and
condemned by a Man of his own making. Oh the infinite Condescension of Christ!
that he who chastens the Heathen, should be scourged by Mortals; that he who is
the Blessed God, should hang upon a cursed Tree; and that he who is the
Fountain of Life, should undergo the stroke of Death; that he who hangs the
Earth upon nothing should himself be hanged between Heaven and Earth. And
therefore the Apostle presents us with the Example of Christ as a Copy to write
after, Phil. 2.6, 7.
and a President to imitate.

5. If Christ be God over all, this amy inform us of our infinite Obligations
to God the Holy Ghost for forming the Humanity of Christ of the Virgins
substance so pure and holy, that God over all did not disdain to take it into a
Personal Union with himself, and also for convincing us of sn; whereby he
emptyed the Soul of sinful, worldly and righteous Self, and thereby made room
in our Hearts for the Reception of the Blessed efforts of the Death,
Resurrection, Assension and Intercession of Jesus Christ.

6. If Christ be God over all, this may inform us, that all the Perfections of
God which have been affronted by Man's sin, have gained by Man's Nature in the
Person of Christ, because of that Retribution that God over all has (in our
Nature) made to God Perfections; for which cause God is said to have received
double for all our sins, not by our Persons, but by our Nature in the Peson of
him who is God over all, Isai. 40.2.

1. For the Sovereignty of God, which has been prodigiously rejected by sinful
Men, whose Nature and Practice is ready to utter this wicked Language of
Pharaoh, Who is the Lord that I should obey him? We will not have this man to
reign over us. This gloriour Perfection of God, Exodus 5.2. Luke 19.14.
has gained more by our Nature in the Person of Christ than it has lost by us;
for Christ who is God over all has owned and acknowledged the Sovereignty of
God by praying to him, and by obeying of him even unto Death; so that when the
Law is ready to cry to Justice for Vengeance against a Believer because of his
sin, says Justice, it is true, Law, what thou say concerning the sinfulness
of those Believeing, Repenting, and Returning Sinners; but yet I am so far from
complying with thee to Damn them, that I am resolved to stand by them, and to
justify them, Isai. 40.2.
for I have received double at their hands, for their rejection of my
Sovereignty; for their nature in Personal Union with God over all, has by all
its Obedience unto Death honored my Sovereignty more than Adam and all his
Posterity could have done, had they continued in their Innocence; for then my
Sovereignty had been honored only by Creatures, but now it is honored by God
over all in Man's Nature.

2. As the Sovereignty of God has been more honored by Christ than it could
have been by Adam and all his Posterity, had they continued in their Innocence;
so likewise the Holiness or God wherein consisted God's Image, which Man
defaced by his Fall, has got more ground in our Nature, as it is in Personal
Union with God over all, than it lost by the Fall of Adam; for if Adam and all
his Posterity had continued in their Holy State, there would not have been so
much Holiness in all their Persons, as is in our Nature in the Person of
Christ, into whose Lips Grace was pouered, Psalm. 45.3. and who received not the
Spirit by measure, John 3.24. So that when the Law is crying to Justice for
Vengeance against True Believers for the loss of their Holiness, says Justice,
I cannot Damn this Believer, though their Persons have lost their Holiness;
because their Nature, in Personal Union with God over all, has more Holiness in
it, than ever they lost; And beside, says Justice, as there is the Perfection
of Holiness in their Political Head and representative God over all, so I have
likewise by the Almighty and irresistible power of my Spirit implanted my Image
of Holiness in them, as they are by Faith United to God the Fountain of
Holiness, from whom they do derive such Streams of Holiness which carry them
with an Holy Holiness against the Wind and Tide of their corrupt Affections,
and Satan's Temptations, and the Worlds Allurements, and the Frowns and
Flatteries of wicked Relations; in which respect the Holiness of true Believers
is of a higher Nature than the Holiness of the Angels; forasmuch as they in
their Acts of Holiness meet with none of that Opposition as the Saints do while
they are here in this World, and though all this will not justify them,
because of Adam's sin imputed to them, and that sin which is implanted in them,
yet forasmuch as God over all has in their Nature not only purchased Justifying
Grace for them, but also Sanctifying Grace in them; I am resolved to glorify
them, notwithstanding all that thou, O Law, do allege against them; for
though they were deeply in my Debt, I have received double at the Hands of
their Surety; and it would be an Act of Injustice in me, to exact one Debt of
two Persons.

3. If Christ be God over all, this may inform us, that the Mercy of God has
been no loser but a gainer by our Nature in the Person of God over all; for the
Mercy of God is more displayed in redeeming of us by the Death of Christ, than
it would have been by God's keeping of Adam and all his Posterity in their
Primitive State of Happiness: Oh who can take the Dimensions of that boundless
Grace and Mercy of God, that was displayed in sending of his only Son out of
his Bosom to undergo his Wrath for sinners! For though the Godhead of Christ
was incapable of suffering, yet he was in Personal Union with the Manhood that
did suffer the intolerable weight of God's, Wrath for sinners; and no sooner
does the Law cry to Justice against Believers, for their abuse of Mercy, but
presently it receives this or the like answer from Justice, Though it is true, O
Law, what thou say concerning this Believer's abuse of Mercy, yet I am
resolved to stand by this Believer, because my Mercy has shone forth so
abundantly by their Surety, God over all, in their Nature, that a finite Being
is not able to comprehend; for, says Justice, if there had been but one of
Adam's Offspring saved, my Mercy would have been more displayed thereby, than
it would have been in the Salvation of all Mankind, had they continued in their
Innoceney; for then God had only extended Mercy only to Loyal Subjects: But for
God as an Act of his Grace to save sinners by the Death of his Son, was an
extending of Grace to Rebellious Adam, and his Rebellious Offspring, which is
a great Amplification thereof.

4. As this Doctrine does inform us, That the Sovereignty, Holiness and Mercy of
God are no losers by Believers, with respect to their Nature in the Person of
God over all, so likewise the power of God has been more displayed in the
Conception, Death and Resurrection of Christ, than it would have been in
keeping Adam and all his Posterity in their State of Innocence. Oh what power
did the Spirit of God manifest in forming the Pure and Spotless Humanity of
Christ of the Substance of a sinful Virgin! And how was the Power of God
manifested, in bearing up of that Spotless Humanity, under that Wrath, the
thousand part of which would have sunk the whole Creation? So that when the Law
cries to Justice for Vengeance against Believers, for contemning of God's
Power, by acting in his sight contrary to his Nature, it receives this or the
like answer from Justice; Though it is true, O Law, what thou say, That Man
has greatly contemned God's Power, yet I am resolved notwithstanding to stand
by this Believer, because my power shone forth more in the Conception, Death
and Resurrection of their Surety, who is God over all, than it would have been
in preserving Man in Innocence: And besides, says Justice to the Law, my power
has been as much displayed in infusing the habit of Grace into the Hearts of
Believers, Ephesians. 1.19. 1. Pet. 1.5.
and in keeping up that habit by constant supplies of persevering Grace, as in
making of Heaven and Earth.

5. As the Power of God has been more magnified by God over all in Man's
Nature, than it would have been in the perseverance of all Mankind, so has his
Wisdom likewise; for as Man did put a slight upon God's Wisdom, when he
consulted with Satan for the mending of his Condition; yet there has been, for
that slight, such satisfaction made to the Justice of God in Man's Nature, by
contriving that way for our Redemption which was infinitely above the reach of
Human and Angelical Wisdom, that when the Law cries out to Justice against
sinners, for putting of slights upon God's Wisdom, when we go not to him for
Direction in our important concerns, Justice returns this or the like answer,
It Is true, O Law, what thou say, concerning the slights that have been put
upon my Wisdom by sinners, yet I am resolved to stand by this Believer
notwithstanding; forasmuch as the essential Wisdom of God, and in whom is hid
all the Treasures of Wisdom, has managed that Work of Man's Redemption at such
a rate as would have puzzel'd all the Angels in Heaven; for what Angel could
ever have imagined that the same Person should be the Satisfier, which was the
Satisfied? But thus it was with God over all in Man's Nature, for Christ as God
was satisfied, but Christ as God, Man, or Mediator, was the Satisfier.

6. As the Wisdom of God, so the Truth of God, has been more displayed by God
over all in Man's Nature, in the management of the Work of our Redemption, than
for ought that is revealed in the Scripture, it would have been by Adam and all
his Posterity, had they continued in their Innocence; for such was the Zeal of
the Man Christ Jesus, for the magnifying of his Father's Truth, that
notwithstanding the unutterable Torments that he was in upon the Cross, he
would not put a Period unto them by his Death, till all those Prophesies were
fulfilled, that were to be accomplished by his Death; and therefore it said,
That Jesus knowing all things that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, said,
John 19.28.
I thirst; and therefore Christ is called the Faithful and True Witness. In a
word, had Adam and all his Posterity continued in their Innocence, there had
been many True Men, but there would not have been one Man Truth it self; but
the Man Christ Jesus is Truth it self, and the Fountain of all Truth; so that
the Truth of God is greatly Glorified by God over all in Man's Nature.

7. Last of all, the Justice of God shines forth greatly in the Man Christ
Jesus, by laying upon him unconceiveable Sufferings, for Sin imputed to him,
though not committed by him: And certainly, could the Justice of God have
dispensed with Sin, it would, when it found it only by imputation upon the
Darling of Heaven; but such was the Severity of God's Justice, that if Christ
would undertake to pay our Debts, God would not dispense with the non-payment
of them.

8. If Christ be God over all, and that the Dignity of his Person has put such
efficacy into his Sufferings as has made them infinitely meritotorious, so as
to make full Satisfaction to the Justice of God, for all the Wrong that has
been done to all his Attributes, then this may inform us, Romans 3.26. 1 John 1.8.
that the Justice of God is engaged to Justify a True Believer, forasmuch as
he has been fully satisfied by Christ, the Believers Surety. In a word, though
the Damned in Hell will never have satisfied Justice, for which cause they must
never come out of their Torment, yet Christ who is God over all, did satisfy
the Justice of God to the uttermost Farthing.

9. If Christ be God over all, then this may inform us of the honorable and
happy Condition of True Believers, who are mystically one with Christ who is
God over all, by his Essential Union with the Father: if it were such an honor
to Hester to be relatively one with an Earthly Prince, it must needs be a far
greater honor to a True Believer to be mystically one with God over all, who
is King of Kings.

10. If Christ be God over all, this Doctrine may inform us what encouragement
we have in this Day of Jacob's Troubles, when contempt covers the Faces of the
Saints, to be importunate with God for the Deliverance of Sion, and for the
Exaltation of the Interest of Christ; for if Christ be God over all, he will
make all his Implacable Enemies to feel the Force of his Irresistible Power, in
order to his own Glory and his Churches Good.

11. If Christ be God over all, this may inform us, That a True Believer has
nothing to do with the Condemning Power of the Law; whenever the Law
threatens a True Believer for its Breach and Violation, he may, with comfort,
return it this answer, Thou Holy, Just, and Good Law, I know that I have
deserved the Wrath and Curse of God for my Breach and Violation of thee, but
thou did lay Violent Hands upon my Nature in Personal Union with God over
all, thy Maker, and thou would not leave him, till thou had brought him to
the cursed Tree, where his Soul was made an Offering for Sin, and a Curse for
me, that I might be Blessed through him; and now, Law, though thou have enough
against my Person, I fear not all thy Threatening Power, forasmuch as I am by
Faith United unto him who is God over all, and who has answered all they
Demands for me; and as my Breach of thee was imputed to him, so his Obedience
of thee is imputed to me; and though I do resolve in the strength of God's
Grace, to yield Obedience to God's Commands, yet I shall rest only upon the
Imputative Righteousness of Christ for Life and Salvation.

12. If Christ be God over all, this may inform us, what encouragement
Ministers have to Preach the the Gospel of the Kingdom to the greatest of
Sinners; for though we cannot Convert Sinners by our Preaching, God over all can
do what he pleases; and he that has commanded us to Preach the Gospel, John
9.6. Luke 13.13.
and whose Glory is concerned therein, is as able to open the Eyes of Men's
Understandings, as he was to open the Eyes of those that were born Blind; he
that made crooked Bodies straight, is able to make crooked Wills straight, in
the Day of his Power, Psalm. 110. He that raised Dead Bodies, Ephesians. 2.1.
is able to quicken Dead Souls; and therefore let us be found in our Duty, and
leave the issue of all to God.

13. If Christ be God over all, then see what encouragement you Hearers have to
be found in the discharge of your Duty toward Ministers; forasmuch as God over
all has said, ^ov. 3.9, 10.
That if you honor the Lord with your substance, and with the first fruits of
all your increase, that your Barns shall be filled with plenty, and your
Presses shall burst out with new wine. You Hearers, What do you say to this? Do
you think that God over all is not able to make good his Promises? or do you
think to honor God more with your Substance than to contribute toward the
Necessities of such Ministers, who Study Night and Day to promote God's Glory,
and the Good of your Souls? And beside, you know not how little a time you have
to show your Love to the Ministers of Christ; ^ch. 1.8. ^ek. 37.
for though now all the Ministers of Christ are as Myrtles in the Bottom, and
as dry Bones in the Valleys; God can put them under better Circumstances, that
they may have no need of your Bounty: And therefore remember what the Apostle
said to such that had contributed toward his Necessities, That it was an odor
of a sweet smell, a sacrifice well-pleasing to God. And for their encouragement
to persevere in that Duty, he adds, But my God will supply all your need
according to his riches in glory, by Christ Jesus, Phil. 4.18, 19. And beside
consider, that when you come to lie upon a Deathbed, how will your Consciences
torment you, when you shall think what opportunities you have had to encourage
a faithful Minister of Christ, and either you did nothing at all of your Duty,
or that which was next to nothing? And you are to remember, that God expects
your Contributions should be proportionable to what he has lent you in the
World; they that have but little, God will accept of a little from them, but
those to whom God has given more, he does expect more from them.

14. If Christ be God over all, this may inform us what encouragement Godly
Parents have to send up strong cries to God for Rebellious Children, seeing
that when God over all ascended up on high, and led Captivity Captive, he
received Gifts for Men, even for the Rebellious also, that the Lord God may
dwell among them; and therefore if any of you that are here present have
Rebellious Children for whom you have poured out your Souls before the Lord,
and as yet you can perceive no change in your Children, in answer of your
Prayers, be not discouraged, God can answer your Prayers in the Conversion of
your Children, when you are Dead and Rotten. And remember God's time is the
best time; he that Governs the World by his Wisdom, and has founded the Earth
by his Understanding, and makes every thing beautiful in its Season, knows the
properest time for the answering of the Prayers of his People; but suppose your
Prayers should not be answered in the Conversion of your Children, your desires
thereof will find acceptance with God, and your Prayers shall return to your
own Bosom.

15. If Christ be God over all, this may inform us of the excellency of Faith,
whose Work and Office it is to Unite the Soul to Christ; for which cause we are
said to be Justified by Faith, as it Unites us to a Justifying Christ.

16. If Christ be God over all, it may inform us of the evil of Sin, which
could be expiated by nothing short of the Death of Christ; the malignity of
(...) does more appear in those Sufferings it brought where it was only by
Imputation, than in all the Forments of the Damned in whom it was by
Implantation.

17. Lastly, see the Folly of Wicked Men, that will for the Profits and
Pleasures of Sin, which are but for a season, venture the loss of the
Blessedness that is to be enjoyed in the enjoyment of Christ, who will make
True Believers Blessed, so long as himself will be Blessed, who is over all,
God blessed for ever Amen.

To conclude: Let us make it our great Work and Business, to clear up our
Interest in him, who is over all, God blessed for ever; and that by making of
it sure to our Souls, that he has Blessed us: in turning of us from our
Iniquities, and in making of us to see our want of him, and the worth of him,
so for as with the Spouse, to say with our whole Souls, That he is White and
Ruddy, the Chiefest among ten thousand, and that he is altogether Lovely, Songs
5.10, 17. And that we may have the same Apprehensions of him as Moses had when
he esteemed Reproaches for him to be greater Riches than all the Treasures of
Egypt; and in so doing, though not for so doing, we need not question, but that
Christ who is God, Blessed for ever, will make us for ever Blessed with him
through his Merits without us, as certainly as he has Blessed us with
Preparation for that Glory by his Spirit within us.

FINIS.

