A PERFECT CATALOGUE Of all the Lords Treasurers That have been in England to
this present Year, 1679. With Particular Observations on THOMAS EARL OF DANBY.
Best Wines to drooping Souls, best Cordials prove,
But once Corrupt, who can such Poisons love?

1. THE first who ever enjoyed this Place, was Dunstan Archbishop of
Canterbury, he was made Treasurer to King Eldred, Anno Dom. 946. and was after
Canonized for a Saint; and this is the St. Dunstan, who, the Goldsmiths say,
took the Devil by the Nose with a pair of Tongs.

2. Hugolme; he was made Treasurer and Chamberlain to Edward the Confessor.

3. Odo, half Brother to the Conqueror; he was Earl of Kent, Bishop of Baieux,
Chief Justice of England, and treasurer in the days of the Conqueror.

4. Godfrey Clinton, Treasurer and Chamberlain to Henry the First, 1112. he was
afterward accused of Treason.

5. Ranulph Bishop of Durham was afterward made Treasurer to the said King.

6. Roger Bishop of Salisbury, Treasurer and Chancellor to Henry the First,
and died in the 4th of King Stephen, 1139.

7. Nigellus Bishop of Ely was also Treasurer to Henry the First; he was a
greater Statesman than Churchman; and, as Trivet says, died Anno 1169.

8. Richard of Ely, the Son of the said Nigellus, was made Treasurer to Henry
the Second, by the purchase of his Father Purse; who gave the Sum of 400 Marks
to the King for the Place for his Son.

9. William of Ely, being a Kinsman of the aforesaid Richard of Ely, was also
made Treasurer to Richard the First, and also to King John.

10. The next was a Dean of Paul's that enjoyed this Place, (as appears by
Matthew. Parker) who also speaks of his miserable End. And, I suppose this to be
that Dean, who is recorded to have made this Will: Lego omnia bona mea Domino
Regi, Corpus Sepulturae, Animam Diabolo. I give all my Goods to the King, my
Body to be buried, and, my Soul to the Devil: quo dicto expiravit (says
Huntley, in his Epistle to King Charles, page 69. of the Prelates Usurpation.)
He was made Treasurer in the seventh year of Richard the First, 1195.

11. Walter Gray Bishop of Worcester, was made Treasurer in the eleventh year
of King John.

12. Geffery Archdeacon of Narwich, was made Treasurer to King John, and
forsook his Master when he was Excommunicated by the Pope.

13. John Ruthall next enjoyed this Office, Anno 1219. in the third year of
Henry the Third.

14. Eustachius de Faulconbridg, Chancellor of the Exchequer, was made
Treasurer, and afterward Bishop of London, in the 5th of Hen. 3.1221.

15. Johannes de Fontibus, or Defontnes, Bishop of Ely, was made Treasurer in
the 9th of Henr. 3.

16. Wulter Malclark, or Lack Latin, was Bishop of Carlisle, and Treasurer of
England, in the days of Henr. 3.

17. Ranulph Briton, is mentioned next in Order, but I suppose it should have
been Hubert de Burgo.

18. Peter de Orial, he was made Treasurer in the seventeenth year of Henry the
Third, 1233. and afterward Guardian of all the Forests, Escheats, and Cinque
Ports.

19. Hugh Pateshall, Treasurer of the Exchequer, and afterward to the King, in
the eighteenth year of Henry the Third, 1234. and after that, Chief Justice of
all England.

20, William Haverhull, a Canon of St. Paul's, was made Treasurer to the King,
1240. in the twenty fourth of Henry the Third.

21. Richard de Barking, Abbot of Westminster, was Chief Baron of the Exchequer
and Treasurer of England after him.

22. Philip Lovel did next obtain this Honor, Anno 1251.

23. John Crockhall Archdeacon of Bedford, was Treasurer from the 42, to the
44th year of Henry the Third, at which time the King gave him a Prebendary, and
so he was removed.

24. John, Abbot of Peterborough, was by the Barons made Treasurer, and by them
also were the other Officers of the King Elected and Confirmed, 1260.

25. Nicholas Archdeacon of Ely, was made Treasurer in the 47 of Hen. 3.1263.

26. Thomas Wi^undham was by the Barons first made Treasurer of the Exchequer,
and afterward of England, in the fiftieth year of Hen. 3.1266.

27. John Chisul, Dean of Paul's, afterward Bishop of London, and sometime
Chancellor, was made Treasurer in the fifty fourth of Hen. 3.1269. About this
time also there is mention made of one Philip de Ely.

28. Joseph de Chancey, was made Treasurer in the second year of Edward the
First, 1274.

29. William, or Walter Gifford, Bishop of Bath and Wells, was the next
Treasurer to Edw. the First.

30. Robert Burnell, Bishop of Bath and Wells, and Chancellor of England,
succeeded the said Gifford in the Place of Treasurer.

31. Joseph de Chancey was the second time made Treasurer in the sixth year of
Edw. 1278. He was also Prior of St. John's of Jerusalem, that is, of the Order
of Knights so called, whose Residence was chiefly at Rebodes.

32. Thomas Beck was made Treasurer in the 7th of Edw. the First, he being then
Archdeacon of Dorchester.

33. Richard de Ware, Abbot of Westminster, was made Treasurer in the eighth
year of Edw. 1.1280. This man going for his Consecration to Rome, provided and
brought Stones and Workmen from thence, to make that curious Pavement at
Westminster before the Communion Table, and also the Shrine of Edward the
Confessor.

34. Walter, or William de Wenlock, Abbot of Westminster, was made Treasurer
after Richard de Ware.

35. The Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry was made Treasurer in the 14th of
Edward the First, 1286. and succeeded the same year by John Kerby.

36. John Kerby Dean of Winburn, and Archdeacon of Coventrey, was made
Treasurer in the 14th of Edw. 1.

37. William de Marchia was made Treasurer in the 18th of Edw. 1.1290. and held
the Place five years; after whose time the Place was void: the Barons of the
Exchequer supplying the Place, till they chose

38. Walter Langhstone; who enjoyed the Place all the while the King lived, and
was afterward removed and imprisoned by Edward the Second.

39. Walter Reignolds, Schoolmaster to Edward the Second, Bishop of Worcester,
and Chancellor of England, made Treasurer in the first of Edw. the Second.

40. John de Sandal, Chancellor, was made also Treasurer, but he kept his
Place but a year.

41. Walter Norwich Knight, was made Treasurer in the fifth of Edward the
Second. 1312.

42. John de Sandal was the second time made Treasurer in the sixth year of
Edward the Second.

43. Walter Norwich Knight, was the second time made Treasurer.

44. John Drokensford, Bishop of Bath and Wells, did next enjoy the Place of
Treasurer, who was succeeded by

45. John Hotham, in the eleventh of Edw. the Second, 1317.

46. William de Walwaine was made Treasurer in the twelfth of Edw. the Second,
and was for Misdemeanors removed by the Parliament at York.

47. John Stratford Bishop of Winchester succeeded in the same Place the same
year: -- This Treasurer found in some by-place in the Treasury, the Sum of
twenty nine pound, seventeen shillings, and eight pence; for the supposed
Expense of which, the last Treasurer was turned out of his Place. -- Fiat
Justitia -- this falls short of two or three Millions.

48. Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter, was made Treasurer in the 13th year of
Edw. the Second, 1319.

49. Sir Walter Norwich, the third time made Lord Treasurer in the 15th year of
Edward the Second, though Walsingham says otherwise.

50. Roger Northborow Scutifer, made Treasurer in the 16th of Ed. 2.1322.

51. Walter Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter, the second time made Treasurer, in the
18th of Ed. 2. and was beheaded by Queen Isabel, when she came into England to
Depose her Husband.

52. William Melton, Archbishop of York, was made Treasurer in the 18th of Ed.
2. and kept his Place till the Deposition of his Master.

53. John Strafford, Bishop of Winchester, was the second time made Treasurer,
in the twentieth year of the Deposed King Edward.

54. Adam Tarleton, or de Orleton, Bishop of Hereford, was made Treasurer also
in the first year of King Edward the Third.

55. Henry Burwash, Bishop of Lincoln, was made Lord Treasurer in the first
year of Ed. 3.1327.

56. Thomas Bishop of Hereford did next possess this Place in the third year of
Ed. the third.

57. Robert Woodhouse was made Lord Treasurer in the fourth of King Edward.

58. William Archbishop of York was again made Treasurer in the fifth year of
Ed. the third.

59. William Bishop of Norwich was also made Treasurer in the fifth of Edward
the third, in Michaelmas Term. Note, that there were three Lord Treasurers
successively in this Term.

60. Robert le Ailstone made Treasurer in the 7th year of Ed. the third, 1333.

61. Henry Burwash was again made Treasurer in the tenth of Ed. the third 1336.

62. Richard de Bury Bishop of Durham was made, Treasurer in the 11th of Ed.
the third.

63. William de la Zouch was preferred to this Place in the 12th year of Ed.
the third, 1338. He was Bishop of York, and, in the Kings absence, Vicegerent
of the North; and also took David Bruce King of Scots, who then Invaded
England, 1346.

64. Richard Sadington was made Treasurer in the 14th year of Ed. the third.

65. Robert Northborow, Treasurer also in the 14th year of Ed. the third.

66. The Bishop of Chester made Treasurer in the 15th year, and soon lost his
Place.

67. Robert Perning was also Treasurer in the 15th year.

68. Roger Northborow Bishop of Coventrey, did possess this Place in the 16th
year of King Edward.

69. William de Cusans, made Treasurer in the 17th year of King Ed. 3. in which
place he continued but the space of Michaelmas Term.

70. William de Edington Bishop of Winchester, made Treasurer in the 19th Year
of Ed. 3.1345. which Place he held twelve Years.

71. John Bishop of Rochester, made Treasurer in the 32 year of Ed. 3.1358.

72. Simon Langham of the Priory of Westminster, was made Treasurer in the 35
year of Ed. 3, and he was afterward a Cardinal.

73. John Barret, made Bishop of Worcester, and after Treasurer of England in
the 36 year of Ed. 3.1362.

74. Thomas de Brandington was made Bishop of Exon, and afterward Treasurer in
the 43 of Ed. 3. and continued in his Place till the 45 of Ed. 3.1371. and was
then removed by the Parliament, and at the same time it was enacted, that
Clergymen should no more serve in the Place of Treasurer, Chancellor, or Clerk
of the Privy Seal, but secular men only.

75. Sir Richard Scroop, was made Treasurer in the 46 of Ed. the 3. A man of
great Worth and one who hated to cheat a Kingdom.

76. Sir Robert Ashton, Constable of Dover Castle, and Warden of the Cinque
Ports was made Treasurer in the 50th year of Ed. 3.

77. Henry Wake of Wakefield being before made Bishop of Worcester was made
Treasurer in the 51 year of Edward 3. which was the last year of his Reign.

78. Thomas de Brantington was again made Treasurer in the first year of
Richard the second, 1378.

79. Richard Earl of Arundel and Surrey made Lord Treasurer in the second year
of Richard the second, and held it one whole year, and then gave place to.

80. Thomas de Brandington, who was the third time made Lord Treasurer in the
third year of Richard the 2.

81. Robert Hales (Chief Prior of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem in
England) was made Lord Treasurer in the fourth of Richard the Second.

82. Hugh Segrane Knight, whom Walsingham calls Regis Senescallum, the Kings
Steward, was made Treasurer in the fifth year of Richard 2.

83. John Fortham Cannon, being Secretary to the King, was made Bishop of
Durham, and in the ninth of Richard the second, he was made Treasurer also 1385.

84. John Gilbert Bishop of Hereford was by the Parliament made Treasurer in
the tenth of Rich. 2.1386.

85. Thomas de Brantington was the fourth time made Treasurer of England.

86. John Gilbert Bishop of St. David's in Wales, was made Treasurer in the 13
Year of Richard 2.

87. John Waltham Bishop of Salisbury, Masters of the Rolls and Keeper of the
Privy Seal, was made Treasurer in the 15 year of Rich. 2.

88. Roger Walden was the next who succeeded in that Place, in the 18 year of
Richard 2.1365.

89. The Bishop of St. David's in Wales was chose Treasurer in the 22 year of
Rich. 2.

90. William Scroop Knight and Vice-Chamberlain was made Treasurer also in the
22 of Richard 2. This man bought of the Earl of Salisbury the Isle of Man, with
the Crown thereof, he was also one of those to whom this King let the Kingdom
out to farm, yet after all he was beheaded at Bristol, in the 23 year of Rich.
2.

91. Sir John Northbury made Lord Treasurer in the first year of Henry the
fourth 1399.

92. Henry Bowet Bishop of York, was made Treasurer in the fourth of Henry
4.1403.

93. William Lord Ross, enjoyed the Place of Treasurer in the fifth year of
Henry the fourth.

94. Thomas Lord Furnival had the Place and Office of Lord Treasurer in the 6th
year of Hen. 4. To this Lord Furnival did that House in Holborn belong, as
their Common dwelling house, which is now called Furnivals-Inn.

95. Nicholas Bubwith was made Lord Treasurer in the 8th year of Hen. 4.

96. Sir Richard Scroop, Lord of Bolton, made Treasurer in the 9th year of Hen.
4.

97. Sir John Tiptoft did possess this Place of Treasurer in Michaelmas Term,
in the 10th year of Hen. 4.1408.

98. Henry Lord Scroop of Masham and Flaxfleet, was made Treasurer in the 11th
of Hen. 4.1410. He kept his Place so long as the King lived, and in the third
year of Henry the Fifth he was beheaded at Southampton.

99. Thomas Fitzallen Earl of Arundel and Surrey was made Treasurer in the
first year of Hen. 5.

100. Sir Roger Leche was made Treasurer in the 4th year of Hen. 5. and was
with the King at the Siege of Roan.

101. Henry Lord Fitzhugh was preferred to the Place of Treasurer in the 5th
of Hen. 5. and kept his Place during the Kings Life.

102. John Stafford, Clerk, made Lord Treasurer in the first of Hen. 6.1422.

103. Walter Lord Hungerford, Knight of the Garter, and Son of Sir Thomas
Hungerford, was made Lord Treasurer in the 4th of Hen. 6.

104. John Lord Scroop of Vpsal and Masham, was made Treasurer in the 10th year
of Hen. 6.1431.

105. Ralph Lord Cromwell, Son of Ralph Cromwell of Tatershal, obtained this
Place in Easter Term, in the 12th of Hen. 6.1434.

106. Sir Ralph Butler, Knight of the Garter, enjoyed this Place the 7th of
July, in the 22th year of H. 6.1444.

107. Marmaduke Bishop of Carlisle, was made Treasurer in the 15th year of Hen.
6.1488.

108. James Fynes, Created Baron of Say and Seal, was made Lord Treasurer in
the 28th of Hen. 6. and was afterward beheaded by Jack Cade in Cheapside.

109. John Lord Beauchamp, a Person of great Worth, he was made Treasurer in
the 29th of Hen. 6.

110. John Tiptoft, Earl of Worcester, was made Lord Treasurer in the 31th year
of Hen. 6.

111. James Butler, the Son of James Earl of Ormond, enjoyed the Place of
Treasurer in the 33th of Hen. 6.

112. Henry Vicount Bourchier, the Son of William Bourchier Earl of Ewe in
Normandy was made Treasurer in the 33th of Hen. 6.

113. John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, was next made Treasurer in the 35th year
of Hen. 6.

114. James Butler, the Son of the Earl of Ormond, was the second time made
Treasurer in the 37 of Hen. 6. and was after beheaded at Newcastle, in the
first of Edward the 4th.

115. Henry Bourchier was the second time made Lord Treasurer in the 39th of
Hen. 6. who, upon the Kings Deposition, lost his Life.

116. John Tiptoft, Earl of Worcester, was the second time made Lord Treasurer,
in the second of Edw. 4.

117. Edmund Lord Gray of Ruthin, the Son of the Lord Gray of Ruthin, was made
Treasurer in the fourth of Edward the 4th. 1464.

118. Sir Walter Blunt was chose Treasurer in the 5th year of Edward the 4th.

119. Sir Richard Woodvile, first Chamberlain, then Constable of England,
afterward Baron, and then Lord Treasurer, in the 6th of Edw. the 4th.

120. John Longstrother, Prior of St. John's of Jerusalem in England, was made
Treasurer in the 9th of Edward the 4th. but was soon removed.

121. William Gray Bishop of Ely, was also made Treasurer in the ninth of
Edward the 4th 1469.

122. Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex did the third time possess the Place of
Treasurer in the 11th of Ed. the 4.

123. Sir Richard Wood, made Lord Treasurer in the second of Richard the third.

124. Sir Reignold Brey, the Son of Richard Brey Doctor of Physic, was made
Treasurer by Henry the seventh, in the first year of his Reign.

125. Sir John Dinham did next enjoy the Place of Treasurer in the second of
Hen. 7.1486.

126. Thomas Howard Son of John Lord Howard, he was made Treasurer in the 16th
year of Henry the 7th. (...) was created Duke of Norfolk, and continued in his
Place till the 15th year of Henry the eighth, which is in all (...) years, sure
if he had been but ingenious he might have got a vast Estate in that time, (you
all know one ^t would, though he had beggered 3 Kingdoms by it) -- sed -- Credo
eum ingeniosissimum and honestissimum esse.

127. Thomas Howard Son to the said Duke, being made Earl of Surrey, enjoyed
the Place of Lord Treasurer in the 15th year of Henry 8. and held it while the
king lived, which was till the 38th year of his Reign.

128. Edward Seymour Earl of Hartford, and afterward Duke of Somerset, was made
Treasurer in the first of Edward the sixth 1546. and was after that beheaded:

129. Sir William Paulet, after Marquess of Winchester, was made Treasurer in
the 5th of Edward the 6th, and held that Place to the 15th year of Elizabeth,
in all 23 years and more, he lived to 97 years of Age, which was without Doubt
a great Blessing to man of his Employment.

130. Sir William Cecil created Lord Burley, was made Lord Treasurer the 13 of
July 1572 in the 15 of Eliz.

131. Thomas Sackvile, Baron Buckhuest, was made Lord Treasurer the 15th of May
in the 41 of Elizabeth: he was after created Earl of Dorset by King James.

132. Sir Robert Cecil second Son to William Lord Burley, was by King James
created Baron of Essendon, 1603 then Vicount Cranborne 1604. after that Earl of
Salisbury, and last of all Lord Treasurer, and held the Place till his Death.

133. Thomas Lord Howard of Walden (second Son to the Duke of Norfolk) was
created Earl of Suffolk, and after Lord Treasurer in the 12 year of King James.

134. Sir Henry Mountacute made Treasurer in the 18 of King James on the 19th
of December, and was after created Earl of Manchester, by King Charles the
first.

135. Lionel Lord Cranfield of Cranfield in the County of Bedford was made Lord
Treasurer the 19th of October 1621. and created Earl of Middlesex 1622.

136. Sir James Ley Knight and Baronet, was made Lord Treasurer the 22 of
December, in the 22 year of King James, and soon after created Baron Ley, of
Ley in Devonshire, and after the Coronation of King Charles, Earl of Marleborow.

137. Richard Lord Weston, upon the Remove of the said Earl, was made Treasurer
the 15th of July in the 4th year of Charles the first 1627, and after Earl of
Portland.

138. Upon the Death of the said Earl of Portland, the King appointed
Commissioners of the Treasury: vizs William Archbishop of Canterbury, Henry
Earl of Manchester, Lord Privy Seal: Francis Lord Cottington Chancellor of the
Exchequer, Sir John Cook and Sir Francis Windebank Principal Secretaries of
State.

139. William Juxon first Bishop of Hereford, then translated to London,
afterward Dean of the Chapel, and one of the Privy Council, and last of all
Treasurer, March the 9th 1635.

140. Francis Lord Cottington, was made Lord Treasurer the third of October
1643, after whom there were no more Lord Treasurers till the Honorable Earl of
Southampton enjoyed the Place 1660.

141. Thomas Earl of Southampton that Emblem of Honesty and English Generosity,
of whom I may say, as Ovid of Caesar.

O Deeus, O Patriae per te Florentis Imago!
O Vir non ipso quem regis Orb minor!
He was made Lord Treasurer the 8th of September 1660, and held that Place till
his Death, which indeed could not be enough Lamented; Alas good man! he got no
Pounds, much less Millions by this Place, Honor and Honesly united, may in
political Philosophy undoubtedly pass for a Comet, and indeed this worthy
English Hero was no less.

142. This Honorable Lord being dead, the King appointed five Commissioners
for the Treasury, viz. Antony Earl of Shaftsbury (that Champion of England's
Liberty) George Duke of Albemarle, the Lord Clifford, Sir John Duncom, and Sir
William Coventry, these continued Part of 1667, 1668, and in 1669. Sir William
Coventry was turned out, all the rest remaining till 1672 ( Monk excepted, for
he died)

143. The Lord Clifford was appointed by the King, Lord Treasurer of England,
1672.

144. In the Year 1673. Sir Thomas Osborn was preferred by the Duke of
Buckingham and some others, to his Majesty, as a Person deserving the Honor
and Trust of the Kingdoms Treasury, and in order thereunto he was sworn about
June, eodem Anno. This Honorable Gentleman was born in Yorkshire in the year
1631/2 February the 20th, being Monday about four a Clock in the Morning, his
Father was President of a Council in the North, his Grandfather wrs Knighted
in Ireland for Merit, he is the fourth Knight of his Family, and the second
Knight and Baronet, the first Earl and the first Lord Treasurer, and descended
from Osborn a Quondam Lord Major of London, who being but mean in his Minority
was advanced by the Marriage of his Masters Daughter, for some secret Service
by him performed, which to mention in this Place would not be so grateful as
true -- but (pax mortuis) let us consider some of this worthy and Eminent
Persons Virtues.

1. He has been a great Royalist, which Qualification made him the fitter for
this great Employ. 2. He has been an extraordinary good Husband, so that he
has from a small Estate advanced himself to a considerable Revenue. 3. He was
a great Preferer of his Kindred, especially to the Parliament house, Memen. the
Case of Mr. W. T. in the last Parliament, and at several Elections in this. 4.
He was ever a very grateful Person, which was evidently seen in his Carriage to
the Illustrious George Duke of Buckingham in the Beginning of this present Year
1679. whose Gold was freely serviceable to him, when his Necessity obliged him
to want. 5. He is a very good Accomptant, which I suppose the whole Kingdom
knows to their Cost. 6. and lastly. To him and some others we owe our Thanks
for our last eight Months Distraction and Destruction not forgetting innocent
Godfrey's Death.
Odimus Accipitrem quia semper vivit in Armis.
FINIS.

