THE SUBSTANCE OF THE INFORMATION OF Richard Perkin OF SHUTBORROW, In the
COUNTY of STAFFORD; Taken upon Oath at Stafford Assizes 1679. by Sir Robert
Atkyns Knight, then one of the Judges for that Circuit.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin in Ball-Court, near the Black Bull in the
Old Baily. 1681.

The Substance of the Information of Richard Perkin, as it was taken upon Oath
by Sir Robert Atkyns Knight, then a Judge at Stafford Assizes 1679.
THis Informant says, that about Seven or Eight Years since, Mr. Arthur Fox, (
then Servant to the Present Lord Aston) came to him, and to another of his
Friends, and told them that there was a Bastard-Child laid to his charge, by
one of his Lords Tenants Daughters, and did acknowledge to them that he did
several Times lie with her, and that by the best computation of Time he could
make, he had just grounds to believe that she had done him no wrong in this her
charge, and that he verily believed himself to be the Father of the Child, and
therefore came to them as his particular Friends, for their advice in the case,
how to prevent the noise and scandal and great charge that was like to ensue
hereupon, and desired them to treat with the Young Woman's Father and Mother
about it, and to offer them a certain Sum of Money to free him from all future
charge from, or by reason of this business.

In Pursuance of this request, this Informant and his Friend addressed
themselves to the Young Woman, and to her Father and Mother. The Young Woman
with the greatest Asseverations and Protestations did affirm that she had never
lain with any man whatever, but the said Mr. Fox, and that he was the real
Father of the Child; then they came to a Treaty with her Father about
ascertaining the charge, and agreed that Mr. Fox, should Pay Thirty Pounds, to
be for ever discharged from the said Child, Part of which Sum was accordingly
Paid.

When they returned to Mr. Fox, and had acquainted him what Agreement they had
made for him, with the Father and Mother of the Young Woman, he seemed
exceeding well satisfied therewith, and returned them many Thanks, owning
himself very much obliged to them both, for their great care and pains in
transacting this Affair for him, and bringing it to an issue, so much to his
content.

Mr. Eures the Priest belonging to the Lord Aston's House, was abroad whilst
this business was in agitation, but returning in few days before all the said
30 l. was paid, was informed by Mr. Fox himself what agreement was made for him
by this Informant and his Friend as aforesaid.

Mr. Eures having thus understood the whole case, told Mr. Fox, that what he
had done was not sufficient to take off the Scandal from their Church; for to
his knowledge this story was much talked of abroad, and that with very severe
Reflections upon the Roman Catholics in general; and therefore as his Ghostly
Father, he would advise him what was to be done in order to the taking off so
great a scandal from their Church, and added, that he had consulted Mr. Peter's,
another Priest, about it; and that they were come to a Resolve what method
should be used; and therefore required him to prepare himself for Confession.

Accordingly Mr. Fox came to Confession to the said Mr. Evers, and owned the
whole matter as aforesaid; then Mr. Evers told him again, he still continuing
upon his knees, that the Scandal that was hereby brought to their Church and
Religion, was very great, and therefore for the taking it off, and preventing
further scandal for the future to their Church, to my Lord Aston, or to
himself, Mr. Peter's and he had agreed upon this course, viz. That he should go
immediately to his Lord Aston, and on his knees before his Lord and Lady, with
solemn Oaths and Asseverations, deny that he ever had any thing to do with the
said young Woman in that nature; and that he was altogether innocent of the
Crime laid to his Charge; and that after this he should go up to the Chapel
where the Congregation was met, and there in like manner deny it, with the like
Asseperations; and to confirm them in the belief of the Truth of it, he should
then before them receive the Sacrament. When Mr. Evers had finished these
Instructions, he gave him Absolution before he rose from his knees, telling
him, That if he observed these Instructions, he was absolved from the said
Crime, and therefore Innocent of it altogether and might so declare himself as
aforesaid. And for his further Penance, he enjoined him to visit the Chapel
once a day for the space of a a month next following, and to say such Prayers
as he should particularly direct therein: All which Instructions in every
particular the said Mr. Fox punctually observed. His Friend aforesaid being in
the Chapel when the things enjoined were done, viz. when he disowned the Face
with solemn Oaths, and received the Sacrament upon it; and did the Penance
enjoyced him.

After this Mr. Forces other Friend that had assisted in composing the Affair
with the Father and Mother, came to him, to know what care was taken about the
Payment of the Moneys, because he stood engaged for it, and supposed he should
be called upon for it; to which Mr. Fox answered, That what he had done since
that Agreement was by Mr. Evers his order, nor should he do any thing else but
by his advice; upon which his Friend repairs to Mr. Evers, and desires to know
of him what they intended to do, and when the money should be paid; Mr. Evers
answered, That what Mr. Fox had done in reference to the denying of the Fact,
was done upon nature deliberation, and good advice; and that it was the best
way that could possibly be proposed in that Affair, and that he should not need
further to concern or trouble himself about it; his Friend then told Mr. Evers,
that he stood engaged for the moneys, having promised to see it paid. and that
he was therefore in danger of being sued for it; to which Mr. Evers replies,
that he would take such effectual care about it, with the Lord Aston, that he
should not suffer thereby, and so he did, as appeared by the sequel; for the
Lord Aston soon after sent for the Father and Mother of the Young Woman, and
told them, that if they did not desist from spreading such a Report, that Mr.
Fox was the Father of the said Child, he would ruin them, to which the Father
answered, That it was not in his power to stop the said Report; nor was it any
thing but Truth, and Mr. Fox himself had confessed, that he was the Father of
the Child; at which refusal the Lord was very much incensed, and presently
ordered him to be deprived of several Profits that he enjoyed, as one of his
Lordships Tenants and Servants.

FINIS.
A Notice to the Reader.
THe Reader is desired to take notice, that though the Title mentions only the
name of Richard Perkin, and though he only made the Information upon Oath, yet
to make the Story Perfect, there is sometimes intermixed with it, what came to
the knowledge of the other Friend concerned with Mr. Perkin, who for some
reasons best known to himself, thinks fit to conceal his name, and is therefore
throughout the Information called only his Friend.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere are Published Animadversions on the Lord Staffords last Speech, plainly
Discovering the Fallacy of all his Asseverations of his Innocence; Price Sitcht
4. d.

As also an Account of the manner of his Execution, with several other Branches
of the Plot, lively delineated on a Large Copper-Plate; Price 4 d.


