A Perfect RELATION of the most Glorious and Entire VICTORY obtained by the
Christian Army (under the Command of the D's of Lorain and Bavaria) over the
whole Turkish Forces near DARDA, Taking all their BAGGAGE and CANON.
Brought by Express to his Excellency the Spanish Ambassador

August the 20th. 1687.

YEsterday Morning arrived a Flanders Male, which brought no Fresher Letters
than the 11th. from Vienna, there having been that Morning an Extraordinary
Courier arrived from the Imperial Camp, with Advice that the Duke of Lorrain
was Marched from Mohaez toward Darda, with full resolution (considering how
Important it was to the present Juncture of Affairs) by some Stratagem or
other, to oblige the Prime Vizier to a Battle. The said Courier reports, that
being a League on his way, Early in the Morning, he heard the Discharge of a
great many Cannon, and continued Vollies of Muskets; which gave subject to
believe, that the two Armies began to Engage. The Gentlemen of Horse of the
Marquess Castanaga, Governor of the Spanish-Netherlands, arrived at the same
time here, being sent Express to Don Pedro de Ronquilio the Spanish Ambassador,
to impart to him the Glorious Victory the Christian Army has obtained over the
whole Ottoman Force in Hungary, being 80000 Effective Fighting men, being
brought to Brussels by the Gentleman of Horse of the Marquess Burgamanero the
Spanish Ambassador at Vienna, and sent from his Highness the Duke of Lorrain by
the Prince of Savoy to the Emperor, doted from the Imperial Army in the
Turkish Camp near Esseck the 7th. of August 1687. Which for the Valor and
Conduct of the General, as well as the good of Christendom, shall give what
particulars can at present be obtained.

His Highness the Duke of Lorrain having since his re-passing the Drove, reach,
d his Bridge of Boats over the Danube at Mohaez, not thinking the Prime Vizier
would have abandoned his strong Retrenchments about Esseck, was about entering
upon the Design of Besieging some Strong hold the Turks yet possess in Hungary:
When Advice was brought him that the whole Turkish Army, with all their Cannon,
Baggage and Attirals of War, passed the Drove the 28th. of last Month, and
strongly Encamped themselves near Darda: On the 30th. the Duke of Lorrain held
a Council of War, where 'twas resolved, that 'twas absolutely necessary to
preserve their Conquest, to return, and Fight the Enemy, if they could be
possibly drawn to accept it; and secret methods were among the Generals
Concerted, how to induce the Turks to quit their Encampment, and Fight on equal
Terms. The Duke made a present Detatchment of 8000 Horse to cover Sycloss and
Five-Churches from the Insults of the Enemy, which lay most Exposed, and so
leaving his heavy Baggage behind him at Mohaez Mustered his Army, which did not
much exceed 40000 Men; the next day Marched toward the Enemy with easy
Journeys, not too much to Fateigue his Men, and Skirmishing with some Parties
of them in his passage; on the 4th. he came within a League and a half of their
Camp, and made Entrenchment, and finding that 'twas impossible to force them
from their Post: On the fifth sent a Detachment notwithstanding, to make a show
of Attempting it, who retired with some loss to the Camp. In the Night, the
Duke of Lorain caused the Elector of Bavaria with a considerable Body of the
Army, to draw out of the Camp, some one way and others another, as if they were
Retreating; which the Prime Vizier being advised of by his Spies, and believing
(through the disadvantage they were at the day before,) that the Christian Army
was retiring as they did, when they re-passed the Drove, seeing them separated,
by Six the next Morning, the Prime Vizier, before they were all Retreated, drew
out his Army from their Post, Attacqu'd the Christian Camp, thinking to have
eat them for a Breakfast; but they Valliantly maintained the Fight till almost
Noon, before the first Detachment (which was Marched some Miles round) fell in
upon their Rear; and soon after, another Body of Christians on their Flank,
which put them into so great a Consternation, seeing themselves Decoyed, that
they began to give ground, taking their Flight toward Esseck, and some
Thousands of them driven into the Drove; which, through the rapidness of the
Stream, were most of them Drowned; but in some places the Fight was very
Obstinate and Bloody, and continued till Ten at Night: But in conclusion, the
whole Army was Discomfited, the Christians being in a full pursuit after them,
they having entirely quitted the Field, leaving all their Cannon, Baggage, and
Attirals of War behind them, which is said to be full as Rich as their Camp
before Vienna. The number of the Slain are Computed to be 8000 on the spot, and
almost as many Drowned in the River, besides a good account will be had of the
Pursuit, which every Post for some time will bring us more particularly: The
Germans in this days Action, have so approved themselves for their Valor and
Conduct, as they will for ever be dreadful to the Turks, and the Success of the
Engagement being the Turks last Effort, will bring no small Advantage to the
Emperor. The Christian Army being not wholly returned from the Pursuit; There
is no certain advice of the loss on our side, but as it may be Computed, 700
some think a 1000 may be slain: And we do not as yet miss any Considerable
Officer of Note; but few of the Turks are made Prisoners, the Germans being so
Enraged for the Action of Esseck, as to give no Quarter.

POSTSCRIPT.
Just as this Happy News arrived, when the Emperors Affairs were thought to be
declining in Hungary; we received the joyful Advice, that the Venetians have
been also Successful in the Morea, General Morosini having landed his Army at
the mouth of the Gulf of Leponto, laid Siege to that Fortress, and after some
Resistance, made himself Master thereof.

London, Printed by N. T. 1687.


