THE REDEMPTION OF MANKIND, BY THE Passion of our Lord. A SERMON, PREACHED On
Palm Sunday at Kintbury, in the County of Berks.

By Jos. Perkins, late Vicar of Hill, in Gloucester-Shire.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall,
1692.

EPHESIANS. I. VII. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness
of Sins, according to the Riches of his Grace.
PAUL an Apostle of Jesus Christ, had no sooner planted a Church at Ephesus,
and sown the Seed of the good Word of God; but the Devil, who commonly Erects a
Chapel where God has laid the Foundation of his Church; like the Envious Man
in the Gospel, came in the absence of Paul, and instead of good Seed, cast
Tares amidst the Wheat, and infected the Ephesians with pernicious and
erroneous Opinions. St. Paul in his Preaching, defended the Doctrine of
justifying Faith: Afterward arose Jewish Seducers, which taught, that
Salvation was not only from Faith, but came by the observation of the Mosaical
Law. Our Apostle forbad the abuse of Christian Liberty; after this, there arose
Corrupters of the Gentiles, which persuaded the Ephesians, that Fornication,
Covetousness, and Drunkenness, were no Sins, but natural Inclinations. That the
Ephesians might avoid the danger of these malicious Instruments of Satan, Paul
writes an Epistle unto them, containing the confirmation of Doctrine, and the
information of Life; wherein he proves and directly manifests, that God's gifts
and graces proceed not from any merit of foreseen Work of ours, but from his
own Mercy and favorable Grace. And so, beginning with Election, which is the
cause of our rejoicing, that our Names are written in Heaven, Luke 10. verse.
20. be descends to our Redemption; where we are to consider, 1. The meritorious
Cause, in the first Particle of my Text, [ In whom.] 2. The subject of our
Redemption, in the word [We.] 3. The effect it self, and that specifically set
down, [Redemption,] even the forgiveness of Sins. 4. The manner how our
Redemption was effected, [through his Blood.] 5. The Cause moving our Redeemer
to this Act of Redemption, [according to the Riches of his Grace.]


1. Christ the second person in Trinity, the Son of God, and the Son of Man, is
the Savior of miserable, wretched, and damned Mankind; in whose Incarnation,
Life, Obedience, Passion, and Death, we have Redemption from the eternal
Sorrows of Death and Hell. This sacred Savior, consisting of a divine and
human Nature, being both God and Man, has by his Sufferings, reconciled God to
Man; whom Disobedience, the first and Mother of all Sins, had set at variance.
An Angel could not effect this Office of a Mediator; for an Angelical Nature
was not ordained for this Service: Man could not become Intercessor for Man;
for grant there should be such a Phaenix in the World, as a Man without Sin,
yet an infinite Nature was offended; therefore it must be an infinite and
divine Nature that must satisfy: Nevertheless, so Divine, as there must be an
union of Natures, that as Man trespassed, so Humanity must suffer. Indeed, the
efficient cause of our Salvation, is God the Father; but the meritorious cause,
is Christ our Mediator, by whom God effects all that he does. Our former
Integrity was so far from Redeeming us, that it was rather Ignominy to have had
it, and then to lose it; than having lost it, to glory we had it, Miserum est
fuisse. Christ is made to us, Wisdom, Justice, Sanctification, and Redemption:
Wisdom, because he has Revealed his Fathers Will; Justice, because he has
offered up himself a Sacrifice for Sin; Sanctification, because he has given
us his Spirit; Redemption, because he has appointed a day to vindicate and
free his Children out of the hands of Corruption, into the Liberty which is
Glorious. It is the Lord, strong and mighty, that has done these things for
us: For who is God, besides the Lord? and who is Mighty, save our God? 2 Samuel
22. verse. 32. Caesar said of the Gauls, in one Battle, They had overcome, if
the Romans had not been their Enemies: So we may truly say, That Hell, Death,
and Destruction, had swallowed us up quick, if Christ had not been our Captain,
and Enemy to Satan, and his Accomplices. Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away
the Sins of the World. A Lamb in Patience, but a Lion in Victory. That our
Faith may find a sure ground of Salvation in Christ, a Threefold Office of our
Mediator is considerable; two Offices of his Humiliation, and one of his
Exaltation.

The First Office of his Humiliation is Prophetical, whereby Christ instructs
his Church, and is thereby termed the Word and Orator of the Father. The Spirit
of the Lord God is upon me, therefore has the Lord anointed me: He has sent
me to Preach good Tidings unto the Poor, to bind up the broken Hearted, to
Preach Liberty to the Captives, and to them that are Bound, the Opening of the
Prison, Isai. 6. ver. 1. At sundry Times, and in diverse Manners, God spoke in
the old Time to our Fathers by the Prophets: In these last Days he has spoken
unto us by his Son, Heb. 1. ver. 2.

The Second Office is his Priesthood, Prophesied by King David, in his 110.
Psalm. ver. 4. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for
ever, after the Order of Melchisedek. He is that Priest, who offered up his own
Body for a Sacrifice for Sins. The Priest was the Sacrifice, because none other
could satisfy God, and the Sacrificer was the Priest, because no mortal Priest
was worthy to offer so precious a Sacrifice. He remains still a Priest, through
whose Intercession all our Sacrifices of Prayer and Thanksgiving are
consecrated unto God.

The last Office is his Kingly Office, foretold by David, Psalm. 89. ver. 6. and
prefigured by Solomon; Yet here we must not dream of an Earthly, but of an
Heavenly and Eternal Kingdom. Miserable Jews they are, that still expect a
Messiah to restore the Kingdom of Israel. He is the Hope of all the Ends of the
Earth, the Honor of the World, the common Joy of Men, that said, John 28.36.
My Kingdom is not of this World. By this Office, Christ triumphs over his
Enemies, and administers his Spiritual Gifts and Graces to us which are his
Members: Unto every one of us is given Grace, according to the Measure of the
Gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4. ver. 7. If you will see an excellent short Sum of
those Benefits which we have received in Christ, consider that we have our
Salvation in the Name of Christ, Gifts of the Spirit in his Anointing;
Redemption in his Passion; Absolution in his Condemnation; Satisfaction in his
Sacrifice; Mortification in his Grave; Newness of Life in his Resurrection;
Security, and enjoying all Good in his Kingdom. Now God's Justice is satisfied,
so that he is a just Judge; but not with any Satisfaction proceeding from
Sinners, but by the Death of his Son: So that he is a merciful Father to
usward. If for us the Son of God has fulfilled all Righteousness (who had no
need to undergo such Service for himself) should not the same Righteousness be
imputed unto us? Where any thing is in the Nature of Duty or Debt, it is at the
Discretion of him, to whom it is due, to accept one Man's Performance for the
Discharge of the other. Therefore Christ's Performance being acted in our Name,
we are the Subjects, and Partakers of Redemption.

2. Man invested with the Robes of Righteousness, disrobed himself of that
Dignity, and fell into a Sea of Misery. It is a Favor to have a Petition
Granted; but when we were plunged in our Sins, and wretched in our selves; when
we neither considered, nor requested a Mediator, God out of mere Mercy sent his
only Begotten Son to be a Ransom for many. God so loved the World, that he has
given his only Begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish,
but have Everlasting Life. John 3. ver. 16. Whatsoever Man had wrought in
himself, was Evil, and deserved eternal Punishment; But God had respect unto
his own Work, unto his Creature, unto Man, whom he himself had made. Man had
disfigured himself, but God had not forgotten to be Merciful: Melius judicavit
de malis benefacere, quam mala nulla esse permittere: He thought it more
agreeable to his Nature, to pardon Sinners, than to suffer no Sin, says St.
Augnstin. When the Citizens of Laurentum delivered to Romulus the Murderers of
certain Ambassadors, he notwithstanding let the Murderers depart, saying,
That one Murder was requited by another; for Tatius was killed for the Death of
those Ambassadors. [ Plot in Romulus.] Our Case is not much unlike the former;
we might be Indicted for Rebellion against the King of Heaven and Earth; But he
will not the Death of a Sinner: It is sufficient that one, even Christ Jesus,
dyed for our Disobedience; For with his Stripes we are Healed. Ah Sinful
Nation, a People laden with Iniquity, wicked Seed, corrupt Children, Isaiah 1.
ver. 4. All these Appellations agree to us all; yet so wide are the Bowels of
his Compassion enlarged, that he sends a Redeemer to us. St. Paul speaks in my
Text, in the first Person, saying, We have Redemption; [We] that is, the
Faithful of the Jews, in which Number I rank my self: And in the 13. Verse, he
extends the Benefit to the Gentiles also: Intimating, that they also, after
that they had heard the Word of Truth, were partakers of that Liberty,
purchased to the Praise of his Glory. We have Redemption, i. e. the Faithful,
God's Elect, which are the Members of Christ's Mystical Body. The Angels, which
fell from that pure Estate wherein they were Created, could never attain unto
it again; But such was the rich Favor of God toward Man, that he united
humane Nature to Christ's Divinity, and gave to Men that Dignity, to be called
his Sons. Shall we think, that God has endued Man with so many Excellencies
more, not only than any, but than all the Creatures of the World besides, to
leave them in such Estate, that they had been happyer if they had never been
born. We have a Righteous Judge, and rather than he proceeded in Rigor of
Judgment, he will provide a Sacrifice for himself, to be offered up in our
Names; and all the Benefit shall redound to us, and our Posterity. Yet all Men
are not Redeemed, but some of all sorts. Christ dyed sufficiently for all, but
effectually only for some. In his Death he intended a Price of such extent in
Value and Worth, as should be of Power to save all, and therefore should be
offered indifferently to all: But in his eternal Counsel and Love, he paid this
Price only for them, to whom in Love he intends Fruit and Benefit thereby.
There is a World of Men, of whom, John 17. ver. 9. Christ says, I pray not for
the World, but for them that thou have given me out of the World. If all Men
had the Gifts of Grace, and the Merits of Christ's Passion, where were God's
Justice? If no Man had Redemption, and Hope of Salvation, where were his Mercy?
Deus in sua Misericordia voluit omnes servare, and per Potentiam potuit, sed
non potuit per Justitiam. In his Mercy he might save all, but in his Justice he
could not. Neither is God the Cause why any Man does perish; For Christ was a
sufficient Sacrifice to save all Men: But Death and Destruction came from the
Incredulity and Unbelief of Men. As the Sun is in its self sufficient to
enlighten all Men; yet the Blind for want of Sight cannot enjoy the Use
thereof: So Christ's Death was a sufficient Ransom for all, but the Reprobate
(for want of Faith) cannot apprehend it. An easy Condition of so great a
Benefit: He requires us not to earn Peace, but to accept it of him: What could
he give more? What could he require beside of us? With Men, it is a good Rule
to try, and then to trust: With God, it is contrary: We must first Trust Him,
(as most Wise, Omnipotent, Merciful) and try Him afterward. Eusebius reports
an Answer of Thaddeus, one of the 70 Disciples, framed to Agbarus the Governor
of Edessa, in this manner: Because thou has greatly Believed in the Lord Jesus,
which sent me, therefore am I sent unto thee; But in Case thou believe in him,
[and in his Fathor,] as yet, thy hearty Petitions according to thy Faith thou
shall obtain. Agbarus answered, I have believed in him, and in his Father; To
whom Thaddeus replied; Therefore, in the Name of the Self-same Lord Jesu, I lay
mine Hand upon thee; Which when he had done, he forthwith was Cured of his
Malady, and delivered of the Pain that oppressed him grievously.

It is Faith that incorporates us into Christ's Body; it is Faith whereby we do
not believe generally our Salvation, which with the Papists, is to believe as
the Church does; but we believe particularly, and apply it to our Selves; as
St. Paul does in this Place, saying, We have Redemption; where he brings
Redemption home to his own Breast. Fides in Dei and Christi cognitione, non in
Ecclesiae reverentia jacet. Devils know the same things which we believe, and
the Minds of the most Ungodly may be fully persuaded of the Truth: But the
things which we believe, are by us apprehended not only True, but also Good,
and that unto us: As Good, they are not by them apprehended; as True, they are:
Whereupon it follows, that the Christian Man, the more he increases in
Faith, the more his Joy and Comfort abounds: But they, the more sure they are
of the Truth, the more they quake and tremble at it. Let us believe firmly,
that God is good unto us; if God has promised Eternal Life to those that walk
faithfully before him, let us believe his word, above all times; in Immortality
he has established a Dwelling for his Saints. Whosoever brings a wavering
Heart to God's Promises, the Sentence is pronounced against him: Because he
has not believed the Truth, he shall believe Lies, till Vanity wash away his
Years, and he fall into Eudless Destruction, 2 Timothy 2.9. Who will not believe,
since God has sealed those that are his. Signamus quae elegimus. Merchants set
their Seals on their Merchandise, which they would distinguish from others; but
their Seals are set for their own Gains: whereas God Seals us as a Loving
Father, to assure us of Everlasting Salvation.

I have spoken sufficiently of the Apprehension of Redemption: It is our
Apostles intent in this Place, to show how our Redemption was wrought in
Christ, by the Oblation of his Body, and Effusion of his Blood: Which
Redemption, according to our proposed Method, is now to be considered.

In the work of our Redemption, we see the manifold Wisdom of God: For in our
Creation, he only said, fiat, and it was done. But there be diverse courses in
Redemption, and turnings that seem almost Contradictory in his Eternal Decree;
He elected the Gentiles, yet at the Creation, he suffered them to be made the
Vassals of Satan: He promised Salvation to Adam, and his Posterity, by the Seed
of the Woman; and afterward he elected Abraham and his Seed, rejecting the
rest: He chose the Israelites for his People: Who would have thought that they
should be cut off, that we might be ingrafted? yet this is the Mercy of the
loving Lord, and it is marvelous in our Eyes.

This Redemption was wrought freely, in respect of us (says Bp. Sanderson)
none of our Money went to this Purchase: Not for Price nor Reward, Isa. 45. But
ye shall be redeemed without Money. The Meaning is, not that there was no Price
at all paid, but that there was none paid by us: We laid out nothing to this
great Purchase, there went none of our money to it: But otherwise, that there
was a Price paid, the Scriptures are clear: Ye are bought with a Price, says
St. Paul, 1 Cor. 6 20. and he says it over again, Chap. 23. He that paid it,
called it, (...), a Ransom; that is as much as to say, a Price of Redemption.
And his Apostle somewhat more, (...), Mat. 20.28 which implies a just and
satisfactory Price, full as much as the thing could be worth of any Man's Money:
Yet not paid to Satan, in whose Possession we were; for he was but an Usurper;
he had indeed the Dominion over us, but he had no right thereunto: He had but
bought of us, and we by our Sale could convey no more right to him, than we had
our selves, which was just none at all. Our Redeemer therefore would not enter
any Capitulation with him, or offer to him any terms of Composition; but
thought good rather, in pursuance of his own Right, to use his Power, and so he
vindicated us from him by main Strength; With his own right Hand, and with his
holy Arm, he has gotten himself the Victory, and us Liberty, without any Price
or Ransom paid him.

But then unto Almighty God his Father, and our Lord, under whose heavy Curse
we lay, and whose just Vengeance would not be appeased toward us, for our
grievous Presumption, without a condign satisfaction to him: I Say, there was
a Price paid by our Redeemer, and that the Greatest Price that ever was paid
for any Purchase since the World began, not Silver and Gold, says St. Peter, 1
Pet. 1.18. which being corruptible things, are not Valuable against our
immortal and incorruptible Souls; But even himself, in whom are absconditi
Thesauri, amassed and hidden all the Treasures of the Wisdom of God, and even
the whole Riches of his Grace, Coll. 2.3. Treasure enough to Redeem a whole
World of sinners, take it collectively or distributively, Singula generum, or
Genera singulorum; this way or that way, or which way you will, in Christ there
is Copiosa Redemptio, Plenty and enough for all, if they will but accept it,
take all Mankind singly one by one: He gave himself for me, says St. Paul, in
one place: Take them all together in the Lump, He gave himself a Ransom for
all, in another.

This Redemption is signified by this Word (...) and was most lively and
punctually prefigured by the Deliverance of the Children of Israel from
Pharaoh: Pharaoh there Representing the Devil; and Moses Representing Christ.
The Israelites were there delivered from the cursed Tyranny of Pharaoh. We are
freed from the Curse of the Law, from Blindness, from Sin, from Corruption,
which is the Punishment of Sin: We are so freed from this Death, that we cannot
be holden of it. From the First, We are freed by Christ's Obedience and
fulfilling the Law: From the Second, By the Preaching of the Gospel: From the
Third, By the Donation of Faith and Grace. From the last, At the day of the
Resurrection by God's Almighty Power. Christ, at his Coming, freed us from the
Ceremonial Law, the Performance whereof was only exacted till Christ was
exhibited. Ephesians. 2.14. For he is our Peace, which has made both one, and broken
the stop of the Partition Wall, in Abrogating through his Flesh the Hatred,
that is, the Law of the Commandments, which stands in Ordinances. Coll. 2.14.
Putting out the Handwriting of Ordinances, which was against us, which was
contrary to us, he even took it out of the way and fastened it upon the Cross.
They which were under the Law, were subject to that Terrible Gurse Pronounced,
Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed be he that confirms not all the Words of the Law to do
them. But we are freed from this strict Exactness and Rigor of the Law. Gal.
3.23. Christ has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for
us. We are still bound to observe the Moral Law; yet if we fail in Performance,
we are freed from the Rigor and Curse which it imposes; because Christ has
performed the Law in our Names: Ye are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans
6.14. What then, shall we sin because we are not under the Law, but under
Grace? God forbid. Ver. 15. Do we then make the Law of none effect through
Faith? God forbid; Yea, we establish the Law, Romans 3. Ver. 3. Libertines they
are, that under the Pretense of Christian Liberty, let loose the Reins to sin;
when as the Liberty tends to the Peace of Conscience, and to encourage us with
greater Alacrity to do good Works: Those which think themselves tied to the
strictness of the Law, are like unto Servants, which can do nothing Pleasantly,
because they know when they have done their Best, their good Works will be
imperfect. But Christians, being confident that Christ has satisfied the Law
in their behalf, are persuaded that their Obedience will be approved by their
indulgent Father; and therefore they offer unto him their best Works, as a
pleasing and acceptable Sacrifice, though imperfect.

And thus it behooveth us to do; for amidst those Terrors, where it is
doubted, whether God be offended with us, or reconciled to us in Christ, we can
never do any thing faithfully; for whatsoever is done doubtfully, is not of
Faith; and whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin. It is our Comfort and our
Wisdom, we care for no Knowledge in the World but this, that Man has sinned,
and God has suffered: That God has made himself the Son of Man, and that Men
is made the Righteousness of God: God Pours his Wrath upon all, as long as he
reputeth them Sinners: Behold! the Lord's Hand is not shortened that it cannot
save, neither is the Ear heavy that it cannot hear: But your Iniquities have
separated between you and God, and your Sins have hid his Face from you, that
he will not hear, Isa. 59.1, 2. Here we see Sin to be the Division between God
and Man; and Man is Enemy to God, till he be reconciled in Christ. Now God was
in Christ, and reconciled the World to himself, not imputing their Sins unto
them, and has committed unto us the Word of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19.
Redemption taken for the Remission of Sins, is all one with Justification: For
St. Paul expounds it in his Sermon, Acts 13. ver. 28. Through Christ is
Preached Remission of Sins, and from all things by which he could not be
justified by the Law of Moses, by him every one that believes is justified; we
are justified not by any inherent or infused Righteousness, but by imputed
Justice, and by Remission and Forgiveness of our own injustice. God looks on
his Servants as they are the Members of Christ, clothed with his
Righteousness. For, as Jacob did not deserve the Birthright in himself, and in
his own right, but received the Blessing and Inheritance in the Garments and
Apparel of Esau his Eldest Brother, to whom the same did properly belong; so
we receive the Blessing of God, and are accepted to Eternal Life in the Garment
of the Righteousness of Christ, for whose sake and sufferings God looks upon
our Sins with a discerning, (not a revenging) Eye. Howsoever our Sins cleave to
our Souls, let us hate them as we hate Hell; for thence they are, and the Devil
works them: Yet though they are many in Number, and grievous in their Nature,
our hopes are not in our own Persons, but in the Body of Christ, into which we
are Grafted, and in which there is no spot nor blemish but perfect
Righteousness: By this Perfection he has delivered us out of a more than an
Egyptian Thraldom; for we were liable to that Servitude and Punishment, where
Hell should be our Prison, the Devil our Jailer, Sin our Crime, our own
Conscience our Accuser, and perpetual Torments our Punishment. Thanks be to
God, who has given us Victory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. If Christ have
paid a Ransom for all; it follows, that all without Exception, even Mary,
Christ's Mother, were Captives, all Sinful, none absolutely Righteous in
themselves, but were absolutely Righteous in Christ. If one have died for all,
then all were dead in Sins; We are not to rejoice that we are Just, but that we
are Redeemed: Not that we are without Sin, but that our Sins are forgiven us.
For the first Man that was made, the first Man that was born, he sinned. Death,
which is the Punishment of Sin, seizes upon all, therefore all are Sinners.
And if we were not all Captives and Sinners, we should need no Redemption at so
high a rate, as through his Blood; which Blood, though it wash and purge us, yet
it does not take away the stain and infection of Sin, but only the Guilt
thereof: It makes us not to fulfill all the Law; but causes that which is not
done, to be pardoned. When thou have done all that thou can, nay, all that
thou would, nay, all that Men can or will say, Thou art an unprofitable
Servant, and have need to be washed with his Blood.

4. Blood is taken for the Effusion of his Blood, and it is spoken by a
Synechdoche, implying the Sacrifice and Oblation of his Body; and besides all
this, all the Sufferings which he endured in his abode upon Earth, which
Expiation was finished upon the Cross, when he said, Consumatum est. This
Sacrifice was paid unto God: For He it was, whom we offended; and He it was,
who had the Power to condemn us; therefore his Justice was to be satisfied. But
he paid nothing (as was said before) to the Prince of Darkness, who held us
Captive; but only broke his Power, and triumphed over his Kingdom with a mighty
and streached-out Arm. As soon as we were absolved, and reconciled to God, the
Tyrant was compelled (being but the Jailer) to restore us. God's Justice could
not be satisfied without the Effusion of this Blood: For Debts which do not
wrong the Majesty of the Owner, may be remitted without any Recompense or
Satisfaction; but those Debts which do detract from the Dignity of the Creditor
(as Sins are repugnant to the Majesty of God) cannot be released without a
Mediator. Now, as Adam makes us Sinners in his Seed, so Christ justifies us in
his Blood. The Israelites were instructed of Necessity to seek a Mediator by
the Priests Office; for they could not come to offer their Prayers, Vows, or
Gifts, but by the Mediation of the Priest, for whom it was unlawful to enter
into the Temple with empty Hands; but he must needs offer up Blood, or other
Sacrifice; all which Sacrifices were ended in Christ, whom they did prefigure,
being Types and Shaddows of the true Body. It is not possible, that the
Sacrificers should think their Salvation might be wrought by the Blood of
Sheep, or Goats, but expected a Lamb, sent from God, to be slain for the
People. Christ alone works in them, the Work of Man's Salvation: Our own
Works are rather the Fruits, than Causes of Redemption: For Men are not
therefore the Sons of God, because they do good Works; but they have the Grace
of God fructifying to good Works, because they are the Sons of God. As a
Princess invested with Kingly Ornaments, and thereby distinguished from Vulgar
Women, is not therefore the King's Spouse, because she is adorned with gorgeous
Apparel; but she is clothed with soft Raiment, because she is the King's
Spouse. We exclude good Works from Meriting, not from Being. Our own Merits and
Satisfactory Actions are excluded from free Remission of Sins: For he is said
to remit, who expungeth the Debtors Name without any Payment: And this is God's
own Testimony, that of mere Favor, he remits our Offenses. Isaiah 43. Ver. 25.
I, even I am he, that puts out thine Iniquity for mine own Sake, and will
not remember thy Sins. And let every Man's Conscience be at Peace with God,
when he is persuaded of that. We read, Isaiah 53.6. All we, like Sheep, have
gone astray; we have turned every one to his own Way, and the Lord has laid
upon him the Iniquity of us all. What Peace of Conscience, where Man's
Satisfaction is required? The least Satisfaction that can be imagined,
requires a Days Labor wherein it may be effected; and who can tell, how often
he offends in a Day? Then for the Satisfaction of one Days Sin, a whole Life is
not sufficient. Sufficit ad Meritum scire quod non sufficiant Merita, sed ut ad
Meritum satis est de Meritis non praesumere, sic carere Meritis, satis est ad
Judicium. [ Concerning Merits.] It is sufficient to know, that they do not
merit Heaven, but to want good Works, is sufficient for Condemnation. The Devil
does labor by Two Seducements to weaken our Faith: First, He would persuade
us, that good Works are the Cause and Means of our Salvation: If he cannot
succeed this Way, then under a Pretense of Faith, he would draw us from true
Obedience, and suggests it into our Minds: That if we have Faith, let us be
indulgent to all Affections, and commit all Offenses; yet Faith will bring us
to an everlasting Kingdom. But we are taught, that real Sanctity of Life is
never separated from a free Remission of Sins; and we, who are interressed by
Faith in the Right of Inheriting, by Works are wrought to the actual Possession
of eternal Bliss. Sanctification is a true and inseparable Companion of
Justification; For whom he has justified, them has he also sanctified. For
how can a Christian be persuaded that he is beloved of God, unless he be
certain that he loves God with an unfeigned Heart? And who can love God, who
is not willing to perform and obey his Will and Precepts? If ye love me, keep
my Commandments, says our Savior. Though we say, that Children or Infants may
be saved out of the Depth of Perdition, by the Depth of God's Mercies, without
the Works of the Law; yet let those, to whom the Lord has lent the length of
Days, think that he will exact an Account of their Stewardship, how they have
spent their Time, how they have employed their Talents, which he in his Mercy
had bestowed upon them.

Since our Redemption is of so high a rate, that Christ's Blood was shed for
it; since the Malady of Sin is so cruel a Disease, that nothing could cure it,
but the Death of the Physician, it behooveth us, who are washed with his Blood,
to look to our ways, and take heed of Unrighteousness. It is already manifest,
that our own Works are no causes of Redemption, but rather the Fruits thereof.

5. Now, let us fall a little into Consideration of the Passion of our Lord and
Savior Christ, and hear what great things he has done for us: And here I find
him Buffetted, Crowned with Thorns, Spit upon, Reviled, Blasphemed, Condemned,
Executed, Dead and Buried. Civis Romanus sum, was enough to save a Citizen from
Scourging; and so St. Paul tryes the Experience of it. Yet Christ, that was
Lord of Heaven and Earth, and the only Door by which we enter, and are made
free Citizens of the new Jerusalem, he was Whipped; Who but our Savior would
have spent his Blood for our Sakes? Who but our Savior could have satisfied
for our Sins, and renewed us by his Spirit, conferring infinite Graces upon us,
when we lay Dead in Sins and Trespasses? Who but our Savior could get Life
into us, and that by the sprinkling and shedding of his most Precious Blood;
like the Pelican, which is a Symbol of Christ? Plutarch reports, That the
Senate durst not accuse Caesar for conspiring with Cataline, and his
Confederates, against the State; for if Caesar had been convented, he would
sooner have saved others, than have suffered himself. In like case, it was an
Happiness for us, that Christ was Indicted for our Sins, who was able to repel
all the fiery Darts of Satan, and to Triumph over him that had the Power of
Death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 2.14. A Mystery it is, that our Savior should
vanquish both Death, and the Devil, by Death, which proceeded from the
Maliciousness of the Devil; that he should make the Devils Glory his shame, his
Power, his Overthrow, his Kingdom, his Undoing. What could the Prophet David,
in all his Zeal for God, wish more against reprobate Men, Traiterous to Christ
and his Gospel, than thus to wish: Let their dainty Tables be Snares to take
them, and let their Prosperity be their Ruin. Even thus Christ has vanquished
the Devil: He has spoiled Principalities and Powers, and has made a show of
them openly, and has Triumphed over them in the same Cross.

Behold Christ once again, and consider Dilectionem in discendendo,
Mansuetudinem in Patiendo, Fortitudinem in animose Perferendo, Vtilitatem in
mala Poenae et Culpae auferendo. All the Punishments which we had deserved,
were inflicted upon our Mediator, and he has quit the Score: So whatsoever
Afflictions befall the Godly in this Life, they are not Punishments, but
Fatherly Chastisements and Corrections for our Humiliation and Amendment: Yea,
Death her self is spoiled of her Sting, and is become to the Godly, only a
passage into a more Blisful Life. The Afflictions of the Wicked in this Life,
make them readier for greater Torments in the World to come; for they tend only
to revenge, but the Corrections of the Godly, make them afterward more
Cautelous, and tend to their Instruction. Saul was punished by the taking away
of his Kingdom: David was amended by the loss of his Child. Ferulis Verberantur
Filij, non ut mulctam delictorum Deo persolvant, sed ut inde ad Resipiscentiam
proficiant; as Judicious Calvin has it. When we lay struggling in the midst of
all Miseries; Let us remember what our Jesus has done for us; and then it will
be to us, as we have believed.

The Heathen Philosopher could say, None is of Strength to raise himself, some
Man must lend his Hand, and then he shall be lift up. The Mind of Man cannot be
without some Refuge; and (as we say of the Elephant) cannot rest, unless it
has something to lean upon: Let Christ be our rest, which is the chief
Cornerstone of his Church, and we shall never fall; and let us so rest, that
we be not idle, but obedient to his will, and fructifying to good works.
Themistocles said of himself, That the Athenians used him like the Plane-Tree,
to which, in a Tempest, they ran for Succor; but the Storm being passed, and
fair Weather succeeding, they tear down his Leaves, and tread on them. Let it
not be so said of you, who finding no other Remedy for your afflicted, burdened
Conscience, but the Merits of Christ's Passion, his Mediation; but when the
Storm is past, and you begin again to find in your selves, that Peace of God
and Conscience, which Passes all Understanding, you should return again with
the Dog and Sow to the Vomit, and trample under feet the Blood of the New
Testament, and make a mock of the Passion of Christ, who was so kind for you,
as to pay all those huge Sums, wherein you stood bound to God; and that without
either Price or Prayers of ours, but according to the Riches of his Grace: Our
Election into the Adoption of his Sons, was (...), according to the good
Pleasure of his Will; and according to this Election, all the Graces that are
bestowed on us, are freely wrought in us, and derived to us from the Rich
Overflowing Fountain of his Grace. The mere Love of God to Mankind, is the
cause why we are adopted to be his Sons. Man, miserable and forlorn Wretch, had
nothing to please God with all, but was ashamed to appear before his Sight; yet
God reflected upon himself, and finds in his own All Sufficiency his glorious
Love, which he makes the cause of Man's Salvation: Christ is the (...), and
Price of our Redemption, the Foundation and meritorious cause of our Salvation:
But he is not the impulsive or efficient Cause of our Adoption: Only the Love
of the Father is the Cause thereof: God so loved the World, that he sent his
only Begotten Son, Joh. 3.16. It is lawful for him to do with his own what he
pleases: To some he shows himself in Mercy, to others in Judgment: from both
he reaps his own Glory. And let no Man reason [if Men be saved, good Works
cannot further them; if they be not in the state of Grace, bad cannot make them
worse:] for the Ways of the Lord are past finding out, and none is his
Privy-Counsellor. Who dare call God to account? It is better, by humbling our
selves, to be conformed, then Blasphemously to pry into God's secret Counsels.
Our Apostle, to amplify God's Favors, mentions the Riches of his Grace: It
was favor, that he Redeemed us; but that he effected this Redemption by the
Blood of his only Begotten Son, proceeds from the Riches of his Grace. For God
finding nothing in Man, that could move him to compassion, but Misery; out of
his tender Mercy sent his Son to Redeem us: I will heal their Rebellion, I will
love them freely, for mine Anger is turned away from Sin. And most lovingly He
bespeaks us, Isay 55.1. Ho! every one that thirsts, Come ye to the Waters;
and ye that have no Silver, Come, Buy and Eat: Come, I say, Buy Wine and Meat
without Silver, and without Money. This is his free Grace, by which he does
work in us: This is the Grace, whereby he does Regenerate us; To the Praise of
the Glory of his Grace, whereby he has made us freely acceptable in his
Beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.

Beloved, what manner of Men ought we then to be? We are grafted, and made
Members of Christ's Body. Shall the Head be Pure, and shall the Members remain
Unclean? We are called out of the Kingdom of Satan, into the Kingdom of God;
out of Darkness, into his mavelous Light: Let us walk worthy of the Vocation
whereunto we are called. He has placed us in a Kingdom; He has made us his
Sons, and therefore he gives us his Inheritance; not as a Stipend or Reward of
mercenary Works, but as a free Fatherly Blessing and Benediction. Since we are
Inheritors of this Kingdom, let our own vile Affections be our Servants, and
let them have no Power over us. When God commanded the People Obedience, he
incited them thereunto by a Preface, containing the delivery of them out of
Egypt; so that, they knowing him to be the Author of Liberty, might serve him
with greater Alacrity. Greater Liberty than we have, no Man ever attained unto:
Let us fashion our selves to be like our Redeemer in all humbleness of Mind,
and Meekness, Long-suffering, Supporting one another through Love; And after
all Conflicts with Errors and Darkness, yea, with the Prince of Darkness, the
Devil and his Associates; you shall find rest in God, yea, rest unto your
Souls, far from Troubles: Through this World, as through the Wilderness, he
will bring you to the Heavenly Canaan, which flows with Eternal Bliss and
Happiness:

Whither God, of his abundant Mercy, bring us, for his precious Death and
Passions Sake, AMEN.

FINIS

