(...) Honorable,
I Am your Cousin, (though a Prisoner) descended from the Body of (...) Percy
5th. Earl of Northumberland; By which Descent I am Cousin and next Heir-male to
Josceline Percy your Father the late and 11th. Earl of Northumberland,
Deceased. A Prison is a Grave for Men alive; But when Naboth was stoned to
death, then Ahab took postession of the Vinyard, 1 Kings. 21.18. And walking in
the Garden among the Beds of Pleasure, then God sent his Prophet Elias, to tell
Ahab of his Transgression, (notwithstanding he was a King.) Ezekiel 46.18. When
Belshazzar wat quaffing in the Gold and Silver Vessels of the Temple, then
appeared the Handwriting upon the Wall, Dan. 5. When your late Husband the
Lord Ogle went about to assume the name of Percy, and to have the Percies Lands
settled upon him by Act of Parliament, then God called him to Account;
Therefore let Your Ladyship to Justice speedily, and submit to Truth in Time,
for fear God calls You to Account also. I believe Your Servants and Agents have
rendered Me to You to be a Monster, and not a Man; Be not too subject to Believe
Them, but see with your own Eyes, and hear with your own Ears; and admit Me into
Your preserice, for I have something to offer (...) will add Fame to Your
Honor, and Rank You with those Two Worthy Women of our Family, the Lady Agnes
Percy, who preserved the Percies Name, and the Lady Lucy, that settled the
Estate upon the Heirs Males of the Percies for ever; And for ever that Estate
must attend the Title; And the Fines can never be recovered but by the true
Heir-Male of the Percies Mr. Gee can inform You (if he pleases,) how I was at
Petworth in the Year 1654. And then, and there made my Claim as I do now; And
before Mr. Clark's Trial, Your Agents, with their Council, would have owned Me
to be the next Heir, and would have assisted Me for the Title with their Books,
Pedigree and Records: And also how I met with Mr. Champian and Mr. Gee at
Doctor Lampley's House, and there made out my Pedigree clear, only I could not
find out my Great Grandfathers Name; First, it was a very hard Name; And
Secondly, Mr. Champian kept it secret till he was forced to declare upon his
Oath, that Sir Ingelram Percy was Married, and had Sons and Daughters, at Sir
John Coppleston's Trial for Cannington and Rodaway Lands in Somersetshire.
Thirdly, The Heralds had altogether neglected the Collateral Line of the
Percies. Now all my Aim is really to beget a right understanding, so that I may
remain,

Your Ladyships Real, Cordial, and Faithful Kinsman, and most Humble Servant,
JAMES PERCY.


What I have to declare to your Ladyship is not convenient to be oommitted to
writing, but assure your self it really tends to your present Welfare, and
future Peace and Prosperity.

An Answer will find me in the Kings-Bench-Rules, at the Written Table at
Captain Dancer's House in Lombard Street, near the Bowling-green, in the
Borough of Southwark.

This Letter was presented the day of the date hereof, and the Claymant has
printed it, that the world may see that a true Percy is not ashamed of his
Innocent and Just Cause, nor afraid of his Potent Opponents; For he whom I
trust in, is grower than they, 5 Eccles. ver. 8.

NOw in these our days there is no Prophet God, Michaia, Elijah, nor
Interpreters of Dreams, like Joseph and Daniel, that dares presume to speak to
Kings as they did in those days.

Therefore James Percy, the true Heir male of the Percies, Earls of
Northumberland, humbly makes bold with the Prophet Ezekiel, cap. 46. ver. 18.
Moreover the Prince shall not take of the Peoples Inheritance by oppression,
but he shall give his Sons Inheritance out of his own Possession, that my
People be not scattered every man from his Possession.

(...) to that purpofe His Majesty ordered (...) willing to go to the Attorney
General, to (...) which the Clavmants Solicitor, Mr. Thomas (...) Attorney,
General said, He could not sign Percie's (...) for the Countess of
Northumberland. And the (...) dethize the Claimant in his Proccedings, and to
(...) on and been sheltered under Privilege, which has (...)

And from that time Mr. Swayn (the Glaymant (...) two sticks^ for whilst James
Percy was prosecuting (...) Ejectments in the North, the Solicitor had
contrly'd the (...) were begged, disposed and scattered before the Claymant,
(...) Co-warrant, with other Writings, was lost, which cost a considerable
(...) then arrested his Clyent James Percy in three several Suits at Law, wh^
continued three years; But the Solicitor Swayn was overthrown in all the 3
Actions; more (...) the Claymant James Percy was those travels poisoned at
New Castle, arrested at York in two Actions of 20000 l. each A (...) then durst
not proceed at Law, but let the Actions fall, and (...) 40 s. Cost, a poor
(...) for a night and two days Imprisonment, and maintaining my two Men and
three Horses, besides the Charge of spunging Bums; And the Actions were in the
Lord of Essex, and Mr. Clark, and others Names: And to fill up the measure of
malice, they published in the English Gazette, and the French Gazette, That the
Claymant was an Impostor; And Mr. Blackston said in all these Courts, That the
Claymant's Name was not Percy, but declared him to be a Bastard; with many more
scandalous wordr, which were proved at that Trial before the Lord Chief Justice
Scroggs, notwithstanding he discharged Mr. Blackston and Sir George Jeffreys at
that Trial, took Fees on both sides, so the Claymant James Percy was clearly
bought and sold, and proved to his Damage 12000 l. Besides, it was the occasion
of this his present Imprisonment, upon the Writs of Error that were so
strangely dismissed the House of Lords without any Hearing; notwithstanding the
renewing and continuing after every Prorogation, cost in all above 300 l. And
now the Claymant James Percy has used all ways and means possible, (as by his
Petition and public Prints appears) and cannot proceed further without the
Assistance of the Honorable House of Commons. His Majesty is much troubled,
and the Claymant really believes that His Majesty had a cordial Desire to he^^
and see the Cause determined, as by His coming up to the Bar of the House of
Lords, that day the Hearing should have been had. Besides, His Majesty may
perceive, I shall never leave my Claim, till Justice be done, by reason I now
know it is my Right by Birth and Blood, and that the sole power of creating and
preserving Honor rests in His Royal Breast, as Flowers in the Crown: And by
the Coronation Oath, the King cannot take Titles from one Peer, to give to
another Peer. But as God has in mercy restored His Majesty to His Crown and
Kingdoms, even so ought the King in Justice to restore every Loyal Subject to
the Birthright, Title and Inheritance of his Ancestors. It was very hard at
first for the Claymant to find out the Name of his great Grandfather, by reason
he was in his Childhood brought up amongst his Mothers Relations; And in the
troublesome times (he being a Royallist) was forced to abscond and travel for
many years, (...) But the Adversaries did wildernize the Claymant, in hiding
his great Grandfathers Christian Name from him: For Sir Ingelram Percy was the
Claymant James Percie's Great Grandfather, and youngest Son of Henry Percy 5th.
Earl of Northumberland; and this Collateral Line was never attainted; and
therefore ought to be restored according to Henry Percy the 5th. Earls Patent,
and not under the Patent of the New Creation by Queen Mary for Thomas Percy,
2d. Son of the 5th. Earl, was attainted, but Sir Ingelram Percy 3d. Son was
Innocent, and so has his Issue continued to this day: And therefore prays for
speedy Justice: Justice removes oppression, Glorifies God, Honors the King,
Rejoices the People, puts an end to your troubles, and ratifies Peace, for
which the Petitioner prays.

For Henry Percy, 5th. Earl, Great Great Grandfather, had Sir Ingelram Percy,
Great Grandfather, who had Henry Percy Grandfather, and he had Henry Percy
Father of the Claymant.

JAMES PERCY.



