man on a horse Behold A Prince Renownd In Peace and Arms.
whose name and Fame the world with wonder Charms.
The Be^gian Glory and Great Britains Joy.
who saved the Dear Palladium of our Troy.

P. P. Beu^ho Soul:


The Perfection of Military Discipline After the Newest Method, As Practiced In
England and Ireland, etc. OR, The Industrious SOLDIERS Golden Treasury of
Knowledge in the Art of making WAR.

CONTAINING, Instructions for the Exercising the Pike and Musket in all their
Postures, with the Signs of the Drum, by its beating the several Points of War,
the Exercise of Granadeers, Horse, and Dragoons: The Explanation of the Words
of Command, and how to be put in Practice: The manner of drawing up in several
forms of Battle: The various Fireings and Advantages to be gained thereby: The
several Doublings, Wheelings, and drawing up of Battalions, Squadrons of Horse,
etc. with the conduct of Armies in open or enclosed Countries, or upon any
occasion or Immergency: How the detached Party and Officers, etc. ought to
carry themselves; several ways off of Incampment, opening difficult Passes,
taking Castles, passing Bridges, opposing Towns, or Fortresses. The Method to
be observed in Garrisons, and the manner of Fortification, with that of
befieging strong Holds, etc.

To which is added, as a Second Part.

The Art of Gunnery, or the Complete Engineer, showing the Practice of the
Ordnance, Mortars, etc. with the manner of making and using Fireworks for War,
at Sea and Land, and many other things necessary to be known for the
Improvement of Soldiers.

London: Printed for Nicholas Boddington, at the Golden Ball in Duck-Lane, 1690.

Lisenced according to Order.

October. 12. 1689.
THE PREFACE.
THE Profession of Arms has in all Ages been in such Esteem, that the Great Men
of the World have made it their Study; Emperors and Kings have preferred the
Name of a Soldier above the rest of their Glorious Titles, and indeed, the
Sword is properly the Bullwark of a Kingdom, without which the Laws would prove
weak and ineffectual; for did not the Violaters fear that Power, which is of
force to compel them to undergo the Penalties of the Laws, they would esteem
them but a dead Letter: And to speak more plain, The Soldier is the Guard of
Liberty, Property, and what ever is dear to Mankind, as being at all times
ready to sacrifice his Life for the Defense of his Country; nor are the
Advantages small that may incite men to the study of the Military Art, for it
is often seen, that Persons of mean Birth and Fortune, have by their Courage
and Industry become great Commanders; and many times Generals of Armies:
Courage indeed, is a great Qualification in the profession of Arms, but without
Experience it frequently does hurt, and rarely raises a man to any considerable
Station; but joined with Experience, and kept within bounds, it wants but
Opportunity to make him Eminent, though many Books of this kind have appeared
in the World, yet being either of an extraordinary Price, or wanting somewhat
new, and necessary to be known, we thought fit, especially for the Instruction
of young Soldiers, to compile in a small Volume such a Body of Military
Disciplined, etc. as at this time is Practical, and approved by the great
Captains of the Age, that they may be able to understand their Duty, and
perform it with Exactness and Dexterity; so that being well grounded in the
most necessary and honorable Art, their Courage, Zeal, and Loyalty, may not
only frustrate the Projects of our Enemies abroad, and at home, but render
these Kingdoms Dreadful to our Neighbors, and Happy in themselves.

The Perfection of MILITARY DISCIPLINE After the Newest Method, As Practiced In
England and Ireland, etc.
THE most promising things to Preferment in this great Art, are Valor and
Obedience, for it is not only very commendable when occasion offers to fight
Valiantly, but likewise to obey Patiently, the latter being looked upon as a
great Virtue; to these Experience acquired by Labor, and Industry being
joined, Difficulties will the easier be overcome; a man may indeed, a long time
bare Arms, and yet be ignorant in many things he ought materially to know; but
an Industrious Mind will accomplish much in a short time.

There are several things in the Military Art to be considered, and in the
first place, those properly called the Senses, by which we receive
Advertisement, as the Eye and the Ear; and in this case a strict Observance,
and Silence is required, that the one and the other may not be mistaken. The
Signs used in War, are commonly three, viz. The Voice which conveys the word
of Command to the Ear. The Trumpet or Drum which by certain Sounds and Beats
give notice to the Cavalry and Infantry what is to be done. And the last is,
The Hand Colors, or other Signs which inform the Eye; and these are called
Vocal Semi-vocal and Mute, and these must be perfectly understood, or else by
mistake, or not knowing what to do, a Soldier may run into great Error,
especially in Battle, loosing himself, and being the occasion of the loss
others: But of this more hereafter.

When it happens that a Regiment has the word of Command to draw out, then
ought the Major, or Adjutant, to Assign each Company its proper Post, and this
must be done by placing the eldest Company upon the Right, and the next to that
on the Left, and so in order to the youngest, who by this means will come into
the Center, and every Company or Body of Men are to be drawn up in the
beginning at the same order they march at, as well in Rank, as File, the single
Companies always taking notice to leave so much room as the Sergeants and Drums
may place themselves in, on the Right and Left of each Company: Then observe
before you form your Battalions, to draw up from every Company the odd Men,
forming in Opposition a Rank at fifty paces in distance from the head of each
Company, that no broken Files may appear; and by this means with more speed and
dexterity you may complete the Files.

The Battalions may be formed, the Companies disposed in order as aforesaid by
these words of Command, viz. 1. Have a care to form the Battalion. 2.
Musketeers, to the Right and Left outward. 3. Pikes, to the Right and Left
inwards. 4. March interchanging Ground. Upon the interchange of Ground by the
Pikes and Musketeers; the first Rank of Pikes must pass before the first Rank
of Musketeers: And it ever is to be noted, That after Command for moving of
any kind, no man stir till the word March be uttered, so that they may move
jointly, and not break the Order.

The Ground being changed, the Soldiers must forbear to face to their Leaders
till they be so commanded, which done, they are in Battalia at close Order in
File; and the Officers in this case must have a regard to the whole, as not
limited to their particular Companies, and the Commandant must take notice how
many Sergeants are present, and if the Battalian contain eight or ten
Companies, or a bigger number, and every Company two Sergeants, and three
Corporals designed to do the duty of Sergeants, two must necessarily be placed
on each Rank, to the Right and Left, and the others must have their Stations in
the Rear; but if the Sergeants be not so many, then there will be allowed but
one to each Rank, to the Right and Left, and the rest in the Rear, making a
Parallel Rank to the Soldiers, keeping three paces distance from the Rank.

The Sergeants thus placed, the Drums must stand one half on the Right, and the
other half on the Left, that they may range directly with the first Rank of the
Soldiers; but if the Drums be more than usual, and the ground be straight,
then they may be disposed in two Ranks, on the Right and Left, ranging with the
two first Ranks of Soldiers ever slinging their Drums, unless contrary Command
be given. The Hoitboys, if there be any, are to take the right of the Drums
which are on the right of the Battalion ranging with them in the same Ranks.

The Commission Officers, according to the English Military Discipline, are to
take their places at the head of the Battalion, as the Colors are drawn; but
more of this hereafter. In this close Order, the Ranks, by the care of the
Sergeants, are to have twelve large Feet distance between Rank and Rank, which
must be kept very even, the Chief Commandant to place himself about forty paces
distant from the Center of the Pikes.

As to the words of Command, they must be given with deliberation, least
commanding too fast put the Soldiers beside their Exercise; Silence being
commanded, the next word of Command is,

Files, open to the Right (or to the Left) to your Order. March.

At these words each Soldier turns to the hand mentioned, and after a short
stand the Flanking Searjeants lead the Ranks (which by this means are Files)
marching slowly forward by short steps; the Sergeants with advanced Halberts,
the Iron uppermost: every man, if they move to the Right, observing the
left hand man, if to the Left, the contrary, and as soon as the last man but
one of the first Rank stirs, the Command is to be given for them all to Halt.
And in proceeding to open Files after this manner, no man ought to move till
his Leader be at four foot distance, and then to move with equal pace and keep
the distance, so that when faced to the proper Front, there will be three foot
space between them: The word of Command to Halt being given; the word of
Command succeeding is,

To your Leader.

In this case the Captains and Lieutenants are to carry their Pikes comported
ever when they move to the Right, or Left; the Ensigns being Advanced, the
Ranks must also be kept even at twelve feet distance, which is the Sergeants
Care, the Files must be likewise at three feet distance, each having regard to
his right and left hand man.

To draw the Officers from the Front of the Battalion to the Rear; these words
must be used, viz.

Have a care of the Exercise.

Upon this the Musketeers are to draw off their right hand Gloves; and stick
them in their Girdles. The next words are, viz.

Officers take your Posts of Exercise in the Rear. March.

Upon this the Officers must face to the right-about, the Captains marching a
pretty swift pace in the one Rank, and the Lieutenants and Colors in another,
two paces behind; Captains and Lieutenants, carrying their Pikes Advanced;
being in the Rear, the Lieutenants and Ensigns are to take their places in a
Rank about twelve feet from the Sergeants; the Captains ought to be thirteen
paces from the last Rank of Soldiers, and the Lieutenants and Colors eleven;
and at this word of Command, or further signal from the Officers to take their
Posts of Exercise in the Rear, six Sergeants of the Rear must march thorough
the Intervals of the Files, posting themselves in the Front forty six paces
from the first Rank of Soldiers, being advanced six paces before the Chief
Commandant, making by their ranging, a parallel Line with the Battalion,
keeping the Front free, and undisordered. This word being likewise given, the
Pike men must join their left-hands with their Pikes, placing them even with
their Shoulder.

We suppose the Musketeers to have Shouldered, and the Pikes Advanced, none
are to speak after Silence is Commanded, but the Officer in Chief who thus
proceeds,

1. Order your Pikes. 2. To the Right, to the Right, to the Right, to the
Right, to the Right-about, as you were; To the Left, to the Left, to the Left,
to the Left, to the Left-about, as you were.

Words of Command for the Exercise of the Fire-Lock and Pike.
1. MVsqueteers, have a care of the Exercise, and carry your Arms well. 2. Lay
your right hands on your Muskets. 3. Poise your Muskets. 4. Rest your Muskets.
5. Cock your Muskets. 6. Guard your Musket. 7. Present. 8. Fire. 9. Recover
your Arms. 10. Half bend your Muskets. 11. Clean your Pans. 12. Handle your
Primers. 13. Prime. 14. Shut your Pans. 15. Blow off your loose Corns. 16. Cast
about to Charge. 17. Handle your Chargers. 18. Open them with your Teeth. 19.
Charge with Powder. 20. Draw forth your Scowerers. 21. Shorten them to an Inch.
22. Charge with Bullet. 23. Ram down Powder and Ball. 24. Withdraw your
Scowerers. 25. Shorten them to a Handful. 26. Return your Scowerers. 27. Poise
your Muskets. 28. Shoulder. your Muskets. 29. Order your Musket. 30. Pike-men,
take heed. 31. Advance your Pikes, to the Front, Charge. 32. To the Right,
Charge. 33. To the Right, Charge. 34. To the Right, Charge. 35. To the Right,
Charge. 36. To the Right-about, Charge. 37. As you were, Charge. 38. To the
Left, Charge, 39. To the Left, Charge. 40. To the Left, Charge. 41. To the
Left, Charge. 42. To the Left-about, Charge. 43. As you were, Charge. 44.
Advance your Pikes. 45. Shoulder your Pikes. 46. Charge to the Front, 47. As
you were, Charge to the Right, as you were. 84. Charge to the Right-about. 49.
As you were, Charge to the Left, as you were. 50. Charge to the Left-about. 51.
As you were. 52. Port. 53. Comport. 54. Charge to the Front. 55 Trail your
Pike. 56. Charge as you were. 57. Advance your Pikes.

When you Exercise thus, it must be done altogether, and not one after another,
that a whole Battalion may seem to do but one and the same Action. Then to
proceed further, viz. Musketeers take heed. Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your
Muskets. Musketeers, make Ready; at which time all the Postures of the Musket
are to be performed by the Musketeers together, which readiness imploys a
Cocking, which must be guarded with the Thumb, least it should go off
unseasonably, and the Muskets brought straight before them, with the left hands
a little above the Chin. The Pike-men at the word, Make Ready, are likewise to
bear their Pikes straight before them, and recover their left hands the height
of their Ears, both of them observing when they come to this Posture, to
recover their Arms before them, that they bring their right Heels to their left
Insteps; and when the Pikes Charge, and the Musketeers rest, to retire, or
fall back with the right Feet in a direct Line, observing in all Chargings, or
Motions of the Pikes or Muskets, to take care that they clatter not one against
another.

An Explanation of the Words of Command or Postures, in Exercising the
Fire-Lock, Musket, and how they must be performed.
WHen you enter upon Exercise, whether it be of Pike or Musket, you must
observe to keep your at Feet a moderate distance, that you may upon occasion
retain your full Force and Strength, ever keeping the left Heel firm, and set
the right Feet: But as to the Exercise.

1. Lay your right Hand on your Musket.

In this Action the Lock being uppermost, turn your Barrel toward you, and
your Fingers being extended, lay your right Hand just behind the Lock, then
close the butt end of your Musket to your Shoulder, so that it may in all parts
be of an equal height.

2. Poise your Musket.

Here you must hold your Musket with a hard grasp, facing to the Right, and
turning with a quick motion upon your left Heel, keeping your Musket exactly
before you, the height of it between your Shoulders, your right Elbow on your
side, and your Feet at a moderate distance, that turning about, the point of
your left Toe may be to the Front, and that of your right, as you face to the
left Heel, being directly against the middle your right Foot; and so are you in
a resting Posture, etc.

3. Rest your Musket.

In performing this, let your Musket slide, or sink down to your left hand,
letting down your Arm as low as possible, without stooping, receiving the
Musket directly where the Scowerer enters into the Stock, suffering your hand
to touch no part of the Barrel; let it be a little stooping from perpendicular
about half a foot from your side, keeping your right hand with your fingers
extended behind the Lock.

4. Cock your Musket.

In this doing, place the Thumb of your right Hand and your Finger behind the
Trigger, and clapping it against your Thigh, Cock, keeping for the better
security your Thumb upon the Cock.

5. Guard your Musket.

In Guarding your Musket, bring it in the foregoing Posture with a very quick
motion straight before you to the Recover, your left hand equal with your Mouth
but about half a foot distance, not stooping, nor suffering your Musket to
sink, observing in bringing up the Musket, before which is a Recovering, to
make the right Heel come to the left Instep, keeping your Musket right
perpendicular.

6. Present.

In this case, fall back with your right Leg, so that the left Heel be against
the middle of the right Foot, suffering the butt end to rise to you Shoulder,
setting it fast, your right Elbow even with the height of the Piece, being ever
ready to pull the Trigger with the fourth Finger of your right Hand, bending
the left Knee a little, and keeping the right very steady, levelling breast
high.

7. Fire.

Here you must keep true motion in drawing the Trigger, doing it all together,
so that the Fire of a Battalion may give but one Report, or appear to be no
more than one Flash, the body steady, and the Musket close to the Shoulder till
the next word of Command, which is,

8. Recover your Arms.

Hereupon suffer the butt end of your Musket to sink in both hands, till it be
perpendicular, the right under the Cock, and the left as high as your Mouth
always upon a Recovery, bringing it up before you upon a very quick motion,
turning the right Heel, so that it may come up with the left Instep.

9. Half bend your Musket.

With your right Leg fall back, let the Muskets rest at once, the right Thumbs
being upon their Cocks, and the right Fingers behind their Triggers, then
closing to the Thighs half bend, with your right hands placed behind the Lock,
keeping them rested with fingers extended.

10. Clean your Pan.

This you may do by pressing the ball of your Thumb into the Pan, holding the
right hand behind the Lock, that the posture may the better appear.

11. Handle your Primer.

In doing this, take the little end between your Thumb and Finger, turning the
great end to the back of your Hand, your Arm bearing backward.

12. Prime.

Upon priming, level your Piece exactly upon a Line, and having Powder a little
bruised, strike it into the Pan as much as is convenient, the left Toe being
kept upon the Front.

13. Shut your Pan.

Here use your two first Fingers, casting your Primer back, and drawing up your
right Heel to your left Instep, your Musket straight up before you Recover,
with the Barrel toward you, done with a quick Motion, the Thumb of your right
hand on the top of the Steel, and the left hand as high as your Mouth.

14. Blow off your loose Corns.

In this case, bring your Pan within four Inches of your Mouth, and blow with a
strong blast, observing to do it altogether, standing upright without declining
the Head, casting out your Arms, and suffering your Piece to sink from the
posture it before was in.

15. Cast about to Charge.

In doing this, let your right Leg advance, turning the Barrel of your Musket
downwards, bringing it to your left side somewhat backward in your left hand,
suffering none of your fingers to touch the Barrel, the Toe of the right Foot
being directly to the Front, the right Heel over against the middle of the left
Foot, the Musket balanced in the left Hand, the Muzle to a proper Front of an
equal height, half a foot from your Body, your right hand joined to the Muzle
of the Musket, and your Thumb extended to the slde of the Barrel.

16. Handle your Charger.

This must be done with a full gripe, holding it even with the Muzle of the
Musket underneath about an Inch from it.

17. Open it with your Teeth.

Here bring it up to your Mouth without bowing your head, then bring the
Charger within an Inch of your Muzle underneath, covering the Chargers Mouth
with the ball of your Thumb.

18. Charge with Powder.

Having put the Powder with a quick motion into the Barrel, hold the Charger
underneath, as before.

19. Draw forth your Scowerer.

Upon this word, let fall your Charger, and by turning your hand, draw your
Scowerer or Gun-stick at three motions, holding it level the height of your
Forehead, your Arm extended, as if you were about to dart it.

20. Shorten it to an Inch.

In this case, turning the great end of your Scowerer toward you, let it sink
till within an Inch of the end, resting it against your Body somewhat below
your right Breast, stooping.

21. Charge with Bullet.

Having a Bullet in your Mouth, take it out with your right hand, and put it
into the Barrel, placing the great end of your Scowerer just at the Muzle of
your Musket.

22. Ram down Powder and Ball.

Take a full grasp with your Thumb and Forefinger, from the Muzle your Thumb
on the top of the Scowerer, keeping a handful in your hand.

23. Withdraw your Scowerer.

Your hand Thumb and Forefinger being turned toward the Muzle, clear your
Scowerer at three motions, and dart it as before.

24. Shorten it to a Handful.

Clap the small end of your Scowerer to your Breast, slip it to a Handful of
the end, holding it a little below your right Breast slooping.

25. Return your Scowerer.

Upon this, place it in its proper place, without expecting any word, grasp the
Muzle of your Musket with the right hand, your Thumb being extended upon the
Scowerer, keeping it half a foot clear from your Side, the Muzles directly to
front all of a height.

26. Poise your Musket.

In this case, with your left hand before you, bring up your Musket, grasp it
with your right hand under the Cock, falling with your right Leg to your left,
keeping it Poised directly before your Nose, being faced to the Front, let your
right Elbow rest upon your Body.

27. Shoulder your Muskets.

In doing this, take the rule that has been mentioned.

28. Poise your Muskets.

Do this as before has been showed.

29. Order your Muskets.

In doing this, sink your right hand a little, take hold of the Stock with the
left hand on the top of the Scowerer; then suffering the left to sink, take
hold of the Muzle with the right hand, the butt end easily sinking near the
ground, when after a little pause, let them all come down together, giving as
it were but one thump, then close to the right foot place the butt end about
the middle of it, the Lock outward, and your right hand an Inch below the Muzle.

30. Lay down your Musket.

Having turned it with the back upwards, you step forwards with your left Leg,
and your right hand lay it on the ground, that it may lie in a straight Line
with the rest, never laying it down with any other but the right hand.

31. Quit your Musket.

Stand upright, by raising your self with a fall back of your left Leg to your
right.

32. Handle your Musket.

Here observe to step forward with your left Leg, and lay your righ^ hand on
the Muzle of your Musket.

33. Order your Musket.

Upon this word, raise the Muzle, and fall back with your left Leg to your
right, turning the Lock outward by the middle of your foot: And thus, in case
of Firearms, the postures are little different, as will hereafter appear.

Instructions for Exercising the Pike, relating to the various Postures already
mentioned in Command.
1. Pike-men, take heed. Advance your Pikes.

IN this case, move your Pike upward in a direct Line, with your right hand
near your side, your right hand well near as high as you can reach, depressing
your left hand as low as you can, your fingers straight out, and raise your
Pike till the butt end comes to your right hand, at what time, place it between
your Breast and Shoulder, keeping your butt end close, that it may be more
firmly uprigh^

2. To the Front.

Place your left hand on your Pike even with the top of your Shoulder, casting
your finger straight, bringing your Pike right before you with a very swift
motion, drawing in your right Heel to your left Instep, keeping the Pike
straight.

3. Charge.

In this posture fall back with your right Leg, suffering the heel of your left
foot to be against the middle of your right, and bring down your Pike with a
quick jerk, support your Pike with your left elbow, and Charge breast high,
bending your left Knee upon yiedling your Body forward to fix your self the
firmer, holding the butt end in the palm of your right hand, your left Toe
directly pointing with the spear of your Pike, set your Feet at a moderate
distance, to stand the more firm, and bring your Pike down a little beneath
your breast, beware of clattering, close it to your breast when it is Charged.

4. To the Right, four times.

In this doing, turn your left Toe to the right, then make your left Heel come
up with your left Instep with a quick motion, recovering your Pike straight
before you, then having turned, fall back with your right Leg, Charge, as
before, etc.

5. To the Right-about.

Here you must, by turning your left Toe, bring it to the Right-about, bringing
up your right Heel, your Pike recovered, then Charge being turned with much
quickness.

6. As you were.

Bring up your left Toe by turning to the Left about, then bringing your Pike
recovered, your left hand must never be higher than your Mouth, your Feet in
Order, when being turned, you must fall back with your right Leg and Charge,
bringing your Pike straight up without Clattering.

Do these as has been shown in case of the Right, only observing 8 left
Motions. etc.
7. To the Left, 4 times. 8. To the Left-about. 9. As you were. 10. Advance
your Pike.
In doing this, make your right Heel come up to your left Instep, having your
Pike before you, fall out with your right Foot, and bring your Pike to your
right Thigh.

11. Shoulder.

Your fingers of your left hand being extended, lay that hand on your Pike even
with your Shoulder, then make your right Heel come even with your left Instep,
your Pike right before you, fall back with your right Leg, and put back your
right Arm as far as may be, holding your Pike about half a foot from your side,
keeping your Eye upon the Spear, and that directly to the Rear, your Pike
slooped, when forsakeing it with your left hand, bring in your right Leg,
laying your Pike on your right Shoulder, keeping your Elbow to your Body, the
butt end about half a foot from the ground in the middle of the distance.

12. Charge to the Front.

Here you must fall back with your right Leg, putting back as much as may be
your Arm, keeping the Spear exactly to the Rear, setting the Pike aslope at the
same height as shouldering, then bring the butt end backwards with your left
hand, turning the head with your right hand, then quit it with that hand, and
take hold of the butt end, and Charge breast high, the palm of your hand
against the butt end open, and your left Elbow under the Pike, the left Toe
directly with the Spear, and when you Charge, let it be directly forward, your
left Heel being just against the middle of your right Foot.

13. Shoulder as you were,

In the first place, raise your Pike with both your hands, then quit it with
the right, and with the left, turn the head backwards, the Spear directly with
the Rear, then seize it again with your right hand as high as you can reach
without straining, and stand with it from your Body aslope, bring up your right
Leg, and forsaking your Pike with your left hand, lay it on your Shoulder,
always keeping the Spear in a direct point to the Rear, not any ways crossing
others.

14. Charge to the Right.

Here you must fall back with your right Arm and Leg, keep the Spear in the
Rear, sloped at the height of shouldering, turning your left Toe to the right,
let the right fall behind the left, that the middle of your right Foot may be
over against your left Heel, and in this Action bring your Pike up, and turn
backwards the butt end by your right side, then pressing it in the palm of your
right hand, Charge.

15. Shoulder, as you were.

Make your left Toe come to the left, and the middle of your right Foot against
your left Heel, with your Pike up, then turn the head of it to the right, viz.
directly to the Rear, doing it at one motion, then with your right hand take
hold of your Pike, so with both hands keep it a little distance from your Body
slop'd, as when you Shoulder, then bring your right Leg up, and lay your Pike
on your Shoulder.

17. Charge to the Right-about.

Here you must with your Hand and Leg give back, and stand with your Pike a
little distance from your side, turn your left Toe to the Right-about, bringing
the butt end of your Pike to the right side, falling back with your right Leg,
Chharge, keeping the Spear of your Pike all the while to the Rear a shouldering
height, being careful not to mount the Spear of your Pike higher or lower; and
when you are to face to the Right-about level your Pike and Charge.

17. As you were.

Upon this word of Command, turn your left Toe to the Left-about, causing your
right Foot to advance a moderate step, so that the middle of it be placed
against your left Heel, bring the butt end with your left hand by your left
side, observing the Spear to be exactly with the Rear, the same height as in
shouldering, then as high as with ease you can reach, lay on your right hand,
and stand with it in form, after which bring up your right Leg and Shoulder.

18. Charge to the Left.

In doing this posture, fall back with your Leg and Arm, as has been showed in
the former Chargings, turn to the left Toe, and turn the butt end of your Pike
with your left hand to the Right, then bring up your right Leg and Charge.

19. As you were.

Here you must raise the Spear with both your hands, turning the left Toe to
the Right, then fall back with your right Leg and Arm, holding your Pike from
your side, the Spear directly to the Rear, then bring up your right Leg and
Shoulder.

20. Charge to the Left-about.

In this case, fall back with your Leg and Arm, then bring the Pike over your
head with both your hands, keeping the Spear directly to the Rear at the height
of shouldering, turn your left Toe to the Left-about, then bring up your right
Foot, so that the middle of it may come with your left Heel and Charge.

21. Port.

Do this as charging the Front, but be cautions, that you sink not the Spear of
your Pike so low, resting it instead of the Elbow between the Thumb and
Forefinger, keeping the Elbow close to your side.

22. Comport.

In this doing, you must bring your left hand backward as far as you may,
stretching out the right, making thereupon a step forward with the right Foot,
firmly grasping the Pike with the right hand as far as you can reach, not
tossing the Spear too high, this done, forsake it with your left hand, bringing
back your right Leg even with your Left, then close the Pike to your side,
keeping the Spear about the height of your Head.

23. Charge to the Front.

In performing this, let your right Arm be extended at the same time, advancing
your right Leg putting back your left hand as far as you can, bring your Pike
forward, upon which give a step back with your right Leg, take hold of the butt
end with your right hand, then Charge, Charging ever breast high.

24. Fire.

Here you must face to the Right-about, suffering the Spear of your Pike to
fall behind you, then let your right hand be quitted from the butt end, without
moving the Left; take care likewise not to strike up the Spear.

25. Charge as you were.

In this Exercise, turn your self to the Left-about, take the butt end of the
Pike on the palm of your right hand and Charge, keeping your Spear at an even
height.

26. Advance your Pikes.

Here you must observe to bring your right Heel to your left Instep, as
likewise your Pike before you to the Recovery, then fall out with your right
Foot, till it come even with your Left, and by this means bring your Pike to
your right Thigh.

27. Order your Pikes.

Raise your left hand even with the top of your shoulder, and lay it upon your
Pike, your fingers stretched out, then sink your left hand, and raise your
right, and so raise the Pike, that when the butt end is on the ground, your
right hand may be against your Eye, setting the butt end to the Latchet of your
Shoe, and keeping the Pike near your Head: and in this Exercise suffer all the
butt ends to fall to the ground together.

28. Pikes to your Inside Order.

In this doing, you must fix the butt end of your Pike on the inside of your
right Foot to the middle, moving only your Pike, and not your Foot.

29. Lay down your Pikes.

Here step altogether with your right Legs, stoop all together with a quick
motion, and lay them very straight with your right hands.

30. Quit your Pikes.

With your left Leg fall back, bringing it even with your right, and stand up
all together.

31. Handle your Pikes.

In this doing, step forward with your left Legs, in a quick motion, stoop all
together, and extending your right hands as far as you can reach, grasp your
Pike.

32. Order your Pikes.

Raise the Pike with your right hand, step back with your left Leg, clapping
the butt end for the more easy raising about the middle of your right Foot on
the inside.

33. Pikes to your Outside Order.

To do this place, the butt end of your Pike on the outside your Foot, moving
your Pike, and not your Foot.

34. Advance.

Do this as before: And thus have we given the Practitioner in Arms, The true
Postures of the Musket and Pike distinctly, which with a little use, may
perfect him in that which is so necessary to be understood by the Sons of Mars,
from which we proceed to give further Instructions of this kind.

Directions for the Exercise of the Pike and Musket together by a whole
Battalion, or single Company, supposing the Pikes Advanced, and Muskets
Shouldered: The word of Command given is,
1. Musketeers make Ready.

IN this case, they must perform all the postures and motions directly
together, till such time as they stand gaurded with their Muskets before them,
and their Thumbs for the better security on the Cocks, whereupon the Pikes are
to be recovered before the Pikemen, the butt ends in the palms of their hands,
and the Spears upright, their left hands no more than the height of their
Mouths.

When the word Charge is given, then must they bring down the Muskets and Pikes
at once, being sure to turn the left Toes that way they Charge, and the heel of
the fame Foot directly against the middle of the right Foot in every Charge,
charging directly forward, not at first charging, the Pikes close to one
another Breasts, but charge a little way distant in bringing down the Pikes,
and when they are charged, then is the time to close them.

The Charge is, To the Right four times, Then to the Right-about, after that,
As you were, Then to the Left Charge four times, Then to the Left-about Charge,
Then as you were, which you may plainly observe in what has been laid down in
the former Exercise.

Here the Pike-men must turn as the Musketeers, bringing up their right Heels
to their left Insteps, extending their Arms as they turn, bringing their
Muskets straight before them, their left hand as high as their Mouths, pulling
back their Arms, and when they are faced, fall back with their right Legs, nor
must the Soldiers bring down their Arms till the word Charge is given, doing
it with a quick motion, and not suffering the Pikes to clatter.

Then the word of Command is, viz. Recover your Arms. Half bend your Muskets.
Poise your Muskets. Shoulder your Musket.


As before is noted.

Hereupon, the Muskets being Shouldered, the Pikes that stood Recovered falling
out with their right Legs, the Pikes are brought to their Thighs to their
Advance.

Poise your Muskets.
This Command given, the Pike-men must fix their left hands to their Pikes
about the height of their Shoulders. Then

Order your Arms. Pikes to your Inside Order. Lay down your Arms. Quit your
Arms. To the Right-about. March.
These must be observed, as is before directed in the Exercise, which to repeat
again would be Tautology, only thus much when you are clear of your Arms, you
must disperse, and upon the beat of Drum run thither again with a Huzza, your
Swords drawn, and their points upwards: Then these words of Command are given,
viz.

Return your Swords. Handle your Arms. Order your Arms. Pikes to your Outside
Order. Advance.
These things ought to be duly considered, and in this first place, in ordering
your Arms, observe to make a little stop before the butt ends come to the
ground, that they may fall together at once; after the Arms are laid down and
quitted, you must all stand up together, as if it were but one motion.

Upon marching from your Arms, step Front and Rear together with the left Feet,
and march but a little distance.

Your right hands being laid on your Swords, you must take hold of your
Scabbards with your left hands, and your Swords being drawn, you must hold them
upright before you, bringing them down at one motion, and when by Command you
have returned your Swords, you must stand upright to your Arms, looking to your
proper Front. As for the rest, we refer you to the Exercise of the Pike and
Musket distinctly.

Several things to be observed in Command and Exercise relating to the
Match-Lock, Musket, etc.
THE Match-Lock Musket in all the material parts of Exercise is the same with
the Fire-Lock; but some other things being to be observed, we shall lay them
down for the ease of the Reader, and this chiefly consists in keeping your
Match well with a good Coal, fastening it upon Command, advantagiously in your
Screw, blowing the Coal, and trying your Pan by false flashes, laying it down
at Command, taking it up again, shortening it to the Pan, that it may give true
Fire: But more to the particulars.

1. Lay down your Matches.

Do this at four Motions, first by a little turning the butt end of your Musket
easily, slipping on your Shoulder, lay then your right hand on your Match: In
the next place, extend your right hand and foot before you, and recover your
Musket in its place. Thirdly, stoop and bring your Match near the right Foot,
within-side, suffering your Ham to bend a little. Lastly, quit it, and bring
your Body upright, and your right Foot even with your left.

2. When the Command is given, viz. Handle your Match, then having recovered
it, bring it between your third and fourth Finger by the help of your Thumb and
first Finger, always using your right Hand then the Palm being turned from you,
you stretch your Arm toward your right hand Man.

3. Blow your Match.

Hereupon bring your Match to your Mouth, not stooping, but turning your Head a
little to the right, when having given a strong Blast to carry off the Ashes,
cast off your Arm to the right.

4. Cock and try your Match.

In this case, fetching a compass with your Arm, bring your Match to the Cock,
and supporting it with your two near Fingers, press it down with your Thumb,
guiding i^ with your middle Finger, when keeping you^ middle finger, between it
and the Pan, pul^ your Cock down as low as the Pan, and sink or raise your
Match, that it may hit the middle of the Pan, and having fired when you hear
the word.

Return your Match.

Hold your Musket in your left hand, the Barrel toward you, suffering your
left Elbow to rest on your Body, then take your Match between your Thumb and
Finger in the right hand, placing your Thumb on the top of it, the palm being
turned from you, placing one end of your Match between the third and fourth
finger of your left hand, and the other end press with the first and second
fingers, then with extended fingers place your right hand under the Pan.

This is all that is material as to the Match, the other postures of the Musket
being the same with the Fire-Lock already mentioned.

Directions for the Exercise of Foot Granadiers.
THough the Granadiers in many things differ from the Musketeers in Exercise,
yet for the better part they do the same, drawing up in the same Order, Rank
and File, only they seldom draw up above three deep, and supposing then to be
shouldered. The words of Command are,

Lay your right Hands on your Firelocks.

1. Poise your Firelocks.

2. Rest your Firelocks.

3. Cock your Firelocks.

4. Gaurd your Firelocks.

5. Present.

6. Fire.

7. Recover your Arms.

All these are to be done in the same manner as the Exercise of the Fire-Lock,
Musket.

8. Cast over to the Left.

In doing this, they are to lay their right hands on their Daggers.

9. Draw your Daggers.

Here they must draw their Daggers and hold them upright in their hands before
them.

10. Screw it into the Muzle of your Fire-Lock.

Do this so, that the flat side may be toward you when you have recovered.

11. Return your Arms.

12. Charge to the Right (four times.)

13. To the Right-about, Charge.

14. As you were.

15. To the left Charge (four times.)

16. To the Left-about Charge.

17. As you were.

18. Recover your Arms.

These are to be done with a quick Motion after the manner of the Fire-Lock,
Musket.

19. Cast to your Left.

Upon this, they are to seize their Daggers with their right hands.

20. Withdraw your Daggers.

Hereupon hold them directly before you, the flat side to your Body.

21. Return your Daggers.

Upon this, put them up into the Scabbard.

22. Poise your Fire-Lock.

23. Half bend your Fire-Lock.

Do these as the Musketeers do the Fire-Lock.

24, Open your Cartridge-Box, and handle your Primer.

These are easily understood, and need no direction.

25. Prime.

26. Return your Primer.

27. Shut your Pan.

28. Blow off your loose Corns.

30. Cast about to Charge.

Do all these as the Musketeers.

31. Handle your Cartridge.

32. Open it with your Teeth.

33. Charge with Powder and Ball.

34. Draw forth your Scowerer.

35. Shorten it to an Inch.

Here, by the Cartridge is meant, the Charge of Powder made up in a paper fit
for the Piece, so that the Bullet being placed on the top of it, they may be
put in together.

36. Ram down Powder and Ball.

37. Withdraw your Scowerer.

38. Shorten it to a handful.

39. Return your Scowerer.

40. Poise your Fire-Lock.

Do these as the Musketeers do, according to the Instructions laid down, in
their Exercise.

41. Shoulder your Firelocks.

Upon this Command, the Ranks are to close forward at six foot, it being the
Sergeants care to place their Halberts at a due distance.

42. Poise your Firelocks.

Upon this, over and above what the Musket requires, seize the sling with your
left hand.

43. Sling your Firelocks.

44. Handle your Pouches.

In handling your Pouches, let your left hands be on the bottom, all of a
height, advancing the right Legs, and the right hands being of an equal height.

45. Open your Pouches.

Do this altogether.

46. Take forth your Grenades.

Do this with the right hand extended before you.

47. Shut your Pouches.

Do this all at once.

48. Uncase your Fuzee.

Doing this, step back with the right foot to the left facing.

49. Handle your Match.

Do this with the left hand to the left side, extending your Arms, doing it
nimbly altogether.

50. Blow your Match.

In this doing, the first Rank must fall back with their right Legs altogether,
giving a strong Blast.

51. Fire your Fuzee.

52. Deliver your Granado.

At this last word of Command, the second Rank must advance six foot before the
first with their Match ready to blow; and when they have observed the words of
Command, the third must advance before them, when upon the word, Blow your
March, the first and second Ranks are to lay their hands upon their Hatchets;
and uppn the word, Fire your Fuzees, they are to raise their Hatchets; and upon
that of Deliver your Granado, the Sergeants must be careful that the first Rank
stands, the second Marches six Foot before the first, and the third six foot
before the second, expecting the word of Command with their Hatchets raised, at
what time the first Rank must raise theirs likewise.

Fall on.

In this case they must handle them fast, bringing them down.

Return your Hatchets.

Upon this you must put them into the frog of your Belt by your side.

Poise your Firelocks.

Shoulder your Firelocks.

Do these as in case of the Fire-Lock, Musket.

Granadiers make Ready.

In this case the first Rank must make ready their Firelocks, and the second
Rank handle their Pouches, and the third their Hatchets

The first Rank present.

At this word of Command, the second Rank must open their Pouches, take thence
their Grenades, whilst the third raise their Hatchets.

Fire.

Upon this, word of Command, the second Rank must shut their Pouches, uncase
their Fuzes, and handle their Match.

Recover your Arms.

Here without any further Command, the Granadiers of the first Rank must cast
over to the Left, draw and screw their Daggers into the Muzles of their Pieces,
Recover their Arms and Charge; the second Rank to advance six foot before them.

Blow your Match.

Fire your Fuzee.

Deliver your Granadoe.

Upon this last Command, they are to Poise their Firelocks, and make ready,
whilst the third March as the second with their Hatches.

Fall on.

Recover your Arms.

At this last, the third Rank must march twelve foot before the first Charging,
the second at six, the first returning their Hatchets, and making ready their
Firelocks.

Recover your Arms.

Upon this they are to half bend their Firelocks.

Cast over to the Left.

Withdraw your Daggers.

Return your Daggers.

Poise your Fire-Lock.

Shoulder your Fire: Lock.

Face to the Right-about.

March.

Upon this last it is the Sergeants duty to be careful, that forward the Ranks
open to twelve foot, and that they so continue marching till they come to their
Ground, where they must halt without any word or Command.

In these observe the posture of the Musket.
As you were. Poise your Firelocks. Order your Arms. Lay down your Arms. Quit
your Arms. Face to the Right about. March.
Here observe, that when you are clear of your Arms, you are to disperse, and
upon the Drum beating, you must have to your Arms with a cheerful Huzza, your
Daggers drawn, lifted with their Points upwards.

Observe these as the Exercise of the Musket, Fire-Lock, and the rest as they
have been laid down, and you may grow expert.
Return your Dagger. Handle your Arms. Order your Arms. Poise your Firelocks.
Shoulder your Firelocks.
Considerations of the Drum so necessary in the Exercise of the Foot, what
relates thereto.
THE Drum has been very anciently used in War, and always approved by the
greatest Captains; the Soldiers understanding thereby, what they are to do in
many points, as well as by the voice of their Commander, and therefore it is
called seme-vocal, and gives directions of sundry kinds in these six points of
War more peculiarly distinguished, viz.

1. The Call. 2. The Troop. 3. The March. 4. The Preparative. 5. The Battle.
6. The Retreat. And of these in their Order.

1. The Call is to bring the Soldiers together to their Arms upon deliberate
or urgent occasions, or to hear any Proclamation or Orders that are to be given
by the Officers; so the Soldiers ought not, especially in time of War, on
great Penalties, to ramble beyond the hearing of it, unless they be sent upon
Parties, or by some Express, with the Knowledge and Approbation of the General
or Officer in Chief.

2. The Troop being beat, the Soldiers must incontinently shoulder their
Muskets, and Advance their Pikes, closing their Ranks and Files to Order,
following their Officers to the place of Randesvoze, or else where.

3. The March beaten, you must observe to take your open Order in Rank,
shoulder both Musket and Pike, and march quicker, or slower, as the Drum beats.

4. The Preparative is to warn you, that you close your due distance in
preparing for Battle, or Skirmish, and see that nothing be out of Order that
may turn to your Advantage or Hindrance, for a Battle seldom succeeds well
where the Order is not observed with the greatest Exactness.

5. The Battle is that which is usually called the Charge or Signal, to Charge
the Enemy; so that upon this the Soldier must raise his Spirit to the highest
pitch of Fury, though with caution, for Valor and Prudence ought to go hand in
hand, if you would attain to things noble and great.

6. The Retreat. This is beat when at any time the Enemy is too strong, or by
drawing off to better your ground, you may gain a better Advantage, or expect
greater Succor, as when an Out-guard or Party finds it self overcharged, it
Retreats to the main Body, or when on a sudden, an advanced Party espies an
Ambushment.

Besides these, there are two others used, but they are not properly called
Points of War, viz.

The Tatto, or Tapto, and the Revalley.
The first of these is used in a Garrison, or upon the Rounds, both to warn the
Soldiers and Inhabitants, when they ought to repair to their Quarters, or
Guard, and when to shut the Doors, that so if any Spies be abroad, they may be
the better distinguished; for when the Tapto is returned to the Body of Gaurds,
a warning Piece ought to be shot off, after which no person ought to be out of
his Quarters, or from his Post, unless the Watchword be given him.

The Revalley takes, as is most likely, its Denomination from the French word
Reveiller, which signifies as much, as to arise up, or awake from sleep, for
this is beaten in the Morning, to give notice to the People, that they may be
safely abroad, at which time the Out-Centinels are taken off.

There are of late other things signified by the Drum, as the manner of
Exercise, but it being mostly according to Humor, the Drum-Majors ought to
give it to every File-leader in writing, that so he may be able to direct his
File by his Example, what they are to do till the Soldiers are perfect in it,
and the reason why we so direct is, because it is variable, and not so
substantial as the word of Command.

There are at this day in many Regiments Hoitheys used instead of the ancient
Flutes, but they have no significant Sign, being only to cheer and raise the
Spirits of the Soldiers, that their labor may seem the less.

The Exercise of Dragoons or Musketeers on Horseback.
IN this, to shorten any tedious Prologue or Intricacy, we will suppose the
Dragoons to be ready in the Field, drawn up in three Ranks, having advanced
their Muskets, the Officers taken their Stations, and all things in a readiness
for the word of Command.

1. Dragoons have a care.

2. Sling your Muskets.

3. Make ready your Links.

4. Clear your right Foot of your Stirrup.

5. Dismount.

Here they must stand ready at their Horses heads, and the six outside men
continue mounted, that so they may hold and guard the Horses.

6. Link your Horses to the Left.

7. March clear off your Horses, and Shoulder as you March.

8. Halt.

Upon these words of Command, the Battalion by the care of the Officers, is to
be formed as the Foot, viz.

1. Have a care of the Exercise.

2. Officers to the Right-about.

3. Take your Posts in the Rear of the Battalion.

4. March.

In this Ordering, the Sergeants and Corporals must fall into the Flank, and
Rear of the Battalion, and the Commission Officers form a Rank in the Rear.

5. Dragoons have a care.

Upon this they must pull off their Gloves of the right hand, and stick them in
their Girdles.

6. Lay your right hand to your Muskets. 7. Poise your Muskets. 8. Rest your
Muskets. 9. Cock and Guard. 10. Present. 11. Fire. 12. Recover your Arms with
the Cock half Bent. 13. Rest upon your Muskets. 14. Handle your Daggers. 15.
Draw forth your Daggers. 16. Fix them in the Muzle of your Muskets. 17. Poise
your Muskets. 18. Charge to the Front, 19. To the Right, Charge, (four times.)
20. To the Right-about, Charge. 21. To the Left-about Charge. 22. To the Left
Charge (four times) 23. To the Left-about Charge. 24. To the Right-about,
Charge. 25. Recover your Arms. 26. Rest upon your Muskets. 27. Handle your
Daggers. 28. Withdraw your Daggers. 29. Place your Daggers. 30. Poise your
Muskets. 31. Rest your Muskets. 32. Clean your Pans. 33. Open your Cartridge
Box. 34. Handle your Primer. 35. Sink and Prime. 36. Return your Primer. 37.
Shut your Pan with your Fore-fingers. 38. Blow off your loose Corns; At which
time you must Recover your Arms. 39. Cast about to Charge. 40. Handle your
Cartridge. 41. Take out your Cartridges; which done, you must presently shut
the Box. 42. Open them with your Teeth. 43. Charge with Powder and Ball. 44.
Draw forth your Scowerers. 45. Shorten them to an Inch. This must be done
against your Breath. 46. Put it into the Muzle of your Musket. 47. Ram down
Powder and Ball. 48. Withdraw your Scowerer. 49. Shorten it to an Inch, as
before. 50. Place your Scowerer. 51. Moise your Muskets. 52. Shoulder your
Muskets. 53. Poise your Musket. 54. Rest your Musket. 55. Lay down your Arms.
56. Quit your Arms. 57. To the Right-about. 58. March clear off your Arms and
break: Being marched clear off the Arms, they must offer, as if they dispersed;
but upon the first beat of Drum they must swiftly return with a Huzza, every
one drawing (in that motion) his Sword, then each must stand over his own Arms,
to expect further Command, viz. 59. Return your Swords. 60. Handle your Arms.
61. Rest upon your Arms. 62. Poise your Muskets. 63. Sling your Muskets. 64. To
the Right-about. 65. March to your Horses* 66. Vnlink your Horses. 67. Shorten
your Bridles. 68. Put your left Foot in your Stirrup. 69. Mount. 70. Fasten
your Links. 71. Vnsling, and Advance your Muskets.

Though this Exercise is for the most part like the Exercise of the Fire-Lock,
Musket, on Foot, whether to know any thing difficult; we refer you, yet these
are many times obliged to fight on Horseback, as being appointed, and
necessary for the succor, either of Horse or Foot, as occasion or advantage
offers; therefore it will be requisite to speak something of their fireing on
Horseback.

The Exercise of Dragoons on Horseback, as to their Fireing, etc.
THE Dragoons having advanced their Muskets on their right Thigh, must expect
the words of Command, viz.

1. Ioyn your left hand to your Musket,

2. Cock and Guard.

3. Rest your Muskets on your Bridle hand.

4. Present.

5. Fire.

6. Recover your Arms with the Cock halt bent.

This being observed, they are in a posture to March, Wheel, or Face, as shall
be Commanded, or seen most Expedient.

These Dragoons were at first entertained for swift Marches, passing deep Ways
or Waters, to keep equal pace with the Horse, till the Foot at more leisure
could come up; but being since found very necessary to defend against the shot
of the Musketeers, they have been continued, and are no more than a kind of
Musketeers on Horseback.

Granadiers on Horseback, what their Exercise is, and how to perform it with
Dexterity. etc.
THese, as the Dragoons often fight on Foot, and therefore, though, when they
are on Horseback, they may be Exercised as the Horse; yet it is most
convenient whenever they March, Wheel, Face, or Halt, that they do not bear up
too close, nor do it in thick Files, but between every File leave three foot
distance at least, the easier to dismount, and March clear off their Horses, or
Face about as occasion shall require, when in this manner being marched into
the Field with their Arms laden, Hats on, and the the word to Halt given, the
Commanding Officer having bid Silence, must thus proceed, viz.

1. Granadiers have a care. 2. Sling your Muskets. In this doing, have your
left hand upon your Sling. 3. Put on your Caps. 4. Right and Left Hand Men of
each Rank, keep Mounted. 5. Clear your right Foot off the Stirrup. In this case
they must handle their Muskets, casting them backwards. 6. Dismount. This must
be done altogether with a quick motion. 7. Make ready your Links. 8. Link your
Horses to the Left. 9. March clear off your Horses. This may be done by a third
or second Rank, marching through as soon as clear, handling at the same time
their Muskets. 10. Halt. 11. Lay your right hands on your Muskets. 12. Poise
your Muskets, facing to the Right. 13. Rest your Muskets. 14. Cock and Guard.
15. Present. 16. Fire. 17. Recover your Arms. Here you must have your Muskets
half bent. 18. Cast about to the Left. 19. Draw your Dagger. 20. Fix them in
your Muskets. 21. Recover your Arms. 22. Charge to the Front. 23. To the Right,
Charge (four times) 24. To the Right-about, Charge. 25. As you were. 26. To the
Left, Charge (four times.) 27. To the Left-about. 28. As you were. 29. Recover
your Arms. 30. Cast about to the Left: Hold, on this word of Command, your
right hands on your Daggers. 31. Withdraw your Daggers. 32. Return your
Daggers. 33. Poise your Muskets. 34. Clean your Pan. 35. Open your Cartridge
Box. 36. Take out your Primer. 37. Prime. 38. Return your Primer. 39. Shut your
Pan. In doing this, bring your Piece up quick before you. 40. Blow off your
loose Corns. 41. Cast about to Charge. 42. Take out your Cartridges,
immediately shutting the Boxes. 43. Vncap your Cartridge with your Teeth. 44.
Load with Powder and Ball. 45. Draw forth your Scowerer. 46. Shorten it to an
Inch. 47. Place it in the Barnel. 48. Ram home Powder and Ball. 49. Withdraw
your Scowerer. 50. Shorten it to a handful. 51. Return your Scowerer. 52. Poise
your Musket, (Do this before you.) 53. Shoulder your Musket. Upon this word,
seize the Slings with your left hands. 54. Sling your Muskets. 55. Handle your
Pouches; the same with the Foot Granadiers. 56. Open your Pouches. 57. Take
forth your Granadoe. In doing this, extend your right hand before you. 58. Shut
your Pouches. Do this, that it may appear but one Motion, the left hands being
held-up all at a height. 59. Wncase your Fuzee. In doing this, you must face to
the Front, having fallen back with your right Leg, bringing it even with the
Left. 60. Handle your Match. 61. Blow your Match. 62. The first Rank, Fire your
Fuzee. 63. Deliver your Granadoe. Upon this Delivery, you must unsling your
Muskets.

At this Command, the second Rank must advance through the Right, having their
Match in Order, ready to blow and place themselves six Foot before the Rank.

64. Blow your Match. 65. Fire your Fuzee. 66. Deliver your Granadoe. Upon this
your Musket being unslung, you must stand ready Cockt and Guarded; then the
third Rank is to march on the Right six foot frontward of the second. 67. Blow
your Match. 68. Fire your Fuzee. 69. Deliver your Granadoe. This done, unsling,
and stand Cockt and Guarded; and upon this Command, the first or proper Front
must speedily March through at six foot distance. 71. First Rank Fire. After
this word, the first Rank must fix their Daggers in the Muzles of their
Muskets, and the second and third must imitate the first successively, as the
same words of Command come to their turn. 72. Recover your Arms. 73. Cast about
to the Left. 74. Withdraw your Daggers. 75. Poise your Muskets; doing it to the
proper Front. 76. Shoulder your Muskets. 77. To the Right-about. In this doing,
take up your first ground in your March, opening your Ranks. 79. To your
Leader. 80. Poise your Muskets. 81. Rest upon your Arms. 82. Lay down your
Arms. 83. To the Right-about. 84. March. In marching, the Ranks must be broken
in manner of dispersing, then upon beat of Drum, you must draw your Swords,
face about, recover your Order, and return to your Arms with a Huzza. 85.
Return your Swords. 86. Handle your Arms. 87. Recover and Poise. 88. Shoulder
your Muskets. 89. Poise your Muskets. 90. Face to the Right-about. 91. Sling
your Muskets. 92. March your Horses.

In this last performance, the second and third Ranks must March, and standing
at their Horses heads, face to the Front.

93. Vnlink your your Horses. 94. Fasten your Links. When this is done, you
must shorten your Bridles. 95. Put your Feet in the Stirrups. Here you must lay
your Muskets over your Sadles. 96. Mount your Horses. This must be done
altogether, as if it were but one Motion, and the Officers whose business it
is, are to see the Ranks completed in good Order. 97. Handle your Swords. 98.
Draw your Swords. 99. Place your Swords. Here you must put your Sword into your
Bridle hand. 100. Handle your Pistol, which must be ever the Left. 101. Draw
your Pistol. 102. Cock your Pistol. Here you must keep the Cock gaurded with
your Thumb. 103. Present. In this doing, bear up your hand. even with the Cock.
104. Fire. Here you must observe not to take down your Pistol, till the next
word of Command, which is, 105. Return your Pistol, and the same Order must be
observed upon drawing the right Pistol, till you return it, etc. 106. Handle
your Muskets. 107. Vnsling your Muskets. 108. Mount your Muskets.

If you are to Charge on Horseback with the Musket, which is not done but upon
great oceasion, the Piece being Charged, the words of Command are, viz.

1. Cock your Muskets. 2. Present your Muskets. 3. Give Fire. In this doing,
you must keep your Musket in its posture, till the next word of Command, viz.
4. Sling your Muskets. 5. Handle your Swords. Do it by taking your Swords in
your right hands. 6. March. In Marching, the Officers commanding, may bring
them to any moving posture, as Wheeling, Facing, etc. by giving his words of
Command with such deliberation, that those who are more peculiar to take
notice, may see each Individual Part, perform his Exercise, and that they
mannag^ their Horses as they ought.

These Instructions put in practice, man greatly forward the young Soldier,
thoug^ indeed, a heedful practice is the Life of Exercise.

The Exercise of Horse so properly called
THough as to the words of Command i^ Exercise, they are not many, yet various
are the Actions to be performed by them, as after we have given an account of
the known words of Command shall be showed at large, and in this case, when a
Squadron or Troop is appointed to Exercise, having their Carbines and Pistols
Laden, the Corporals must pass through the Ranks, and see that they are all
ready, which done, the Chief Officer commands Silence, and gives the words, viz.

Lay your right hands on your Sword.

Draw your Swords.

Put your Swords in your Bridle-hands.

Lay your hands on your Pistels.

Cock your Pistols.

Hold up your Hands.

Give Fire.

When you have given Fire, you must not let your Pistol hand fall till the next
word of Command be given, viz.

Return your Pistols.

And this you must obseve in Fireing the right and Left again.

Lay your hands on your Carbines.

Advance your Carbines.

Cock your Carbines.

Fire.

Let fall your Carbines.

Take your Swords from your Bridle-hands.

Return your Swords.

These motions must be exactly observed, every man doing each particular motion
at one and the same time; the word of Command for that purpose, being given
deliberately, that there may be no mistake.

In drawing up a Body of Horse, that is, when the Body is drawn up, the
Officers that command not in Chief ought to keep close to their Men, but the
Chief Commandant must be about a Horses length before them, to see more exactly
what is done; and so it must be observed in Marching: It is further to be noted
at this day, that when a Squadron of Horse is to Wheel; if to the Right, the
right hand men must not close to the Left as formerly, for that puts the Rank
many times out of Order, but they must keep their Ground, suffering the left to
come about whilst they only turn their Horses heads, observing their left hand
Men.

This may serve for the Motions, which the Officers are to take care of, yet
there remains many other curious Matters, to which we proceed.

To Close the Files.
1. If you would be at close Files. To close your Files, The righr Wing File
stand Close your Files. To the Right. To the Left. As you were. To the left
Wing an^ stand. To the Left by Files close the Squadron. To the Right. As you
were. The righ^ and left Wing Files stand. By half Ranks close Files to the
right and left; or by closing Files, you may cleave the Squadron.

The manner of Closing the Ranks.
File-Leaders stand. By Ranks close the Squadron to the Front. On the Front as
you were, or open to the Ranks on the Front to the first distances.

The manner of doubling Ranks.
By half Files to the Right, Double your Ranks to the Front.

File Leaders Advance your Rank. Half Files take your Ground. In this manner
you may Command to the Left.

The first half Files stand. By half File, Leaders on the left Wing double your
Ranks to the Front.

Now if you would reduce this again, observe the following Command, viz.

Right Wing half Rank Advance your Ranks. Half File-Leader take your Ground.
The first half File stand. By half File-Leaders on the right and left Wings,
then double your Ranks to the Front, Carocolling to the right and left, then
the last half File stand, and the first half Files by Carocol to the right and
left on the Wings, after this double your Ranks to the Rear.

Here the first half File must observe to open the half Rank to the Right and
Left. The first half File by Carocol, To the Right and Left double your Ranks
to the Rear.

In this case, let the last half File open the half Rank to the Right and Left;
and since these words Carocol and Conversion may appear difficult to
understand, it will be convenient to explain the Motion.

When you are to Wheel by Carocol, observe that it is made by the depth or
flank of of the Squadron, by which means the Rank, and not the File makes the
Motion.

Conversion in Wheeling is performed by the Front of the Squadron, by which
means the File remains whilst the Rank makes the Motion.

Directions for Wheeling by Conversion with the Word of Command.
WHen we say to the Right by Conversion, it is to be understood, That you ought
to close your Right Leg to the Horse, your Knee touching that of the right hand
man's, and so you must do in the word of Command to the Left, as when we say,
Close the Left Wing; then must the left Leg closed.

By half Ranks, and by Conversion, divide the Squadrons into two Troops.

In case you would reduce the Squadron, The Cammand is,

By Conversion, the Squadron into one Troop, or the left Wing, Advance by
Conversion.

In wheeling by Carocol, the words of Command are, viz.

The right Wing to the left by Caracol, Face about to the Rear: Or it may be
performed by half Ranks, viz.

By Quarter Ranks, and by Carocol divide the Squadron into three Troops. Then
if you would reduce them, order Quarter Ranks and Squadrons into one Troop.

If you are to be Commanded, the Volt, Face, or Facing about, observe it in
this manner,

Face about to the Right, Face to the Right by Controversion, Face about to the
Right by Carocol, Face about to the Left by half File, Face about to the Right
and Left.

In case in Hay you are to be drawn up, Observe this Order.
By half Ranks, To the Right and Left draw up, in Hay, To the Front; and if to
be reduced again, the proceeding is thus, By Carocol, To the Right and Left. As
you were. By half Ranks, and by Carocal, To the Right and Left. Draw up in Hay
to the Rear. Reduction, here the Command is, To the Front. As you were. By half
Ranks, to the Right and Left, draw up in Hay. Reduction, By Carocol, To the
Right and Left. As you were. By Carocol, To ^he Right, draw up in Hay.
Reduction, By Carocol, To the Left. As you were.

The Order of causing Horses to File off.
File by Ranks on the right Wing, on the left Wing from the Squadron. File off
by Ranks on the left Wing. Form the Squadron on the Right. File off by three
Files on the Left Wing from the Squadron. Some, indeed, are for Filing off with
whole Ranks; but the most Experience in this matter have found it most
convenient to be done by Files, because three Files make a Squadron, which a
Rank does not.

The next material thing to be considered is, the Doublings being useful for
the strengthening any part of the Battle, as it shall be seen necessary, or
required, consisting in these following Heads. As to the General.

Front and Rear. Both Flank.
1. Doublings of Length. 2. Doublings of Depth.
But if you come to particulars, there are six sorts of Doublings; as thus,

First of Ranks, that is, when every Rank doubles into the odd, and if it
happen that the odd Ranks are to double, then let the Body face to the Rear,
and you need not expect any other words of Command.

2. Half Files.

3. Bringers up,

Here they are said to be doubled, at what time they double their Rear into the
Front.

4. In case of doubling, the Rear it must be done when the half Files double to
the Rear.

5. Observe that the doubling of half Ranks must be by the one Rank doubling
the other, and every doubling is done by the passing through by Counter-marches
entire or divisional doublings: And observe in the doubling of Ranks, that they
are reduced by the doubling of Files, further noting that the doubling Files to
any hand, by the doubling of Ranks to any hand, they are reduced.

In every Motion it is to be observed, that those who are to double, must before
they quit their places, Advance and Poise their Arms, and the Commands being
performed, they are to conform to the same posture as they observe those to be
in, to whom they double whatsoever the Posture be.

If you go upon entire Doublings, they are to be performed by Order, as well in
Rank as File, and in Divisional Doublings, must be at open Order, as well in
Rank as File, observing your right hand man in all Motitions.

If your purpose be to strengthen a Battlion in the Front, Rear, or Flanks by
doublings, it may be done as to the Front and Rear by entire Doublings, entire
Wheelings, Divisional Doublings, and Divisional Wheelings; and in the Flanks by
Files, half Ranks, and Divisional Wheelings.

In this case, the words of Command are, Ranks to the Right, Double. March,
Ranks as you were. March. Ranks to the Left, Double March. Ranks as you were.
March Observing i^ these matters a general Rule, That upon any doubling of
Ranks, or half Files, notwithstanding their turning to the contrary hand, they
double on from the ground they double to. They (when they come to their own
ground) must ever turn to the ^and they double; and thereby they stand directly
after their Leaders.

If you are for doubling of Files, that may be done in the same manner, holding
in the same Order with the Reduction of doubled Ranks; and for the doubling
Front, half Files, by the Rear half Files, the words of Command are, Half Files
to the right Hand. Double your Front, March. Rear Half Files as you were,
March. Rear half Files to the left hand, double your Front, March. Rear half
Files, as you were, March.

And again, if you would reduce, let the Rear half File stand without facing,
till they are passed by the Front, half Files, then let them fall after their
proper Leaders; but if by the Rear you intend to double the Front, half Files,
the Rear half Files are to march exceeding slow, the body standing still, and
in the half Files be curious to observe well the right hand Men, and in
doubling of Rear, half Files by the Front, half Files with the Reduction: The
words of Command are, Front, half Files, to the Right-about, Double your Rear,
half F^^es. March.

In this case, the three Front Ranks, or Front half Files must turn to the
Right about, passing on the right hand of the Rear; half Files doubling unto
them, and then to face to the Left-about to their Leaders, without expecting
the word of Command; and in case of Command, viz. Reduction, From Half Files as
you were, March, the Front half Files are to March slowly three foot distance
from the right hand Man, directing more le^^ward, which reducees them to their
former Ground.

If you are desirous to Exercise in Doublings, observe the following Method,

Having drawn up the Battalion, and if it consist of Musketeers, the Commander
in Chief must give the word of Command, viz. Musketeers shoulder your Muskets;
but if the Battalion be composed of single Pikes, those that are to march must
be Commanded, viz. Ranks that are to double to the Right, Advance your Pikes.
Ranks that are double to the Left, Advance your Pikes; and this ought to be
taken by the Pikes as a general Rule, when they form a Battalion of themselves,
always advancing when they are to double, fixing their Pikes upon the ground
when they make a stand, but different from this in some kind, when the
Battalion is composed of Musketeers only for the Command, then is what is
required in the ordering Musketeers alone, and Pikes alone.

To the right, double your Ranks in Front, March.

Here, if you would make your Doublings exactly true, then the Soldiers upon
their parting from their left Feet, must come and place themselves in the
middle of the distances of the Ranks they double; and if the Battalion consist
of six Ranks in depth when they are to double by Ranks, either in Front or
Rear, then must it loose one Rank of the depth of ground, and the distances of
the Ranks by that means shall become double to those with whom they were before
doubled; this being well observed, and you intend to reduce the Battalion,
proceeding thus, Ranks as you were. Then to double to the Left, say,

To the Left double your Ranks.

If you intend to double your Ranks by half Files, the Command must be, viz. To
the Right by half Files. Double your Ranks in Front, March. And the same words
are required to double the left by half Files, either in the Wings, or in the
Rear; then to reduce the Battalion, the Command is only, Ranks as you were.

To double the Ranks in Front upon the Wings, so order it, that from the half
File to the close File, the Battalion cut, or divide it self in the half Ranks,
then the half Ranks on the left hand must face to the left, and double upon the
Wings of those two that have not changed their ground.

The manner of drawing up a Battalion, and the Officers taking their Stations
for Parade, when they are to receive the King, or General, etc.
HEre the Battalion, or Regiment being drawn up in Exercise, the Ranks at
twelve Feet distance, and the Files at three, the Musketeers sloping, and
carrying their Arms well, the Pikes must order their Pikes in a close posture
to their Bodies, holding them near to their Heads, the butt ends to the
Latchets of their Shoes: The Sergeants taking two, or one, on the right and
left of every Rank at an equal distance, as the Soldiers are at in the File,
but those on the Rear must place themselves at three paces from the last Rank
of Soldiers, well ordering their Halberts, and having their Hats off, the
Drums are to stand on the right, and the left even with the Front Rank of the
Soldiers, and at the same distance one from the other. The Hoitboys are to be
on the right of the Drums on the one side, and the Drums on the right on the
other.

The Officers Posts or Places.
Lieutenants to be divided equally at the head of the right and left Wings of
Shot, the Ensigns to be at the head of the Pikes in an equal Line, each two
paces distant from the Body; the Captains to be divided on each Wing, advanced
two paces before the Lieutenants, the Commander in Chief excepted, none are to
be before the Ensigns, and he to be two paces advanced beyond the Captains,
unless it be when a Regiment makes but one Battalion, and the Presence of the
Colonel and Lieutenant Colonel be had, then the latter is to take his Post on
the left hand of the former. The Major who must be on Horseback, is to place
himself in a direct Line before the Sergeants on the right Angle, somewhat more
advanced before the Line of the Captains, and the Aid Major being likewise
mounted in the left Angle after the same manner.

If the King be to be received, then Pikes must be Advanced, and Muskets
Shouldered, the same likewise to the Queen; but to all others the Pikes are to
Ordered.

If a Company of Granadiers belong to the Regiment, it must be drawn up on the
right of the Battalion at three deep, about three paces being left between
their Drums and those of the Battalion.

The Order and Manner of Salute.
As soon as it is observed the King approaches, the Drums must beat a March,
and the Officers are to Salute in their Order as he passes by, keeping the
Spear of their Pikes exactly with the proper Front, and not by any means
turning their cross ways.

The Salute being made, they without making a Leg, or Bowing, are immediately
to pull off their Hats, keeping them off with their bodies upright, till the
persons to be Saluted are passed by.

The manner of the Ensign's Saluting is with their Colors at one Motion,
bringing them near the ground directly before them, raising them altogether at
one Motion, upon which they pull off their Hats as the former. The Sergeants
are to stand with their Hats off, and their Halberts Ordered, facing the same
way with the Battalion; and here it is to be noted, That if the Person to be
Saluted goes round the Battalion, it must face as he moves, without altering
the Posts.

This must be observed upon the private review of a Battalion, but if it so
happen, that it be to be done in the Field, and the Army drawn up each
Battalion, must salute with Pikes and Muskets Charged. The Musketeers upon the
approach to be Shouldered, and the Pikes Advanced, when the Commander in Chief
proceeds to give the Word, etc.

Recover your Arms.

Upon this bring your Pikes and Muskets directly before you the butt ends of
your Pikes in the Palms of your Hands, and the right Heel brought to the left
Instep, and when the Drum first strikes the March, you must Charge with Pikes
and Muskets at one Motion, and keep your Arms in that posture, till the person
to be Saluted is passed by; up which these words of Command ensue.

Recover your Arms.

Poise your Muskets.

Shoulder your Muskets.

At which time the Pikes are to be brought to the Advance, but in case of
Marching the Salute is somewhat different.

Of Marching and the Salute, etc.
In marching a Battalion, be sure in the first place, to see the Files close to
the right or left in their marching Order, which is so much distant, as they
can conveniently have the use of their Arms, without incumbering each other,
and greater Bodies in this case require more distance than the lesser, as half
a Foot and more from the right hand Man, and so in Order to the rest, when the
Pikes being Advanced, and Muskets Shouldered. The words of Command are,

Files close to the Right, (or the Left.)

To your close Order.

March.

Then each man is to turn to the hand named, and consequently closes to the
distances and hand mentioned; and when this is performed, the next word of
Command is,

To your Leader.

Hereupon the Sergeants are to see the Ranks kept at their twelve large Feet
distance, and being thus disposed, if it march in a Body, the Lieutenants must
be in the Rear, at the same distance they were in the Front from the Soldiers;
the Sergeants that were in the Rear, taking care of the Flanks, that they keep
even and well in Order, and upon the word March, they are in Front and Rear, to
step with their left Feet forward all at a time, setting them down together,
marching very slowly, the Pikes marching equal with the Wings of Shot, not in
the least pressing upon each other.

When the Body is marched as far as is intended, then the Command to them must
be,

Halt.

To the Right-about.

The Drums beating a Retreat, the Lieutenants in the same Order and Method,
lead them back to their Ground, as was before observed; and there again the
word of Command is Halt.

viz. To the Left-about.
To the Right-about. As you were.
At this word, the Lieutenants must quit the Rear, and come to their station in
the Front, whilst the Sergeants in the Flank who were removed from the Rear,
take their places again.

To March in three Divisions, the Method and Order.
IF you are to march a Battalion in three Divisions, the Captains must divide
the one half at the head of the first Division of Shot, and the remaining half
in the Rear of the last Division: And again, one half of the Lieutenants in the
Rear of the first Division of shot, and the remainder at the heard of the last
Division of shot: The Colors marching at the head of the Pikes, which are to
be Advanced, the Commandant in Chief marching two paces before the Rank of
Captains at the head of the first Division of Shot, the Captains and other
Officers exactly keeping the distance they were at first posted at, when the
Battalion was drawn up.

The Officers that are appointed in this case, to march in the Rear of the
Division, are as they march off to fall after them; and the Sergeants that were
posted in the Rear, are to take care of the Pikes upon their marching: As for
the Drums, they are equally to be divided upon the Division, marching between
the second and third Ranks. The Granadiers marching about twenty Yards before
the Battalion, the Equipage of the Officers of the Front must march somewhat on
the left hand, between the Battalion and Granadiers: The Hoitboys marching in
the middle distance between the Colonel or Commander in Chief, and the
Granadiers.

In marching, the Colonel and all the o- Officers must march with their Pikes
underhand Comported, not suffering the Spear to descend too much, but keep it
steady from swinging, etc. But if they have occasion to Salute, they must, as
they approach, Shoulder all together, that is, every Rank of Officers as they
approach, carrying them level upon their Shoulders, performing the Salute, as
if it was the Action but of one Man; not must the first Rank of Captains
Salute, till the Colonel or Commander in Chief has performed it, not standing
still, or medning their Pace when they Salute.

The Officers pulling off their Hats, as has been directed in the standing
Salute, or in a Battalion drawn up for a Review. The Sergeants must march with
their Halberts shouldered, the butt ends uppermost, always upon this occasion
marching with their Hats off, when those that are to be Saluted pass by, not
any being to Salute the same Party more than once standing, and once Marching.

As for the Major, and the Aid-Major, they have not any fixed Post appointed in
Marching, but are attending for Orders on the Colonel or Commander in Chief;
and if an Ensign be absent, a Pike-man, as he is qualified, claims the carrying
or holding the Colors before either Sergeant or Corporal.

If it so happen, that a Battalion in the March be attacked, they must
immediately thereupon draw up, and face either the same way they March, or
wheeling to the Right or Left, recovering thereby what Advantages you shall see
necessary.

How a Battalion ought to the Ordered if Attacked.
IF you are marching in three Divisions, or a greater number, then if you be
Attacked, and obliged to wheel to the Right, the first Wing of the Musketeers
must draw up on the right of the Granadiers, and the Pikes on the right of the
right Wing of Musketeers, whilst the left Wing of the Musketeers takes the
right hand of the Pikes, which is done with more Ease and Speed than by
marching round the Rear.

As soon as you prepare for Defense, or the Chief Commander is for drawing up
the Battalion in the same Method, he gives the words of Command, that the Rear,
half Files of Musketeers do double their Front to the Left in Marching, and
upon the first Command to the Musketeers, to make ready, viz. (to be Cocked and
Gaurded) the Pike-men without expecting Command, are to Port their Pikes, and
the Drums to beat a Preparative, whereby the Rear must take notice to draw up,
and at the same time the Ensigns must give their Colors to the right hand Man
of the respective Companies, who immediately must retire with them to the
Center of the Pikes; and the Ensigns taking the Soldiers Pikes, must march at
the head of the Pikes: As for the Drums that before marched between the Ranks
of the Musketeers; as likewise those of the Granadiers, that are to be joined
with those Drums that march with the Pikes; and the Hoitboys must join the
Colors.

When the Drums beat the Preparative, the first Division excepted, every
Division is to march up with as much speed as may be, not breaking or falling
into any Disorder, the first Division marching slower, and not altering its
former pace.

The Ranks in marching must observe to close forward at six foot, which must be
well directed by the Sergeants who are to look to the Order.

The Granadiers are to be divided into three parts, no part exceeding each
other, and one of these parts must be with the Captain at the head of the
Pikes, about eight paces from the first Rank, and the other two parts on the
right and left of the Battalion, when those at the head of the Pikes are to
receive the word of Command, Present, and Fire, and the first Rank of
Musketeers are commanded to Kneel, and when they have fired, they must make
ready their Grenades, and after the two other Ranks Fire, then are they to
deliver their Grenades, and place their Daggers in the Muzle of their
Firelocks, and those Granadiers placed on the right and left of the Battalion,
are to make their Fire as the Musketeers Fire, viz The two last Ranks must fire
with the Musketeers, and when they have so done, they must fix their Daggers in
the Muzles of their Firelocks, then the Front of Granadiers must have their
Grenades ready, and likewise when the first Rank of Musketeers kneel, they
must do the same, and when the two last Ranks have fired, they must stand up,
and upon the fireing of the first Rank of Granadiers, they must deliver their
Grenades, and fix their Daggers in the Muzles of their Firelocks as the
others.

Observe, that when the Adverse Battalion is so near, that the Grenades may
fall amongst them, the Officers and Soldiers keeping their equal distance, the
Commander in Chief gives the word to Halt, at which the Drums must cease, and
the Officers whose Post is at the Front, must Rank at the head of the Battalion
two paces distant with their Pikes Ported, and four of the Sergeants that
marched with the Pikes before they drew up, must draw up with them, viz. Two
with the first Rank, and two with the last on the right and left of each Rank,
and the remaining Sergeants to be on the Ranks, and to be assisting to the
Officers in the Rear, who are to be those Officers that took their march in the
Rear before they were drawn up, and are to continue in the Rear of the
Battalion, to take care of it, all except the eldest Captain who is to come up
immediately to the head of the left Wing of Shot in the Front, and the
Sergeants are to be very exact upon the Battalion, drawing up to order the
Ranks at six foot distance, and the Files at the same, every Soldier for the
better use of his Arms, and the passage of the Enemies Shot, to keep at least a
Foot from his right hand Man.

When the Commander in Chief has given the word Halt, the next Command is,
Ranks of Musketeers Kneel.

This is to be done by falling back with the right Legs, without moving the
left, keeping your Muskets so low; that the two other Ranks without incommoding
may fire over them, and upon the giving this word, the Rank of Officers posted
at the head of the Battalion, must fall at once into the Intervals behind the
first Rank of Soldiers, taking care at the same time, that the Officers
perform their duties. The Officers having their Pikes in the posture
conformable to the Pike-men, and those with the Musketeers must observe to
kneel as the Musketeers do.

When the word of Command is given for the first Rank to kneel, the other two
Ranks of Musketeers are to close forward, and in the same manner the five Ranks
of Pike-men as they can with convenience, and use their Arms without any word
of Command.

Two last Ranks Present.

This must ever be observed to be done breast high, the first of the two
stooping without any word of Command, and at the same word the Pikes are to
Charge, and continue Charged.

Fire.

Retover your Arms.

At which word of Command the foremost or Front Rank must stand up without
expecting further Command, at the same time their Muskets being recovered
straight before them, Cockt and Gaurded.

Front Present.

Fire.

Recover pour Arms.

Club your Muskets.

Fall on.

This must be done with a Shout or Huzza, the Pikes continuing Charged, and the
Drums beating another Preparative.

Halt.

Upon this word given, the Drums must be silent, and now in case of a
Reduction, it must be done by this order of Command, etc.

Poise your Muskets.

Hereupon the Pikes must be recovered from the Charge; the Granadiers must take
their Posts, as before they were divided.

Shoulder your Muskets.

The Pike-men at this word of Command, must bring their Pikes to their Thighs,
to their Advance, the Rank of Officers Advancing together before the head of
the Battalion two paces.

Ranks open backward at twelve Foot distance.

March.

Rear half Files of Musketeers that doubled to the Right-about, as you were.

March.

Officers, Colors, Drums, and Hoitboys to your proper Posts.

March.

If it so happen that a Battalion be more than once to Fire in Exercise, then
before you fall on, instead of Clubing your Muskets, when the first Fireing is
over, the Musketeers as they March, must make Ready, and the Pike-men Port,
noting by the way, that every right hand Man (being a Pike-man) of each Company
must ever march with the Ensign's Pike.

The Drums must beat the Preparative at what time the first Division draws up,
either in Battalion or single Company, being the most ready way to give notice
to the Rear to draw up likewise; when the Preparative is beat, the Pikes
Shouldered are to Advance, except the Command be given to the Musketeers, to
recover their Arms, and then the Pikes are to Port, but not otherways in
drawing up, but at the Advance; neither must the Ranks close forward, or mend
their pace in Marching, but to draw up as at other times, except the Command be
given to the Musketeers, to recover their Arms, or make Ready being the same
posture, then they are ever to march, as has been before directed.

In Marching by Subdivision, what is to be observed.
IF a long March be designed for a Battalion by Subdivision, the Files must be
counted and ordered according to the wideness or narrowness of the ways they
are to March, posting one half of the Captains at the head of the first
Subdivision of Shot, and the other in the Rear of the last, dividing the
Lieutenants to every Subdivision of Shot for their better care of them, the
Colors being likewise divided to march at the head of every Subdivision of
Pikes, and the Sergeants are always to march on the Flanks, never leading or
bringing up a Division, except Commanded, and those Sergeants that are placed
at the Rere of a Battalion, when drawn up, are ever to take care of the Pikes,
in Marching; and in this way of Marching they are to March shouldering, in
Files, but not in such Order as to jostle, or incroach upon one another; and
although at sometimes it may fall out that more Men may be in one Rank than in
another, yet the Spaces must not be Left but they are to file in Marching
shoulder to shoulder, the Captains and Officers ever to March with their Pikes
underhand, unless it be when they pass by a General Officer, or advance before
a Guard, which they are to Relieve, or off the Parade, in which Cases they are
to shoulder.

Defiles, their Management.
A Defile, properly so termed, is a mirey Lane, or difficult Place of Passage;
if it happen withal to be narrow, and to make good the Passage you would draw
up as soon as you have passed it in order, then make the Ranks Files, and if
the Right, the Right Hand man is to File first, and the rest of his Rank must
follow him; then are they to Rank again as they were, which proves more
advantageous than Files fileing; for this Reason, viz. Because it presently
makes a Front to the Enemy; and in case of great Ranks, they may File two a
Breast, beginning with the outermost File-Leaders, and if the space will admit,
that is in large Defiles, the Commander may make a Front by Drawing off, as
appears best to his Discretion.

Wheeling, what it is, and how to b^ observed, etc.
WHeeling is a Motion in Military Exercise which, by turning, brings the Head
of a Battalion to the Flank ground, which is extremely necessary, if the Wing
of a Battalion be attacked, or when you see it advantageous to attack the Enemy
in the Flank; and on many other occasions as the advantage, or disadvantage of
War offers. But to the purpose:

The Battalion drawn up, the Officer in chief gives the Word of Command, March,
and when the Battalion wheels upon the first Head of the right hand File, then
it wheels to the Right, and when it does the like upon the Left, it wheels to
the Left.

A Quarter Wheeling is termed the first Wheeling, as it happens when they take
a Compass to possess their own, or the Ground left by another Battalion; and in
all Wheelings such compasses of Ground must be taken as that they leave no gap,
nor press each other out; and to avoid this, every Man must take notice of his
distance at File, the Word of Command being given to Wheel, and then if you are
to Wheel to the Right be sure to keep that distance from your right hand Man,
the Ranks taking great notice of their Leaders, closing very quick to the Left
in the Rear, observing to do the like to the Right, if the Battalion wheel to
the Left.

The manner of Wheeling a Battalion, or Body, when they March in Division.
The Battalion being upon the March, and commanded to Wheel, when it is so so
ordered to the Right, the right hand Man keeps his ground, only turning upon
his heel, whilst the left hand Man moves about with a swift pace, till he makes
an even Line with the right hand Man, and the Word be given to Stand, the
second Rank observing not to begin to Wheel till they have taken the ground of
the first; by which means every Rank is to March successively forward up to
their Leader's ground before they attempt to wheel, for therein lies the
dexterity of this way of Wheeling.

The Soldiers before they offer to Wheel must take notice of that hand in
Marching to which they are to Wheel, for as the Right hand Man is to be noted
upon the March when they Wheel to the left; so on the contrary the Left Hand
Men when they are to Wheel to the Left. If the Service requires Wheeling in
single Ranks, observe

The Manner of Wheeling in single Ranks.
When it is requisite for the Service to wheel in single Ranks for lining or
guarding. The Words of Command are, viz.

Ranks to the Right, or if to the Left, then

Ranks to the Left Hand Wheel, March.

The Right or Left Hand Man, to which the Wheeling is made, being to keep his
ground, only turning till the Line comes direct, the rest, being all to Wheel
together in one Rank, and at the Word of Command March, the Colors must wheel
in before the Ranks, the Drums taking their Places on the right and left of the
Ranks, as must the Sergeants observing that they be closed to the right or
left, without leaving any unseemly Spaces; and to Reduce again, observe the
following Order.

The manner of Reduction.
IN doing this, the left hand Man of each Rank must stand, and keeping his
Ground only turn about to the Left, and at the word March the rest that compose
the Rank must wheel to their places.

The manner of Wheeling backwards by Half Ranks.
Here you must observe there must as near as possible be an equal number of Men
in every Rank, the right and left hand man of each Rank standing firm on his
ground, and turn only to the hand named, the words of Command being, viz.

By half Ranks wheel to the right and left backwards, March.

Whereupon the Battalion opens the half Ranks, separating and falling back to
the right and left hand Men, which leaves an intervale, and forms two Ranks
opposite to each other, the Officers and Colors dividing in the same manner,
taking their Posts and Ranging before the Soldiers to make a Guard, the
Sergeants and Drums placing themselves equally on the right and left: This
being observed, the manner of Reduction is by these Words of Command, viz.

By half Ranks to the right and left inward. Form your Ranks as you were.
March.

Here the half Ranks are to wheel from the right and the left, and close the
interval, by which means they become whole Ranks; for having wheeled inward at
the word March, they are no more half Ranks but whole Ranks in a Marching
order. In case of Closings and Openings there are diverse words of Command
required, viz.

Ranks close forward to Order, viz. (three foot) March.

Ranks close forward to close Order, viz. (a foot and half) March.

Ranks open backward to Order, viz. (three foot) March.

Ranks open backward to open Order, viz. (six foot) March,

Ranks open backward to a doubling distance, viz. (12 foot) March.

In this manner of proceeding to open backward the Ranks must fall backward in
Order, without changing the Aspect, having ever regard to their Leaders and
right hand Men.

The further Words of Command are, viz.

Files close to the Right, March.

Files close to the Left, March.

Files close to the Center, March.

Files open to the Right, March.

Files open to the Left March.

Files open from the Center, March.

By the Files opening to the Center, is meant their facing from the Center, and
if there happen to be an odd File, that remains and is properly termed the
Center File.

When Files are to open to the right, or to the left, they must keep their
station without Changing in any manner, till the word March be uttered;
whereupon they are to face to the hand named, taking their distances commanded,
each from his Leader. In all Openings, as has been said, the contrary Man must
be observed; if the Command be to open to the right, the second File from the
right must by short steps first take its distance, suffering the Leader to pass
as far as it is commanded, before you move, the rest of the Files in their turn
and order observing to do the same; as for the left hand File it is not to
move; in all Openings they are to move directly forward with a slow pace.

Thus the young Soldier may his Duty Read,
But now to greater Things we must proceed;
The Rattling Drum and Trumpet calls us on
A Soldier's Work you know is seldom done
But ever Travels with the glorious Sun.
A further Consideration of Doublings, Relating to Foot, etc. and their
Reduction.
1. RAnks to the Right double, March.

2. Ranks as you were, March.

3. Ranks to the Left, March.

4. Ranks as you were, March.

In case of doubling the Ranks, those that are to do so, must observe their
right hand men, and move, as they move, beginning to move with the Foot next
the hand then named, and so to come into Order, this doubling the even Ranks,
must be observ^d to double into the odd, and when the odd Ranks are to double,
you must face the Body to the Rear, and the like words of Command will perform
it, or you may further proceed, viz.

Odd Ranks that stood to the Right-about, Double the even Ranks.

The Reduction of Ranks, etc.
Those Ranks that double, must face first to the contrary hand, and then with
the contrary foot bring themselves to the former Ground, but not to move in the
least, till the word March be given, and this is held upon all doublings of
Ranks, and half Ranks, notwithstanding the contrary hand is to be turned to,
they must double on to the Ground they double to, yet coming to their proper
Ground, they there must turn to the hand they doubled, and thereby they are
brought directly to their Leaders. And in the like manner Files are doubled,
remaining much the same with the Reduction of doubled Ranks.

The manner of doubling Front, half Files, by half Files of the Rear.
The words of Command in this case are,

Half Files to the Right Hand Double your Front. March.

Rear half Files, As you were. March.

Rear haal Files, to the left hand double your Front. March.

Rear half Files, As you were. March.

If this happen upon the March, the Rear half Files must then move into the
Front by a very swift motion, the Front half Files at the same time continuing
there, each observing the right hand Man.

In case of Reduction, the Rear half Files must not face about, but stand still
till the Front half Files are passed, and then fall in, and follow the proper
Leaders, but if the occasion require the Front half Files to be doubled by the
Rear, the Rear half Files must march a softly pace, observing their right hand
men, so that all the Ranks may double at one time.

Observe in Reducement, as it is in the doubling of single Ranks, that no man
must move till the word of Command, March be given, upon which they turn all
together upon the contrary hand they doubled on, and when they come up to their
own Ground, they must turn to the hand they doubled to.

Rear half Files doubled by the Front half Files.
Here the words of Command are, viz.

Front half Files to the Right-about, double your Rear half Files.

This word of Command given, the three Front Ranks, or three half Files must
turn to the Right-about, and going on the righthand of their Fellowers, or the
Rear half Files, they must double into them, and when they have doubled, face
to the Left-about to their Leader, without expecting any word of Command.

The manner of Reduction
The words of Command are,

Front half Files, as you were.

March.

Whereupon the half Files must march slowly, keeping at three foot from their
right hand Men, by which means they incline to the left, and are brought
directly upon their former Ground; and it is only doing thus, and observing the
contrary hand in doubling to the Left.

Now it remains that somewhat more particularly then has been said of the
several manners of Fireings be laid down, etc.

The manner of Fireing to the Front.
When the Soldiers are to Fire, and keep their Ground, it is expedient that the
Body be made close as well as in Rank as File, as will stand conveniently with
the use of Arms, and hereupon, Command must be given, viz.

Musketeers make Ready all.

Then they are to have their Arms straight before them ready Cockt and Gaurded,
and the Pikes being Ported, they must charge when the Musketeers Present, and
then ensue the further words of Command, viz.

The five first Ranks kneel.

The Rear Ranks Present.

Fire.

The Fifth Rank stand up.

Present.

Fire.

The Fourth Rank stand up.

Present.

Fire.

In this manner the rest must be Commanded, and when they have fired, they are
to Charge again, and make themselves in readiness, to expect the next word of
Command, and this Order of Fireing may be performed by two or three Ranks at a
time, the first kneeling, the second stooping, and the third standing up.

In fireing to gain ground, observe this Order, The Battalion marching, he that
is to give the word of Command proceeds thus,

First Ranks of Musketeers make ready.

Halt.

Upon this the entire Battalion must Halt, then he is to Command the Musketeers
of the first Rank,

To Present.

Fire.

And as soon as they have fired, they must recover their Arms, not expecting
any word of Command, and with a swift pace File off to the Right and Left into
the Rear, observing ever when the first Rank Presents, the next Rank is to make
Ready, and as the first files off, the next must make good the Front, Battalion
marching, and every Rank to fire in this Order, and at the presenting of every
Rank, the Pikes without Command.

The manner of Fireing to the Front, Retreating.
If the Enemy press your Battalion in Front, and you cannot make good your
Ground, you may to prevent their pressing on Fire, Retreating in single Ranks
in the same manner, as when you are to gain Ground, except, (after the fireing
of every Rank, and their having filed off to the Right and Left into the Rear)
instead of the next Ranks advancing to make good the Front of the Pikes, the
Pikes must make their Retreat to the Musketeers, who must keep their Ground
till the Pikes make an even Front equal with them, and the rest of the Ranks in
their Fireing and Retreating, are to observe this Method.

The manner of Fireing in the Flank.
If a Battalion be upon the March, and is constrained by reason of the pressing
of the Enemy to Fire, to both Flanks it is to be thus performed,

Keep the Ranks at six foot distance, and the intervals of that distance must
be carefully observed between the Muskets and Pikes in their Divisions, and
this must be done by causing the Musketeers to incline to the right and left
upon every fireing to the Flanks.

The words of Command are, viz.

To the right and left hand, Files of Musketeers, make Ready.

Which they must do, and keep along with the Body, not facing to the Flanks,
till they are commanded to Present; and when they have fired, they are to face
to the Rear; being thereupon lead a thwart very quick by the Sergeants, and so
up between their own Divisions and the Pikes, and as soon as ever the next
Flank Files Present, those that succeed or support them, are to make Ready
without expecting the word of Command, as is many other cases has been
instanced, keeping a long with the Body till they are bid Present and this
Order must be observed, till all the Files have fired, each man upon fireing
falling back with his right Leg, in case of fireing to the Rear, which many
times stands instead, especially upon being Charged by a greater number, or
upon a Retreat; you must observe the following Order.

The manner of Fireing in the Rear.
The words of Command directing this way of Fireing are first,

The Rear Ranks of Musketeers make Ready.

By which is understood Cocking and Guarding.

Then Present.

Fire.

Upon these words, the Soldiers must turn to the Right-about, casting their
left Legs backwards, then Present and Fire, which done, they must recover their
Arms without any word of Command, marching up into the Front, and there taking
their Stations, and note, that as soon as the first Rank is bid Present, the
next is to make Ready without Command, but must not face to the Rear till
Commanded to Present; and when the first Rank is bid to Present, the Pikes must
march till such time as the Rear of the Pikes are even with the next Rank of
Musketeers that have made Ready, by which means room will be left in the Front,
for that Rank that fires, to bring themselves up even with the first Rank of
Pikes, every Rank being to do the like by the same Order.

The manner of Fireing the Street-way.
THis Fireing is generally made to defend against Horse that attempt to Charge
in the Front, when the Pikes are few, then the Rear half Files of Pikes must
double the Front; upon this Command, viz. Rear half Files of Pikes to the
Right. Double your Front.

March.

Musketeers to the Right about, March.

The Musketeers being clear of the Pikes, the following Commands are to be
given.

Musketeers face to the Right and Left inwards.

March.

Upon this Command, they are to join the Center of the Pikes, and the
Commandan^ proceeds, viz.

Face to your Leader.

Hereupon the care of the Officers must b^ to observe the Shot, and the Pikes
equall^ Wing, the former keeping no more distance from the latter then to give
space for the Ensigns, Drums and Hoitboys to com^ between, then the Captains
are to take place in the first Ranks of the Pikes, and the Lieutenants with the
Musketeers; and according as the Body is bigger or lesser, one or more of the
Sergeants must see the two first Ranks of Musketeers to face to the right or
left, and when the Command is given by the Chief Commandant, viz. Port your
Pikes. The Musketeers of the two first Ranks must make Ready, and at the word
March, the two first Ranks are to be brought up by the Sergeants to the right
or left according as it is ordered, who by two and two siting up, they thwart
under the Pikes, and there they are to face to the proper Front, without
expecting any Word of Command, and to make two Ranks, and that some are may be
ever reserved, it is most expedient to fire but one Rank at a time, the second
being cocked or guarded to stand either of them as near to the Pikes as the
Management of their Arms will permit, then the Word is to be given, viz.

First Ranks of Musketeers kneel.

Upon which they must fall-back with their right legs, keeping their left
fixed, their arms-upright before them, their left hands even with their mouths;
then the further word of Command is given, viz.

Present.

Fire.

Immediately upon fireing they are to recover their Arms without expecting the
word of Command, and so file off on the contrary hand they advanced on, with as
much speed as they can, the Sergeants leading them close by the Body unto the
Rear, placing them there, in their proper Files.

The Musketeers being commanded to Present the Pikes must port very low without
any other word, and in the same Order to raise their Pikes as soon as they have
fired to their proper height, the sub-altern Officers always minding, that the
next Rank of Musketeers be ready at the Angle to make their March under the
Pikes, instead of the second Rank which is to take the Place of the first when
the first Rank has fired.

In this manner of fireing, if the street to be defended be very broad then a
space, or interval must be made, over and above the passage on the flanks,
sufficient for two Men a breast, which will prevent the Horse from making any
advantageous Attack.

To reduce this Order, the Words of command are, viz. Musketeers face to the
right and left outward, March; and as soon as they are quit the farther,
Command is given, viz. Musketeers to your proper Front March.

This they, must observe to do till such time as they are even with the first
Rank of Pikes, and then the Officers, Drums, Colors, and Hoitboys must take
their proper Posts.

Of the hollow Square, and the manner of forming it by Words of Command.
IF you proceed to this, the Battalion must be drawn up in Ranks, at Twelve
Foot distance, the Files being at three, then the Muskets shouldered, and the
Pikes advanced the Words of Command ensue, viz.

Colors, Drums, and Hoit-boys to the Center of the Pikes, March.

Ranks close forward to Order, March.

Three outward Files of Pikes on the Right and Left, double your Files to the
Right and Left inwards, March.

Half Files of Musketeers to the left hand double your Front, March.

Files close all to the Right, to your close Order, March.

To your Leader. Pikes face square. Pikes close forward to the Front. Left Wing
of Musketeers to the Right about. Both Wings of Muketiers March. Halt.
Musketeers Face to the Left, March. Halt. Face to your proper Front, all
Officers and Sergeants take your Posts, March. Granadiers take your Posts in
the Angles, March. Face square. Musketeers make ready.

At this Word the Pikes must be ported very low, when the Musketeers present,
and the next Word is, First Rank kneel, which must be done in such a manner
that the two last Ranks may advantageously Fire over. Then again, The two last
Ranks present, Fire. Having fired, the next is, Recover your Arms, upon which
the first Rank is to stand up with their Muskets recovered, ready cocked and
guarded, whereupon the two Ranks that have fired take the opportunity to Load
again, and these Words of Command ensue, viz. Front Ranks present, Fire, which
done, the Commandant proceeds, viz. Recover your Arms, and hereupon the Pikemen
recover from their Port, then again To your Leader, March, Halt, Face Square,
etc.

These being performed after the same Order, they may March, and fire to every
Front, noting that when they are hid to Face to their Leader, it must be to the
Commandant in chief, wherever he takes his Station; but in facing to the proper
Front it must be done to the Front of the Battalion, as it was before; it was
formed into this manner of Figure.

Words of Command used to reduce this Form.
The Battalion being faced to the proper Front, the Commander in chief
proceeds, viz.

Granadiers take your Posts on the right of the Battalion, March.

The Right and Left of each Wing of Musketeers Face to the Right and Left
outward, March. Halt.

The three Files of Pikes of the Right and Left that doubled as you were, March.

Musketeers Face to the Right, March. Halt.

To your Leader.

Rere half files of Musketeers that doubled to the Right about, as you were,
March.

Ranks open backward to Twelve Foot, March, Colors, Drums, and Hoitboys to
your former Posts, March.

Files close to the Right, to close Order, March. To your Leader.

Things proper to be observed by a Commander, being in an Enemies Country, etc.
HE must be careful to observe the situation of the Place, and gain as good
Intelligence of the Enemy as he can, and if he Command a Troop of Horse, he
must beware of skirting the side of a Wood, for fear of an Ambush, the strength
of Horse, consisting in the open Country, as that of the Foot does in a VVood;
for the Enemy is all ways to be expected to take advantage; it is therefore
dangerous for a Troop of Horse, by reason it may be fallen upon before it can
get to any secure Post.

An Officer of Foot marching through an enclosed VVoody Country, must avoid, if
he can, marching in the middle of a Plain, or too near a VVood, by which means
if the Enemy approach he will have time to consider what course to take; and if
he be attacked by Horse, then ought he to retreat unto the Wood, Skirmishing to
make it good; for if he get into it, the Horse will not attack him there; but
if he has to deal with Foot, and observes himself the weakest, he must regain
the last Defile, or narrow Post, and drawing up in Battalia, dispute it, till
he can better secure himself; and the like is to be observed by the Horse, if
overmuch pressed; wherefore it is good for a Commander to take special notice
of the places he passes through, sending his Scouts before him to discover the
Enemy, and search the Places where Ambushes are suspected; for although it be
in a Village, there may be a Party of the Enemy there, who will suffer the
Scouts to pass by, and conceal themselves till they see an opportunity to set
upon the main Body.

When an Officer is arrived where he intends to Encamp he ought to Draw up his
Men, and having set his Guards, he may permit them to take some ease, by
alighting from their Horses, if it be Horse, or if Foot, to repose themselves,
always facing toward the Town or Place possessed, or suspected to be possessed
by the Enemy, having, if possible, a Defile in the Front and Rear, or some
other security; to prevent surprise, the Scouts ought to be sent out from one
half hour to another, and when day appears they may venture farther into the
Country, and if there be no convenient Town, or Place, the best way, if two or
three days March in the Enemies Country, is to lie in a Wood when it has been
well searched, to prevent an Ambush; nor must an Officer suffer his Men to
straggle, though he be near a Friendly Town; for it may so fall out that a
Party may lie hid, who taking that advantage may fall upon him, and rout him,
though a lesser number; for there it is the Enemy most commonly lays
Ambuscades, thinking, as it often happens, that by a Confidence of Security
they shall find Men negligent and disordered.

When at any time the Word is required of a Party you meet, it is generally
given by the weakest, however it ought not lightly to be credited, nor the
Soldiers to Return their Arms till the Officer be assured whether they are
Friends or Foes; for many times a Deserter may betray the Word to the Enemy,
and he make an advantage of it.

Considerations in Marching an Army through an Enemy's Country, etc.
IF the War be carried into the Enemies Country, to besiege or relieve any
place whether the Enemy keep the Field or be beaten, Caution ought to be had,
especially in Case of the former, nor is it otherwise to be believed but he may
Rally again; wherefore it behooves the General to March close so that the Army
may be in a Condition to open its passage to do which it ought to be divided
into little Bodies the Cavalry placed upon the Wings in Front and Rear of the
Bodies, the Infantry, marching in the middle, in a gross Battalion, the
Artillary upon one side guarded by an experienced Regiment, and so it happens
that an Army never undergoes more difficulty than in an enclosed Country full
of VVoods, and Rivers especially if in an Enemies Territories where so many
difficulties will arise.

Of marching in a Woody-Country, etc.
THE most probable Advice that can be given in this case, is to send the
Pioneers supported by Horse and Foot, to cut open ways of more easy passage,
fill up the Ditches, and lay over Bridges, and to do what else is required,
getting by Scouts, and commanded Parties; what Intelligence there can be had,
and the General not trusting altogether to others, must be careful to inform
himself, and if he meet with a Bridge, or difficult Pass defended by Curtains,
Bastions, or any other Heights; the Engineers having well viewed it, it will be
convenient to detach a Party, to try whether the River be fordable, and these
being Horse, may carry over each a Footman behind them, which will more
facilitate the Passage, but if there be an Eminence to defend it, on which
Canon are placed, then he may raise a cross Battery in the most advantageous
place, and endeavor to dismount their Cannon; but if the Entry be fortified
with a Bastion, then a commanded Party of resolute Men must be detached to
attaque it, which must be done suddenly, and with much Vigor, for that daunts
the Enemy, when on the other hand, delay encourages them to stand out.

How a General ought to behave himself when he meets with Castles and strong
Fortresses in his March.
TO overcome these Difficulties, the Engenier and Marshal De Camp must look out
the most advantageous ground to place the Cannon for Battery, and observe the
Enemies Cannon how they bear, as also their Sally, Ports, etc. And if he
designs to make himself Master of them, he ought to take the most convenient
Posts, not only to annoy them, but to prevent their being Succored, and raise
a convenient Battery on the weakest side, or that which by the Approbation of
the Engenier lies most open to the Attaque, causing the ground to be
distributed for an Incampment, as the Quarter Master General shall think fit,
and if the place to be forced prove strong, Earth must be cast up to secure the
Approaches from the Cannon or Shot, running Lines Travers-wise, and Indenting,
so that they cannot bear upon those that approach, till they come to the breach
made by the Batteries, or undermining any part, where they can charge their
Mine, and throw down the Wall, but if it be not of extraordinary Strength,
requiring a formal Siege, then a resolute Party may be detached from the main
Body, supported by others with Scaling Ladders, Faggots, Spades, Shovels;
Pick-Axes, etc. to fill up a Trench or Ditch, whilst the Armed Bands attempt to
force the Gates with Petrades, or the like Engines, or scale the Walls, ever
maintaining and making good their Posts; but in this case the Methods are
various, as the Service required, offers it self more or less difficult; and
therefore we presume not to give exact Rules for what frequently alters.

Of Encampments, and how they are usually Managed.
THough the manner of Incamping frequently is attended with some Variation; yet
to give the young Soldiers an insight in these Affairs will not be unnecessary
as to what has been lately practiced.

When an Army, or any great Body is to Encamp, it is usually disposed in Lines
with a Reserve, concluding the ground at the same time to be convenient for the
so receiving them, and if the Lines are but two, there ought to be 300 paces
distance between them at a yard, the Pace and the Squadrons of Horse have for
every one five and thirty paces of ground allowed, and the like space between
the one and the other, that so without disorder, they may march out if there be
any occasion to Engage.

As for the Infantry, if they Incamp six deep, they must have 80 paces at three
Foot, the pace allowed, or more if the Situation of the ground require it, and
between the Squadrons of Horse and Battalions of Foot, the Line must be forty
or fifty paces distant. The Artillary ought to be placed upon the first Line of
Infantry at such Advantage as may best annoy the Enemy if they come to make any
Aattaque.

The Baggage and Ammunition take their place between the second Line and the
Body of the Reserve on the right Hand, and the Provisions on the Left, or near
the Tent of the Commissary General of Provisions.

The Quarter Master and Sergeants as well Horse as Foot, are to pitch their
Tents in the Front, or Head of their Squadrons or Battalions, and the other
Officers Tents behind: The principal Corpse du Gaurd, and the Parading place
claims to be at the head of the Camp, where the Arms, Ensigns, and Colors are
Lodged.

The Posts of the Horse are on the Wings, and the Foot take their Station in
the middle, and to every Squadron, consisting of three Troops, and fifty Men in
a Troop, fifty paces are allowed, and every Battalion consisting of 16
Companies, and 50 Men in each Company ought to have 100 paces for their
Incampment.

As for the Dragoons, they are not Encamped in the Body of the Army, but have
their Camp a little separate at the Head or Wings, to which the greatest danger
seems to threaten, as being the out-gaurd for the Army, and each Regiment ought
to have a Gaurd at the head of their Camp, and the Major General for that day
is to take care to place the great Gaurd in a convenient place, at a distance
from off the Army toward any expected Danger, which may discover any approach
before it come too near, and thereby prevent any Surprise, for Caution is to be
used where Danger is not, as well as where it is.

Remarks upon the Encamping of Horse.
IN Encamping a Troop, if it consist of 100 Men, they ought to have 70 Foot in
Front allowed them, and 200 in depth, eight Foot in breadth, and 12 in depth
must be accounted to two Horsemen to make their Hutts or Barques, and the Men
and Horses are to be Lodged in two Ranks, the Horses heads standing toward the
Hutts of their Owners, yet between the Hutts and Stables there ought to be an
Interval of eight Foot: The Captains Tent to be at the head of the Barques of
his Troop, possessing the whole Front, and between the Lodging of the Captain
and the Troop, there must be the space of 20 Foot, a Lane of 10 Foot must be
likewise between the Stables, that the Horses may be brought out without
incumbering each other, and behind the Troop, the Sutlers ought to place
themselves at about 20 Foot distance, and if any considerable number of Troops
Encamp together, then 20 Foot distance is allowed between Troop and Troop, or
more, as the commodiousness of the ground will allow.

The manner of the Incampment of Foot.
A Hundred paces is commonly allowed for the Incampment of a Battalion of Foot,
divided by the Quarter Master into several Stations, he allowing for each Hutt
or Lodging a Square of 7 Foot, 12. Foot to the By-street, and 15. Foot to the
great Street, and two Foot distance between Hutt and Hutt, every Company
composed of fifty Men, ought to have ten Hutts; and the Kitchen for dressing
Provision, ought to be just over against the Hutts at 12 Foot distance, the
length of the Kitchen 12 Foot, and the breadth 8, standing about 30 paces from
the Captains Tents, and 40 paces between the Tents of the Subalternate Officers
and the Captain, the remaining ground being for the Encamping of the Field
Officers, and this Captains Equipage, the Hutts of the Sergeants are to be at
the head of the Soldiers, opening to the Front, the Suttlers to Encamp behind
the Tents of the Officers at a convenient distance, and about 30 paces are
allowed between one Battalion and another; the Colonels, Field-Officers, and
Staff-Officers, Tents ought to be in the Center of the Battalion behind the
Captains Tents, and the Pikes to be at 18 Foot distance from the Hutts, the
Muskets to stand the like distance, and the Drums and Colors to be placed
within the hollow of the Pikes.

Things worthy to be observed in Relation to Garrisons.
THose Officers that take place in a Garrison are usually a Governor, a
Lieutenant Governor, a Major, Aid-Major, and Captains of the Gates.

The Governor above others is obliged in this case to have a care of the
Place, and see that there be no wrong done to the Inhabitants, and furthermore
he is to appoint the Guard Rounds, and Patrolls, to give the Word each Evening,
visit the Posts, keep the Officers and Soldiers in such Order that their Duty
be performed, observing that frequent Parties go abroad to get Intelligence,
and thereby prevent surprise; and in the Governor's Absence the Lieutenant
Governor has the same Charge upon him, and commands with the like Authority.

The Major's Care is to see the Guards mounted, the Posts and Rounds assigned,
he Orders the Sentinels, and goes every Evening to receive the Word from the
Governor, giving it about to the Quartermaster and Sergeants upon the Place
of Arms, and likewise goes his Rounds; the Major also visits the Corpse of
Guards, and observes that the Soldier's Arms are well placed, and in good
Order, ordering the necessary Ammunition to be distributed amongst them, he
takes care of the Gates being shut and opened, and is accountable to the
Governor of what passes, and gives him a Relation thereof, and indeed the
Officers that are in Garrison are to be obedient to the Governor or Commander
in chief, and not to stir thence, without leave in Writing.

The Captains of the Gate are to go morning and evening to the Governor's
House to receive the Keys, that they may open and shut them, and frequently
there is in the Garrison, if it be in a Frontire-Town more especially, a
Commissary of the Artillery or Store keeper, whose care it is to keep a
Reckoning of the Ammunition, and to distribute it according to the Governor's
Order, and always one Gunner is to be upon the Guard, at the Batteries. There
ought to be likewise a Commissary of the Provisions, and if there be any
suspicion of an Enemy, some of the Garrison ought always to be at the Gate, to
observe Strangers that go in and out, and the Sentinels are to suffer no Carts
or Wagons to stand or stop upon the Bridge, or under the Gate, and the
Innkeepers, and others, must give an Account to the Major every night what
Strangers they Lodge.

As for the exact time of Mounting the Guards it cannot be set down by reason
many vary, being set sooner, and others later, as pleases the Governor, but
the frequentest time is about Two in the afternoon; and whilst the Drums give
them that notice the Sergeants and Corporals cast Lots at the Major's House for
the Posts and Rounds, which are writ down in a Register to that intent; then
they return to their Companions, who assemble before the Captain's Quarters,
and if only detached Men mount, and not whole Companies, they are Lead by the
Sergeants, the Drums beating the while, as far as the place of Arms, and when
the Detachments are drawn thither, and formed in a Readiness to Mount the
Guards, the Major or Aid-Major, makes the Captains, even to the Sergeants, draw
Lots for their Posts and Rounds, always observing in the weakest Places to post
the strongest Guard with skillful Officers, and not till the Officers have
taken their Posts does the Major order the Main Guard, or Guard of Arms to
March off: then he causes those of the Gate and Bastions to do the like, and
after them, those that were without, and during the time the Guard is mounting
those Officers who are to be Relieved put their Men in a posture of Arms, and
Draw off from the Guard, posting themselves at the Head of their Soldiers,
over against those that are to take their Places, and deliver to them whatever
Orders there are, whilst the other Corporals do the like to the Corporals that
are come on, and those that are Relieved being Drawn up at the Place of Arms,
they are there dismissed, in order to refresh themselves.

Those Officers that have Mounted the Guard proceed thereupon to Command the
Soldiers to set down their Arms, the Pikes at that time being advanced, and
the Musketeers shouldered, which is done upon these Words of Command, viz.

Recover your Arms.

Ranks file off by Division to the Right and Left. March.

Set down your Arms in good Order.

This done, the Corporals upon the Soldiers setting down their Arms, receive
Orders to be careful in all things that they may be in a Readiness to prevent
Danger, or Surprise; and here the out-Sentinels upon the approach of any
Stranger, whether Horse or Foot, are to make him stand, and call their
Corporal, who is to give notice of it to the Officer, and he to send him to the
Governor's House, with a Guard, to know his Business, and if the Sentinels
discover any Troops, though at a great distance, they are to give notice to the
Main-Guard, and the Officers are to make the Barriers fast, and draw up the
Bridges, suffering none to pass unless an Order be brought from the Governor,
by the Major, or Aid-Major.

There is in all, or most Garrisons, a Bell to give notice to those that are
abroad to repair home a little before the time of the Gates being shut, and
then the Keys are fetched from the Governor, and returned again, so that none
can pass after the Gates are shut; and then one half of the Guards Draw off
upon the Rampart to pass that night in the Corpse of Guard in the Bastions or
Curtains and whilst some Soldiers are ordered by the Corporal to fetch Fire and
Candle, the Words are received by the Sergeants at the Place of Arms, and then
it is carried to the Officers, and dispersed about amongst the Corporals, and
after that, none, whether Townsmen or Strangers are to be upon the Ramparts,
without giving an Account of themselves, especially when the Taptooe is beaten;
and the Major himself, when he goes the Rounds is received by the Officers of
the Guards by their Corporal, attended by two Muketiers giving the Word but
once, viz. at his Round-Major, but when the Governor or Commander in chief is
received upon the Rounds he may require the Word as many times as he thinks
fit; all other Rounds are obliged to give the Word, and the Corporal receives
it with his drawn Sword at the Breast of the Party, and where there is the
least thing suspected in a Garrison, the Rounds go frequently as every quarter
of an hour, that the Ramparts may not be unprovided, and care is taken to know
who neglects; and thus Rounds are made with Light; wherefore at the Approach of
it, the Sentinel must demand Who comes there? with such an audible Voice that
it may be heard by the next Guard, and he that approaches must reply, or may be
in peril; for the Sentinel is not to let him come within his Arms, and the
Answer is generally the Round, the Round Major, or the Governor's Round being
to be received not by the Sentinel but the Corporal, who is called forth for
that purpose, and he is to bid him that has the Word Advance, which upon coming
forth he gives him in his Ear so softly that it cannot be overheard; but if
the Word be wrong, the Officer of the Guard is to have notice, and the Party to
be secured, if he sees occasion; and although in the nightime it is observed
that the Sentinels stand with their Pikes charged, and rest their Muskets upon
the passing by of the Rounds, yet in the daytime it is the contrary; for then
the Pikes are ordered, and the Muskets shouldered. As for the out Corpse of
Guard they pass the Rounds about the covered Ways; but there is no Word
required of them, they being only to listen, and give notice if any thing
happens.

As for the Patrolls they are made in the Street by a Sergeant, commanding
about six Soldiers of the Main-guard, and then the Soldiers are to be in their
Quarters, and all public Houses within the Garrison to shut up their Doors;
and at any time when the Alarm is rung all the Soldiers are to hasten and
present themselves before their Captain's Quarters, in order to his Leading
them to the Posts assigned by the Major; and when day appears the Reveille is
beat, and the ^eys are fetched again from the Governor, and the Soldiers are
commanded off the Romparts, and drawn in two Ranks with their Muskets
presented, till the Gates are opened, and a detached Party must be sent out
into the Suburbs, adjacent Villages, and narrow ways, the Bridge being drawn up
after their going out till they return and bring News the Coast is clear,
thereupon the Bridges are let down; then the out Centries being placed, the
Keys are carried back to the Governor, and the Soldiers are commanded to set
down their Arms, though where there are any considerable number of Horse in
Garrison, it is their Business to go out upon Parties, and see that the Roads
are clear, and every Officer is accountable for his Post, etc. All Governors,
or Commanders in chief, should have their Doors guarded by a Sentinel, or a
greater number according to their Quality in Command. These are the chief
things, and indeed the most material, and ought to be carefully observed; for
it has sometimes appeared that the safety of a Kingdom has depended upon a
strong Fortress.

A Survey of Warlike Fortification, and what is to be observed in Sieges, etc.
IF a Town be defended by Outworks, a Ditch, or Mote Bastions, Flankers,
Curtains, or Counter-mures, and the Garrison be strong, it was the old Way to
build Forts at advantageous Places, but now they proceed in a Siege, by making
Trenches, raising Batteries, Mining and gaining Lodgments, which indeed is the
quicker way, and the most secure from the Cannon of the Town. The best
Fortification is held to be built Octangular, by which means the force of the
Cannon is much abated; for the points of the Angle slaunt the shot, or if it
make a breach in the hollow Cavity, yet the Angles serve as Flankers on either
side to hinder the Approaches of the Besiegers, so that it has happened when
there has been a Breach wide enough to enter they durst not Attempt it; though
indeed the manner of Fortification is various throughout Europe, yet the late
Models have been indifferently uniform; and in case a Town be well fortified,
and an Army comes to Besiege it, a serious View must be taken, and the true
Nature of the Ground, as well as the Situation of the Place, enquired into,
with the Number of the Garrison, and especially the Courage, Conduct, and
Reputation of him that Commands; for as it is in an Army so it is in a Town, a
valiant Governor, whose Courage is carried on with Prudence, will better
defend it with a small Garrison, than some with a very powerful one, as the
famous City of Londonderry has instanced to the Immortal Honor of her worthy
Governor, Mr. G. Walker whose Name shall live in spite of all that Malice can
devise; Vienna likewise, under the brave Staremberg, in the year 1683. held out
till Relieved against an Army of 120000 Turks, being the Flower of the Ottoman
Empire, and yet neither of these Cities had any thing considerable to trust to
in their Fortifications: But to return.

The place being viewed, and the ground ordered to be broke, the Pioneers once
set on work, must make such places or Lodgings that those who enter them may be
able to succor their Fellows against any violent Sally of the Besieged, having
Issues and Passages for passing and re-passing as the best advantage shall
require.

Having made these Advances, the Artillery must be planted upon Batteries
raised with Earth, and staked with Timber, secured with Gabions or Baskets
filled with Earth, or else the Engineers cannot be secured from the Fire of the
Town, Wool-packs were formerly used on this occasion, and are not altogether
laid aside in the present management of Sieges, planting your Batteries
something aslant, that the Cannon if recoyling, may the easilier be brought up
again, and always in this there is one Battery bigger than the rest, called the
Royal Battery, which generally fronts the Town besieged, and is frequently
raised as high as the Walls, and these Batteries must labor to dismount the
Cannon of the besieged, as well as batter the Walls, for thereby the Enterprise
will be facilitated, but many times the Flankers are covered in a manner by the
Counterscarp, which must thereupon be laid open, or possessed by the besiegers,
to gain a more uninterrupted Access, and if the besieged Parley, and send out to
make terms, Hostilities ought to cease till those that came out are returned,
unless the besiegers will refuse to hearken to any Parley which is not often
observed, unless the matter be carried so far, that the breaches are laid open,
and there is no way or means for a longer Defense; then instead of gaining
Conditions, they are forced to surrender upon Discretion.

If by Battery, Mining, throwing Bombs, or a perpetual tiring the Enemy, the
Town is saultable, and a general Storm be intended, it must however be the
General's care as much as in him is to keep his intentions from the besieged,
but pretending one thing suddenly change, the Order into another, for by it the
Enemy is accused, and the Soldiers Spirits are kept up; this Rule was observed
by the Duke of Lorain in taking of Buda, and proved very successful, as it has
done in the like upon other occasion.

The Court Martial, or Council of War, what is to be considered therein.
IT is necessary the young Soldiers should have some insight in this Affair,
to prevent his ignorantly incurring Danger, and in this Case in an Army, or
Incampment, the Council of War meet at the General's Tent, or Quarters, and to
this are called the Lieutenant-Generals, the Major-Generals, the Brigadiers, as
likewise the Colonels, and Commanders of Bodies, where it is requisite, or
that the Matter concerns their Regiment.

There are private Court-Martials, or Councils of War, frequently held in
Garrisons, and these may be held at the Governor's House, or in any other
convenient place, as the Governor shall appoint; or if it be in a Camp it may
be at the Collonel's Tent, and he thereupon is to send notice to the Captains
of his Regiment to be present; those whose business it is to be there being
assembled, the Colonel, or Governor, or whose Right it is to be President,
takes place at the upper end of the Table, and the Captains in their Degree,
and if there be no Judge-Advocate, or he be absent, the Town-Major, Aid-Major,
or Quartermaster, discharges that Office, and accordingly takes his place at
the lower end of the Table. As for the Lieutenants, Sub-Lieutenants, and
Ensigns, they have Privilege to be there but only as Spectators with their
Hats off, and if the Matter be of consequence, after it is opened by the
President, the youngest Officers gives first his Opinion, and so the rest in
Order, the President being the last, and being put all in Writing, the Matter
happens conform to the plurality of Votes and then is to be signed by the
President; if the matter is to be judged of by this Council or Court, then the
Party accused is brought before them, and being informed of what he stands
accused, the Questions proper to the matter of his Accusations are asked him,
and then he has Liberty to reply, as in case of civil Judicature, when being
withdrawn in the custody of the Marshal who is the Jailer of this Court, the
proof against him is considered, and every one gives his opinion upon his
Conscience, and he stands or falls by the plurality of Voices, and being called
in and made acquainted with what has been determined, the Sentence is
pronounced by the President in the name of the Court, etc. and if he be guilty
it is the business of the Provost Martial to see it put in Execution, and if the
Punishment be public, the Regiment ought to be drawn up Spectators, as a
warning to them in offending, etc. but a Soldier for the Honor of the
Profession is not to undergo any infamous Punishment before he be degraded of
his Arms, and his Coat in public stripped off, and to frame this Court, there
must be no less than Seven, the President being one, many times for want of a
sufficient number of Superior Officers, Inferior Officers are admitted, but
not often.

Of diverse Figures in Battel-Array, or for Fireing, etc.
THere are various Figures wherein an Army or a Body of Men may be drawn up,
besides these we have named, wherefore for the satisfaction of the more
curious, and for the greater variety, it will be convenient to incert them by
way of Prospect, etc.

If you would draw up a cross Battle in the following Figure, you may do it
with a private Company, or as many as you please, and to bring them into form:
The words of Command are, viz.

The first two Ranks wheel your Front into the midst.

The two last Ranks wheel your Rear into the midst.

These words being given, the next Command must be,

The rest of the Body Face to the right and left, March.

The March must be continued till the Rear of the four Divisions make an even
Hollow that may be square, after that, the Commander must go into the middle,
and give these words of Command, viz. To the Center face all, by which means he
may give them directions what to do, and then proceed further to say, Face all
about to the Right, which makes the cross Battle.

Of the two Divisions, one after the other, Then Face all to the proper Front.
So you have all your Musketires in the midst flanked with Pikes, Then
Musketeers Face.

cross-shaped battle array, in which each arm of the cross is labeled Front S.
The Cross Battle.


Face to the right and left outward. Pikes face to the right and left inward,
pass through and interchange ground. So is your Body reduced to its first Front
and Order.

If you would fire upon this Figure, consider there are two ways in general,
and of these first it is to be noted when the Musketeers give Fire, thereupon
placing themselves in the Rear of their own Division, the next Rank is after
they have Fired, place themselves in the Rear of the Pikes.

To Reduce the Cross Battle.
The Officers in the middle must give the Command, viz. Face all to the Center:
And then further proceed to Command those Divisions that were Flankers, viz.
Close to your Order.

The four fronted Battle, called the Plynthium, how to frame it by Command.
TO order this, the Command must be, viz. Half Files of Pikes Face to the Rear.

March.

This they must observe till clear of the Ranks of the Musketeers, and then the
Command is,

Half Files of Musketeers Face to the Right and Left.

March.

This must be done in marching between the Divisions of Pikes, then the further
word is,

Left half Ranks of the first Division of Musketeers Face to the Right, and
March between the Rear Division of Pikes.

In this case it is noted, that the Musketeers must be in the middst, and the
Pikes as Flankers.

the plynthium, a four-fronted battle array The Figure of the four Fronted
Battle, etc.


To Fire upon this Figure, the Musketeers must do it in Rank, and after
Fireing, wheel off to the Right, making their passage through the intervals and
placing themselves in the Rear of their own Division successively, maintaining
the same Ground, or if you would bring the Musketeers to the Angles, and reduce
the Pikes to the middle, then must the Musketeers take place on the Flanks when
you make the Figure.

To reduce this Figure.
The whole Body is commanded to Face to the proper Front: And then,

Musketeers in the Rear March up on the Left of the Musketeers in the Front.

Musketeers in the Flank Face inward, and close your Division.

These Commands given, cause the Pikes to march up, taking their places
directly after their Leaders, and by that means they will be brought into a
sollid square: The Commands are,

Musketeers Face to the Right and Left inward.

Pikes Face inward interchanging Ground.

The Hollow Fronted Cross Battle, how to form it.
THE Files in this case being eight Men in depth, the words of Command are thus
to to be given,

The two first Ranks wheel your Front into the midst.

Two last Ranks wheel your Rear into the midst.

The rest Face to the Right and Left.

March.

Here they must move until they have made the Cross, then the Musketeers must
Flank the Pikes, as for example in the following Figure.

the "hollow fronted cross" battle array Proper Front.

Front of the Right Flank.

Front of the Rear.

Front of the left Flank.



If you come to Fire in this Figure, it may be done every way as at Front, Rear
and Flanks, the Fire made, they must wheel off by Division, and take their
stations in the Rear of their own Division, moving forward into the Leader's
Ground, that the form of the Figure may not be altered, and when the second
Fire is given, the Pikes must move leisurely up, Porting as they Advance, till
they make an even Front with the Musketeers, the second Fireing being made,
those that fired are to wheel, and place themselves in the Rear of that
Division of Pikes which they Flanked, which order, all the Ranks must observe
upon Fireing, and by the Pikes, Charging and Re-advancing, the Figure will be
preserved, and the Reducement may be observed in what is directed for the
Reducement of the cross Battle.

How to frame the hollow Square with Angles when required to be guarded with
Pikes.
IN this case the Pikes being Advanced, the Command must be,

Pikes close your Divisions before the Musketeers.

Pikes face all to the Right.

upon this, they must Advance and move into the space between the Angles of the
Musketeers, by which means the following Figure will be formed, etc.

"hollow square with angles" battle array Front.


In fireing upon this Figure, you have your choice to fire either to the Rear,
Front, or Flank, as many Ranks as will stand with convenience, who upon fireing
must wheel off and keep the ground, or upon fireing, they may retire into the
Figure and charge for a second fireing.

How to form the Quintuple hollow Square, etc
IN forming the following Figure, the Musketeers having made Ready, and taken
their station in the middle, make the hollow Front cross Battle by wheeling the
Front of the two first Ranks into the middle, which done, the Rear of the two
last Ranks must be wheeled into the midst likewise, then the rest of the Body
must Face to the Right, and the Left and March, till they have formed a Square,
whereupon the words of Command are,

Face to the Front, Rear and Flanks.

This done, the Pikes in the Front of the Musketeers must be Commanded, viz.

Open to the Right and Left.

Upon this, the last Rank of Pikes must be even with the first Rank of
Musketeers, and then these words of Command follow, viz.

Two first Ranks of Musketeers of each Division move forward clear of the
Pikes.

This done, the following Figure will be produced.

"quintuple hollow square" battle array

In fireing upon this Figure, the Command is,

Musketeers in the midst, close to the Front, Rear, and Flanks.

Fire, etc.

The Musketeers ought upon the first fireing to make good their Ground, the
second time fireing over, they must Rank even with the Pikes, and upon the
third fireing, the Pikes must move somewhat forward, and the Musketeers loose
Ground, by which means a hollow Fronted Cross is formed, and the Pikes must
Port and Charge in the Angles, whilst the Fire is made by the Musketeers.

The form of a hollow square Battle impaled with Shot.
TO bring this into Figure and Order, the Sergeants must draw forth the odd
Files on the right Flanks as well Muskets as Pikes, then give Command to the
odd Files of the left Flank, Pikes and Musketeers, viz.

Face to the Rear.

This must be observed in wheeling to the left Cross, the Rear following, the
Bringers up, then the Command to the rest of the Body is*

Close to the Right and Left outward.

This must be till the Rear Angles of each Division be in opposition to each
other, then the Command is,

All Face to the Center.

Face all about to the Right,

By this means the following Figure is formed.

hollow square battle array

Noe, In these Figures, that C stands for Commander in Chief, L for Lieutenant,
E for Ensign, S for Sergeant, and D for Drums, P are Pikes, and M Muskets.

To Fire upon this Figure, when the Ranks of Musketeers have presented and
fired, they are to wheel off to the right and left through the Intervals, that
so they may be made in the middle of each Division, as appears in the Figure,
and then they must place themselves in the Rear of their own Division, the next
Rank moving into their Ground, or if any urgency require it, the Musketeers
having fired, they may wheel off and take their station in the Rear of their
following Division of Pikes, which Division is to move forward and maintain the
Musketeers Ground.

If you would reduce the Order, the word of Command to the whole Body is,

Face to the left Angles of the Front Division.

Upon this, they must March and even their Ranks, and straighten their Files,
upon which the half Files must double their Ranks to the left forwards, and the
first Order will be regained.

Directions or general Observation in giving Battle.
THough there can no certain Rule be ascribed where the Contingencies are
various, yet it has been observed by experienced Commanders, that Rules are
necessary, wherefore a Commander must avoid engaging against his Will, as much
as in him lies, and take the happy moment to charge the Enemy, when he sees an
active Liveliness, and sprightly Vigor in his Soldiers, chosing the most
advantageous Ground according to the quality and number of his Men, sheltering
for fear of being enclosed, one of the Wings or Flanks to a place strong,
either by Nature or Art, and bring on the Divisions of Horse and Foot at their
ordinary distance, placing the best Regiments of Horse and Foot on the Wings;
if the Enemies out front you on the contrary Wing, it is requisite, then the
contrary Wing must march leisurely, and give the Charge as soon as ever the
Cannon is playing, and if your Division of Horse out-flank the Enemy, then may
they wheel and charge them in the Flank at the same time, the rest of the Horse
are charging in the Front, and likewise it may be done on both Wings if they
exceed the Enemy, but if your Horse be few in number, the best way is to keep
near the Foot, the better to be sheltered if need require by the favor of
their Shot, or there is a further security, to draw up on the outermost Flank
of the Wing of Horse that is out-flanked, the Rear Guard of Horse of the same
Wing; and this must be done with speed, or if it happen that your Divisions of
Horse do front the Enemies Foot, when you are out-flanked by their Horse, then
ought the Officers to draw off the Division and place them on the outermost
Flanks of that Wing which is out-flanked, and in all matters of War Diligence
and Expedition is wonderfully available with caution not to let your Councils
be discovered to the Enemy, which if you suspect to be done by any Disserter or
Prisoner taken, it will be requisite to change them so far as is convenient.

depiction of a siege A Prospect of Grim war you here behold,
Sieges and Battles we In this unfold.
To Show In peace what dreadful Mars dos teach.
By which you may fames higest glory Reach.


THE SECOND PART: OR THE Expert Engenier: Being the ART of GVNNERY, AND Making
Fireworks for WAR and other Matters. Serving as a SUPPLEMENT To the foregoing
TREATISE.
AS great Ordnance are an essential part of War, so it will not be a miss, but
altogether convenient to give the Practitioner in Enginry a prospect of those
Affairs that must unavoidably concern him, and therefore he that would improve
himself in this kind either by Land or Sea, must first be careful in knowing
what Materials are requisite, as also to be skilled in Geometry and
Arithmatick, the better to know what measures to take on sundry occasions that
vary in themselves.

And to this purpose, the Gunner must ever have Rammers, Scoups, Ladles,
Sheepskins with the Wool on, to sponge or clear the Piece; as likewise Canvas
or fine Past-board to make Cartridges for the Powder, when the Piece is hot
with often discharging, least the Powder being put in lose, it fire of it self,
he must have spare Wheels, and Axel-trees, least any should break in the way,
and so delay the March of an Army, which frequently happens to its great
detrement, shot he must have of fuch sizes as the Pieces will bear even to the
full of the Calliber, least forcibly rattling against it flaw the Piece; he must
likewise have case Shot to break the Front of an Enemy, open a Passage, on
clear a Deck when borded; likewise hand Spikes, Budg, Barrels, Baskets to carry
Shot, Match, well Armed Linstocks, Torches, dark Lanthorns, and Compasses to
measure the Piece and Shot, and to prevent breaking the Charge, must be
proportioned according to the thinnest Metal of the Piece, and in this case,
the Charge being put in with your Scoup; if you are to Fire upon a Line, or
under Metal, you must be sure to clap in a good wad after it, and ram it down,
or else the hollowness of the Powder may chance to burst the Piece, not only to
the defeating your Design, but to the killing and wounding many Persons near
it, which has but too sadly happned by carelessness; and to move or travers your
Piece, beside, hand Spikes or Leavers, you must have Crows of Iron, Coins of
Wood to lay it above or under Metal, taking care to know the depth of the
Chamber of the Piece, that the Charge may be agreeable, for if the Shot be to
light, or too heavy for the Charge, it will never answer your expectation.

Of Artillary, there are several kinds, viz. the Falconet, the Basilick, the
Rabinet, the Falcon, the Minnion, the ordinary Minnion, the Sacker, the lowest
sort, the ordinary Sacker, the Sacker of the elder make, the lowest
Demiculverin, the eldest sort of Demeculverin, the ordinary Demiculverin,
Culverin of the best size, ordinary Culverin, Culverin of the largest size,
lowest Demicannon, ordinary Demicannon, Demicannon of the great size, Cannon
Royal, or whole Cannon, being the biggest of all Ordnance.

According to the bigness and weights of the several Pieces, they must be
charged both with Powder and Shot, and if we suppose a Piece to be in length
eight Foot, and that this Piece weighs 1500 Pounds, having four Inches Diamiter
in the Bore, and you would know how much it requires, take notice that it
requires four pound of Powder to carry a Shot of sixteen Pound 160 paces at
five large Feet to the pace, and do Execution, unless the Piece be defective,
by reason of Flaws or Honicombs within, and to try the first of these as soon
as ever the Piece is discharged, stop the Muzzle of it, and the Touchhole, and
if there be any Flaws that come through, you will perceive the Smoke work
through them, this is to be known likewise by an Iron Handspike, which will
cause the Piece to jar, if the Flaws are considerable.

The Honicombs are certain spunginess or defects of the Metal in casting,
which may be perceived by reflecting the Light of a Looking-Glass held against
the Sun into the Mouth of the Piece, or putting in a piece of Candle on a long
Cleft-stick.

The Terms of describing a Piece and Shot, etc.
THE outward Ring of the Breech is called the Cascabel Deck, that Ring next the
Touchhole is called the Base Ring, and that place between the Touchhole and
the next Ring, is called her Chamber or Charging Cillinder, the next Ring is
the Ramforce Ring, the third the Tronion or Balance Ring, and that next the
Muzzle is called the Cornice Ring, and the uttermost Extremity is the Muzzle,
the hollow is called the Caliber, the top the Superficies, and the whole length
the Chase, so that he that will be a Gunner, must have these distinctions at
his Fingers ends as ready as a Sailer has the points of the Compass.

As for the Shot used, it is generally Iron, but sometimes Lead, and for want
of these Stone, and these must be considered according to their weight and
bigness, for there is a disproportion, if we consider the equality of their
Weight, and this not being well observed, may be of great hindrance in hasty
Exterprizes, and the proportions are these.

Between Lead and Iron six to nine, by which it is observed, that a Shot of six
Pounds Iron, is as big as nine Pounds Lead, and the proportion between Iron and
Stone is three to eight, so that there is eighty to thirty, for a Shot of Stone
of thirty Pound is proproportionable in bigness to an Iron Shot of eighty
Pounds; and in this manner you may guess of any kind.

How to make Cartridges, etc.
IN case a Piece is very hot by Exercise, and will not endure the Powder, then
a Cartridge is necessary to make them; you must have a Rowler of Wood to the
bigness of your Piece, on which you must role Past-board or Paper, pasting it
as you role, that it may lie firm and smooth, then having dried the cases, fill
them with Powder, and choke them at both ends with a small Cord, or you may
stop the ends with Flax, and put it into your Piece, forcing it with the Rammer
into the charging Celinder, then with a sharp Iron bore it at the Touchhole
and Prime.

If you would shoot red hot Bullets as many times, it is done at Sieges to fire
Houses, you must when you have rammed down your Cartridge, force a green Turf
upon it, and then sling in the Shot, this way has been common, especially at
Sea, but since Bombs, Hand-Granades, Stink-pots, etc. have been in use; it is
not often practiced.

Observations in Ballancing a Piece.
YOU must ever observe in Marching, that the Carriages are proportioned to the
Piece, to prevent overthrowing, or breaking, so that to set them true, one and
a half of the length of the Cellinder or Chamber should be the length of the
Carriage-Stock, and the depth of four Diamiters of the Concave of the Bore in
the middle, but at that part next the ground, about the proportion of the
Diameter of the Shot will suffice; as for the Wheels they must be strong, and
their height for Land-Service about half the length of the Piece, but on
Shipboard lower Carriages are in use, the Turneons or bearers of the Piece must
be laid on equal heights upon the turning Irons of the Stock, that the Piece
may stand true mounted, least swerving to any side the Shot become Random, and
in this case two thirds of the Piece must appear above their Center, having
Cordage ever ready to move or turn them, especially for braces at Sea, for many
times a Ship is over-set and in danger to be lost by their breaking loose
through the defect of Tackle.

Further Instructions necessary to be known.
EVer observe that your Budg-Barrel, Leather Bag, or Cartridges of Powder lie
on the windy side of you, least a spark flying from your Match blow it up, and
after a Discharge having cleansed the Concave with your Sheeps-Skin, Furbisher,
fill your Ladle, but not so full as to scatter any, and having Charged it as
home into the Piece as you can, give it a sudden turn with your Thumb and
Finger, keeping your Body for your own safety clear of the Muzzle, and so
quickly drawing it out, clap in your Wad, and force it down, that the Powder
may not lie hollow in the Chamber, then put the Shot in and wad it down, having
the Touchhole all this while covered, least any spark should fall in, then
having a Linstock well armed with a good Match and Coal, prime with small
Powder, drawing a Train from the Touchhole, and fire one end of it, for if you
should hold your Match upon the Touchhole, the force of the Powder would blow
it away.

Directions for Shooting at Random, or at a Mark.
IF your business lies to shoot at Random, or at a Mark, then you are to
consider the Random of a Piece is its entire distance from the place where you
discharge, to the place where the Bullet first lights or grazes o a level Line,
called a Horizential plain, and to gain the true knowledge of this, the ground
must be level where it is put in practice, so that the level of the shot may
not be hindered, and having taken notice of the distance of ground from the
Piece to the fall of the Bullet, mount the Muzzle a degree higher, observing
again the same notice, by which through many degrees you will be capable of
knowing, upon the level or Ascendant, how many paces the Piece will carry with
more or less Powder, which may be raised even to a tenth degree, or as high as
the Piece can be mounted, so these distances well understood, the Gunner may
know how to direct his Piece either at a Bastion, Castle-Wall, Curtain, Ravelin
Counterscarp against the Batteries of Besiegers, or into their Trenches, or he
may batter the Ranks of an Army at a great distance, and many other things
incident to true Rules of Fireing even to the striking a Ship under Sail, but
in fireing at any thing in Motion, you must consider the swiftness of it, and
Fire in your aim a distance before, and so the Bullet by that it moves that
space will be there, for although a Bullet is carried with great impetuosity,
yet all Motions require time more or less.

If you would strike down a Light in the Stern of a Ship, or in a Castle if it
be in the Night time, you must stick directly on the top of the Muzzle of your
Piece, either a piece of Wax-Candle lighted, or a fired Match, by which means
you will bring that and the other Light together, so as to take a fair Mark,
and to know whether they are brought together, stick up a Nail with a piece of
Wax or Clay on the breach of the Pice, and bring that and the other two to bear
with each other.

How to take out a Shot that sticks in a Piece, and cool her to make her
recover her Force.
IT many times happens through too much hastiness, or that a Shot is mistaken,
or that the Powder, for want of being rammed down, makes it stick half way, so
that it is dangerous to discharge it, without breaking the Piece; in this Case
let it descend, lowering its Muzzle, and then having dissolved Bay Salt, or
other Salt, in some Vinegar put it into the Touchhole with a Funnel, and it
will dissolve the Powder; then strike on the Piece with a Hand-spike where the
Bullet lies, and it will roll out, having before given it a thrust or two with
the Rammer to loosen it.

It is taken notice on by all Gunners that the oftener a Piece is discharged, it
by growing hot, looses more, and of it is force, and will not carry the third or
fourth time so far as it will the first or second, every time abating somewhat,
so that you must cool it, which is much the better done with Vinegar; for that
not only carries off the heat, but by the sharpness of it is Quality recovers
the lost force.

What Powder is made on, and how to try its Goodness.
POwder, a fatal instrument of Death, and almost of incredible Force, was first
found by one Bartholdus Swart a Monk, by a spark of Fire accidentially falling
amongst some of his Chimical Preparations, but since as to its Force, has been
much improved, it is made of the Quintessence of Saltpeter, Brimstone, and
Coal Dust, by grinding and other means, however in long lying after it is made,
it will loose much of its Force, the strength of the of the Saltpeter, tending
downwards, and that of the other matters upwards, and the first thing to know
whether it be good or not, is to handle it, and observe whether it be well
dried and corned, this being noted, lay a few Corns scattering upon a sheet of
white Paper, and set Fire to them, when if so it happens, there is a black
Mark, or sindge with a noisome smell left behind, then the Powder is not good,
but if there be little or no Mark, or a clear bluish Mark, then conclude it
fit for Service, but noughty Powder may be made up again, and strengthened with
Saltpeter.

How to Charge a Mine, blow up a House, to prevent the Progress of Fire, or a
Ship that is Sunk.
1. MInes are various, some already advantageous by Vaults, others must be
carried on under Ground, great difficulties being met withal, as Rock or
Springs of Water, however the Mine being made, if there be any considerable
quantity of Water, the Mines for dryness of the Powder ought to be Charged with
Barrels of Powder, whereas those that are drier may be Charged with Bags or
Sacks, the Train may be laid by Match, and six Inches of good Match will burn
an hour, but if it be for quick Execution, a Train may be laid into some Trench
through Cain Troughs or upon Boards, and great Care must be taken that it be so
Charged, that it refund not, or burst out upon those that spring it.

2. To take a House directly up, that it shall fall directly, as we may say in
the place where it stood, though shattered to pieces, place the Powder, if
there be any Cellers directly under the main Beam, lay a Train upon Boards from
the Bung-hole of the Barrel, covering it to prevent Sparks falling in the
Train, and place at the head of the Train a piece of Wildfire, when having
given notice by beat of Drum, set Fire to that with your lighted Match at the
end of a Linstock, and retire to a coverture for fear of any scattering Tiles
or Timber, if you would throw it sideways from the Fire, you must place the
Powder near the contrary side under the most substantial Beam, and it will cast
it as you wish, so that the Timber may be drawn away without danger.

Many times it happens that a Ship sinks in a River or Channel, and is not
worth weighing, yet obstructs the passage, especially at low Water, here you
must send down a Diver to find the entrence in the hold of the Ship. and that
found, fix a Leather Pipe with Pitch or Rosin into the Bung of the Barrel of
Powder, that the end of the Pipe may be above Water when the Barrel is in the
Hold which must be sunk and guided down by Cords, then the top of the Pipe
sloating by help of Bladders, the Boat that waits must with a long pair of
Tongues put a hot Iron Bolt down it, and make of as fast as may be, else the
Powder taking Fire, the Wreck will float and endanger the over-setting it, or
this may be done with a long hollow Fishing Cane.

Fireworks for War, used on sundry occasions, the manner of making and using
them.
MOst Fireworks used in Sieges are of late thrown out of Mortars, the best
Mortars being made of Brass or Copper, though sometimes they have been made of
Past-board and Wood.

If the Bore of a Mortar happen to be ten Inches in Diamiter, it ought to be a
Foot and nine Inches in length, and the Chamber three Inches and a half in
Diamiter, and in depth five Inches, the Metal above the Port, Fire, to be
three Inches and a half in thickness, and so lessening to two Inches; as for
the planting these Mortas, the ways are not difficult, for they are mostly
played Mounting, yet the Engenieer ought to be well skilled to direct a Granado
Shell to any particular place, for upon his delivering it, he ought to know
justly where it will fall; likewise his Fuzes must be so exactly made, that
they will not break till they are in the place designed for Execution.

How to make, or Order a Granado.
A Granado is first properly called, so in relation to its Shell, for the Shell
to contain the matter are cast with hollow caveties, and a small vent
frequently of Iron, but some times Brass, Copper, Glass, and Earth, these, if
designed to blow up, or beat down, are usually filled with dry Powder, and an
Iron hollowed or Pistol Barrel rammed with Wildfire made of Brimstone Flower,
Dust of Powder, Saltpeter, and Oil of Petrolum drove into the Vent of the
filled Shell to an Inch, when the Mortar being Charged, the Granado must be
slung in with Ropes put in the Hooks of the Shell if it be very great, then
having taken your Aim, you must a minute before you give Fire, Fire the Fuze,
then by Fireing the Mortar, send it away to the place designed; and of such
deadly force is this Engine of Mischief, that falling upon a Castle, Church, or
House, it breaks through to the lowermost Flore, beating down all before it,
and then blows up and rends in a terrible manner, the Shell breaking in a
thousand pieces.

FINIS.

