A Perfect Narrative OF THE APPREHENSION, TRIAL, and CONFESSION OF The Five
several Persons that were Confederates in Stealing the Mace and the Two Privy
Purses from the Lord High Chancellor of ENGLAND. As it was Attested at the
Sessions held at Justice-Hall in the Old-Bayly, the Seventh and Eighth of
March; Anno. 1676/7.

With Permission.

Printed for E. Oliver, at the Golden-Key on Snow-hill, over against St.
Sepulchres-Church. MDCLXXVII.

A Perfect Narrative of the Apprehension, Trial, and Confession of the Five
Several Persons that were Confederates in Stealing the Mace and the Two Privy
Purses, from the Lord High Chancellor of England, etc.
MAny and Intolerable are the Injuries and abuses that are committed almost
daily within the City and Suburbs of London, I need not run no further to find
out Examples that may equallize the Barbarian Infidel, do but consider in what
Sphere we move; with double diligence our Natives run to hasten others and
their own destruction; one Brother cannot put confidence in another, but still
is fearful, least he should betray him; one Neighbor hates another, and are
grown so Implacable and almost Incorrigible, that did not timely Justice
Supercede, no man could find a safety in his own Castle: the super-viewing of
each Sessions will demonstrate the Vices and Perverseness of our Times.

But not to Derrigate too far from the Intended Subject of this Present
Narrative; I shall give you an Account of the Audacious Burglary that was
Committed on My Lord Chancellor, the Sixth of February, being Tuesday-Night,
One Thousand Six Hundred Seventy Six, and the Parties that were Apprehended the
Saturday-night following.

The manner of their Apprehension was thus. Some of the head of the gang had
taken a Lodging in Knight-Riders-Street, near Doctors-commons; and there in a
closet they had lodged the Mace and Purses.

The Woman's Daughter of the House, going up in their absence to make the bed,
faw some silver Spangles, and some odd ends of Silver scattered about the
Chamber, which she with no small diligence picked up, not knowing from whence
such Riches should proceed, in this Admiration she paused a while, and 'twas
not long before her Fancy led her (like the rest of her Sex) to pry into, and
search the furthermost point of this new and strange Apparition, and directing
her course to the Closet-Door, she through the Keyhole could Descern something
that was not commonly represented to her view; which was the upper end of the
Mace, but knew not what it was; however she thought it could not be amiss to
acquaint her beloved Mother with what she had beheld; and with this resolve she
hastens down Stairs, and with a voice 'twixt fear and joy, she thus cries out;
Oh Mother! Mother! Yonder Is the Kings Crown in our closet! Pray Mother come
along with me and see it.

The admiring Mother being something surprised at her Daughters Relation, as
also having no good opinion of her new Lodgers, makes have (good Woman) and
goes to the Closet-door, and opening the Lock with a Knife, she entered into
the Closet, where she soon discerned that it was not a Crown, but a Mace; and
having heard that such a thing was lost, sends immediately away to acquaint my
Lord Chancellor that the Mace was in her House; upon which information, a
Warrant was soon granted, and Officers sent to Mr. Thomas Northy, Constable of
Queenhive-Ward, who with a sufficient assistance went into Knight-Riders-street
to their Lodging, and very luckily found them, being Five in Number, and of
both Sexes, Viz. Three Men, and Two Women; whom they carried before the Right
Worshipful, Sir William Turner, who after Examination (according to Justice)
committed them to the common Goal of Newgate.

At the Sessions held in the Old Bailey, beginning the Seventh day of this
Instant March. The Five Prisoners aforesaid were first called to the Bar,
where according to the custom of England they were bid to hold up their hands,
and asked whether Guilty or not Guilty, they all replied severally, Not Guilty.
After that the Witnesses were Sworn and Examined, who very manifestly proved
the fact, the Woman and her Daughter where they lodged being two great
Evidences against them.

After this the principle of those Malefactors, a person very well known in
court, having been Arraigned at the same Bar five or six several times before,
very confidently speaks to the Bench in this manner: My Lord, I own the fact,
'twas I, and this Man (pointing to one that stood by him at the Bar) that
robbed my Lord Chancellor, and the other three are clear of the fact, though I
cannot say but they were Confederates with us in the concealment of the Prize
after it was taken. This I declare (said he) to the Honorable Bench, that I
may be clear of the blood of these other three Persons. The Bench and all
Spectators else admired to hear him thus confidently declare himself guilty
before Examination, knowing that the Fact was of so high a Nature, and without
all doubt would prove capital; However the Court went on in a legal way, and
another Witness begun to demonstrate in what manner he was taken; to whom the
Prisoner answered in this manner. Prithee Fellow do not make such a long
Narration of my being taken, thou see I am here, and I own that I and this
Man (as aforesaid) are Guilty of the Fact.

With that the other Prisoner whom he thus impeached, endeavored to clear
himself after this manner: My Lord, said he, this Man meeting me in
Pauls-Church-Yard, asked me to go and drink, with whom I went, and after we
were seated, he told me that he knew of a Booty would make me smile, telling me
of the Mace and Purses; and further saying that if I would be his assistant he
would give me my share of the Prize. To whom the Prisoner aforesaid, made this
reply in open Court; Yes, My Lord, I look like a Fellow that would commit a
Robbery, and give him half the Prize. At this there was a great shoot in the
Court, but silence was straight commanded. And the other Man with the Two Women
were examined, who endeavored to clear themselves, but sufficient Evidence was
produced in Court, who did attest that they found some of the Plate with them
at the time of their Apprehension, so they were put to silence, and dismissed the
Court for that time.

It was observed the Prisoner whom the chief Malefactor impeach't to be equally
guilty of the Fact with himself, had a great sense of sorrow upon him whilst he
was at the Bar, and complained to himself of Lewd and Lascivious Women, saying
that they were the cause of his and many other Men's ruin; which is certainly
true that they are the ruin of many a hopeful Young Man. From such vile Women
that brings many a Man to sudden Death, Good Lord Deliver us all.

FINIS.

