To the HONORABLE, The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in Parliament
Assembled.
The Humble Petition of James Percy, of the Family of the Earls of
Northumberland.
Humbly Shows,
THat the Petitioner having in all humility Addressed himself to the Right
Honorable the House Of Lords, that he might have Liberty to make appear to
their Lordships, That he was the next and immediate Heir-Male to Josceline, the
late Earl of Northumberland, their Lordships were pleased by their Order, to
appoint a time for a Hearing of the same, and the Petitioner expecting a full
Hearing, accordingly got ready many Depositions of Credible Persons, and had
many living Witnesses and Records, and Registers there present, whereby the
Petitioner doubted not, but as plainly to have satisfied their Lordships of the
Truth of his Descent and Pedigree, as it is possible for any such Matter to
admit of; And this Petitioner, after so many Thousand pounds expended by
himself and his Relations, in searching for, and obtaining the Records and
Proofs aforesaid, and in pursuing his said Right and Title, desiring only one
full and final Hearing of his said Proofs and Evidences, and to be Concluded by
it for ever after, and then desire, and was contented to suffer, if he did not
plainly prove his being the next of Blood, as aforesaid; yet it was their
Lordships Pleasure, not only to deny the Hearing of the Proofs, but also to
send the Petitioner to the several Courts of Justice in Westminster Hall, with
a Mark that he was a false Pretender; that thereby, as your Petitioner
conceives he might be deprived from all hopes from thence also: That the
Petitioner is informed, That some persons are since endeavoring to obtain an
Act to pass this Honorable House, for settling irrevocably, great part of the
Earl of Northumberlands Estate, which was given to the Late Duke of Monmouth
for want of Issue-Male of the said Earl, as was then believed, whereby the
Petitioner will be utterly deprived of all Remedy for Recovery thereof, though
he hopes by publication of diverse of his plain and undeniable Proofs, yet to
obtain the favor of one fair Hearing, and to satisfy the World of the Truth
and Justice of his Right and Claim.

The Petitioner therefore humbly prays, That this Honorable House will be
pleased to deferr for a time, the Passing of the said intended Act, the
Petitioners Right being a Matter of no small Concern;

And Your petitioner shall ever pray, etc. James Percy.


