Pereat Papa: OR REASONS Why a Presumptive HEIR, or Popish Successor Should not
Inherit the CROWN.
IT is conceived, and that very heartily, without prejudice to other Judgments,
or troubling our selves by reflecting on that so often baffled a Cause called
Popery, that a Papist, or one Popishly affected, ought not to Inherit or Succed
in the management of the Crown.

Reason I.
In strictness of Law, because one so qualified, has wilfully disabled or
rendered himself incapable of that benefit, which the Common Law (after the
usual course of Descent) does positively require; for it is presumable that he
that succeds in the Office of the Crown, should be Legally Adopted to execute
so great a Trust; and therefore if Minus, Idoneus, be not sufficiently
ballasted with the Notion and Intrigues of State, others are to govern in aid
of him, as in case of Idiocy, Lunacy, or the like, and the Parliament is bound
(as entrusted to redress Grievances, and secure the Nation) to place it where
Religion and Property shall be adjudged most safe.

There are several Presidents of this Nature.

1. Edgar Atheling (as Stories agree) was the undoubted Heir, yet William the
Norman, commonly called the Conqueror, was called in to oppose Harold, and
invested with the Crown; and Atheling for ever an Exile, and dis-inherited. 2.
After him succeeded his Second Son William Rufus, and not Robert the Eldest. 3.
King John not only laid aside, after Plantaginet his Eldest Brothers Son; but
likewise put him to Death. 4. In Sicily there was lately a great Contest
between the two Sons of Charles the Second, Mortel^ and Robert, and I find the
Crown awarded to Robert the Younger, as Magis dignis ad Regnandum. 5. Alexander
was demanded to whom he would bequeath his Scepter, he said, The Worthiest, and
to him whose Sword had the sharpest point; meaning, whose Virtues were most
Luculent, and of the brightest Integrity: after the disposition of Jacob,
passing by Manasses, and conferring the Blessing upon Ephraim the Younger, as
more deserving, and acceptable to God. 6. The State of France rejected the King
of Navarr, and appointed another to Reign over them, because of his Religion.
And when afterward the said King of Navarr came to be Henry the Fourth of
France; it was by his forsaking God, and complying with the Church of Rome, by
means of which he thought to settle the Crown upon his head, but was so much
mistaken therein, that he thereby lost both Crown and Life together.
Reason II.
Can it be thought but that he that succeeds in the Crown should not succeed
Concurrent^bus his qui injure requirunt, as the Civil Law expresses it, that is
in all the concerns thereof, which are the Laws, principally those that relate
to Religion, and not for one man led away with a blind perverseness, renouncing
the Religion he knows not why (and so wilfully attainting himself) to inthral
the Nation in Superstition and Tyranny; for regularly in all parts where Popish
Lords are in the Church, there Tyranny (on course) rages in the State.

Reason III.
It Is a maxim amongst Lawyers, that Lex facit Regem, and maxims must not be
denied; if so, then to speak out after the true intendment of Law, he that
comes not to the Crown satiatim, as the Laws notifies and prescribes, it is no
lawful succession, but down right Usurpation. And without scruple, it is the
endeavor of every good Christian to withstand an Usurper, it being undoubtedly
more pleasing to God to put one man by, who thus wifully disables himself, and
withal most shamefully usurps, than expose millions of souls to damnation, and
the streets to flow with blood by suffering that Religion to creep in, whose
reformation (at the mildest rate) will certainly prove Fire and Faggor.

For this very cause Maacha was removed (from being Queen) by her Son King Asa,
for making an Idol in a Grove, incited thereunto by the the Prophet Azariah.

Reason IV.
The Succession of the Crown, and a common Descent much differ; for if an Heir
that is a Subject prove loose and debauched, it little damnifies the Public,
more deserving persons may happily perchance step into his possessions, and be
more serviceable to the Public; the damage is still but private to his own
Family; but in case of the Crown, there is none so senseless but must needs
conceive the damage most fatal because universal.

The whole Nation must inevitably suffer; Religion subverted, and Popery
destroyed, and the whole People in danger of their Lives. It Is well known in a
private case, the Heir is usually thrown off and disinherited: if an entail, it
may be destroyed: and if Law justifies it, the like in the Public. And
therefore the grand Inquisitors of State, and Conservators of the Liberties of
England, the Parliament, may for weighty Causes refuse the Heir presumptive,
and for the Safety of the Nation settle it where they in Honor and Prudence
shall conceive most proper.

Reason V.
We read in Scripture (which is the Golden Rule that we must walk by) that
Libnab revolted from Jehoram, because he had forsaken the God of his Fathers;
so we had better forsake man, and adhere to God in keeping our Religion, than
trust to man, and lose God, to be unavoidably destroyed here, and hereafter
irrecoverably damned in serving Baal, and parting with the Divinity now
established.

Reason VI.
When R^boboam had prepared a great Army to redude the Israelites, he was
forbidden by the Prophet. Thus says the Lord, Ye shall not go up, nor fight
against your Brethren, for they are from me; mark, he calls them Brethren, not
Rebels.

Passive Obedience therefore is simple, and fit for such, that knows no better;
now God has discovered the Snare and the Pit of Ruin that the Pope and the
Devil has prepared for us, if we do not timely countermine it by Cautionary
Laws, to suppress those that dug it, we may in a short space be thrown into
it headlong, and none pity us.

But the Right Line with some shallow pated Talkers, is a Noli me tangere, so
sacred (forsooth) that we must rather venture Body and Soul in subjecting our
selves to all the Curses imginable that Hell it self can inflict on us, than in
the least alter or control it; a very frivolous Cavear, and not to be heeded
by us; for humane Examples (as I showed before) have been noted against it, and
the Scripture warrants it. Samuel foretold in the case of Saul, that he would
be rejected for his disobedience, though not his Person degraded or deposed,
yet that the Kingdom should be removed, both from his Line and Tribe, which was
done accordingly, and transferred on David: This proves very fully that the
Heirs, or the next in Succession, are not so immovably placed, but that they
may lawfully (on just cause) be displaced, if not legally qualified, and other
put up for God's Glory in their rooms. God raised Jehu to purge Idolatry
against the House of Ahab; all the Sons of Ahab were beheaded, and in a manner
his whole Line cut off. For his good service, he had a promise of a special
Blessing for his Issue to continue the Throne to the fourth Generation. Several
other Instances I could give, but this may suffice.

In brief, there is no Reformed Church, from the first Waldenses of Lions and
Languedock, to this very day, but have held it lawful.

Reason VII.
It Is conceited by half-witted States men, that restrictive Laws may prevent
all mischiefs, and secure the Protestants; a very vain Opinion, and most
fallacious; for Laws will never bind, but more intage; thackle him as ye will,
and load him with never so many Laws when King, he and his Parry will be
restless, till they have set themselves at Liberty, to have the Protestants
under; for when King, he is not impeachable, and the Post Regni will be at his
disposal.

When the Wolf is Shepherd, the Flock is very safe indeed, and like to be well
looked after, all may devour that will; for if his Party commit such outrages,
that no Age can parallel, what will they do then? Now, no man is safe in his
bed then none safe at all; they will adventure to murder people in their very
houses; for they hold it no more sin than to kill a Dog.

Reason VIII.
In fine, be sure he and his Party (which will increase daily, and the
Protestants decline) will soon get an opportunity either by Stratagem, or open
Force, to avoid all Laws, though they are never so strong and wary, and
therefore it will be impossible to be safe without a Protestant Successor.

FINIS.

