A Spiritual LOOKING-GLASS, Wherein Is briefly discoursed the Excellency, and
the necessity of saving FAITH. AND Likewise how it may be known, whether we
have this FAITH, or no. BEING The Substance of two Sermons, Published in
London, July the 23. 1671.

By Sam. Pack, Preacher of the Gospel.

Printed in the Year, 1671.

A Spiritual Looking-glass.
Acts 16. V. 31. And they said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved.


IN this Chapter we have a conspicuous manifestation of that enmity that is in
the Devil, that evil one against God, the fountain of goodness. We see in this
Chapter, that no sooner had the Lord Jesus Christ, that Prince of peace, sent
Paul and Silas those Sons of Peace, to Preach unto the World the Gospel of
peace, in order to the bringing in of poor Souls to the God of peace; but
presently the Devil showed his enmity against mod by endeavoring to stop the
course of the mospel, and thereby to hinder Souls from coming to Jesus Christ.
The Prince of Darkness that rules in the hearts of the Children of darkness,
did no sooner see that ou^ Lord Jesus Christ had by his Servant Paul, cast the
Devil of sooth-saying out of a Maid, but presently be shows his enmity in
filling the heart of her Master with a persecuting spirit, being ushered in by
an inordinate love to the World, and this we see in the 19. verse. And when her
Masters saw the hope of their gains was gone, that caught Paul and Silas, and
drew them into the Market place unto the Rulers.

This poor Maids Masters, instead of being thankful to God that bad gained the
Soul of a poor Maid, that did practice, unlawful arts, he was enraged, because
that their temporal, earthly gain was gone: I do verily th^nk that it is one of
the surest pieces of Armor that the Devil has (even this inordinate love to
the World) for the defense of his own Kingdom; when the Devil sees that no
course will serve to keep souls at a distance from Christ, then he betakes
himself to this w^apon, the inordinate love to the world, and that does seldom
or never, fail him; and this we may see in Demus; Demus he made a large
profession of Christ, as you may see in the Epistle to Philemon, 24. v: and yet
you see the Devil overcame him with this approved piece of armor, inord^nate
love the world, ancl did thereby bring him to Apostasy; 2. Tim. 4.10.
well we see how far the Devil did prevail, not only to set this poor Maids
Masters in a rage, but also to set the Rulers in a rage likewise; nay, he
prevailed so far, that they were scourged, and they were thrown into Prison,
and cast into very great afflictions, and had their feet made fast in the
stocks: new, one would have thou^ht, that it was high time for the Devil to get
into his Chariot of Triumph; now, one would have thought, that the enemy having
such advantage, and those servants of God such disacvantage as they had, that
now the Gospel would have been stopped in that place, and that the Devil should
have lost no more of his Subjects; for my Friends, if you look in 1 he
beginning of the Chapter, you shall see in the 9th. verse. there appeared to
Paul a Vision, for to go over to Macedonia; without question this Vision which
Paul saw, was a great encouragement to him, to go to M^^edonia; and now when he
was come there, as soon as ever he had cast a Devil out of one Maid, presently
they must be cast inro Prison; without question, had not God come in with fresh
supplies of comfort, these poor men would have been at a great loss, they would
have been much disheartened in their work? and this the Devid knew would be a
very great discouragement to them; Ezekiel. 1.16.
but now my Friends, behold a wheel within a wheel, all this while the
providence of God does seem to go upon the wheels, as if he had not cared what
became of his Servants, nor what became of his own glory, and of these poor
souls that he had commanded these men to come into Macedonia to convert; but
now my Friends here is a wheel within a wneel, here is the overruling, and the
infinite wisdom of God, appearing in the very nick of time, catching the crafty
in his own device, Job. 5.12.13.
and carrying the counsel of the wicked and a crafty Devil, that having vented
his malice, and his rage against the servants of mod, thought himself now sure
enough of the day; and that his Kingdom should not be molested in that place;
but we see, that though the Devil is called an old Serpent, yet the Ancient of
days did out-wit him; Rev. 20.2. Dan. 7.22. 1 Pet. 5.8.
and though the Devil is called a Lion for his strength and power, and a a
roaring Lion for his fury; yet the Lion of the Tribe of Judah was too many for
him, our Lord Christ did make this very ^ages of Satan, this discovery of his
malice, a means to throw down the Devils Kingdom, and to exalt and propagate
h^s own; for we see, that when Paul and Silas was brought into the Prison,
instead of being discouraged, they sung Psalms; instead of lying there until
the Irons had entered into their souls, every Prisoners bands was unloosned;
well, what follows: the Jailer he comes in, and he finds the doors open, he
thought his prisoners had been fled; and, now what course does he take? he
draws out his sword to murder himself, he had been doing what lay in him to
murder his soul all the days of his life before, and now he was about, by one
act, to murder both soul and body together.

Now without question, the Devil that had encoutaged him in the exasperating of
his cruelty on these worthy servants of God, he was now as ready to rejoice in
the downfall of this poor Creature.

My Friends, by the way I pray excuse this digression; O let it be a means to
make us have very low contemptible thoughts of this ill conditioned Master the
Devil, that when his servants have done him the utmost se^vice they can, he is
so far from having ever the better thoughts of them, and from loving of them
the better, that he does wait his opportunity, and does prompt them on in those
actions, that he may bring inevitable ruin and and destruction upon them. I do
verily believe this, that when the Devil saw the poor man's sword drawn, and the
point of it ready to be set again his breast, that he did rejoice to see the
poor man ready to tumble headlong into everlasting flames; but now this wise
God, Romans 16.27. Rev. 1.14.
whose head is as white as wool, did frustrate the expectation of this subtle
serpent, he did catch the crafty in his own devices; you need not question but
the Devil did endeavor to help forward this cruty, which this Jailer did
exercise toward these se^vants of God; and you may see this cruelty of his,
God did so by his wise providence order it, that it did tend to his conversion.

O happy was it for the poor moaler, that God did finish two works in one
journey; that he came to deliver the bodies of his servants from a temporal
prison, and did deliver the soul of the Jailer from the pr^son of Hellfire.
Well now, in the verse before my Text, you see the Jailer coming trembling
before the Prisoners of hope, he that before thought Paul and Silas, not worthy
to live on the earth, did now come, and fall down to the earth at their Feet,
and said, what shall I do to be saved? O what a serious question was here? well
now, the words in my Text, are an answer to this serious question; why says the
Apostle, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. And thus
being come to the words of my Text, I shall briefly devide them into two parts:
First, here is an exhortation to a very serious and weighty duty, and that is,
believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. 2dly. Here is a prevailing excitation to stir
him up to the performance of this duty in these words, and thou shall be saved;
in the exhortation we have several particulars, in this first general: First,
here is the act, and that is believe. 2dly. Here is the object, upon the Lord
Jesus Christ. 3dly. Take notice of the persons here, that is pressing this
exhortation on him, and that was Paul and Silas: Those that had been scourged
and imprisoned by him, they were now preaching the Gospel to him, and without
question, with bowels of compassion to his precious souls. They did not now
think of Revenge, and did not now, while this poor man was in a spiritual
Agony, take there advantage against him, and say, thou have been cruel to us,
and now shift for thy self as well as thou can; no, for first they hinder him
from Self-murder, and 2dly. they preach the Gospel to him, believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ; in the fourth and last place, the person exhorted to this Duty,
and that was the moaler, one that had been a violent persecutor, and he is here
exhorted to believe in Christ. From whence my Friends, take notice of this;
that it is possible for the greatest sinner to get a broaken heart; one would
have thought, that if any man should have gone without a broken heart, and
without Christ, and mercy, a persecuting Jailer should, that had persecuted
those bleffed servants of God, that did come on purpose among them, to do their
souls good.

By the way my Friends, take encouragement, you that are the greatest sinners
here, (though not to continue in your sins) yet to wait on God in Gospel
Ordinances, for you know not how soon God may be pleased to work on your Souls,
and to turn you from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan unto God; I
shall stand no longer, before I come to the main Observation that I would
present you with, which is this that every true believer shall be saved,
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved; my Friends, I having
elsewhere made an attempt on these words, and made entrance into them, I shall
not now stand to spend much time in the Doctrinal part, but only confirm it by
a few Scriptures, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be
established, the first in Mark. 16.16. He that believes, and is baptized,
shall be saved; another we have in the 3d. Chap. of John, 16. v. For God so
loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life; and in the 36. v. of the
same Chapter, he that believes on the Son, has everlasting Life; he has it
already in its incoation, and when he dies, he shall have it in its
consummation. Now my Friends, I shall come to the Application, which is that I
mainly intend, in setting upon this, subject this day; and in the first place,
if every true believer, shall be saved, this is useful; first, by way of
information. 2dly. By way of examination. Thirdly, By way of consolation.
Fourthly, By way of exhortation. Fifthly, By way of Instruction. First, it is
useful by way of Information, if every true Believer shall be saved, then it
may inform us of the infinite and boundless love of God to all true Believers.
O! well may the Apostle say in the 3d. of John, v. 16. God so saved the World.
O my Friends, their is so much contained in this word so, as cannot be uttered
by the Creature, for when Wisdom it self was speaking of it, he puts it off
with a so, not as thoug^ Christ could not have manifested the ver^ depth of the
love of God, but because, thoug^ he could have done it, we being but finite
Creatures, were not in a capacity to comprehend that boundless depth of this
love of God to poor sinners: My Friends, I may alude to those words of Job.
11.7, 8, 9. Can thou by searching, find out God? can thou find ou^ the
Almighty unto perfection? it is as high as Heaven; what can thou know? the
measure whereof is longer then the Earth, broader then the Sea. We see such is
the immensity and greatness of this love of God to poor sinners, that it is
unspeakable and glorious, and I may say of it, that it is that, we cannot find
out to perfection; it is as high as Heaven; what can we do? the measure thereof
is longer then the Earth, and broader then the Sea. This love of God to poor
sinners, it may appear in the highest Heaven, for not a Soul that is in glory,
but is beholding to this boundless love of God for their salvation. God so
loved the World, the Holy Ghost puts it off as it were with a question, as if
it were that which cannot be uttered, nor indeed can it be uttered by the
Creature; for if all the Angels in Heaven should undertake to set forth the
love of God, in sending of Christ to dye for poor sinners, they must have so
much time as will run parallel with the Line of Eternity, or else they will,
never accomplish their work; for, so long will this love of God extend it self
in the highest degree the Creature is capable of.

Oh my friends, was it not wonderful love in God, that he should send his Son
to dye for Rebels; that he that had but one natural Son, should give him up to
the death for us that were proclaiming open War against him by our sins: Oh
wonderful boundless love, well may the Apostle say indeed, in the 5th. of
Romans, the 8th. v. Herein God commended his love toward us; in that while we
were sinners, Christ dyed for us, that is the first. 2ly It may inform us of
the glorious effects of the death and sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ; for
though the love of God was the impulsive cause of our salvation, yet it was the
death and suffering, the active and passive obedience of Jesus Christ, that was
the meritorious cause thereof; and therefore says the Lord in Isaiah, 53. when
the Holy Ghost had been there spending a whole Chapter in setting forth the
sufferings of Christ for poor sinners, at length he comes to show the
comfortable and the sweet, and glorious effects produced thereby, in v. 12.
Therefore will I devide him a Portion with the great, and he shall divide the
spoil with the strong because he has poured out his soul unto death. Therefore
will I divide him a Portion with the great; what great is this? Why it is the
great Devil, that is so great in power, that he leads Captive the greatest part
of the World; and he shall devide the spoil with the strong, which is the same
mentioned before, which is common with the Holy Ghost in the Old Testamen^ to
enjeminate expressions, as if the Lord should have said, because a poor man
has sinned, therefore the Devil thinks for to have the Souls of all the Men
and Women in the World; but says God, I will divide him a Portion with the
great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; as if the Lord should
have said, my Son shall have some Souls, the Devil should not have all; for
there is some that I am resolved shall be the fruit of my Sons Travel, as in
the 11. v. of the 53 of Isa. He shall see of the Travel of his Soul, and shall
be satisfied, and Alegorical Metaphor, taken from a Woman in Travel, that
though she has a sharp Travel, yet rejoices when a man is born into the
world; so though Christ did endure sore pangs in working out the salvation of
his Elect, yet he shall see of the Travel of his Soul; I will divide him a
Portion with the great: Gods people are called his Portion, as in Deuteronomy 32. v 9.
The Lords Portion is his People. Well says God, my Son shall have his Portion
in Men, and Women, which the Devil does think to bring to everlasting ruin and
destruction; well this is the second thing: O my Friends, that time and it
ength would permit, for the more clearing up of it is great truth, to show the
glorious effects of the death and suffering of the Lord Jesus christ, toward
believers, for the effects of his death, does extend it self to their adoption,
and comfort, and consolation, and happiness, and glory hereafter; all these
benefits, and many more are the glorious effects of the death and suffering of
the Lord Jesus Christ. Then in the third place, if every true believer shall be
received into glory, it may inform us how much we are engaged to love the good
spirit of God, that does seal up to our Souls, our interest in Christ; in whom
alone it is, that we are brought to glory; it is the work of Gods spirit, to show
us our want of Christ; and when he has thus convinced us of our sins, then
it is the work of this blessed spirit of God to bare up our Souls under the
dreadful apprehensions of Gods wrath, that is due to us for sin; so it is the
work of the blessed Spirit of God to help the Soul to see that Christ dyed for
Sinners, and that he has dyed for thee; O Soul, thou art a Believer, it is the
holy spirit of God that does comfort the Soul in trouble; that does settle the
Soul in fea^, that does preserve the Soul in a persevering slate, when it would
be turned to the right hand, or to the left; O my Friends, one may say of the
Spirit of God, as David did of the City of God, glorious things are spoken of
thee, so I may say, glorious things are spoken of thee, O blessed Spirit of
God; and therefore as in Ephesians. 4. v. 30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God,
whereby you are sealed up to the day of Redemption. In the fourth place, if it
be so, that every true Believer shall be saved, then it may inform us of the
falthood of those erroneous Tennets, which hold forth of a possibility of
falling away from true faith; Paul and Silas did net say to the Jailer, if thou
believe, and continuest to believe, thou shall be saved, but if thou
believe, thou shall be saved, once a believer and ever a believer. My
friends, I hope you have not forgot how I did endeavor in twelve particulars
to show you from whence the believers perseverence does arise, and all the
Armenian Tennets in the world shall never be able to strike at the Root of any
of these twelve foundations of a Believers perseverance. As first, thou that
art a Believer, thou have the eternal decree of God engaged for thy
perseverance, 2 Timothy 2 chap. 18, 19. v. Heb. 6.17. Thou have likewise the
Eternal love of God, as another ground of thy perseverance, Jer. 31. v. 3. I
have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with love and kindness have
I drawn thee; my Friends, I wonder how men that pretend to have understanding,
should be blinded so by the God of this world, to think that the same
everlasting love, that did engage God to set his love on us, should ever be
turned into hatred, so as to leave us to our wills, and so to perish for ever;
likewise the wisdom of God is engaged herein; Christ makes it a mark of foolish
man, that does begin te build a house, and is not able to finish it; thou that
art a believing Soul, thou art Gods spiritual building; and if he should begin
to build, and should not finish it, it would demonstrate great folly in the
Divine Majesty, which to affert would be no less then blasphemy, God being the
fountain of wisdom; likewise the faithfulness of God is engaged in it. 1 These.
5.24, 25. Faithful is he that has called you who also will do it, will do
what? you may read in the 23 v. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly;
and I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Till Christ shall come, by judgment,
or by death, that Soul in whom this good work is begun, shall be carried on,
Phil 1. v. 6. He that has begun a good work, will finish it, and we showed
likewise it is clear from the new Covenant of grace, that he has entered into a
new Covenant with the people, and he has therein engaged himself, that he will
put his fear into our hearts, that we shall not depart from him, Jer. 32.40.
Likewise the power of God is engaged herein to preserver every true believer
from total falling away from God, 2 Fet. 1.5. Who are kept by the power of God,
through Faith unto Salvation. Likewise also the glory of the Son of God is
engaged in it; Christ is the foundation of this spiritual building, he is the
chief Corner Stone. Now my Friends, I pray mind it, whenever a house falls,
the foundation is usually defective, and the Corner stone will be sure to fall:
nay, he is the top-stone too, as you may see in Zachary. Now Christ being all
these in the spiritual superstructure, it must be, that Jesus Christ must fall
himself, whenever a true believer does finally, sall off from God. Again, we
showed likewise it does arise from the influence, that the blessed Spirit of
God has on the hearts of those that are believers, as in the 1 John 2. v. 20.
But you have an Unction from the Holy One, and you know all things; he had been
showing before what a sight of Antichrists and Apostates there were; but says
he, you have received an Unction from the Holy One; you have that which they
want, they had only an outside profession, but they wanted the inward teachings
of the spirit, as in the 26 and 27th. ver. Isa. 59.19. You may there see how
God does keep a soul in a persevering frame, So shall they fear the Name of the
Lord from the West, and his glory from the Rising of the Sun, when the enemy
shall come in like a Flood, the spirit of the Lord shall lift up a Standard
against him. The words are very emphatical, whether they do point at the Devil,
or at the corruptions of our own hearts, which are the greatest persecutors of
the godly; it is a military expression, taken from Soldiers, when they lift up
their Ensigns in defiance of their Enemies; and as Christ says, upon this Rock
have I built my Church, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, so
says the Spirit, here when the Enemy breaks in like a Flood, then shall the
Spirit of the Lord lift up his Standard against them; Isa. 30. v. 21. You may
see how the spirit does proceed in hi work, to keep the Soul in a persevering
frame, whenever the poor Soul is ready to turn to the Right hand, or to the
Left, then he does whisper a sweet word in their ear, this is the way, walk in
it, and truly that is a notable word, Isa. 61. v. 8. And I will direct their
work in truth, it is God by the influence of his spirit, directing of our works
in truth, that does keep us from falling away from God. I hope my Friends,
these are enough to confirm this fourth truth, that true believers cannot fall
off from God. Fifthly, It may inform us of the vast difference that is between
the state of true Believers, and the state of Unbelievers; for if you look in
those Scriptures wk mentioned, Mark. 16. v. 16. He that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not. shall be damned, and so
likewise in John 3. there you may see the difference set down, He that
believes on the Son has everlasting life; and he that believes not on the
Son, shall not see life, but the Wrath of God abides on him.

The true believer is said to have everlasting life, that is, he has the
assurance of it sooner or later; he has it in this life, in its incoation,
though not in its consummation. I pray my Friends, if you remember no more,
carry away this, that if Heaven, and Eternal life is not within you, while you
are in this world, you shall never enter into Heavenly or Eternal life, when
you shall leave this world; Now herein appears the vast difference that is
between the state of a Believer and an Unbeliever; as a believer has the
Heaven of Spiritual Light from God, and the same spiritual love to God, and the
same spiritual joy in God, and the same spiritual Communion with God, now in
this life, as they shall have in the life to come, in respect of the nature and
quality thereof, though not in respect of the quantity; so likewise a wicked
man has the same spiritu^l darkness in his understanding, and the same
irregularality in his affection, and the same contumacy in his will now, as he
will have in Hell, in respect of the nature and quality thereof, though not in
respect of the degree and quantity; now hellish Drunkards make themselves Drunk
with Wine and strong bear, and in Hell God will make them pledge the Devil at a
full Cup of his wrath; which being powered into the Cup of his Indignation,
will make them Drunk for ever and ever; the Hellish Adulterer burns in his Lust
here, and God will make him burn in Hell for it hereafter: As heavenly Saints
love God, and propound his glory as their ultimate end in all their duties; so
heillish Sinners hate God, and propound their own glory as their ultimate end
in duties; as believers are daily more and more complete in virtue, so
unbelievers are daily more and more repleat with Vice; and thus we see the vast
difference that is between believers and unbelievers in this life; and look
upon them at the hour of death, and see what a vast difference there will be
then between them, as in Prove. 14.32. The wicked is driven away in his
wickedness, but the Righteous has hope on his death; and look upon them at the
Resurrection, and see what a vast difference there is between them, as in Dan.
12. v. 2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth, shall awake,
some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt; and look
upon them at the denunciation of that dreadful sentence, and see the vast
difference that is between them, as in Mat. 25.33, 34. where the Righteous and
the believer is set on his right hand, and the unbeliever on the left, Then
shall the King say to them on his right hand, come ye blessed of my Father;
come poor soul, thou have called me to come to thee many a time, in cuty then
come thou now to me; the world looked upon thee to be a cursed Creature, but I
pronounce thee blessed; it may be, whilst thou were in the world, the Foxes had
a privilege above thee, they had holes to hide their heads in; But now there is
a Kingdom prepared for thee, but now see what will become of unbelievers, as in
the 41. v. here is a dreadful sentence past against them. Depart from me, here
is a separation from all joy and happiness; you said to me in your lifetime,
depart from (...), for we desire not the knowledge of the wars, now depart from
me ye Cursed, into everlasting fire, there is the extremity of pain and
torment, thou wast one that did burn in thy lusts here, and thou wast one that
was inflamed with thy lusts, or with wine and strong drink, or with hatred
against me; now go into everlasting fire, it was the Devil whose voice thou
would obey, and whose work thou would do, and now thou shall have enough
of him: now here you may see the vast difference between the state of all true
believers and unbelievers.

Now believers, thy shall cease from all their mourning, and all their sorrow
shell be ^^^^ed into joy, then thou shall have joy without sorrow, and health
without sickness, and life without death, and shall have the shinings of Gods
Countenance, without the least mixture of the hiding of his face, and as for
thou that a^t an unbeliever, what will thou do, 2 vast d fference there will be
between thy condition and a true believers, when thou art cast into everlasting
flames, which I wish that none here may experience the torments of, when thou
shall never more have the least hope of the least Ray of the Son of Consolation
shineing on thee: Oh then what woe and terror will surprise thy Soul, and what
unspeakable horror, to think that thou have been all thy life time heaping up
to thy self wrath against the day of wrath.

I should have proceeded to other inferences, but I shall defer them till the
Afternoon: Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding.

The end of the Morning Sermon.
THen in the sixth place, if it be so, that all true believers shall be saved,
it may inform us of the great necessity we have of hearing the Word Preached,
though my Friends, God is able to convert without means; he is a free agent, he
can work how he will, and when he will, but Preaching is the ordinary means
whereby God does turn Sinners from Satan to God, 2 Chronicles. 4 4, 5. where you may
see there is a molton Sea, which was a Type of Christ, it stood upon 12. Oxen,
three looking toward the North, and three looking towrds the West, and three
looking toward the South, and three looking toward the East; and if you look
into the Revelations, there you shall see the Elect shall come from the East,
and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and there is twelve
doors open in the new Jerusalem, three North, three West, three South, and
three East, Christ he is the Molten Sea, through whom it is we are brought to
Life, he it is that is the Sea of Grace and mercy for poor Sinners: therefore,
if you would have this Sea of Grace, the Lord Jesus Christ, we must have an eye
unto the twelve Oxen, the twelve Apostles, and their successors, which are the
Ministers of the Gospel, and faith the Apostle in Rev. 10.17. So faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. My Friends, I durst not limit the
Holy One of Israel, so as to say, there is no way to convert a Soul, but by
Preaching of the Gospel; but this is the ordinary way God is pleased to make
use of, for the opening of their eyes, that are blinded by the god of this
world; for we are all naturally blind, and we must lie by the way side, to be
cured of this blindness; the Preaching of the word, they are Gods Pools of
Bethesda, whereby he does cure those that are troubled with spiritual lameness,
and those that come into Congregations possessed with Devils, as in Mark.
1.23.24.25. He casts out a Devil of Pride out of one Soul, and a Devil of
Covetuousness out of another Soul, and the Devil of Lust out of another, and
those devilish Lusts Christ does cast out while we ere in the Synagogue.

Then 7thly. It may inform us what enemies they are to our immortal Souls, that
go about to deprive us of the means of Grace; you see Preaching is the ordinary
means for the Conversion of Souls, so they must be soulmurderers that go about
to hinder the preaching of the Gospel.

Eighthly. It may inform us of the uncharitableness and sensoriousness of those
persons that for small differences from them, in circumstances of Religion, will
send whole Congregations to everlasting perdition, that if they cannot comply
with them in every circumstance, they are presently all damned: But we see that
it is not being of this or that persuasion, that will bring us to Heaven, but
believing in Jesus Christ; but yet my Friends, though such a thing is
desirable, and we hope will be when the Lion shall lie down with the Lamb, and
the Leopard shall eat grass with the Ox, yet in the mean while, let us not
pass such uncharitable censures on those that cannot comply with us in every
circumstantial point in Religion; you see faith is the main thing that the
Apostle drives at; believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, that is the main thing
that is to be looked at; I shall now come to an use of examination, if it be so
that none but true believers shall be saved, then it lies upon us to see
whether we are such believers or not: My Friends, if any of us were but to lay
out a little money upon a purchase, though of a little value, how circumspect
should we be, least our evidences should prove false, and this care is not
discommendable neither; but how will this condemn the practice of the greatest
part of the World, that are so strict and careful about trifles, and neglect
the concerns of their immortal Souls; I shall endeavor to lay down some Rules
and Trials, which by the assistance of Gods spirit, we may know whether we are
true believers, and so consequently such as are in a state of Salvation. First,
would thou know whether thou art a true believer, then try whether thou do
know God, for we will never venture any great concernment upon a person that we
know little of; thou that art a believer, thou have greater concerns to venture
on God, then ten thousand worlds; methinks I hear some say, what do you think
we don't know God to be our Father, and Christ our Redeemer. My Friends have
you any reality of the knowledge of God in your Souls: have you a practical
knowledge of him, see what our Lord Christ says, Joh. 17.3. And this is Life
Etarnal, that they may know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent; the Practical knowledge of God is Eternal life, in its incoation. My
Friends, do you know God so in his power, as to fear him; and in his mercy to
love him, and in his omnisciency, not to commit any sin in secret, though the
eye of the Creator be upon thee, this was a sign that Joseph had a true
knowledge of God, that when he was tempted to sin, which possibly might have
been hid from the eyes of the World, yet he dared not to commit it, but on the
contrary, if you know so little of God in his mercy, that it does not draw out
your love to him; and know him so little in his Justice, that you see no need
of Jesus Christ to be your Redeemer, and you know him not in his
faithfulnesses, that you dare not trust him, then it is a sign thou art an
unbeliever: can thou say with Paul, I know whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 12.

2ly. If thou art one, that art a true believer then thou art one that have an
indeared affection to God; when a Soul believes that God has sent his dear Son
to dye for him, and this comes to be realized to the Soul, that soul is set all
in a flame with love to God. Friends, observe this, that proportionable to the
apprehensions we have of the love of God to us, in Jesus Christ, such is the
manifestation of our love to God; what is the reason the Martyrs have embraced
the flames with such courage, which at other times it may be, a few days
before, they were ready to sink at the apprehensions of the bitter cup they
were to drink, but the clear sense they had of the love of God to their souls.
We know this my Friends, that the greater and clearer evidences we have of that
good, which at present we do receive from a Friend, o^ hopes to receive from
them for the future, it does abundantly stir up our affections, and inflame our
love toward them, if we look into the Corinthians, we may see that God has
put Faith and Love together; and what God has joined together, let no man put
asunder, 1 Cor. 13.13. And now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, Gal 5, 6.
Neither Circumcision avails any thing nor Uncircumcision, but faith which
works by love. Friends, how do you find it, what love have you to, the
worship of God, and to the Ordinances of God, and to the people of God; do your
souls bear you witness, that you can say of the word of God, as David did, that
it is sweeter than the honey, or the honeycomb; in the 3d. place, Try it by
your hope likewise; a true faith does always accompany a true hope: It Is true
Friends, we had need be criticol about these things, for go and ask an
unbeliever whether he loves God, and he will answer you, it is pity he should
live else; and again ask them, whether they hope to have Salvation by Christ
alone; yes say they, who do you think we should have it from besides, 1 John
3.3. But what says the Apostle of this hope, and every man that has this
hope, he purifies himself as he is pure. My Friends, all the difference, that
is between faith and hope is this. Faith does respect the cetainty of the
promise, and hope does respect the goodness of the thing promised, and where
one of these are, there they are both, for they both go together; but now you
may say what is the meaning of this purifying himself; as he is pure, can a^y
one be so pure as God is: My Friends, it is altogether impossible, that the
Creature should attain to that degree of perfection and purity that is in God,
pure signifies to be without mixture; a person may be said to be purely evil,
as God is purely good; he purifies himself as he is pure, that is, he has not
a heart for God, and another for the world; he is really such as he seems to
be, he is without hypocrisy. 4thly. Again, would thou know the soundness of
thy Faith, then try i^ by thy constant implacable hatred of sin; this we may
see laid down as a true mark of Faith, Acts 15.9. Purifying their hearts by
Faith: Faith does present the soul with a Crucified Jesus, as Crucified for it
in particular; the formal Professor pleases himself with this, that Christ
dyed for sinners, and ^e are all sinners. My Friends, there is nothing that
gives such a mortal wound to sin, in the soul of believers, as when they do
apprehend that Christ did suffer such grievous things, for its self in
particular. 5thly. Would thou know, whether thy faith be right, then see if
thou have a high esteem of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.7. Unto you therefore that
believe, he is precious, or he is a honor; a true believer, he looks upon it
as his honor, that he is a member of Christ's mistical body, that he is a
branch in that blessed Vine; he looks upon it as his honor, that Christ will
look upon him as his Servant; as the Emperor Theodosius said, he looked upon it
to be more honor to him, that he was a Servant of Jesus Christ, then that he
was Emperor of the World. But I have seen such Christians that would be very
forward to own the people of God, and Messengers of Christ, in times of
prosperity; but when the ways of God has been persecuted, and the Ordinances
of Christ has been trampled under feet, then they would look upon them, as if
they had never seen them before: My Friends, this is a bad sign of a true
Faith, and of a good Christian, to you that believe he is an honor; my
Friends, is Christ precious to you in all his Offices, as King, Priest, and
Prophet; thou that art a believer, I can tell how it is with thee, as well as
thy self; thou do never more rejoice, then when thou can experience the
power of Christ in thy Soul, in subduing of thy Corruptions, and bringing under
the Old man; and is he precious to thee in all his attributes? a wicked man,
God is precious to him in his mercies, but as for the power of God, and the
Justice of God, they cannot endure to hear of; let a Minister go and tell them
of the terrors of God, they will presently cry, Oh there is a Legal Preacher
indeed, enough to make one run mad; and in a word, to a true believer, Christ
is precious to him in all his Offices and attributes, and in all his
providential dispensations, and in all his promises, and in his threatenings, he
is precious to every true believer. Again, sixthly, would thou know whether
thou art indeed a true believer, then see whether thou have the witness of it
in thy self, 1 John 5.6. He that believes, has the Witness in himself; Oh but
methinks I hear some poor soul ready to say; Oh, if it must be so, I am in a
worse condition then I was aware of; I thought I could experienced some of the
other Trials, but I have so little of the spirits witness in me, that I
question whether I have any true faith: Now the Devil is very subtle, as he
will persuade a wicked man, that he has the marks of a true believer, so he
will persuade a true believer, that he has them not, when he has them; as for
example, suppose a person is in great trouble, for fear they don't love God,
they come into the Congregation, and there it may be, God has directed his
Minister to such a subject, where he has been treating on such a truth of Gods
love to us, and of our love to him; if God has loved thee, then he has
subdued thy Corruptions, these little Foxes he has taken and destroyed; now it
may be the spirit of God has set home this word on the soul, and that he can
say, this has been my condition. Now Friends, there was the witness that we
are speaking of Romans 8.16. The Spirit bearing witness with our spirit, that we
are the Children ^f God. Now my Friends, you that are so ready to say, that you
have not the witness of God in you; would thou part with that little
glimme^ing hope thou have of true Faith, for the greatest Estate that a Wicked
man has in the world? to says the soul, I would not; and that is a sign that
thou have the witness in thee, though the spirit of God has not cleared it up
so to thee, as thou desi^est but be thankful to God for it, and take heed thou
do not provoke the Lord to take away that little comfort thou have.

Eighthly. If thou art one that has true faith, thou may know it by this,
it does so realize the glory that is to be revea^ed to thy soul, that it makes
thee earnest in the prosecution of the means that God has appointed in order
to the attainment of glory; this we shall make to appear by comparing two
Scriptures together, in the 11th. of Hebrews, you may see that Faith is the
evidence of things not seen, and the substance of things hoped for, now if you
do but look all along in this Chapter, he comes to show what lorious effects
Faith does produce in those that it does realize the glory that i^ to come unto
them; he tells us it is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of
things not seen, that is not seen with an eye of eason, Luke 13.23, 24. then
said one to him, Lord, are there few that he saved? now see, Christ does not
answer him according to his Question, but does propose to him an exhortation*
to stir him up to a weighty duty, strive to enter in at the strate gate; as if
Christ had said, what need thou to trouble thy self whether many or few
shall be saved? if thou art one that strives like a man in an Agony (for so it
may be rendered) to thrust in at the straight gate, that will be an evidence
unto thee, that thou art one that shall be saved. Friends, how does the hope of
glory spur you on to duty: does thy Faith realize the things of another world
to you, that it makes you run in the paths of Gods commandments. But if on the
contrary, if thou do pretend to have Faith, and yet notwithstanding, go on in
a formal lazy profession of Religion; it is a sign thou never had the things of
another world realized to thee; such as are our evidences for the attainment of
future good, such will be our endeavors, in the means whereby we are to attain
it, if thou have a well-grounded hope for salvation in the world to come, it
will make thee earnest in thy endeavors for the attainment of it. In the next
place, another sign of true Faith is this, if thou art a true believer, then
thy faith does enable thee to overcome the world; this we may see in the 12
Rev. and there appeared a great wonder in Heaven, a Woman ^loathed with the Sun
and the Moon under her feet. By the Women we understand the whole Church of
God, and every particular member thereof, and by the Moon we understand the
World.

And as the Moon is very unstable in her mor^ons, and always increasing and
decreasing, so there is no certainty at all in Creature enjoyments. And the Sun
is never eclipsed, but when the Moon comes between us, and the Sun; and so my
Friends, the Moon, this woe ld, is that which does make an interposition between
God and his people; how does the joys of this world eat out the comforts which
we should have enjoyed. My Friends, it is a hard thing to keep the world under
our feet, for it is a round thing, and I will tell you how true believers do
come to get the world under their Feet.

You that have once enjoyed the glorious beams of the Sun of Righteousness
shining into your souls, the pitiful things of this Woe ld would seem as
nothing: Now my Friends see how it is with you, which is greater in your eye,
the Sun or the Moon; which if it were put to your choice, would you take to
live in the midst of prosperity without God, or in the midst of adversity with
God.

Again, in the next place, try thy Faith by thy Repentance; I know there is
much dispute concerning this, some hold that Faith is wrought before
Repentance, and some on the contrary; but truly my Friends, I am of neither of
their judgments, for my judgment is, that all graces are wrought in the soul at
one and the same ^ime; and though Repentance is made manifest in the soul
before Faith, Mark 1.15. Repent you, and believe the Gospel; Friends, what
Repentance have you got, I thank God say you, I have Repented long ago, though
I cannot talk as some can, and make so many words, I cannot commit any sin, but
my heart smites me for it: Oh my Friends, there is many sorts of Repentance
that a sinner may have, and yet may go without a true Repentance; there is an
over-lay and slight repentance, and such a repentance had Ahab, and then there
is dispairing repentance, and such a repentance bad Judas: but for this
Evangelical repentance, it is such a grace that few attain to it, not scarce one
among twenty, and without this, Evangelical repentance, there is no true grace
in the soul; and I shall endeavor to show, that Faith and Repentance is
wrought together for repentance without faith, will end in desparation; and
faith without repentance will end in presumption.

In the last place, if thou art one that has indeed true faith, thou art made
willing to suffer whatsoever God should be pleased to inflict on thee, this
says the Apostle, where he speaks there concerning persecution Phil. 2.29. For
unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but
also to suffer for his sake; this true Faith, it makes the soul will^ng to
suffer for God, whatsoever the wicked adversaries of the people of God shall be
pleased to lay on them; O says the soul, shall I be unwilling to endure a
little suffering for his sake, that was exposed to such suffering for me: O
says the soul, shall not I be willing to suffer a little affliction from God,
whether poverty, wants* or sickness, or the like, seeing the Lord Jesus Christ
was contented for my sake to a be man of sorrow, and acquainted with grief, for
to suffer both hunger and thurst, and shall not we be willing to suffer for
God, whatsoever he is pleased to call us to, seeing he has pleased to do so
much for us, as he has done.

And so much for this Use of Examination; I should have proceeded to a Use of
Consolation on to true believers, for this Doctrine affoards a spring of
comfort unto such which I should only hint at, first by way of privation,
showing from what they are delivered: econdly by way of provision, what
unexpressable and unconceivable glory, God has laid up in store for them,
which I would have willingly enlarged upon: There was likewise on my spirit, a
Use of Exhortation, in which I would have moved those who have been
participaters of this pret^ous Faith. 1. To be thankful for it, to him, from
whom they have received it, as the gift of God. 2. To let nothing be wanting
for the nourishing, and for the strengthening of it, by the Application of
former experiences of Gods goodness, and also to be careful that they wound
not, not weaken their Faith by running themselves into those streights and
ex^g^ncies which they have not a clear and special call unto, either upon a
civil, or religious account; but I must pass by those things, because my time
is already passed by, and conclude with one Use of Exhortation, or rather of
invitation to those which are yet out of Christ; and oh that God would be
pleased to put some word into my mouth, which might beget in thee an earnest
desire, and panting after an interest in Jesus Christ, the glorious object of
our faith! oh that I could hear some of you crying our with the poor Jailer,
what shall I do to be saved; in the time of sickness, who will not cry out,
what shall I do to be restored to my health, the want of outward mercies are
quickly felt, but how few are sensible of their want in spirituals; beware
likewise that the Devil ensnare you into desparation, by persuading t^ee that
thou have no faith, and therefore art a reprobate, for there is not a Saint on
earth, nor an Angel in Heaven, to whom Gods final reprobation is revealed,
touching any particular person yet in this life, who has not sinned the sin
against he Holy Ghost; be not therefore by these wiles of Satan discouraged
from waiting on the Ordinances, or make thee say I have no hope, I have loved
strangers, and after them I will go; but remember this, that as great sinners
as thou have attained to this Faith, and are now in glory with the Lord; but on
the other hand, let not presumption ceise your heart; for of these two snares
of the Devil, I may justly say what was said of Saul and David in another case,
Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands, so I may likewise
say, that despair has slain his thousands, but presumption has ten thousands:
oh my Friends, take heed of presumptions, procrastination in the great concerns
of your precious souls; it is the present time that God calls for, it is to day,
if you will hear his voice harden not your heart, Psalm 95. acquaint now thy
self with him, and be at peace thereby, good shall come unto thee, Job. 22.21.
you that are in the prime strength and flower of your years, forget not that
momento, to remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, Eccles. 12.1. Agree
with thine Adversary quickly whilst thou art in the way with him, Mat. 5.25.
Now is the accep^ed time, and now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.3. On poor
soul, whilst thou flatterest thy self with future Repentance, thou would do
well to consider both the shortness and uncertainty of thy life, thou may
resolve to repent tomorrow, and before tomorrow thou may be in Hell;
therefore poor soul, I do beseech thee, as if God did beseech thee by me, slip
no present opportunity of thy hearing the word preached, where it is preached
in the power and purity of it; for there may thou expect the presence of God
with it and his blessing upon it; and though thou should come there with the
Devil of unbelief in thy heart, thou know not but there God may cast him
out, and if it shall be thus with thee in thy waiting on Gods Ordinances, that
there shall be any stirrings on thy heart, and the word fe^ home upon thee.

Take heed the pleasures, or cares of the world do not choke it, but follow
home with serious meditation, and beg of God to confirm it with his power; and
thou know not how soon God may be pleased to set it home with such power as
may make thee cry out, what shall I do to be saved; and though the work may be
somewhat strange to thy corrupt nature, yet if God be pleased to undertake the
work, it shall prevail, and then what reason have thou poor soul to bless the
Lord for his unspeakable mercy to thee-wards, to bring thee from darkness unto
light, from the power of Satan unto God* and it will not be long e're thou
shall be for ever adoreing the riches of Gods free grace toward thee in Jesus
Christ, to whom with the Father, the highest and ultimate object of our Faith,
and the holy spirit, be all honor, and glory, and praise, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 29. line 18. for he will suffer, read he have suffered, p. 48. l. ^, 10. for
make the ears thin and empty, r. make thin the ears of thy holy Conversation:
p. 11. l. 4, and 5. are misplaced: p. 111. l. 19. for living, read loving, l.
20. for (...) l. 21. l. 21. for Lamasebachthani, read Lama-gnazabtanie, p. 13.
l. 12. for (...) read (...) l. 21. for (...), read (...)


