THE ASTROLOGER ANATOMIZED: Or, the Vanity of Star-Gazing Art DISCOVERED, BY
Benedictus Pererius.

And rendered into English by Percy Enderbie, Gent.

London, Printed by Ralph Wood, and are to be sold by M. Wright, at the Kings
Head in the Old Bailey, 1661.

To the Honorably Extracted, and truly Noble, Sir FRANCIS PETRE, Baronet.
SIR,
SVch has been the sad Distractions of these our unfortunate times, that
Learning has in a manner been trodden under foot, Arts and Liberal Sciences
contemned and villified: amongst the rest, Astrology has had a grand Eclipse;
many Scioli and illiterate persons like mushroms have sprung up, and armed with
Ignorance and Impudence, mistake themselves for great Rabbis in that most
profound Science. And this scum of the many, undertakes to tell Fortunes,
predict future Contingents, inform silly Girls who shall be their Husbands,
with thousands of such like fopperies. This Grave, Judicious, and Learned
Author, Benedictus Pererius, coming by accident into my hands, after I had
seriously perused him, I esteemed it not amiss to dress him in English habit,
and teach him to speak our Language, to undeceive such as have been inveigled
and misled by pernicious Star gazers. I know there will not be wanting those
who will carp at my Labors, and therefore, Noble Sir, knowing your Education
to be above the ordinary strain even of Persons of Quality; your Judgment
excellent; your Skill in Mathematical Conclusions transcendent; your knowledge
in Tongues and Sciences admirable; and your Extraction Honorable; I humbly
beseech you to patronize these my weak Endeavors, and give them leave to
appear in Public under the Wings of your auspicious Protection: which if you
vouchsafe, I shall neither fear Momus nor Aristarchus, but rest secure, and
subscribe my self,

SIR, Your most Humble, and Faithful Servant, Percy Enderbie.

The Preface.
SO great is the impudency and madness of those (whom fools call
Judgement-giving, or Judiciary Astrologers) that they will needs persuade the
vulgar and illiterate, that the most holy and sacred Scripture (as they boast
and brag it) not only winks at, but gives full power and authority to their
Art of Astronomy; and therefore, forsooth, God created the great Lights and
Luminaries of the Heavens, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and said to them, Let them
be for signs, etc.

Which words they will needs wrest to speak thus; that by Astrological
divination, and observing the motion of the Stars, they can prognosticate
things to come, and future events: This grand error has caused St. Ambrose,
St. Basil, and diverse other Fathers, upon the true exposition of those words to
enlarge themselves; and upon sound Fundamentals, not only to impugn and
disprove, but also to lay open the vanities and fopperies of Astrological
Predictions. By the example of which Fathers, but more especially by the heavy
and several Sentences in holy Scripture against those kind of Astrologers,
being moved, and also by a just hatred against them, by reason of their
fraudulent cheating, and pernicious lies and couzenage, this Book is undertaken
to confute and refell those fantastic Divinations: which is hoped will be
accepted by all; as being for the utility and good of all. Johannes Picus
Mirandulanus has written very largely and learnedly upon this subject, but his
prolixity retards his Readers from perusing his whole works; therefore in this
Tract (though the field be large and spacious) such method shall be used, that
nothing shall be brought upon the stage (yet many curious Questions offer
themselves) but only such as shall be succinct, and most conducing to the
purpose. In this Treatise against the vanity of this sort of Astrologers, I
will reduce all into five Chapters.

In the first shall be demonstrated, that Divination is opposite and contrary
to Sacred and Ecclesiastical Doctrine.

Secondly, That Astrologers are totally ignorant of Celestial and Heavenly
things.

Thirdly, That this Divining and Foretelling Art is contrary to Reason and
Philosophy.

Fourthly, That the Stars are so far from being the Efficient Causes of things
to come, that they are not so much as evident Signs.

Lastly, Reason shall make it appear, that no Predictions of Astrologers can be
infallible and true.

The Astrologer Anatomized: OR, The vanity of Star-gazing, etc.
Chap. 1. Astrologicall Divination contrary to Divine Scripture,
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and Theological Doctrine.
Astrologers confuted, by Sentences and Texts of holy Scripture; Examples and
Institutions of the Church, and Theological Reasons.
THe most holy and sacred Scripture, cries out, and tells us, that the certain
prescience and prediction of things to come and happen, belongs neither to Man
nor Devils themselves, but is only and solely to Almighty God himself; read
the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 41. and you shall hear him say, Show what things are
to come hereafter, and we shall know that ye are gods: and in the 44. chap. I
am the Lord that make the signs of Diviners void, and turn the Southsayers into
fury. And in chap. 47. God deriding the Babylonians and Chaldaeans confiding in
their Siderial and Astrological Predictions, thus speaks unto them; Stand
with thine Inchanters, and with the multitude of thy Sorceries in which thou
have traveled from thy youth, if perhaps it may profit thee any thing, or if
thou may become stronger, thou have failed in the multiude of thy councels;
let the Astrologers of Heaven stand and save thee, which contemplate the stars,
and count the months, that by them they might tell things that shall come to
thee, Isa. 47. 12. And a little before he had said, thy wisdom and thy science,
this has deceived thee; and Jeremiah in his tenth Chapter admonishes the Jews
to contemn and set light by Astrological Predictions and Observations, for that
by no influence of stars any thing was either to be feared or hoped for; these
are his words: According to the ways of the Gentiles learn not, and the signs
of the Heavens, which the Heathen fear, be not afraid, because the laws of the
people are vain. And Solomon in Eccles. 10. denies man to have the knowledge
and foresight of things to come, or contingent; A man is ignorant what has
been before him, and what shall be after him who can tell, etc. A man is
ignorant of things past, and things to come he can know by no messenger. Thus
we may plainly perceive, the vain Astrological Predictions in holy Writ, to be
contemned, derided, and opposed.

And with the sacred Text in this as in all things else, the Judgment of the
holy Church walks hand in hand, for ever from the very infancy and first
beginning, she cries out against, detests, and condemns Judicial Astrology, and
the vain fooleries thereof, how many and several, yea, and those most severe
and checking Decrees, and Fulminations has she enacted to that purpose against
those brainsick Fortune tellers and Calculators of future events, read in the
second part of her Decrees throughout the first five Questions: and you shall
easily discover her just anger against her perverse (if so I may call them)
children; or if such spurious may be styled the issue of so holy a Mother: Read
the ninth and tenth Chapter of the Council called Bracarense, cast your eyes
upon the Toletane Council, in the Assertion of Faith, against the
Priscillianists, and you shall find how much that fantastic seeming Science,
is exploded and detested. Did not Pope Alexander the Fourth of that name, as
the rest of his Successors I suppose would do, suspend a certain Priest a whole
year, from the exercise of his Function, for the only going to an Astrologer
to ask his advice concerning a Robbery committed in his Church: And do we not
find variety of disputations in the writings of ancient and learned Fathers
against those Astrologers, whom sometimes they call Ironically Chaldaeans, or
Nativity-Casters; other while Mathematicians, and Planetarians, (this is as I
suppose, men Planet-struck, or in plain English, mad men) by which it most
plainly appears, how odious and detestable these kind of Fellows was to our
virtuous and godly Forefathers: Basilius in his sixth Homily upon Genesis,
disputes admirably against these people; so does St. Chrysostom, and Gregory
the Great on the second Chapter of St. Matthew; but above all, St. Augustine
lib. 2. upon Genesis, cap. 17. as also in his second book of Christian
Doctrine, cap. 21. and some Chapters following; and in his learned Treatise of
the City of God, in some of the Chapters of the first book, he most copiously
and quaintly handles this subject; unto the very same purpose tend those most
excellent discussions and arguments against Mathematicians; and in the the same
nature disputes Eusebius in his 6. Book Chap. 9. concerning Evangelical
preparation.

And most absurd and ridiculous, or rather infatuated and mad was that grand
Apostata, Julianus the Emperor, who would needs in his Pamphlets, which he
scribbled out against Christians, prove even out of Scripture, Genesis 15. that
Abraham was addicted to, and honored Divination and Astrology, which he will
needs infer out of these words, And he brought him forth abroad and said to
him, look up to heaven, and number the stars if thou can; and he said to him,
so shall thy seed be* And as for his skill and practice in Divination, he
thinks he has hit the nail on the head, to prove it out of these words, Take
me a Cow of three years old, and a she-goat of three years, and a ram of three
years, a Turtle also and a Pigeon; who taking all these, divided them by the
midst, and laid each two pieces arow one against the other; but the Birds he
divided not, and the Fowls lighted upon the carcases, and Abraham drove them
away. Then the foreshewing of his travels, and the captivity of his posterity
for forty years space is added; but this error, or rather madness of Julianus
is sufficiently and excellently confuted by Cycillus, in the end of the tenth
book of that Treatise, which he set forth against that Apostata. Others and as
foolishly will ground the faith and credit of Astrology upon that miraculous
Star, which appeared at the Nativity of our most blessed Savior, whose aspect
incited the three wise Men, and whose conduct guided them to find out and
adore the worlds Redeemer, God and Man Christ Jesus. But these sopperies and
dreams are to the full evicted and convinced by the undeniable arguments of the
two learned Fathers St. Chrysostom and St. Gregory in their pithy Homilies
upon that part of the Gospel.

It is also no great matter to confute the grand error of Astrologers, by
reasons and arguments assumed even from Theological Doctrine it self; for first
of all St. Paul, 1 Cor. 2. But man knows not what himself shall do after
certain (be they more or less) years, nay even days: For as the Scripture
tells us, Prove. 27. Boast not for to morrow, being ignorant what the day to
come may bring forth; the way of man is not in his own hand; man proposes, God
disposes.

For not only the heart of every private man, but even of Kings and greatest
Potentates themselves, is in the hand of God, who inclines, bends, and directs
it which way he best pleases; if therefore man be ignorant what is to befall
him for the future, much less can the babbling Astrologer know it: In
conclusion, it is most certain, that the Devil himself, certain or infallibly,
(if at all) knows not things to come, or future contingents; for if he had
known what would have followed, he would never have egged on or pricked forward
the Jews to have crucified and put to death our blessed Lord and Savior; for
certain he was, that by the death of the worlds Redeemer, Christ Jesus, the
vaste Empire and Power which he had over mankind, was to be quasht, shaken,
and quite overthrown: Neither would that inveterate and malicious enemy of
mankind (knew he what would happen) so vehemently assault the Saints and
Servants of God with his strong temptations and allurements to sin, well
knowing that their victory in overcoming his suggestions and illusions are his
utter confusion, and highest check that may be to his unlimited pride and
malice.

Of the vanity of Apollo's Oracles.
THis truth may very well be asserted, and made most apparent, from the very
Oracles which the Devils gave and uttered; such as were the Oracles and answers
(so highly celebrated, and most famous amongst the Grecians) of the Delphian
Deity Apollo; which Porphirius a copious Author, and sufficient witness in his
book concerning Oracles, averreth had their whole reflection upon Astrologicall
Divination: where he says, That whatsoever the Gods foretell as decreed and
defined by fate, that they imagined would come to pass by the very motion and
influence of the stars; This Eusebius tells us in the sixth book of
Evangelicall Preparation: and the same Porphirius avoucheth, that Apollo in
these his Oracles ofttimes proves a liar; for that the punctual and exquisite
knowledge of future things is not only incomprehensible to mankind, but even
unto many of the Gods themselves; insomuch, that when they are implored to
answer requests, they sometimes lie though not willingly; and ofttimes they do
pre-admonish their suppliants, not to ask questions, for that they cannot
answer truly; yet such is the madness of men, that they insist, and as it were,
urge and compel them to speak: The Delphine God, seeing that by the position of
the Heavens, and inferior Bodies, he could not give a positive and
satisfactory answer, cries out to his Priest, to bridle that fury which had
possessed him, and not to use such charming and enforcing language; but if thou
compel me to speak, quoth the Oracle, I will tell thee nothing but lies: and in
another Oracle the same Apollo said, The Stars afford me nothing to speak this
day. In conclusion, Porphyrius tells us, we have now discovered from whence the
falsity and leasings of the Oracles of our Gods proceed.

Eusebius in sixth Book of Evang. Prep. takes this out of Porphyrius his Book
concerning Oracles, and thus delivers it to the public view; There was, says
he, in former time, a man whose name was Oenomaus, famous amongst the Grecians,
both for his singular Eloquence and prosound Philosophy, who often deceived and
abused by the Delphine Oracle, with great curiosity gathered together all the
Oracles he could gleane and lay hands on, and with exquisite knowledge and
skill confuted them as falacious, ridiculous, and vain.

Why the Devils in foretelling future things so often err.
THere are four reasons why the Devils in foretelling future events so often
and much mistake.

First, they positively and peremptorily affirm things [which have their sole
dependence upon man's free will] which being both mutable and flexible unto all
things as really free; does sometimes operate after a certain extraordinary
manner: and again, being other while divinely inspired, we do and act things
contrary to what we formerly had intended, and by our own judgment and
imagination thought expedient? Nay, ofttimes it falls out, that what the Devil
had foretold and determined to bring to pass (Almighty God forbidding and
hindering it) he cannot make it his desired Catastrophe. To conclude, the
supreme Deity not unfrequently uses to effect things in a way, different from
the common course and ordinary providence; and by this means the Devil is very
many times deceived and mistaken: And pray then, what rational soul will
believe Astrologers infallibly to speak truth, when we see the Devil himself
cannot do it? what do I thus trouble my self with this infernal fiend, when the
most learned Divines and Schoolmen affirm, that the Beatified Spirits and
Celestial Intelligences, who clearly and face to face behold the Divine
Essence, know the nature of the Stars and Heaven, and all other Natural causes,
yet cannot prophecy of things to come, which have their dependency upon man's
free will, unless it shall please the Heavenly Majesty to give unto them a
particular revelation thereof, if it be not ridiculous to give more power to
Star-gazing Astrologers then Beatified Spirits and Celestial Intelligences, I
know not what we shall call madness.

The Truth and Verity of Christian Religion, cannot cohere with the Truth of
Judicial Astrology.
THis discourse and argumentation questionless is most valid and convincing, if
Christian Discipline and Religion be exact, perfect, and true as no doubt but
it is; then of necessity must that vain and impertinent Astrological Science or
Prognostication, be false and erroneous, as having been several times taxed,
censured, and condemned of vanity and falsity by that Religion but if Christian
Faith be false and deceitful, which is spread in a manner over the superficies
of the whole universe, and has brought almost all Nations under its sweet yoke
and obedience, and has now flourished and been resplendent these 1661 years
complete; if all the actions of mortal and humane creatures proceed from the
motions of the heavens, then must it undeniably follow, that the great study
and propension which men have to embrace, maintain, and defend the Law and
Faith of Christ, must have its dependency upon some unresistible and most
powerful constellation; and therefore the heavens should incline and induce
men to evil; for if the Faith of Christ should be false, questionless it would
be more false and detestable then any other sect, or opinion whatsoever; for it
teaches, informs, and illuminateth our souls concerning God and Divine
Affairs, which should they be false, would palliate and contain of necessity
most damnable superstition and execrable impiety: but seeing that that life
which is squared, directed, and guided by the modal frame and rule of Christian
Faith, deserves all praise and admiration; hence it would necessarily follow,
that from the self-same Constellation both good and bad should be produced: bad
in respect of Christian Doctrine, its falsity; and good for the admirableness
and excellent perfection of that life which is directed and conformable to the
rule and dictamen in that Doctrine.

Add also that the greatest proof of our Chrian Faith is, and the most
perspicuous and clear argument of Divine Providence, that whatsoever has
happened either concerning our Lord and Savior or his Church, all that (I say)
whatsoever has many ages since been predicted and foretold by the holy
Prophets uniformly, exactly, distinctly, and most clearly: but if such a
prediction could possibly be made by Astrology, that most sound and firm
foundation of our Religion would utterly be shaken, totally ruined, and brought
to nothing and infallibly this Doctrine of Astrolological divination is not
only destructive to moral Philosophy, but verily even strikes at the root of
sacred Scripture and all Theology, as much as lies in its power; for he who
holds all the acts and transactions of men to depend on the Heavens, the
events, chances, and the like, to be foreseen, foretold, and made manifest by
the observation of the Stars or Heaven, this man must also without question,
think man's soul to be mortal and material; and that there is neither free will
nor any such providence in Almighty God as our Faith teaches us; and also that
the mysteries of our Christian Faith have their dependence and being from the
Heavens, and that all the miracles as well in the old as new Testament,
although they have been ever esteemed (as indeed really they are) supernatural,
must notwithstanding be reduced to Celestial causes, virtues, and influences.
This dangerous opinion begets a more dangerous effect, viz. neglect and
pretermission of good works, a freedom and liberty to all lusts, appetites, and
sensuality; an excusing and palliating of all vices whatsoever, taxing both
humane and divine Laws of severity and cruelty. Cajetan in his Summula, where
he treats of the observation of Stars, though not altogether in so eloquent and
polite a phrase, yet most pithily and truly thus writes; The observation of
Stars concerning nativities of men, and humane occurances may three ways come
into the compass of sin: First, if we reduce such things as are mysteries of
Christian Faith to that pass, as to be subject to Celestial causes and
constellations. Secondly, if we look after future contingents, as things
certain by reason of Celestial causes. Thirdly, if any one tie his elections or
intentions so to the law and guidance of Celestial influences, that he regulate
and conform his life and actions according to the position of the heavens or
influences thereof; each of these three is a mortal sin: First, because it is
against the spiritualness or spirituality of Christian Religion, which mounts
above the Heavens, and is of power to change the course and motions thereof,
according as it is written in the 148. Psalm, The confession of him above
heaven and earth, which is manifest by experience. Secondly, because it is
against the verity of Christian Religion, and free will, whereby we become
controlers and masters over all our actions. Thirdly, it is against the dignity
of Grace, and divine Law, and humane Understanding, whereby we are elevated and
placed above things corporeal, and as we should much mistake and err to make
our selves subject to the passion of hate, fear, hope, and the like, making the
impetuousness and violence of our passions, a rule to guide our actions; so
should we in a most high degree, undervalue our selves, if we should propose
the motion and influences celestial to ourselves, as a rule to order and
regulate our actions by: for they are bodies, and incline us according to the
sway and inclination of our own passions.

St Luke in the Acts of the Apostles, chap. 19 tells us, that many who were
converted at Ephesus, by the preaching and Sermons of St. Paul, and formerly
had followed curious Arts, brought their books and burnt them in public. St.
Augustine, a profound and grave Author, averres, that those books treated of
Astrology, and matters belonging to Divination: Neither did St. Paul reconcile
a certain Mathematician, that is, one who addicted himself to the study of this
kind of Astrology, nor receive him into the bosom of the Church, (although
repenting himself of his former profession) till first he had performed most
solemn penance. For as much as concerns this matter I will set down
compendiously and succinctly the words of St. Augustine; therefore after the
enarration or explanation of the sixty Psalm, when that Mathematician publicly
desiring pardon was brought before the public assembly; thus writes that holy
Doctor: This man became a good Christian, and a zealous Penitent; affrighted at
the power of our Lord, humbly threw himself prostrate before his mercies; for
being seduced by the Enemy, during the time of his seducement he seduced
others; being himself deceived, he deceived others, enticed and cunningly drew
them on, speaking many falsities and untruths against God, giving power to men
to do good, but not power of not doing evil; he affirmed, that to commit
adultery, was not done by man's own proper will, but by the power of Venus; that
our own proper will committed not murder, but Mars; that Jupiter made man
just, and not God; these besides many other detestable and sacrilegious Tenets,
by this means from how many Christians think you did he worm and screw forth
money; how many simple fools bought lies and forgeries of him; of whom it is
said, Ye sons of men, how long are you of heavy heart, and seek after lies, and
love vanity: We may now believe that this man abhorred lying, and the ruin and
destruction of so many; and perceiving him seduced, misled, and couzened by the
Fiend, being humbly penitent and contrite is ingratiated and reconciled unto
Almighty God. You are not ignorant that it is written in the Acts of the
Apostles, Chap. 19. that many lost and forlorn persons, viz. men confiding in
such vain Arts, and followers of that pestiferous Doctrine, brought all their
books unto the Apostles, and so many were burnt before the open assembly, and
they cast up the accounts of them, and found the price to be fifty thousand
pieces of silver; and was all done for the greate^^ glory of God, lest such men
esteeming themselves lost and cast away, should despair of his mercy who knows
how to reduce and bring back what soever is gone astray. This man had as it
were perished, was sought after, was found, was reclaimed, was reduced, he
brings with him now his Books, whose doctrine if he had followed would have
cast him into the flames of eternal destruction; these he casts into the
devouring flames, obtaining himself a most sweet refreshment of grace and
mercy. Before the high and solemn Feast o^ the Pasche, (which we commonly call
Easter) thi^ penitent sought a remedy for his wounded soul from the indulgent
Spouse and Church of Christ but because the Art in which he was so delighted
and lulled up, was fallacious, lying, and destructive; he was put off and
remitted to another time, but at length after trial, he was reconciled, lest he
might be more dangerously tempted.

How severe the Church has been in former times in her censure against this
kind of Astrologers.
IN the Primitive Church this kind of Astrology was reproved, forbidden, and
condemned, as much as Art-Magick, or Necromancy it self. Epiphanius in his Book
of Weights and Measures, tells us, that Aquilla Ponticus, an expositer of
Scripture, was rejected and cast out of the Church, for that he spent great
part of his time in casting and observation of Nativities, and other like
Astrological observations. It is not to be passed over in silence in this
discourse (it being worthy our notice) what Eusebius. in his sixth Book of
Evangelical Preperation, Chap. 9. relates out of Origin in his Commentaries
upon Genesis, of this kind of Astrology: The Gentiles from the Aspects and
Conjunction of the Stars, believe all things upon earth by urgent necessity to
chance and fall out, which strange force and power they style Fate; yea, and
many among the faithful stagger hereat, thinking it almost impossible that
things should otherwise happen then as decreed by the constellations of the
Planets: from whence it follows, that there is no liberty or freedom in us,
no act of ours can either merit praise or dispraise; and consequently the just
judgment of Almighty God foretold in the Scripture, whereby some are
predestined to everlasting and endless torments* others to eternal and
perpetual felicity and beatitude, should be predicated as false; what needs
more, faith it self, the coming of our Savior, all the travel and labor of
the Prophets, the Apostles preaching and laying the foundation of the Church,
should all be vain, unless we should say, that Christ himself by the
constellation of the Planets was necessitated and impelled by their power and
force to do those thing which he did; far be it from any Christian to harbor
such a thought, much more to utter such blasphemy; and that, what he suffered
was not by the potency and power of his deity or divinity, but by the force and
virtue of the Stars; and out of this impious ground and fundamental it also
must be concluded, that the faithful are forced by fate to believe in Christ,
that no distinction can be made betwixt good and bad, that God must be the
author of sin, that no reward is due to men for what they have done, whether
good or evil: to conclude, by this unsavory Doctrine, there is no need of
prayers, obsecrations or vows, to implore the aid and assistance of Almighty
God: Thus Origin.

Let Peter Destliaco hug himself in his conceit of the (by him) so admired
Astrology, let him Idolize it, and defend it, tooth and nail, let him beat his
working brain to yoke it, and make it walk hand in hand with Philosophy; and
(yea forsooth which Theology also) all which he shall never bring to pass,
unless he can familiarize and make a league betwixt Falsity and Truth, Light
and Darkness, God and the Devil; and his impudency blusheth not to assert, that
the Deluge, or (as we call it) Noah's Flood, the Incarnation and Birth of our
Savior, and other high and admirable mysteries and miracles might have been
prognosticated and foretold by the constellations and conjunctions of the Stars
and Planets.

Concerning many most false and evidently impious Assertions.
BUt that it may the more manifestly appear how impious and execrable this
doctrine is, I will here set before your eyes some Assertions and Decrees of
those men, whereby the impiety and wickedness of that Art may the more easily
be discovered: Some of those subtle Doctors affirm, that Mars being seated
benignly and prosperously in the ninth Region of the Heavens, he is of such
power, that by his very presence there, we may cast out devils from bodies
possessed; others (as wise or rather profane as the former) make their boasts
and brags, that by this their adored Art, they can infallibly lay open the most
obstruse and hidden secrets of the conscience, of any mortal creature
breathing: but this is a vulgate and common assertion (I do not say a
Mathematical conclusion) that there are two Planets which are the authors and
procurers of all humane felicity; Venus of what is here present, Jupiter of
what is to follow in the life future, or world to come. Maternus, a man higly
confident and curious, and a great Patron of those lies and feignments, after
he had disgorged himself of many things which happen to mortals, when Saturn is
constitute in Leo; he adds what follows. Men born under such a constellation
shall be long-lived, and after their passage out of this sublunary universe, by
the application and additional help of wings, shall soar and mount aloft to the
highest heaven: And his reason is, for that Saturn being placed in Leo,
reduces souls from the bodies of persons so born, uncaged from innumerable
cares and troubles in this mortal being, to the very Empyrium, the fountain of
their origin. Albumazar will needs persuade us, that he whosoever shall ask any
thing of Almighty God, the Essence of all goodness, when the Moon is conjoined
with Jupiter in the Dragons head, questionless his Orations and Supplications
obtain not only audience, but a full and plenary grant and confirmation of
whatsoever he imploreth; and this honest Petrus Aponensis averreth, that he
found experimentally true in himself, because that he (when that conjunction
was in its full power and vigor) had humbly supplicated to the highest for the
gift and spirit of science and knowledge of things; and from that very moment
(if you will believe him) he felt an incredible exuberance and superabundant
accession of knowledge. By these and many such like fopperies, wicked,
detestable, and pernicious to Christian Religion; which although they would
gladly seem to elevate and extol, yet do they absolutely take away the faith
and belief of those things which the holy Scripture teaches to be done,
supernaturally, immediately, and miraculously by God himself. There is no man
so very much a blocus, or stupid in his intellectual part, but may very well
undeceive himself, if his judgment have gone astray and erred herein. He that
desires more accurate satisfaction in this point, let him read Picus
Mirandulanus, who largely and learnedly handles this subject, in several
places, especially Lib. 2. Cap. 5. and in the fifth Book, Chap. the 11. and so
to the end thereof.

Chap. 2. Judiciary Astrology Arraigned and Convinced by Philosophy, and the
Professors proved altogether ignorant of Celestial Things.
CRave and learned Philosophers, to demonstrate Astrological Divination, to be
ridiculous and grounded upon no firm and solid basis or foundation, assert
their Theses and Conclusions after this manner: Astrologers cannot certainly
know, the vigor, power, defluxions, or effects of the Stars; nay, had they
that knowledge which they have not, yet were it not sufficient, for a full and
certain foretelling of things hereafter to be contingent; and therefore it
follows by necessary consequence, and evidently, that Astrological predictions
are frivolous, vain, and fallacious. Two things are included in this argument,
which are to be more at large elucidated and explained, before further progress
herein: The first is, that Astrologers are ignorant of Celestial things: The
other, that although they were really and undeniably most expert and skilful,
yet were not that sufficient, to divine infallibly of future events; we will
speak of the first in this ensuing Paragraph.

Judiciary Astrologers ignorant of Celestial things.
Out of this which I shall now produce before your eyes, I will plainly make it
manifest, that Judiciary Astrologers are ignornt of heavenly things and causes;
first therefore, it is very intricate, hard, and laborious, to know those
things perfectly concerning the Heavens, which to us seem more obvious and
facile: as for instance; The Nature of the Heavens, the Magnitude, the Number
of the Orbs, the order within themselves; the difference of dignity, the
variety of motions; and to proceed a little further, the number of the Stars,
the comparison of them amongst themselves, concerning their greatness,
brightness, power, and effects. The grand discrepance and variety of opinions
of the best Philosophers herein, which we find gives a most clear and perfect
notion of this difficulty. Aristotle, whom the world acknowledges the Prince
of Philosophers, heartily and ingenuously confessed, that concerning many
Celestial things he had no certain or exquisite knowledge, but only an
imaginary and conjectural skill, and being destitute of real and manifest
reasons, he was compelled to make use of probable arguments and conjectures;
peruse and read over Aristotle himself in his second Book de Coelo, Text 17.
34. 60, and 61. which if it be so, who will give credit unto Astrologers, (who
as all must grant, being as perspicuous as the fun at noonday) are not to be
compared with those great Masters in Philosophy) that those things in the
Heavens by the judgment of Philosophers are most obstruse, and to mortals,
incomprehensible; I say, the virtue and foretelling certainly of things to
come, should be so clear, and experimentally known.

Let us now a little make bold with these all-divining Astrologers, and
something entrench upon their patience, that they will be pleased, out of their
profound knowledge to enucleate and enode unto us some of the more easy
questions and doubts concerning the Heavens: As first, whether the Heavens be
of a simple and uncompounded, or a compounded matter and form? and then whether
the matter of the Heavens be such as is that of sublunary things, or different,
and diverse from it? whether Heaven be animate or inanimate? whether it be moved
by its own proper strength, and by it self, or extrinsically by an Angel? by
what means the dignity and excellency of the Heavens one from another shall be
estimated, judged, and made manifest? What the reason may be, why all the Orbs
are not circumagitated and wheeled about by one only motion; but that some are
forced by one, some by more, and others by fewer motions? Let these Grandees
discover unto us what force and power properly belonging unto it each star has
upon Metals, Vegitables, and such as have fruition of vital spirits and life.
Put these Questions and Interrogatories unto them, or such like, and we shall
find these Astrologers ignorant, weak, and altogether unskilful to return an
answer; how then can any man with reason think it possible, or worthy belief,
that men who know not such things as are more obvious and trivial, should give
an account or judgment of things more remote and hidden from the knowledge of
mortals. After this let them instruct and teach us the defluxions and effects
which flow, and have Influence over the several and dissipated Regions of the
world, and then perchance we may believe them, when they sooth us up with the
future effects of the stars; for who knows not that it is far more easy to
apprehend and know things present, then those which are to come and future,
especially things subject to mutability, where the Contingents are various, and
therefore uncertain. Let them likewise make manifest and express unto us the
occult properties and power which sublunary things have (which we rather admire
then understand) in Stones, Herbs, and Animals; for these seeing they are in a
manner obvious and conjunct unto us, and subjected almost to all our senses,
and which by daily experiments may be found out and discovered, certainly must
have a more express motion and plain discovery: But the intelligence of
heavenly things must needs be of a far greater difficulty and labor, Heaven
being so far remote and distant from us, and only discoverable by the sole
sense of the eye, which ofttimes is deceived, and brought into error through
the longinquity of Intervals, or the violent and swift whirling about of the
Heavens, the depraved and indisposed affection of the medium, or of the sight;
the fault and imperfection of the Astrolabe, Tables, or other Astronomical
Instruments; and this we find attested in the sacred Scripture, Wisdom, Chap.
9. For the body that is corrupted burtheneth the soul, and the earthly
habitation presses down the understanding that thinks many things; and we do
hardly conjecture the things that are in the earth; and the things that are in
sight we find with labor; but the things that are in the Heavens who shall
search out, and thy sense who shall know, unless thou give wisdom, and send
thine holy Spirit from on high? This sufficiently confutes Astrologers, who
pretend to discover all humane events, of which most have their dependency upon
the most inscrutible will and council of the most High and Mighty God.

Against the fictitious Antiquity which these men vainly boast to have
concerning observations.
ABove all, our Astrologers boast and brag, that they have observations
attested and confirmed by their events of I know not how many, yea innumerable
years, beyond the limits of computation almost, out of which their art has its
radix, original, and perfection; for seeing that in the revolution of time
elapsed, diverse things have been produced and come to pass, the same signs
preceding, by the due minding and observation whereof, their Art was conflate
and completed, and therefore they endeavor to persuade us, that the Chaldeans
through their diligent Astrological observations, during the space of four
hundred and seventy thousand years, have brought forth this admirable birth, I
mean the profound Art of Divination, to its full maturity and perfection: But
how childish, fictitious, and improbable this is, is thus easily discovered.
Astrologers (let them brag what they please) could not so many thousand times
collect and gather, no not twice or thrice, those observations and experiments;
for the face and aspect of the Heavens, and the position of all the Celestial
Signs, which was once, shall scarcely or never, or at least not till immense
revolutions of years, return and be the same: For the eighth Orb, in which the
wandering Stars have their being, compleats and finisheth not its course before
the expiration of thirty and six thousand years; and the most learned
Mathematicians demonstrate by convincing arguments, that the motions of the
Heavens are incommensurable; and therefore the same Aspect of the Heavens, and
position of the Stars cannot frequently happen.

The Philosopher Phavorinus in his fourteenth Book, Apud Gellium, and first
Chapter, confirms this reason with admirable perspicuity, eloquence, and
clearness: If (says this learned Author) the Chaldeans observations were
grounded after this manner, to wit, to make a strict observation, under what
habit, form, and posture of Stars a child should be born, and then from his
nonage and very cradle, even to the Catastrophe and last period of his life,
to register and record his fortunes, condition, qualities, and inclinations,
together with the circumstances of his affairs and transactions, and then (as
they suppose the manner was) put all those collections upon a File, and enrol
them upon Record; and afterward when the same Stars should meet in the same
manner, and have the same position, questionless they must needs tell the same
fortune to any one born under such a constellation. If this was the way, and
out of this principle they grounded the foundation of that Discipline, it is
altogether weak and slippery; for let them tell me in how many years, nay ages,
this Orb or Circle of Observation may be perfected; there is no Astrologer but
must know, that those Stars which are called erratical, or wandering, and the
fatal efficients of all those things, do not, unless in an innumerable and
almost infinite number of years, return to the same posture, and with the same
habit from whence they wheeled and wandered; so that, no order or tenor of
observation, no memory whatsoever, no nor the very character of such Letters
and Monuments could be preserved or endure so long a time: Thus Phavorinus.

And if it should be granted that Astrologers should dive into the secret force
and defluxion of every Star seperately, and alone by it self; what force and
power Stars have when they meet, and conjoyn, and are mingled, either in the
Heaven, Air, Earth, in sublunary things or their actions; this is not to be
discovered. Reader observe what Origin writes upon Genesis, cited by Eusebius,
toward the end of his sixth Book of Evang. Prep. Such things as they affirm
(Astrologers) to come to pass by the commixture, composition, and temperature
of several Aspects, this very thing shows their ignorance; for who can tell the
harm pretended by a malign Aspect, the Constellation of the benign and
propitious concurring; and whether the malign detards that which the benign
bestows, because it points at the others location; and whether it change or
rechange, or what commixture is made, what man can judge or perceive; he
whosoever shall seriously penetrate into those mysteries, shall find that they
are not to be comprehended by humane wit and capacity, whosoever shall make
experiment o^ these things, shall find Fortune Tellers and Nativity-casters,
oftener to err then speak the truth wherefore Isaiah, as if these things were
totally impossible, has this saying to the daughter of the Chaldeans, the
grand professors of this mystery* Let the Astrologers come and make thee whole,
let the Southsayers tell what is to betide thee; by which we are admonished,
that even the most expert Caldean in this Art, cannot foretell what will alot
unto every Nation.

Again there are many Stars, which are either not clearly or not at all to be
seen; and if those Astrologers confess there are many not known to them, and
more not perfectly discovered; wherefore then presume they so confidently to
predict events to ensue out of those few Stars, whose power they know, since
through the influxions of the other Stars, which they know not, the effects may
be either hindered or become various: unless they will impudently and absurdly
say, that the Stars which they know not have no power or influence at all: It
is manifest amongst the Astrologers themselves, that in the eighth Heaven there
are 1022 Stars, of which each exceeds the earth in bigness, and therefore must
needs have great force and power; but of all these, Astrologers have little or
no knowledge for that their prognosticating skill consists chiefly in the
observation of the Planets; in which they altogether trifle away their time and
spend their days. Seneca, a man of a perspicacious judgment well perceived
this, when in his second Book of Nature. Quest. Cap. 32. he expresses himself
both eloquently and learnedly in these words. What other thing is it (says he)
which leads Nativity-casters into error, but that they content themselves
with the notion of a few Stars in calculating of Nativities, when all which are
above us, arrogate and challenge a power and influence over us; those which are
lower and nearer have power over us, and those which are more frequently moved
reflect otherwise upon us and other animals: Furthermore those Stars which are
immovable or by their inperceptible volocity seem so to be, challenge a right
and dominion over us.

Of the strange Star which some years past appeared.
CErtain years past we beheld a new and strange Star, never before that time
conspicious in the Heavens; which Astrologers affirm had its position in the
same place where the fixed Stars have their being. This Star (whereas for a
time it appeared visible to our view) on a sudden disappeared totally and
vanished from our sight; this was either generated in the Heavens, and
afterward corrupted (and it is like the same may happen to other through long
intervals of time) or else it had its being above the Planets and wandering
Stars, which have their proper passages although unknown to us; or above in
conclusion in the eighth Heaven, which we esteem wandering and unfixed, which
also has its proper motions and operations; of which Hypparchus famous for his
knowledge in Astrology seems to doubt, as Pliny in the 27. Chap. Book 2.
testifies: Hypparchus, says he, a man never sufficiently praised, discovered
in his time that a strange Star was produced, by the motion whereof, upon the
day of its appearance, he made a great doubt whether this might be usual, or
whether those Stars which we deem fixed, were moveable: Great Astrologers think
it much to concern their Art, to understand certainly the concordance and
discrepancy betwixt the two Zodiacs, the one of the eighth, the other of the
ninth Heaven; which nevertheless they shall never find out, for that the ninth
Heaven has neither Star nor light* neither can any thing concerning it be
discovered, except motion, and that only from the motion of the eighth Heaven:
And certain it is, that Astrologers can give no account of what condition these
two Zodiacs were at the creation of the world; because a certain and exact
account of the time of the worlds creation, to this day cannot be acquired;
some account and number of years since that time may be had and aimed at, but
of days and hours very difficile, if not impossible; and yet notwithstanding
such a computation is very necessary and requisite to the doctrine of Astrology.

What a difficult thing it is punctually to observe what force the Aspects of
the Stars have in every man's Nativity.
THe position of the Stars in the very moment in which one is born, without a
manner of error or mistake can scarcely be attained unto: It is a matter of
difficulty to discover the very point of time in which any one is born, and
rightly to observe the Aspect of the Sars which then reign and have influence
in that very moment, or as I may say Attome, for ofttimes vapors and clouds
being interposed, do either quite take away, obfuscate, or shut from us the
sight and aspect both of Heaven and Stars: and above all, the most rapid and
swift wheeling of the Heavens brings it so about, that it is fleeted and flown
away before we can take perfect cognizance thereof; for in almost every moment
the face of the Heavens, and a diverse posture of the Stars is existant.
Astrologers confidently profess that they will exactly tell you the fortunes
and events of any man, so that he may but know the certain time of his birth;
but such an exact, subtle, and punctual knowledge (as is necessary for an
Astrologer) is very hard to be come by; let us suppose for example, that Oliver
was born the 56 year from this time, the 7 of September, at ten of the clock,
either at the beginning, middle, or end thereof: but that moment, or almost
nothing, or little something of time, wherein Oliver fell from his Mothers
womb, and came into this world, neither the Midwife, Parents, or Assistants can
directly and exactly assure you of, as it is necessarily requisite for the
Astrologer if he intend to divine aright.

I cannot by any means in this place pass away without setting down the words
of Saint Basil, who treated of this subject accurately and pressing, which I
only have glanced at by the way, and slightly touched: his words are these,
which he left written in an Homily upon a part of Genesis. The inventors of
calculating Nativities, perceiving that in a long interval of time many Figures
and Aspects slipped by and escaped the reach of their Science, contracted their
measures intoa very compendious and strait limit of time, and as the Apostle
calls it, a moment of time, or twinkling of an eye; and in this very moment of
time, there is very great difference and desparity betwixt nativity and
nativity; for he that is even now born, shall be invested with regal dignity,
wear the Diadem peradventure of an Empire, give Laws to several Nations, and
abound in all worldly prosperity; when he that comes into the world, even
immediately after, shall be poor, despicable, a Vagabond, Jugler, Hocus Pocus,
and it may be, beg his bread from door to door: that Orb therefore which is
called the Signifer, being divided into twelve parts when the Sun in the space
of thirty days has past the twelfth part thereof, which is styled by
Astrologers, inerrans, or wandering; every of these twelve parts they divided
into thirty parcels, and then those parcels, each being divided into sixty
minutes; these minutes again they subdivided after the same manner into sixty
more. The birth therefore of one newly come into the world being determined,
let us observe whether these skilful masters with all their Art, can keep this
so exact division of time. The woman is delivered of her burden, the Midwife
looks whether it be male or female, next she hearkens to hear it cry, as a
presage of the life and strength of the child; after she brings the infant to
the Astrologer, and when she prattles with him as gossips use to do, during all
these petty transactions since the little one was an inhabitant of this world,
how many minutes as we may conjecture have past away; especially if the Artist
were not in the Chamber, but in some other remote place expecting the news?
Again, whilst he is accommodating his Instruments of Art, to investigate the
exact and precise time, whether nocturnal or diurnal, how many minutes fly
away: and here again when the Star is discovered which denotes the time and
minute, then comes the twelve parts, the thirty parcels, into which each of
those is to be divided; then the subdivision of those parcels into sixty
minutes to be examined and canvased over; and although they can never attain to
so precise and punctual a finding out of the exact time, yet they affirm this
must necessarily be done in the wandering and unfixed Stars to know what
disposition and habitude they have with those which are fixed, and what like
figure is amongst them, when the infant was born; things standing in this sort,
that by reason of the variation of that most short time a certain knowledge
without error is impossible to be had, not by the vain and foolish students of
this Art, who gape after a thing impossible to be attainded; but also thus
silly creatures who run after them as Prophets, and Wise men, deserve the fools
coat, cap, bauble and all.

Chap. 3. Supposing Astrologers to know the very Depth and Cognition of
Heavenly Matters, yet by eight Reasons it shall be made manifest, that they are
not able to tell future Events.
LEt it pass with a Transeat, as Schoolmen say, that Astrologers (as they
impudently and foolishly arrogate unto themselves) have the perfect knowledge
and science of the Heavens and Stars; yet all this, notwithstanding I will make
good that they cannot divine and fortel future contingents, and that by
undeniable and convincing reasons; and thus by many and valid arguments I
confirm it.

Eight Reasons, by which it is proved, that even out of a perfect cognition of
the Stars, future events cannot be foretold.
The first Reason.
IT is a vulgate and well known principle in the Schools of Philosophers, as
every thing is concerning its esse or being, so it is concerning its cognition,
viz. by reason of the causes for which every thing is made and has its being;
by the same it ought to be known, if we intend to have a perfect knowledge
thereof: but to the generation and production of future particular events, not
only heaven concurreth but also a particular cause; heaven is an universal
cause, by which it is manifest, that this vigor and efficience must also be
universal and indeterminate to produce particular effects; but the power and
force of Heaven is determinated by particular causes, in which respect
Aristotle's saying is most true: The Sun and Moon generate man; particular
effects although forasmuch as belongs to the effection and conservation, they
have their dependence on causes universal; yet for what belongs to their
proper nature and natural proprieties, as well specifical as individual, they
rather emulate and imitate a particular then an universal cause.

Besides Celestial Causes, the knowledge of particular Causes is most requisite
to know their effects.
IF therefore over and above Celestial Causes for the producing of future
effects, it be necessary to have a particular efficient cause and matter aptly
prepared, of which if the one be wanting no effect can be produced, from which
we must of necessity conclude, that for the prenotion of future effects the
knowledge of Celestial Causes is not sufficient: and this is in daily
experimentals manifested unto us; we behold the painful Husbandman at the same
time, and under the same aspect of the Stars to sow several sorts of Grain,
from which also several and distinct succreases accrue, which diversity cannot
proceed from the Stars, but from the several seeds themselves; with which St.
Augustine agrees saying: When many bodies of several kinds, whether animate,
herbs, or shrubs, are seminated in the same punctilio of time, and at the same
instant; afterward innumerable increase is produced, and not in several, but
in the same regions and places of the earth, and of such admirable variety, in
the springing, growth, flourishing, virtues and fassions; and will not men (as
the old adage is) laugh at their own folly if they consider these things? and
what I pray can be more foolish and sottish, then being convinced by these
daily experiments to say, that man and only man is subjected to the fatal
decree and influence of the Stars: These last words of St. Aug. Phavorinus the
Philosopher expresses more amply saying: If the period, time, destiny, and
cause of man's life had its dependence upon Heaven and the Stars; what will they
say of flies, worms, and many other animal culums, as well volant and ceptible,
as najant, are these tied to the same laws of production and expiration as man;
have Frogs and Flies their production, being, and fate, from the influence and
motions of the Stars; if you Astrologers will not grant this, why affirm you
that the power of the Stars has such prevalent power over mankind, and yet
prove defective in other creatures?

Of the equal Birth and unequal Fortune and Events of Twins. The second Reason.
WEre it true as Astrologers would persuade us, it must necessarily follow,
that twins who are conceived and born about the same time, must needs in all
things sympathize and be alike; yet daily experience shows the contrary: but to
wave all other dissimilitudes, it often happens, that the one twin proves a
male, the other a female: It Is true, Cicero in his Book of Divination tells us
of Proclus and Euristhenes Lacedemonian Kings and twins, yet their ends were
unlike, and the glory of their actions much discrepant: but above all, that
which we read in the sacred Text is an all satisfying example; Jacob and Esau
proceeded from the same Concubitus, as Paul, Romans 9. sufficiently tells us, and
at the same time born, were notwithstanding severally inclined disagreeing in
conditions, unlike in manners, dissenting in judgment, and differing in other
habits and qualities; neither avails that lurking hole or after game which
Astrologers keep as a reserve to recruit them when the day is almost lost,
saying, that that small parcel of time which interceded betwixt the nativity of
the two twins, though it appear little, or nothing to us; yet in the Heavens,
by reason of the vastness thereof, and the inconceptible wheeling and most
quick motion, makes a wonderful difference and variation,

Nigidius Figulus goes about to demonstrate this in a wheel, circumagitated
with all possible celerity, who with ink or some other material apt to make
impression perspicable, twice endeavored to hit the same mark, and at the
stopping of the wheel, found the two several impressions, not far remote one
from another: This signifies nothing, and gives as little shelter to the
Astrologer, as an uncovered Barn to a weary Passenger in a great shower of
rain: for although in the nativity of twins their might be some demurr or
interval; yet in their conception there was not any: and if the condition of
the constellation under which a man is born, be so immediately variated, the
proper and exact time of any nativity must needs be to Astrologers
incomprehensible. To conclude, we will produce St. Gregory's argument to make
this good. If (says he) Jacob and Esau are not to be thought born under the
same constellation because not born together, but the one after the other; by
the same reason we may infer, that no individual man is born under the same
constellation, because he is not totally produced together, but piecemeal and
joint after joint; as first the head, the^ shoulders, next back, and so till he
come to the feet; and Jacob was so near to his Brother, that he held his foot
in his hand.

Phavorinus disputing against the Chaldeans upon this point, handles the matter
exactly, and with singular accuteness: I would have them (quoth he) to answer
me in this; If the moment of time in which man at his birth has his fate
allotted, be so exiguous and fleeting, that in the same instant, and under the
same Circle of Heaven many cannot have their being, after the same competency;
and that therefore Twins have not the same fortune, because not produced at the
same moment of time; let them make it, I say appear, by what means they
themselves can discover, or attain unto the exact knowledge of the course of
that swift flying and vanishing time, which by the cognition of our
intellectual part can scarce be comprehended; and yet notwithstanding they
averr, that in the headlong tumbling, and wheeling about of days and nights,
even the least moments produce immense and admirable changes: Hitherto
Phavorinus. St. Aug. also gives great light to this discourse of Twins, and
handles it learnedly in his fifth Book of the City of God: in some of his first
Chapters, and in the second Book of Christ. Doct. where he puts Astrologers to
their wits end, if not to a nonplus; for if in so short a moment of time all
things admit a change, that not only several, but for the most part contrary
things may happen, who can predict or foretell in the nativity of a child any
certainty; since it is most certain, that the very moment of time, in which he
was conceived and born, is impossible to be exactly known by any; suppose it
granted that the Stars have great power, influence, and virtue over mankind in
general; yet man's capacity to this very hour could never reach unto what vigor
and force they have in the individuals, because the aspect of Heaven, and
position of the Stars in every particular nativity cannot be attained unto, and
this by reason of the incomprehensible swift motion of the Heavens and Stars
out-strips and prevents the dull slowness of our apprehension and observation.

The third Reason.
Let us lay aside the discourse of Twins, whose interrupt birth may well puzzle
Star gazers, and behold and take into consideration, thousands of nativities,
at the very same time, and in the same Kingdom, under the same aspect and
position of Heaven and Stars, and the Children begot by diverse Parents;
Astrologers must needs give the same judgment, and pronounce the same fortune
to all those being born under the same constellation, and daily experience
shows the contrary; for how many throughout the whole world, are conceived in
the same moment, and at the same time born; and yet in their capacities, wits,
manners, yea religion, life and death, there is a vaste dissimilitude and
disproportion. In the great Battle which Hannibal fought against the Romans,
how many, both great Commanden and ordinary Soldiers perished and lost their
lives and yet no man is so destitute of reason, or destitute of judgment, as
to think all those men born under the same constellation and aspect of the
Stars; and in that admirable Sea fight, and glorious Victory obtained against
the Turks in these latter times, to the immortal glory of Christians; will any
man be so foolish as to think and affirm, that all those miscreants who
perished there and were swallowed up by the merciless Waves of the
all-devouring Ocean, were born under the same aspect of Heaven and
constellation? When Homer, Hippocrates, Aristotle, and Alexander the Great were
born, were not also many others born, in the very same times and moments; yet
in the several excellencies proved equal to them: Phavorinus tells us yet
further, saying, How many of both sexes of all ages, born under several
constellations, either by earthquakes, falling of houses, taking of Towns,
shipwreck, or the like, have come to the same sad end, and in the same moment
of time, which could never have come to pass if the same fortune and destiny
attributed to every one at his nativity, and the power of that moment had had
its proper force and virtue, or laws prescribed; and if some things and events
concerning the life and death of men born at several times, by a likeness of
constellations happening after, may seem to acquire a near or like success and
contingency, why cannot the parity bring it to pass, that many Socrates,
Antisthenes, and Plato's shall have their existence, and being, in form,
feature, wit, qualities, through their whole life and death all alike and
semblable, which yet is impossible; and therefore Star-gazers have but a silly
shift by this argumentation, to make us believe that men born under several and
distinct constellations may have the same final end and Catastrophe.

The exquisite Argumentation of Bardesanes against Astrologers.The Fourth
Reason.
BArdesanes a Syrian, exquisitely skilful in Celestial Doctrine, in a Dialogue
(which by the entreaty of some friends) he writ against the Chaldeans
concerning Fate, demonstrates the observations of the Astrologers to be vain
and childish and their predictions to be full of leasings and falsities; Eusebius.
in his sixth Book of Evang. Prep. Chapter 9. writes his words thus: Amongst the
Seres was a law, which prohibited to commit murder, fornication, or to adore
Idols; from whence it was effected, that in all that Region there was no
profane Temple to be seen, no woman laciviously addicted, or whorish, no
adultress, thief or homicide; neither had that scorching Star of Mars (though
in its full vigor or placed in the midst of Heaven) power to enforce the will
of any man to perpetrate a murder; neither had wanton Venus, though never so
conjoined with Mars* power to induce any man to attempt his neighbors bed, or
violate his consorts chastity; and yet did Mars every day by necessity of his
course come through the middle of that Heaven; neither is it to be questioned,
but that children were born, every hour in that so large a region or territory.
Amongst the Indians and Bactrians are many thousands of men called Brachmanes,
who as well by tradition os their Forethers as their laws and constitutions,
avoid the adoration of Idols, eat not any thing animate; neither drink they or
ingurgitate wine or other strong liquors, men free from all malignant
indispositions, employing their whole time in the Service and Honor of the
most High and Great God. There are other Indians in the same Region who
contaminate themselves with the adoration of false Gods, with adulteries;
murders, and drunkenness; nay, there is yet another sort of Indians, inhabiting
in the same Climate, who assassinate men as they are at their sports of hunting
or offering sacrifice, and devour and feed upon them; neither can any of those
Stars, which they esteem benign or propitious, deterr or hinder those people
from such like villainies; nor yet the malignant enforce or compel the
Brachmanes to act such black and hideous crimes. Amongst the Persians there was
a law, whereby it was enacted, that men might contract matrimony and cohibit
with their Daughters, Sisters, or Mother; and this Edict those people observed
not only in their own Country, but in what Climate soever they inhabited, or
Regions colonized, which they polluted with incestuous Nuptials and horrid
Marriages; which other Nations loathing and abhorring, branded them with the
nomenclation of Magussees; and even at this day in the very heart and center of
Egypt, Phrygia, and Galatia, are many of those Magussees, who by a long
continued practice from former ages, commaculate and defile themselves with
such obscene and detestable villainies; and yet we cannot in positive terms
affirm, that those bruits rather then rational creatures were generated and
produced under the house of Saturn, Mars being an assisting spectator. The
Amazons lived without Husbands, only in Spring time, they conglomerated and
passed the bands and limits of their native soil, made bold with their
neighbors Husbands, and such other lusty sparks, as seemed to be active in
propagation; and as they all enjoyed the company of men and convenied, so by
necessary consequence they must be delivered and brought to bed, at or much
about the same time and instant. The males they unnaturally murdered and
destroyed, reserving the females, whom they trained up in Martial Discipline,
and they proved for the most part undaunted Virago's, and the true Daughters of
Belona; yet it were ridiculous to opinionate, that all these masculine females
were born under the same natalitial Stars. This verity is yet made more
manifest by the example of the Jews, who wheresoever they have their beings, in
what Region or Kingdom, under what King, Prince, or Emperor, or in what
Climate soever they are born, by an inviolable observation, upon the eighth day
they circumcise their Infants, keep their Sabbath high and holy, reverence and
honor the Feast, yet all Jews are not born under the same constellation;
neither can these pretended influences or virtues of the Celestial Bodies draw
them from the Rites and Customs of their Progenitors: much more may it be said
of Christians, who dispersed over the whole superficies of the Christian world,
observe the same tenor of doctrine and form of life; yet neither by force,
fair words, large promises, glorious pretenses, nor thundering minaces,
torments almost insupportable, Tortures, Racks, and other strange and unheard
of punishments, can or could be seduced or drawn one hairs breadth (as the
saying is) from those principles which Christ our Lord and Savior left unto
them; are or were all those Christians born under the same Planet? These happy
souls before the receiving of Christian Faith, followed with an ardent
Superstition the Laws and Precepts of their Ancestors, but after the sacred
Lavacre of sin-remitting Baptism, they forsook all those soul destroying
Ceremonies, invested their better parts with a pure faith, clothed themselves
with the new man, and followed a perfect rule of living, leading upon earth a
life Angelical: upon that score, the baptized Parthians wedded not many wives;
the Medes cast not their dead bodies to the dogs; the Indians committed not the
corpses of their deceased to the consuming flames of fire. The Persians
contract not matrimony with their sisters, daughters or mothers; the Egyptians
abhor the worship of their Apis, Goat, Dog, or Cat; but wheresoever they
inhabit, observe the same form of life and doctrine. What needs more to be
said, each hour men are born in all Nations, and we see, that through free will
and power in man, those Laws and Customs are punctually kept and observed;
neither can these all-powerful Stars (as Astrologers dream) compel and force
the Seres to Homicide; the Brachmanes to eat flesh; neither can they hinder the
Persians from their incestuous copulations; the Medes from giving to their dogs
their friends dead carcasses; nor the Parthians from wedding many wives; all
nations when they will and how they will use the fredom of their Liberty,
obedient to their Laws and Customs. Thus much out of Bardesanes against the
vanity of Astrologers.

The fifth Reason.
The free will of man, and the immortality of the soul granted, this Art cannot
subsist; for if the the one must stand, the other must fall. Judge then
courteous Reader, is not this Art highly to be disesteemed and slighted, which
cannot have an existence, or show any feats, unless the liberty of man's will
and immortality of the soul be overthrown and demolisht: But if our soul be
mortal, and have not freedom in its actions, yet Astrologicall Predictions
cannot subsist, as shall be concluded by these ensuing Arguments.

First of all, Astrologers profess and brag, that by the profundity of their
Art and observations, they can foretell future things and events; future things
which have their dependency upon free will, cannot possibly be discovered by
these Artists; for so they should know future things as they are in themselves,
or per se, in act, and a thing which is not in as much as it is not, cannot be
understood; and therefore it must be after some kind of manner, to wit, in the
powerfulness or potestaty in its causes: neither can future things be known in
their causes, which are three; God, Heaven and humane will; but such things as
are to have their being from the decree, counsel, and absolute will of Almighty
God, what mortal Creature either by the Heavens, or any other means can dive
into them, unless they be such unto whom the Almighty will have them by himself
made known and revealed; for who, says the holy Scripture, knows the sense and
meaning of God, or who has been of his counsel? And as it is written in Wisdom
9. The things that are in sight we find with labor, but the things that are
in heaven who shall search out; and thy sense who shall know unless thou give
wisdom, and send thine Holy Spirit from on high? Such things as depend upon
man's free will cannot by the Heavens be discovered, because Heaven is an
universal cause; and future particular contingents cannot have their dependency
on the Heavens, or be known, unless it be universally and indeterminately. And
again, Heaven is a corporeal and material cause; wherefore the soul which of
it self is incorporeal, not composed of matter, and free in acting, necessarily
and directly cannot be subject to the efficiency and operation of the Heavens.
Again, humane will is the very immedate cause of humane actions, in respect of
future events, which are to be produced from thence, which is of it self
indifferent and indeterminate, for we shall do things which we have not thought
or deliberated; how then can an indifferent, and indeterminate cause produce a
certain knowledge of a future effect; and this may be thus confirmed: The
exterior actions of man depend upon the interior, that is to say, either by
deliberation, or choice and election; and therefore the exterior future action
of man cannot be foretold, unless the election of his future will be known from
whence it must necessarily proceed; but the future election of man cannot be
known to any other; for if the resolves and deliberation of the mind and
understanding which man has in present cannot be discovered by another, how
can those purposes, deliberations, and decrees of man's understanding be
manifested and made known by another, which are to happen after the revolution
of many years?

Whether it be easier to Prognosticate, what a good or a bad man shall do.
MAn is to be looked upon and considered either as he leads a life and operates
according to the dictamen of reason, or according to sense and appetite; if
according to reason, man has no dependence upon the Heavens; for the soul and
intellectual part is immateriall and incorporeal; and nothing corporate can by
it self act upon a thing incorporate; man's will is free, and mistress of all
her own actions, and can by her own instinct and disposition, apply her self to
do or not do this or that; for although from the influence of the Heavens, or
composition and temper of the body, man by the instigation and subtlety of the
Devil, (or otherwise) may be tempted and seduced to do evil, yet may he by his
own power, assisted by Gods Grace, anihilate all those temptations, and
overcomming and trampling them under his feet, do the quite contrary to what he
was provoked and allured; and this is apparent in the very example of Socrates,
who by the natural constitution and composition of his body was both a bard and
much addicted to women, and the delights of Venus; yet by the strength of his
better part, a vigilant watch over himself, as chastising of evil propensions,
and nipping them in the bud, he triumphed over his passions and was esteemed
the most grave, prudent, chaste, and continent man of all that age.

A man who spins out his time according to sensuality and carnal appetites,
leads a life so wandering and mutable, that it is impossible to divine what
will become of him; and Solomon says, that amongst many things which he hardly
understood, he was altogether ignorant how youngsters in the flower of their
youth steered their course; for that age is so slippery, inconstant, fickle,
and wandering, that it seldom abides any long time in the same state and
condition; to day disliking what yesterday extremely pleased; having no Analogy
in its actions, not squared by any dictamen of reason, but rashly and headlong
impelled and hurried away whithersoever cupidity and lust courts and invites
it: from whence it proceeds, that with far less difficulty an Astrologer may
prognosticate the actions of him who spends his days, according to the model
of Intelligence, then his who neglecting both reason and virtue, trifles away
his time according to the vanity of his own affections and desires. More facile
it is by much to divine the transactions and events of a King who rules
civilly, and according to reasons behests and prescriptions, then of a Tyrant,
whose will is his law; how then can these seeming skilful Artists foretell
events, in which there is so much uncertainty and ambiguousness, and where
nothing can be had firm and certain.

The effects of contingents which befall man by celestial fate, and power of
the stars, may or may not be hindered: if the effect may be so hindered, that
it come not to pass, then is it uncertain, and consequently the Prediction
cannot be certain and infallible: If it cannot be hindered, then free will is
taken away, and our soul made mortal and material, as being necessarily
subjected to the power and influence of the stars: If this be so, what benefit
can Astrological predictions bring to mankind? for what good will it be to
know things so long beforehand, if they cannot be declined and avoided? nay
rather it were an inconvenience to be by all means shunned: for what can be
more grievous, then not only to be oppressed with present calamities, but also
to be rackt and tormented with an inevitable expectation of miseries to fall
upon us hereafter? This Seneca lib. 3. epist. 80. understood right well, though
he attribute almost, if not altogether, as much power and dominion to stars
over men, as do the Astrologers themselves: These are his words. I come to-him
who boasts his great knowledge in the stars.

Whither cold Saturns Star, it felf betakes;
Or in what Orbs Cyllenius progress makes.
What avails it to know this? Forsooth to make me startle when Saturn and Mars
stand in opposition, or when Mercury declines Westward, Saturn looking on; I am
rather of this opinion, that wheresoever they are, they are propitious and
benign, and not subject to change or mutability, and this is brought to pass by
the inevitable course and continual order of the Fates: They return at set
times, and the effects of all things are either moved or denoted by the stars;
if they absolutely cause the thing, what will the immutable knowledge thereof
profit thee; if they only signify it, what will it help thee to provide
against that which thou can not avoid; for know thou, or know thou not, those
things will come to pass. Thus Seneca. But Phavorinus handles this point in few
words acutely and Philosophically: Astrologers (says he) foretell either good
or bad fortunes: if good, and miss in their aim, thou art, deluded and made
miserable by a long and frustrated expectation: If bad, and yet lie, thou art
also made sollicitous and afflicted by fearing in vain; if they speak truth,
but foretell thee hard hap; then, even then in thy thoughts and imagination
thou art tormented and vexed before thy bad fortune fall upon thee; if they
promise that the things which they foretell shall be good, and much to thy
advantage; notwithstanding two discommodities will follow; first thy greedy
expectation will weary thee, being held so long in hope, expectation, and
suspense; and again the hope of thy future joy by little and little will wither
away: In no case therefore have recourse unto those men to be satisfied in the
curiosity of knowing future Contingents.

How vain a thing it is to believe, that Astrologers can tell any man that he
shall be chose chief Bishop or Pontifex.
THis thing amongst many others discovers the vanity of this Art; Astrologers
for example will persuade some one, that he shall be elected chief Bishop; but
the promotion of any one to this high degree of honor depends not upon the
will and power of the party himself, or any other particular person, but upon
the decree and suffrages of the whole Conclave, whose charge it is to elect the
chief Bishop; and therefore it is not only necessary (suppose I affirm Peter
to be the man) to know the constellation of his Nativity; but I must also know
exactly the Constellations and Position of the Stars in the several births of
all those whose joint suffrages vote and elect Peter to that high preferment.
If it be true which Swetonius relates concerning Augustus, that Nigidius
Figulus, a man eminent amongst the Romans for his rare knowedge in Astrology,
having taken the hour of his Nativity, and rightly considered the stars
predominant at his birth, cried out aloud, The Lord of the whole world is now
born: We must conclude that this was not spoken by Art, and grounded upon
Reason, but casually and rashly, and that it was mere chance that it came to
pass as he had foretold. For the advancement of Augustus to that height of
Command and Monarchy, was effected by rising unto several degrees of honor,
and depended upon the favor, study, and procurement of many men; so that to
know and pronounce the advancement of Augustus to so eminent a degree of
Sovereignty and Empire, it was not sufficient to Calculate the Nativity of him
alone; for the stars which were prevalent at his birth could not have power
upon the nativities of others who were his Abettors, Sticklers, and Coadjutors
to obtain the Imperial Diadem and Dignity; of whom many were born before, and
many several years after Augustus.

That the Art and Science of Astrology is none, or not considerable. The sixth
Reason.
EVery Art and Science is versant in things which always, or for the most
part, fall out as that Art teaches; and yet it is manifest, that things showed
by Astrology very seldom and rarely come to pass as she foretells, as having
no stable or grounded foundation; and therefore cannot constitute a formal Art
or Science: Being therefore as it is most certainly true, that Astrological
Predictions are most commonly false, and very seldom true and veridical; it is
most clear, that they proceed not from any Art, or certain observations, but
are spoken temerariously and at random: For which cause Phavorinus gives us a
Caveat, not to be over confiding in Chaldeans, though at some times by great
chance they stumble upon a truth and verity; and his reason is, because they
speak not things certain, defined and known, but fallible, and grounded only
upon ambiguous conjectures; and so betwixt truth and falsehood, they steal
hood-winkt along poco poco in a mist of obscurity, and so trying many
conclusions by hap hazard, and before they be aware, they unknowingly stumble
upon a truth; and sometimes also by the credulity and informations of those who
come foolishly to ask their counsel, they seem to meet with a verity; and this
presently cries them up to have knowledge in things both past and future; but
such truths as they discover either hab nab, or covered with the cloak of
subtle knavery, compared with their lies and falsities, amount not to the
thousand pan thereof. Cicero in his 2. book of Divination has these words,
what need we desire more: The Chaldeans are daily confuted; how many things
have these Chaldeans told Pompey, Crassus, and Caesar himself, as that they
should die in their own habitations aged and full of years, and in the very
height and top of honor and renown: It seems strange to me that any man will
follow and give credit to these Fellows whose Predictions and Prognostications,
which daily experience make manifest to be mere leasings and fopperies.

Seneca in a small Pamphlet which he entitles, Ludus in mortem Claudii
Caesaris, brings Mercury upon the stage, negotiating with the fatal sisters the
procurement of Claudius his death; and by the way to put a jear and frump upon
the Chaldeans, amongst other his Patheticall and Rhetorical Arguments, (that
Astrologers may not always be taxt with lying) Be pleased (quoth Mercury) most
dread and powerful Ladies, that Fortune Tellers may sometime speak the truth,
who have so often told us, that this or that year, this or the next month
Claudius should be taken out of this world: And is not the like done in these
our present times; do not our Astrologers prognosticate the death of Potentates
as they find the Peoples affections to wish their lives, prosperities, and
preservation; or death, overthrow, and utter confusion.

St. Ambrose in his fourth book in Hexem. chapter 7. has these words: Some few
days since when we fell into discourse how welcome and grateful rain would be,
one in the company made answer, fear not, Neomenia will send some; truly though
we wish for rain, yet wish we not such affections verified; for my part I am
much pleased that no rain fall, till we obtain it by the prayers and
supplications of the Church. Whereby it is manifest, that an hope and
confidence, is not to confide in Changes and Moons, but to depend upon the
providence and mercy of our most gracious and Omnipotent Creator: By which the
vanity of Astrology is confuted, the efficacy of Christian Piety, and power of
religious and godly prayers made manifest.

The vanity and falsity of Astrological Predictions.
ALbumazar a prime Ringleader of Superstitious Astrology, or Astrological
Superstition, through the observation and precepts of this Art, divined that
Christian Religion should continue only 1460. years: but the years which have
elapsed-since that prediction, prove the Predictor a liar. Abraham a Jew out of
his Astrologicall observation, calculated that the Messiah should be born 1464.
after our Saviou^s Nativity, because (I know not what) the same Constellation
and Position of the stars should then happen and be, as when Moses brought the
Hebrew People out of Egypt; but how true this Prediction was, time has
discovered.

Petrus de Aliaco has left recorded, that the Astrologers of that time (when
the general Council of Constance was called, to extirpate and root out Heresy
and Schism which so much troubled and disquieted the Church) foretold, that
the Church should enjoy no tranquillity; but the Heavens threatened dissension
and discord even to the ruin and overthrow of Christian Religion: and yet
notwithstanding by that very Council, that long continued and pernicious Scisme
was extinguished, and a settled peace and quietness established in the Church:
And this happy event so contrary to their vain Predictions might have moved
honest Peter, to shake hands and bid farewell to Astrology, especially seeing
that he himself (either deluded by his own observations, or circumvented and
fooled by other men's) was struck into a deadly fear, lest that most damnable
Schism and horrid Heresy should be the forerunner of Antichrist, immediately
to follow and ensue.

Errors of Astrologers in Chronology.
ALbumazar the Grandfather of Astrologers admires (I wist not what) Revolutions
of Saturn; for he affirms, that after Saturn has perfected ten conversions or
wheelings round of his Orb, which comes to pass in the space of 300. years,
that then some rare and wonderful things will be effected; for, says he, 300.
years after Alexander, Arelasor the son of Bell appeared, who vanquished and
overcame the Persians; and 300. years after that came into the world, Jesus the
Master and Captain of the Christians. O intolerable and incredible ignorance
in computation of time! for neither was the son of Bell living at that time,
which he sets down and nominates; neither did there intervene 600. years
betwixt Alexander and the birth of our Savior; for his most happy and blessed
Nativity happened 320. years after Alexanders decease, which is another of
Albumazars feignments: But why should any man wonder at this mistake in
Albumazar, since he will needs make Ptolomy the Mathematician, to be one of
those Ptolomies, who were Kings of Egypt, and reigned after Alexander; whereas
Ptolomy the Mathematician was never in all his life honored with such a style;
nor did he ever King it, but lived under Hadrian the Emperor above 160. years
after the last of the Egyptian Ptolomies. Another grand vapor the Astrologers
make, avouching that no mutation of Laws, the birth of no famous Prophet, the
conversion of no Country how great soever, nor any remarkable passage ever
happened, but that some great conjunction of Planets, especially that of
Jupiter and Saturn anteceded. That Conjunction (say they) began at the worlds
Creation, prognosticated the Deluge, brought into the world Abraham and Moses,
foretold the Incarnation of mankindes Redeemer, and point out the origin of
Mahomet; but how scandalous, lying, commenticious. and full of error these
brags are, shall be demonstrated by this Argument,

Peter de Aliaco over confident in these feignments, and hugging himself in his
own conceit, concerning the concord of History and Astrology to make good what
has been related, laying this foundation, from the beginning of the world to
Noah's Flood were 2242. years; from the Flood to the Birth and Nativity of our
blessed Savior 3102. having laid this groundwork, he goes about to prove,
that whatsoever in this universe has fallen out memorable and worthy of
servation, to have happened when some notorious Constellation appeared in the
Heavens: But to confute this, examine his Computation of Time which he makes
the Basis whereon to ground his Argument and assertion; and if upon examination
you find that most false and untrue, then needs must the Doctrine which is
underpropt with so weak a foundation be erroneous and fallible. But from the
worlds first fabricating, and Adams Creation, and Noah's Flood, interceded not
above 1656. as is manifest by Holy Scripture, being fewer years in number then
his computation by 600. and the Constellation which they imagine to have been
in the origin of the world, must needs precede its Creation 600. years; and the
number of years between the Flood and the coming of the Messiah did not fully
complete 2400. years, and therefore that conjunction of stars could not appear
till 684. years after the Flood. The other grand position of stars they would
make you believe had its existance 942. years after the immersion of the
Universe, and 17. years before the birth of Abraham; and yet the sacred Text
tells us, that he was born 292. years after the Inundation; and so by
consequence that Constellation must exist 630. years after Abraham's Nativity.
They observe that the sixth great Conjunction was 225. years before the
Nativity of our Savior, but most absurdly, as relying upon the former
principles and computation, which was erroneous and false; for if we follow the
exact Chronology, that great Conjunction should have happened almost 500. years
after the Quires of Angelical Spirits sang that sacred Canticle, Glory to God
on high, etc. To conclude, that this our learned Peter was altogether ignorant
in Christian Chronography, by this observation it will easily appear; he
affirms that in the year 700. after the birth of our Savior, (in which he
says the seventh great Constellation fell out, that that great scourge of
Christians, the Arian Heresy should breed distraction in the holy Church; and
yet that Heresy, that most viperous Heresy which had its origin about the
300. Year; before the 600. year was fully crushed and extinguished: Who is so
half sighted, or purblinde, that will not see their Predictions relying upon
most lying and unperfect Chronology, to be most vain, false, and pernicious?

But to what purpose spend we our time to collect examples of such frivolous
Predictions, every History and Age being so full of them: For my part I
conceive that it is hard to find the Predictions of Astrologers true
concerning future events, (although they happen sometimes casually, and by
accident to be true and veracious) by reason that there are so many of them,
even past number so perspicuously false; and in the very things themselves and
events confuted. Cato pleasantly says, That he wonders that one Southsayer
laughs not at another, by reason that very few of their presagings come to
pass; and if any did, it seems merely by chance. What Cato said of Southsayers,
the same may we of our Astrologers; for seeing we will not believe a known and
common liar, though he speak truth; why should we give credit to an Astrologer,
for one true Prediction, who tells so many which are quite contrary to verity;
and amongst so many false predictions, it is better to believe one that may be
true, then by reason of one which may prove so by chance, give credit to all
the rest? Some will say Astrologers now and then guess aright, and predict
things which the event proves to be true, but this ignorantly, rashly, and
without judgment: He who shoots all the day long may hit the mark. We may
justly say of Astrologers, as was formerly said of Apollo's Oracles; such as
happened true were recorded, but those which proved false were laid aside and
buried in oblivion: men who defended and maintained the certainty of those
Oracles, divulged and spread abroad the true ones, with great applause and
specious Encomiums, but the false ones they hushed up in silence; those who
contemned them all, neither regarded false ortrue. The causes why the
Predictions of the Chaldeans are reproved, in this ensuing discourse shall be
manifested.

Astronomancy in all ages has been exploded and condemned by prudent and
knowing men. The seventh Reason.
IF this divining Astrology were true and certain, it would appear without all
doubt, to be the most noble part of Philosophy, and most set by, and wished for
by mankind; first by reason of the worthy and excellency of the subject which
it treats of, to wit, the Heavens and Stars; and then especially for the
knowledge of the events and casualties of man's life and death, beginning and
ending, which all sorts of people are most curious to know; but seeing that
that Doctrine in all ages has been contemned and rejected by the most eminent
Philosophers, and many Astrologers themselves, it must needs be a convincing
argument, that the Art of Divining was accounted frivolous, impertinent, and
void of all probability. Xenophon in his book de Sectis Socrat. as Eusebius
relates, lib. 4. of Evangelical Preparation, has these words; The cognition
and knowledge of future things, which are in the power of God, cannot be
obtained by mortal industry; neither is it pleasing to the Divine Majesty, nor
possible to screw into those secrets which his heavenly pleasure will have
occult, and mortals must not dive into. Pithagoras, Democritus, and Plato after
long and wearisome journeys, came unto the Persian Magicans, the Sages amongst
the Chaldeans, and Priests of the Egyptians; from whom they sucked some things
more occult and obstruse concerning Mathematical Discipline, the Religion and
Worship of the Gods; but the Art of Divining they either altogether neglected,
or if they brought any smattering or fragments thereof, they made no use of it,
as it may appear through the whole context of their writings.

Aristotle a man cried up in all Universities and Schools of Literature, a man
most copious in the Doctrine of heavenly things, which he expresses in several
of his books, makes no mention or speaks the least word concerning this
kind of Astrology; when in his books of Meteors, and concerning the parts and
generation of Animals, but especially in his books of Problems, he investigates
the causes of many admirable and obscure things, to unriddle or enode any of
the curious queries, he troubles not his brain, or makes any use at all of the
help and assistance of Astrology; nay, there are many parcels in his Works
which do altogether oppose and contradict this Art of Astrology; as this for
example: Of future contingents there is no certain or definite verity; things
which chance and happen by accident, cannot be comprehended by any knowledge to
judge of the fortunes and casualties of humane affairs, which are not in man's
capacity, the immediate, proper, particular, and corruptible causes of
particular and corruptible effects; to have a perfect and exact knowledge of
these is is not sufficient to contemplate celestial and universal causes; the
Heavens operate no otherwise upon those things which are sublunary, then by
motion and light: neither does he approve the force or efficiency of any other
Stars besides the Sun and Moon, quite contray to Astrological Decretalls, and
the Influences of Celestial Signs, and corporeal and sensible effects may be
prevented and hindered by other causes.

Cicero in his second book of Divination highly commends Eudoxus, the most
eminent man amongst the Astrologers in the time of Plato and Aristotle; as also
Pinetius the Stoic, Archilaus, Cassandra, and Saleyces Halicar, men applauded
and renowned amongst the Astrologers, for that they abandon and cast off the
vain Science of Astrology. Avicenna, who next after Galen and Hipocrates, bears
away the bell amongst Physicians, advises to give no credit to Astrologers in
divination of future things, because they neither know the Celestial Points,
nor the nature of inferior things, which not withstanding are exactly necessary
to give a judgment of future events; neither do they ground upon Demonstration
either Probable, Rhetorical, or Poetical. Ptolomy, whom these men profess to
follow as a grand Master in their Art, in his first book de Judiciis, tells us:
It is not to be imagined that all things are upon necessity derived from
supernatuall causes; that no other power can impede or hinder their operation:
And in his Treatise which is vulgarly called Centiloquium, a book of an hundred
Sentences; the first sentence is this, Men only inspired by God can foretell
future particulars: And his fifth sentence is, A knowing man may prevent many
effects of the Stars, if he be versed in the notion of them, and dispose of
himself before the event fall upon him; from whence comes the Proverb, A wise
man shall command the stars. Porphirius in his book concerning Oracles,
confesses that the exquisite knowledge of future things by gazing upon the
stars, is not only incomprehensible to mortals, but even to the Gods
themselves. And again, in the life of Plotinus, he says, That after he had
spent and consumed much time in the study of Astrology, he discovered at last,
that no faith or credit was to be given to the judgment and divinations of
Astrologers concerning things to come, and therefore afterward, both by word
and writing he confuted this vain Art of Divination, as may appear to those who
will read his book, de Fato and Providentia; but especially in that book where
he disputes, whether the stars have any power or influence to produce such
effects.

What sort of men delight in these Astrologicall Predictions, whom St. Ambrose
compares to a Spiders web.
WEre this kind of Astrology veridicall and infallible, the conveniences and
commodities arising from thence would be held in high esteem; for by the
foreknowledge of future things, what advantage would it be to Monarchs and
Potentates for the well regulating and governing their Territories and
Principalities, and so consequently the professors and masters of this Art
would deserve immortal Laurels, and be advanced to sit at the Helm of the best
governed Republics. But experience shows the quite contrary: For we see that
by most strict and severe Edicts, by Decrees and Proclamations this unnecessary
and vain Art has been exploded, condemned, and exiled by many well deserving
Princes. How often was it banished Rome, with the Astrologers and Chaldeans
professors thereof, by Tiberius, Vitellius, Dioclesian, Constantine,
Theodosius, Valentinian, but especially by Justinian, by all whom the study,
practice, and exercise of this Art, was not only adjudged vain, false, and
lying, but also obnoxious and ruinous to Cities and Societies of men, and in it
self pestilent and detestable. But to what purpose were it to conglomerate a
cloud of witnesses, or to use Rhetorical circumlocutions in a case so manifest?
I dare be bold to say, that in the memory of man, nay in all ages sift them
never so purely, you shall not name a man, the acumen of whose wit surpast
vulgar capacities, whose doctrine was admired, whose prudence in civil affairs
excelled, or who was conspicuous and eminent, for integrity of life and
manners, or admirable in any noble quality of the intellectual part, but he
vilified, derided, and accounted all the Calculations of Nativities, and the
vain Predictions of Astrologers, as false, ridiculous, and to be exploded from
amongst Christians, and well ordered Communities. True, the vulgar who have
ordinarily dull and gross intellects, apt to believe any thing which tickles
their fancy; men credulous and itching to hear novelties, are much taken with
these chymera's, and give confident belief to such fopperies, and many shallow
and giddy brained fools are taken with this vanity, rather for lucre sake then
truth. Amongst Scholars there is a self-conceited Pack, who like nothing be it
never so profitable and commodious, that is familiarly known to all men; they
commonly are haunted with the spirit of contradiction; and rather then not be
contentious and in opposition with the greatest masters of wisdom, they beat
their brains to be delivered of strange Novelties and Incomprehensibilities;
the height of the ambition of these Opinionists is not so much to know verity,
as to seem to the vulgar to know that which the ablest of Philosophers confess
they could never attain unto.

I will put a period to this discourse with a notable saying of St. Ambrose, in
his fourth book of Hexam. c. 4. The wisdom of the Chaldeans is rightly compared
to the spiders web, in which if a fly chance to be entrapped, there is no
evasion or enlargement; but if a Creature of validity and limbs pass that way,
it dissipateth and bears away all those slender machins, and infirm and
feeble gins: Such are the nets and tacklings of Astrologers, in which fools and
weak judgments are entangled and captived, but men of strong sense and reason
pass by them without any retention or impediment. Thou therefore, whosoever
thou art, when thou beholdest these feignments of Astrologers, tell them, their
frail gins and spiders webs have no power to ensnare thee, unless like a
feeble and silly fly through thy own imbecility thou suffer thy self to be
entangled therein; whereas a strong judgment, like a Sparrow or swift flying
Dove, breaks through, and carries all before it.

An Argument against three Fundamentals of Astrology Judiciary.
THe basis and foundation of this Art is either very weak and infirm, or none
at all; then by necessary consequence, so is the fabric raised and constructed
thereupon, and therefore ought not to gain any repute and credit amongst men of
reason and capacity. There first principle would make us believe that the Stars
have all the same proprieties and qualities of the Elements; they are partly
cold, and partly humid and dry; if not formally, at least virtually, that is
not in act but in effect; if not by having the qualities themselves, yet by
having the efficient faculties of those qualities: Saturn by their opinion is
too frigid, the Moon humid, Mars dry: But this both reason and experience
confutes. Reason thus; if all the stars be lucid and cast forth light, they
must be all hot, and produce heat; let us grant their Adage, that the Moon and
the rest of the Stars shine by a light borrowed from the Sun; if then the
reason and origin of the light and brightness of all the stars be one and the
same, how then can the reason of acting and operating by them be so discrepant,
unlike, and different: Experience gives this a check, for when it is full Moon,
and that Planet most resplendent, and replenished with light and luster,
Aristotle and experience tells us, that the nights are warmer then either
before or after. Our Star-gazers besides this luminosity or light, have
discovered in the Heavens and Stars strange power and virtue, differing both
from the light, and jarring among themselves, yet causes of strange and
wondrous effects; and these to the great credit of the business they style
Influences; an invention so modern and modish, that the Ancient and learned
Philosophers were never acquainted with any such nomenclation; nay, the
Astrologers as much as may be gathered out of their writings, in ancient time
were altogether unacquainted with these niceties: But this Monster-influences
begotten by Fortune Tellers of a later brood, nursed by their Abettors, and
defended by their followers, have at all times been hist out of the Schools and
Academies of Learning, as spurious and abortive; and one amongst the more
accurate sort of Philosophers calls them, the Sanctuary and refuge of
ignorance, and fools Paradise. And to these prodigious Influences the baffled
Astrologer betakes himself as to his last lurking hole, being an Ambuscado to
entrap Simpletons, and cast a mist before their eyes who are not grounded in
the true principles of Philosophy; and this they do when, and as often as they
cannot show the proper and natural causes of the wondrous effects of those
things called Influences; which if they be admitted, farewell all Philosophy,
her glory is eclipst, authority anihilated, and her high esteem quite
abolished. What need great Wits and eminent Philosophers puzzle and trouble
themselves to find out and discover the occult and hidden causes of things, if
in a trice, and as it were twinkling of an eye, by means of the Omnipotent
Influences, the obstruse and hidden secrets of nature may so easily be attained
unto; ask by what undiscovered power the Lodestone attracts Iron, you shall
not stay long for an answer; for you shall quickly hear an Oracle tell you,
that its proper Celestial Influence has invested it with that virtue; from
whence has the little Fish called Remora such singular power, as for to retard
and stop a ship under sail in her full career and height of speed? Oh the
proper Celestial influence of that poor and silly fish has given it that
power. What needs more to be said, no problem, nothing so reserved by nature
from man's knowledge; nothing so full of the difficulty which Philosophers have
labored to discover, but these ignorant Pedants, and vagabond Gypsies will
quickly resolve and enode, by telling you of the Celestial Influences.

But to come a little closer to these youngsters, if Saturn, because he is
lucid, by his light produces heat, how can the same by his Influence produce
cold; is it not absurd that in the same star, there should be two contrary
faculties, the one of producing heat, the other cold; not only diverse, but
opposite and contrary? We see that nature has so provided that in all things,
where there are two differencies and proprieties, (as Philosophers say) the one
general, which is common to one thing with many others: The other special,
which is proper to a thing, (as in man to be knowing and rational) so that the
specificall and proper difference and propriety is more noble and perfect then
the general, as being that which does contract and determine it, giving it a
reason and degree of new perfection; as in the example of man, it is more noble
to be rational, then to be knowing: but this happens quite contrary in this
strange Doctrine of the Astrologers; for they teach (for instance sake) that in
Saturn there are two proprieties or faculties of operating* the one general and
common to him with the rest of the stars, which is a power of Illuminating, and
by that Illumination to produce heat; another special and proper to Saturn, in
respect of which he differs from other stars; which is a faculty of producing
cold, or a certain virtue of some other Influence: but it is most evident, that
the Celestial Light is far more noble then any other Celestial Quality; and the
faculty of producing heat far excells that of producing cold: furthermore in
every thing there are two faculties or proprieties natural to that thing; the
one universal, the other particular, in themselves contrary; as in Saturn the
production of heat by light, cold by influence: But reason and nature it self
says this cannot be done: For as in a multiform body, which the Greeks call
Hetrogeneal, according to the several parts there may be several qualities and
faculties, as it happens in the body of man in the head and heart; but it
cannot happen in the star of Saturn, being for as much as concerns its parts of
the same form and nature; the one part thereof is not beautified with light,
the other with influence; but as the whole is replenished with light, so also
should it be with influence. It is needless to make any other dispute against
Astrologers concerning Influences, for this one argument is sufficient to take
away the influence of all things which are produced in nature, seem they never
so singular and wonderful, The true, proper, and natural causes of all things
have their dependency from two Celestial Principles, Motion, and Light; which
is most manifest by daily experience, and all things most probably to be
produced from them. Astrologers imagine and dream, that the figures and
position of the stars* with the signs in the Zodizck, resembling the similitude
of men or animals, to have a great power and virtue in each man's nativity; when
by themselves, and their own nature, they are no such thing, but have only
their existence and being in the Astrologers noddle, which represents such and
such; for they may as well resemble them to Creatures, Houses, Castles, Towers,
Tables, or the like; and therefore it is ridiculous to think, that in such like
figures there is any thing of consequence to divine or foretell future events.

Whether the Birth-stars of any man can be the certain causes of things which
shall befall him
THe second Fundemental of Astrologers is, that the birth-stars of every man
are to be observed, for that from them all casualties and events of his life
may be foreseen and prognosticated; but who sees not this principle to be weak
and infirm? For why do not Astrologers rather observe the time and condition of
the stars, when man is conceived in the womb, formed and animated; for then by
all probability there are more things considerable, and of moment to predict
good or bad fortune, by reason that then man has his first existence, and then
is the first celestial force and power received and imprinted in him; and
throughout the whole nine months that his mother goes with him enclosed in
her womb, all this while he is subject to the power and action of the Heavens.
And why do not Astrologers consider other Defluxions and Constellations which
are contingent to man after his Nativity, in regard that they are far more
prevalent and powerful, and more conspicuous in their effects then those which
happened at his birth; for the effect and defluxion of the stars which happened
at the birth is often changed and varied, the temperature of man's body being
variated; or by reason of some power of Constellations, by education, a several
habit and custom of living; or by reason of some certain laws, to the
compliance whereunto, man is forced to regulate and square his life, manners,
studies, and all other his actions: and above all, peradventure there is
nothing of that first matter, which Schoolmen call Materia prima, left in old
and declining age, which was at the first entrance into this universe: This is
the opinion of many and great learned Philosophers. Neither does St. Tho.
Aquinas, that illustrious School-man, seem to deny it, in 1. Part. Quest. ult.
Art. 1. which being granted, the force of that first defluxion and celestial
effect, which was stamped and imprinted in man at his first being, must at last
of necessity totally vanish and fade away; unless you will have it, that the
same celestial virtue and power can pass from one subject to another, as it
were flitting from house to house, by changing its habitation; or at least be
so kind, that when it perceives its own decay and feebleness, it will provide
some neighboring virtue of like condition and quality, to supply its place,
and officiate in its room.

Whether the Conception or Nativity of man be more considerable to foretell
Fortunes.
PTolomy the grand master of this Art affirms, that there is as much, if not
more matter of weight and moment to be considered in the conception of man, as
in his Nativity; these are his words: When the temporal beginning of man is set
down according to nature, or as Scholars say, per se, or by its self, that
will be the beginning, when the sperma, or seed, is ejected and ejaculated into
the genital and apt place of conception; but in potency or accidentally when
the infant falls from his mothers womb, may be called his beginning also; he
therefore that either by chance or observation obtains the knowledge, when the
fit matter is aptly and duly received and enclosed in the vessel of conception,
ought by all means to follow that exact time, to discover the proprieties of
the mind and body of the then conceived Embrion, by observing the
configurations and constellations at that very instant, etc. By which words he
manifestly demonstrates, that the most efficacious, natural, and even the first
beginning of man is when the seed is first received in the time of conception;
upon which consideration the Astrologer ought principally to insist and reflect
upon that moment, and the then Constellation, to divine and foretell the future
events, contingents, and affections, as well belonging to the body as the
mind: But to give a salve to this sore, seeing it is almost impossible to know
exactly the moment before mentioned, either of conception, or the other,
Ptolomy, lest their Art may seem to be eclipsed, who only prognosticate from
the nativity of man, adds these words: But he that cannot atttain to the
knowledge of the seminal beginning, must of necessity content himself and make
use of, and follow the time of the Nativity, to predict future events and
fortunes.

Haly that so much admired and followed Astrologer, in his book which he writ
concerning Elections heartily confesses, that the efficacy and exactness of
foretelling the fate and fortune of any man has its greatest dependence upon
the hour of conception: But because Astrologers cannot arrive at this height of
knowledge, they are forced to fly for refuge to the hour of the nativity; and
when this kind of professors are put to it, and pressed with the argument of
Twins, all that they have to say for themselves, and save their credit is, that
the diversity of contingents and events in Twins, happens by the diversity in
Conception, and not in the Nativity.

The vanity of Astrologers in applying their Art not only to Men, but also to
walled Towns and Cities.
BEhold, courteous Reader, how great and shameless is the audacity and
impudence of those fellows, who will not only divine the fortunes of Mortals,
but Cities and Castles also; and tell you, that if you observe the
Constellation when any City or the like has its foundation laid, or is
erected, you shall (if you will believe them) calculate and divine the
casualties, destinies, and events which hereafter shall befall and happen unto
that place. Plutarch tells us in the life of Romulus, that Tarutius a certain
Mathematician at the entreaty of Varro, made such a Calculation concerning the
City of Rome. This story Cicero in the second book of his Divination renders in
these words: A certain man called L. Tarutius Firmanus, a familiar friend of
mine, exquisitely fu^nisht and instructed in the Art and Discipline of the
Chaldeans, dived into the foundation, or as I may call it birth time of our
City, from these Configurations and Constellations of the Stars, under which he
conceived it founded by Romulus; and finding it incohated in the wane of the
Moon, made no scruple to prognosticate the fate and destiny thereof. O strange
madness, and powerful force of error and blindenss! can possibly the
foundation of Cities have any relation and dependency upon the force and power
of the Moon and Stars? Suppose it possible to foretell events by Constellation
of the Stars at the birth of a child, will you thence infer, that it is easy
and possible to declare and predict what will become of stone, brick, and
mortar, with other materials, with which a City is constructed and built. Thus
Cicero.

Why Astrological Observation may not be as prevalent in Herbs and Animals, as
in mankind.
I Would gladly learn of those all-divining Masters, whether or no their Art
have as much power over herbs and animals, as over man: If they answer
negatively, they betray their own ignorance, the weakness, folly, and
fallaciousness of their Art and Profession: For why should it not be as
prevalent in such things as in men? nay, far more* for herbs and plants by a
natural necessity have greater dependence upon the power and efficience of the
celestial bodies; and seeing that fewer (and those not so various and
differing) Contingents happen to plants then men, by consequence it must be far
more easy to predict their future events, then those of mankind: If they
grant, that the stars have equivolent dominion over plants, and mortals; I ask
them calmly, and in a friendly way, if they observe the position of the
Heavens, and constellation in that very moment and season, when plums,
cherries, or pears are grafted or inoculated; or in seed-time, when wheat or
other grain is cast into the ground, and out of that prognostic observation
they can foreshew what increase and multiplication all these trees and grain
will produce; how many cherries on every tree, how many ears of wheat in every
acre or cover, and how many wheat corns in every ear; if they grant me, that
their skill cannot arrive at such a height or perfection, let them leave their
babbling to persuade me that they can foretell the future events of mortals.

Concerning the Antiquity of Astrology amongst the Egyptians and Chaldeans.
THe third basis and foundation of Astrologers is, that their Art is backed and
bolstered up with most certain experimentals, of I know not how many, even
almost innumerable ages; and that the quintessence and marrow of that divine
Art had its origin from the Chaldeans, and the Inhabitants of Babylon and
Egypt, the very first and ancient possessors of this Universe; and Aristotle
himself in his book concerning the Heavens, and in another, wherein he treats
of Meteors, affirms, that the Egyptians are the most ancient Planters in the
terrestrial Globe; and in the beginning of his Metaphysics he says, The
Egyptians the most ancient amongst mortals first invented and digested the
Mathematical Art and Science. And the former and ancient Astrologers were wont
to boast, that the Chaldeans successively employed their time and endeavors
for the space of 470. thousand years, in calculating the Nativities, and
carefully keeping and reserving the experimentals and observations of the
children in that so long a time born: But this is so manifest an untruth, a lie
so palpable, that it may almost be felt, and therefore not worth mentioning or
confutation; for since the very first Creation of the world there have elapsed
not much more then 6000. years, and from the first original of that Nation of
the the Chaldeans, viz. from the confusion of tongues at the subversion of
Babels Tower, not more then 4000. years. Picus Mirand. in the second Chapter of
his second Book against Astrologers, brings Hypparchus and Ptolomy, grand
masters in this Mystery, to confute this imaginary and Chimerical Antiquity of
Astrology; for these very Grandees when they labor any conclusion or
dogmaticall precept, from the long and prolix observations of their
Predecessors, they can ascend no higher then the Reign of Nebuchadnezzar that
potent Monarch amongst the Egyptians and Babylonians; and since the first
inauguration of that Prince, and beginning of his Empire to this present year
of our blessed Saviors Incarnation, (says mine Author when he writ this
Treatise) 1588. there cannot be computed above 2232. years. And St. Augustine,
that grave and learned Doctor, in chap. 4. book 18. of the City of God, checks
and scoffs at this fantastic vanity, saying; Foolishly do these men babble and
prate, who go about to make the world believe, that it is above an hundred
thousand years since first the Egyptians found out the power and influences of
the Stars; from whom I pray did they extract such collections, it being not
above 2000. years, since first of all that Nation learnt the art of Letters
from their first Mistress Isis? This Varro, who is no mean Author, delivers unto
us. And thus we conclude the eight reasons, by which it is demonstrated this
kind of Astrology or Divination to be opposite and contrary to the true and
solid grounds of Philosophy.

CHAP. 4. The Stars are so far from being the Causes, that they are not as much
as Signs of future things.
SAint Augustine in his fifth book of the City of God says, That there were
some men, and those of esteem for their learning and knowledge, who although
they did not allow the stars to be the causes of humane affairs, yet granted
them to be certain and infallible signs thereof.

Whether or no if the Stars be not causes, they may be certain signs of future
events.
Origin in his Treatise upon Genesis (as Eusebius tells us in his sixth book of
Evangelical Preparation) explaining these words, And they shall be for signs,
in the first Chapter of Genesis, (which words beget the argument of this
present discourse) delivers unto us, that God placed the stars in the
firmament, that by their several aspects and conjunctions they might
presignifie unto us what things in future times, whether universal or
particular, shall happen, but not be the causes thereof; and therefore he
compares the Heavens unto a book, in which the great God as with a pencil has
delineated and drawn forth all the contingents which shall happen in future
ages, so long as this fading world shall last; and to strengthen this
assertion, he cites a certain book, entitled, Joseph's Narration, formerly
highly esteemed, where the Patriarch Jacob is brought upon the stage, thus
speaking to his sons: I have read in the tables of heaven whatsoever shall
befall to you and your sons. Plotinus a Coetanean and School-fellow of Origin,
was of the same opinion, and asserts it in a Book which he entitles, Whether or
no the Stars have any power; and in another book concerning Fate in the sixth
chapter he says, that this is the use and benefit of the stars, that whosoever
beholds them and contemplates as books and letters, and is skilful in this kind
of literature, shall know future things from those figures, if with a kind of
anologicall comparison he diligently search out their mysteries and
signification: and Porphirius affirms, that being fully bent to kill and make
away himself, he was diverted from that wicked resolution, by the means of
Plotinus, who foresaw the danger by the virtue of the stars.

This opinion Julius Severus in his ninth book of Fate will not have to be
exploded or condemned; and that he may make it appear probable and plausible,
he brings some sentences out of holy Writ to trim and deck it up withal;
for, says he to grace the matter, Isaiah chap. 34. not obscurely tells us, And
the heavens shall be folded together like a book; by which it is meant, that
after the day of judgment, the heavens like a book shall be claspt, and fast
shut up, which now are laid open, and exposed for us to read and meditate; and
to the same effect and purpose, that of Psalm 21. The Heavens shall declare his
justice; and in Psalm 18. The Heavens show forth the glory of God; and in the
first book of Genesis speaking of the stars, And they shall be for signs; and
in Psalm 88. The Heavens shall confess thy mavelous works, O Lord. Neither,
quoth Origin, does this opinion take away freewill in man, no more then
formerly did the Prophesies of the ancient Prophets, or the prescience of all
future things, which is in Almighty God, and rests in his divine bosom.
Plotinus opinionates, that this power and skill to predict future things by
virtue of the stars is given to man either by the singular favor of Almighty
God, or through the excellent knowledge in Astrology; for the obtaining whereof
we use all possible diligence and acurate study.

And Julius Severus persuades himself, that St. Augustine was not much averse
or alienated from this opinion, by reason that in his second book against the
Manicheans, cap. 21. speaking of man, who whilst he is invested with
mortallity, has these words: Neither is it to be thought, that in the
Celestial Bodies our thoughts are so concealed, as in these our bodies; but as
certain motions of the mind appear in the countenance, especially in the eyes,
so in the perspicuity and pureness of the Celestial Bodies, our motions of the
mind cannot be concealed, as I imagine.

Whether according to St. Augustine the Stars are Signs of all humane affairs.
IF any man peruse attentively this place of St. Augustine, by these words
Gelestial Bodies, he shall find him not to understand the Celestial Orbs,
but the bodies of the blessed, who after the Resurrection shall be invested
with celestial glory and immortality; making a grand distinction betwixt men
encaged in this fragile and perishing body, and the beautified, who enjoy the
fruition of Almighty God, and live a life Angelical: and whereas here on earth
we can palliate and cloak our thoughts and cunning dissemblings, and thereby
make our neighbors believe that which we never intend; in Heaven all thoughts
are mutually discovered, all glossing couzening, and dissembling utterly laid
aside and cast off. And that this is the meaning of that great Doctor, these
his ensuing words demonstrate: These therefore deserve that blessed habitation,
and happy change into Angelical forms and brightness; who when they had power
in this mortal pilgrimage, under homely habits to palliate leasings and
untruths detested it, and only with a most flagrant and ardent zeal of truth
and verity shunned whatsoever might scandalize the hearer, abhorring upon what
account soever to tell a lie; for the time will come, when nothing will be hid,
and whatsoever is hid shall be made manifest. So that we see St. Augustine
speaks clearly and perspicuously of glorified bodies, and not of Celestial
Orbs, Heavens, or Stars; so that I am in admiration, that Julius Severus
should so inconsiderately and rashly read over this place, and through
misunderstanding brand so eminent a man with an opinion, which he is so far
from maintaining, that in the fifth book of the City of God, he utterly
opposes and confuteth.

Of the nature and variety of Signs.
THat the stars are signs of future events, I conceive not only contradictory
to solid Philosophy, but also opposite and repugnant to holy Scripture; and
although the reasons which I have alleged in the premises be sufficient to
convince this infirm doctrine; yet in this place I will produce other forcible
arguments to corroborate what formerly I have maintained: First therefore
whatsoever is a natural sign of another thing, that upon necessity must be
either its cause or effect, or both, and proceed from the superior and common
cause; for besides these, what fourth member can be imagined, to have the sign
upon necessity joined with the cause by it signified; this is no way distinct
from the third Member, for such a connection and conjunction can no other ways
have a being, then that the cause should produce that out of it self, which is
the Sign; and then that which is the thing signified, as the same thing which
moves the cause to action and excites it, must also applicate and apply that
which is presignified; but each of these must necessarily be referred to the
common cause, from whence this argument may be framed: If the Heavens and Stars
be signs of all sublunary things, they are either their causes (which this
opinion allows not) or the effects, which no man in his wits will grant, or
presume to affirm; or else (which is all that can be said) as well celestial as
sublunary things proceed from the common cause; as the Rainbow is sign of fair
weather, not that it is the cause or effect thereof, but one and the same is
the common cause of both; upon necessity the common cause of celestial and
sublunary bodies must either be corporeal or incorporeal: I do not think they
will say it is corporeal, for above the Heavens there is no body at all;
therefore they must grant, that all things must be referred to an incorporeal
cause; that is, either to God himself or Angels, who moves the Heavens: so that
whilst Angels move the Heavens, in the very state, habit, position, and
conformation of those Heavens, as it were by certain nods and becks of theirs
like notes and signs described therein, they should point out and predict the
events and contingents of humane affairs; but this in many respects is not
credible, for whosoever grounds upon this foundation, must needs grant and say,
that Angels induce mortals unto all, and whatsoever, even the greatest and most
horrid fins and villainies.

In this point Philosophy does inform us, and also Theology does the like, that
there is no action of Angels, (as they call it) transeant, which immediately
proceeds from them, other then local motion; and that the Angels who do
circumvolve and wheel about the Celestial Orbs, these I say, those great
masters aver to have no other operation concerning humane affairs, then what
proceeds from motion and the light of the Heavens: For those I know not what
insluences distinct from light, I have formerly sufficiently made null; and
there is no man so brainsick, who will affirm, if he will speak things
probable and likely, that motion and the light of heaven can infallibly,
clearly, and distinctly premonstrate all future effects of sublunary things;
and again, when two effects of the same cause necessarily show one the other,
as they must proceed from the same cause, so must they also proceed after one
and the same manner, otherwise it cannot be that they should indicate one
another: Such things as are brough^ to pass by God and his Angels in Celestial
bodies must have their beings necessarily and invariably; whereas those which
are beneath the Moon, have their contingency very mutably, and I may say
defectively.

In like manner other arguments may be framed; if the stars who are confined to
a set and certain number, and of a like condition, can be signs of future
things, which are almost infinite both in number and variety, and in themselves
discrepant and differing: How can the same positure and conformity of stars,
under which Twins and many others are born in in the same moment of time, be a
certain sign properly and distinctly to presignifie so many several and
distinct dispositions, casualties, and events, as we daily discover in them?
therefore if we grant the stars to be signs of future things, we must also
affirm them to be their causes; and if we deny them to be Causes, we must also
deny them to be Signs.

Whether Comets or Blazing Stars be signs of humane affairs.
Thou will perhaps avouch that Comets which are generated in the high and
sublime air, are signs which predict strange and wonderful events to ensue,
and of those Contingents the Comets are neither the causes nor effects; and
therefore probable it is, that the stars are in the like condition in respect
of sublunary affairs: for my part I shall never grant Comets to be signs of
humane chances and events, though this is as much believed amongst the vulgar,
as exploded by wise men: Should I walk hand in hand with the vulgar in this
error, and say that the Stars produced the Comets as Poasts or Curriours to go
before them to foretell future events; if I should, I say, grant this, yet
concerning the stars another account is to be given, for that they have no
corporeal cause superior unto them.

Whether those men who make the Stars signs of future things, do thereby upon
necessity establish that thing called Fate.
WE will make no great business of this the Authors of this opinion although
unwillingly engage themselves in a necessity of Fate, far more then those who
will have the stars to be the causes of sublunary effects; for grant that the
stars should be the causes of all things which are produced beneath the moon,
yet for all this there is no necessity of bugg-bear fate; for what is to be
done and effected upon earth by the influences and defluxions of the stars that
may be impeded and crossed by contrary affections of the matter, or by the
intervening of particular causes as obstructions thereunto: But if stars be
naturally the signs of future Contingents, then upon necessity whatsoever they
signify must come to pass, otherwise they are signs fallacious and deceitful:
and seeing that our great God has ordained and instituted them to signify and
give notice of things, and has engraven them in heaven as in some voluminous
Tome, to point out and be as it were Indexes of things to come to pass; if the
event of these things which they signify should not prove answerable, you must
either make God their author ignorant, or a great impostor and deceiver: If you
say the stars presignific what is to be done in some particular causes, and
only in some and not in all, this is extremely improbable and fable like; for
why should the stars foretell the future chances and effects of some particular
effects, rather then of others, and not rather of all alike, the reason being
indifferent and like in all; or else you must say, that the stars are the
future effects of all particular causes: If this be so, it must needs follow
that there will be no causes left remaining to impede, obstruct, or hinder
whatsoever is by the stars predicted, and it will necessarily come to pass,
that whatsoever is sublunary must be tied to an absolute fate and necessity
which the defenders of this opinion will not allow of, or should they, it were
most wicked and impious.

As concerning that Text of Isaiah 54. The Heavens like a book shall be folded
up; which amongst all the places of Scripture formerly set down seems to have
the most of difficulty in it, I find it diversely, and by diverse and several
Expositors glossed and interpreted; yet no exposition, if it be of an approved
Author, or at least probable, which makes for, or sides with that opinion.
Justinus Martyr answering to the forty ninth interrogatory of the Orthodoxes,
wherein the Querie was, how that place of Isaias was to be understood, when he
says; That the Heavens like a book shall be folded up: says, as the divine
word sometimes by a similitude compares heaven to a skin extended, saying, who
extends the heaven like a skin; other times to smoke, other times to a chamber:
and so on the contrary, speaking of the dissolution of the heavens, it is
compared to a book and other things, and by David in his Psalms to a garment
waxing old. St. Hierom upon the same words says; we must observe that he says
not the heavens to perish, but to be wrapped up like a book, that after all
sins were detected and made manifest and read, they should no more be opened,
never more to have the sins of men written in them. In the Scripture the
Heavens are said to show the justice of God, to reveal his anger, to prove and
give testimony of man's wickedness.

St. Thomas and Nicholas de Lyra expound these words after another manner; the
Heavens, according to them, like a book shall be shut up, that is, henceforth
Ethnicks shall make no use of their Astronomancy, nor dare to foretell the
future events of mankind, as if they were able to read from the stars future
fortunes and contingents. Others interpret these words thus, there shall be no
further entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, from henceforth the gates thereof
shall be shut up: Others expound these words in this sense; the help, use, and
ministry of the Heavens and Stars, which is bestowed upon mankind before the
day of judgment, after shall cease, and have no more being; for although the
Heavens shall not utterly perish and be anihilated, yet those good offices and
favors which now they perform on the behalf of mortals and their sakes, shall
after that day of dread and terror cease, and shall have a long vacation,
which by Isaiah is excellently expressed in the similitude of a book, which when
we have made what use we can of it, and fully perused it, we clasp and shut it
up, and lay it aside.

Another interpretation of this place is not to be rejected; some are of
opinion, that in that terrible day by this similitude is meant the high
indignation wrath and just anger of the supreme Judge against those Nations of
whom the Prophet speaks: such a hurly-burly, confusion and consternation;
such horror, fear, and trembling amongst the reprobate; such remorse, grief,
and anguish of mind, that through the very vehemence thereof, the very
celestial luminaries will seem as it were to be extinguished, the stars to
drop from the firmament, the motions of the Orbs to be in rebellion, and heaven
it self to be wrapped up and foulded, and vanish away: and what is here said by
the Prophet to be foulded up, by St. John in the Apocalypse, is said to recede
and depart away.

But to make this more plain, if such as are not acquainted with Antiquities
startle at this word folded up, speaking of the book, in the similitude, they
must know that the Pebrews (as also the Romans and all civilized people) had
not their books bound up in Folio, Quarto, or Octavo, as the now mode and form
is, but in a different manner* for they had skins of velome or parchment, or
else the thin rindes of trees, tatched and fixed together (of one and the same
breadth) in length, and being fastened at the one end to a Cylineer, or round
piece of wood they resembled much our Pedegrees which are drawn by Heralds, or
a web of cloth wrapped about a weavers beam, so that when they had a mind to
peruse any parcel or passage, they did fold and unfold as occasion required;
and this the Prophet used as a similitude: for as the Membranes encircle the
round piece of wood, so do the Heavens environ and compass the Terrestrial
Globe one above another, and wheeling round about it, as it were their
Axle-tree. Thus have you heard many expositions of this seeming hard place of
Esaias, and I am confident your own judgments will tell you, that not any one
of them favors these grave masters of Astrology, Southsayers, Fortune Tellers,
Star-gazers, Quacks, or what you will call them.

CHAP. 5. How it comes to pass, that Astrologers foretells many things true.
IT now remains (that we make an end of this disputation and draw to an
period) that we lay open the reason why so many Astrologicall predictions prove
true and congruent with the events and contingents: Of this subject we spoke
something formerly; but that it might be the more clearly handled, and for the
better understanding of the Reader it is principally reserved to this its
proper place.

Although it be most certain and uncontroulably true, that Astrologicall
predictions are most false, as we have already sufficiently demonstrated; but
because in former ages, yea and in our present* all-knowing times it is almost
believed, and that by grave and learned persons, as a granted fundamental, that
in a manner all predictions of skilful Astrologers have proved true, and
attested by their events and issue thereof, and that very few or none have
fallen out contrary to what they have divined. Well, let us also follow this
torrent, lest we should be thought to swim against the stream, and seem to be
Joannes e contrario, in opposing that which by public says and authority is
cried up and embraced, the verity of those predictions being granted, let us
examine and look into the causes thereof; viz. by what means Astrologers can
infallibly foretell future things, which seeing of themselves they are
uncertain, they fall not within the power and notion of humane intellect; I
will avoid prolixity, and therefore do peremptorily affirm, that if any
predictions of Astrologers have proved true, that truth proceeded not from the
verity and firmity of that art of Astronomancy, but from other causes; and what
these causes be I will tell you succinctly.

Four causes there are, by reason whereof Astrologers sometimes speak truth.
Sometimes by the very instinct of the Devil men are prick forwards to divine
future things.
The first Cause.
SOmetimes the verity of those predictions proceeds from a clandestine contract
betwixt the Devil and the Astrologer, otherwhiles by an implicit instinct or
contract, and unperceptible instigation of the grand Impostor the general
enemy of mankind; men though ignorant in themselves of the devils delusion,
are impelled and egged on to divine and prophecy. This St. Augustine confirms
in the fifth book of the City of God, chap. 7. saying, Not without cause do men
believe that when Astrologers miraculously almost, or at least strangely,
foretell many things which prove true, that is done by the instinct and help of
wicked spirits, whose sollicitous care it is to imprint and ingraft in the
minds of men the noxious and soul destroying doctrine and opinion concerning
syderial Fate, which possibly cannot be discovered by the Art of inspecting or
observing the Horoscope; which Art indeed is none at all. Thus St. Augustine.

By how many ways the Devil by himself can foretell or teach others to do the
like in future things.
THe Devil first persuades man and buzzeth in his ear, that he will teach him
how to foretell future contingents and accidents, either by presenting himself
unto him in a visible form and shape, making large promises; or else
articulating and frame voices in the air, fore-shewing succeeding events
without the assumption of any aerial body; or by dropping down some scroll or
character which shall contain such like divinations; otherwhiles by dreams when
we sleep, at other times to men perfectly awake, by working upon their fancy,
by poisoning and possessing it with strange chymericall imaginations, thereby
to move the fantasy to apprehend strange phantasmaes, whilst by this deceit
he moulds the party into an apt and fit disposition, to predict and prophecy
that which the phantasma represented unto him: The devil may know some future
things (which he imparteth) by divine revelation, disclosed unto him by a good
Angel; for sometimes Almighty God to bring things to their allotted end uses
the ministry of the devil: Other times the same Chapman will discover to man
that which he himself is resolved to put in execution, and by reason of the
incomparable celerity of his motion, he informs his friends in a trice and
moment of the transactions of the most remote Regions in the world: yet more,
this cunning enemy of our hoped for felicity, from cabinet counsels, private
conferences, letters writ in never so concealed and unknown ciphers and
characters, from private marks which are either interiorly inherent, or
exteriorly in man's body: By a too too vigilant and sollicitous investigation
will shrewdly guess at and discover man's occult and hidden cogitations and
inclinings, and those discover to his best beloved favorites: Another way he
goes to work, which is by the causes which necessarily must concur to produce
such an effect: and lastly, by reason of the extreme subtlety and diligence of
his understanding, his long experience of so many thousand years, his great and
exact knowledge in all natural things, he must needs have a strong advantage
to search out and manifest future events.

The very thing of which we have now discoursed is by St. Augustine in his book
upon Genesis chap. 7. most exactly and candily demonstrated, and therefore I judge
it not amiss to set down his words: Concerning fates and subtle quirks of the
stars, and documental experiments drawn as it were from the art of
demonstrating, or Mathesis her self, which they call Apotelesmes, we utterly
reject as being incoherent and opposite to Catholic and Christian Faith; for
by such like disputations the force and necessity of prayer is taken away: Sin
(which ought to be corrected) bolster'd up, the fault is rather laid upon God
the author and creator of the Stars, then upon sinful man's wickedness; and
therefore we must confess and say that when any truth or veracities are
predicted, it is done by an occult and inperceptible Instinct, which our weak
capacities unwittingly entertain; which since it is done to deceive and seduce
poor man into error, questionless it is no other then the work and operation
of seducing spirits, unto whom it is permitted to know some certain truth
concerning temporal affairs; partly by reason of the strong acumen of their
most subtle intellect; and partly by reason of their long and cunning
experience, proceeding from the vaste longitude and time of their being and
continuance; and lastly, revelation from the holy Angels, being appointed so to
do by their Almighty Creator, who distributes and disposes humane merits,
according to the sincerity of his most secret and hidden justice; and sometimes
those wicked spirits 'predict some things which they themselves are resolved to
bring to pass by the way of prophecy or divination; and good Christians ought
to avoid and fly this sort of Mathematicians or any other whosoever professing
to tell Fortunes, (although sometimes they tell the truth) lest they entangle
and ensuare their deceived souls by some clandestine and implicit contract
with this grand enemy the devil. Thus St. Augustine.

How many several ways and how grievously men sin, who either make use of the
devil, or help of his Servants the Fortune Tellers, to know future things.
MAn plungeth himself in a gulf of sin, whosoever he is that has recourse to
the Devil or Astrologers the Devils Instruments or Trapanners, to dive into
future contingents; in this case many and several are the ways of falling into
sin; first when he addresses himself to the devil or the Astrologer his decoy
to know future events, confiding that the devil for certain knows whatsoever
shall happen; for seeing that it is only proper and peculiar to the highest
and divine Majesty to know future contingents; he who so impiously attributes
that knowledge to the devil, falls into the horrid sin of Impiety and Idolatry:
and if it be accounted a sin to consociate and keep company with one
excommunicated by the holy Church, how much more will it be to enter into
league, drive bargain, and make contracts with the most malignant enemy of Gods
Church, a blasphemer of the Deity, and most envious and implacable enemy of
mankind, who God himself has banished from the society both of men and
Angels, unto the dark and hideous shades and infernal cloisters, and has
inflicted upon him eternal and everlasting plagues and torments: and will man
be so mad as to take and make use of such an accursed feind for his master,
friend, and guide? And whosoever he be that enters into this devilish
familiarity and combination, runs the extreme hazard of losing his soul, being
lulled asleep with the sweet incantations and syrenicall allurements of these
divining Prognostications, which the devil lays as an ambuscado to entrap
and circumvent poor man: He again highly offends the divine Majesty who
consults with Astrologers to know the secret and hidden sins of his neighbor;
and lastly he is inexcusably to be blamed, who runs after those Miscreants, the
Devil, and Astronomancers his Disciples, whereby to enable himself to
perpetrate some horrid villainy and mischief.

These kind of Astrologers are for most part of a wicked life and conversation.
THese Quacks are Imps of the devil, Familiars and Comrades of Satan, for no
better are our Fortune Tellers, as may easily be demonstrated: First, by the
impurity of their lives, and brutishness of their conversation; secondly, by
the contempt they have of Christian Religion, and the true exercise of piety
and practice of devotion; thirdly, as Owls they hate the light, and shun the
society of good and virtuous men, seldom appear in public but lurk in holes
and private corners, avoiding as much as in them lies, any over-seer of their
exorbitant and unlawful proceedings; of whose faith and religion, and not
without cause, the wiser sort of men make a groat scruple and question: And to
conclude, in Spain, and where the Inquisition is in force, many of this sort of
fellows having been secured and put in durance, and duly examined by the
learned Judges of that Court and Tribunal, have openly confessed their
unchristian-like commerce and familiarity with the Devil.

The second Cause.
THe second Cause why Astrologers sometimes divine truly, happens through the
occult and hidden disposing of Divine Providence; which (as St. Augustine in
his fourth and seventh book of Confessions says) does so agitate by a private
and unperceptible instinct, the blind and wicked minds of these Diviners,
that though they themselves be ignorant thereof, yet they tell to their Clients
and Customers such things as either through their own demerit or out of the
inscrutible abyss of the just judgment of the Highest, are most fit for them
to hear.

Of the use of casting Lots amongst the Ancients to discover future things.
AMongst the Ancients was a solemn custom to select certain verses out of
Poets, and roll them up as we see in Lotteries of our age, or choosing of
Valentines, and to draw them out of boxes, hats, or aprons, by which it often
happened that men drew verses, which contained that which was agreeable either
to their present fortune or future condition; as it happened in Alexander
Severus being then but a youth or stripling, (and far from any hopes of
aspiring to a Monarchal Diadem) who being amongst diverse of his associates at
this interlude and pastime, extracted out of the box or scrutiny some Verses of
that illustrious Poet Publius Virgilius Maro, contained in the sixth book of
his Aeneids, which predicted the Command of the whole Roman Empire.

Be carfull how to rule the Roman State.
'Twill be thy charge allotted out by Fate;
The humble cherish, and the proud cast down,
Cut Traitors off, and thou shall keep thy Crown.
And it is no wonder that such things now and then come to pass through the
permission of God, moving the minds, moderating the tongue, and sorting and
mingling the lots according as he will have things to evene and fall out; for
not only Balaam the South-sayer and false Prophet, but his Ass also foretold
most certain veracities and future events.

By the permission of God those who so earnestly gape after the knowledge of
future things, are caught in Satan's nets and toils, and entangled in many
pernicious errors.
WE must not in this place omit the grave, good, and Christian admonition of
St. Augustine in his book of Christian Doctrine, chap. 22, 23. wherein he
averts, That now and then even by the permission of our heavenly Creator it is
so brought about, that the devils by the help of man forelleth many things
which prove true, whereby many seduced by a various superstition, destructive
persuasion, and impious curiosity, in believing those vain Divinations, being
left to themselves, or as it were by God forsaken, through the demerit of their
fore past sins and transgressions, run headlong into most dangerous and
execrable villainies and enormities: let us take St. Augustine along with us.
Hence it is, says he, that through a hidden and occult divine judgment men
thirsting after the knowledge of unlawful things, are delivered over as their
want on voluptuousness has deserved to be deluded and deceived by the fraud
and deceit of the prevaricating Angels, unto whom the lowest part of the world,
according to the admirable order of things by Institute of Divine Providence,
is subjected; by which deceptions and delusions it falls out, that through the
most damnable and superstitious divinations, many as well future as present
contingents are discovered, and happen accordingly as by them predicted; and
many things fall out through their observations, of the adorers of this art,
that being entangled they become daily more and more curious, and so ensnare
and involve themselves in the traps and tacklings of most pernicious error;
this kind of soul-fornication the sacred Scripture discovers and also adds;
if they foretell you things which really so fall out, yet give no faith or
belief unto them: for though the Image of dead Samuel foretold unto Saul
veracities, yet was the sacrilege by which that Image was effected the more to
be execrated and detested. The woman in the Acts of the Apostles told things
which were true and certain, did St. Paul therefore connive at that wicked
spirit? no, he chastized him, and dispossessing and casting him forth,
delivered and freed the poor creature from that vexation and thraldom: then
needs must all these Apotelesmatical Arts and obnoxious superstitions begotten
and brought forth by pestiferous combination betwixt man and the devil, be
odious and hateful to knowing mortals, and to be avoided and abhorted by all
good Christians: Thus this great light of Gods Church.

To these may be added two causes more, and although not so probable, yet as
much in use and practice.

Many foretell future Events rather out of a prudence and experience in humane
things, then by Astrological Art. The third Cause.
MAny there are who foretell future things not so much by their skill in
Astrology, and Apotelesmaticals, as by a deep and searching reach of a pregnant
intellect, and by a long knowledge in the practice of humane affairs, from
whence they divine strange things to their Clients, from the observation and
insight in their affairs and negotiations, employments, studies, and
conditions; for some there are who taking a survey of the temper, affections,
and inclinations of other men's bodies and constitutions, and observing what
kind of course of life they lead, whether virtuously or viciously inclined,
what company they frequent, what exercises they delight in, they imagine and
intimate what is likely to befall them; and from hence with a great deal of
audacity and impudent confidence predict what ensuing events shall befall them:
And according to this rule and score when they see a Prince to tyrannize over
his Subjects, and rack them with Contributions, Excize, Free quarter, and such
like other extortions, presently they divine, that this Potentate shall be
murdered, or unking'd: If any man spend his time in robbing by the high way,
breaking up of houses, or the like, Oh he shall be hanged; a blasphemer of God
and Religion, a broacher of damnable Heresies, a murderesse of her Husband,
questionless you shall be told, such an one must be bound at a stake, and
round about it fire and fagots, and so be burnt to death. This kind of
divining crafty Hannibal made use of, who perceiving the temerity, rashness,
and ignorance in the Martial Discipline of the Roman Consuls and General,
Terentius Varro and C. Flaminius foretold and prophesied unto his Africans a
glorious victory, and to the Romans an ignominious overthrow and dismal
slaughter; which confident assertion of Hannibal, the immediate overthrow of
the Roman Army, and destruction of the soldiers, made current and good.

The too much confidence and credulity of such as run after Astrologers often
times is the cause of their speaking truth. The fourth Cause.
Often times the predictions of Astrologers prove true, through the foolish and
light credulity of their Clients; for men for the most part give credit and
belief unto such things as are foretold them either concerning the results they
most vehemently desire and thirst after, or such as they most extremely fear
and abhor: for this vain and sottish credulity of persons gaping after that
preknowledge of their fortunes does distill and infuse into their thoughts,
either a grand hope of the good which the Star-gazers promise; or contrariwise,
an inavoidable fear and sadness, abhorring the deplorable and fatal events
which they are made believe shall shortly fall upon them: These two passions of
the mind Hope and Fear have such dominion and power over man, that they work
strangely upon him, and often are the efficients, that Contingents come so to
pass as predicted by Astrologers; for a vehement and ardent hope and desire of
the promised good fortunes, does ofttimes so stir up and induce man to make
himself fit to receive them, that he employeth all his endeavors; and uses
his utmost sedulity to make himself a worthy subject fit to receive and
entertain so great and wished for fortunes and preferments; and by this careful
disposition of man in himself it often comes to pass, that he hits the mark,
and arrives at the port and haven of his so longingly looked after promised
happiness and good fortunes: and on the other side, the terror, fear, and
horror of calamities and evils foretold so work upon men's thoughts and
imaginations, that when they are to undertake any matter of concernment, they
hang in suspense, afflict themselves, fear, doubt, and cast a thousand
stumbling blocks and scare-crows before their apprehensions, and thereby leave
the business unattempted, or at least not brought to perfection, and so fall
through their own folly into those miseries and sad catastrophe's which were
predicted unto them. Of this we have an excellent and convincing example which
happened in a Roman Army (as (Lucius writes) being ready to fight the enemy:
The Commanders and Southsaying Priests (as the then custom was) beheld the
Intrails of a sacrificed Victim, thereby to conjecture of the future event of
the battle; but alas they found all the Omens inauspicious, prefiguring nothing
but ruin and destruction; yet wisely consulting among themselves, they laid a
fair varnish on a rotten inside, and by an officious or rather necessary and
profitable Lie, made the Army believe that the Omens pretended Laurells,
Victories, and Triumphs: The soldiers by this encouraging prognostication
(though only a time-service Lie) heartned and animated with courage and
undaunted bravery, join battle, and boldly engage the enemy, put to flight and
rout those Squadrons, Files, and Troops, which the Augurs and Diviners through
their superstitious observations denounced Victors. Contrarily Misias, High
Admiral of a great Armado of the Athenians, beholding a sudden Eclipse of the
Moon, vainly imagined with himself, that if he weighed anchor that night, and
set sail, some disaster or storm would scatter and confound his Navy; through
foolish fear he stays still in his supposed safe harbor, but before morning,
to chastise his folly, he together with his whole Fleet is surprised by the
Syracusans. And here to make good my promise made in the beginning to avoid
prolixity, I conclude this Discourse concerning Astrologicall Divination.

To the Eternal Father Creator of all things: To our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: To the Holy Spirit, to whom only things present, past, and future are
perfectly known and manifest, be all Glory, Honor, and Praise for ever and
ever. AMEN.

FINIS.
The Index of the Discourses contained in this short Treatise.
CHAP. 1. 1. AStrological Divination contrary to Divine Scripture,
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and Theological Doctrine, and by it confuted. Fol. 1
2. Of the vanity of Apollo's Oracles. 7 3. Why the Devils in foretelling future
things so often err. 9 4. The Truth and Verity of Christian Religion, cannot
cohere with the Truth of Judicial Astrology. 10 5. How severe the Church has
been in former times in her censure against this kind of Astrologers. 17 6.
Concerning many most false and evidently impious Assertions. 19
CHAP. 2. 7. Judiciary Astrology arraigned and convinced by Philosophy, and the
Professors proved altogether ignorant of Celestial Things. 22 8. Against the
fictitious Antiquity which these men vainly boast to have concerning
observations 27 9. Of the strange star which some years since appeared. 31 10.
What a difficult thing it is punctually to observe what force the Aspects of
the Stars have in every man's Nativity. 33
CHAP. 3. 11. Supposing Astrologers to know the very depth and cognition of
heavenly matters, yet by eight reasons it shall be made manifest, that they are
not able to tell future Events. 37 12. Besides Celestial Causes, the knowledge
of particular Causes is most requisite to know their effects. 38 13. Of the
equal birth and unequal fortune and events of Twins. 40 14. The equisite
Argumentation of Bardesanes against Astrologers. 45 15. Whether it be easier to
Prognosticate, what a good or a bad man shall do. 53 16. How vain a thing it is
to believe, that Astrologers can tell any man that he shall be chosen chief
Bishop or Pontifex. 57 17. That the Art and Science of Astrology is none, or
not considerable. 59 18. The vanity and falsity of Astrological Predictions. 61
19. Errors of Astrologers in Chronology. 63 20. Astronomancy in all ages has
been exploded and condemned by prudent and knowing men. 68 21. What sort of men
delight in these Astrological Predictions, whom St. Ambrose compares to a
Spiders Web. 72 22. An argument against three Fundamentals of Astrology
Judiciary. 75 23. Whether the birth-stars of any man can be the certain causes
of things which shall befall him. 80 24. Whether the Conception or Nativity of
man be more considerable to foretell fortunes. 82 25. The vanity of Astrologers
in applying their Art not only to men, but also to walled Towns and Cities. 84
26. Why Astrological observations may not be as prevalent in Herbs and
Animals, as in mankind. 85 27. Concerning the Antiquity of Astrology amongst
the Egyptians and Chaldeans. 86
CHAP. 4. 28. Whether or no if the Stars be not causes, they may be certain
signs of future events, 89 29. Whether or no, according to St. Augustine, the
Stars are Signs of all humane affairs. 9 30. Of the nature and variety of
Signs. 9 31. Whether Comets or Blazing Stars be signs o^ humane affairs. 9^ 32.
Whether those men who make the Stars signs of future things, do thereby upon
necessity establist that thing called Fate. Ibid
CHAP. 5. 33. How it comes to pass, that Astrologers foretell many things true.
103 34. Sometimes by the very instinct of the Devil men are pricked forwards to
divine future things 104 35. By how many ways the Devil by himself can
foretell or teach others to do the like in future things 105 36. How many
several ways and how grievously men sin, who either make use of the devil, or
help of his Servants the Fortune Tellers, to know future things. 108 37. These
kind of Astrologers are for most part of a wicked life and conversation. 110
38. Of the use of casting Lots amongst the Ancients to discover future things.
111 39. By the permission of God those who so earnestly gape after the
knowledge of future things, are caught in Satan's nets and toils, and entangled
in many pernicious errors 112 40. Many foretell future events rather out of
prudence and experience in humane affairs, then by Art Astrological. 115 41.
The too much confidence and credulity of such as run after Astrologers often
times is the cause of their speaking truth. 116

FINIS.

