A COLLECTION OF SOME Brave ACTIONS AND Memorable SAYINGS OF King Henry the
Great. Writ in French by the Bishop of Rodez, as a Supplement to the History of
that King, formerly published by the same Author.

Done into English.

Licensed, June 6. 1688.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper at the Bell over against the Middle
Temple-Gate, near Temple Bar, 1688.

Advertisement.
THE Glorious Name of Henry the Great is sufficient to recommend to the the
Public any thing concerning him. Nor is it the least of those Glories which
Crown his Memory, that not only the most Christian King now reigning in France
is his Grandson, but also our own most Gracious Sovereign King James II. whose
true and lively Character we may read in what is here said of his Grandfather
King Henry IV. This Collection of that famous Prince's Words and Actions I find
Printed at the end of the French Edition of his Life, and writ by the same
Author, Hardovin de Perefixe, Bishop of Rodez; tho it seems it has not been
hitherto rendered into our Language. Certainly the Remarks here collected are
worthy the Applause of all Nations, and the Imitation of the greatest and
bravest of Men. As he was not inferior (except only in time) to the best of
those Heroes of Antiquity, whose Actions and Sayings Plutarch has with great
Industry collected, so are these Particulars of his Life no less worthy of
Observation. But I will detain the Reader no longer from perusing the Author,
premising only, that the Bishop of Rodez was formerly Preceptor to his Present
Majesty of France, King Lewis XIV, and the occasion of his making these
Collections, he has sufficiently set forth in his Epistle Dedicatory to that
King, as follows.

TO THE KING.
SIRE,
WHEN I observed your Majesty's Care and Delight in reading the Summary of the
Life of Henry the Great to have given your Majesty some Satisfaction, and
caused so great Joy in all France, who saw her King follow such glorious
Examples, I thought my self obliged to add thereunto this little Collection,
which I have made of the bravest Actions, and the most memorable Sayings of
that August Monarch; That so the Picture which I have already presented to your
Majesty may appear more finished and perfect. In effect, Sire, these particulars
do represent the Interior of his Soul, and express his Genius and his
Inclinations more lively than all that has been said in the most glorious part
of his History; and discovering to us the bottom of his Heart and Spirit, they
at the same time make us see that this generous Prince was such within, as he
appeared without; and that he was not at all like those who have nothing good
but the Exterior, and who disguise dangerous Vices under beautiful Appearances.
But, Sire, it must necessarily be acknowledged, that you have made a much
better Picture of him in your Person and Conduct, beyond the performance of all
the Pencils and Pens of the World. Further let me add, that in regard your
Majesty is not displeased that I have the Honor to be near your Person, and
that thereby I have the Joy to see such great and glorious Actions at so little
distance, I find my self engaged to commit them to writing, that so I may one
day attest them to all Europe, and to Posterity. I believe that when the Public
shall see the History which I design to give them, they will confess, that the
Parallel of your Majesty with Henry the Great will be most just, and that even
the Glory of the Grandfather will receive new Splendour from that of his
Grandson. I shall be at no trouble to invent any Artifice, or false Ornaments,
to embelish the Work: I shall not need to employ therein any thing but Candor,
and the simple Truth; and if I have any Reproach to fear, it will be that I
have said less than Renown it self has published. In effect, Sire, seeing that
so noble Air, and that profound Wisdom with which your Majesty proceeds, I dare
boldly, and without Flattery foretell, that your Heroic Virtues will in a
little time surpass those of Augustus, of Charlemagne, and of Henry the Great;
and I hope also that, the Favors of Heaven continuing, I shall see your Glory
and your Posterity to equal the Desires which I daily make with that Zeal which
ought to appear in,

SIRE Of your Majesty, The most humble, most obedient, most faithful, and most
obliged Servant and Subject, Hardovin B. of Rodez.

A COLLECTION OF CERTAIN Brave ACTIONS AND Memorable SAYINGS OF King Henry the
Great.
IT would be a Task mighty painful, and without end, to him who aims to express
every thing that is Brave in the Life of Henry the Great. More than Fifty
Historians, and above Five Hun^ Panegyrists, Poets, and Orators have
endeavored it, and yet have not expressed half what the Subject affords. Amidst
so great variety, we collect here some Flowers, not the most beautiful,
perhaps, but however, such as please best; and we will put them together
without Art and Order; the Confusion of pleasing Objects having its proper
Beauty as well as the best Method.

Some have observed that this Great King excelled the Emperor Augustus in
Goodness and Mercy; and that, like him, after a long Intestine War, he closed
up the Wounds of the State, allayed the Tempest that disturbed it, and restored
the Force of the Laws, the Authority of the Magistrate, and the Discipline of
his Soldiers.

Many also have compared the beginning of his Reign to that of David for the
great Revolutions that exercised his Courage: The Middle, to that of Solomon
for the Order and Beauty of his Government, and for the Plenty and Riches which
he procured to his Kingdom: And his mournful End to that of Josias. Three of
the best and most religious Kings that ever Governed God's People.

Others have put him in parallel with Cyrus, the Founder of the Persian Empire;
with Alexander the Great, with the Emperors Constantine I. Charlemagne, Otho,
and Henry IV. Certain it is, there is not one of these Princes to whom he may
not be equaled, and, perhaps, in some particulars he much excells.

It is a curious Observation, that never any Prince arrived to the Succession
of a Crown, at so great a distance from it; nor ever saw so many Princes of the
Blood die before him. But it is a more important Remarque, that never King of
France united so many fair Possessions into his Dominion as he. He only,
brought more Additions to the Crown, than Philip de Valois, Lewis XII. and
Francis I. who all, like him, were of the collateral Line.

He annexed that part which was left him of the Kingdom of Navarre, the
Sovereignty of Bearn, the Dutchies of Alanson, Vendosme, Albert, Beaumont,
Vicomte, I know not how many rich Counties, Foix, Armagnac, Bigorre, Rovergue,
Peigord, la Fere, Marle, Soissons, Limoges, Conversan, and so many other Lands,
that to name them would be troublesome.

It is easy to say what was the most prevailing Passion of this Prince, but
not which was the greatest of his Virtues; for he had them almost all in the
highest degree. As to his Courage and Warlike Virtue, it would be peradventure
impossible to find any Sovereign Prince, nay even any Captain, who ever showed
it on so many occasions. It is reported of the Emperor Henry IV. that he had
been in Threescore and Two Battles, or eminent Combats; but our Henry had
signalized his Heroic Valor in Four or Five pitched Battles, more than a
Hundred Bloody Combats, and in Two Hundred Sieges. Before the Death of Henry
III. had called him to the Crown of France, he had defended himself against
Seven Wars, which he concluded happily in Seven Treaties of Peace; and in these
Wars, at diverse times, and in diverse places, he has had Four or Five Armies
upon him, having no good assurance to trust in but his own proper Virtue to
support so great a Weight.

From the Age of Fifteen Years, at which time he first put on his Arms, he bore
them continually to the Age of Forty Five. In all occasions he was as forward
in Danger as any one of his Captains. He was wounded two or three times, but
slightly. However it was not Rashness, nor only the desire of Glory that
engaged him in such Hazards, but Necessity. It concerned him to show an Example
to his Soldiers: The Fortune of France, and his own, was reduced to that
Condition, that Honor obliged him either to conquer or die; otherwise he had
not exposed himself in such sort as he did: For he was not ignorant that a
King, whose Affairs are in Peace, ought to preserve himself for the Love of his
Subjects, to whom he ows himself more than to himself.

He was so generous as to cause Vitry the Captain of his Guards to receive the
Man who had wounded him at the Battle of Aumale. The Marshall d'Estrees being
one day with him in his Coach, and his Guard marching by to their Post, he
showed him the Man, saying, Behold there the Soldier that wounded me at the
Battle of Aumale. Really this was a most Heroique Action.

He never feared Death in whatsoever posture she presented her self to him,
whether in the Field, or in Bed. He was often heard to say, That he yielded
himself with an entire Submission to the Divine Providence, and that he should
never have either Fear or Regret, when it should please God to call him.

He went to a Fight with a Courage truly Martial, and with a brave Resolution,
but without Vanity. After a Victory he expressed less Joy, than before the
Encounter: For (as he expressed himself) he could not rejoice to see so many
Frenchmen, his Subjects, lie dead on the place, and that the Gain which he
made from that Action could not be without a Loss.

He was wondrous active. He was himself personally in all his Enterprises. He
applied himself entirely to what he undertook; and never went about any thing
of which he had not a perfect Knowledge, and had foreseen all the means by
which he might expect to be successful, or obstructed. He had always an
attentive Eye to the Execution of what he commanded, and oftentimes made
himself one of the Party. Thus he found few Enterprises that he did not go
through, and few Obstacles that he did not forecast; in such manner, that it.
was not without just Reason that he took for his Device a Hercules, the
Conqueror of Monsters, with these words, Invia Virtuti nulla est via.

He judged wonderfully of the Designs of his Enemies; and often foreseeing what
they would undertake, he gave out such Orders as secured his Army, and caused
the greatest of his Captains to say, That they were beholden to him for their
safety, and that he, having a Soul more elevated, saw further than any of them.

His Promptitude was no less than his Judgment. The Duke of Parma having
observed with what celerity he acted, said of him, That other Generals made War
like Lions and Wild Boars, Beasts of the Earth, but the King like a Flying
Eagle. He was continually on Horseback, which was the occasion that they said
of him, that he wore out more Boots than Shoes, and that he was less time in
Bed than the Duke of Mayenne at Table.

He used to say, That the great Feasters and the great Sleepers were not
capable of any great Action: And that a Soul, which sleeping and eating had
overwhelmed in a Mass of Fat, could not have any noble and generous Motions. If
he loved Feasts and good Cheer, it was not for filling his Belly, but only for
the refreshing his Spirit, and rejoicing himself.

He was no Bigot, but truly pious and Christian. He had very good Sentiments of
the Majesty and infinite Goodness of God. It was his Saying, That he trembled
with Fear, and that he became less than an Atome, when he beheld himself in the
Presence of such an Almighty Power, who has raised all things from nothing, and
who could reduce them again to the same Original, by withdrawing his Almighty
Hand: But that he felt himself transported with unutterable Joy, when he
contemplates, that his Sovereign Goodness protects all Men under his Wings, as
his Children; and more especially Kings, to whom he communicates his Power of
doing good to other Men.

After his Conversion, he had always a very great respect for the Holy See, and
showed himself its Defender with no less Zeal than his Ancestors: And also
expressed a strong and lively Faith for the Reality of Christ's Body in the
Eucharist.

Passing one Day in a Street near the Lonvre, he met a Priest carrying the Holy
Sacrament; He cast himself immediately upon his Knees, and adored with mighty
respect. The Duke of Sully, a Hugnenot, who was then with him, demanded, Sir,
Is it possible that you can believe in this after the things which I have seen?
The King answered, Yes, by the Living God, I believe; and he must be a Madman
who believes not: I would willingly lose a Finger, that you also believed as I
do.

He also employed all Gentle Means to draw along with him all his Subjects into
the Bosom of the Church, in such sort, as he was the cause of bringing in of
more than Threescore Thousand Souls. But he would never use any Violence for
this end, as the Leaguers desired; nay, he despised those who became Converts
for any temporal Interest.

When he prayed, he kneeled upon both Knees, his Hands joined, and his Eyes
lift up to Heaven; his Prayers were not long, but fervent: Through the whole
Course of his Life he never undertook any thing, but first he implored the
Assistance of God, and committed the event into his hands. It is but a few days
since I was informed by a Person of great Quality, who did usually accompany
the King in his Huntings, that he never dislodged a Deer, but that he put off
his Hat, and made the Sign of the Cross, and then set Spurs to his Horse, and
away after the Chase.

He had read and studied the Holy Scriptures, and took great delight to hear
them explained; and would often in his Discourse bring Examples from thence.

While he was yet a Huguenot, he had an Honor for the Prelates and
Ecclesiastics, tho they were his severest Persecutors; and that the most of
them, instead of reducing him by fair means into the Sheepfold, did what
possibly they could to expel him still further, and shut the Gate against him.

Here-establisht the exercise of the Catholic Religion in more than three
hundred Cities and Towns, where it had not been suffered of Thirty years
before. What shall I say of so many Churches which he Rebuilt, and of so many
Hospitals which he Founded? among others that of S. Lewis near Paris, for those
who have the Plague, one of the most Beautiful Structures that adorn that great
City; and that of the Brothers de la Charity in the Fauxbourg St. Germain; It
was his Credit that preserved the Holy Sepulcher of Christ in Jerusalem, which
the Turks were about to demolish, and caused the Cordeliers, who were the
Guardians of that place, to be released, whom the Barbarians had put in Irons;
and obtained the Grand Seigniors permission to build a House for the Fathers
Jesuits in the Suburbs of Constantinople.

Homer calls Justice one of the Counselors of Jupiter. One may say more truly
that she was so to Henry the Great. If we may believe his greatest Confident,
he did often protest both in Public and Private, that he did not at all desire
the Goods of others unjustly; that he sought nothing but his own; and that God
had given him a Kingdom great enough for his satisfaction, were it not that his
Providence did permit something else. We may also perceive plainly, that in the
great design which he had to divide Christianity into Fifteen Dominions, he
took not one Foot of Land to himself; so far did he renounce his just
Pretensions to the Kingdom of Navarre.

Never was Prince more punctual than he in the Payment of his Debts. We need
but see his Letters to the Duke of Sully his Surintendent, in which he often
commanded him to pay even what he lost at play.

One of the Projects which he endeavored with the greatest Ardour to effect,
was the retrenching the exorbitant length, and vexatious Tricks of the
Proceedings at Law; almost every time that his Chancellor, and Achilles de
Harlay, his first President, came to wait on him, he would still conjure them
to find out some means, whereby his People might not be any longer tormented by
this Inkhorn War, sometimes more ruin ous than that of two Armies.

He could not see without aversion, Prelates of an ill Life, and corrupt
Judges. He used to say of the first, I would willingly do what they Preach, but
they little think that I know what they themselves are. And of the other, I
cannot comprehend how People should be so wicked, as to judge against their
Knowledge and Conscience.

He had always an open Ear for the Party accused. He never suffered himself to
be engaged with prejudice, nor ever judged of any person before he was
thoroughly informed. Thus honest men had always the greatest advantage with him.

He said, That to reign well, a King should not do all that he can do. A
Sentiment very like that of the Great Emperor Justinian, Recorded in these
words, Truly Royal, and Worthy to be Writ in Letters of Gold, Digna Vox est
Majestate Regnantis, Subditum se legibus profiteri.

You may see here the reason why this wise King did not think it any diminution
of his Authority to hear the Remonstrances of his Subjects, and his Courts of
Justice. He debated their Reasons with themselves, and with his Council, and
sometimes thought it honorable to change his Resolutions when he perceived it
any way for the better, or where, possibly, he had been deceived, knowing well,
that there is no Man in the World so intelligent, and of so clear a Judgment,
but that he may fail through Passion or Ignorance. But when he found, that the
motives which he had to order any thing, were more prevalent and just than the
others, he would be obeyed strictly; and used to say to his Sovereign Courts,
that his own Intelligence and Experience could not suffer their Contradictions.

He said sometimes, that God did him the favor in his Old Age to let him go
twice or thrice a Week to the Parliament, and to the Chamber of Accounts, as
the good King Lewis XII used to do; There to shorten Proceedings, and to put
his Revenue in such good order, that in the future it might not be Wasted. Such
ought to be his latter Walks.

He was easily induced to grant his Pardons, where the Offense was not
horrible; for in such cases he stood firm to the utmost Severity.

Thus at one time he answered a person who begged the Abolition of an excess
committed upon some Officers of Justice; I have but two Eyes and two Feet; in
what then do I differ from the rest of my Subjects, if I have not the power of
Justice in my Disposal?

Yet at another time he told a Person of Quality, who besought him for a Pardon
for his Nephew, who had killed a Man; I am sorry that I cannot grant your
Request; it becomes you to behave your self like an Uncle, and me, as a King; I
excuse your Petition, do you excuse my Denial.

He did passionately affect Glory and Reputation, as all great Souls have done,
and was extreme sensible both of the Good and Bad which People said of him. But
he could not relish those Praises which were not cordial; and was not at all
pleased to be praised to his Face, nor by such People who were not
praiseworthy themselves. For this Reason, although he esteemed those whom he
thought good Historians, taking delight to discourse with them, and inform 'em
of what he had done, allowing them great Pensions; yet did he despise all
little Scriblers who were incapable to eternize his Name. In this he was like
Alexander the Great, who forbid all Painters to attempt his Picture, but only
Apelles, whose Pencil might in some sort equal his own Renown.

He did him a great Displeasure who concealed the Truth from him; he desired to
know the Truth in all things: But above all, none could oblige him more, than
to let him know what People said of him; for he desired to know his own Faults,
that so he might reform them; however, he was not pleased that any should tell
him of these matters otherwise than in private. But so, he received their
Advice kindly; he would thank them, and encourage such who had taken that
Liberty to continue it upon the like occasions. This is the only way by which a
Prince can make himself perfect, know all things, and never be deceived.

Never was any Prince a more Religious Observer of his Faith and Promise, than
he. According to that excellent Saying of King John, That if Faith were lost in
the World, she ought to be sought for, and found in the Mouth of Kings. Of this
we have observed many Examples in his Life: Among others, that concerning the
Duke of Savoy: But in regard this was wonderfully brave; it will be good to
insert here what has been already writ by D'Aubigne, a Person the more
credible in this, in regard he has not bin over favorable to this Prince in
other matters:

Two Ancient Counselors of State, says he, gave him strange Advice, which was
to detain the Duke, and break that safe Conduct which he had given him, whom
they accused of having often broke his Agreements, when to his Advantage: By
this means, say they, the King may recover the Marquisat of Salures, save much
Time and Treasure, and the Lives of many French Soldiers. But the King
answered, I brought this Principle into the World with me, and I have learnt it
from those who nursed me, that the Observation of my Faith is of greater
Advantage than any thing that Perfidy can promise. I have the Example of King
Francis, who might by Treachery have kept a greater Prize, I mean Charles V.
but would not. If the Duke of Savoy has violated his Promise, yet the
imitation of another Fault is a Crime, and the best use that a King can make
of the Perfidy of his Enemies, is to advance thereby the Luster and Value of
his own Faith and Integrity. Where can any Man find a better Lesson, and more
generous Sentiments?

Tho he loved Discourse, and understood Railery as well as any Gentleman of his
Court, yet he hated all Detractors and Detractions; and if at any time he spoke
ill of any Man, it was certainly of such an one who was notoriously known to be
a Bad Man; and for such he thought it a piece of Justice to decry them, and
discover to the whole World what sort of People they were. Witness what he said
to Biron concerning Laffin; His faithful Servants had always this Advantage,
that the ill Offices of such Men could never make any impression against them
in his Mind. Without such a Judgment in a Prince, things would go very ill at
Court; and it would be impossible for honest Men to defend themselves from
Parasites and Knaves.

He did infinitely favor his Nobility and Gentry, and held it a great Glory to
be the Head of that illustrious Body. When he spoke of the several Blessings
which God had bestowed upon him, he esteemed it above all, that he had a Train
of Four Thousand Gentlemen to attend him, able to encounter the greatest Army
that could be raised against him. A Spanish Ambassador did once acknowledge to
him, That he was surprised to see what a number of Gentlemen were continually
about him, and did even crowd him up: The King answered, If you had but seen me
in a Fight, they crowd me up then much more.

He behaved himself to the Courtiers with great Familiarity, and desired that
they might use the same to him, provided they did not lose the respect which
was due to his Person; and if any was wanting in that, he was assuredly made
sensible of his Fault.

Some there are who would insinuate, that he did not love Men of Learning, but
they are much deceived. He allowed Pensions to many Scholars, even in Italy and
Germany, and took care himself that they should receive them. The Cardinal du
Perron, de Sponde, Scaliger, Casaubon, Fresne, Canaye, and many others have
testified the esteem which he had for Learning.

It Is also a great Error to believe that he was altogether unlearned himself.
It is true, he was not extremely knowing; but it is as true, that he was not
ignorant in any hing that was necessary for a King to know. He understood a
little Latin. He had much studied History, as well that of France, as the Greek
and Roman, and the History of the Bible. He knew as well the Theory as Practice
of the Politics, Moralality, and OEconomicks. He learnt the Art Military from
the Books of that Subject, at the same time when he exercised the Practice. And
he had by heart many excellent Sentences taken from Ancient Authors, which he
used to apply so very pertinently, that his Teachers were astonished. He
resolved at his return from Germany to reform the University of Paris, and to
found there four or five Colleges to teach freely, and among the rest, one
where there should be a Revenue for the Educating of Three Hundred Gentlemen,
without the least Expense to their Parents.

He was not, indeed, liberal even to profuseness, as the Princes of the House
of Valois had been before him. But if he was sparing in his Expenses, it was
because he would spare the Substance of his poor People; and that he thought it
not just to vex whole Provinces to enrich particular Persons. After all he was
so just, and paid so well, that none could ever say that he retained the
Sallery or Reward of those who had served him. He gave away every year in good
Silver, not in Bills and Papers, above Three Millions of Livers, which he
bestowed and distributed among a great number of People. Was not this very much
for those times?

He was at some times hasty and passionate to his best Servants, but it passed
over in a moment; and he was not ashamed, if they were Persons of Quality and
Merit, to make them his Excuse. You may remember what he did on this occasion
to Theodoric de Schomberg at the Battle of Yury.

An easy Freedom, Trust, and Facility of Conversation was natural to him. In
the time of War he has been seen to make himself a Camrade to Common Soldiers,
to sit down at the Corpse de Guard, and lay himself upon a Mattress, to hold in
one hand a piece of Camp-Bisket, which he would eat, while with a Coal in the
other he would draw out and design a Camp and Trenches. He would himself take a
Pickax, and dig, to encourage the Soldiers to work. He would comfort poor
People during the War, and convince them, that it was not he, but the League
that was the cause of all their Miseries.

Afterward, in the time of Peace, he would make himself familiar with the most
inferior Persons: He would suddenly slip a way from his Company, and mingle
himself (unknown) among Country People, and Tradesmen in Inns, to whom he would
put a hundred Questions to sift out of them that which he knew none was bold
enough to tell him barefaced, and to discover the Oppressions which they lay
under, whether it were from the Violence of Gentlemen, the Extortions of the
Officers of his Revenues and Taxes, or the corrupt Decrees of wicked Judges.
When he had learnt from them what he sought for, he would return again to his
Courtiers, who were sometimes not a little troubled in his Absence to know what
was become of him.

It was upon one of these occasions, that an inferior Tradesman, but a Man of
Good Sense, convinced him, that the Paulete, or Annual Right, was an Invention
highly prejudicial both to King and People. Another time being in an Inn at
Milly in Gastinois, and having put certain people there into a Discourse of his
Life, there was one who said a thousand good things of him, but concluded thus,
He loves Women too much, God punishes Adulterers, it is to be feared that in
the end he will not let it pass, having endured so long. These Words sunk so
deep in his Heart, that he confessed never any Preacher touched him so sensibly.

Another time being extreme hungry in hunting, he came to an Inn on the
Highway, and set himself down at Table with a Company of Tradesmen; where
having dined, they began to talk of him, (they knew him not, for his Apparel
was always plain.) A certain Fellow that dealt in Hogs cried, Never speak of
that, the Cask will always smell of the Herring. A while after the King
standing at the Window, saw several Lords who rode about to find him; these
seeing the King, came up presently to the Chamber: The Hog-Merchant hearing
them call him Sire, and your Majesty, without doubt was sufficiently astonished,
and wished heartily that he had never spoke those foolish Words. But the King
stepping from the place where he stood, stroke him gently on the Arm, saying,
Honest Man, the Cask will always smell of the Herring; but this ought to be
applied to you, and not to me: I am, I praise God, a good Catholic, but you
keep still the old Leaven of the League.

In what Terms ought we to speak of his good Humor and Clemency, to express
them worthily? One may say that he was all Heart, and that he had no Gall. Of
so many Conspirators that did their endeavor to embroyl the Kingdom, it is
observed, that he never Executed any but the Marshall de Biron, to whom,
before he delivered him over to Justice, he offered his pardon, three several
times, in case he would but acknowledge his Offense.

In all his Wars, when he saw his Enemies give Ground, and just put to the
Rout, did he not use to ride up to the Head of his Bataillions, crying, Save
the French, Quarter to the French. In time of Peace he always preserved his
Hands clean from the Blood of his Subjects; although in his Wars, he never
returned from a Fight with his Sword unstained in the Blood of his Enemies.

Like a good Shepherd, who endeavors to Cure those of his Flock that are
infected, rather than cut their Throats. He used all patience, obliging
Actions, and Address, to recover those whom the Faction had infected. He
dissembled the knowledge of their ill Will, and in spite of their Endeavors he
hindered them from doing Evil, and converted them to good. A wise King, said he,
is like an able Apothecary, who of the worst of Poisons composes excellent
Antidotes, and of Vipers makes Treacle.

Above all these excellent Qualities, we ought to place the unspeakable Love
and Tenderness which he had for his People. He affected nothing more
passionately than to pleasure them, and to make them live at peace and ease. To
this purpose was his most ordinary Discourse. We may see an infinite number of
his Letters to the Governors of Provinces, to his Sur-intendants, and to his
Parliaments, containing these Expressions, Take Care of my People, they are my
Children, God has given them to my Care, and I am responsible; and such like
Words, full of Ardour, and a most cordial and paternal Goodness.

When the Duke of Savoy came to Paris, the King took him one day to see'em play
at Tennis, in the Fauxbourg St. Germain; after the Sport was over, as they were
standing together at the Window that opened to the Street; the Duke seeing a
mighty Concourse of people, told him, He could never sufficiently admire the
Beauty and Opulence of France, and asked his Majesty what the Revenue might be
worth to him. This Prince generous and ready in his Repartees, answered, It is
worth what I please. The Duke finding this Answer evasive, pressed him to tell
him precisely what France yielded him. The King replied, Yes indeed, what I
please; for having the Heart of my People, I have all that I desire: And if God
gives me but Life, I will cause that there shall not be a Labourer in my.
Kingdom, but he shall be able, if he pleases, to have a Hen in his Pot every
day. Adding, And if they have not so at present, it is because I am forced to
maintain so many Soldiers to reduce all those to reason, who would choke my
Authority. The Duke replied not a word more, but remained satisfied with the
Answer.

Certain Troops that he sent into Germany, having committed some Disorders in
Champagne, and plundered some of the Peasant's Houses, he told the Captains
that remained behind in Paris: Depart in speed, and take Orders about this
business, or you shall answer for it. What! if they ruin my People that
nourish me, who shall maintain the Charges of the Government; and who shall pay
your Pensions, Gentlemen? Living God! He that takes from my People, takes from
me.

The Inhabitants of the Valley which runs along the River Loire, having been
great Sufferers by the overflowing of that River, besought to be eased of the
Taxes, and to that purpose writ to the Duke of Sully, Sur-intendant of the
Finances, who presently made their Request known to the King by Letter, who
answered in these pathetical Expressions; As to that about the great Floods,
God has given me my Subjects to preserve them as my Children; Let my Council
treat them with Charity; Alms are most pleasing to God, especially upon this
occasion: I have a Tender Conscience; let them then have all the Assistance
that you think I can afford them. After this can we wonder if this Prince was
adored by all the World?

The best Mark of the Goodness of a Sovereign Prince, and the straight Band
which ought to be always between him and his Subjects, is, the Care which he
has to communicate to them his own Joys, and the part which they take in those
Joys, not only by outward appearances, which are extremely deceitful, and which
they afford as well to bad as good Princes; but also by the inward motions, and
by the Sentiments of the Heart.

From the first entry that this true Father of the French made into Paris, and
when his Goodness began to be known there, all the Inhabitants of that little
Word were always concerned for whatever happened to him, and were as much
affected with it, as if it had happened to themselves: They rejoiced at his
Contentments, and sorrowed at his Displeasure. Both the times he was sick, it
seemed as if the people of that Great City had been in a Fever: On the
contrary, he was no sooner well again, but his Health became theirs, and they
believed that the Health of the Kingdom, and that of their Prince was the same
thing. In like manner, when God had sent him any cause of Joy, he desired that
they might partake of it; and to that purpose he would make it known to them in
the kindest manner imaginable. Thus when Heaven had given him a Dauphin, he
caused him to be carried thorough the Streets in an open Cradle, that the
People might behold him at their ease, and enjoy the pleasure of the sight of
that Blessing which they had so long desired for the love of the Father.

I will here also observe some of his memorable Sayings, some of which discover
the Sentiments, and very bottom of his Soul, as others the quickness of his Wit.

At such times as he was taken up in pressing Affairs, so that he could not
assist at Mass, (I mean upon the Worky-days, for upon Holydays and Sundays he
never failed) he used, by way of excuse, to say to the Prelates, who were then
at Court; When I am employed for the Public, methinks I leave God for God
himself.

Sometimes he used to say to his Confidents, and most intimate of his Servants,
The French do not know me sufficiently; they will know better, when they have
lost me, what I am worth. Then lifting up his Eyes to Heaven, Lord, I am ready
to depart this World when you please, but what will become of this poor People?

When any advised him to be more careful of the preservation of his Person than
he used to be, and not to go so often alone, or so slenderly accompanied, as
his custom was, he would answer, Fear ought not to be admitted into a Royal
Breast: He that fears Death, will never attempt any thing upon me; and he that
despises his own Life, may be always Master of mine, in spite of a thousand
Guards. I commit my self to God when I rise, and when I lie down, I am in his
Hands; after all, I live in such a manner, that I ought not to distrust; it
belongs to Tyrants to stand continually in Fear.

The Duke of Orleans, his second Son, being extreme sick, and at the point of
Death, he declared, That if he should die, he would not have any go about to
comfort him, for he had entirely resigned himself to the Will of God.

Within two or three years after his coming to Paris, all the Suburbs, which
were old ruinous Houses, were repaired; and the particular and public
Buildings, which he raised in that great City, made it become more Beautiful
than ever. The Spanish Ambassadors that came thither to swear the Treaty of
Vervins, were astonished to behold it in so good a Condition, and so different
from what it was in the War, insomuch, that they told him one day, Sir, Here Is
a City mightily changed from what it was when we saw it last. Do not admire at
that, (said he) when the Master is not at home, all is in disorder; but when he
returns to his House, his Presence becomes its Ornament, and all things there
feel the Advantage.

He was in very great streights at the beginning of his Reign, in such manner,
that he was heard to say, That he seemed once a King without a Kingdom, a
Husband without a Wife, and a Warrior without Money: But since that God had
shown him so great Blessings, as to give him his Arsenal, he might boast that
he had there wherewith to Arm Fifty Thousand Men with all sorts of Munition,
and in the Bastile (which is near the other) wherewith to pay them for three
Years.

He said, That he had crossed the Imaginations of three sorts of People; The
Huguenots, who thought he would be always of their Religion: The Leaguers, who
hoped he would not suffer himself to be converted: And the third Party, who
believed he would never be married to a second Wife: I have deceived them all
three, said he, I have left the Huguenot Opinions, I am become a good
Catholic, I am married again, and I have Children that shall succeed me, if
God pleases.

He said also, That when he first came to the Crown, he found three Parties;
that he had united all three into one, without any Terms of distinction; that
he was the King of these, as well as those; that he believed them all equally
affected to his Service, but that it belonged to him to make the Difference,
and to choose those that he thought most capable.

Nerestan, a very gallant Gentleman, having raised him a Regiment, and as he
protested that he desired no recompense, but only the Glory to serve him: The
King Replied, Good Subjects ought to speak as you do; they ought to forget
their Services, but it belongs to the Prince to remember them; and if he
desires that they should continue faithful, he ought to be just and
acknowledging.

The Huguenots requiring of him some places of security, he told them, I am the
only Security of my Subjects, I never yet broke my Faith with any. And when
they replied, That King Henry III. had given them such. The Times then, said
he, were such, that made him fear you, and not love you; but as for me, I love
you, and fear you not. Some have made him give the same Answer to other Persons.

They told him one Day of a certain Captain, who had been of the League, and
was really a very gallant Man; but tho he had been pardoned by him, and had
obtained from his Favor many other Benefits, yet for all this he loved him not
at all; I will, said the King, do him so many good Offices, that I will force
him to love me whether he will or no. 'Twas thus that this Prince used to gain
back the greatest Revolters. And he was used to say to those who admired at
such Proceedings, That a Man catches more Flies with one spoonful of Honey,
than twenty Tun of Vinegar.

But as Policy obliged him to do thus to those who loved him not, so his
Generosity caused him always to grant an easy Pardon to those who humbly
sought it by Submission. And he had often that excellent Verse of Virgil in his
Mouth: Parcere Subjectis, and Debellare Superbos.

He jeered those extremely who pass the Bounds of their Profession, and meddle
with those things that do not belong to their Science. A Bishop one Day
discoursing of Martial Affairs very ill-favouredly, he turned from the Cock to
the Ass, as the Saying is, and asked him, To what Saint does the Office of that
day belong in your Breviary?

At another time his own Tailor having printed a little Book of certain Orders,
which he thought necessary for the Public Good, and presenting it to the King,
he took it, laughing, and having run over some Pages, he called to one of his
Valets de Chamber; Go, says he, fetch hither my Chancellor, to make me a new
Suit, since you see here my Tailor has undertook to make Orders for Government.

A Gentleman of Provence having purchased at a dear Rate a Presidents place,
for which he was fain to borrow Money; being come to wait upon the King, he said
softly to a Lord that was near him, Behold here a good Judge; I doubt not but
he will discharge the Duty that he owes very honestly, in a small time.

A Famous Physician being converted from Huguenotism to the Catholic
Religion, he said to Sully, My Friend, your Religion is desperately sick, the
Physicians have given it over.

The Huguenots of Poictou and Zaintonge, having sent to him certain Deputies to
request some Succors, soon after his Conversion, he bid them, Apply your
selves to my Sister, your Government is now fallen to Distaff; that Princess
remaining still a Huguenot.

The Queen making a Ball in the first Year after her Marriage, for which she
made choice of Fifteen of the most Beautiful and best qualified Ladies of the
Court, he said thus to the Nuncio, Sir, I never beheld a more Beautiful
Squadron, nor in all my Wars one more dangerous than this.

A certain Lord, who had a long time stood Neuter during the troubles, and took
part with neither side, coming to him one time into the Room where he was
playing at Cards, he called to him thus: Come, Sir, you are welcome, if we win,
you shall be on our side.

A Lady of Condition, but very old and dry, being come to a Court-Ball, in a
green Dress, he told her merrily, That he was much obliged to her, for having
reconciled Verdure and Dryness to honor the Company.

A Spanish Ambassador saying by way of Menace, that the King his Master would
maintain such an Action at the Head of an Hundred Thousand Men; He replied
angerly, You deceive your self, they are not Men in Spain, but Shadows.

Once; when the Prevost de Merchands, and the Eschevins came to demand of him
his permission for the raising a small Imposition upon the Water-pipes in
Paris, toward the defraying the Expenses of the Entertainment of Forty Swisse
Deputies lately arrived there for the renewing the Alliance, he answered, Find
some other expedient, it belongs only to our Lord to change Water into Wine.

Behold here a small part of the renowned Actions, and memorable Sayings of
Henry the Great There is an infinite number of others which are graved in
immortal Characters in the Hearts of all good Frenchmen, who pass them from
Father to Son, through all Posterity, to serve for a Model to Sovereign
Princes, who aim (as they ought) to reign happily, and measure their Power by
the Rules, of Goodness and Justice.

FINIS.

