Battering Rams AGAINST ROME; OR, The BATTLE of JOHN, the Follower of the LAMB,
Fought with the POPE and his Priests, whilst he was a Prisoner in the
Inquisition-Prison of ROME.

ALSO, A Certain REMONSTRANCE of Righteous Reason, written in Rome-Prison of
Madmen, unto all Rome's Rulers.

Together with a POSTSCRIPT, to all tenderhearted Roman Catholics.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black-Spread-Eagle and
Wind-mil, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

To the tender, moderate, Roman Catholic Reader.
Friend,
THe following Writings, being such as have been dispensed in the City of Rome,
unto which Answers were expected by me, from them, whom it chiefly concerned;
but not receiving any (unto any of my Queries propounded to Pope, Priests, etc.
in Rome) even unto this day; and being now returned unto this Land of England,
may expect something of Answer from thee unto the said Interrogations, which
are of general concernment unto all Roman Catholics; or else, I may conclude
that Truth is in no wise on your side, but absolutely and undeniably against
you, which I therefore leave unto thy consideration: and if [from that which
followeth] thou shall be persuaded of the Truth which is held forth therein,
confessing it in singleness and simplicity of heart and mind; if afterward
thou desire to be further satisfied touching any thing of our Doctrine or
Practices, ask it in the Spirit of Moderation either by Word or Writing of me,
and according to the Light of the Knowledge of GOD given unto me, I may meekly
answer thee in the tenderness of my Soul; Who am a real, faithful and true
lover of all Souls,

Called, John Perrott.

To the READER.
Reader,
I Have found it expedient, for the satisfaction of many tender Desirers, to
intimate these few preceding Words to the following Tract; showing the
certainty of the thing which many have enquired after; yet not as if the
relation thereof were able to enduce any Souls to believe in the True GOD,
forasmuch as Christ said, If they will not believe Moses and the Prophets,
neither would they believe if one should come from the dead. Yet every Work of
the Lord God to me is of exceeding weight, especially such, wherein the life
and safety of my outward man was very much concerned, in the time of my
Pilgrimage in Foreign Parts and Countries.

In brief, I give this Relation (to wit) When I was in Legorn in my Travel
onwards to Turkey, on a certain night an Angel of the LORD awakened me out of my
sleep, saying, Arise and go to the Window: the which I did in very much dread
and trembling; where standing, I suddenly heard certain Englishmen in another
Room at a Neighbor's house, wickedly conspiring my hurt: but blessed be God
(who sent his Messenger to warn me) by the Power of his own Life delivered and
saved me, from the Evil of the said Conspiracy.

Moreover, In Greece I met with diverse difficulties, being in my Pilgrimage led
through many Trials and Tentations, by being brought before Rulers and
Magistrates, and sometimes destitute of any thing to purchase natural food: yet
still the presence of the Lord was with me both by Sea and Land, and in the
greatest straits he always appeared in the greatest power of Love, caring and
providing for me, even beyond all that my heart could ever think; which things
to mention at large, would fill up much Paper: And therefore in this
compendious Preface may only hint one passage more, of the powerful Arm of God,
battelling for mine Innocent Soul in a Righteous Cause; which the Romans were
well informed of before I arrived at Rome, and that by diverse hands from
Venice, by which they might at leastwise understand, That God was my God, and
that I was his faithful Servant in the Work that he had called me unto.

It came to pass in proceed of my Pilgrimage, as I was returning by Sea from
Smyrna to Venice, that upon the way near unto Corfu, the Seamen and Captain of
the Ship took a wrongful occasion of Anger and Wrath against me, at which time
I offered my self in much meekness and moderation to reason the matter with
the said Commander of the Ship; but in brief, he threatened to cast me on shore
on a certain barren Island, on which there was no Inhabitant; who when he saw
that I was in that contented (being wholly offered unto God in all place and
time) desisted that Attempt; but forthwith bound himself under an Oath and
Curse, that when I came to Venice he would have me burnt to death by fire; To
whom I replied, saying, I fear not man, whose breath is in his nostrils, but
the God of life, who was my Leader in all that he had called me unto: This
being at evening, suddenly after these passages there was a cessation of many
of his words of bitterness, though some there were that grinned their teeth
upon me, and could even have found in their hearts to have bitten off my flesh
from my bones; which kindled the Anger of the LORD GOD Almighty against them;
for all that Night his sore Indignation and Vengeance did burn as a flame in
his bosom; so that it came to pass, at the dawning of the next day, that he
cast down a ball of Fire betwixt the Decks, amongst diverse Passengers, which
brake as into the roaring of a Cannon amongst them, and slew two persons, and
wounded one more; and besides that, the Lord caused Fire to Rain down from
Heaven in coals upon them, which burned some in their bodies, others it smote
and wounded, and others it slew in the Ship. And this is the Account of the
slain, viz. An Englishman the Gunner, a Dutchman the Carpenter, and an
Italian a Mariner, an Armenian Merchant, and a Turk a Servant; which were five
of five several Nations; and five others wounded, which the Lord God Almighty
gave as Examples of his Wrath, that the rest that lived might fear his dreadful
and terrible Name. Moreover, the said coals of Fire burned many holes through
their Sails, and split their Main-Top-Mast in the Puttox, and then grievous was
the cry of all Flesh amongst them: And from thence their perverse Spirits were
much more moderated, to hear me in causes of Equity and Truth.

Many things more I might mention, of the wonderful Works of my God, whom my
simple soul serves, even in the integrity and uprightness of my whole Heart.
But in these things I cease at this instant, having hinted some things of other
Passages in other Writings, and therefore at the present do draw to the putting
in order the following Writings, which were dispensed by me in the
Inquisition-Prison at Rome.

J. P.

An Epistle general to the Romans.
GOD, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, in the days of old, spoke by
the mouth of his holy Prophets, has now in these latter days spoken unto us
by the Revelation of his Son, the LORD from Heaven; who in the fullness of the
dispensation of time, came a Light into the world to be the manifest Salvation
of GOD unto the ends of the Earth; as was spoken by the Word unto Isaiah his
Prophet, in whose face expressly we have the Revelation of the Father, in whom
we behold the Glory of the Son, as the Glory of the only begotton of GOD, full
of Power and Wisdom; hereby knowing what we Worship, whom the whole world
alienated from the Power, Life, Wisdom, and Holiness of GOD, do ignorantly
Worship in the imaginations of their own hearts, which before the Lord are only
evil continually; Him therefore declare I unto you, GOD, the Eternal (and unto
every mortal) Invisible, and Incomprehensible Spirit, who is not likened unto
the Creation, which by the Power of his Eternal Word was made to glorify hi^
Name, by the Spirit; shows, That he dwells not in Temples made with hands,
neither is he worshipped by the Works of men's hands, as if he needed any thing;
who from the beginning determined the times appointed, and made all mankind of
one mould, and gave unto them Life, and Breath, and added thereunto of the
Grace of his Mercy, a measure of the Divine Nature, if happily that thereby they
might seek and feel after him, the LORD their Creator: But Man, whom the LORD
made little lower than the Angels, and gave him the fullness of the Earth to
possess, rebelled at all times against his GOD; he departed from the beginning,
from the living Way, and made Invention the joy of his Heart, and made his
Inventions a fence against God, and his Imaginations a Bullwark of defense; and
in all Ages and Generations, though the LORD visited with Judgments,
Destruction, Mercies, and wonderful Deliverances, and sent his Servants the
Prophets, arising up early, and lying down late, with Precept upon Precept, and
Line upon Line, speaking as afar off, by Signs, and Figures, and Parables; and
as at hand, by Judgment and Mercy: And always showed how that he is GOD, and
altogether unlimited, neither bound unto Words, nor Wonders, nor limited in Sea
or in Land; but still Man made marks for GOD, and set bounds for the Arm of his
Power, who in no wise is measured as the waters in the Wells, nor contained as
the Rivers with the banks, who was not conceived as the Seed of Man, nor born
as the Babe of the Womb; who is not comprehended as the grass with the ground,
nor as the wide swelling Seas with the sands of the shores; who is not known as
he knows all fowls, and calls the Stars by name; who is not measured as the
Earth with the Moon, nor as the Heavens with the course of the Sun; and
therefore Man always lost the knowledge of the eternal Power of the Godhead,
and still settled in his own will, which at first rebelled against GOD, and in
the same Will made Laws, and Statutes, and Ordinances for Government, for
Worship, and for punishment; though even from the days of the first man Adam,
unto this day, the hand of the LORD GOD was turned against that work, as
witness the preaching of the Spirit of Abel, Enoch, and Noah, he who has an
ear let him hear; witness also Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, among the Heathen,
and Moses among the Egyptians; yea, witness the Spirit of Moses among Israel,
by Preaching, by Power, by Judgment and Deliverance. What may I more say? They
would build a Tower to reach unto Heaven, and Arks, and Cities, and
Tabernacles, and Temple; And all for GOD to be constrained in their Works, and
when they had Commandments and Sacrifices, as appointed by the Word of the
LORD, the Spirit shows, when in all these things, they would have forced the
Rest of GOD, the LORD arose always against them, and sent his Servants the
Prophets to cry against those things, with the same Word which commanded them,
whom they did beat, imprison, wound and torture, yea, and put to death. And
thus it always was, He that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was
born after the Spirit, even as it is now; and in like manner, it has been from
the days of Abel, until the Heir came, and him they shamefully slew to possess
the Vineyard.

Moreover, of his days I may also speak, even in the days of the LORD CHRIST,
when he was transfigured before his Disciples, at the glorious appearance of
Moses, Eliah, and the LORD, the Disciples would build them Tabernacles; but
mercy appeared unto them in a Rebuke, and they were instructed in the Way of
GOD; but yet (and notwithstanding also, that Paul the Apostle taught a pressing
on from one degree of Faith unto another, until all should be perfected unto
the fullness of the measure, of a complete stature, showing also in the
Resurrection, [who himself was risen with Christ] the diversities of the
measures of the Glories which were revealed, and every measure as gathered into
God in his fullness, were respectively full, showing it by the figure of the
Glories, of the Lights, of the Sun, Moon and Stars; and wrote to the Church,
how that he was caught up into the third Heaven, and saw things which were
unlawful to be uttered. And John, in the LORD'S Day, [in the Revelation of the
Lord from Heaven] saw the great things of GOD, yet said the Angel unto him,
Come up hither: I say, notwithstanding all this, the doctrine of GOD, that he
might be known to be GOD, and not in any wise to be limited) Man in his
wilfulness and presumption unto this day, has set marks against him, and made
measures of words in their Wills, as Cords of restraint to bind him; yea, the
Heavens and the Earth, and the depth of the Seas, and all the increase of the
Plant of the field, and her seeding Seed, the Sun, Moon and Stars, the Clouds,
the Winds, the Hail, and the Rainbow of GOD, shall witness against the Nations
of the world in this matter; They limit not God in their pleasure; but do bow
in subjection to his Will: but the Nations of the Earth, in the crookedness of
their hearts, have made walls against the passage of GOD.

O Man, lift up thine head, and look, and behold, how the People and
Inhabitants of the Earth do limit the LORD to their lusts: O open thine Eye,
and see how they make GOD as a Transgressor in the Earth, even as the Cattle of
a Stranger, which have fed in the fields of their Pasture, and as the hand of a
Thief and Robber, which has stolen the labor of another. Look through the
Earth among the Nations thereof, and thou may read all their Professions as
Prisons; for the Reign of of GOD in the Conscience is limited by the forms of
their Words; and one cries Here, and another says There; and another says
these are the Laws and the Precepts, and he that will not Rest in this, he is
out of the Way of GOD, and he that speaks against our Law, and the Manners of
our Worship, he must bear the punishment thereof. Concerning all which, if the
Conscience of GOD should demand, Are your Words GOD? or, Are your Customs the
Arm of GOD? yea, I say, if that Conscience in whom GOD lives and reigns,
should ask of them all, Are your Words, or Customs, or Forms of Worship, the
immediate Commandment of the LORD GOD from Heaven, which shall endure for ever?
not one of a thousand either could, or would give a ready Answer thereunto;
which if they would honestly answer negatively, concluding their words not to
be GOD, nor their Customs the Arm of GOD, why then do they set their Words
above GOD, as a limit and bound to the Spirit of GOD? And, why set they their
Customs and Forms of Worship in the Seat of GOD, to judge in more Power than
the Arm of GOD? To the sons of men it may be fully said, To whom is the Living
GOD known, and the Arm of the LORD revealed? For, if GOD be a Spirit, and is
only known in Spirit, to live in Spirit, and to dwell with men in the Spirit,
How remains the knowledge of this true GOD among the sons of men, who by the
limitations of their Customs and Forms of Worship, and Words in the Will, out
of the unlimited Spirit, do thrust him the unlimited Spirit out of his true
habitation?

To all the sons of men upon the face of the Earth, who have reached as far as
the Tradition, but want the Life, even unto all Sects, and among you all, I
might largely and plentifully declare your Judgments of others, and not with
that of GOD in the Conscience, answers not that of GOD in the Conscience of any
man, and GOD has no Unity with your Judgment, but his hand he turns against
it, even as in all Generations past; The Customs of your Worships, and not in
the Spirit, the Spirit turns against you, and the Spirit will have glory over
you; for, be you not ignorant, how that the Spirit created the Times, and in
time Tradition and Custom came forth; And the Spirit which changes the Times,
will change the Customs and Forms; and when GOD has put all these things under
foot, he will be known to be All in All, in the Conscience, his own proper Seat
and Dominion. What art thou O corruptible man [in whom God created a
Conscience] that sits above GOD in thy Will, making a Law against GOD in the
Conscience of another? Know thou not that GOD has the whole Dominion there?
Know thou not that GOD has granted a Law against all Sin, and written it in
the Conscience [his own seat] where he comes to Judgment of the whole World of
Mankind, as well in it the Heathen who have not the Letter of the Law, by the
same which he will judge both Jew and Gentile, who have the Law, and in the
Life are found transgressors of the Law; And make thou a Law against the
Light of the Throne of GOD? against that which thou make and set a
bound-mark, limitation, and Law, which is in another; in, and by the self same
thing in thy self, shall thou be judged of GOD, because of thy Law; and the
LORD GOD will be known to be the Lord of Spirits, and Father of Lights, whose
Spirit and Light by all the Customs, Traditions, Laws, and Forms of Worship in
the World, is not in any measure comprehended to be equally judged, or made in
Righteousness subordinate unto in the Conscience of another; and that of GOD in
you all shall witness this for ever, and bear its everlasting Testimony against
your comprehensible corrupt wills, which make Laws, and constrain Customs and
Traditions by Laws, against the incomprehensible measure of GOD in another.

Wherefore a Warning from the LORD GOD, the Father of Spirits and Lights, to
you all is come, to give you to take heed in due season, lest you be found
fighters against GOD your Creator, in the day that he calls to Account, and
draws near unto Judgment in the Land; And lay it to heart with understanding,
that for this cause only that he was fought against in the Conscience, by
Customs, by Laws, by Judgment, by Life, by Traditions, by Forms of Worship, by
Sinners, by Rebellion against the Power in the Conscience, by Jews and by
Gentiles, all the Overtures, Desolations, Confusions, Destructions,
Captivities, and Revelation of the Wrath, Indignation and Vengeance of GOD,
from Age to Age, reaching unto this present Age, came to pass in the Earth;
Witness the Flood; witness Sodom and Gomorrah; witness the Red Sea; witness the
Walls of Jericho; witness the Mulberry-trees; witness the Battles of Israel,
and the Captivity of his Children; witness the Worms that ate Herod; witness
the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the scattering of the Jews in the Earth;
witness Greece, Germany, Scotland, England, and Ireland; and yet the LORD will
call the whole Earth to witness, and bring heap upon heap, and destruction upon
destruction, and desolation upon desolation, by Fire and Sword in every Land,
that stands against the Word of the LORD GOD.

But blessed is he that comes to know the ground and root of a matter in him,
to know the end of the Desolations determined to be in the Earth.

I might say unto you, how that in the days of Luther, GOD moved in the
Darkness upon the face of the deeps thereof; but they which made him their Rest
are confounded, and their head is broken as Clay. He appeared brighter by
Behman and Brown; but they which built their Travels as Towers, the LORD
confounded with many Languages, and even running up to the height, Baptists,
Seekers and Ranters, some made bounds for the pure, and others in their lusts
revolted; wherefore GOD has laid them one upon the other, as a heap of
confusion together: And thus he has begun the work of his hand, decreed to
perfect his purpose.

And the LORD GOD will make the Nations to know, That he has not sent down his
Word in the Earth, to be likened unto a breath of Vanity in the Air, and that
he caused not his Prophets to run in vain, as him which comes short of the
mark; but that his Law which he wrote upon the Tables of Stone, he writes upon
the Table of he Heart; and both the Law and the Prohets, no more as in the
days of continual ransgression, shall be told as a tale of tatlers, and as a
history of vain bablers, pointed upon the tongue of a deceitful mouth; but that
they shall be fulfilled and witnessed, yea, and perfected in the Spirit, in Life
and in Power, as by the Spirit in Life and in Power they were revealed, and
given forth to this only end of GOD in his Creature: For which cause (lastly)
JESUS the Savior was revealed, to perfect that which was lacking, and to
complete the Redemption in fullness.

Therefore all you dwellers in the Monuments of the Earth, Awake from the
deadness of your Forms and Worships, and draw near unto the quickening Power of
the Righteousness of GOD, which leads to Life in the Truth, and Salvation from
all Sin: To which end, GOD sent the Immanuel, a LIGHT unto the World, that all
men through belief in the LIGHT might have Everlasting Life.

You that are in the Profession and Confession of a dead hope in a Savior
without you, and are not in the Life of the Faith of the Substance, CHRIST the
living hope in you, which cleanses the Soul from Sin, and washes the Heart
from Iniquity; Wait in the Silence for the Revelation of the LORD from Heaven
[who unto us is come] that [in you also] he may be known and witnessed, and
testified to be come, (according to the Promise) the second time without sin
unto Salvation. Wait for his Appearance in the Clouds, to come breaking through
the thickness of the blackness of the long night; to come down in the Earth as
a burning fire, and to darken the Air with the smoke; to set the Heavens in
fire, and to melt the Earth before him; that you may come to know the Wonders
of GOD fulfilled; the Sun to be darkened, and to become black as sackcloath of
hair, the Moon turned into blood, and the Stars to fall from Heaven, in the
same substance to see and know these things come to pass, and with the same
eye by which the Glories of the Heavens were created, and saw that it was good;
I say with the same Spirit and Life which spoke forth the Prophecy (which unto
learned and unlearned, is become as a Book that is sealed, and hid from the
Vultrous eye) to witness the Prophecy fulfilled. Wait for the Revelation of
GOD's Plough in the Earth, for the tearing up of the Ground, and breaking the
Clods thereof; for a due preparation to receive the Seed of the Kingdom, that
you may become as GOD's Husbandry in the Earth, and no longer remain as the
barren Mountains thereof, which never bear Plough thereon, nor yielded increase
of good; nor as the Woods of the Forests, whose Trees were never pruned, which
spread their unfruitful branches as thickets that cumber the ground. Settle not
your selves in the sluggards Rest, nor as a wounded Fool with his putrified
flesh, who is rather willing to perish in death, than to cut off his Corruption
for life: Be ye not always as Moab, settled upon the scent of the old lees, for
it stinks in the nostrils of GOD; but wait for the Remove of the Ground, and
yield unto the hewings of GOD; the Ax to be laid to the Root of the Tree, and
the Sword to the Soul that sins, to know Judgment begin at the House of the
LORD, to cut off the Wicked in the Land. And seek not to escape the day of
GOD's Wrath, but bear his Indignation within you, as the just Reward of your
sins, which are called up unto Judgment against you; And wait in patience until
it be over and past, that you may know his acceptable year to be come: And when
these things you know, and witness fulfilled within you, even as they are known
and testified in the Life of GOD's Heritage, you shall bear me Testimony in the
Holy Ghost, That although the Judgment be weighty, the Ax burthensom, and the
flaming Sword of the LORD a most grievous thing; all the burden, the weight,
the grief, and the travel is but of the carnal and sinful part; And to it only
is the irkesomness thereof, until it be utterly cut off and slain upon the
Cross, even of that part which is this day the cause of the cry of the Just in
the Land; and then you shall be one with the Judgment, one with the Sword, one
with the Ax, one with the Everlasting Burning of GOD, to dwell in its glory for
ever. Here the true Purgatory is come, and the sin is washed away, through which
the entrance is made into the habitation of the Peace of GOD, and there is no
true Rest without it: Then there is no more sin, no more transgression in the
Land, the cursed Earth is consumed with all her increase, the evil Ground, and
the Works which were wrought therein are burnt up together, the New Creation is
come, Jerusalem is created anew, the old Heavens, and the old Earth is passed
away, there is no more remembrance of them, and Jerusalem is created an
habitation of Peace, the Glory of the LORD is in her; and this is the holy
City, into which the Hebrews were entered, which John prophesied should in
these latter days come down from Heaven [without whose gates are the Dogs,
Sorcerers, Witches, Whoremongers, Murderers, and whatsoever loves or makes a
Lye] into which we in the Kingdom are entered; whose Kingdom is not of this
World; and you coming hither will enter into the way of the Wisdom and Counsel
of the Most High, to see all things, purposes, Statutes and Judgments, by that
of GOD ordered and brought forth, in the Wisdom and Counsel of GOD, and your
own cast under foot as a corruptible thing for ever: Then the whole Creation of
GOD which travelleth in pain until the Redemption comes, will joy in the
approach of Wisdom; for then shall you use the Creatures singly to the proper
end, in the same Wisdom, by the which they were created: The burning desire of
Lust shall dye, and the evil appetite be taken away; Increase shall fill the
house, and Blessing overflow the heart; the Land shall be preserved in Peace,
and the City become a Sanctuary of safety; Invasion shall never prosper; For
Wisdom shall confound the work of the Wicked, and bring to naught the counsel
of the Ungodly.

The eye of GOD is his Wisdom, which pierces the Depths of the Earth; to be in
his Wisdom, is safety, true safety, sure preservation from all Snares, Plots,
Conspiracies, Designs and Intentions of the World, Hell, and the Devil; For by
the Wisdom all flesh was made, and that which warreth against its Maker, by the
Wisdom it shall be confounded: Wherefore all [for everlasting safety] draw near
unto Wisdom's gates, and wait for the Counsel and Wisdom of GOD* to receive
Wisdom in the Counsel of GOD* and growing in the Wisdom, and dwelling in the
Wisdom and Counsel of GOD, his eye comes to be with you, as manifestly revealed
in you, which searches and sees into the depths of a matter: This is that
Spirit of a man that knows the mind of a man; and by the same the way of the
wicked comes to be manifest, and is a true defense against a thousand Armies.
Remember the poor man which was in the City, who by Wisdom delivered it from
the Destruction of the Enemy; And make not the seat of Treachery your Trust,
nor pollished subtilty upon the head of Iniquity, your Fort of Refuge for
safety; For it shall be as a rotten string in your right hand, which shall
break with the bent of the Bow; For deliverance is only of GOD; And the purpose
of the perverse shall perish.

These things I have written, if happily you may get hear to be led unto the
entrance of the Knowledge of GOD, to partake of his Treasure of Wisdom, and
whilst the poor man moves you, to listen unto Counsel; if you resist and will
not, beware: Beware, lest in the time of distress, you cry, and gladly would,
and then he be not to answer.

From the Inquisition-Prison in Rome. J. P.

To Fabius Guisius Pope of Rome.
Friend,
MY Message is not unto any part of the natural, either Wit, Will, or Wisdom;
it is neither meat for Serpents, nor air for Camelions; But the Word of the
Lord God is to the Seed, which shall be witnessed by the next Generation,
whether this which now is will hear or forbear.

This is the Message which I have heard and received, and do declare unto thee:
GOD is Light, and in him is no darkness at all, who has sent his Son a Light
into the World, that all that believe in him who is the Light of the World, may
have everlasting life; unto which Light thou must bow, and ought to lay down
thy Crown, at the feet of him who comes in the Cloud^ through the thickness of
the Night, and breaking through the blackness and darkness of the black and
gloomy day.

That which Daniel [the greatly beloved of GOD] saw afar off, I see at hand;
the little stone is cut out of the Mountain without a hand, and is already
become a Mountain, which the whole Earth is not able to remove, and will become
a Mountain which shall fill the whole Earth, which shall throw down every Image
before him, as says the Prophet; GOD will confound the Image and the
Image-maker, and him which boweth before it: Behold! Overturn comes, and
Overturn follows, until the last Overture be fulfilled, and He come whose
Right it is to Reign, and his Government, which is an Everlasting Government,
be set up, and his Dominion unto the utmost Ends of the Earth, of which there
shall never be end.

GOD has looked over the Government of the Land, and has heard the
Blasphemies thereof; They profess my Name (says the Lord) of whom I am made
but as a curse in their mouth: And my Name is but made the grievous Oath of the
Land, says the Jealous God: And from the head to the tail, there is none
amongst them that have made the Separation betwixt the Just and the Vile; but
as a Cage of unclean Birds, they are all common, as in Confession, so also in
their Iniquity and Transgression; for which things I will visit says the Lord
of Hosts. As David complained, I am made the song of Drunkards; Even so now is
Mary the Mother of Jesus, by every unclean tongue in the corners of the
streets, in the Temples, and in the Highways of this Land of Whoredoms.

Thus says the Lord, Pull down the Highway marks of Idolatry, that the
stranger may not stumble before me. Exercise thy Power for me, and not against
me, says the Lord; And throw down the great Image and Idol of the Land, lest I
quickly tumble down two at once, says the Lord of Hosts. Plant not Briars in
the Way, neither set Thorns in the Gap; For lo, I am arisen to smite the whole
Earth, and to make breaches in the fenced places thereof; For now, even now,
for mine holy Name sake, and my Seeds sake, I am jealous says the Lord of
Hosts; Righteousness shall run down like a Stream, and the Knowledge of the
Lord shall cover the Earth, as waters cover the Seas; which is found scant in
thy Land. Be thou henceforth no more called POPE, for that was never promised
nor prophesied of by the Word of the Lord; I am Peter's Successor who am of his
Spirit, whose Kingdom is not of this World, and so are we all who are made
partakers of the Divine Nature, which was fully in Christ, who when the Jews
would take him by force, and make him a King, he departed into a Mountain
alone, and was hid from them all; but thou may keep the name of one of the
Princes of this World, and in thy place as a Ruler, rule with the Judgment of
Truth and Righteousness, not turning the stranger out of his way, nor
condemning the Just by a Law, which David in his day complained of.

Rob not God of his Glory, For he forgiveth Sin; Repent, for thy Sin is not yet
forgiven; Neither watch for any man's halting, for that is Iniquity; but
cherish all that cry against Idolatry, and lift thou up thy voice with them
that are redeemed out of the nature of Transgression and Sin, that bear witness
and cry against all Sin; and always wash thy hands, and keep thy heart clean
from their blood, and the innocence of their sufferings. Say not, that I came
to deceive the People of thy Nation, whose life is as a Sea of Sin and
Transgression, who have not anything to be deceived of in that nature, but
Profaneness, Sin, and Uncleanness. I came to declare the Message of GOD unto
thee, and so to pass as a Pilgrim and a Stranger out of thy Land. I came not
with any thing in my Vessel unto thee, or any of this City, which is new, save
only as it is new unto the old nature of all Transgressors and seed of
Corrupters, which is the new Wine of the Kingdom of GOD. Do not ask, how thou
shall know? For in Judgment thou shall know, that this is the Message of the
LORD GOD of Heaven and Earth unto thee.

I have born a burden for thee, and now I bear thy yoke under thee; Yet much
more could I suffer in the exercise of the long patience of the LORD, That this
Nation might drink of the Cup of the Everlasting Blessing of the LORD, and the
Curse removed from their head, to eat the bread of peace and gladness for ever.

So having thus far cleared my self unto thee, did it stand in my own freedom I
should depart thy Coasts; but being not mine own, but the LORD's Witness
against all Ungodliness; For this Testimony, with gladness I wear the yoke of
bonds; and not only yet, but what else may follow, in his content and patience
that has called me:

Who by the sons of men am called

JOHN PERROTT.
From the Inquisition-Prison in Rome.
To the Governor of Rome.
Friend,
COme to know the Higher Power, the Power of GOD to be highest in thee, and let
that be the Judge of all matters and causes which shall come before thee; Let
the Sword of the Judgment of GOD be set up in thy house within, that the
Transgressor may be slain within; then the Eye will be opened, the Ear will be
unstopt, the grossness of the Heart will be taken away, and thou will have the
understanding of the root of a matter in thee, and wilt always judge for GOD,
and every end will be shaken off; No man shall at any time see his end over
thee, by gifts or presents, deceitful speeches or flattering titles of that
honor which comes from man; but so thou will stand in the state of Honor
which comes from GOD only, which is the believing state; but the seeking of the
other is the unbelieving, says Christ.

Wherefore come to the Light, and dwell in the Light, with thy mind and heart
stablished and fixed in it, which shows thy own transgression within, to have
feeling of the Judgment of GOD upon the transgressor in thee: And come to the
love of the Light, and follow the Light, by it to be led out of sin and
transgression, and then with the Light, by which all things are made manifest,
in all matters of Judgment, thou will reach that of GOD in all, which in all
will justify thee in the sight of GOD; and so thou will stand girded with
Justice in the seat of Equity and Truth, a terror to evildoers, and a praise
to them that do well.

GOD is coming to search the whole Earth, who looks for the fruit of
Judgment from all that sit in the seat thereof: Mercy to the Poor, Relief of
the Oppressed; The Poor has cried, and the Oppressed has groaned, and GOD
has heard it, and he who hears will answer.

Answer thou always in thy place for the LORD, lest the LORD GOD make thee to
answer for thy self before Him. Though I am but as a suckling of the Lords
Flock, nevertheless in the simplicity and tenderness of my life, as one that
has received Mercy at the Judgment seat of God, according to the lowliness of
my measure, I counsel thee in his pure fear, That thou do look over the Books
of the Registers of the Law of thy Nation, and see if any one Statute be there
written, which may stand as a Law to condemn the Just* David complained of that
in his day; for he saw the issue of what came to pass, though it was afar off
from his days: We have a Law (said the Jews) and by our Law he ought to dye;
by which they in their wilfulness put the LORD CHRIST to death. And so it was
in all Ages, that transgressors (for whom, says Paul, the Law was made) did
make such to suffer under the Law, and put them to death by a Law, in whose
mouth guile was not found, which was the unrighteous Judgment. Friend, Draw
thou thy hand from that; And though the people do cry, even as it was
complained of in Judah concerning the Prophet, The Land is not able to bear all
his words, yet of a truth the Word of the LORD will come to pass and be
fulfilled. And truly I say unto thee, as Jeremy said unto the Elders of Israel,
with the life of that Prophet: Do with me as seems good in thy sight; but
assuredly know I am of God. And I also desire, that the LORD GOD in Mercy, may
not lay this thing to your charge in the day of his Judgments, forasmuch as you
do you know not what. I sit not in the seat of the unrighteous, in any measure
apt to judge any thing before the true time; wherefore unless the fruit in this
matter did show the Tree, I shall not at the present accuse the Romans with our
detainment under their Yoke of Captivity, to provoke words from us, whereby the
Prophet's words might become fulfilled upon your heads, in this your Age, in
making a man an offender for a word; but I am rather in expectation of the
Appearance of the Nobility, of that which has been reported and written
concerning the Romans; If we have transgressed the Law of GOD, Try us by the
Law, and give us our punishment according to the Law; For the LORD GOD knows I
delight in Righteous Judgment: If we are not found transgressors, why are we
innocent strangers and pilgrims stopped of our Voyage? if our Bonds hold us by
you, only upon the account of suspicion, we blame you not; but prove us, and
satisfy your selves concerning us; only if we have found the favor of Justice
before you, which the living God requires of you, show us the Cause in truth
why we are detained, that according to Law and Equity before your seat (...)
Judgment, we may make our open Defense.

I am a Friend of thy soul, J. P.
From the Inquisition-Prison in Rome.
To all in the Colleges of Rome, that have any zeal or desire to answer Truth
for the Lord and Truths sake.
MEn fearing GOD are not rash nor heady, neither will they judge a matter
before the time: Wherefore for the better information of your selves,
concerning the Truth and Life, the Way of GOD and Church of CHRIST, I have in
plain-heartedness queried, for you (in the honesty of sober minds) to give me
your Answer in writing, plainly and pertinently to each of them, without
renting any part of my words; For which, in expectation, I shall wait in Rome
whilst these Bonds hold me, until it come to my hands; which you ought to
answer, as you profess the name of Christianity among the sons of men, for the
sake of souls.

Query 1. What is that one thing needful unto Salvation, which with the
possession thereof a man possesses all things? And, whether can a man possess
it, and not know it, yea or nay?

Que. 2. What is that by which Paul exhorted the Brethren to, to try the
spirits, whether they were of God, yea or nay?

Que. 3. Whether are any of you now called by CHRIST to a further estate of
Knowledge than the Disciples were then when Christ said unto them, You know not
of what spirits you are, yea or nay?

Que. 4. If by Christ you are called further, show me how? And, whether you
have really heard the Voice of Christ? but if not called unto, or beyond that
estate which they were then in, not knowing your own spirits, by what spirit
would you truly judge of my Spirit who am of God?

Concerning the Way of God.

Que. 5. Whether are you in the way of God, which is but one? and, How was that
one unto Enoch, and now but one and the same unto you?

Que. 6. Whether is not CHRIST the Light of the World, that one way, yea or nay?

Que. 7. Whether are sinners in CHRIST, who is the narrow way? or, are they
under the power of Satan in the broad way, yea or nay?

Que. 8. Whether are you in that way which was prophefied of, and is now
manifest, which the wayfaring men, though fools, cannot err therein, yea or
nay?

Que. 9. Whether are you in any other way, but in that in which an Hypocrite
can walk? and, whether can an Hypocrite walk in CHRIST, yea or nay?

Que. 10. Whether are not all that are in the Church of Christ, in the true way
of God, where the wayfaring men, though fools, cannot err therein?

Que. 11. Whether is the Spirit of Truth come unto you, which leads the
Members of Christ's Church into all Truth? But if you have not a Member that in
life is led out of all Error into all Truth, How can you say that you have the
Spirit of Truth?

Que. 12. If all be in Sin and Error in the Life, How shall I conclude any one
to be of the true Faith, seeing the Apostle says, Show me thy Faith by thy
Works? Can the Faith be perfect, except the Works be perfect, yea or nay?

Que. 13. Whether had not the Jews all the words of the Prophets, and yet when
Christ came slew Him, who was the Virtue, Sum, Substance, the Beginning and End
of the life of the Prophets? And, whether you, being out of the Spirit of
Christ, are not under the judgment of Jeremiah's words, viz Though they say,
the LORD lives, surely they swear falsely?

Que. 14. Whether did Adam lose more in his life, than CHRIST came to restor^
unto Man in this life? Which is the greater the living soul, or the quickening
spirit And, whether is any one or more of you Members restored unto either, or
not in the life of either of these two states, yea or nay?

Que. 15. Whether is not all Sin of the Devil, and he that commits Sin, of the
Devil, yea or nay?

Concerning the true Church.

Query 16. Whether is not the Trut^ Church the Body of CHRIST which is in GOD?
And, when Paul spoke of Christ and the Church, whether did he not speak of a
Mystery, yea or nay?

Que. 17. Whether are the Members of Christ's Body evil? And if sinners be
Members of Christ's Body, tell me if any other spirit be the sinnews of that
body, besides the spirit of the Devil, which leads into sin and evil, yea or
nay?

Que. 18. Whether is not the perfection of the Glory of GOD in his Church? And
whether does that remain among sinners, yea or nay?

Que. 19. Whether has not Christ, said, Without exception God hears not
sinners? and therefore says James, You ask, and have not. And, whether does
not God hear the Prayers of his Church, yea or nay?

Que. 20. Whether does not Paul say, That Christ's Church is without spot or
wrinkle? to bring it into which state, he purged every branch, and the
unfruitful he cut off; And tell me since the last two hundred years, whether
your Members have increased, in more Sin, or in more Holiness, in outward show
and practice in their conversation?

Que. 21. Whether all that commit Sin are not in the Apostasy from the Spirit,
which is the life of the Church, and leads out of all sin, yea or nay?

Que. 22. Whether is not Christ the Promise of the Father? [The Seed of the
Woman shall bruise the Serpent's head.] And did he come to do less than was
promised? Now search you the Prophets, and see what was promised, and also
answer me: When the Serpents head is bruised, is not Man as he was in the day
that he was created, yea or nay?

Que. 23. What is Salvation and R^demption, and Restoration, and from wh^ and
unto what, and when?

Que. 24. Whether the evil works all men, is not Testimony of the false fa^ of
all such men? And if Adam for one (...) lost so glorious an Estate, How think
you wi^^ your so many sins shall you be made Inheritors of his first state?

Que. 25. Whether can any of you just say, That Christ is the end of the Law
f^^ Righteousness unto you, who never came (...) the beginning of the
Righteousness thereof Did Christ come to destroy the Law, or (...) fulfill the
Law? Do you believe Paul's Testimony of Christ (in whom he was reveale^ who
therefore testified) That the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in
them that walk nor after the flesh, but after the Spirit? And, whether is any
one of you, s^^ entered into the Spirit, yea or nay?

Que. 26. Is any one or more of you truly in the Faith to witness unto John's
Testimony, who said, As Christ is, so are we in this present world; and whether
were they the^ in sin, yea or nay?

Que. 27. Whether did not Christ rebuke Hypocrites, when he said, Why call you
me, Lord, and do not the things which I say? And, Did not Christ say unto his
Disbiples, Be ye perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect? And,
Whether do you think that he was an unequal Lord, and his Commandments
grievous, which could not be born, yea or nay?

Que. 28. What are the Clouds, and the time of the Night, and the cause of the
Darkness, Blindness and Ignorance? And what are the Vails which cover the
Heart, and the understanding part? And how is the World set in man's heart,
whereby man cannot find out the Work which GOD makes, from the beginning to
the end thereof?

Que. 29. What is that which removes the Darkness, breaks through the Clouds,
rents the Vails, and drives back the mist and thickness of the Night? And,
whether is not that which is the Cause, and that which removes the Cause, these
two still the same since the Fall, unto this day of man's remaining under the
Curse in the Fall? And whether any thing redeems out of the Curse, but that
which redeems out of the Fall? and is not every sinner in the Fall, yea or nay?

Que. 30. What is that which takes away the Original of Sin? and if the
Original which is the root and offspring, be take away, the root not left in
ground, how ca^ a branch grow, or fruit be brought forth GOD says, the soul
that sins shall die And, Whether do you otherwise believe, Tha^ if you live
in sin until death, but you sha^ receive (as Paul says) the wages of sin,
which is death, yea or nay?

These things are but that, which man lead unto an entrance of somewhat more to
follow, which I offer (as hereby directe^ in the Substance) to all such as
desire to know the new birth; And when the Learne^ have answered them, as the
liberty of Pen, Ink and Paper is afforded me, I may explicate your
Replications, and show the groun^ thereof, and withal try, if the key of the
understanding all Mysteries is among you, which is in the Church of Christ, and
any thing concerning the Kingdom of God; Call your Councils together, I am an
alone Child; propound your Queries, and let me answer them; for in GOD is my
trust, and not in self, who am his Servant,

From the Inquisition-Prison in Rome. J. P.

THe Church of Christ this day stands in the Doctrine of Christ. They are in
the Life which cannot recompense unto any man evil for evil, but good for evil:
but you I find recompencing evil for good, which is contrary to all good. You
are in the nature and practice of the Scribes, Pharisees and Hypocrites, which
Christ cried Woe against; You call men Lords and Masters, and are called of men
Lords and Masters; You love Greetings and Salutations in the Marketplaces, and
in these things love to be seen of men; And you are in the delight of the
uppermost Rooms and Places at Feasts, and love the honor which comes from men:
All which is contrary to the Doctrine of Christ: But the Church of Christ,
speaks not more of Christ, than as they live and walk in the Doctrine of Christ.

Number over your Traditions, and compare them with what Christ and his holy
Apostles delivered, that you may see in how much you are short on the one hand,
and in how much you have spun a third beyond the staple on the other, that you
may see how you have lost the end, your line not leading to Perfection, nor
your life out of sin and corruption; Preach, write and speak to the end of your
days and time, you shall never beget, but by your own seed none other
likeness, but of your own nature* You may come as far as the shadow, shell, and
husk; You may have the words, but your nature cannot receive the Life and
Power; the Cross of Christ, which is the Power of GOD to Salvation, is too
hard a thing for you to bear: You have the Image which is the loss of the
Substance; for where CHRIST, who is the Substance, is come, there the end is
come, unto all Shadows, Types and Figures, which shadowed and figured out the
Substance before it came.

Concerning Opinions, I blow over them all as Chaff, in as many as are in
dissembling, lies, hypocrisy, swearing or cursed speaking. Repent, God's day
is at hand.

Rome, dispensed from the Inquisition-Prison. J. P.

I Could say many things unto you, but you are not able to bear a little (as
the Priest concerning the Prophet complained, saying, The Land is not able to
bear all his words) you being not yet come unto the Charity (which is in the
Church of Christ) which can bear all things, and endure all things; Wherefore
at present I query a little further; expecting first an Answer of the former,
and after that, of these.

Concerning the Kingdom.

Query 1. What is the lost groat, and the sweeping of the house to find it? And
whether have you found it, yea or nay?

Que. 2. What is a Virgin's-state, and, are you in it? and, In which of the
two, the wise or the foolish? What is the Lamp, and the Oil in the Lamp, and do
you possess it, yea or nay?

Que. 3. Whether is not the Kingdom of Heaven as really in you, as it was in
the Scribes and Pharisees? And, whether are you in the Kingdom, yea or nay?

Que. 4. Whether is any one of you a greater Prophet than John Baptist, who was
the greatest Prophet born of Women, which went before him; seeing he that is
least in the Kingdom, is greater than he?

Que. 5. If not one of you be in the Kingdom of God; Are not all in the kingdom
of Satan; which are not in the Kingdom of God, yea or nay?

Que. 6. What is the first Principle which leads to the understanding and
knowledge of the Oracles of GOD? And, whether are you in it, and does your life
answer it, yea or nay?

Que. 7. What is the Key of David, an^ who keeps it, and whether is any thing
opened or shut in Heaven or in Earth without it yea or nay?

Que. 8. What is the Book which is sealed with seven Seals, and what are the
Seals thereon which John said no man i^ Heaven, nor in Earth, was found worth^
to open? Whether was Peter then in Heaven or in Earth, or neither in Heaven nor
i^ Earth? And, whether any now in your day is found worthy in Earth to do that,
which John in the Lord's day saw no man in Heaven or Earth was found worthy to
do, ye^ or nay?

Que. 9. Whether is not the Prison an^ the Prisonhouse, the seat of Sin, and
habitation of Corruption? Or, Is darkness an^ the shadow of death the Purgation
from Sin, for the Redemption out of Death? Do you not know that the Seed is in
Prison under the Clouds of darkness, through Sin and Corruption, in each one of
you, yea or nay?

Que. 10. Whether have you Salt and Savor in your selves? If you know not
that it is in you, are you otherwise fit but to be cast out and trodden under
foot of men?

Que. 11. What are the two Witnesses, of whom it was said, That they should
again prophecy? Whether are they not yet come, or, how know you but they be
come?

Que. 12. Whether is the Creation of Jerusalem anew unto you in Rome, in the
old Age of your sins, which the Hebrews shall enter into, according to Isaiah's
Prophecy, and which the Saints of the Most High are now entered into, according
to John's Prophecy, where nothing that defiles can enter? And, whether is this
any other than that which the Apostle said, the Hebrews were entered into, who
were come unto the spirits of just men made perfect, yea or nay?

The Prophecy is become unto all (says Isaiah) as a Book that is sealed.
Friends, spur up your Colleges to answer me; For, if once your Chariot wheels
are clogged in the sand, and your Host troubled, know, that Judgment is nigh,
and the Floods will soon close and join hands over your heads.

Dispensed from the Inquisition-Prison in Rome. J. P.

THat which is done in secret, shall be preached upon the house top; For the
Bed is too short, the Covering is too narrow, the Nakedness is seen; strip off
the Fig Leaves, they hide not; the Line is stretched, but yet the Stone is
sealed. Nevertheless, if you will come forth, come forth; if you will enter,
enter; come and be as a Roe and Heart upon the Mountains, to run and read me, to
grow to the understanding of a Proverb, and the Interpretation thereof; the
words of the Wise, and their dark sayings: For behold, there comes a Nation of
a deeper speech than ye can perceive, of a stammering tongue, that you cannot
understand; they shall break over Walls, and climb upon the tops of Houses, and
enter in at the Windows of the Closets; A fiercer People has not been, says
the Spirit of the Prophet.

The Trumpet of the Lord of Hosts is sounding the Alarm; his dreadful day is at
hand; the dead in Christ have heard, and are partakers of the first
Resurrection: He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear, and Repent.

Rome, dispensed from the Inquisition-Prison. J. P.

To the Pope, and Governor, and the rest ruling in the City of Rome.
Friends,
IN your places it is necessary, that you consider that which is indeed above
all things honorable. I crave not the breaking off the yoke of my bonds at
your hands, as being assured, that your hands were bound of the Lord, thus far
unto my Imprisonment, that you by the means thereof might have knowledge how
you are bound with the Chain of Satan, under the Curse through Sin and
Transgression; the LIGHT being come, declared and testified unto you;
henceforth you have no more cloak for your sin. This I desire, not of you, but
concerning you of Him, which opens, and no man shuts, that the Prisoner in
you, in the Prisonhouse within, which sits in darkness, under the shadow of
death, may be set at liberty, and come forth with the high praise of GOD in his
mouth; This I offer unto you, that I might know either by your willing, or
nilling, whether you exceed, or fall short of the Nobility of the Bereans, who
searched the Scriptures to know the truth of the matter; and the Athenians in
hearing Paul, though first they called him babbler? either to let your Colleges
give me a Public Dispute, or to give me a Meeting by way of audience, of the
Utterance which GOD may give me; or at least, to provoke them to answer the 31,
and the 12 other last Queries, which I gave forth of this Prison, else you may
be assured, as truly as I know, although all the former were granted, that this
is the prick which was too hard for Paul to kick against, and so is now unto
all Nations, you, as well as others; But of a truth I tell you, though you may
say that you will not hear, the next Generation shall preach my Testimony in
the Streets, and not withhold their Cry in the Gates of the High places. And
this is the Word of the Lord God to you all.

From the Inquisition-Prison in Rome. J. P.

To Fabius Guisius Pope of Rome.
Fabius Guisius,
THe Outstretched Arm, and exercise of the Hand of Cruelty unto Death, is not
able to make me to daub a dirty Wall with untempered Mortar. The impudent
wicked carriages of the Priests Instruments under thee, which are set to watch
over me, do not in the least move me, save only to tell thee, therein they are
not an honor unto thee; but on them I may not altogether lay the weight of the
matter, as knowing, that they are but as saudred Pipes of Lead, prepared for
the Vent and running forth of the stinking corrupted waters, of the Priests
malice, wrath and envy, forasmuch as the Truth has reproved their Iniquity;
And as for the others, they are not worth the naming. But as touching thy
Priests, some I have found in swearing, others in lying and dissembling,
flatteries and hypocrisy, which all are sheltred under the shadow of thy skirt.

Now consider what thy Power does uphold, a Liar and a Priest, a Priest and a
Liar; a Dissembler, a Flatterer, a Hypocrite, and a Priest. Does thy Law
preserve such in liberty and out of Prison (who are in Death's Prison) to watch
over the Just, which cannot lie unto thee, nor dissemble, nor flatter with
thee, though in Prison? If thou be Peter's Successor, show me Christ's Command
unto him for such a practice? else be thou ashamed of it, and deny thy Priests
in their wicked practices: For Truth is ashamed of all rottenness and
wickedness, deceit, lies, and corruption; but it is not ashamed to stand before
thy face, neither does it fear the frowns of all the wicked Powers and Princes
of the whole Earth; but in Prisons, Persecutions, Tortures, Banishments, or
Death, it stands over them all, and rejoices over them all, and treads upon
the head of the Serpent, which seeks to bring to pass his vain imagination in
or by them all. Wherefore I would not that thou should be a Fool, to sit in
the Council of the number of the Crafty and Wise; but rather be wise, and bow
to the innocence of Fools, and then thou will discover the ground of the works
of the others matter.

Now let me reason with thee concerning my Imprisonment, which if thou
answerest Nay; saying, We have it under thy Hand, and it is enough unto us.

I reply, It Is true, I have given under my hand the Declaration of a VVitness
and Testimony for GOD against Iniquity; for which cause, if God has foreseen
it, that the perishing of this Tabernacle under thy Bonds of Cruelty shall be
my Crown, when the day comes that Inquisition shall be made after my innocent
blood, let this, with the rest, be produced, that the Action may be openly
remonstrated. Truth, Honesty, and Wisdom would implead, act, judge, and execute
the Judgment of the Law of God, in Form, Manner and Order, and to the proper
end that it was given forth; and not in blind holes and corners, and dark
Cells, as are wrought the works and deeds of the Devil; but openly and
manifestly unto, and before all, as in the Righteousness of Him, which rippeth
open the secrets of al^ hearts, and brings every man's actions to be
discovered by the Light, in which the Magistrate, Judge and Ruler, which
judges and rules for GOD, stands in the honor of the true Dominion, a
Praise unto the living GOD, and openly to the Glory of GOD, reigns in the
Righteousness of GOD, in dealing and executing his Sentence of just Judgment,
through the convincement of the Transgressor, openly by the Law; and so he
stands a terror to evildoers, and a praise to them that do well.

If I have written, or spoken any thing, which I cannot sufficiently prove
(openly in the Court of Justice, where Truth reigns) to that of GOD in every
man's Conscience, then (as I have said) as the Law of GOD was given forth for
due and public impleading and execution, through open Convincement) let me
bear the everlasting open shame, and spare not by due punishment, to make me a
public Example in the face of this Nation, as a slanderer.

For again, I say, I delight in the execution of the Righteousness of true
Judgment, but if thou will not in Equity hear this, Then hear thou moreover
the Word of the LORD GOD; GOD by the execution of his Justice upon thee, will
shorten thy days upon the face of the Earth, and give thee for an example of
his Wrath before men. Therefore whilst thou have time, Repent. This is the day
of thy Visitation.

And forasmuch as at several times I have given forth Forty two Queries, or
more, to be answered by the Members of the Colleges in Rome, or others; And
having sufficiently expected, forasmuch as considerable time since that has
passed away, which in less time, yea, much less, Truth would have answered so
plain a matter; but having not received answer from any of them, I now query to
thee, who art reputed as the Angel over them, as him which has the Keys of the
Kingdom, which I would first try (because of the diversity of Voices in the
Earth, crying, Lo here, and lo there) and in spirit be convinced of the same,
before I would (as a foolish rash hypocrite) confe^s without knowledge or
understanding; as knowing that when Truth has convinced, the mouth of the
Gain-sayer is stopped, and that of God in the Conscience is answered, and the
measure of the Manifestation of the Spirit of Tru^ bears witness within unto
the Truth, b^ which all are left without excuse; an^ therefore in thy thoughts,
by thy Answers leave me without excuse; or else know That hereby thou art left
(even as all the rest that will not answer Truth, for Trut^ and the Lord's
sake, are) without excuse.

Query 1. What is the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Light of the
glorious Gospel, which gives the Ligh^ of the Knowledge of the Glory of GOD in
the face of Jesus Christ? And, what i^ the everlasting Gospel of God, which
shall be preached to all Nations of the Earth* And, whether have thou immediate
Authority from God, to send forth any to preach it; or, if knowing what the
Gospel is, Is it any thing less than thy duty to go forth and preach it, yea
or nay?

Que. 2. What is that flaming Sword which is set at Edens Gate, to keep the Way
of the Tree of Life, that not any in the state of Transgression, and nature of
Corruption may taste thereof; which he that eats not thereof in this Life,
shall perish unto everlasting Death, at the end of his Life? And declare,
whether there is no difference, or, what is the difference in the nature,
ground, and substance between that Sword, the Blood of the Lamb, the Cross of
Christ, Purgatory, and the Fountain which is set open for Judah and Jerusalem
to bath and to wash in?

Que. 3. Whether they who have bathed in the Fountain of God, and washed in the
Blood of the Lamb, that have born the Cross of Christ, unto the crucifying of
the nature of the Corruptible and Mortal, and that have passed through the
flaming Sword, shall enter into any other Purgatory? And what did Enoch pass
through, to attain to the perfection of living and walking with God? And,
whether was, or is Salvation more than one since the Fall; seeing the matter
thereof is but one, and God the All, but one, and his Promise one, and
unchangeable to save out of the Fall, yea or nay?

Que. 4. Whether did Christ come to work Salvation for Souls, through the
imprisoning the Just, or captivating Souls; seeing the Scriptures say, that he
came to open the Prison doors, and to bring forth the Prisoner? How may it
honestly be said that thou art Peter's Successor, in the Truth, or the
Vicegerent of Christ; who contrary to the end of the Coming of Christ, the
Life, Practice and Example of Christ, do profess and practice that which
brings dishonor to the Name of CHRIST? And, answer, By what would thou have
me to know a Vine branch from a Thorn-tree?

Que. 5. Whether is thy Nation grow^ in Righteousness unto the Age of the
Beaut^ of Holiness? or, Are they even ripe unt^ Judgment, in the multitude of
their Oaths Curses and Blasphemies, Pride, Whoredoms and Adulteries, Lies, Envy
an^ Hypocrisies, in the full growth of all manne^ of Abominations and Iniquity?
Can tho^ show me one Member of thy whole Bod^ which now is as Nehemiah the
Captain of the Lord's People, and as Nathaniel, the tru^ Israelite, was, that I
may have unity wit^ him? else, who, what, and where think thou is the Church
of Christ?

Que. 6. Whether, and in what manne^ have thou passed from under the Reign an^
Dominion of Death, unto Moses's house* And, show me the testimony of thy
Stewardship in his house, and the seal of thy passage through his house into the
way of the Prophet^ life, and the mark of the way, and signet of the Prophets
life leading to John Baptist's cry in the Wilderness, and the Record of his
Baptism to be of God in thee; and how thou have been emptied from Vessel to
Vessel, unto the perfect loss of the scent of the old lees? which if thou
can not show me the true effect of this work in thy life, whether in thy best
profession of all the writings of thy dead fathers, and the confession of the
Scriptures of the holy Prophets and Apostles, Art thou any other than (as Paul
says) a boaster in another man's line, made ready to thy hand, yea or nay?

Que. 7. Whether have thou the true Eye of discerning, to trace the way of a
Serpent over a Rock? Do thou know the course of a Dolphin in the Deeps, or
the path of a young Dolphin in the shallow Waters? And, by what line would
thou measure their way? And, with what Instrument can thou measure the path
of the first flight of a young Dove through the Air and shadow of the Heavens?
If thou know not this, how know thou to take the Wings of the Morning, to
meet the Sun in the South, to be at rest with the Children of the Day, where
the light of the Moon is as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun as
the light of seven days, the everlasting Sabbath of God?

Answer these with the Life of Truth, if thou will have me believe that thou
art Peter's Successor in the true Faith; But wherein thou art unable, honestly
confess it, hear me, and come out of Prison and I will instruct thee in the way
of God more perfectly. Let all thy men of Learning take heed of high obstinate
perverse wills and froward hearts; And take you all heed, lest a root of
bitterness, and spirit of envy be in you; and learn this, Wherever you see a
persecuting spirit, know always that that spirit is not of God.

Rome, given forth of the Inquisition-Prison. J. P.

TO all in ROME, from the highest to the lowest, that are settled in sin, and
will not hear to come out of the way and nature thereof, who walk in the path
of Iniquity, in the love of Transgression, and say in your hearts, Who is of
God that we should hear him? whose liberty is in the lust and pleasure, in
persecuting the Just, walking in the broad way, which leads to endless
destruction, under the seal of everlasting wrath; and will not hear to know and
enter into the strait path of life, in which the wayfaring men, though fools,
cannot err therein; And in your hardness against GOD you think that you are
above all men, wise in your sinful ways; you are wise unto evil, but not in
the good which comes from God; who will not hear, to be turned from all evil;
but shut your eyes, and stop your ears, and make Vows as sealed Bonds together,
crying, Away with it, Away with it, We will have none of it; not considering
the days of old, how the Messiah came according to the Prophets, yet contrary
to the Jews expectations, and in cross to all their Lusts and Inquities;
Wherefore they took counsel of their own Wills, and slew Him. And now I do but
in the Substance testify unto you, That CHRIST the Light of the World is come
and coming (according to the Apostles Testimony of Him) the second time without
sin unto Salvation, which is contrary to your Expectations, under the blackness
and darkness of the clouds of your sins and transgressions, under which you
cry, We will not, We will not; And every man in his hardness utters his
sentence saying, Persecute, persecute, Imprison, imprison; as it was in all
Ages, He that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that wa^ born after the
Spirit, even so it is now; and thus rendering evil for good, you plat the Crown
of the Thorns of the cruelty of you^ hearts upon the head of the Innocent an^
Just.

This therefore is your Condemnation LIGHT is come into the World; but ye ha^
the Light, and love Darkness rather tha^ Light, because your deeds are evil:
For whosoever loves the LIGHT, brings his deed to the LIGHT, that by the LIGHT
the may be made manifest. The LIGHT is all your Consciences is your
Condemnation within, who hate the Light, and will no^ come to the Light, by the
Light which convinces of sin, to be led out of all sin: Verily I say unto you,
neither Wit, Craft no^ Guile, the Horse nor his Rider, Sword, Bo^ nor Battle,
nor Angels, nor any other creatures, but the Light (which you hate and
persecute the Witness of it) shall deliver in the day of Wrath which is near
you And this is the Word of the LORD GOD to you all, Remember you are warned
Therefore whilst you have time, Repent and henceforth blot out the vain
imaginations of your minds, and let it be written upon the table of your
hearts. If God's Everlasting Covenant be changeable, then may our cruelty
change them from the Lord their God.

Given forth in fear and trembling, before the God of all dreadful Power. From
the Inquisition-Prison in Rome. J. P.

THese are to this blind-hearted Generation, which are smooth to the rough, and
rough to the smooth; and cannot discern the rough from the smooth, the crooked
from the straight, the right from the left; Your love, the love of the
everlasting Father holds in an irreconcilable hatred; for ye love the smooth
words of the men of this world, which stand in the rough places of the Earth;
Ye love their Titles, Daubings, Flatteries, Dissimulations and Hypocrisies, and
your selves smooth in the same nature, unto this their nature of roughness; But
ye are rough to the smooth, which deal with you in honesty and plainess, which
are not smooth to your rough nature of dissimulations; Wherefore you are rough
in your consultations, secret reports and actions, and bend your selves in
crookedness, against the streightness of the smooth things of Gods Kingdom;
Your hatred the LORD despises, even as your love he hates; For the thing
which you hate, is the seal of the love of the Father, to be holden in love
unto death, as a testimony against the roughness and crookedness both of the
love and hatred of your Life; you love not to come unto the smooth stone of
David, which sank into the forehead of the Philistine; The Philistine lives in
you, and curses the Dominion of the GOD of David; he spoke roughly to the
smooth thing in the Stripling; but the smooth did smite his roughness: even so
must it be by the Philistine in you, ere the GOD of David be known, to be God
among you. And this is to you all, that the smooth, which is rough to the
smooth thing of God, may dye in you, that the Lord's smooth thing may live, in
dominion over the rough things of the Earth.

Rome, dispensed from the Inquisition-Prison. J. P.

To a Franciscan of the Irish Convent in Rome.
Irish Priest,
THou have desired something from me, that thou may answer it; And I hereby
proposing, let thy own words stand thy own obligation, to be as faithful in
answering, as thou were forward in promising. I have sometimes born witness
unto diverse of you Priests of the Roman Catholic Assemblies, manifestly
showing unto you, how that CHRIST is the LIGHT of the World, which lights
every man that comes into the World; and unto that LIGHT in all your
Consciences, approving my Message, and the Testimony of the Faith of JESUS
(which I hold in a pure Conscience) to be of GOD, which in you all shall stand
a Witness for me everlastingly unto Judgment, though now you rise up as false
witnesses against it; and so bear false witness against me, and will not come
unto the Light, that you may have Life; but do choose to your selves the ancient
path of the Serpent's way, settling your selves in the inventions of your own
hearts, lurking in the secret dens of craft and subtilty, stretching out your
hands in the corrupted fallen, apostatized Policy, and so whatever is brought
forth by you, is but the birth or age of Iniquity. Diverse of you have confessed
unto me, and lastly, as next unto this present time, Thou did acknowledge
that there is not one of all your Catholic Church, which is restored unto
Innocence, or redeemed from sin, and the daily act of transgression; and then I
showed thee, if not one in Innocence, then all in the contrary, which is
Iniquity; If all in the daily act of transgression, then all wallowing in the
miry place in the apostatized ground, fallen from the Life of the Lord Jesus,
who leads out of sin.

Now therefore understand, you who are settled in the obstinacy and perverseness,
and hardness of heart; Read your unbelief and the desperate end thereof, who
will not that the Devil's kingdom should come to an end in you; you may have
all the words of Christ and the Apostles, as the Jews had Moses and the
Prophets, and yet perish in the same desperation, through refusing to come unto
Him, who is the Life; You may say, The Lord lives, and yet therein be false
swearers, as said Jeremiah; You may have all tongues and many gifts, you may
give all your goods to the Poor, and your bodies to be burnt, and yet want the
Charity, says Paul: You may (as the Magicians of Egypt) show many Signs, yea,
and in the Name of CHRIST, Preach in the Streets, do many wonderful things, and
cast out Devils, and at the last day say, Lord, these things have we done in
thy Name: But not coming unto the LIGHT and LIFE of CHRIST, which leads out of
Iniquity, and to dwell in the LIGHT unto the End, above Iniquity; Unto such I
will profess unto them, I know you not, depart from me ye cursed workers of
Iniquity, says Christ: What therefore avails your Doctrine? what also has
it profited any of you, in confessing so much of Truth unto me, saying that my
words are true and just, and are as Jewels and Diadems, and Precious Stones,
and ought exceedingly to be owned and honored, Except you come to the Life and
Truth of the Substance from which they were offered unto you? not that you
should catch at the shadow and shell, as the Hypocrites in the whole Earth, who
are smooth in confessing and saying, but cursed in doing; for know ye, that it
is one thing to be enlightened, and to walk contrary to the Light, in such the
Light is their condemnation; and another thing to dwell and walk in the Light,
in which God dwells, in such the Light is their justification: You may read
the declaration of another man's state without you, but cannot read more than
your own states, with a true witness within you; you may dream of sweet Wine,
but be awakened unto a potion of Wormwood. There cannot be plainer proof than
the Witness of your own Confessions, to conclude your Professions of God
vanity; your wicked sinful life, a scandal to Honesty and all Truth, and of
Christ, but an occasion of the contempt of the reproachful shame and ignomy,
which sometime past I have in my understanding read among the Turks and Jews.
Ponder these things, and be awakened, and in spirit be provoked unto Holiness,
which stands not in the wilful afflictions and penance, heaped upon the vessel
of the creature, Man, or by hanging down the head like a Bulrush for a day, but
by a due and diligent search of the hidden man, coming unto the Judgment of
Truth, and revelation of the Indignation and Wrath of the Lamb, which is
slaughtered in the streets of Mystery Sodom, That you may come to the Testimony
of the DAY of Vengeance, and the acceptable Year of the LORD; until which, the
works of your wills in all your daily services, are but as the offering of the
sacrifice of Cain, who killed the Just.

And furthermore, hereby I give you to understand, That there are but two Seeds
known unto all in the Substance, two Wills, two Natures, two Spirits, and each
of them the ground and root which yields the fruit of good or evil in all,
whether Prayers, Preaching, Plowing or Planting, even all which is brought
forth within, or without, by either of them; the one, the Redemption out of the
Fall, and from the ground of the first Apostasy in lost Adam, and the
Restoration unto the first state of Innocence; the other, the Plant of
Perdition, which holds in the Captivity, even all the Professors of the Name of
Christ, who are alienated from the Life of Christ in the ground of the second
Apostasy, under which you have concluded your selves, as Christ said, The Tree
is known by the fruits; which thing well understood by you in heart, and
faithfully owned in life, would put a stop to all your vanity of enquiring
after more things, until first you have found, and do come to live in the one
thing, which is only needful unto Salvation, with which all things else come to
be possessed.

Nevertheless, to thee I query a little concerning your Doctrine, Practice, and
Example, to be plainly and particularly answered in writing, by the words of
the Declaration of the Doctrine, Life, and Example of Christ, or any of his
holy Apostles, as written in the Record of their Scriptures, of which some were
given forth before the Apostasy came in, and others before it fully entered and
came in, prophesying the full succession thereof: What since them is brought
forth among you, thou may omit to mention in thy Replication: for I know
your spirit, and do also know what you can, and do live unto; and this (as the
former to your Body) for the Truth's sake simply I give forth, that if happily,
thou and the rest may come down from your Mountain into the Valley of
Jehosaphat, unto the Righteousness of the Judgments of the LORD of the whole
Earth, who else with Vengeance will dash you in pieces as a Potter's Vessel.
Remember you are warned to prize your time, and Repent.

Query 1. Why call ye Christ, LORD, and do not the things which he says?

Que. 2. Why delight ye Priests to wear long Robes, like as the Scribes and
Pharisees?

Que. 3. Why delight ye in Salutations, and Greetings in the Marketplaces, and
love the Uppermost Rooms at Feasts?

Que. 4. Why love ye to be called of men Lords and Masters, or to call men
Lords and Masters?

Que. 5. How can ye believe in Christ, who seek the honor which comes from man?

Que. 6. Why teach ye for Doctrine the Traditions of men?

Que. 7. What Precept of CHRIST, or President of the Apostles, have you to
warrant your worshipping before graven Images, or painted Figures?

Que. 8. What Precept of CHRIST, or President of the Apostles, have you to
warrant the owning and conf^ssing of more than ONE Intercessor, Advocate, and
Mediator?

Que. 9. By whom was it prophesied or practiced, as in the Declaration of
Truth, and Record of the Scriptures, That, besides Prayers for all Saints in
the Churches, Prayers should be made unto any Saints in Heaven, seeing CHSIST
taught, Not unto Himself henceforth, but only to the Father in his Name?

Que. 10. What Precept of CHRIST, or President of the Apostles, have you to
warrant often Repetitions, and vain Bablings? and to yield unto God in your
manner, but one Prayer of eleven? that is to say, Ten Ave Mary's, and but One
Pater Noster.

Que. 11. What Precept of CHRIST, or President of the Apostles, have you to
keep count of the tale of your Prayers, by Bracelets, or Beads upon strings?

Que. 12. What Word of the Record of Truth have you to warrant a place of
Purgatory for Sin after this life, under that cloak granting liberty to your
selves to sin unto death?

Que. 13. What Word of GOD, or Precept of CHRIST, have you to warrant unto any
soul which requires a reason of you, to show how possibly can any one of you
sanctify Bread and Wine, to dispense it under the denomination of a Sacrament;
seeing you are all confessed to be of corrupt hearts and unclean hands, which
never could touch the holy thing?

Que. 14. What Precept or President recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, have
you to warrant the Administration of Water, sprinkled upon Infants with unclean
hands, in the corruption of your hearts, to be the Baptism which takes away
the Original Sin? How is the Original taken away from any one, whilst the life
of you all is a continual issue, and open fountain of all sin?

Que. 15. How can an evil heart bless any thing? or the spirit of Satan make
Holy Water? Which of you being daily washed in that Water, will it cleanse from
the Corruption and rottenness of his heart?

Que. 16. What Precept of CHRIST, or Doctrine of the Apostles, is your Warrant
to deny the general use of the Scriptures of Truth among your Church Members;
and to allow Books of lying Stories, and Tales, and beastly Songs, and
bewitching Plays and Sports, and such abominable beastly things openly in the
Streets, and in Houses, as are not meet to be named?

Que. 17. What Precept of CHRIST have you to call men Fathers upon Earth?

Que. 18. What Prophecy is there recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, for the
succession of Popes, Cardinals, Chaplains, White-Fryars, Black-Fryars,
Gray-Fryars, Jesuits, Nuns, and Queristers, to come in the Truth?

Que. 19. What Precept or President have you in the Scriptures of Truth, to
worship in Idols Temples, made with hands, there seeking GOD, where GOD
dwells not?

Que. 20. What Scripture is it, that warrants your going Processions?

Que. 21. What Scripture-Example have you for your Begging Brothers going about
(hood-winked and disguised, with Money-Boxes, and others with great Wallets and
Wine-bottles) from house to house a begging?

Que. 22. What Example in Scripture have you, which shows that the Saints and
Apostles in the Primitive times did live in the observation of the Days or
Times of CHRIST's Conception, and with his, also of one another's Day yearly of
Births or Deaths?

Que. 23. What Commandment of GOD have you, for the time called Lent, and in it
the abstinence from flesh; and so in like manner sixth and seventh days of the
Week always besides, commanding it under the Judgment of Penalty?

To be brief, I would draw to the understanding of the Root of a Matter, which
ought in Wisdom principally to be known in you all, that you may know your
Root, of which I have seen much, as ye daily bring forth the fruit thereof.

Que. 24. Whether the spirit of Oaths, Envy, Lust, and Lies, is not of the
ground and original root of Heresy, yea or nay?

Que. 25. Whether that Spirit has not an absolute and instant Ground, and Root
universally (according to Confession) in your Body, yea or nay?

Que. 26. Whether is not all things, which are contrary to the Doctrine and
Life of CHRIST and his Apostles, absolutely and undeniably Heresy, and that
(assuredly) Opinion, which is the lesser, as practice, which makes it greater,
and they both but one in the Ground and Nature, yea or nay?

Que. 27. What Rule of Truth, or Precept in the Scriptures of Truth, have you
to condemn any man as an Heretic, which denies your evil spirit, and in the
Life utterly abhors all your beastly works, and wicked words, brought forth
by the spirit of Heresy? And, to what purpose, think you, stands the
judgment of your spirit?

Do thou mind thy blind-hearted brother, Thomas Courtney, of these things, who
told me, that Heresy (speaking of some Opinion) was a worser sin than Murder;
which weighed in the deeps, lets to see, that it breaks a gap for more evil
than a thousand of the like his lines is able to reconcile: the which was his
ignorance; as if Murder were not the most abominable desperate act of
wilfulness against GOD, and a man's Neighbor, brought forth by the spirit of
Heresy? which spirit abounds in all your Coasts, which is the real cause of
all the Oaths, Curses, Lies, Dissimulations, Hypocrisies, Drunkenness,
Gluttony, Adulteries, Pride, Covetousness, Envy, all Uncleaness, and Murders,
brought forth innumerably in your Land; For which cause, if you had all Words,
and understood all Mysteries, yet the Saints, interested in the simplicity of
Truth, dwelling in GOD, cannot join hands with you, to partake of your spirit,
and so of your evil deeds, and lastly of the Wrath to be revealed, which the
Lord God in his Counsel has determined shall sweep a secure Land.

When lastly thou were with me, I saw that thy visage was none of thine own, as
always unto thy own, I desire not to judge thee rashly; but let me exhort thee,
saying, Carry not a Bears Paw under thy long Gown, nor a Lion's Tooth within
thy mincing Lips; thy words, many of them, were as smooth as sweet Butter and
fresh Oil, but see thou that under thy tongue there be not hid the poison of
Asps, in such things, as in the rest of the dead works, signs, shows, and
noises, as the Magicians of Egypt, about the Walls of the Prison, and elsewhere;
you may (as they themselves did) deceive your selves also, but by all these
things, neither in my self, nor in you, am I at all deceived. Settle your
selves in Council, I am bound within Walls, yet, blessed be the LORD GOD, I
savor the deeds of darkness, and many of them would not be of good report to
be told among your selves: You know that I bear all the folly, as being (...)
your V^ssal to that end; but you know not how I trample upon the fruit, and the
spirit which yields it.

From the Inquisition-Prison in Rome. J. P.

To the Inhabitants of the bloody City, the Mother of Cruelties and Murder.
REad the Declaration of the Righteousness of this Cause, let it be spread in
an open Parchment upon the Standard of your Host, and let it be marked in your
Ensign, as a perpetual shame in the face of your Camp.

There was a certain Message sent by the hand of a Servant, by the LORD of a
strong Army, who treated for the Surrender of the City: He came not as a Coward
to hide in a hole, nor as treacherous to slay in secret; but to deliver his
service to the Chief, to depart with the Answer of the Head of the Land. He was
foolishly entreated by the hands of the jealous, and il^ handled by the
doubtful and timorous hearted; they bound a Man of War in Chains, and rejoiced
often to smite him with rotten sticks; they chused not to plead with him in
open field, nor to deal with him, as do the Valiant and Honorable; they bound
him in their seat of contempt, and sent Scorners to view him in secret; he
looked at the works of their hands, and wrote them in the soals of his feet; he
settled his heart in the righteousness of the Message of his LORD, and rather
chose the Chain of his Enemies Yoke, than to yield unto Cruelty and Flattery;
he was faithful to his Enemy in what he was sent, as he was to his LORD that
sent him; he washed his hands of the Blood of the City, and possessed the Peace
of his LORD.

What will you say for your selves when this Servant's Cause shall be publicly
pleaded to your faces? I know your purpose concerning the Heir, and the purpose
also of the LORD of the Vineyard, as the Reward of your wilful works: You have
been well warned, but you have not well received, but have ill rewarded and
requited: Yet in all I desire not that God may requite you, as ye have requited
me; and therefore I have Consolation, and you know not my Crown. The putrified
head of the corrupted body and rotten tail, yea, the whole body, even from head
to tail, I tread upon for ever.

J. P.
Rome, from the Inquisition-Prison.
To the Priests, appointed as Inquisitors and Keepers of the
Inquisition-Prisons thereunto belonging, A Visitation of the Lord God to you
all is come.
ARise, arise, It is high time to Awake and Arise from the Seat of Blood; For
the LORD GOD is arisen to make Inquisition for the Blood of every Innocent
Soul, which has been starved and slaughtered upon the face of the whole Earth;
Indignation flies with him as a pointed Arrow; Vengeance is in his Right hand
as a Spear for the Battle, and Wrath as a Dart to pierce the Liver of the
Wicked; The LAMB is arisen for Slaughter, as a Lion to devour the Prey; a
Burning fire proceeds out of his mouth, The Ungodly shall be consumed before
him; and because Iniquity is plentiful in the Land, he hastes the Judgment of
the Day; neither Covering nor Cloud shall hide the Wicked; nay, nor the Clifts
of the craggy Rocks from the fierceness of his provoked Fury; He will smite
suddenly, even in a moment, in the Land, and bereave the habitation of the
Dweller; He will catch, as a snare in the night, and none shall deliver from
his Wrath; He will abide as burnings in the Earth, Corruption shall not dwell
in his Presence; the Evil-doer is for the Wine Press of his Wrath, but the Just
shall dwell in his Pleasures: It is at hand, It is at hand, the Day of
Vengeance of the LORD, according to the Prophecy: The abundance of Iniquity in
the Land, yea, the fullness of the measure of Sin, has dragged the fullness of
the determination of Time, for the Revelation of Woe in the Earth, and
Vengeance upon the Inhabitants thereof.

Long have you made Inquisition after evil for evil, and banished the good from
your Presence, and shut it up in the Dens of Dragons. Arise and draw out of the
ground of the Curse, where the righteous Blood of Abel was spilt; For your sin
is as Sodom, and your transgression as the evil of Gomorrah. Your Glory is the
Kingdom of this World; your Seats are as the dwellings of Princes: You have
fullness and ease in your houses, you eat not the bread of carefulness. You make
the miseries of others your mirth, and their mourning your song of rejoicing.
You stretch your Carcasses upon the burden of their sorrows, and take pleasure
to heap weight upon weight: You make the simple to bend at your Bow, and the
wayfaring man to bow at your beck. You stretch forth your necks in pride, and
bend your brows in presumption. You have slain the Lamb in your streets, and
trampled on his blood in your secret habitations. You crucify the Lord afresh,
and put him to open shame. You are not ashamed to say, Lord, though your lies
and your lightness abound. You have provoked the LORD unto Jealousy, and
raised his Anger by constraint. And therefore, behold, he comes, as with
Voices and Lightning, and will search your dark corners as with Candles: He
will rent the Coverings of your body, and set you as in the day wherein you
were born, and place you as Butts for his Shafts; even as you made the Innocent
your mark to shoot your Arrows at in secret: You are planted the Judges of the
Citadels, as the Chief of the Munitions in the Land, and as the principal
Castle of Refuge among all the Forts of the City: But the LORD will make the
Staff of your Trust as for a shout in Battle against you; your Wallings he will
make as a Wilderness, and your houses as an habitation of Bitterness; your
pleasant Dreams shall have their end in sorrows, and your Divinations of
gladness be finished with the compass of trouble; Unbelief hastes the Woe,
because Iniquity waxes ripe in the Land. And the LORD said unto Jonah, Go down
unto Niniveh, and preach: And Jonah cried in the City, Yet forty days, and
Niniveh shall be destroyed: And when Tidings came to the King, he questioned
not the matter, but considered the sins of the Land, and through Faith there
was Repentance found among them, and the Lord turned back his Anger, and spared
the City.

Remember your Visitation which is come from the LORD, in the day that you cry,
Peace, peace in the Land, saying, none evil shall happen unto us; had I turned
to another Land, the Lord would have had followed me with Storms, even as he
did Jonah with displeasure; And God, who said, Go unto Rome, said also, Thus
shall thou say: which things I have given forth among you, and am clear from
your works of Iniquity, and from the Blood of the Land and City, which else, as
the Lord lives in Judgment and Righteousness, he would have required the thing
at my hand.

Concerning your Judgment I have this at leastwise to say: You sit as Lords in
the Land, and your Wills are the Precepts of the People; You constrain your
words for a Law, and make Envy the Judge thereof; The mouth of Malice deals
the Sentence, for the instruments of Cruelty to execute your Wrath; You will
not that your Judgment be judged, for you deal it in craft among the simple:
but this the LORD wills, although you will not; I say the Lord wills it,
and it shall come to pass: For the LORD GOD will enquire after Judgment, and
bring Judgment as a spoyler of your Seat; You will seek to escape the Day,
which comes as a Thief in the night; But the LORD will compass you as Fish in
the Net, and entrap you as Birds in the snare; and you that have dug a Pit
for another, shall fall your selves therein: Judge, judge the sin of your own
hearts, and the liberties of your own lusts, and make inquisition after
Judgment, for the sake of the Righteousness of the Judgment of Truth, which
stands against the Iniquities of your life; and until it be perfected in you,
Judge not, lest you be judged; For ye have not received the measure in love,
for Judgment to justify you in the sight of GOD; and wanting the measure in
your selves, you heap up Oppression upon the head of another; and, wherein you
judge another, you are left inexcusable your selves; for, wherein you judge
another, you stand guilty of transgression in the self-same nature; yea, you
judge as the Jews judged Jesus, whom they blindly accused for Blasphemy, and
perversely condemned his Innocence, to cover their Seat of Iniquity. O man,
Judge thou another as an Heretic, and have thou Oaths and Curses in thy
mouth? Judge thou another for Heresy, and thou an Hypocrite and Liar in thy
life? Thou shall bear the burden of thy Judgment, for thy own spirit gave the
entrance, and yielded the increase of Heresy in the Earth, and thou shall not
be excused in the sight of the LORD GOD; And you shall all know, That the
Judgment of GOD is according to Truth, against every one that does evil.

Concerning your Restraints, let me show you the general Issues and Effects
thereof: A man that breaks the Covenant of your Wills, as having eaten Flesh
upon a sixth day of the week (which you call Venus day, after the manner of
ascribing glory to a Heathen Goddess) for so doing, or otherwise you offending,
though not against GOD transgressing, he is judged by you as a sinner against
your Church, and therefore receives the sentence for restraint in your
Inquisition-Prison-house; and then he is yours, as the wild Ass that is caught
in the Collar; and knowing the nature of your own lusts, you work upon the
strength of the same in another; you are experienced to deal with your own, as
the Falkoner to bring Hawks to the waving of the Lever. Man in the Fall (as
your Members have said, not one of you restored unto the first Adam's estate in
Paradise) dwells in the cursed ground of Corruption, Lust standing head over
the whole Life, which being a little curbed with your bridle of Restraint,
quickly languisheth in the Creature, and with it also the mind of the Creature,
unto the bereaving and robbing the false Rest; which, through the subtilty of
the Serpent, was planted in the Creature. A Sea of misery then flows into the
heart, and the mind gathers up the remembrance of the delight of every pleasure
that is past, and painfully pleads in it self; I have lost the fullness and
choice of the Bread and Wine, which I had in my liberty; here is no vent for
the performing of what my heart desires, either fullness or want does but heap
Woe upon Woe, in the Creature, which knows not a stay to the heart, nor a guide
to the affection of the mind; and then there is an outcry, according to the
Writings in the Walls, O Liberty, Liberty, without Liberty all is nothing; yea,
the fullness of all without Liberty, is but the Addition of Fuel to the Flame of
the Misery; Wherefore, says the Serpent, Thou know the Redemption, do this,
and thou reapest thy Freedom; for it is better to pass under the Confession
and Penance, which is but as it were for a moment, than to languish in this
Gulf of Affliction for ever: And then the Hypocrite arises in the heart, and
comes to the Confession of deceit, with watery eyes, and wringing hands, and
strong supplications to the Priests, and makes the moan of a burdened and
troubled Conscience and wounded Spirit, because of the Transgressions; and then
it says, Yea, with all my heart, Saint Mary, St. Joseph, and St. Anthony, St.
Francis, St. Dominick, and the rest of the Saints, which are written in the
Prison-walls, I will take for my Advocates, and holy Purgatory, and all the
rest; I believe as the Church believes, and gladly will I bear my Penance, that
my Conscience may be eased. Whilst all this is but the outcry of the Devil,
even of that wicked one, for the purchase of Liberty; I say, to purchase
liberty for the full exercise of the Lust; and when the Liberty is come, and
the Lust fulfilled therein, in Meats, and Music, and Wine, and Women, and
Pride, and Covetousness, and Lies, and vain Jesting, and Idle-talking, and
cheating, and double-dealing, and swearing, and cursing, and all manner of
mischief and abominations; then the pleasure is full, and the peace is
possessed, the delights are fulfilled, no sorrow remains, no conscience laden,
nor spirit burdened with affliction, because of transgression, but all is
accounted well, and he reckoned a good Roman Catholic: And then, what
commendations of the good of the Priests? and what commendations do the Priests
give of that Convert? Thus all rottenness is daubed up with dirt, and this is
the sum and fruit of the whole work; which things the LORD GOD will assuredly
and that most strongly plead, in the faces both of Priests and People, unto the
utter confusion of all hands, and deceitfulness of all corrupt hearts; who
knows how to deal with his own, and to deliver from the snare of the wicked,
whom you know not how to handle, to bring under the bent of your Bow: You are
warned of Gods mighty day, wherefore prize your time, and repent.

I also propound a few Queries unto you, to the end that you may give me some
plain and distinct Answer to each of them particularly, under your handwriting.

Que. 1. Whether are there more grounds in the nature, than two in the Earth
(that is to say) the good and the evil, the blessed and the cursed? And whether
the fruits of each ground, according to their nature, are not blessed or cursed
in the sight of God, yea or nay?

Que. 2. In what ground were your Inquisition Offices and Prisons, and the
Officers thereunto belonging, brought forth? and in which do they stand;
whether in the ground, as the fruit of the ground of the many inventions, which
brought the flood of destruction in the days of the generation of Noah, or
absolutely in the righteousness of the ground of God's Law, as given by the
Lord from Heaven, yea or nay?

Que. 3. In what ground is Persecution brought forth, which any man suffers
for the real sake of a conscience of God?

Que. 4. Whether can any such Persecutor truly discern, and consequently judge
the real conscience of God which is in another, yea or nay?

Que. 5. By what testimony of Truth, can you show me, That your Penance or
Prisons do mortify the flesh without Murder, or quicken the mind from every
motion of corruption, as freedom from the lusts of transgression?

Que. 6. Whether have you made inquisition after the Hypocrite and Heretic
within you? and show me how you have laid his Life unto the suffering of the
Penance of Christ's Cross, with the testimony of the effects thereof?

Que. 7. What was the Inquisition which CHRIST made after the Offense of the
accused Harlot, and the Judgment of the Harlot's Transgression? and, whether
do you judge with that, or contrary to that Judgment in your Inquisitions?

Que. 8. With what confidence can you judge the pure conscience of another in
the presence of the Lord, yea, or cast a stone at a transgressor, whilst you
your selves are found sinners?

Que. 9. What is that Unjust, in whose Eye is the Beam? and what is the Beam in
the Eye? and whether is not the Beam in your Eye, yea or nay?

Que. 10. What is the cause that a mote is judged by the Eye that is beamed?
And, what is the ground, root, original and principal cause of men's calling
good evil, and evil good? And, whether is not your fruit in the general a
testimony that you are in that ground, and that root in you in the ground which
yields the fruit of calling good evil, and evil good, in the particular, yea or
nay?

I love the Truth and Souls; but do hate a Lie and Deceit, with every evil way.

Rome, dispensed from the Inquisition-Prison. J. P.

To the Seed which is yet unborn in Rome, Salutation.
TO the Seed of that Woman which the Dragon drove into the Wilderness, over
whose sufferings many Generations have passed, which viewed them with an eye of
contempt. O Seed, I see thy travel of sorrows, and the sighings that compass
thee in the deeps; thou art swadled in the womb of affliction, and bound in the
belly of trouble; thou lie in the deeps of the raging Seas, the weeds are
wrapped about thy head; thou art as the bloodshed of Abel in the Earth, and
groanest in her bowels to the LORD thy Creator; thou dwell in the solitary
places, as hid in the hole of the Asp; thou art constrained in the Den of the
Dragon, and forced in the Cockatrice's dwelling; thou art as a Pelican in the
Wilderness, and an alone Sparrow sitting on the house top; thou art as a Be in
the holes of the Rocks, driven from the Hive of the Swarm; thou lie as a Lark
in the heaths of the Mountains, and as a Quail in the Stubble-fields; thou art
as a Wren in a Bush of Thorns, the Vulture soars over thee to devour; when thou
liftest up thine head for a flight the Kite does strike at thy life, the Hawk
does watch for thy rising, and the Gier-Eagle to devour the prey; Woe! woe! woe is
me for thee in this thy hour of Tribulation! for I bear thy wound in my body,
my soul is pained with thy grief; my belly is as a bro^k of bitterness, thou
art laden with the Hills of the Earth, and pressed with the Mountains of the
Wilderness; heaps of stones are laid for thy weight, and Rocks for the weight
of thy burden; thou art shut up in Prison, in the Prisonhouse, and sit
solitary in darkness, in the shadow of death; the bonds of death have bound
thee, and the Covenant with Hell has captivated thee; many do look at thee
with the countenance of mirth, and wag their heads at thy mourning; thou art as
a Lamb among Lions, and as a prey to the devouring beasts; thou art as a spoil
to the mouth of the Fox, and as a destruction to the teeth of the Wolf, the
wild Ass is offended at thy moving, and snuffeth up the wind in scorn of thy
breathing; the Bulls of Bashan do pursue thee with roaring, and push with their
horns at thy dwelling; thou art cast in the side of the way, and the Chariot
wheels run over thee; thou art placed as a But in the field, for the Arrows and
Darts to pierce thee; thou art the despised in the Earth, and mocked of men of
the World; thou art sold as a Slave into Egypt, and counted the outcasts of
Israel: though I have heard thy cry in the Land, and bear marks of the bleeding
of thy grief in my bosom, yet I want the greatness of the weight of Wisdom, to
measure the depths of thy misery; thou mournest as a Dove in the Deserts, which
has lost her only mate; thou weepest as the wayling of a Widow, and Mother
bereaved of her Children; thou cryest with the grief of the fatherless and
comfortless Child without Mother; thy mourning is as the cry of the Voice of
the Orphan, left without help in the Land; thy groans are as the languishing of
the Poor in the Earth, which wants the daily bread; thou lie in the fields
like a yeaned Lamb, by the side of a dead Sheep; sore are thy cries, as a
struggling Babe at the breasts of a dead Mother: Eye has not seen, neither has
ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of vain man to conceive the
weight of thy Woe and Passions, in all the days of thy Wrestlings.

Wherefore, O Seed, because thou have born the Indignation of the LORD for a
season, and waitest until it be over and past, and have not slipped thy shoulder
in the heat of the day, nor thy neck from the yoke in the stormy time;
Therefore has thy GOD, thy Creator determined the good of thy travel in the
Earth; He has said, Thou shall not always be as barren in the Land, but shall
yield thy increase in the Nations. O thou afflicted with the troubles of the
deeps which tempests have rouled to the bottoms! lift up thy head in the Joy of
the LORD, and be strong in the Power of his Might; for the Word of the LORD is
come down in the Earth, which was spoken by the Prophets of GOD; the LORD of
the Heavens has restored thy Mother, and pitched her as a Sanctuary in the
Earth; the Daughter of Sion is her Name, the Glory of GOD is with her; He has
given her a new threshing Instrument with Teeth, to thresh the Mountains to
dust, and to beat the Hills to powder; to seive the Vanity of the Nations, and
to fan the Earth with her strength; to be as a wound to every Wild-beast, and
destruction to the life of the Destroyer; to be a snare to the Fowls of the
Air, and a fire to devour the Devourer; to find out the Dens of the Earth, and
to open the holes of thy hiding; to break the bolts of the Prison-doors, and
the Chains of Death and Darkness; to make thee as freeborn in the Land of the
Living, to possess an Inheritance therein: And it shall be no more with thee,
as in the days that all men sought after thee for evil, and hunted thee for a
purpose of mischief and cruel end; for the LORD has sworn thy Salvation, and
covenanted thy Peace for ever; sighing and sorrow shall fly away from thee, and
thy tears shall be wiped from thine eyes, and the LORD will possess thee with
the Joy of Consolation, and thou shall reap Rejoicing as ripe Corn in the
Harvest; He will give thee Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of joy for mourning, and
the garments of praise for the spirit of heaviness; he will stay thee with
Flaggons, and comfort thee with Wine, and fill thee with the greatness o^ his
Love; thy habitation he will compass with increase, thy basket and thy store
shall abound; thou shall eat the food of the Angels of God, and be reckoned as
a Leader in the Land; thou shall spring up as a plant in a fruitful ground, and
thy branches shall overspread the Nations; thou shall be at the calling of the
Assemblies in the East, and the gathering of the People in the West; the Lord
will enlarge thy borders, and make thy dwellings as the fullness of the Cities
in the Earth; thou shall be as the Lord of an Host, and as the Captain of the
Army of GOD; Battles shall bend to thy Bow, and Hosts shall tremble at the
shout of thy Voice; thou shall stand as a dread in the Land, and a sign of
astonishment in the Earth; Princes shall tremble in thy presence, and the faces
of Kings gather paleness; the dread of thy Countenance shall fill all with
fear, the Heavens shall tremble before thee.

Arise, Arise my Love, why sit thou as dead in the night of slumber? And as
asleep amongst the Monuments of the Earth? Why shall Death be thy dwelling, and
the Night a Watch unto thee? Why shall thy face be veiled, and the Clouds thus
cover thy Glory? Though thou art but that small worm Jacob, and the Voice
cries, Who shall raise him? Yet, Arise, Arise my Love, and being raised, thou
art stronger than Armies, thou art more than the Camps of ten thousand Hosts
prepared in order for the battle. O arise and spread forth thy Comeliness, and
ravish the Virgins with thy Beauty, and fill their Lamps with the droppings of
thy Locks, which wait until the morning for thee; thy Presence is an Odor of
Perfumes, thy Word as a stream of Honey. O whereunto, whereunto shall I liken
thee, thou fairest of ten thousands! filled with the Glory of thy GOD? thy Feet
are the Foundations of the Earth, and thy Legs the Pillars of the Heavens; thy
Bowels, as a Cistern, hold the Waters of the Earth, and the Waters of the
Heavens as a Well: Thou sendest them forth as a running brook, and as streams
to refresh the Plant; Thy Reins are as the Virtue of God, which made man in the
glory of his Image; thy Belly is the Fountain of Judah, to wash away Sin and
Uncleanness; thy Thighs are as the Bats of the Fountains, and thine Arms as the
strength of GOD; thy Back is the Tower of Zion, and thy Breasts, the
nourishment of her Children; thy Body is the Temple of GOD, and thine Head the
Crown of his Saints; thy Hairs are as the Stars of Heaven for glory, and thy
Beard as the bright Clouds thereof; at thy neesing the Earth is in fire, and
the Heavens in a flame before thee; thy Soul is the Substance of the Creation
of GOD, and thine Eyes the Light of the Day; thy Teeth are as the Angels of GOD
in the Heavens, to fight thy Battle on Earth; thy ^outh is the Door of the
Counsel of GOD, and thy Tongue the Teacher thereof. O! the Earth, the Earth is
confounded before thee. I am as a Wren in the Earth, lost under the stretching
of thy Wing; I began in the shallow places, but am overwhelmed as a Worm in the
deeps of GOD; no man has comprehended thy Glory; wherefore let him bear his
Judgment for ever, that fashions thee like unto a graven thing, or that makes
an Image of thy CHRIST; Let him bear the perpetual shame of his folly, and the
judgment of thy dreadful Word; Let his own soul eat his confusion, and drink up
the dregs of his condemnation; for Glory is thine in the highest, who art only
known to the pure in heart, and remembered of the Upright in the Earth. An Image
is a mark of the unmindfulness of thy Name, and a sign of the forgetfulness of
thy Presence.

O Seed, stand up as a Sign to the People, and as an Ensign to the Nations of
the Earth, that they may be gathered to the Knowledge of the LORD thy GOD, to
remember Him as a God that is present, even at hand, for Judgment to the
Wicked, and Salvation of his own Elect.

Call, call for thy Courage, and cry aloud for thy Strength, and cloth thy
self therewith, as in the days of old; stretch forth thine Hand in thy Power,
and draw back the Clouds of the Night; Appear thou Sun of the Morning, as
settled in the Heavens above, that the Nations may flow to thy Light, and Kings
to the brightness of thy Rising; that the Isles may be gathered in one, to wait
for the Law at thy Mouth; that the tongue of the Egyptian Sea may be dried up,
and but One pure Language remain in the Earth; and that the Earth be filled
with the Knowledge of GOD, as Waters cover the Seas.

It was once said, and the Voice answered, Until how long? And the Spirit said,
Until the determination of the time appointed, even until the fulfilling of the
Abomination of Desolation in the Earth, and it seen to stand in the Holy Place.
Then said the Angel, The mighty Dreadful Day of GOD is at hand. Awake, awake to
the Judgment of the Terrible Day of the LORD. Fear GOD, and give Honor and
Glory to his Name. O that thine Innocence were known in the Land, and thy Love
received in the Earth! Thou art as the Innocent Lamb of the Flocks, and as the
Newborn Babe at the Breast; thou art as the Turtle which flies in fear, and
as her young in the Nest without guile; thy Love is as the Mother to her comely
Daughter, and as the Father to his only Son; thy Love is as the Spouse to her
Welbeloved, and as the Bridegroom wedded to his beautiful Virgin; it passes
the love of Women, thy Bonds are stronger than Death; thou bear the grief of
thy Love, for because of thy Love thou art hated: I love the love of thy Love,
and do bear the burden thereof; I love the bonds of thy Love, for because of
thy Love thou art bound; O make thy Love thy Battle, and the bent of thy Bow in
the Earth, that he which has pierced thee may mourn, and be broken in the
bowels of Love; that the Mountains may be melted before thee, and the Hills drop
down like Wax; and gather to the Body of Love, where neither Envy nor Lies have
life: Spread forth thy Arms in love, that thy measure be filled in the Earth;
For Scorners do hiss at the kindness of thine heart, and mock at the meekness
of thy mind; thine Arrows of Love be their wound, to pierce them to the heart
in their seat; Overcome with the Love which created, and perfect the Glory of
GOD; Make known thy Self as thou art, a Leader in the Righteousness of GOD:
Instruct the simple thy way, and confound the Prudent thereby: Thy Way is the
path of the Just, the sinner cannot walk therein; it is a Guide to the
Wayfaring-man, the Fools cannot err therein; The Wise do stumble in their
sight, and the Subtle do fall before them; which makes the Heathen rage, and
all the Diviners mad: Open, open thy Bosom to thy lovers, and thy Treasure to
the soul which seeks thee; which spares not Life from the Cross, nor Lust
from the flaming Sword, but lays the Neck at the Yoke, to yield the
Firstborn unto Death: Thy Treasure is the body of Wisdom, more pure than
refined Gold: Thy Wisdom is as the Oracles of GOD, and Counsel of the Most
High: Thou feedest thy own with the Life, with Wisdom the substance of Life:
The Swine feed on husks as a prey, and run to a shadow for shelter: In Winter
they wander in the Woods, and in Summer they wallow in the Mire: The Serpent
licks up the dust of the ground, and hides in a hole of the Earth; But thou
buildest a Nursery for Babes, and a Dwelling for the Sons of God; Thou make a
Bed for the Virgin, and she is kept as a Bride for the Lamb: Thou make the
simple as an Host, to battle with the Armies of Gog; thou give thy Counsel in
the Day, and the weak is made strong for the War: The Philistine flourishes
his Sword, but it is kept for the wound of his body: The weak turns back the
force of the Giant, and slays him with his own Sword; he takes not Glory to
his hand, but yields his heart to his GOD: By Wisdom the Kingdom is created,
and folded in secret from the Wicked; he which casts his Crown at thy feet,
thy Glory shall cover his head.

This is without respect to any man's person, whether Jew or Gentile in Rome, A
Visitation of the Love of GOD to the Seed; And be it his Woe for ever and ever
that keeps it back.

Dispensed from the Inquisition-Prison in Rome. J. P.

Righteous REASON, written as a REMONSTRANCE to Romes Rulers, Touching the
Imprisonment and Persecution of the Servant of JESUS.
ROME being called of her Inhabitants, The Head of the World, and Holy City;
and her Church, the Mother of many Nations, cried up as the most famous (in
Faith, Doctrine, Life, and practice of Righteousness, of the Lord Jesus) of all
Peoples upon the face of the Earth; To her Heads and Rulers therefore I am
willing to offer this entrance of the Remonstrance of my Cause, in a
compendious Tract, by the representation of Reason, the Rule of the Law and
Prophets, the Judgment of wise and holy Judges, the Commandments, Doctrine and
Example of the LORD JESUS, with what else occasionally may be intervenially
inserted in the same; to be placed as a Looking-glass of Equity in all the
Courts of Judicatory in her City.

I John the Servant of JESUS [in the holy and blessed Calling of the Quaking
and Trembling at the Word of the LORD GOD] upon the sixth day of the fourth
month, in the year, 1658, arrived in the City of Rome, with humble desire of
attaining sight and speech with the Pope; the which not foolishly, or
presumptuously did I seek; but in all sobriety and modesty, made orderly
proceed, in as many steps as I trod in the path of this progress; the which is
well known unto diverse of Eminent Report of your own Sect, within your City
Walls.

Forasmuch as first of all, I opened my desired Purpose, and said End, unto
Thomas Courtney, Jesuit, and English Confessor of Peter's, from whom I received
Advice, and, in due order thereunto, made exact progress, by passing, next and
immediately from him, to John Crey, Irishman, and Chaplain to the Pope; before
whom in like manner I spread my said Desire, as an unfolded sheet upon a smooth
floor. At which time several words passed between us, of which I retain a full
remembrance, though not esteemed of such weight, but may be waved at present,
to the end, Lines of more consequence, and more properly pertinent to the
instant purpose, may rule the side of my Paper; and therefore do proceed,
showing;

That upon the eighth of the said month and year, I was (by the Chief Marshal
of the City, and his Guard) taken out of Bed, in my Lodging, at the sign of the
Cock in Piazza Fornase, stripped of all things, except the Apparel which I
wore; and so at a late hour of the night was led bound to one of the New
Prisons, where the second day I was briefly interrogated by the Governor of
the City, who at the same time, verbally conceaded me consent to my Demand, of
a sudden, fair and public Trial at Tribunal of Law; the which Equal deed mine
Eye never saw put in execution and practice, unto this instant day of my
Restriction.

And it came to pass, that before six days were expired, with a second Guard I
was taken from thence, bound in a Coach, and transported to the
Inquisition-Prison; at which Office and Prison, diverse of your Ecclesiastical
Orders came to seek, and received full and plain speech from me: And after that
a short space of time had vanished, there was adhibited me a free and lawful
Privilege, (viz.) The solid, clear, and incontradicted License, to write my
mind in whatsoever thing I would; to which purpose, and as an Authentic
testimony of the same, him called the Father Commissary of the said
Inquisition, allowed me Pen, Ink, and Paper; with the use whereof I faithfully
forwarded the matter of clearing my Conscience, through a naked Explication of
the words of Righteousness, in sundry Manuscrips, and an Epistle general to the
Romans.

Moreover it came to pass, that I having been about 18. weeks close Prisoner,
in the said Inquisition, was the third time bound, and again in a Coach
transported from thence unto this Prison of Madmen; where I have rested (in
the Peace and Patience of the Lord Jesus, as one of his Innocent Lambs) under
much hardship and severity; the which I over-pass, pressing on in the Progress,
and succedently to show forth, (viz.)

Concerning my more than two years Persecution, under Authority of your
jurisdiction.

Known be it unto you, O all ye Heads, Rulers, and Judges of Rome, That there
was not an act done by me in your City (for which I am persecuted) which any
Law of God, or Precept of his Son Jesus Christ, does condemn; and am sure,
where Righteous Judges perspicuously understanding the matter, from no
righteous rational Law could judge, either worthy of Bonds or of blame; for the
things which your Sect do call Heresies, which were the Writings that were
found with me, though of a truth my Intention was naked to God (the which (when
apprehended) I hid not from you) to dispense them, as they were directed to
you, some folded, and others sealed; yet not any of the said Papers, being
actually dispensed in this your City, before I was Apprehended; consequently
not matter of Fact to be charged upon me, as transgression of a Law, and so not
worthy of these Bonds; the which you may plainly perceive also by the
succeeding illustrations.

First, From the word of Affirmation of one of your Fathers (a Confessor) unto
me, showing the Erection of the Inquisition by a Law, was not to persecute, but
purposely and properly to stop the in-courses of such things, as the said my
Writings, (which he reputed none other, but as a dangerous Impress of
Heresies,) the which when stopped, the Law was fulfilled, and in Equity, had its
uttermost end; and so much the clearer, because the matter was not a Fact
actual, but a purpose Intentional, the which no Righteous Law calls criminal,
seeing not any word therein was carnally evil, or, relating to any man's person,
mentally treasonable.

Secondly, Because that whereas in the Inquisition-Office (declared to be
erected for the prevention of the influences of Heretical and Schismatical
Opinions) was adhibited me, the free and lawful License and Privilege to Write
whatsoever things I would; the Righteous Judge in his Wisdom, will not impute
that thing unto me, as Transgression of the Law, in the City, which is a
licenced Privilege adhibited me, by the Ruling Power over the City.

Thirdly, Because it is well known, that not in any of my Papers, (which were
taken from me) there were words, (which your particular Judgments do esteem
Heresies) which you could call more dangerous Heresies, than in them which I
had free and lawful admission of Writing; whence the palpability of Reason,
infers the infallibility of Conclusion, not worthy (as precited) either of
Bonds, or of Blame; for before an entrance of the Sentence of Condemnation
might judiciously approach me herein, it would first take its proper Stage
rationally, to reach your own Members; and thereby, if the Law could implead
any at the Bar as a Transgressor, me, in mine Innocence, it would acquit, and
charge the guilt on the heads of them Heads, which at the last adhibited me the
free Liberty to Write, and so to dispense to you whatsoever I would; without
which I the Prisoner could not have done the thing acted.

Fourthly, Because the said later Writings, whilst I was a Prisoner, being
privileged, do in the perspicuity of Reason hold forth, That the former,
written whilst I was at Liberty, do stand with suitable assent of one of these
three, (viz.) first, Either according to your Law; or secondly, Not contrary to
the rule of your Law (that is to say) a Law not standing in potential record
against them; and to that, says the Apostle, Where there is no Law, there is
no Transgression; or otherwise, at utmost, you constantly avouching that they
were against your Law. Finally, the Rule of Equity stands to test, that of a
truth, it was your selves, which by the Act of Assent, first nulled that Law,
and so no more stands in force of a Law, to judge me now as a transgressour;
for, except that it were not against a Law, or that you had made void and null
that Law, which you may say, that my Writings were against; then, as aforesaid,
could not I have written the things which I have written in your
Inquisition-Prison?

Fifthly, Because that all Righteous Laws of GOD in Nations, touching Facts
Criminal, and Crimes Capital, are no more to one person particular, than unto
all men in general; And therefore my adhibition at last, to write things of the
same nature and purpose in Prison, which at first I did in the fruition of
Liberty, demonstrates, that your said self-nulled Law, (Under which (contrary
to the tenure of GOD's righteous Law) I am yet irrationally and compulsively
held in your house of Captivity) was not at first so much a stable Law, as an
aerie variable nicity; for that which (in such cases) adhibits to one, and
prohibits the same to another, is rather like a wind of vanity, than a body or
pillar of solidity, seeing that it will admit of the respect of persons in
Judgment, and consequently what equality there is, in restraining of persons,
more than two years, upon the account of a changeable curiosity, and aerie
nicity; judge thee, O thou righteous Judge, in the high seat of superiority.

Sixthly, Because the Eternal Spirit of Righteousness, my Maker, which
searches all hearts, and tries all reins; which is the greatest Witness of
all Witnesses, bears testimony in my spirit, that in all which I have
written, have stood, and do stand in my Conscience, clear, naked and void of
all and every part of a prejudicial mind, or conception of Envy, Wrath, Malice,
Scorn, or despightful Contempt of any man's person; neither have I thereby
wronged any man whatsoever; for all that is therein inserted, is none other,
but wholesome Admonitions, exciting to a more peculiar, holy, and blessed life,
toward GOD and a man's Neighbor; with certain solid, sober Interrogations,
which tend not to the custom of heathenish strifes and contests in the envious
and malicious spirit of bitterness; but purely, sincerely and reverently in the
humble spirit of fear of the LORD GOD, to the proper and sole end of the Glory
of GOD, through the Salvation of Souls, by his heavenly enlightening of
Understandings, with the Glory of his holy Spirit; And savoury reprehensions of
that spirit which sins, and testimony against the Evils of the Land, and the
insertion of sundry spiritual Mysteries of the heavenly Kingdom, with the
spiritual Witness of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; and nothing therein
contrary to the New Testament of GOD, the Blood of the Covenant, and immaculate
Life of the Lamb, nor any thing in opposition to that chaste Spirit of Sanctity,
which was in Mary, or any which was, or is, as that blessed Virgin was, which
(upon further and due trial) I am able (in the grace and power of GOD, and the
Life of our Lord Jesus) to make appear unto that of God in you, and all men
whatsoever (which my Language can understand) upon the face of the Earth; In
which thing being justified, First, by GOD which sent me. Secondly, By example
of the holy Prophets of old. Thirdly, By the practice of CHRIST and his
Apostles, which at large (through the Mercy of the Lord God Almighty) I am also
able to hold forth unto you (in the day of due trial) according to the
undeniable Record, and Witness of the holy Scriptures of Truth; And therefore
Righteousness says, Because that the nature of the matter was of a pure
purpose, should rationally have been recompensed by you with none other than a
pure and Christian-like practice.

Seventhly, Because the sweet savor and good report of our Innocence came to
your City before us, which God made diverse of your Ecclesiastical Members to
confess in plainness of speech to my face.

Eighthly, Because the Witness of GOD, which is greater than the Witness of
Man, testified in my spirit, That all my honest Queries, sweet and holy
Admonitions, pure Advertisments, and godly Reprehensions, proceeded from no
other, but as Crystal streams from the fountain of the Father's Love, which he
has made as a Well of Waters in my bowels; And principally, because that
Reprehension is an infallible token of the Father's Love to his Seed in all
Nations and Lands, testified by the Spirit to John the Apostle, saying, Whom I
love, I rebuke and chasten; be zealous therefore and repent.

Ninthly, Because it is the undeniable Duty of all men upon the face of the
Earth, to love the Rebukes of the LORD; as it is purely the LORD's Mercy, and
of his infinite Love, to send them as Visitations of his Love unto all Nations.

Tenthly, Because the resisting of the Rebuke, is the resisting of the token of
the Favor and Love of GOD; which renders men unworthy of the Love and Mercies
of GOD their Maker: And because it vails the heart from the life of the true
Zeal in spirit, and hardens the heart in the Wrath of Cain toward Abel, of
Esau to Jacob, and of the Jews to Jesus.

11. Because the Righteous Law of God is of the same nature, full of Judgment
and Reprehension of every Evil, not respecting the Person of any man, and is at
unity with every such spirit of its own nature in so good a work; for the which
cause it was righteously added of GOD: for if there were no bridle, how should
the Beast be tamed? if no Helm, how should the Ship be sailed? And without
Correction, there is no perfect Instruction.

12. Because the Rebuke of Life is as a Steel which smites at the Flint of
man's heart, and kindles in his Internals, the fire of the fear of his
Creator, which is the beginning of Wisdom, which reveals the knowledge of the
countenance of the Father, whom to know, is Life eternal: and because of
Solomon's proverbial commendation of the work of Reprehension, saying, The
Reproof of the Righteous, is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver.

13. Because, as the matter of my said Writings is manifestly composed of
Righteousness, and covered with the Countenance of the Word of GOD; so the
manner thereof stands in unity with the Scriptures of the Prophets and
Apostles, which were in the nature of Divinity, which covers not Iniquity
with daubing Iniquity.

14. Because Moses the Messenger of GOD, justified him which prophesied in the
Camp, (whom the People complained against) thus answering and saying, Would God
all the Lords People were Prophets. And because GOD Almighty is unchangeably
the same, as yesterday, so this day, and for ever; of these stones able to
raise a Seed unto Abraham.

15. Because of the amiable Example of the gesture of David the King under the
sharp Reprehension of Nathan the Prophet; who persecuted not the Prophet, but
with a contrite spirit repented of his own sin. And the like of the King and
People of Niniveh, who persecuted not Jonah, though he cried their Destruction
in the Streets.

16. Because the Prophet Isaiah prophesied it, as the great Evil of such a
People, which would make a man an Offender for a Word.

17. Because that for the same things, (like unto them, my said Writings in
life and nature) the Prophets, CHRIST, and the Apostles (by ungodly and
unrighteous Rulers) were persecuted and made sufferers in the world; And
because from the day of Cain's Cruelty, even unto this moment, there was never
any other spirit in the world, which did or does persecute any soul for his
pure Conscience of GOD, besides the thick spirit of darkness, which is of the
old Serpent the Devil, to which the Apostle in his day held his Testimony,
saying, As it was then, he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that
was born after the Spirit, even so it is now.

18. Because the Doctrine and Life of CHRIST teaches his Church, to recompense
all men good for evil, and not any man evil for evil; seeing the recompense of
evil for evil renders men manifestly as children of the Devil; and much more
the rendering evil actual, for the work of good sincerely intentional. And
because that Christ reprehended that spirit of Revenge in the youth of his
Disciples, which would have had Fire come down from Heaven to destroy his
Persecutors, saying, You know not of what spirit you are. Who, though the
glorious Power of the Father was with Him, (which could do all things) yet
persecuted no man, but suffered all things. And because we do not persecute
you, nor any other Sect beside you.

19. Because that when CHRIST so sharply reprehended Peter, saying, Get thee
behind me Satan: And when he said also to the Jews, You are of your father the
Devil, and the lust of your father you will do, and he was a liar from the
beginning: Neither his friend nor his foes persecuted Him with that bitterness,
wherewith you have persecuted me. I might moreover instance Jeremiah's crying
against the Temple, which once GOD commanded; Paul's Reprehension of the High
Priest; Peter's of Simon Magus; Paul's Declaration of Reproof to the Athenians,
in the open Court of the Arreopageans; with many other Acts of CHRIST and his
Apostles; yea, and a Cloud of Witnesses, reserved to the day of Judgment, and
to testify the Innocence of the Just at the open Bar of Tribunal.

20. Because the Kingdom, Weapons, and Warfare of the LORD JESUS and his
Apostles and Church, were not, nor are not carnal, but spiritual; and also
because my Writings, Sayings, and Speeches are not carnal, nor tending to a
carnal end, but spiritual, tending to a spiritual life, without end; The which
spiritual Holiness, if you call spiritual Wickedness, yet professing your
selves to be the Church, which is the Body, should consequently in the Channel
and clear Course of the running River of Righteous REASON, be subject unto
CHRIST, whom you confess to be the Head of the Body, and so the Body to be
subject to the Law of the Head, and not to make the Head subject to the lust of
your body; and then you would do as CHRIST did, and as the Apostles practiced,
cut down the spiritual Wickedness with spiritual Weapons: For when the Jews
said unto Jesus, Thou have a Devil, and in the name of Beelzebub do cast out
Devils: the LORD (then, whom you are not greater, in whose hand all Power was)
persecuted not their persons, but fought with them with the spiritual Weapons,
and said, If I in the name of the Prince of Devils do cast out Devils, then is
his Kingdom divided; and so with the spiritual Weapons cut down the spiritual
Wickedness.

These are the things which I call Righteous Reason to every righteous rational
man living.

Forasmuch also as for more than two years space (as precited) and in like
manner in the interval of the said time, as opportunities, sundry and diverse,
were presented, I having in the spirit of sobriety moved, and modestly urged
for an open, fair and legal Trial, according to the holy Law of GOD, and of his
Son JESUS CHRIST, which righteously regulateth among his Church, the which was
many times promised, but being hitherto never performed, may give just occasion
unto every person of prudent understanding, which has, or may hear thereof, to
conceive that my continued Restriction, thus debarred from the Judgment of the
Law of Equity, is of the nature of Apostasy from, and consequently in Antipathy
unto the sage, moral Ty of humanity, and all things which are of the Virtuous
Substance heavenly; And that from the consideration of the subsequent causes,
which I the rather intimate, from the cogitation that they may be rationally as
an Inducement and Instigation of you, to expediate my hitherto detarded Trial
at open Tribunal of Law, where I may justly find ample Audience to illustrate
(unto all attending Apprehensions) the perspicuity of the Defense of mine
Innocence; In due progress whereunto, therefore, from this Spirit of meekness,
O ye Rulers of ROME, conceive, etc.

First, Because the simple, proper, pure, solid, and sole end of the Law of
GOD, and all Righteous Laws of Nations, is really, righteously, and equally,
for the expedition of Judgment on every Transgressor, for the fact of his
Transgression, without respect of persons, for the perfecting Righteousness in
the Earth: and where the end of the Law is made void, there the substance of
the whole Law is destroyed.

Secondly, Because punishment inflicted upon any man by any Judge or
Magistrate, which has a Law without Judgment, and open Conviction by the Law,
is not, according to Righteousness, so much an act of Equity, as directly
contrary to all Law, and unreasonable constriction of the cruelty of Tyranny;
and such an Act stains the glory of his Tribunal of Authority: For by a Law he
holds the Seat of his Superiority, and the Righteousness of Judgment, by the
Law being the Glory of the Chair of his Magistracy; Judgment being perverted,
the Just Tribunal is overturned, and thereby the Glory thereof rendered as a
stage of Infamy: And thus the Law being violated, mark what follows, The Land
by unrighteousness ruined.

Thirdly, Because the constriction, and continuation of Bonds through suspense
of Judgment, and Punishment of a Person without Judgment and open Conviction by
the Law, stands in contrariety to the pure practice and life of true
Christianity, which actually leads to the doing unto all men, as a man would
that another should do unto him; in which also consists both the Law and the
Prophets. And because it is but of the same, which the Proverb renders most
infamous, saying, Hang a man first, and Judge him afterward.

Fourthly, Because it is expressly in opposition to the pure Nature of GOD your
Creator, who looks for the work of Judgment in the Land, and sent Judgment
into that Land, in which the Righteousness thereof was scanted; and where
against the end of the Law, the Judgment thereof is found delayed and
suspended, there the measure is scanted, and the balance falsified upon the
Stall; and there the presumptuous Lust of irrational and unsatiable Will rules
in the Seat of wrongful Revenge, in the enmity to the Righteousness of the Law
it self, which was added of Christ for the regulating of that gluttonous Lust
of the spirit of Revenge; and, so where the Judgment of Truth is always
suspended, there the wrongs and injuries heaped upon the Innocent, never come
(by the Magistrate) to be removed and ended.

Fifthly, Because that in the Land where Judgment is not equally practiced, but
unrighteously detarded, and tediously suspended, the fame thereof breaks an
inlet in that Land, unto all Assaults, Deceits, Wrongs, Robberies, Riots, Rapes
and Murders; For there the Judge's Insolences is made the president of the
Subjects Villainies; and there the two can sup of one cup in the communication,
saying, Give me of thy Broth, and lo, thou shall partake of my Bread: And thus
the Just is violently led to languish in the Land.

Sixthly, Because through the suspense of the Just Judgment of the Law (which
was added because of Transgression, and provided as God's Ordinance, for the
removal of Oppression) as the Innocent is thereby on the one hand oppressed,
and his Yoke not broken, but strengthened; so by the same, on the other hand,
the Transgressor also receives not his due, but a wrong; and so no man has
right by the Law which God has appointed for every man's right, either of
Condemnation or Justification by due and open Trial at Tribunal of Law; but
thus the Law, which GOD has ordained for the removal of Oppression from all,
through violation is converted, and made as an Instrument of Oppression unto
all.

Seventhly, Because the suspense of Judgment is contrary to the good Examples,
practiced of God's holy men of old; Witness Moses, and his true Successors in
the same seat; and Solomon the wise King, who when the cause of contest between
the two women (concerning the living Child) came before him, delayed it not,
but instantly called for a Sword, and thereby in the Righteousness finding the
true Mother, immediately gave her her due: Likewise CHRIST, who suspended not
the Judgment of the Cause of the Harlot, but quickly judged, Whosoever is free
from sin, let him cast the first stone.

Eighthly, Because the righteous Son of GOD, marked out that unjust Judge, (by
the name of a man that feared not God, nor regarded man) who suspended the
Cause of the oppressed and wronged Widow, and judged it not for the sake of
Justice and Equity, but detarded it, until he found himself wearied with the
Widows importunity.

Ninthly, Because the very Jews hard-heartedness suspended not the Trial of the
Just Man JESUS, by keeping him Two years, or more, under the temptation of the
severity of Bonds, to make him deny his Calling, and consequently the Father
which sent him, but quickly and publicly (though unrighteously and against
Law) judging Him worthy of Death, exposed him to the pangs of the same; and
because also the Jews in the same unbelief and hardness of heart, and the
Gentiles in the Heathenism and Paganism, diverse times gave Audience, to the
open Declaration of Paul the Apostle in defense of his Righteous Cause.
Moreover, though it might have been apprehended as an Affront to his
Countrymen, when he the said Apostle, in the day of his Trial in the Court of
Judicature, appealed [from them] unto Caesar, yet because of the Law, had his
Appeal assented him.

Tenthly, Because That Person whosoever, that under pretense of a Law, violates
the Righteousness of the Law, by perverting the Law (as the Jews did in the
Judgment of Jesus) or by unequal suspending of the Law, which is given into his
hands, as a Stewardship, to handle, in equal administration of just Judgment
unto all, without suspense or respect of persons, thus wilfully acting in
contrariety to all true humanity, the pure practice of Christianity, the holy
Law of GOD, and Prophets, and nature of the true GOD, appears manifestly (in
the Crystal glass of the Law of Equity) but as a beastly, lustful, lawless
fighter with his horns of Superiority, upon the high mountain of Arrogance, an
Oppressor of the Poor and Simple in his Innocence; and so warreth not only
against Moses and the Prophets purity, and Christ's sanctity, but also against
GOD Almighty his Creator's Divinity; and thus renders himself but as one in the
Paganism and cursed Atheism, a subject of the Vengeance of GOD's Just Judgments
in the actual work of despairation, which shuts from the true hope of the least
drop of the Mercy of the LORD GOD.

These things I call Silver (seven times) refined, Drops of the Representation
of Righteous Reason, which in the substantial, practical, and living channels,
run down like streams from the top of the Mountain of Sion, which stands in the
midst of the holy City of GOD; the which, if no man can confidently stand to
oppose openly to my face, yet if any man will wilfully withstand in secret
behind my back, let him send me in writing the strength of his Opposition; and
with further privilege, I in the only strength of GOD, may happily show his
confusion, that so the work of Righteousness may prosper in the Land, the which
is sincerely desired. But finally, if approved, and not opposed, then in
Justice, without further suspense, let them serve to the effect of one of the
ensuing Propositions.

1. Either for my fair, open, clear, public and legal Trial at Tribunal of
Law, if any man has justly to charge me as a Transgressor.

2. Or, if not a Trnsgressor, then to be righteously acquitted of these Bonds.

In a word, Consider in soberness, O ye Heads and Rulers of ROME, that if by
any man's means I stand wrongfully represented before you, as a transgressor;
whether more than Two years Imprisonment, does not equivolently answer such a
Law, as counts not the represented Fact to be so criminal, as that it is
worthy of the cognizance of Judgment at the Bar of Tribunal: For my God
weighs all things in an equal balance.

Summarily, if the strong will of causless irrational Revenge, has not glutted
her appetite on me, I am still the same, in the same Kingdom of the Content and
Patience; as yesterday, so also to day, even unto the last day, until her
greedy mouth has sucked my last blood and breath, and so this very Prison to
be made the Ax of Execution of a Martyr of Jesus. And know ye to the utmost,
that I am of the Spirit of Stephen, and Life of the Lord, which prayed, and
despited not.

JOHN the lowly Lamb in the Life of JESUS the Son of GOD; To the Pope of Rome.
THis City has ill requited the simplicity of my bowels of the Eternal Love
(as well toward her Inhabitants) as they have been largely manifested to thy
Children in Ireland, in the time of their most grievous distress; Once, when
about 120 persons were imprisoned in the City of Kilkenny, to be sent as
Captives to the Barbados, and but one man more besides me in all that Land,
either English or Irish, that durst to appear in their behalfs to plead their
cause for them; which the God of Heaven knows that I did (without an Earthly
Reward) with the then Governor of that City; (who sometime before that, sent me
up Prisoner to Dublin, prosecuting my Life, because I had written about three
sheets of Paper, that represented the sore Grievances and heavy Oppressions of
all thy Children in that Land, which none of them instigated me unto, but was
only carried forth thereunto in the Mercies, Pities and Compassions that God
had put into my soul, beholding them a bleeding People) With the said Governor
I pleaded (for the said persons) first, in his private house, and next, with
him, and all the Commissioners, in the open Court of Justice, and obtained a
Warrant for the delivery of the said Prisoners, which I went personally to see
executed; but the Marshal, hoping to gain Moneys, disobeyed it; which made me
go a second time to the Court, and open the Cause afresh, whereby I obtained my
Desire as full as I could possibly expect; for with a second Order I returned
to the Prison (not giving trust to any humane eye besides my own) and saw them
all delivered; at which time many fell down upon their knees to me in the open
street, worshipping me as if I were a God, and not a man; which I then denied,
remembering the words of Christ, and of the Angel, that said, thou shall worship
GOD, and Him only shall thou worship.

Besides, other times I have appeared for some poor Widows, being formerly of
eminency and repute in the World, and thy Children, and many other Roman
Catholics in their distresses; and GOD Almighty knows that the Pitties of my
soul were such to them all, that I was so far from expecting a Gift for all
that I did for them, that besides my Expenses in several Journies to serve
their needs, my hand was open to all, and not one of thy Children can say that
he came to my Door for an Alms, and went away empty-handed. Besides all this,
the GOD of Knowledge remembers that I have stripped off the Apparel immediately
from my body to cloth thy Children that I saw in need and want.

Therefore consider thee this Case, as thou will appear to be a natural Father:
And because I have not found Mercy in this City answerable to the least part of
my Bowels to thy Children in their woeful distresses; yet show me Justice but to
plead my own Cause in a public Court of Judicature, as I have openly pleaded
the Cause of thy Children in a public Court of Judicature in time of their
misery, when they could not plead it themselves, nor durst others do it for
them, and it shall satisfy my soul; which spirituality, nay nor humanity it
self will deny me: the which I seek in the Spirit of meekness, as one that is
delighted in the Order of Truth, loving and praying for Enemies, and watching
to recompense good for evil, that the Light of the Lamb in me may appear as a
City set on a Hill.

Who am thy Prisoner in the Prison of Madmen, called the English Quaker, JOHN.
And though something was (a long while before) desired, and earnestly besought
by diverse of the Pope's Priests and other Officers, for me to write unto the
Pope, even in this wise, yet after I had sent and heard of its delivery to the
Pope at his Palace, the Answer which I received was, this, (viz.) That I should
have no hearing; and withal, I was stripped of all my Writings which could be
found, together with Pen, Ink and Paper, and threatened to have my Door walled
up, and half, or more, of the Window also walled up; and scarcely Water to be
brought unto me for my necessary use: Whereby the very worst of men may discern
that the spirit which rules in Rome is not of Christ, but of Antichrist.



A POSTSCRIPT to all the zealous Roman Catholics, (which have sought God in
their Imaginations, but yet have not found him to possess him in the Substance)
that they may all come to find and enjoy Him in his Everlasting Life of
Pleasure.
AFter all the former fruits of Righteousness, shown forth by Epistle,
Exhortation, Admonition, Reproof, Questions, and Righteous Reason, none of
which being at any time answered by any person or persons in ROME, or
elsewhere, Now I am come to show the weakness of all the Pope's Adherents in
that City; who when they saw that they could not answer the foregoing Queries
(unless it should be to their own Condemnation) took occasion to censure me
under the Judgment of being in the state of a Madman, thinking that the
Cruelties which were determined in their Council, to be inflicted upon my Body,
might prove to be the means of turning my soul from the work of GOD's
Righteousness effected in my heart; to which end I was sent (as precited) from
the Inquisition unto the Prison of Mad-people; In which place I was first
chained by the Neck to the wall, in which Chain I had the exact liberty of
standing upstreight, of sitting, or of lying down; but after three nights had
passed, it was ordered that the Chain was to be taken from off my Neck, and
another Chain locked on my Leg, which was about six foot long, which gave me
liberty to walk the length of three steps from the Wall whereunto it was
fastened, which abode upon me for the full time of fourteen weeks; in which
space of time (it proving then to be Winter season, and the Winter also proving
very cold) shrank up the Sinews of my Leg on which the chain was locked, so
that when (at the expiration of the aforesaid fourteen weeks) it was taken off,
I found my self a lame man; but (through sore suffering) in twelve days
following, the Lord (in whom I believed) made me again a sound lim'd person;
whose Name my soul magnifieth, praises, blesses, and thanketh for his
goodness and loving kindness, whose mercies endure for ever.

Moreover, in the said time of my being chained, I was diverse times beaten,
tortured, and sorely bruised and wounded in my body, by persons appointed
thereunto, using for the most part a dried Bulls Pizzle as the Instrument for
punishing of me, bruising and breaking my body with the same; yea, and after
that I had the freedom of the Room in which I was kept (which I judge could not
exceed in latitude 9, and longitude 14 feet) I was also several times beaten
and exceedingly wronged in my body, once especially my Torturers came into the
Room, by whom I was stripped of all my Clothes from top to toe, and with the
aforesaid Instrument fell upon me, and did in such manner beat me with the same
[as I was stark naked] that they left me from the very crown of the head unto
the soals of my feet, black and bloody, having broken their Instrument about
me. I might speak and write that which would fill many Volumns of my
Sufferings, both in body and spirit, which are well known unto God, but in
brief may sum up all in a short saying, not mentioning the many Particulars
which were day after day, and night after night exercised upon me; as
revilings, mockings, infamous names, beatings by Madmen, with other abuses,
which in modesty I cannot well express by Pen, but may say thus, (viz.) even
such as passes the bounds of all humanity, when I have been kneeling at
Prayer, and when I have been walking in Praises and Thanksgivings unto God. Ah!
can I number, can I number again the many thousands of Temptations that
attended me, besides blows, wounds, mocks and suchlike abuses? tried with
Wine, proved with Women, tempted with Riches and Honor, and all the Pleasures
that ever my heart could desire; after that I was threatened even day after day,
and night after night; sometimes with Tortures, and sometimes with Death; by
Gallows, by Fire, and sometimes subtly by Poison; Well, what shall I say? I
have read the Sufferings of Job, and the Slaughters of many of the Martyrs, but
yet this can I say in God, that such were my suffering-dayes in Rome (as I have
said in body and spirit) that no soul that lived immediately in his Grace, ever
suffered the like, even since the day of Adam's being a man created of his
Maker from the beginning, [which I made manifestly appear unto my Afflictors,
Torturers and Tormentors in ROME, even unto their shame and confusion, whilst
in bonds I was so constrained unto sufferings in the state of my manifest and
approved Innocence in the sight of GOD, and themselves my utter Enemies. All
which was inflicted upon me to turn my heart from the Righteous Way of GOD,
which is manifest to you by their many Temptations (for me to speak a Lie) and
often Provocations to break me from the Spirit of Patience and Content, which I
held in my God.

Now the aforesaid Punishments and Cruelties having been laid upon me for the
precited causes, which all the foregoing Writings (dispensed unto them forth of
the Inquisition) shows, the unrighteousness of their Cause, and the
unreasonableness of their Weapons, which fought and battelled against me; whom
I showed (in the time of my Sufferings) That if they judged me to be a Madman,
they seemed to me to be nigh senseless, to seek me by Temptations of Cruelties
and Pleasures, to turn unto them, by sinning against the Lord of Righteousness.

And again, I remonstrated to their understandings, viz. That if the Pope,
Cardinals, Doctors, Jesuits, Priests, Friars, Lawyers, Physicians, and all the
wise Councils and Counselors in Rome, were fallen so far from the knowledge of
GOD, and degenerated so much below humane Reason, as not to judge of a humane
state in a more rational sort, than to conclude me to be a Madman, that Soul
was in a most miserable destroying state that should trust unto their
Judgments concerning any thing which they should judge was spiritual, tending
to the Worship of GOD, and Salvation; For if all could not rightly judge of a
Cause external, in so low a degree, it is impossible that they should judge of
things spiritual, which are matters of the highest concernments; and therefore
must needs conclude my self, a wilful destroyer of mine own Soul, if I should
have adhered unto such spirits, as were not able rightly to judge, betwixt a
state of true sense and madness.

From all which it is my desire, that the poor, simple, hungry and thirsty
Roman Catholics (whose souls are not satisfied without the enjoyment of the
true God) may know the real cause why they yet walk with heavy hearts and
pressed-down minds, not having the comfort of the assurance of Salvation in
them, though they have carefully sought many years to find it, going unto many
Masse-houses, to communicate often, and to pray frequently, and to confess
several times in the year, and to bear penance for their sins willingly, and
yet all has been so short of making their perfect Peace with God, that a
thousand times more than all whatever they practiced, cannot take away from
their hearts, nor wash from their souls one of their least sins; I say, one
cause is this, as the Prophet Jeremiah says, The Leaders of this People cause
them to err, and they which are led of them are destroyed: And the Priests,
whose lips should keep Knowledge, have hid Knowledge from the eyes of the
People; and therefore has the Lord complained, saying, For want of Knowledge
my People perish; which your Popes and Priests have really hid from your eyes,
having led you into the ways of their own Inventions, which they sought and
found out in the Counsels of their own Wills, whilst the immediate Word of the
LORD was not instantly in and among them, but absolutely wanting from them, who
therefore led you into those things which the LORD GOD never required from you;
and therefore in your daily sacrifices, you cannot expect another Answer from
GOD than this, as the Prophet Malachi says, Who has required these things at
your hands? For GOD never instituted Beads, nor Images of Persons or Crosses;
neither ever said he, That the invisible spiritual Worship of Him the Spiritual
GOD, stands in the visible and carnal appearances, which cannot reach unto the
soul, to sprinkle, wash and cleanse the soul from every evil and dead work,
word and thought: Forasmuch as nothing but an invisible and an eternal
Substance is able to reach unto, to wash, purge and cleanse your invisible and
immortal souls from your sins, which are the causes of your weights, pressures
and burdens which yet remain upon you, not knowing your Deliverance from them.

Seeing therefore, that you have long practiced to find, but have not partaked
of the substance of the thing desired, having sought ease, but not found ease,
having sought it, but in the way of your Leaders, who cause you to err; and
not having sought it in any other way, but in that which (your souls have
experience, through long practice) brings you not unto the true End of your
hope; not having sought it as you ought to seek; trying all things, and holding
fast that which is good.

Come ye therefore, and try this Way of GOD, and prove the LORD in his Way,
even the Merciful GOD, who has proved you in your ways, and always found you
defective in your ways; and mark Him in his Way, and try and see if it shall
be with you in the days to come, as it has been with you in the days that
are past; For now Reason may tell you, that if your way was imperfect, surely
the Way of GOD must needs be perfect, which leads unto a perfect end; first, to
a perfect Life in Him that is the Beginning, and consequently unto perfect
Peace in the same, who is without End. Can you do less than to prove and see
and seek in that, wherein I know assuredly you shall find, that you shall not
always walk as in wearisomness and faintness, nor be in your hearts as parched
heaths, nor in your minds as barren mountains, neither shall be as Briars of
the Woods, and Thorns of the Forests; nay, nor as pricking Thistles of the
Stubble-fields; neither shall you always walk as afflicted, tossed and
tormented through the swellings of the waves of temptations passing over your
weary minds; you shall not always mourn like doves for a mate, nor grieve like
Widows for the loss of their Beloveds; neither shall your days be always
Tribulations, nor the continuance of your time as surpassing pangs of pains:
But surely you shall draw into a good time, wherein Beauty shall be given into
your souls for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for Mourning, and the Garments of Praise
for the spirit of heaviness; in which time the strength of the LORD your Maker
shall be the Pavillion of you Peace, and you shall rest in his Joys for ever.

Well therefore, O ye tender Friends, (whom my soul is seeking in the Love of
my Father, to be united unto Him in his Holiness) Come and experience this
Doctrine, and prove this new and living Way of the LORD (though not another
than that which from the beginning was; but only new unto the old nature of all
flesh, which corrupts its way in the sight of the Lord God) which is the Way
wherein the holy Apostles and suffering Servants of JESUS lived and walked; and
being but one, as the Apostle says, There is one Way, one Truth, and one Life,
as ye believe and confess, there is but one True GOD: and therefore, as ye find
in your way coruption abounding, ye have cause also to confess that the Way of
God being but one, cannot be the Way in which you walk; Forasmuch as GOD has
said by the mouth of his holy Prophet, speaking of the Messiah, I will give him
for a Way, and for an high way, which the wayfaring-men, though fools, shall
not err therein; Who also spoke by the same Prophet, saying, I will give Him
for a Covenant to the People, for a Light to the Gentiles, that He may be my
Salvation unto the ends of the Earth; of whom also in the fullness of the
dispensation of time John the Baptist bore Witness, testifying Him to be the
True LIGHT that lights all mankind coming into the World; as Christ himself
said, I am the LIGHT of the World; he thot believes in me, shall not abide in
Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life.

This is the Way, even the true Way of the LORD GOD, which I desire (through
proof) your souls may experience; And to the end that you may have the true
Witness within you of the Power of Holiness, which leads into perfect Unity
with the Perfect GOD, in the Innocent Life of the Lamb of GOD that takes away
the sin of the World; I tenderly exhort, counsel and advise you, to turn your
minds unto that Light of the Lamb of GOD, which shines into all your Souls,
convincing you in all your Consciences of all your sins, and joining your minds
unto it in perfect Love of it, because it is of the pure Nature of your pure
Creator, you shall come in due time to find and see assuredly, that as that same
Light which shines in all your Consciences, is of such a powerful and virtuous
Nature, as that it not only searches your hearts, and tries your reins, and
finds out your most secret sins, but also convinces you as well of the least,
as of the greatest of your sins; so it will likewise free, deliver, and ease
you from the burden of your sins, which is the cause of your dissatisfaction
and many sorrows; because that as it is of GOD, pure, perfect, and altogether
virtuous in its nature, cannot change from its property, nature, and virtue;
but as it convinces of the least sin, being loved and lived in, must also
deliver from the least sin; and being still of the same virtue and nature of
GOD, convincing your souls of your greatest sins, being loved and lived in,
must also free and deliver you from your greatest sins; and being found of so
pure and powerful a nature and virtue to free and deliver your souls from your
least and from your greatest sins, must also of necessity in the same love,
deliver you from all your sins: The which all must confess, excepting some in
Atheism might say, That the perfect Grace and Light of the Alsufficient GOD is
an Insufficient Medicine to heal the soul perfectly of all its maladies and
infirmities: But I am better persuaded of all you that desire the true
Knowledge of the true and living God, having a sensible Understanding in you,
that there is such a Light shining into your souls, that shows you all your
sins, the which ye may remember you have had from your Childhood; because you
cannot otherwise say, but that from your Childhood it accused you of all your
sins in the secrets of your Consciences, which no one else could accuse you of;
but yet ye were not then directed unto it as you are now counseled, and
therefore could not know the power and virtue, because you never proved its
force, strength and virtue, through a perfect love, yielding, in obedience unto
its motions and often checks of your minds; Wherefore, this is the happy day of
your Visitation, wherein it is told you, that if you love that LIGHT, which
shows you the nature of all Temptation unto Evil, and join unto the LIGHT, so
as to be guided by the LIGHT, which is contrary to all Evil, it will deliver
you from the end of the Tempter which presents the Temptation, by saving you
from the Evil: which Light you will then know in the invisible power of the
holy God, which is given you for the perfecting of his Praise in your hearts,
through the forming and new-creating your hearts into the mind of his own
Righteous Spirit; which thing you cannot know but through the experience and
trial, which in the trial I am sure (as God is holy, and that measure of Light
in your Consciences is of GOD, which is holy, virtuous and powerful) will
purify you from sin, and perfectly save and deliver you from all evil; And
therefore I must needs conclude, that he is most extremely sinful and
desperately evil, that says, he desires to be delivered from all sin and evil,
which will not try to experience such a power and virtue of the Grace of GOD
given into his soul, which is able to save and deliver him from all evil.

Be ye therefore wise (O People) unto your own Salvation; having had experience
of the vanity of your own way, and ways; try ye now the Righteous Way of GOD
in which you cannot transgress, and that because in your ways you have not
found rest to your desirous and thirsty souls, which of all things would choose
rather to be clothed with the Righteousness of the living GOD; and, after
trial by pure obedience (in pure and undefiled love) if ye find not deliverance
from your sins, which is the cause of your pressures and burdens, and
afterward the peace of your poor souls, and satisfaction of your simple tender
minds, even in fullness of Content and Joy in the Pleasures of Immortal Life,
which is the end of all your Desires, Requests, and earnest seekings. Then may
ye also say, we have sought in the way of Light, but our Creator cannot be
found there: But truly, this is my Testimony of my heavenly Father, unto whom
there is none like, in Goodness, Mercy and Deliverance, That if any one seeks
Him in his Way of Holiness (in which sin cannot be committed) he will satisfy
the desires of that soul in due time, and overspread it with his abundant
Fullness; And therefore to that of GOD in your selves I cannot but commend you,
which is more safe for you to mind, obey and follow, than the invented customs,
ways and statutes ordained of men, which never came to live in that Grace of
GOD (which was the Light in all their Consciences) which could have led them
out of all their sins, into the true knowledge of the washing by the Blood of
CHRIST, which cleanses from all sin; which being taken away, puts an end to
the supposed Purgatory; for, if any thing purges from sin, it is the
Everlasting Blood of the Lamb of GOD (which was slain since the foundations of
the World was) which washes away all sin; And this also puts an end to the
vain thoughts of the Popes remission of sins, which stands in opposition to his
professed Purgatory after this life: for, if he forgives all sins, excepting
one sin, how is it that after his forgiveness generally all souls of his Sect
must enter into Purgatory to be cleansed from that which he has formerly
forgiven them? so that you may see either his profession of forgiveness is
deceit and vanity, or else that his professed Purgatory is a deceit and vanity;
because to the one work of forgiveness and cleansing from sin, there is not a
need of any but one thing to effect it; and because I know that the Blood of
CHRIST, and only the Blood of CHRIST (which is his powerful Life) does it, I am
assured in the Spirit of the holy GOD, and therefore do assert it, That both
the Pope and his Purgatory, which stand crossing one the others virtue and
authority, are both but a deceit and witchery.

This therefore may awaken you from all slumber of supposed security concerning
your way, and induce to take heed unto the LIGHT of GOD in your selves, that it
may lead you out of your own thoughts, words, and ways, to walk with God in
Righteousness all your days; that of Him you may be made Partakers of his
Endless Everlasting Kingdom of Life, Peace and Joy, which will swallow you up
in his high Praises, who is worthy of the Glory of his Works in the whole
Earth, even for ever and ever, Amen.

A Concluding Word to those that falsely accuse me, and my Brethren of being
Papists.
FInally, Whereas there are diverse that have accused me and my Brethren, as
being persons which in the bottom of our hearts are Papists, This may plainly
serve as a Testimony very substantial, that we are so judged upon none other
than a wrong and false account, as has been demonstrated by Doctrine, Life,
Example, and large Suffering, among such persons, and in such places as are
counted the most reputed Papists upon the face of the Earth: Which is more than
ever Luther, Calvin, or any Protestant or other Sect, testified or witnessed,
viz. against the persons in the same place; yea, than any would be willing to
do amongst all the Sects in England, that cry against Pope and Popery here at
home in their own Liberties, or upon soft Cushions on Pulpits: yea, I can say,
that I have found many that have falsely accused me of Popery, that would not
for a King's Ransom go to Rome, and cry against it, as I have done; and
therefore their own Consciences may rather accuse themselves of Deceit, or at
leastwise, as Backbiters, whilst they speak that against the Pope in England,
which they would not speak to the Pope himself at Rome (as I sought to clear my
Conscience to the Pope's face) and therefore are but like the Papists, that
backbite and speak evil of English Sects, in the Countries where their own is
tolerated and approved of, which is but of one unrighteous nature in them all
of all Parties. From all which the Accusations of my Accusers do turn upon
their own heads, as an undeniable Covering of shame; who henceforth in prudence
may rather choose the keeping of silence, than utterance of slanders, etc.

Yet after all the precited Passages, I do hereby intimate a few of the Papists
Principles, which I (together with the rest of the People of God, called
Quakers) do utterly deny, as not being of GOD'S holy Spirit of Truth, but
consequently of the spirit which produced all their other invented Traditions,
which suite not with the holy Nature of the holy Eternal GOD.

1. We deny the Pope and his Cardinals to be of the Election of GOD, Angels, or
Saints; and therefore in their Places and Offices not of GOD, nor the Truth;
but contrary to God, and the Truth.

2. We deny the supposed place of Purgatory, which the Papists profess to be
after death; we owning no Purgatory for the Soul after the Body is departed
this life.

3. We utterly deny all Images which the Papists worship and bow down before.

4. We deny the Mass, both matter and manner thereof.

5. We deny Prayers to be made unto Saints or Angels ( which the Papists use)
seeing Christ says, Ye shall henceforth ask nothing of me, but of the Father
in my Name.

Many other things I could insert, but at present forbear. But whereas, lastly,
that I have denied the abovesaid five Particulars to be any thing of Truth, it
lies upon the Papists to prove them according to the Spirit of Truth, if they
are able, and not according to their own, nor their father's inventions; else
all men may see that they live in Deceit, Error, and Falsehood, of which let
all men take heed, lest they should be wilfully destroyed.

John Perrot.

THE END.

