A SERMON PREACHED On the 16th Day of April, 1696.

In the Parish Church of St. Michael in New-Malton: BEING THE Thanksgiving Day
Appointed for the Discovery and Disappointment of the Horrible and Barbarous
Conspiracy, etc.

By William Perse, M. A. Minister of Malton, and formerly Fellow of King's
College in Cambridge.

LONDON: Printed for E. Whitlock, near Stationer's-Hall, 1696.

To the Honorable The Lady PALMS.
Madam,
YOUR favorable Acceptance of that small Freewill Offering that I paid to the
Memory of the Best of Women, our late most Gracious Queen, incourages me to
hope that your wonted Goodness, which I have long experienced, will vouchsafe
to receive this mean Eucharistical Oblation for the Deliverance of our Dread
Sovereign, (the Best of Princes) from the Barbarous and Inhumane Conspiracy,
that was laid against His Sacred Person and Government, with the same Candor
which you did the Former: Especially since in Obedience to your Honor's
Commands, which I shall ever to the utmost of my Power with all readiness
observe, it is made thus Public. And I am the rather induced to suffer it to
pass through more hands than it was at first designed for, because the Chief
Subject it treats of, (being the Peculiar and extraordinary Providence, which
watches over Good and Righteous Kings, for the Security and Protection of
themselves and Government, against the most Secret Contrivances that can be
formed against them) may, I hope, convince every one of the Folly and Vanity,
as well as Sinfulness and Danger, of all such attempts that are made against
either: And that this Particular instance of the Wonderful Discovery of the
late Bloody and Treacherous Design, that was so deeply laid against the Life of
our Gracious Prince, joined to that series of Signal Providence which has all
along attended his Royal Person for his Preservation from all those Perils to
which he has been so frequently exposed, may at length cause that Obstinate
Party, which has hitherto so unreasonably stood out, to comply with, and to
own that Authority which GOD has so visibly and so signally appeared for; and
by which their own Liberties and Religion, have continued safe to them, and us.

That our Church, (the Best and Purest of all other) and our State, may long
Flourish under the Happy and Prosperous Reign of our Wise, Valiant, Merciful,
and Religious Leader whom God's own Right Hand has placed over us, and made so
strong for himself; And that your Honorable Family, which has so Zealously
espoused the Interests of both, may always enjoy the Blessings that accrue to
this Nation thereby, and the Everlasting Happiness of the Kingdom that is above
afterward, is, the earnest Prayer of

Madam, Your Honor's Most Faithful, and Obedient Servant, William Perse.

A SERMON Preached on the 16th of April, 1696. being the Thanksgiving-Day.
Ecclesiastes, Chap. 10. Ver. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy Thought,
and Curse not the Rich, no not in thy Bedchamber; for a Bird of the Air shall
carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter.


THere is a general Providence, that to any observing Eye, is visible over the
face of the whole Creation, whereby all things are kept, and preserved in their
own Order, and Way of subsisting, by the same Divine Power which at first
formed, and brought them into Being: and according to the several Degrees of
Perfection of those diverse Species which God Created, (for when he saw every
thing that he had made, behold it was very good) has he proportioned the
manner, and the measure of their preservation. Though nothing, no not of the
most minute consequence can pass without his Knowledge, and which is not under
his Eye, yet Creatures of the lowest rank, and size, cannot pretend to claim so
great a share of his Protection, for their continuance in that station wherein
Nature has placed them, as those which are of a more eminent, and useful
Quality in the World. And as Infects which are of an equivocal Generation, some
of which are but of a days duration, come into the World by Shoals, so they
tumble out of it again by heaps. Thus the Locusts, God's great Army, as they
are called in the Prophet Joel, which covered the face of Egypt, as they were
brought in on a sudden by an East Wind; so after they had consumed all the
Forage in the Land, and done the Work which God had appointed them, a mighty
West Wind cast them back again, as suddenly into the Red Sea, and destroyed
them. But as the scale of the Creature rises, and becomes more serviceable to
that great End for which he Created all things, viz. Man's Happiness, and his
own Glory; so has he ordered all means to concur suitably for their conducing
in their proper ways toward the promoting of that Design, to which every thing
in its respective capacity is, and must be subservient. And this our Blessed
Savior plainly intimates to his Disciples, in his Discourse concerning
Providence; wherein he tells them, that God preserves the Grass which is to day
in the Field, and to morrow in the Oven; and that he orders Food for the
Ravens, that have neither Storehouse nor Barn; and that not one Sparrow is
forgotten before him: inferring from thence by an Argument drawn a fortiori
from the stronger side, that they ought in their greatest Exigencies, and
Extremities, to depend upon God's Care of them, and his Love toward them;
seeing, if he does not neglect his Creatures of the lowest Degree, but sustains
them in a way suitable to their own Nature; it must needs follow that he will
take a more particular Care of those whom he has made after his own Image, and
for whose sake chiefly, all his other Works in this lower World were Created,
and appropriated to their use, and service; and that he will let them lack
nothing that may tend, not only to the continuance of their Being, but their
Well-being also: And as I have drawn this Scheme of Providence from its lowest
Basis, till we come to the highest Spire, and top of this sublunary World; all
whose parts mutually depend upon one another; and which are all conserved by
the same All powerful Hand from which they received their Original; so the
Beauty, and Harmony, of this wonderful, and stupendous Frame will more
eminently and conspicuously appear, and the infinite Wisdom of the Almighty
Architect be the more visible, when we consider that even in the dispensation
of his great Care and Providence over Man himself, the Noblest and finished
Masterpiece of his Six Days Works, that even here, as to Persons of the same
kind, he puts a great difference between them, in order to their particular
security, and preservation, according as they are by his Divine appointment, to
be more or less concerned in the administration of that Government, which he
has constituted for the establishing these things, in that Order wherein he
first placed them; and without which they would run into Anarchy, and
Confusion: and therefore, although for the better preservation of Mankind, he has
denounced a severe penalty against every one, who should upon any unwarrantable
Account Destroy the Life of another; Declaring, That whosoever should shed
Man's Blood, by Man his Blood should be shed: yet he has thought fit to lay a
particular Injunction upon all Persons, not to offer any violence to those whom
he (for by him Kings Reign) has set in Authority over his People; to which end
he has fixed a peculiar Mark, and Character upon those whom he has designed,
and appointed for public Offices of Trust; upon whose welfare the safety of
the whole depends, to keep their Persons Sacred, and Inviolable; saying, Touch
not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: because by them he was to
promulgate, and put in execution those Laws and Precepts, which if duly
observed, would keep the World in Peace, and Prosperity here, and lead them the
way to Eternal Happiness hereafter; And likewise to be a Terror to those who
would not yield Obedience to his Commands: for the Magistrate is not only the
Minister of God, for the encouragement of them that do well, but likewise a
Revenger to execute Wrath upon him who does evil. Touch not God's Anointed, no,
not with the venomous Arrow of thy Tongue: for he has given a particular
Charge, that none should dare to Curse the Ruler of his People; as it is
Recorded, Exodus 22.28. To which St. Paul alludes in the 23 of the Acts, ver 5.
when he was taxed for reviling the High Priest; when he says, I wist not
Brethren that he was the High Priest, for it is written, thou shall not speak
evil of the Ruler of thy People; and it was no less then death to do so; as
appears by what Abishai said concerning the Railer Shimei; Shall not Shimei be
put to death for this, because he cursed the Lord's Anointed? And David, when
he dying, left it in Charge to his Son, Not to hold him guiltless, but to bring
down his Hoar-Head to the Grave with Blood; and we find that he was afterward
slain upon that old score, by Solomon's Commandment. But here my Text seems to
go further, when the same Wise Man tells us, That we must not only forbear from
casting Reproaches, and Calumnies upon our Governor, by scurrilous and
opprobrious Language, thereby to make him vile, and to blacken him in the Eyes
and Esteem of his Subjects, to the endangering his Person and his Government;
but we must not so much as in the secret of our Heart, think evil of him, nor
wish his ill; nor in our mind, contrive to do him any Mischief, for even that
Thought of the Heart, which was the first mover of the wicked Design, (for as
our Savior says, Out of the Heart proceed Murders, faise Witness, and
Blasphemies, etc.) shall not go undiscovered, before it come to its full
execution, and consequently, shall not be unpunisht.

Curse not the King, no, not in thy Thought (says the wisest of Princes) nor
the Rich, no not in thy Bedchamber, for a Bird of the Air shall carry the
voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter.

King Solomon, to whom God had given a Wise, and Understanding Heart, had
searched narrowly into the Causes of all things under the Sun, and strictly
examined, as you will find throughout this whole Book of his Sermons; all the
Proceedings of God in the management of the Affairs of this World, so far forth
as they were knowable and apprehensible by their effects; and does more
particularly insist upon the various methods of his Providential Dispensations
toward his Creatures, than upon any other Subject whatsoever. And upon a
general Survey, he acquaints us, that he had observed, that as God had not
placed all things on a Level, so neither had he left all things to be guided
and ordered necessarily by the common Rules of Nature, which he has prescribed
to the whole Creation; but that sometime, whenever he pleases, he interposes
his own Power, for the bringing about his own Ends, to the frustrating of those
Designs, which, had they been left to work according to the strength and vigor
of those proper Instruments, and means whereby they were acted and carried on,
must have produced effects suitable to their respective Causes: Thus he tells
us, that the Race is not always to the Swift, nor yet the Battle to the Strong,
nor Bread to the Wise, nor Riches to Men of Understanding; though these in
their several ways, are the best qualifications for the obtaining of those
Ends: And as God has put a great difference between those of the same kind,
ordaining some to Rule, and others to obey, by which subordination the
Government of the World is preserved in that uniform Harmony wherein it
continues as to the main, at this day; so does he take a more particular Care
of those whom he has appointed for the administration of Justice, and the
preservation of the Rights and Liberties of his People, committed to their
Charge, then of others of the ordinary sort, and mould; as knowing, that they
would be apt to be exposed to a thousand hazards, and violences for the due
execution of their Office; it being a difficult matter to satisfy and please
all Parties that sue to them for Justice, and to gratify all those who pretend
by extraordinary Services to have merited great Favors from their Prince; and
then, the Party who thinks himself wronged and aggrieved for want of such a
favorable Sentence as he expected in his Cause; or, who thinks he is not
sufficiently rewarded according to his Deserts, will be prone to Meditate and
Study Revenge, and to side with those who are discontented upon the same, or
any other Account: And therefore the All Wise Moderator of the World has
thought fit, in order to the keeping the frame of Government on the Wheels, and
to prevent that disturbance that would accrue to the Public by the frequent
Change, and alteration of Magistrates; and to encourage Persons qualified
thereunto, to take those weighty and troublesome Employments upon them, to
secure and protect them with a higher, and more defensible Mound and Bulwark of
his special Providence then ordinary, and to set a particular Watch over them;
so that there cannot be so much as the least Thought of evil designed against
them; nor the closest contrivance hatched in the most secret Apartment of the
Heart, either against their Persons, or their Government (so long as they are
approved by him, and that they act in conformity to those great and good Ends
for which he set them in those places of Trust, as well as Honor) but as it is
known to him from whom nothing is hid, so does he in his own time, when he sees
all things ripe for execution, send his Emissaries, and dispatch his Messengers
to discover the bottom of those damnable and hellish Conspiracies that are
plotted against them, and thereby to frustrate, and defeat their deepest, and
most secret Designs; for there is nothing of this kind so hid, but shall be
made manifest; That which they have spoken in Darkness, shall be heard in the
Light, and that which they have whispered in the Ear, in Closets, shall be
proclaimed upon the House tops; For a Bird of the Air shall carry the Voice,
and that which has wings shall tell the Matter.

By which expressions does appear the wonderful and extraordinary Care, that
God Almighty the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords does take of Kings, and
Magistrates that he has set in Authority over us; for by Birds of the Air in
this place, and those that have Wings, we may safely conclude to be meant the
Holy Angels, those winged Messengers of Heaven, those Ministering Spirits which
he sends abroad upon all emergent Occasions, for the good of his Elect; and
especially for the preservation of those whom he has marked and dignified with
more than ordinary Beams of his own Majesty, and Glory. He has certainly given
his Angels a particular Charge over those good Princes who execute Judgment and
Righteousness, and who make it their business to preserve the Peace, and
Prosperity of all those whom the Divine Wisdom has committed to their Care,
and Protection: And that there are Tutelar Angels presiding over Kings, and
their Kingdoms is plain from the Tenth Chapter of Daniel in several parts of
it; and as they are set by God for a Guard over his Anointed; so are they sent
likewise for the deliverance of his Prophets also; thus God sent his Angel, as
you find in the 12th Chap. of the Acts, and delivered Peter out of the hand of
Herod, and from all the expectation of the People of the Jews: and that it was
the Opinion of his Friends that he had a peculiar Angel attending on him for
his safety, appears in that after the Maid affirmed constantly that he was
knocking at the Door, and they could not be brought to believe a thing which
they thought upon a surprise impossible, they said, It is his Angel. And though
sometimes God suffer a Pious, and Religious Prince, for the sins of a Nation,
whom he designs, either to chastize for their amendment, or to destroy for
their Obstinacy, and Ingratitude; to fall into the Ambushes, and to be taken in
the Nets of wicked and Blood-thirsty Men; yet in the general course of his
Providence, he does usually by some signal means, or other show his great Care
of them, by delivering them contrary to the expectation of their Enemies, from
all the open force that is gathered, and from all the hidden Treachery that is
contrived, and managed against them; by discovering the Designs that are formed
against their Persons, and their Government, by these speedy and swift
Messengers whom he imploys for that very purpose.

Neither are those Heavenly Spirits which continually wait about the Throne of
God, and are always ready to obey his Will, and to dispatch his Commands,
unfitly by the Wise Man likened unto the Birds of the Air, to those swift
Creatures that have Wings wherewith they are able to measure vast distances of
space in a Short time, and to Protect and Preserve whatsoever they admit, and
receive under the Shadow and Coverture of them. The Representation of the
Cherubims, the highest Order in the Caelestial Hierarchy, was made by God's own
appointment by Creatures with Wings, wherewith they covered they covered the
Mercy-Seat; and in all the Visions of the Prophets, they always appeared to
them in that form; and the Seraphim that was sent to the Prophet Isaiah is said
to fly unto him, Isa. 6. v. 6. Nothing so swift to convey Intelligence as those
winged Posts of the Air, to which purpose Doves we know are frequently made use
of, to be News Carriers in the Eastern Parts of the World to this day; and
therefore nothing so proper to represent the Activity and Celerity of those
Faithful Messengers which God dispatches in the time of Danger, to warn his
Vicegerents of those Wicked Designs that are formed against them, and to
discover by those Ways and Methods he orders, those hidden practices that the
Devil and his Agents are plotting and Contriving against them; and think that
no Eye can see them, and that it is beyond the Art of Man, as sometimes indeed
without the Hand of God it is, to hinder the Execution of them. These are the
true Birds of Paradise, which have Wings and no Feet: Wings to express their
Swiftness wherewith they haste to give tidings either of Good or Evil, to those
to whom they are directed by their great Lord and Master; but no Feet to fix
upon any Earthly Object, or to make any stay there. Though indeed, no Creature
on this side Heaven can in any due proportion, represent the wonderful Agility
of those Spiritual Substances, who move quicker than Thought it self, whereby
they communicate the Will of GOD to those to whom they are sent: Nor yet can we
tell the Secret ways whereby they instill and insinuate those early Notices
into their Breasts, to forewarn them of the Dangers wherewith they are
threatened. Sufficient it is, that we know they attend for that very end; and
that we have Scripture, and frequent Experience for the Confirmation and
Avouchment of it. These are the Heavenly Intelligencers that belong to the
Court above, which upon all Emergent Occasions, fly on the Wings of the Wind by
their secret Intimations to bring to naught the most hidden Counsels of the
Wicked, and to make all these Devices, though never so artificially laid,
against those Public Persons who are the more immediate care of Heaven, of
none effect. And how, indeed, should it be otherwise, when, as my Text assures
us, that the least Malicious Curse, and Evil Intention, that is lodged in the
closest Caverns of the Heart against Kings, and Public Magistrates, (for by
rich Men are meant here Magistrates, because they are taken and chosen from out
of that rank which is most eminent for Wealth and Honor) shall not be
undiscovered. So that the Wise Man here shows the Vanity and Folly of all those
wretched Miscreants who conspire and lay their heads together, to overthrow the
Foundations of that Government which God's Providence has settled; by the
Destruction of the Heads and Supporters of it. Seeing, as he tells us, that not
the least Design of Harm that is contrived against their Persons, though it be
never so deep laid, never so closely managed in the most private Bedchamber,
but as it is known to him, who searches the Secrets of the Heart, to whom
Darkness and Light are both alike, so when the cursed Design shall by the
untimely Discovery of it miscarry, and become abortive, it brings not only
Shame, but Punishment also to the Rash and Desperate Undertakers.

God by his Holy Spirit, or the Ministry of his Angels, sometimes lays open the
Secret Counsels and Machinations that are intended against his Chosen ones to
themselves; and by some sudden, and almost unaccountable impulse of Spirit,
they are prompted to such thoughts that tend to the Preventing and
Disappointing the Conspiracy that is laid against them: Thus God put it into
the Heart of King James the First, to unriddle that Mysterious Letter, by which
Interpretation, that Horrible and Hellish Powder Plot of the Papists which was
near its Execution was prevented. Sometimes God raises good to a Prince and his
Government, from the Evil that was intended against it; making the
breaking-forth of the Treason instrumental to the Settlement and Security of
those, whose Ruin and Destruction was thereby maliciously endeavored and
designed. Thus after Abner the General of the Army, had set up Ishbosheth, the
Son and Heir of Saul, against David, whom God had chosen to be King, though he
was not of the Royal Line; and was defeated, and disappointed of his great
Expectations; the House of David ever after, as may be seen in the Second Book
of Samuel, c. 3. v. 1. waxed stronger and stronger, and the House of Saul
weaker and weaker from that very day. And when Absalom's Treason was discovered
and brought to nothing, it made abundantly for the Peace of David all his Reign
after. It settled the Hearts of the Twelve Tribes, which were in part divided,
wholly toward him; so that they all then unanimously Associated, and friendly
strove togther who should have the greatest share in him, and do the most for
him. Sometimes God, for the Preservation of the Person whom he intrusts with
the Government, inspires the Hearts of his Prophets with the Knowledge of the
Secret Counsels of those that rise up against them, and thereby eludes and
disappoints the Success of their Designs. Thus when the King of Syria warred
against Israel, he took Counsel with his Servants, saying, in such and such a
Place shall be my Camp: The Man of God immediately sent to the King of Israel
to beware of passing to that place, for thither, says he, the Syrians are come
down, and he saved himself, as the Text says, not once, nor twice that way:
Therefore the King of Syria was troubled, and concluded that some of his own
Privy Council had betrayed his Secrets; till one of his Servants told him, that
none but the Prophet Elisha had revealed his most secret Intentions, for says
he, he tells the King of Israel the Words that thou speak in thy
Bedchamber.

You see then, that God is pleased in a more Peculiar manner to take upon
himself the Care and Protection of his Anointed, and to appear in sundry
manners for the Discovery of those hidden Counsels that are hatched in the most
Secret Places against them. And this God does, as I have already hinted, for
the continuance of the orderly Government of the World, which would in every
short Period of time be put out of Joint, if the Designs of Proud, Ambitious,
and Revengeful Men, who upon several Interests are ready at every turn to
combine against those that are possessed of the Seat of Honor, and the Throne
of Justice, should obtain their designed and intended Effect. For the Welfare
and Prosperity of the People, are locked and treasured up in the Life and
Safety of a Good, Virtuous, Valiant, and Courageous Prince; whose Life, as the
Children of Israel told King David, as truly, as well as affectionately, in
relation to the Public Good, is worth ten thousand of his Subjects: Seeing
their loss may easily be recruited and made up again; but the loss of a good
King is so much the greater, by how much the harder to be repaired again.
Besides, the dismal consequences that attend a Nation ween deprived suddenly,
accidentally, and unexpectedly of him, on whose staff of Authority, under GOD,
their Strength chiefly depended, and relied, makes the Case most deplorable.
The Prophet Zachariah took two Staves, the one he called Beauty, the other
Bands, when those Two were broken, and Three Shepherds cut off in one Month;
the Order of the Government wherein consisted its Beauty, and its Bands,
wherein consisted its strength, was dissolved; and the Brotherhood between
Judah and Israel was broken: as you may see, Zachariah 11.7, to the 14th. upon
this account God, (some particular Cases only reserved) does usually defend
those good Princes whom he raises up, to be instrumental to the Peace and
Prosperity of his People, as he does the Earth it self, with a Shield; and
protects them both from the open Assaults, and the more dangerous hidden Plots,
and Conspiracies of their most furious, and implacable Enemies.

Why then do these worse then heathen Miscreants, from time to time conspire
against the Lives of Princes, and take Council together against the Lord, and
his Anointed; saying, Let us break their bands, even the bands of their Lives
asunder, and cast their cords from us: Why do they rage so furiously, and
imagine such a vain thing; and contrive such designs as they are not able to
perform? For he that sits on high shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall
have them in derision, when they least think of it, he shall speak to them in
his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure; he shall break them with a rod
of Iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel.

Surely the reason why these mischievous workers of Iniquity in secret Places,
who lay in wait for Blood, and lurk privily in corners for the Innocent,
without a cause, are so bent upon these wicked and abominable Designs, is their
misapprehension of the Divine Nature: They do not certainly believe that God
takes any notice of what is done, and acted in this Lower World, but imagine
that he sits an unconcerned Spectator of the various Scenes that are presented
on the Theater of the Earth; and that he lets every thing go on, and succeed
suitably to the Vigor and Energy of those Natural Causes, by which it is
managed, without any interposition of his own Power to control, and check
their Proceedings, though he never so much dislike, and disapprove of them: or
else they fondly conceive, that their hidden Deeds of Darkness are unknown to
him, and that he cannot pierce into the depth of their secret Councels;
otherwise, did they either believe that God took any particular Care of the
Government of the World; or that he was a discerner of the Thoughts, and
Intents of the Heart; they would not be so foolishly impudent as to dare to
Plot against the Lives, and to devise and compass the death of those whom he
has more peculiarly shrouded under the wings of his particular, and especial
Providence. This is the very Reason given by the Royal Prophet, why these
workers of Iniquity boast themselves in their Villainies. Psalm. 9.4.7. They say,
the Lord shall not see, neither the God of Jacob regard it: But he presently
convinces them of their Folly and Ignorance, in the next Verse; when he says,
Ye fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the Ear, shall he not hear? He
that formed the Eye, shall he not see? Yea, he sees them in their most private
Cabals, and in their most secret Consultations, and lets them alone till they
fancy they have brought their bloody Designs beyond any possibility of
disappointment. He knows their Down-sittings, and their Up-risings; he is about
their Path, and about their Bed, and spieth out all their ways; yea, there is
not a word in their Tongue but he knows it altogether; nay, he understands
their Thoughts, from whence proceed all their evil Deeds, long before; when
they are yet a far off; for the Thought is the main Spring, and Original of all
Humane Actions. The Heart is that small spot, that little dark Cloud which,
though not so big as a Man's Hand, would produce such showers of Blood, if not
prevented by Divine Providence, as would overflow whole Countries. Here the
wicked Traitor, after he has conceived mischief, travelleth with Iniquity, and
brings forth Falsehood. Here Ambition and Revenge, when they have conceived
some cunning stratagem for the accomplishing their wicked Design, bring forth
their monstrous and deformed Issue of Sin, and that Sin brings forth Death,
either to the Author, or the Parties against whom the Plot is contrived; but
most commonly the mischief returns upon their own Head; and their violent
dealing comes down with a vengeance on their own Pates: For tho the Anvil of
the Heart, upon which all their ungodly Projects are hammered, be never so soft
quilted, that the boldest strokes whereby they are forging mischief against the
Lords Anointed, and against his Church, cannot be heard by the quickest Ear;
yet even the least Thought does not escape his knowledge, from whom nothing is
hid; though for a while he lets them go on in their Villainies, till at length
he takes them in their own craftiness, and their Counsels come down headlong
upon themselves: Thus the Psalmist says particularly to this Point, when
Treason was hatched against his own Royal Person; Psalm 37.12, etc. The wicked
plotteth against the Just, and gnasheth upon him with his Teeth; The Lord shall
taugh him to scorn, for he sees that his day is coming; the wicked have drawn
their Sword, and bent their Bow (all instruments of Cruelty ready for the fatal
execution) to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as are of an
upright Conversation; But, behold the issue; their Sword shall enter into their
own Heart, and their Bow shall be broken. The wicked watches the righteous and
seeks to slay him; but the Lord will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn
him when he is judged; the Righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance,
and shall wash his footsteps in the blood of the wicked; so that a Man shall
say, Verily, there is a reward for the Righteous, doubtless, there is a God
that judges the Earth. Psalm. 58.10, 11.

And this insensibly leads me to that which is an evident Proof of what the
Wise Man lays down in my Text: an Undeniable Instance and Demonstration, of the
Particular Care that God takes of those Good and Righteous Princes, into whose
hands he has committed the Reins of Government, for the Establishing of the
Welfare and Prosperity of his People; manifested in the late Signal and
Wonderful Act of his good Providence, in discovering the late Barbarous and
Inhumane Conspiracy against the Precious Life of our Dear and Dread Sovereign,
in whom all our Lives and Welfares are wrapped up: Which shows the Watchful Eye
that the Almighty has over his Royal Person, which he has so often secured,
not only from the Casualties of War, which have been many and great, but from
the secret Plots and Machinations of Deceitful, and Blood-Thirsty-Men, which
have been formed and contrived against him; for this is not the first time that
they have laid wait privily to destroy him, nor the first Demonstration of
God's wonderful Deliverance of him. O who can sufficiently detest and abhor the
Villainous Attempt of those Barbarous and Bloody Assassins, against the Sacred
Life of our most Gracious Prince, or enough praise the Almighty's Goodness for
the Preservation of it? Who can without horror and amazement of Spirit consider
what the dismal and fatal Consequences would have been to this Land and Nation
wherein we Live, if God, for the Sins of this ungrateful People, had suffered
this Black and Hellish Conspiracy hatched in the Secrets of Darkness to have
obtained the expected Success. Had the Breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of
the Lord, under whose shadow we hope long to be sheltered from the Fury of all
our Popish Enemies, been taken in their Nets, what a sad Confusion would there
have been among all Orders, Degrees, and Conditions of Men among us? What
Rivers of Blood would have run in lately dry places; when every Man's hand had
been against his Neighbor? What Murders, what Out-crys, what Groans, and
Shrieks of Dying Persons? What Devastations by Fire, to consume that beautiful
and magnificent City, one of the Europaean Wonders, which has risen more
glorious out of those Ashes in which those implacable Incendiaries had not long
since laid it. And all this to be followed (for without the accomplishing the
Barbarous Assassination, it would have been in vain to attempt it) by a
terrible and formidable Invasion, when all things were in hurry and Disorder;
and a sudden Fear and Astonishment for the dismal and unexpected Blow had
seized upon the hearts of all good Men; and no Preparations at hand to have
resisted the vast Numbers of Armed and Well-Disciplin'd Men, which would
continually have been pouring forth upon us: And all this to bring us into
Slavery and Subjection, to a Cruel and Perfidious Nation that hates us, and
which we have no other Reason but only as Enemies, to Love; and what is worse
yet, to destroy our Rights and Liberties, and that which ought to be dearest to
us, to extirpate our most holy Religion, and to introduce the Hateful Names of
Popery and Tyranny among us. And how near was all this dire Mischief to be
accomplished? Just upon the Edge of Execution: The black Cloud that hung over
our Heads, that was charged with Thunder and Lightning, was ready to break down
upon us, unless he who is higher than they, had diverted the Bloody and
Dreadful Storm. For God was pleased to discover this Horrid and Detestable
Conspiracy but a day before the Fatal time intended for the accomplishment of
it. He touched the Heart of one of the Conspirators by a sudden Impulse of his
Spirit, with a Remorse for that Barbarous and Inhumane Design wherein he had
engaged himself, and made him see with Horror and Distraction of Mind, the
Blackness and Unworthiness of that Cowardly and ungenerous Fact he was about to
commit: So that he could not be at quiet, nor take any rest, till he had
vomitted up, and disgorged the Bloody Secret which he had so greedily
swallowed. God making him, and others that were picked out to be of the Party
to Assassinate our Gracious Prince, (and they were more than Forty, the like
number of those who had banded together to kill St. Paul, who made this
Conspiracy) to be the happy Instruments of his wonderful Deliverance and
Preservation. Thus God, when he pleases to appear for the safety of the Church
and his People, can turn a Lion into a Lamb; he can make of Saul, who was a
Persecutor of the Saints, a Paul, a Preacher, and an Apostle, and a Propagator
of his Holy Gospel. Thus near was this Deadly, Execrable Plot of being fully
executed upon us: And that there was something at that very time extraordinary
in the Wind, some great matter hoped, and suddenly looked for by that Party,
which is still, though God be praised for it, unsuccessfully plotting the
Downful both of our Church and State, might easily have been conjectured,
(neither did it miss the Observation of some) by the more than ordinary
Feasting and Revelling, and meeting together of the professed Enemies of our
Religion; the Flocking together of those ill-boding Vultures in unusual numbers
of that time in the chiefest Places of concourse, showed that they more than
smelt the Bloody Design; and that they were in daily expectation of their
long-look'd for Prey; waiting to be gorged with Royal Blood; and that with the
Gore of those innumerable Sacrifices of both the Senatorian Orders, as well as
of those of inferior Ranks which must have indistinctly fallen, to have made
way for the completing of that detestable, and almost unparalled design
which they had undertaken. And indeed, the time of extremity of Danger is the
usual Season that God for the manifestation of his own Honor, and to show that
it is his Hand that does it, chooses for the Discovering and Frustrating the
Wicked Counsels of those who are in deep Consult, to overthrow the Foundations
of that Government he has established, and for the Deliverance of his Chosen
Servants: When the Mandatory-Letters were sent Post by Haman's Order to
destroy, to kill, and cause to Perish the whole Nation of the Jews, then was
God pleased to give Esther so much favor in the sight of the King, as to
obtain to have them counter-manded, and to turn the Destruction intended
against them upon the Heads of the Authors themselves: O may we ever, as the
Jews did, keep solemn the two days of our Purim, for our wonderful Deliverance,
when the Lot was on both days cast to consume, and destroy us; That these Days
may be may kept Holy to the Lord by an Ordinance, according to their appointed
time every Year, that they may be remembered in every Generation, and the
Memorial of them be continued to our Posterity after us. Again, when the Match
was laid to the Train, and the Conspirators were in expectation every Minute to
hear the Fatal Crack, then GOD, when they least expected it, was pleased to
open the long hidden Mine, and to discover their Magazine of Ammunition that
was laid to have blown up the King, with all the Flower of his Nobility and
Gentry, together with our Religion, at one blast. Thus God suffered this
damnable Conspiracy for the greater Confusion of the Traitors, who fell so
suddenly from their hopes with which they were puffed up; and to give us the
greater occasion to Praise and Magnify his Goodness toward us, to come just
to the Birth, and then would not give it strength to come forth. He saw them
all along; followed them from one place of Meeting to another, his Eye pursued
them from one Tavern to another; for there in those Temples, Dedicated to
Bacchus, they held their most Private and nocturnal Consults; there, on his
slippery Altars they sacrificed their Drink Offerings in intemperate Bowls,
for the success of their unhallowed, and most bloody Conjuration: and when they
were thoroughly heated with the furious Spirit of their impure Deity, then were
they fittest to contrive, and the most audacious to execute the maddest, and
most desperate Designs: Dignum sane Patella operculum; a fit Cover for such a
Mess; A proper Place, and fit Ingredients for the carrying on such a cruel and
bloody Enterprise, that no Man in his right Wits, and in a sober Mind, durst so
much as think on. Thus Cataline, such another bold Conspirator against his
Country, as these were; who plotted the Death of one of the Chief Magistrates,
Tully, the best Consul, they almost ever had; and the burning the City; the
slaughter of the Senate, and the ruin of their Temples, and all that was Sacred
among them, (just such another Holy and Worthy Project as this was) kept all
his debauched Consults by night, with all manner of lewd Intemperance, and
Excess; and when they were high flown, then he carried about a great Goblet,
wherein Wine and Man's Blood was mixed together; and when all his Accomplices
had tasted of it, and taken that Sacrament of Confederation to be true to one
another, he swore them all to Secrecy, and then participated his Intentions,
and then consulted for the most proper time and means for the execution of
them; but when all their black and horrid Designs, which they had formed
against their Country, Laws, and Magistrates, were ripe for to be put in
Action, and a Day appointed for the same, (even a time prefixed in the Month of
February, as the Historian tells us) their Plot was discovered to the Consul,
by one of their own Party, and the City saved, and his Life, with the Lives of
the Patricians, and the whole Order of Senators, and their Liberties preserved.
Thus God to show how easily he can baffle all the most cunning contrivances of
the wisest Achitophels, let us them go on, without seeming to take the least
notice of them: he suffers them to Pride, and boast themselves in the happy
invention of their bloody Project, and of the fitness and convenience of the
place for the Execution of it; he lets them go on to fill up the measure of
their Iniquity, and then on a sudden when they think they have their Prey, so
safe in the compass of their Net, that he cannot escape them, and that nothing
can intervene to frustrate their expectation; Behold a Bird of the Air, a
Message from Heaven sent by God into the Heart of one of their own Tribe, which
prompts him to a Discovery, carries the Tidings, and that which has wings
tells the matter.

And now what can we think of a Religion, if we may call it one; which
Authorizes, Allows, and Commands the acting such barbarous Villainies, for
promoting the Interest of the Roman Catholic Faith, as it is by themselves
incongruously, and absurdly called, and the bringing a Nation back again to
that Spiritual Thraldom and Captivity, out of which God had wonderfully
delivered it, which even the worst of Heathens would have been ashamed to own,
or in the least to countenance; to the great scandal and reproach of our most
Holy, Pure, and peaceable Christian Profession, which suffers much in its
Credit, and Reputation, by such pernicious Doctrines as the Church of Rome
teaches, and prescribes to those of her Communion; under the color and
pretended Authority of Religion, they contrive with the greatest Sacredness
that can be, the most bloody and inhuman Murders, and Treasons imaginable;
making even the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, the Bond of their wicked
Confederacies, and Combinations; both their Obligation to commit their
execrable Villainies; and their Tie not to confess it, if it may tend to the
prejudice, and discerdit of their Holy Mother Church; when it is done. Now what
Security and Guard can Mankind have against such as have no regard for whatever
they say, do, or swear, when the Cause which they have espoused is concerned;
or when their Lives, Fortunes, or Reputations are called in question: Who can
but detest and abominate such cruel and Faithless Principles as destroy all
Morality, and good Nature, and which encourage their Proselytes to Murder
Princes in cold Blood, and to do the Devil's work, who was a Murderer from the
beginning in God's name, under the mask and pretense of doing him good Service.
They consecrate Danners with Exorcisms, and Holy Water, for a more successful
Invasion; and that they may the more deeply, and effectually take the Dye of
Protestant Blood, they Hallow Daggers and Pistols with all the dire Ceremonies,
of their formal, and soppish Superstition, that they may enter the sooner, and
pierce the further into the Hearts of Gods Vicegerents. But God be praised, who
has defeated all their pernicious Counsels, who has discovered all their
deep-laid Designs, who has turned back all their vast Preparations with shame,
and dishonor; and has made that proud insulting Monarch, who by these vile
Arts, and unchristian, unmanly, as well as unkingly practices thought to have
overrun us, and our most Holy Religion, a scorn, and a byword, and an object
of Contempt, and Reproach to all Christendom. Though Satan and his Adherents
sat in full Consult for the ruin of our Religion, and the Chief Head under
Christ of it; yet the everlasting Counselor who always advises the best for
his chosen, has infatuated all their Designs, and has brought that untimely
Fate which they intended to others, upon their own Heads: this, God has done
for us, and it ought to be marvelous in our Eyes; That God who has assured,
that he will make all things conspire, and make for the Good of those who love
him, and put their Trust in him: who makes even the wrath of Man to praise him,
and whose fierceness he can, when he pleases, restrain, and make their most
wicked Conspiracies, instrumental to their future Security, and Preservation. A
Tree shaken by the Wind, and whose Roots are loosened thereby within the
ground, thrives the better, settles the faster, and bears the more Fruit when
the Storm is over: and this Government, whose Foundations seemed to be shaken
by the violence of those furious attempts, which have been made by the Prince
of the Air to overthrow them, shall be the stronger and more firm for those
vain and empty blasts which these bold Conspirators have raised against it. It
has cut off some of the rotten and unsound Members already, and I hope will
either hinder many from being infected with the same Contagion, or cure them if
they have been already tainted with it. It has united and confirmed the
Hearts, and Affections of all Good Men, and made them unanimous in their
Resolutions of defending the Sacred Person of their valiant Leader; and of
taking new, and more effectual Methods (with submission still to, and reliance
on God's Providence, which has hitherto watched over him, and us) for the
securing both Him, and our Religion, which through him was aimed at from the
like dangers for the time to come. It will, and ought to make us the more
watchful. and to have a stricter Eye over those whom we now find, to be,
according to the Character that St. Paul gives First Chap. to the Romans, of
those whom God had given up to a reprobate Mind, to be filled with all manner
of Unrighteousness. and Maliciousness, to be full of Envy, Murder, Debate, and
Deceit, to be inventers of Evil things, Covenant-breakers, without Natural
Affection, Implacable, and Unmerciful: whom no Kindness can oblige; but are
still studying, and plotting to disturb the Peace, and quiet of our Jerusalem.

But above all this, it will in all Humane Probability, have that good
Influence and Operation upon a Party within our selves, as to open their Eyes,
and to convince their Judgments, and to make them own that Duty and Allegiance,
which they have so long neglected and forgot to pay; when they cannot but see
before their Faces the Base, Unworthy, and inhumane Practices that have been
used by the Papists, (Permissu and Jussu Superiorum) and by some among
themselves to bring about their Wicked Designs; and when they must, if they
have the least grain of Sense left, acknowledge, that if what they have so
passionately wished and strove for, had for our Sins, been accomplished by a
French Power, which I hope now they will no longer deny, that they themselves
must have fallen a Sacrifice among the rest to their besotted Bigottry, unless
they would abjure that Religion which hitherto they seem so Zealously to
profess, and to fall down before the Golden Idol of Rome. Surely they will be
ashamed to herd with the Papists for the time to come; seeing as their
Principles lead them to it, so now they are actually detected and convicted, by
Plain and Undeniable Evidence, of the most Barbarous and Ungenerous Attempt
that almost was ever made, against the Life of a Prince, by secret Treachery
and Ambushment, who has so Freely and Bravely exposed his Person to the most
imminent Dangers upon all Occasions, not only for the Preservation of the
Protestant Religion, and the Rights and Liberties of his Subjects, which, but
for him, under GOD, had long since been swallowed up by that great Leviathan,
who spares nothing that comes within his reach and grasp; but also for the
recovery of the Rights and Possessions of most of the Princes of Europe which
have been invaded, and encroach'd on by the common Disturber of the Peace, and
Welfare of Christendom.

O how happy should we be, if all our Divisions and Differences were composed
among us; then should all our Enemies, either Abroad or at Home, be discouraged
to make any more attempts against us; then should our Religion flourish, and
the Prosperity of the Nation be firmly established among us! Let us therefore
make that right use of GOD's Mercy thus signally and visibly conferred upon us,
by the Discovery of that Detestable Conspiracy against His Majesty's Royal
Person and Government, as to lay aside all distinctions, and frivolous Disputes
about Words more than Realities, and bear a Dutiful and unconstrained
Allegiance to the best of Princes, who thinks nothing too hazardous to
undertake, nothing too painful to undergo to procure the Happiness of his
People, and the Security of their Religion.

And as we have praised God this Morning in that excellent Form of
Thanksgiving, composed by his Order, for the great and signal Deliverance of
his Person and Government, from all the Wicked Designs that were laid against
both, so let us show the sincerity of our Thankfulness unto God by our
conformity to his Laws, and by yielding a cheerful Obedience to the Commands of
his Vicegerent, for whose safety he has so graciously appeared.

Lastly, As we have jointly set our hands in token of our readiness to employ
our whole Strength, and to use our utmost Endeavors to assist for the Defense
of his Royal Person, and support of his Government, and to bring to condign
Punishment those who shall offer any violence to the one, or disturbance to the
other; so let us now with one accord lift up our Hearts and our Voices, and
associate our selves this Day, to present our humble Address to the Divine
Majesty of Heaven, in behalf of our Dear and Dread Sovereign, King WILLIAM;
that he may be long the Care and Darling of the Almighty, and the Joy, Comfort,
and Safe guard of these, and all other his Realms and Dominions whatsoever. He
has long, O Lord, abode in the heat of the Battle, under the cooling and
refreshing Shadow of thy gracious and protecting Providence; thou did cover
him with thy large and capacious Wings, from the Bullets that flew about him;
and now thou have quashed all those Midnight-Plots and Conspiracies that were
hatched in the depth of Hell, and they are by thy goodness discovered, and come
to nothing. O contime thy loving kindness unto him, because he has known thy
Name, and when he calls upon thee, do thou answer him. Let thy Truth and Mercy
be still his Shield and Buckler; Let him take to himself the Jealousy for
thine Honor for complete Armor, and let him put on Righteousness for a
Breastplate, and true Judgment instead of an Helmet: Let thy Hand, O GOD, hold
him fast, and thy hand strengthen him: Hide him from the Secret Counsels of the
Wicked, and from the Insurrection of Evildoers, who encourage themselves in
Mischief, that they may suddenly shoot at him that is perfect, and commune
among themselves how they may lay snares, and say, that no Man shall see them:
But do thou, O Lord, suddenly shoot at them with a swift Arrow, that they may
be wounded: Yea, let their own Tongues make them fall, that whosoever sees them
may laugh them to scorn, and that all Men may say, This has the Lord done, for
they shall perceive that it is thy Work; then shall the Righteous rejoice, and
put their Trust in thee, and all they that are true of heart shall be glad. And
that he may be a long Blessing to this Nation, do Thou continue to deliver him
from the Evil Man, and preserve him from the Wicked Man, who imagines Mischief
in his Heart, and stirrs up strife all the Day long; Keep him from the hands of
the Ungodly, who had purposed to overthrow his Goings: Keep him from the Snares
they have laid for him, and from the Traps of the Wicked-doers; Let the Ungodly
fall in their own Nets together, and let him ever escape them.

Grant this, and whatever else we have prayed for, in much mercy to us and this
Sinful Nation, for thy Dear Son Jesus Christ's sake, to whom, with thy self,
and Holy Spirit, be ascribed all Honor and Glory, World without end, Amen

FINIS.

