TWO EPISTLES, Written to all Friends in the Truth: The one, touching the
Perfection of HUMILITY; Written in Rome-Prison of Madmen.

The Other, Touching the RIGHTEOUS ORDER OF JUDGMENT IN ISRAEL.

Written at Lions in France, By the Servant of God, JOHN.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmil, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

CONCERNING HUMILITY
JOHN the Prisoner, to the Little LAMBS, SALUTATION.
GOD Almighty is greater than the swelling and boiling Waves of a troubled,
angry, raging Sea; for though she rouls the unsetledness of her Outrage as the
Tumblings of Mountain after Mountain; yet He which rules on high (ordering [in
his unsearchable Counsel] all things for the Advantage of good Prosperity and
Happiness of all the constant, settled and faithful-hearted; whose Delight,
without wearisomeness, is to trust in his Living Name, and Eternal Supreme
Power) can make all in a moment, and turning of a short space, become as
standing Oil. Thus says the Voice which is holy, which is true, which is
living and faithful; Who has Power but the LORD? Or, where is there permission
but of the Mighty One? Where is Counsel but with the Eternal Wisdom, who
purges Jacob in his way, and befooleth his Foes in the very open ways, and
narrowest and secretest paths of their own Outgoings and Designs? Who has
known the LORD, and will not trust in Him for an Everlasting Good? Who has
trusted in the God of Salvation, that can say his Trust has perished in the
end, and the peace of his soul is fled from him? Or, can his Servants say that
He is as a man, or like unto the son of man which remembers not the way, nor
enclineth unto the Cry of the Just? Verily, the Seas may sink through the
Earth, and be no more, as the Waters in her belly, and the whole Earth become
as a whirled dust out of a golden Balance; Yet is there Judgment with the Lord
for Worm Jacob, and a Covenant of Righteousness for Israel. Moreover, Though
Nature may degenerate from her proper kind, the Cow nor the Ass, the Camel nor
the Old Lionness; nay, nor the Nurse nor the Mother have any more pity or
compassion to the fruits of their own bowels to suckle or nourish them in due
season, though they might harden their hearts, and shut their ears from the
Cries of their own flesh, and should loath and abominate their languishings
unto death; yet is there Compassion with the God of David for the humble and
contrite-hearted, and Deliverance with the God of Moses for the Seed of his own
Host, though they are straightened by the Red Seaside: Therefore lift up your
heads, O ye little Lambs, and breath to your Keeper in the spirit of fear and
reverence, sanctifying his NAME in your hearts, in the Life of Faith and
Obedience, until the Rod be stretched over the Floods; for then shall you march
with dry shoes through the mighty deeps, with the Songs of Salvation in your
Way; But the joining hands of the divided Waters will cover the running stones
of the Defenses of Egypt, as Rocks that are cast to the bottoms; doubled then
shall your Psalms be, Yea, and trebly tuned unto the highest Land and Glory of
Him which rules in the Heavens above.

This is the Day wherein God Almighty is trying and proving with what an eye
you are inclined to look into the Life of his humility, who shows himself as a
servant unto Man, walking his Cornfieldsd, and attending him with Bread and all
things; who feeds the Worms of the workmanship of his hands, and refreshes the
creeping things with the lowly and humble Attendance of his own most infinite
bowels of Mercies; yea, he walks in the deeps of the Seas, amongst the Worms
that creep in the bottom of her belly and womb, watching and waiting as the
diligence of all diligence to serve them in all wants. Ah! what shall I say of
the King of Glory, to whom the Sun, Moon and Stars are but as a shadow, and the
Firmament of the Heavens but as a dark and gloomy vail? Surely, when I consider
the Glory of the most Eternally glorious, full of Wisdom, Strength, Power,
Virtue, Light and Brightness (the height of whose Majesty in all things which
glorious are, there is no end of space to reach) how He has humbled Himself to
come down in the lowliness of his Life, to serve me (his despised of man) with
the greatness and grace of His rich Compassions, it moves and melts my heart
before him, and even now makes me cry in the Spirit, saying, Oh that the Wisdom
of the most wise and humble would increase with me for ever, to the end,
instructing me to serve, as He serves in the humbleness of his wisest Life.
Children this is the deep place where you are to sink down into, in this the
day of the trial of spirits, to know of what nature they are: So here, try your
selves, and prove your selves, and see if you can serve the Worms of God, which
creep upon the face of the Earth (even as God serves them) according to the
measure and proportion of the wisdom and knowledge which from God you have
received; search your selves, and examine your selves, whether in nature and
true kind you can serve, as God Almighty serves, the poor creeping things; or
serve Lazarus the poor man, as God Eternal served him in Dogs, and the World
saw it not: Yea, and question your selves, and try your hearts, that you may
know, whether you can serve God in that lowliness in which He daily serves
you; and so consider well how God Almighty provideth your food and raiment, and
puts the bread in your mouths, and pours the water into your cups, and arrays
you, and latches your shoes, and makes clean the filthy way before your
footsteps; And if any among you have griefs or sores, or botches or painful
boyls, God Almighty humbles his compassionate Soul, and comes down from on
high, and stands exceedingly below you, where you see him not, and puts out
his tongue, and licketh your sore places, and so heals the wounded, and
saves the sick from the grief of the malady.

Oh my Beloved Ones! and dearest little Children and Lambs of God, I cannot
tell you how infinitely you own tender and merciful Father stands below you,
and round about you, waiting and watching in grace and loving kindness to serve
you, whose day this is, which now is, wherein you must be tried and proved,
whether you bear the Image of his holy Spirit of Humility, as did Jesus the
Just; and as you are found sinking down here into the low place, even in
admiration, considering where (before this day) you dwelt in a house which had
its Foundation above the Rocks of the deeps of the low places, whereon the
highest Heavens are pitched, and therefore All must sink unto it and be firmly
settled on it, whereby ye may know the bosom of Love, from which all pure
service does proceed; service to God, service to man, service to beasts,
service to fowls, service to fishes and service to worms, all in the Love, in
which they were by the humble Spirit created, to be served of the humble
Spirit, according to all their respective kinds; So here you may see the
Eternal Wisdom dwells in the low place, where a friend in the pure Spirit of
Humility (which proceeds out of the Eternal Bosom of Love, which created all
things for a service, as God Almighty himself serves all living creatures in
the same Love and Lowliness) oughteth to sweep his friend's house and to latch
his shoes, and make clean the way of his footsteps, yea, and to do it with the
very sweat of his brow; which I speak in God Almighty's holy Spirit to all
without respect of persons; For this will give all the Children true entrance
and living ingress into the bowels of God's mercies, that as they (in the
incomprehensible Love) are come down to serve in the low house, beneath all
Earth, and Waters under the Earth, and there to give due attendance as God
Almighty waits to serve all; and thus are Ministers in the feeling bowels of
the unlimited pitties and compassions to all distresses, without respect of
creatures or persons; in this manner gathering all into the unlimitedness of
their bowels of mercies; So become, they gathered into the inmost part of the
Eternal Bosom; and here the Life provokes the Love, and the Love stirs up
the Bowels, and the Bowels of God are provoked to yearn in Himself, which
brings home the Oppressions of the Oppressed in a greater weight upon the
Spirit of the Almighty God, than if it were done to him alone, and in
particular; for that they are the helpless Apple of his Eye, which cannot help
it self, nor take out the pricking motes without the help of a careful and
merciful hand.

And therefore the GOD of your Hope (in the day of Affliction and Temptation)
will arise and roar as a Lioness which is robbed of her Whelps, because her
compassions go after her young; and the Nations shall dread and tremble, and
the Host thereof shall fall by the highway side; for as much as they carried
away the spoil which they should have left in the Land, and have wasted the
Tents of the Lord: And the house of the Spoiler shall be made a spoil before
Him, and he which robbed the Labourer of his Hemp and Flax, as he bears the
burden thereof from his Neighbors door, it shall burn as a flame at his back.
Woe unto Egypt, for the Lord is jealous: Woe unto Rimmon, for that the Anger of
the God of Righteousness and Judgment kindles; Weep ye craggy Rocks, and howl
ye exalted Mountains, and lament your part, O ye lofty Hills round about the
Cities of Tire and Sidon; For I will overturn says the Lord God, and it shall
be a day of rattling, even as if the Firmament were falling with Thunders;
Nations shall hear it and dread, and I will have a Name of Righteousness, says
the Lord Almighty, even unto the ends of the whole earth. Then shall thou sing
O Daughter of my own Beloved, and gladness shall never depart from thy
Situation, O Damsel of my hearts delight; for I will be thine in an Oath, and
thou shall be mine in a perpetual Covenant, even for ever and evermore, says
the God of eternal love.

In this Spirit therefore (which is of Power and Might, of Truth and
Faithfulness) I have dearly to stir you up, and exhort you, to wait in the
patience and content of the Life of the Lamb, submitting in the will of the
Father unto every yoke, weight and burden whatsoever, may be permitted to be
put upon your necks and backs: and also in the true feeling of the Oppressions
of every soul, put your backs to their burden, whosoever they be, without
respect of persons; for that Spirit is of God which is tender, and enclineth
unto a feeling of every man's Yoke; for so did God Almighty feel, and pity, and
compassionate them in their Sufferings, and under their Oppressions, which now
do oppress, and make the others to suffer by whom they formerly were
oppressed; which the others should not have done then, neither should these do
so now; Therefore do ye, the Children of God, even as your Father does, stand
between them both in the Spirit, which bears every man's Oppression and unjust
load, and so you show your selves to be of the Image of your Father, who
thereby will enlarge his Glory very greatly in the whole Earth; for God will
have such a sound to go unto the ends thereof, and gain himself a great Name of
praise thereby: And as for you in this Spirit, your Reward shall be very great,
and your Redemption shall certainly come; and therefore again, I say let
Patience have her perfect work; for the black horse which is Colored over with
blood, which now runs the race, was never truly ayred, nor well breathed,
and the Course from the first start, being a full loose upon switch and spur,
will surely sink, before half the Race is run; and he which comes gently after
on the moderate speed will obtain the mark and the prize. So though the little
ones do eat their bread with the sweat of their brows for a season, it is but
to prepare them, and their pure appetites to eat at a feast of fat things in
the infinite worth, and incomprehensible price of an everlasting life of
thanksgiving and praise unto him which prepares the Table.

To which purpose, this the Lord God requires of his People, rent souls,
broken spirits, contrite hearts, breathing minds, fervent prayers, and
exceeding open bowels to God Almighty, in all things of your souls desires; for
this is the Sacrifice which the Eternal Power requires from All without
respect of persons, and he loves the broken spirit, and has respect unto the
contrite heart, which I full well know by large testimony and experience; and
now, the deeper I ponder it, the more it rents my inward parts, to consider the
greatness of the Goodness of God, which answers the full streams of the
broken spirit and contrite heart, which I cannot but testify, that Israel may
drink refreshment even at the brim of the Cup-ful of my Consolations, and hold
it as an exceeding Joy in his house, to go down and humble himself before his
God in the rent soul, broken spirit, and exceeding contrite heart, to feel his
Creator's acceptance of him in the day of his mourning before him.

Enter, enter, and feel your thorough ingress into this house in the contrite
heart, O all ye Children of the living God, that you may know your Father's
Life, and bear his very Image and true likeness in all things; for his Spirit
is wounded, and mourns and grieveth, (in more contriteness than your eye can
discern or reach) bearing every man's oppressive burdens, without respect of
persons: so you entering here into the deeps of the Spirit of God, the humble
spirit of contriteness, you move the bowels of your Maker, and his bowels stir
up his Power to return the Captivity of Judah, and of all the house of Israel,
whose lot is to inhabit Jerusalem.

And be it known unto you all, That God Almighty will be angry with all such
which do stand in a height (above the contrite and broken heart) saying in
presumption, We are above and beyond all things in the outward which can annoy
or hurt us, and God will bring down all such, and make them to know that if he
is lived in, he will be lived in, even in his Spirit of contriteness, which
infuseth the reverence, and fear, dread and trembling at his Name in the inward
parts, where the broken heart must be witnessed, which is the true sacrifice
which God requires and accepts: So he that is gone above the contrite heart
is gone out of the acceptance with God, not having the true Sacrifice in which
acceptance is found, and in that heart which is gone from the contriteness
there is no true praise; for the low life is departed from, which only can
praise Him which rules above all things, and so the creature goes from his
Creator and sacrifices unto his own affection, and praises the delight of his
own lust, and drowneth his poor soul in perdition.

Finally, my dear and everlastingly beloved little Lambs of the true Shepherd,
in this Spirit my life labors with you, and the abundance of my unspeakable
love flows forth unto you, even that which no Voice can tell you but the
immediate Voice of God, which is nigh you; wherein I am rouled, bound up and
sealed among and in you, greatly comforted concerning you, feeling a glorious
and goodly number (in my daily prayers) of great price in the gracious eye of
God; And many will pass thorough a fire which will make them shine as the Sun,
and their fruit will be only to God.

Ah! I cannot tell you of the Glory of the Day which comes among you, for I am
ravished and overcome in the sense of that Glory, which my weak and bleared eye
can see; and truly the Glory is such, that for Glory I cannot behold, but I
cry, but I cry, Oh! the depths of Love which will wound Enmity! Oh! the weight
of Mercy which will kill Cruelty! Oh! the pleasantness of Patience which will
extinguish Persecution! Oh! the depth of Wisdom which will work over
Stratagems! Oh! the worth of Virtue, which will crown with Diadems! Oh! the
dread of Life, and power of Supremacy, which will wear the Glory of an
everlasting Dominion! this will be the Sting, the Woe and the Torment unto every
unclean spirit upon the face of the Earth, until she shall bear that spirit no
more upon her face, but all things shall be as they were in the beginning, and
God in more infinite measure gloriously known and enjoyed, than ever in any Age
that is past since the days that Adam was made a true and living Soul. Grace,
Mercy and Peace be unto you all, giving you growth in this Life. Amen.

So read me in the Word of God, and then read this a second time over in your
Congregations. Written in Rome-Prison of Madmen.
Concerning Judgment.
The Son of Love, Peace, and Unity, who is of the mind of Subjection unto the
Spirits of the Prophets; To the Gathered Seed of the Lord Almighty, Sends the
Fruits of the Life of Concord, as a most sincere Salutation, unto them all,
wheresoever upon the face of the Earth.
BEloved Sisters and Brethren, I would that you should all know, in the deeps
of the Spirit of Power and Glory, that GOD is but one Eternal Life of Love,
Peace, and Everlasting Unity in Himself, not having in Him Prejudice, strength
of a froward Will, lust of entrance into any other Nature than His own, or
Pride in His Throne of Glory; but is full of Love and Mercies unto Enemies,
easy to be entreated of; Pure in Life, and the lowest and humblest in His
Eternal mind, of all things beside Him; Yea, as He is Infinitely in Power above
all the works of his hands, so in His Humility He is Immeasurably below them
all, wherein the Excellency of His Beauty and Glory is seen to be above all,
who is blessed, praised, and honored of all that truly know Him, for ever,
Amen.

This therefore is His mind, unto all the Children of the Day, (viz.) That they
should seek to have a dwelling in the brightness of the Glory of His Life, by
feeling after Him in the lowest places of His habitation, where righteous
Judges in Israel shall be known, and righteous Judgment (which oppresses not
any, but is appointed for the Revelation of Mercy unto all) shall be witnessed
in the Consciences of every raised Seed of Jacob, which shall preserve the
Concord, Peace, Love, and everlasting Unity among all, even unto the
determination of all Time; wherein the Restoration of all things shall come to
pass, as it was first in the Original, before Transgression was; that there may
not be the groan of a Creature under the bondage of Oppression; but the whole
Earth, Seas, and all that in them is, become one entire Body, made up of the
perfection of the Glory of the Almighty Creator, that it may be an everlasting
Song, of His highest Honor for ever and ever, Amen.

I feel a Life, which in some years silence (through Tribulations and great
Tribulations) in the secret continual exercise of the mind of the Spirit of
holiness, through the deep mercies of God, has attained unto a small measure
of the understanding and knowledge of the Judgments of its Maker: And therefore
as one that has obtained Mercy at the Tribunal of God, and is precepted to the
same, am drawn forth of a free heart, to show unto all the tender in Israel,
That Order of Judgment which is justified of the Lord God; that in the
execution thereof, without respect of Persons in Judgment, the Peace of his
God's Holiness, may be kept in his Tents; and Love and Unity, in the richest
blessings of Mercy be held and retained in his Land Everlastingly.

All that are born of the Seed of Promise, must grow into the similitude of the
glory of their heavenly Father in all things, which are holy and virtuous in
the light of Life, which gives to see that God is not rigorous, rash, nor
cruel; but tender, pitiful, forgiving, long-suffering, and merciful; which
shows the amiableness of His Glory in Judgment, in which Image of Glory, all
the Children of Light must grow to be as their Father is; for which Cause in
matters of unresolvedness or controversy betwixt Friend and Friend, Brother
and Brother, it ought to be pondered, Whether the thing that is objected
against, be sin? which if it so appears, and that also to the dishonor of God,
and his Truth in the eye of the World, then shall there be an utter denying of
the sin, and a tender admonition given to that Person to forsake and repent of
his sin: And so like wise Gardeners, ye ought to pluck up the Weeds, that the
Plants may prosper in the ground, and prune the Tree, cutting off the
unprofitable branches, that the profitable may much more prosper, yiedling
abundance of fruit, in due season, unto the Lord of the Vineyard; and not go
too hastily and cut off a Twig, because of a corrupted leaf thereon, nor cut
off a Limb of the Tree because of a withered bow on the Limb; but rather learn
the Judgment of Wisdom and Righteousniss of the Lamb, in cases of sin and
uncleanness, to stoop down and write with the finger on the ground, and when
you have sufficiently written there; as the Lamb stooped down twice in the
Judgment of the cause of the Harlot, then you will come to lift up the head
also, (as he did) and say, Go thy way, and sin no more; for by stooping down
and writing on the ground, you will put many in the way, wherein they will sin
no more; as the Lamb (your Example) did the Adulteress: And there you will be
known to be of His Spirit, which takes away the sin of the world, and not made
as Instruments to the cutting off of souls from holiness and righteousness,
causing them thereby to turn into all sin and uncleanness; neither will the
grief of the Just fall justly upon your heads, nor the sore distractions of the
oppressed become your Burdens, but Peace will be with you for ever: But until
this order of the Judgment of Righteousness be thoroughly among you, God will
make Whips for the daughters of Judah, and Scourges for the sons of Israel, and
in measure chastize His People, until they are formed into the similitude of
the brightness of His Glory, in the true Knowledge of His Judgments and
Mercies, which go over all His Works; to be made a perfect Inheritance unto Him
for ever, as He is their God, and their Perfection; But after Admonition upon
Admonition, Reproof upon Reproof, if such a Person as is spoken of, stops
the Ear, and hardneth the Heart, and despises the Way of the Lord, and will
not be Converted and Healed, after all the gentle dealings of the Spirit of
your Father, and the Lamb in you: Then it will appear just and righteous in any
Sister or Brother, that is moved of the Lord in his pure and holy Fear, in the
Spirit of Sobriety, to Judge the evil of such a one, in such severity as the
Brother or Sister may be led unto by the Spirit of Widom to do; and so the
Judgment will stand true and sound never to be repented of, for it will reach
to that of God in all, in relation to Truth, both in matter, time and manner.
And as this Order of Righteous Judgment is kept, so Peace will be also kept in
Israel, and the Unity of Love in all his Tents for Ever.

And be it known unto you, that Hastiness is not of the nature of my Father,
who wooeth sinners, and corrects gently in measure, and stirs up his
Bowels of Love and Mercies, again and again unto sinners, and often wooeth a
stiffnecked and rebellious enemy, and wins a treacherous soul by the power
of his boundless eternal Love: Wherefore all that are born of the Seed of his
Kingdom, must so grow into the Image and Similitude of their God, in his
Spirit, of the glory of Love, Meekness, Long-suffering, and exceeding
Tenderness unto one another, and unto all the Creation of Mankind, made of His
mighty hand, as that their lives may show forth the excellency of His Praise in
their Generation, even to the End of their days in the Tabernacle.

Again, in Cases of Trespasses of Brethren against Brethren, it ought to be
looked into, whether the Trespass was of a presumptuous Will; and finding it
so, the Trespasser may wisely be dealt withal as abovesaid; but still the
Brethren in such cases must mind Forgiveness more than Judgment: Because the
exercise of Forgiveness, in the glorious Power of Love and Mercies, is able to
overcome all the Trespasses, and the strong Will in all men which works
Trespasses. Wherefore he that overcomes in this manner, gains Victory in the
Battle of the Lamb, and so Conquers, as to receive the Crown of Victory on his
Head; and also to see plainly, how the Virtue of Love in him, covers a
multitude of sins and evils: And may not I say unto you all (without respect of
persons) if my Eternal Father of brightness, gave you the Example of the Lamb
of His Glory, in taking away the sins of the World, ought not ye to be careful
followers of Him in all His steps, pressing on in the growth of His Spirit, as
much as in you lies, to do, as he did? And if He, in the Love of the Father,
took away the sin of the World, whilst yet it was in enmity to the Father, and
His own Life, ought not ye therefore, earnestly strive to be careful, in
seeking to remove the nature of a Trespass from a Brother? And know you not
that the most Forgiveness is a ground and cause, for the stirring up of the
most Love? and if Love be stirred up in this Principle of Life, in the hearts
of Trespassers, through the obtaining from you the abundance of Forgiveness,
does not this truly beget souls unto a nearness in God, who is the Original and
Fountain of Eternal Love and Forgiveness? Surely yea; And therefore, this is
Counsel to you all, that you may be a pure and holy People to the Lord your
God, Learn the Life of the Lamb, Follow Him wheresoever He goes, and you shall
never want Wisdom nor Counsel in the Way.

And to the end that you may all bear in your faces the express similitude*
and Image of the Father, mind the Word of the Lord to the Revolted People of
Israel, who thus spoke unto them by his Prophet, saying, As I live, says the
Lord God [who is pitiful, merciful, and long-suffering; slow to anger, but
ready to forgive] I delight not in the death of a sinner, but rather that he
might turn from his sins and repent: Unto which Repentance the Lord God of
Grace has often wooed (as I have said) perverse Rebels, which have wilfully
resisted his holy Spirit, and sometimes has smitten them with the Rod of his
gentle Corrections, and then has wooed them again, and said, All the day long
have I stretched out my hand to a gainsaying and rebellious People. And, Oh
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are
sent unto thee, How often would I have gathered thee as a Hen gathers her
Chickens, but ye would not? And which of us (this day in Sion) can say, but
that our God sent unto our souls Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept
before we turned unto Him? and whilst yet we were sinners He loved us, and
whilst we were Enemies, He prepared the way of reconciling us unto Himself; and
whilst we were in our Blood He washed us; and when none eye pitied us His
Mercies covered us: Now therefore if we should deal by our Brethren which have
halted by the way, and not in the way of the dealings of our Father's love,
mercies and compassions unto us whilst yet we were enemies unto Him; then
should we degenerate from the brightness of the similitude of His Life, and be
but as the sons of darkness in Judgment; for in the Eternal sweet Spirit of
God I am sure that all Judgment out of the Life of this Testimony is but for a
day of reproof, and also to be tried in a day of Revelation by Fire; and
therefore the merciful Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world,
said, Judge not, lest ye be judged; because every tittle, out of his Spirit, is
to be judged by his Spirit; since, in all Judgment besides it, there is a
secret seed of prejudice and enmity in the heart, which stirs up prejudice
in the hearts of the persons judged; and such judged souls by shyness and
strangeness kept at swords point, and at severe distance from Friends, hardens
their hearts from God, which saves not, but destroys the soul: which is a sore
weight to fall upon any spirit (viz.) not to be an instrument of Salvation, but
rather of Damnation; which for ten thousand times ten thousand the price of all
the Treasures of the Earth, I would not should fall justly upon my back through
an act of the spirit of rashness, unless first I had exhorted, secondly
admonished and meekly reproved; yea, after all this, if the person blameable
should stand in obstinacy and perverseness of heart against God, even until the
last and utmost occasion of denying such a soul, I ought not to deliver such a
one over, but for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in
the day of the Lord.

Again, All Friends must take serious and prudent heed how they take up matters
upon slight reports; for that is but of the same which is ready to say, Report,
and we will report: for such things will make Israel walk maimed in Counsel,
and halt in Judgment, and make him cast the simple in the ditch, and set the
subtle to fly swift over fences.

Wherefore, again I say, Be ye followers of the Lamb wheresoever he goes; for
he took the Testimony of many, before he judged the Harlots Cause in the seat
of Mercy.

And be ye careful to take the advantage of countenancing and cherishing the
least appearance of Repentance and Contrition of heart in any revolted soul,
turning not your ear from it, but nourish it and cherish it in all, that ye may
appear as strength thereunto: And how know ye but that in so doing, ye may
convert a sinner to God, and turn him from the evil of his way? And will you
not know in that day that there will be more Joy in Heaven among the Angels of
God, than for the other ninety and nine of the Flock, which never erred nor
strayed from the Sheepfold? And will not the sense of the Joy of God's Angels
be a sufficient Crown of Reward unto you for so happy and blessed a work?
Surely yea. And therefore my dearest Sisters and Brethren, look ye to your
Father, grow in his Image, and walk with Him; and blessed shall your Day be
unto you for evermore, Amen.

I am your Sister in our Spouse; JOHN.
Sent from Lions in France, to be read by the Flock of the Lord everywhere: and
not among the World, who pervert the Judgment of Truth.


TOuching the foregoing Epistle I mention these few following words, for the
prevention of the Worlds evil carping, and the exaltation of every spirit which
has erred, yet which has seen the weakness of other persons judging them, and
not according to the true order of the Judgment of the Lamb of God: To the
World I say thus, Though a few, in Zeal, have stepped forth in Judgment, in a
particular matter, somewhat beyond their measures; yet because of infirmity in
such a case are not to be cast forth, and that because of their Youth and
Tenderness in the Truth, who in their this days birth, as newborn babes, have
not yet attained unto the Perfection of that Wisdom, which is to be attained
unto, but through Experience are growing more and more into the same. And to
persons imprudently judged, this I also insert, That if they from a sense of
this Admonition unto all, which reaches unto such young and zealous souls in
the Truth which have imprudently judged them, should rise up and seek to boast
over them, they would by it bring themselves under the real Condemnation of the
Spirit, which gave utterance of the aforesaid Epistle, which only tends in
substance for perfecting Unity, Peace and Love in God, which may never end.



THE END.

