THE Syracusan Tyrant: OR, THE LIFE OF AGATHOCLES. With some Reflections on the
practices of our Modern Usurpers.

(...) Arist. Pol. l. 5. c. 10.

The most High rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will, axd sets over it the Basest of men. Dan. 4.17.

LONDON, Printed by J. F. for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred
Majesty. MDCLXI.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS Earl of SOUTHAMPTON, Lord High TREASURER of
England, Lord WARDEN of the New Forest, Knight of the most noble Order of the
Garter, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
TO open the Grave of an Impious Tyrant, and to revive the memory of his
detestable Villainies, may be censured as a design to infect the present Age,
and to instruct by an accursed Example those who want only the Arts, not the
desires, of doing Mischief. But if the unhappy Issues of such perverse Counsels
cannot secure this History from such an Effect, (to which even the Sacred
Stories and the most wholesome Laws are obnoxious through the Corruptions of
men, whereby they imitate that which is proposed to their Hatred, and follow
Their Practices whose Infamies they abhor, and whose Ruins they tremble at;)
yet the Compiler hopes by the Dedication of it to Your Honor to free himself
from such suspicions. It being not to be supposed, that He intends to teach,
but to discover the Impostures of Tyrants, and to warn the Credulous world to
arm themselves against those Monsters, who presumes upon the Patrociny of so
great an Assertor of Piety and Justice. For (My Lord) neither the Nobility of
Your Family nor the Plenty of Your Fortune have so much commended You to the
Admiration of men, as Your inflexible zeal to Righteousness and Truth. This was
that which drew You forth to follow that court in Persecution and Danger, whose
Honors and Pleasures in times of Peace could not allure You from Your
Retirements. And Your uncorrupted Faith to that Righteous Cause wherein all
Just Government was concerned, I have heard force from the Adversaries of it an
Elogie not beneath that which the brave Fabricius by his Virtue wone from his
Enemy, that The Sun might sooner forsake his course then My Lord of Southampton
depart from Justice. So that when the Popular Fury had overwhelmed the greatest
part of our Nobless in contempt, the Chiefs of that Faction testified an
Observance almost Religious to You, as to an Inviolable Sanctuary of true
Nobility and Honor. And they seemed to treat Your Lordship as the Conquering
Romans did the Captive Gods, whom, even while they chained, they did supplicate
with Sacrifices to remove to their triumphing City: so while they restrained
Your Liberty, and invaded Your Rights, they did even then with a sollicitous
Reverence court Your approbation of their successful Crimes. But as Your
Lordship despised their injuries, so You slighted their caresses. And though
You seemed unconcerned in their Oppressions, yet I have seen Your Indignation
then swelled high, when they profaned Justice by pretensions to it, and
blasphemed Religion by imputing their Impieties to the ducts of the Immaculate
Spirit and just Providence of God. As these Virtues, My Lord, are Your Glory,
so I humbly crave they may be my Protection: And that as I was confirmed and
heightened in a detestation of Unjust Usurpers by Your great Example, so under
the shelter of Your Honorable Name I may endeavor to render them Odious to
others. Since, that the Wicked should be exposed to the Public Hatred, as that
the Good should be rewarded with all that affection which is due to the
Benefactors of Mankind, is equally the Interest of Virtue. All whose
concernments being so dear to Your Lordship, that God, as well for His own
Glory as for the advantages of Good men, may long continue You as a Light in
this perverse Generation, and prosper all Your Counsels, is the constant prayer
of

My Lord, Your Honors most humble and most faithful Servant, R. P.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE miseries which Tyrants usually bring upon that unhappy people who, by
impatience of a Just Government, and by their seditious attempts upon their
Lawful Prince, have exposed themselves to the Cheats, and are at last inslaved
by the Power of such Ambitious Persons, cease not with their Lives, but are
extended to the following Age, and are apt to vex the next Generations. For
although the Rapines and Murders (which are not the greatest unhappinesses of
the Oppressed Vassals) may possibly end with the Empire of the Usurper; yet
those debaucheries of the Spirits of Men, and the unquiet principles of Villainy
(the most ignominious brands of Slavery) which they introduced both to acquire
and preserve their Greatness, survive their Authors, and like Venom infect
the blood, when the Viper is killed that gave the wound. Hence comes it to pass
that such a People, though freed from the Force of their Oppressor, yet
tenacious of his Crimes, debauched by impious Habits, and distracted with
various Factions, can never conspire to their common Peace and Safety; nor with
patience submit to those who would restore them the Benefits of Society and
Government. Our Age has had too fresh an Experience of this: for the Methods
of Tyranny having been acted with so much Industry, and continued with so great
Success among us, though we are now (through the benignity of Heaven) in the
enjoyment of all safe Liberty that is consistent with Government, and which can
be hoped for from a Just and Lawful Prince; yet have not men parted with those
Principles of Confusion and Ruin which the Tyrants did impress, but like Waves
that have been tossed with a Tempest, find no Calm, though the wind be down
that first raised them.

The method of curing such a distempered Multitude is, to show the Arts of
their Impostors, and to discover that what was obtruded upon them as the
Oracles of Heaven, or as the generous dictates of Free Souls, were but the
accustomed cheats of former Tyrants, newly proposed to an Ignorant and
Credulous Generation. No discovery comes with more Evidence upon Vulgar spirits
(who cannot weigh the force of Reason,) then that which is made by Example:
Like the Spartan Discipline, who to preserve their Youth (on whom Philosophical
discourses would have made but small impression) from Intemperance, presented
them with the Indecencies of their drunken Helots. And Menenius did retrive the
Roman Populacy from their Sedition by an Apologue, which is but a fictitious
Example. Such (Reader) is the design of publishing this Historical Discourse,
(which in the composing was intended but as a private Essay) of the Life of a
Tyrant; which has such a conformity with the Monster of Our Times, that who
reads the actions of the One, cannot but reflect upon the practices of the
Other. So that it may seem to confirm the Opinion of those who imagined that
All humane affairs had a Circular motion, and that no Age produces any thing so
prodigious that may not have its parallel in another. And it would give some
credit to the Pythagorean Transmigration: for comparing the Arts and Success of
Both, in rising from an abject condition to most absolute Sovereignty, and how
in Both Tyranny was acted to the height of Injustice, one of that School would
fancy that the Soul of Agathocles, after several peregrinations through the
forms of Tigers, Wolves, Foxes, Harpies and Vultures, with some diversions in
humane shapes, as of Mahumet, Borgia, and such other enemies of Mankind, it had
at last vexed the world under the name of OL. CR.

It would be too great a distrust of the Reader's Judgment to anticipate his
thoughts in drawing a Parallel: the disagreements being but few, and those more
properly to be referred to the distant Times and Scenes wherein they acted, (to
which Both did accommodate their designs) then to any difference in their
temper of Spirit or variety of Lusts: Impiety, Perfidiousness and Inhumanity
being the equal delights and exercises of either. So that though they coasted
different Countries, yet they sailed by the same Compass, and aimed at the same
Port of Power and Greatness. In nothing more does the Ancient seem to exceed
the Modern Tyrant then in his Cruelty: yet even this is not imputable to a more
tender sense of Humanity in one then the other, ( For he that dares sometimes
be wicked for his advantage, will be always so if his Interest require) but to
a fear of losing the emoluments of that more powerful and prosperous cheat, the
pretension to Sanctity; which being to be shadowed with a seeming Meekness,
would have been too plainly discolored by too frequent effusions of blood. But
if when we would censure the Crime, we consider not only the quantity, but the
worth of the Blood, the Sicilian will not appear more odious then the other.
Since the Blood of a Pious, Just and Lawful KING, spilt with so much dishonor
to Religion and contumely to Justice, lays a more heavy guilt in the eyes both
of God and Good men then rivers of Plebeian gore. Besides, that horrid
Parricide inevitably exciting several attempts for Justice, the slaughters of
those brave Souls that endeavored it did accumulate the guilt contracted by
their Sovereigns Blood. So that the cutting those Royal veins opened such
Sluices in all the British Empire, that the Earth was not more constantly wet
with the showers of Heaven, then it was yearly polluted with the blood of some
Loyal person and lover of the People's Rights and Liberties. Blood of this
tincture he was observed to drink with a gust; though he was nauseous of that
of his own Party: whom, when their divided Interests made them contrive his
Ruin, or provoked his spleen, he used as the Romans did their offending
Vestals, whose blood, because they were consecrated to the service of their
Gods, they never spilt, but enclosed them under ground with some small
provisions, that so they might perish without pity and unobserved. So those
that had been once consecrated to the Good Old Cause, it was unnecessary to
take away their Lives, which were hateful, because they had administered to his
Grandeur: but degrading them from his trust, and permitting to them some
remnants of the spoils of Iniquity, he exposed them to perish in want and
obscurity.

In these other Crimes whereby Usurpers make their way to Dominion, the
Wickedness of this Last was more transcendent, and such as made our Bondage
more ignominious, and our Miseries more lasting. For not to mention those
frequent Perjuries, those horrid Blasphemies of referring all the most damnable
Projects to the Impulses of the Spirit and Returns of prayer; Religion never
received a more fatal Wound then by this Modern Impostor. For when the Majesty
and Reverence of that stood like a strong rampire of Just Authority, and like a
mighty stream ran cross to his design; he undermined it by introducing notions
agreeable to his Interest, made it contemptible by the basest of the People
whom he made Priests, caressed every Heresy, raised and increased new Schisms,
and so cut it into several channels and small Rivulets, to make it fordable for
his ascent to Dominion: and by proclaiming a Spiritual Liberty, reduced it into
so many Atoms, that nothing but what was fortuitous could unite them in a
solid body to oppose him. Not content with these injuries to Religion, he
proceeded to extirpate those eternal rules of Right and Wrong, which even
Nature had impressed upon the Minds of Men. For by his Instruments new Schemes
of Justice were composed, new rules of Obedience and Government were framed
according to the Institutes of Tyranny. The sacred Religion of an Oath, the
foundation of Society even in the most barbarous Nations, was among us
published no longer obliging then till an inconvenience ensued. Thus as
Caligula took off the heads of those Images of the Gods that were most
worshipped, and set his own upon them, that he might receive the adorations of
the people: so did this Usurper pervert those Oracles of Life, the Laws of God
and Nature, that we might receive only the Dictates of his Lust and Interest,
and be guided by the deceitful Impulses of his deluding Spirit.

How far he prevailed by these Arts in vitiating the sense of Religion and
Justice in men, appeared too evident in the servile Flattery of those Addresses
which were made to his contemptible Successor. In which the Composers by a
prodigious Sacrilege having rifled all the Sacred Records, and thence took
those attributes of Glory with which as Jewels God had adorned his choicest
Servants, and had given them as Odours to embalm their Memories to Posterity,
applied them to his successful Wickedness. So that they seemed to have
forgotten what Virtue and Righteousness were, when they crowned Impiety with
the rewards of Goodness.

And how pregnant the Principles he had acted by were of Destruction, by the
just Judgment of Heaven was experienced on his Infamous Issue, they being
ruined by the same practices by which himself had destroyed the lawful
Government; the Children of his Example destroying those of his Blood; the
ministers of the Father's Villainies being the Executioners of the Son's Empire.
Nor was the mischievousness of his Arts confined within his own Family, but
like an infectious Contagion spread it self over the whole Nation. His Example
exciting every bold hand and violent spirit to invade the Government: and his
Principles serving to color the prosperous Invader's Perfidiousness to his
supplanted and complaining Predecessors. That Power would they to day despoil
and vilify, with whom it was on their Hearts the day before to Live and Die.
What they bewailed yesterday as their Backsliding, to day they would practice
as their Saint-like Obedience to the Call of God. So that by reason of these
different Actings, sometime as Men, and another as Saints, like creatures of
various elements, there was no faith among themselves, nor constancy in their
Wickedness; but varying their Crimes, and together with their Guilt increasing
our Miseries, the Sun seldom rose but he saw the ruins of that Government
which he had left at his setting, and the erection of a new. And Peace and
Quietness were set at such a distance from our hopes, that they could not be
expected but after a Desolation.

Then which effects though nothing could be more convincing of the
destructiveness of such Principles and Practices, that they neither proceeded
from God, who is the Author of Order and Government, nor agreed with Justice,
which is the preservative of Peace: yet because they so impudently pretended to
an Extract from Heaven, and seemed to be owned by it in an uninterrupted
Success against a Lawful Sovereign, and are still importunately urged by
Persons of no just hopes, and whose broken Interests are impatient of a calm;
they are as yet received by some deluded Souls as Oracles, and as the sober
dictates of right Reason; and the mischievous Consequences are reputed the
depravations of the Actors, not the legitimate Issues of the Principles. But as
the Divine Records do vindicate the Immaculate Purity of God (from whom nothing
proceeds which does not make men happy in obedience to it) from having any
benign influence on such destructive counsels, and right Reason does free
Justice from any alliance with such wicked practices: so the History of all
Ages will testify that these have been the artifices of Ambitious persons, who
seeking a criminal Greatness, have divested themselves of all sense of Virtue,
do by these ways delude and distract the minds of men, that so being weakened
by their own Factions, and disarmed by vicious habits, they may more easily be
oppressed by them. And this History of Agathocles, transmitted to posterity by
Diodorus Siculus and Justin (from whom it was gathered) will evidently show,
That the usual Method of overthrowing an ancient Government established by Law,
is to slander the actions and counsels of the present Magistrate; That those
that have the extremest Tyranny in projection, will be the greatest pretenders
of the Public good, and the most importunate assertors of the People's Rights;
That it is the most compendious way of imposing Slavery, by raising in the
Multitude too eager and passionate desires of Liberty; That in a corrupted and
disquiet State, the most Contemptible member of that Community may without the
help of a Miracle arise to Sovereignty; That it is not the Indulgence of Heaven
to the Usurper, but the Indignation thereof to the People, when Success attends
the Tyrants enterprises; That Power acquired by Fraud or Violence will never be
employed in the exercise of Justice.

These therefore being the only fruits that are to be expected from the
unquiet Principles and deluding hopes which designing Demagogues infect the
People with; Wise men have constantly advised that even the Vices of Bad
Princes are to be born with the like Patience as we endure Dearths and
Tempests, and other deviations of Nature from her usual course. And this not to
flatter Offending Kings, (who at a most dreadful Tribunal are accountable for
their disobediences to their Eternal Superior) but in affection to mankind,
and pity of the deceivable Multititude. Because though Princes, as they are
Men, may be Vicious, yet as such are not Immortal; and a Pious Successor may
repair all the ruins of a former Oppressor. But when the People will usurp
the Office of Heaven, whose Prerogative it is to chastise Kings, and to cut off
the Fury of Princes, and they themselves will correct their lawful Magistrates,
God most severely punishes them by suffering the basest of men to ride over
their heads. And the Primitive Christians thought it not only their Duty, but
their Prudence, by prayers and tears only to seek the deliverance of Heaven
from the injuries of a Governor, rather then by opposing, their lawful
Sovereign to administer to a Tyrants Ambition, who, according to that Maxim,
of changing all things that were under the former Governor, must deface
Religion to maintain his Power, and on the dishonor of Piety build his
Greatness.

We have had experience of the Anger of Heaven for our Sins, in giving us over
to the delusions of men, who sought and acquired Power by slandering a PRINCE
whose most Eminent Worth we understood not, till our ignorance had made Him and
us miserable. Which Power being so impiously got, was not otherwise used: For
the Treasures and Ornaments of many Ages Peace were wasted and consumed by
their Oppressions in a few years. And we are now under the return of Mercy by a
Lawful Sovereign. Both Conditions may teach us to measure the Benefits and
Inconveniences of Government as they are in their own nature: and not by the
sinister interpretations and seditious Harangues of Unquiet persons, who will
calumniate even the justest Rulers and the wisest Counsels. And if the
discovery of the methods of Tyranny, which is made in this History, may
contribute any thing to effect a just hatred of such practices, or establish
sober Minds in a thankful acquiescence in that Gracious Providence which has
restored our ancient Government, and given us a Prince instructed both by
Affliction and Mercy in the best arts of Empire; the Compiler has attained his
chiefest ends.

Farewell.
ERRATA.
Page 5. l. 23. r. hating. p. 18. l. 5. r. for. p. 89. l. 12. r. for. p. 113.
l. 6. r. councils. p. 185. l. 14. r. impress. p. 201. l. 3. r. provoke. p. 234.
l. 26. r. Ambicas.

THE General CONTENTS of the several BOOKS.
LIB. I. THE Introduction. The necessity of Government. The causes of the
Changes of Government. The Miseries that attend those Changes. Occasions to
Usurpers. The requisites of an Usurper. A Tyrant in Title will be a Tyrant in
Exercise. Agathocles an Example of Usurpers. Agathocles's Birth; the prediction
of his Cruelty and Greatness. The uncertain Original of such Predictions.
Agathocles's abject beginnings, baser Youth, and infamous introduction into
emploiment. His Seditious practices cause a change of Government at Syracuse.
His flight from thence, and vain attempts for Tyranny abroad. His return home,
and another change of Government. His exploits in his Command. The City's
Jealousy of him, and his Banishment. His War against Syracuse. Amilcar
reconciles him to his City, and they revoke his Banishment. He practices the
arts of a Demagogue: gets the office of Praetor, and Keeper of the Liberty of
Syracuse. His plot to get an Army fit for his purpose, by whom he massacres all
the Senate and chief Citizens. By dissimulation he prevails upon his associates
in the Massacre, to force the Principality upon him. The Sicilians confederate
against the Tyrant. Acrotatus, chosen General of the League, by his Vices
overthrows the enterprise. Agathocles designs the Empire of all Sicily: by
fraud seizes upon Messene. The Exiles send an Embassy to Carthage. The Death
of Amilcar. Agathocles's success against the Exiles. LIB. II. THE Carthaginian
War. Amilcar the son of Gisgo chosen General, who by his wise conduct restores
and heals the losses of his shipwreckt Army, and raises up the hopes of the
Sicilians to be delivered from Agathocles; who had surprised Gela, and murdered
the Citizens, and afterward fighting Amilcar is overthrown. His counsel of
transferring the War into Africa. His preparations for that design. The
difficulties of getting forth of the Haven. An Eclipse frights his Army, which
he dexterously interprets: gets safe to the shore of Africa, where he burns his
Ships. The Punick Fleet gather up the beaks of his Vessels, and send them with
the news to Carthage, which before was terrified with the affrighted relations
of the Africans. They choose two Generals to oppose the Sicilians. The Reason of
such a choice. They fight Agathocles, and are overthrown. The Carthaginians
refer their loss to their angry Gods, whom they endeavor to appease; send for
aid from Amilcar, who in vain besieges and assaults Syracuse when the news came
of the Tyrants Victory. Who wins more upon the Carthaginians, while Amilcar
intending to storm Syracuse is taken and killed. His baffled Army divides, and
the Agrigentines aspire at the Empire of the Island. The Tyrant's Army
dangerously mutinies, which he luckily appeases, and turns their fury upon the
Enemy, whom he also follows and beats in Numidia. He invites Ophellas to the
War, and basely murders him. Bomilcar attempting the Tyranny at Carthage
miscarries, and is crucified. Agathocles assumes the title of a King, and
masters the Uticenses by an inhumane Stratageme. LIB. III. AGathocles returns
to Sicily, to obstruct the Success of the Free League, against which he
thrives, till Dinocrates declares himself for it, who forces the Tyrant to
retreat. His fortune declines in Africa; his Army beaten and besieged.
Agathocles preparing to return thither gets two Victories: under the pretense
of a Thanksgiving for which, he discovers and murders all that he could not
confide in at Syracuse. Afterward he sails to Africa, where all was desperate.
From whence, after some vain attempts, a strange Terror of his Army, and his
own Imprisonment, he basely flies back to Sicily, leaving his two Sons to the
fury of his deserted Army: who when they had slain them, make Peace with the
Carthaginians. The Tyrant landing in Sicily, destroys Aegesta; commands
another Massacre at Syracuse. Pasiphilus revolts from him; which frights him
into a Treaty with Dinocrates, in which he offers to relinquish the Tyranny.
The Treaty not taking effect, he fights the Army of the League, and by
treachery overthrows them, and murders seven thousand that did surrender upon
composition. He receives Dinocrates into favor, and employes him. He takes
away the consecrated Treasure at the Isle of Lipara, invades the Brutii, and is
beaten; surprises Croton; associates with Pirates, and confederates with
Demetrius, by whom he is persuaded to renew his War with Carthage. He is
prevented by death, through the Conspiracy of Maenon and Archagathus his
Grandchild, because he had made his younger Son Agathocles his Successor in
the Tyranny. Maenon poisons the Old Tyrant, and Archagathus kills the Young
one. His Tortures, End, and Character. The state of Syracuse after his Death.
depiction of the tyrant Agathocles of Syracuse, with personifications of
perfidiousness and inhumanity TYRANNVS. Perfidia. Crudelitas.



THE TYRANT, OR, The Life of AGATHOCLES.
LIB. I.
THE security and comforts of humane life consist in Society. Society cannot be
preserved without Order. For although by it men are secured from a foreign
force, yet in it are they subject to intestine injuries; and when Necessity
makes no war abroad, Ambition and Covetousness will raise some at home.
(These being so impetuous and restless affections in the breasts of men, that
they never leave them, even after the largest acquisitions.) For man naturally
is greedy of every thing, yet so weak that he can acquire but few: so that the
desire being too great for the power of acquisition, there arises a
dissatisfaction with the present condition, when it is secure, and an endeavor
of altering it, though with the ruin of another's fortune. This immoderate
desire in some men of more then they have, produces a fear in others of losing
what they do enjoy; and from both these arise Jealousies, Enmities and
Injuries, which in the issue undermine Society, and render it more dangerous
then Solitude, and make Communities of men more obnoxious to ruin then herds
of Beasts. Therefore Order must set bounds to some men's Lusts, and fences for
the security of others.

Order cannot be observed without Government, which is the Intrusting some
persons with the care and power of maintaining this Order. And that it may the
more effectually attain its End, Heaven has declared it as its own
Institution, and impressed upon it the luster of Divine Authority. But as
Pearls, though they have their Original from the dew of Heaven, yet must be
formed and solidated in the Sea and the womb of a Shel fish, which as it is
more or less disposed by Nature for such a production, renders the Jewels
proportionably great and orient: So Government, though it derives its extract
from a Divine Institution, yet because it is to be managed by Men which are
subject to Corruption, does often prove too uncertain a guard for so great a
treasure as is the public good and common safety. Because the Trustees of this
power may either through the depravedness of their affections distort it to the
satisfaction of their private lusts; or by an imprudent menage, give umbrages
of suspicion that they will pervert it to the common ruin. So that such
impotent persons being in Government, bewitched with the sweetness of Command,
and passionate to enlarge or preserve that power in the unlawful exercise
thereof, make frequent invasions upon the Liberty of others. And those that are
under Government, pinched with the difficulties of obeying such unequal
Commands, and laboring to keep their liberty entire, strive to extend it even
to License, till it becomes inconsistent with Government. Hence arise
Discontents, Jealousies, and Changes of Government, which to sick minds, like
the turnings in bed to sick bodies, are hoped for remedies: and what men cannot
find under one kind of Magistracy, they will seek in another; and therefore do
either contract or enlarge the subject of their trust of Power, according to
the sense of their present Grievances.

If a Community at first, either by Choice or Necessity, are united under one
Head in a Monarchy, while He or his Successors intend the public good for
which they were designed, the memory of their first Institution and the sense
of the present Benefits provoke from their Subjects (not corrupted with too
much Felicity, nor debauched with the subtle Slanders which Seditious persons
cast on their Prince) a Veneration next to that which is due to Heaven; an
Universal Love and a delight to obey being the constant Returns to their Cares
and Hazards for the public Security. But because all worldly things are in a
continual Motion, and there is either a progress to perfection in that which is
good, or else a precipitate declination to evil, and men are most easily
corrupted in the supremest Fortunes, where Lusts may have the advantage of
being armed with Power: such as received the highest Command as a reward of
Virtue either in themselves or Ancestors, do sometimes abuse it to license the
most horrid Crimes; imagining Rapines, Adulteries and Capricioes of Power the
rewards of Principality, wherein they only receive but a fading Pleasure, and
leave to their Subjects a perpetual sense of Loss and Dishonor. Hence comes it
to pass, that those who by Virtuous Practices might have maintained the
reputation of Earthly Gods, by these wicked Courses degenerating beneath the
nature of Beasts, become hateful and terrible to mankind.

Hate and Fear are always pregnant with Conspiracies. Conspiracies that prove
successful (for otherwise they advantage him whom they design to ruin) are
soonest formed and most dexterously managed, not by such as are fearful and
weak, but by persons of generous spirits and active Souls, who are most
tenderly sensible of injuries, and most impatient under them. These being
exalted above the rest of the injured Multitude by the greatness of their
Minds, and made more powerful to accomplish the design by the riches of their
Patrimonies, the liberality of their Education, and the Nobility of their
Families, become the Chiefs of the Community for Security, and Revenge on their
unjust Monarch. He being extinguished, the People translate the Reverence which
before they were wont to pay to a single Prince, on these persons whom they
look upon as their Deliverers.

These having the Government of a single Person, and fearing the return of the
same Miseries from another Monarch, or else pleased with the present Adorations
of the Multitude, do retain the Government among themselves, which seated in
such and so many persons is called Aristocracy. These in their beginnings bound
their power with such Laws, as (being made in the fresh memory of the former
Tyranny) appear very tender of the Common liberty, and prefer the Public to
the Private Interest. Which administration of Justice, partly through the
Novelty, (which always has much of the People's hopes,) and partly through
the Cares of the New Governors (which are commonly most strict in their first
undertakings) to manage all concernments with the most exact moderation, is
entertained some time with honor and conformable obedience. But men seldom
use Dignities with the same good arts whereby they acquired them, and assume
another heart in the Palace then what they wore in their private families. So
that corruption either assaults their very persons, or in a short time seizes
upon their Successors; who unacquainted with the Instability of Fortune, and
insensible of the dismal Consequences of public Injuries, grow insolent with
their present state, discontent with equality, and forming Factions among
themselves, reduce all power into a few hands, and change the Optimacie into an
Oligarchie. Thence falling into the debaucheries of the former Tyrant, and
their Number making them less tolerable, they incur the same hatred, and meet
with the like ruin. For the People haraffed by so many importunate Oppressors,
will soon offer its ministry to any bold hand that will offend their detested
Governors. Neither will there want unquiet Spirits, that will take advantage
of the People's anger and assistance, both to ruin them, and raise themselves
in the Popular esteem.

When the Oligarchie has lost that power which they knew not how to use, and
the People are free to another choice, the memory of injuries by a Prince being
not yet dead, and the brands of slavery by more numerous Tyrants yet fresh, the
People are unwilling any more to trust after so many abuses, and therefore
reserve the Government in themselves, which then receives the name of
Democracie. This form of Government after it has spent that stock of Vulgar
affection which is used to be given to every thing in its first beginnings,
discovers that they have embraced License instead of Liberty; and whereas all
Government, should be the preservative of Order, this fills all with Confusion.
The body of the Society is torn into several Factions, and of one Community it
becomes many. The Laws are neither framed nor executed for the public Utility,
but for the advantage of the several parties, each by its course in Magistracy
endeavoring to depress the contrary, and elevate it self. In this State, as in
routed Armies, every one commands, and none obeyes; the most prudent must be
directed by those that have no skill to command, and the wisest follow the
dictates of the ignorant rabble; those that are fittest to give the safest
counsels, must by a simple obedience be the instruments to perform the decrees
of ruin. Heroic Virtues and brave Examples are as dangerous here as under the
worst of Tyrants, and both the Love and the Hate of the People are equally
dangerous. So that this Government lasts no longer then till the universal
calamities (which come speedily) dissolve it; or some ambitious Officer takes
from the Multitude that Liberty which they could not long keep; or some
discreeter Citizen persuades them to seek for peace and safety in the paths
they have forsaken, and to return to Principality again.

These are the usual stages which Government treads; and as the Persons are
qualified in each state, it makes the shorter or longer abode. But in every
change, as the Sun in his removal to the several Tropicks, leaves the last
squallid and deformed with cold and darkness, so Government leaves the last
entrusted with it in ruin and desolation. And the quicker the motion is, the
more pregnant it is with destruction. For Ambulatorie Government is like the
Planets which, observation tells us, both at their rising and setting bring
Storms and Tempests: so the ruin of the old, and the erection of a new form,
wast and tire those unhappy people that live under them. Bad Governors being
like Malignant spirits, which when they are exorcised torture more eagerly the
wretches they are to forsake; and these are industrious to ruin all with their
fall, and that an universal flame might be kindled by their Funeral Pile. On
the other side, new and hopeful frames of Government, though they are as
desirable as Children to less-fruitful wombs, yet, like such, come not into the
world without pangs and throes, and sometimes begin their lives with the death
of their Authors.

But in nothing are changes and corruptions of Government more noxious to a
Community, then in that they are often inlets and occasions to Usurpation,
administering opportunities to ambitious spirits of usurping Magistracy against
the Peoples consent, and contrary to the just pretensions which other Persons
may have to the same. For from all these several forms of Government declining
to a dissolution, do Tyrannical Usurpers, like Prodigies that are generated of
Corruption, arise. And when such do prevail and attain to power, that wretched
people that are subject to it must expect the worst of miseries which are
derived from Impiety and Injustice. For Usurpers being the products of such,
are, as every thing is to be preserved by its Principles, to be maintained by
the same.

To an Usurper no Qualities are more requisite then to contemn God, vilify
Mankind, and hate all Religion and Justice. He must know and dare to be exactly
wicked, and never intend any good beyond the appearance. He must pretend an
affection to Religion, but it must be only that he may deflower it; not by it
to contract a friendship and league with Heaven, but that he may more easily
cheat, and execute his malice upon men. Faithfulness and Truth must be esteemed
by him as the most dangerous Rocks on which his Power would shipwreck;
therefore his Oaths and Promises are like those monstrous Chymaera's, whose
upper and more visible parts have an humane and beautiful aspect, but in their
extremities become most noxious Prodigies. He permits the pleasures and lovely
names of Mercy and Pity to soft souls and just Princes; but neither time,
supplications, or satiety, which use to soften others, can mitigate a Tyrants
fury, which is raised by his own jealousies: for he must punish Suspicions as
manifest Crimes, and circumvent the Innocence of others to cover his own Guilt.
He must injure all he fears, and hate all he has injured.

To those unhappy people whom he has enslaved, he must endeavor to leave no
more then the names and shapes of men, and that their humane bodies be but
false harbors for brutish Souls. If it be possible, he must raze out those
principles of Liberty, Virtue and Reason, which Nature has impressed on the
Spirits of men. For to be Virtuous under a Tyrant is to undermine his Empire,
because good Examples upbraid his Weakness, and rebel against the Customs of
his Lusts, which he would have as a Law. And Reason has more light in it then
will suffer a Tyrants arts to be undiscovered; therefore he will murder all
those whom he cannot corrupt, lest they should be guides and lights for the
recovery of Freedom; and secure himself in the next Generation by introducing
a barbarous Ignorance, which shall obstruct the ways to Prudence: and by
vexing Virtue with ignominy and danger, (as the Romans punished criminal
Virgins, first deflouring them by the hangman, and afterward strangling them)
he extirpates the love of it out of the breasts of men. He interprets
Friendship and Love among his vassals as a dangerous Combination, and therefore
breaks all the ligaments of a Community which Religion or Nature have formed in
it, that he may twist the cords of Bondage stronger. Religion, which is the
most binding cement of humane affections, he renders weak by its variety: and
when the People cannot agree about their Gods, they seldom conspire to any
public benefit, or against a Common Enemy, as a Tyrant is. Or else he embases
it with the alloy of wicked and abject Principles. Men being seldom more
generous then the Deities they worship, and their spirits are but level to
their Devotions. From the Courts of Usurping Tyrants crept those monstrous
Idolatries of Calves, Dogs, Cats and Crocodiles. Their civil and natural unions
must be broken also. Public conventions, where converse creates a familiarity,
and that a mutual confidence, as also public Feasts, which are the sinews of
acquaintance, are either wholly forbidden, or made dangerous by his Spies, who
are to gather up the loose speeches of men made free by wine and excess, and
form the simplicity of Table-talk into compacts of Treason; so that by such
treacheries an universal diffidence is created, and members of the same City
become as strange to each other, as if they dwelt under the opposite Poles. Nor
can a Tyrant be safe, unless he dissolve the private as well as the public
unions. Therefore Wives are bribed with their own dishonor, a license for a
wandering Lust and assurance of Alimonie, to betray their Husbands. Sons by too
early hopes of Patrimony are solicited to rifle their Fathers cabinets, unlock
their secrets, and expose them to the Tyrants bloody fury. And Servants have a
liberty beyond manumission to make their Masters bondmen. For while every house
flames with contention, the Usurper may, like Nero, securely sing and play.
Their Fortunes must be no better then their Souls; for he must make them poor
and needy, that all their cares being employed for necessary subsistence, they
may have no leisure to contrive their Liberty. While his Gabels waste their
goods, he must make Wars to consume their multitude, lest the contemplation
of their Number produce a confidence in their strength, to break that power
which does oppress them. For Tyrants measure not their power by their own
force, but by the weakness of their miserable Vassals. His Instruments of
slavery must be such that either have no Reason to dispute, or no Conscience to
scruple the most impious Commands, whose Fortunes are made by his spoils of
villainy, and whose safety only depends upon his service. Yet when they have
performed his work, he uses them as the Roman Aediles did beasts and
malefactors in the Theaters, when they would recreate the People in their
Spectacula, make them accuse and destroy one the other: so they fall with the
public applause whom before he had objected to the public hate. For their
obsequiousness to his lusts cannot secure them from his fury. Because
instruments of great crimes do even with their sight upbraid him that employed
them. Or else he fearing that what they have done for him, they may practice
against him, therefore he will serve them as those that killed the Posthorses
by which they fled, lest others should use them in their pursuit.

These are the Institutes of Tyranny, which the practices and dictates of
former Usurpers have transmitted as Oracles religiously to be observed by such
whose blinded Souls prefer Power to Virtue, and an ignominious Greatness to the
Innocence of a Private life. And under such a Magistrate that shall conceive
these as the Reiglements of Empire and Mysteries of State, what can the People
expect, but the greatest miseries a Society can be subject to? To which kind
of punishment incensed Heaven most commonly condemns an unquiet people, who
corrupted with Plenty, and grown wanton by a long Peace, become impatient of
Laws, and discontent with lawful Governors; that when they know not how
moderately to use a just Liberty, they might be made sensible of the heaviest
Slavery. Usurpers proving to be the most insupportable Tyrants. For although a
lawful Prince may possibly degenerate into Tyranny; yet has he no necessity
nor incentives to it: because when his own Virtues, or the happy memory of his
Ancestors, have commended him to the People's Love, and he enters upon his
Dignity with their Consent, he cannot imagine (unless infatuated to
destruction) any surer basis for his Power then what He first stood upon, the
Affections of his Subjects, and the Justice of his Title. But an Usurper that
either by force or deceit has imposed upon them, does in his very entrance
create causes of Hatred in the People, and of Fears in himself: thence flow the
contrary desires of Revenge and Security in each other, which are not to be
satisfied but by mutual Injuries. And he that wrestles with the People's hate,
will find himself as born under the Star of Hercules, who when he had cut off
one of the Hydra's heads, had his labors renewed by the sudden production of
many more: and while a Tyrant seeks to secure himself by injuring one of his
suspected Enemies, he will provoke a multitude more eager for his ruin. So
that he shall find himself necessitated, if he will keep what he has wickedly
got, to repeat his Crimes, and increase their miseries, till they become
incapable of Liberty, stupid under their calamities, and neither desirous nor
able to take revenge.

Of the barbarous effects of this kind of Tyranny no place was evermore
sensible then the Island of Sicily, a Country continually teeming with these
Monsters, who endeavoring to enslave their Cities, and perpetuate their
Dominion, made that Island the Theater of Misery and Villainy. And among all
those plagues of mankind and disturbers of Society, whose acts Antiquity has
transmitted to posterity, none have their memories branded with more eternal
marks of Infamy then Agathocles, whose bloody Artifices and execrable practices
to raise himself from an abject and base condition to an absolute Sovereignty,
and from being the most contemptible part of a Community to arrive at such a
power as to trample upon the Liberties of his City, made the Ancient Historians
never mention him without the Title of The most Impious. And Machiavel, the
modern Criuck of Policy and grand Instructor of Tyranny, singles him out of the
whole Herd of antique Monsters as the singular Pattern of Tyranny, and Example
of such that by Injustice and Impiety will acquire Principality: in whose
ascent to Greatness he acknowledges no advantage by Virtue, nor any favorable
assistance from Fortune; but that all his Power was the sole product of a
monstrous Wickedness, which will appear in this History of his Life.

AGATHOCLES the Syracusan Tyrant was the son of Carcinus, a native of Rhegium,
a City in Italy; who being banished from thence, had seated himself at Thermae,
one of the Cities in Sicily that were then under the Dominion of the
Carthaginians. Where taking to Wife one of the Citizens daughters, and she
having conceived by him, he was continually disquieted in his sleep with horrid
dreams concerning the child his Wife was then pregnant with. To put an end to
these terrors, and to be assured from the Gods what the issue should be of what
his Dreams did but confusedly and imperfectly represent, there was presented to
him this opportunity. The Carthaginian Commander in Sicily was at that time
dispatching some Ambassadors to the Oracle at Delphos, to enquire of the Event
of some public design. These men Carcinus acquaints with his present
inquietudes, and desires them to consult the Oracle concerning his expected
Issue. They satisfied his desire, and received from the Oracle this answer;
That he which should be born should be a cause of exceeding great miseries both
to the Carthaginians and all Sicily. Which answer allaied not, but increased
the disquiets of Carcinus: for he was now tortured betwixt the fear of the
Punick wrath, if he should foster their future Enemy, and his Paternal
affection, which dissuaded him from sacrificing his own Child whom the Gods had
designed to some great emploiments, (or otherwise he could not cause such
troubles:) that he might secure the Carthaginian fears, that were but his
imperious Oppressors; and for the quiet of Sicily, which was but his stepdame.
But at last his fears, as is usual, prevailed over his other affections; and
therefore left the breeding of his Child should be the cause of both their
deaths, he exposed it to perish in public, and some were appointed to watch
its end. But it being impossible to reverse the Decrees of Fate, which though
foreknown, are not to be avoided; his life outlasted the patience of the
Watchers, who being tired in their expectation, became more negligent in their
charge: which afforded his Mother an opportunity to steal him away by night.
But not daring to bring him home, lest she should renew his danger, or
consulting the safety of her Husband, she commits him to the care of her
Brother Heraclidas, and calls him after her Fathers name, Agathocles.

This is the relation of Agathocles's first coming into the world; a Birth
proper for a Tyrant, wherein he proved terrible and dangerous to those that
were the Authors of his life. But such Prodigies and Predictions as these are
of a dubious credit and uncertain Original. For although the Longanimity of
Heaven, that unwillingly punishes the sins of men, may and does sometimes, by
means that seem most proper to its infinite Wisdom, before it strikes, warn
the World of those plagues that shall come upon them: yet most of these Oracles
which we meet with in History are post-nate, and after the fact invented and
published; and that from various beginnings. For sometimes the Vulgar, who are
more Superstitious then Religious, will either find or frame a Prediction for
every great Event: Because they being ignorant of the true Causes of things,
and not able to observe the progress of Effects, but considering the Event in
its full product, cannot but admire it, and therefore attribute it to that
power which only can work wonders; and so seek or make a Decree of Heaven,
that should convey the Issues through so many seeming difficulties. Hence also
it came to pass that when men of obscure births have performed great actions in
the World, their descent not fully appearing, when their actions were full of
splendor, they have imagined their Virtue was to be their Herald, and so did
derive their pedigree from the Gods; as Hercules from Jupiter, and Romulus from
Mars. And because the Divine Providence, willing to show that its sole power,
and not the prudence of Men, does make them great, does often expose such in
their Infancy to great dangers, whom in their riper years it intends to advance
to mighty Honors; thereby beginning to demonstrate its force, when Prudence
cannot pretend to their preservation: the Vulgar likewise fits by their
fancies, for those whom with admiration they behold raised from low beginnings
to unexpected Greatness, such entertainments in the World as must require the
care of the Gods for their preservation. Thus the Romans formed the beginnings
of their Romulus, and the Persians for their Cyrus, and the Inhabitants of
Spain for their King Habis.

Nor are the rude Multitude the only authors of such fabulous Miracles, but
Tyrants themselves, which accommodate their designs to the Vulgar fancies, are
frequently the very Oracles that frame Predictions concerning their own
grandeur. For these either designing the change of their Republics, or being
already seized of power, do labor to make the world believe that Heaven is of
the Plot, and concerned in their preservation: nothing being more prevalent
upon the minds of men then Religion, which Tyrants by these Oracles make use
of, to produce an awe in their oppressed Vassals, that they should not vainly
attempt to break those chains which Fate has imposed on them, and by their
efforts upon their Oppressors, seem to undertake a fruitless war, to reverse
the Decrees of Providence. Thus Lysander projecting the change of the
Government of Sparta, would engage the Gods in the design, and corrupted the
Priests to forge Oracles for the same. Agrippina's ambition to have her Son
reign, prompted her to disperse a Miracle to make way for it, that the Gods to
preserve him for the Empire, had appointed two Serpents to be the Guardians of
his Infancy. Catiline, to inflame Lentulus to burn Rome, fed his ambitious and
empty Soul with some dark Oracle out of the Sibyl's leaves. And such who have
grasped at great designs, have labored to make the world believe that there
was always some commerce betwixt the Gods and them. Scipio Africanus would
never undertake any action, before he had some time sat in the Capitol in the
Shrine of Jupiter; from whom he would be conceived to be inspired with some
Heroic airs: so that his Soldiers with confidence followed that Leader whom
they believed the Gods directed. Eunus, a Slave in Sicily, pretending
inspirations from the Syrian Goddess, soon gathered up an Army of sixty
thousand men, who, as if they seemed to follow the commands of the Gods,
stoutly assisted this their imaginary King, and overthrew four Roman Praetors
with their forces. Sandrocot, a Greek Fugitive, having by Art reduced a Lion
from his natural fierceness, to come and lick the sweat of his body, persuaded
the Indians that the Gods had designed him for Empire by subjecting the Beast
to his service; and he was readily accepted by them for their Prince, and
employed to recover their Liberty from the Captains of Alexander: who freeing
them from that yoke, did oppress them with his own Tyranny. So easily do the
multitude follow that choice which they believe Heaven has made; admiring him
whom they fancy the Gods have loved, and fearing to offend those who pretend a
Deity to be their Guardian. Which natural reverence of Heaven and Religious
simplicity in the minds of men, the Tyrants make their first advantage to
ascend to power. And it is possible that Agathocles was no less impudent to
deceive the people and abuse the Gods this way then he was in his other
practices, and had composed this Miracle when he first imagined to compass the
Tyranny; founding his first hopes of Dominion in a Superstitious fear of the
credulous multitude.

The Fate of Sicily and the Carthaginians having thus preserved him that was to
be their Scourge, he was brought up by his Uncle Heraclidas, and grew to be of
a comely countenance, and lusty frame of body beyond his years. When he came to
seven years of age, his Father Carcinus was invited by Heraclidas to a
Sacrifice: where seeing Agathocles playing together with some of his mates,
whether through some secret motion of Nature, or by the rarity and pleasantness
of the sight, he was much affected with the beauty and vigor of the Boy. His
Wife observing it, did immediately suggest unto him, that just such an one
their Son would have been had he not been so inhumanely exposed. Carcinus
professed that he was sorry his fears had transported him beyond natural
affection, and to show his resentment, exceedingly wept. His Wife conceiving
his present affections to comport with her design, acquaints him with the whole
story, how she had saved the Child, and that this was the same. He was
extremely pleased with the relation, and with joy received his Son, whom
Providence and the affection of a Mother had so preserved: but doubting lest
the receiving of his Son to his own house should quicken the remembrance of the
Oracle, and so expose them both to the Carthaginian Fury, he removed his narrow
Family out of their Dominions, and planted himself at Syracuse, the stage on
which his Son was to act those various Scenes of Blood and Villainy.

Carcinus at his new habitation was so poor and destitute of friends, that to
maintain himself and his Family, he emploi'd himself in making of Pots, and
taught his son the same trade, that he might contribute something to his
maintenance. Which occupation, being the Emblem of absolute Dominion, did seem
to habituate his haughty and aspiring Soul to the practice of a boundless
Power; and by composing clay to the forms of his own fancy, he did inure
himself to module Societies and Commonwealths to the Ideas of his own Lusts and
interest. In this mean trade Carcinus and his son did only wrestle with
necessity and poverty, and could never increase his substance to the Cense of a
Citizen; and therefore a long time lived as a burden, not a member, of that
Community: till such time as Timoleon, the Scourge of Tyrants, having freed
Sicily from those Monsters, to replenish Syracuse, which the cruelty and horrid
attempts of those Usurpers had almost depopulated, did grant the privileges
and immunities of the City to all that would come and inhabit there: at which
time Agathocles with his Father were enrolled among the Citizens, and did enjoy
that Liberty which he was shortly to ruin.

Carcinus not long after dies, and leaves the care of this young Potter to his
surviving Mother: who in a feminine fondness of her Son, would needs set up his
Effigies made in stone in one of the Temples of Syracuse. On which a swarm of
Bees did one day settle, and made their little Cells of wax betwixt the thighs
of it. The Augurs, and such as addicted themselves to the vain curiosity of the
future, being consulted concerning this accident, gave this answer; That when
her son came to years of maturity, he should arrive to great dignity. A
conjecture which, because it was answered in the Event, became an observation,
and was transmitted to posterity. Whereas the greatest part of such vain
Auguries are buried in oblivion, when the success makes them not authentic.

From these low beginnings did Agathocles arise to a Principality. Thus the
Providence of Heaven sometimes, to mock the pride of Princes, and baffle the
Insolences of Greatness, as also to assert its own absolute overruling Power,
does permit the inhabitants of the dunghill to possess the Palaces of Kings,
and gives the Kingdoms of the world to the basest of men. He that shall
observe and consider the Examples that are in ancient and modern History, will
find how much of Mockery there is in all humane affairs, and how short-sighted
that which we call Humane Providence is to foresee and prevent future events;
for when jealous Cities have provided for their Liberty by the banishment of
their most potent Citizens, and the Ostracisme of such who by their noble
extracts and descent from imperial Originals are most to be suspected to impose
upon the rights of their Country, they have been many times inslaved by some
contemptible member of their Community. And frequently in Kingdoms, not those
whom Fame or Hope destined to Empire, but whom Providence has in secret
reserved to be the future Prince, have ascended the Throne. And the highest
Commands, which men conceive the due reward of all Virtues, and the portion of
the best-descended, are yet sometimes given to the vilest persons, and the
Majesty of Empire profaned by most abject exercisers of that power, as Slaves,
Thieves, Fencers and Shepherds, or such like dregs of the people. This happens
not but through the just Indignation of Heaven against an unquiet and sinful
people, when not contented to bear the moderate Rule of lawful Princes, they
are condemned to serve such reproachful Lords. The Romans bewailed the
malignity of their Fortune when they were forced, in preserving their Dignity
and defending their Associates, to send forth just Armies against such
theatrical Princes, as if they had been honorable and lawful Kings; and as it
were ashamed of their Victory, they thought the majesty of a Triumph would be
polluted if it were granted to the subduers of such imaginary Commanders. The
ignominy therefore of the Tyrant must needs aggravate the bondage of those that
are compelled to serve him. And by how much they are removed from the just
hopes of the supreme power, they are so much the more immoderate in their pride
and ambition when they arrive unto it; their Souls being, like half-famished
stomachs, insatiable with Dominion. In the exercise whereof they are like
Comets, which being but Exhalations of the earth, when they are raised to the
height, and kindled to the brightness of a Star, do portend ruin to the
greatest persons and the best families. So such contemptible men elevated to
power do rage most against the better and most virtuous parts of a Society, and
seek to hide the baseness of their own, by spilling all the nobler blood. And
as subterranean fires which first feed upon the roots, and then consume the
entrails of great mountains, do from thence spread ashes and ruin upon the
adjacent Valleys and neighboring plains; so do such men, fired with ambition,
labor to undermine the Optimacy, which are the supereminent parts of every
Community, and then diffuse vassalage and misery upon the Populacy. And such
did Agathocles prove to be to the miserable Syracusans.

Agathocles's Birth and Childhood, though poor and obscure, were yet more
polluted by his vicious Youth and his following conversation. For he was more
infamous by the course of his life, then for the meanness of his birth; because
not the beginnings, but the progress of our lives are the subjects of our
choice, and it is that which renders us capable of shame or glory. And as
Virtue is not intailed upon Patrician families; so by no Decree of Fate or law
of Nature is it proscribed from Plebeian breasts: but such as can boast no
glory of their Ancestors, may yet be admired for their own Heroic actions. And
many of those great actions which the world has wondered at, have been
performed by persons who were obscure in their Original, and had no advantage
for Fame from their birth. Virtue wheresoever it is placed, draws the reverence
and affection of men; who behold Gallant persons as they do fair and great
Trees, in which are commended the straightness, height and bigness of the
Trunk, and the large extent and beauty of the Branches; but seldom is it
inquired of the measure and depth of their Roots. Rome never repented the
prodigality of her Honors in six Consulships to Marius a Plebeian, while she
received no less glory and safety from his conduct then from any of her
Patrician Consuls; and while he was contented to receive, not force the
people's favor, which is usually most prone and indulgent to new appearers in
the State. But when his Ambition made him impatient of rest, and he would
ravish, not court, his City's love, and snatch those Honors which she had
designed to others, he appeared in his seventh Consulship no less dangerous to
his own Citizens in peace, then he was to their Enemies in war. So that not his
Birth, but his Vices disgraced his former dignities, and exposed him to the
public hatred.

But Agathocles his Youth was more disgraceful then his Trade, and continued
the ignominy of his Infancy with the dishonor of his riper years: for being of
a comely frame and lovely visage, he did allure, and prostitute himself as a
common Bardacio to every man's Lust who was able to pay the reward of his
infamy. And that he might not be unacquainted with any iniquity, he afterward
transferred his Lust from men to women; that as before he injured the Wives by
diverting the affections of their Husbands, so he would abuse the Husbands with
the Dishonor of their Wives. And in these practices he spent his first years,
living so contemptibly, that he was without any esteem or regard, as one that
had no Fortune to be sollicitous to preserve, nor any Credit or Modesty to be
tender of.

But by these baser Arts he at length got into favor with Damas one of the
wealthiest Syracusans, by becoming his Pathick, and into the affections of his
Wife, by being her Gallant. This man's favor brought the Potter into the
Militia of the City, and in the discharge thereof he was so encouraged and
assisted by him, that he was put into a condition of thriving, and a way to
raise his Fortune. For Damas being made Commander in chief of the Syracusan
army which they employed against the Agrigentines, when one of the Colonels
were dead, he preferred Agathocles to that Command, who had before showed
himself not unequal to such an emploiment, being of a vigor and courage fit
for great actions. He also had made himself considerable among the Vulgar, who
always look upon things extraordinary, by accustoming himself in all his
military exercises, to use such heavy and strong arms as none else could easily
manage. But being now made Colonel, he had more advantage to get a popular name
and esteem among the Great and eminent, though not among the Good. And his
preferment rendered more conspicuous all those his other advantages which he had
either by Nature or Art. He was of a comely presence, and a large stature
(which to the Vulgar are marks of Rule) an high and immoderate spirit. He had a
mixture of good and bad Arts. He was as well industrious as he was luxurious,
not less popular then arrogant, base and infamous in his pleasures when he gave
himself to them, but sollicitous and bold when he conceived it expedient; he
was hazardous in his attempts, a despiser of dangers, impudent and passionate
in his harangues, and so usually prevailed upon the Multitude, who are more
easily persuaded and moved by what appears, then by what truly is: and he
seemed to have all things requisite for Fame, but an honest Soul. To all these
at length was added that other advantage of Wealth and Riches, which are the
keys to Greatness, and make the accesses to Honor more easy and open. For
Damas dying, and leaving his estate to his Widow, she became the Wife of
Agathocles, and her Dowry put him into the Cense of the richest Citizens, and
raised his desires beyond the level of a private person: for having a long time
been vexed with Poverty, and now suddenly grown wealthy, he could not well
dissemble the change of his Fortune, but was immoderate in those desires which
had by a long Poverty been hitherto suppressed.

The unquiet state of the Commonwealth, either by Factions at home or Wars
abroad, gave him frequent opportunities of promoting his designs, and improving
his esteem among the Vulgar. For commotions in a State are like Earthquakes,
which as they sometimes swallow up pieces of land that have been long
inhabited, and much adorned with the arts and Edifices of men, so do they
sometimes thrust forth into the world some new pieces of ground, which though
barren at first, may be capable of the same ornaments with those which are
lost: so in Civil broils many ancient Famisies and eminent Persons are
overthrown and destroyed; and in their stead arise new men to receive the
Honors and reverence of the people. No Societies are more subject to such
seditious commotions then Democratical Polities, where all things being carried
by the rude, ignorant and popular breath, they are often managed by ambitious
persons to the shaking of the State, who endeavor to overwhelm others, to
raise themselves. In such a Commonwealth did Agathocles live, which was
therefore more obnoxious to his Arts; and he neglected no advantage that seemed
favorable to his design. Therefore the Syracusans having decreed to send an
Army to relieve the City Croton, that then was besieged by the Brutii,
Agathocles gets himself to be created by the public suffrage a Colonel in this
Expedition; but the chief command was entrusted to Sosistratus and Heraclides,
men that had a long time lived by oppression, rapine and blood, and had made
themselves powerful by exceeding Crimes. In this service Agathocles having
behaved himself stoutly, was notwithstanding, through the Envy of Sosistratus,
denied those Honors and rewards which he conceived due to his achievements.

This injury coming so cross to his designs, as checking his course to popular
estimation, he could not digest; but his spirit boiled with anger and hatred,
that others should have the Glory of that which he thought was the proper
effect of his Valor, and that he should be obscurely exposed to fruitless
dangers: nor was he less grieved at his Enemies Honor then at his own Wrong.
Therefore to satisfy his revenge, and to try another way to Fame, which was
to make himself great by enmities with great men, and for which he was also
fitted by Nature, being of a round and smooth discourse, skillful in raising
slanders, and bold enough to prosecute them, powerful at Factions and popular
discontents; he leaves the Army and makes have home, where he challenges the
liberty of a free City, and accuses Sosistratus and his party (of the greatest
Crime in a Popular State) as invaders of the common Liberty, and such as
intended a Tyranny. But the Syracusans neglected these accusations; either
because their Commonwealth was defective in its constitution, as having not
provided for a way whereby such accusations even of their most potent Citizens
might be thoroughly examined, (which would have been much for the security of
their Liberty, because it would have terrified any consultations and
conspiracies against it, and have opened a way and course by Law for Citizens
to vent their passions and humors one against another, and not necessitated
them to extraordinary ways and private force, which do soon ruin the
Commonwealth;) Or Sosistratus his greatness and success had secured him against
the force of any impeachment, so that the people were not willing to take
notice of that crime which they could not punish, or of that design which they
could not prevent. For sometimes treasons are with more ease avoided when they
are not understood, and are more dangerous in so potent a person when known,
then when they are only in design. Or else the credit of Agathocles was so
low, that he could not raise a belief in any that he could be sollicitous for
the public good; or that this was any thing else but a sally of his factious
Spirit. His attempts being slighted, he was forced to suppress his present
Accusations.

But Sosistratus returning home victorious from Croton, the Syracusans lost
more by the Victory then was sought by the war; for he being proud with his
success, and conscious of his own designs, and doubting that the accusations of
Agathocles had made him obnoxious to the peoples jealousy and anger, he
changes the form of the Government into an Oligarchy, establishing the Supreme
power in some few of the Nobless, and making himself the chief of the party: by
this way consulting his own safety: it seeming evident to him there could
happen nothing more dismal in his enterprise, then what he was to expect in a
modest and private condition. This though at first it seemed to secure
Sosistratus, yet was it of a pernicious consequence both to himself and the
City in the issue of it. For to change the Government and the accustomed Orders
of a Society must needs offend many persons; and where there are many
malcontents, some wretched accident may be every day feared. Besides the
Example it gives to others to the same attempts, which will adjust the most
horrid practices that are done in imitation: for Examples stay not where they
began, and though at first they be admitted but in a part, yet at last invade
the whole; and when men have once declined from the rule of Justice, they are
precipitate to that which is evil: no man conceiving that dishonorable for
him, which has proved beneficial to another. So that this practice of
Sosistratus and his party did in some measure honest the future proceedings of
Agathocles against them, and license his projects for Tyranny.

Yet at present Agathocles, that had sound no Justice from his Enemy when he
served under his command in the war, could not now expect sec^ity from him in
peace, who had the whole power of the City, and was exasperated by hi^
accusations; and as formerly he felt his Envy, so he was now to fear his
Revenge, and therefore forsakes the City. And because he was thus obstructed in
his courses to Principality at home, he intended to attempt it abroad. To this
end he gathers up in Sicily a company of such as were accustomed to robberies,
by hopes of larger booties and more splendid rapines. These he disposes into
the species of a just Army, dividing them into several Companies, and
marshalling them under distinct Leaders, to be the fitter to receive and
execute his commands. With this thievish Army he sails over into Italy, and
watches all opportunities for spoil and Tyranny. The first that felt his
attempts were the Crotoniates, for whose liberty before he had behaved himself
stoutly even to envy: and now as if he had repented of his Virtue, or to show
that though he was not willing they should serve others, yet he desired they
might be his Slaves, he endeavors to surprise their City. But being discovered
and encountered, he was beaten back with great loss of his company. With shame
and the rest of his beaten forces he flies to Tarentum, where he with his
company were received into pay as mercenary Soldiers for the defense of the
City. But his immoderate thirst of Greatness, and his unquiet spirit, which
grew more eager by repulses, would not let him rest; (So pertinacious is that
hope which great desires do conceive) that even there he practiced to arrive at
Principality, and instead of a Servant to become Master of the place. But his
designs being divulged, he was cashiered, and with his Faction and party driven
out of the City.

Thus everywhere unfortunate abroad, he is presented by Fortune with an
opportunity of returning home, and revenge on his adversaries. For the
Syracusans were about that time in hostility with the City Rhegium, and had
sent an Army to besiege it under the Conduct of Sosistratus. Agathocles, that
was then maintaining himself and his small party by Robberies, hearing of it,
gathers together all the Exiles that were in those parts of Italy, and other
Vagabonds and Thieves, and with such forces attempts to raise the siege before
Rhegium: and so happily accomplishes it, that he broke the Army of Sosistratus
with so great a rout, that he became contemptible to the Syracusans. The
contempt of a Magistrate does always usher in his ruin. For the people
encouraged by his overthrow, and exasperated by the insolency of the Oligarchy,
who had incurred the public hatred, and animated by some secret practices of
Agathocles, took up arms, and forced Sosistratus and his party, which were
about six hundred, all Instruments or Members of the Oligarchy, to quit the
Government and City also: and then retrived their former Democracy, but with
the addition of a Senate of six hundred, which should consist of the wealthiest
and gravest of the people, who were to debate things of the weightiest
concernment. This change opened a safe return to Agathocles, and greater hopes
to seize upon the power of the Commonwealth, Sosistratus and his party being
removed, who were the greatest obstructions to his designs. And because he
wanted strength to force the people, he applies himself to cheat them by the
arts and ways of a Demagogue, by which Dionysius before him had attained the
Principality of that unquiet City. For there being in every Society two several
parties, the Nobless and the Populacy, they are carried with different and
opposite humors. The Grandees still seek after a power to oppress and command
the lower and inferior part of the Community; and the People strive for that
liberty that they may neither be commanded nor oppressed. And by means of these
distant and opposite humors most part of the Tyrannies did arise. He therefore
who intends to use the people for his ascent to power, must be frequent in his
harangues, flatter the multitude, bitterly inveigh against the insolences of
the Optimacy, extol the name and benefits of Liberty, and make large promises
of peace and plenty in the counsels he does propose: and this is to be a
Demagogue. For such an one speedily becomes the leader of the ignorant
multitude, who are easily deceived by specious promises, and the accusations of
such whom they hate, and conceive him to be very just that favors their
desires, which have more of honesty then those of their adversaries; and they
do usually give a power into his hands to suppress the contrary Faction, which
he afterward uses to take away their Liberty.

This way, which seemed most safe and easy, did Agathocles upon his return
proceed in. Therefore when the news came that the Banditi, Sosistratus and his
party, assisted by the Carthaginians, did intend to make war upon the
Syracusans, he was frequent and importunate in his Orations to the people, that
they would not return again under the yoke of the Oligarchy, but undertake the
war to maintain their Liberty. Which being managed with the usual arts did
prevail upon the Multitude, and they decreed the war: which continued a long
time, and was varied with several Overthrows and Victories. In this war
Agathocles, sometimes as a private person, and sometimes as a Commander, did
behave himself gallantly, and showed himself to be a person of good Conduct,
close design, apprehensive of all advantages, and speedy in the execution,
having always in doubtful cases some cunning Stratagem, either to baffle the
enemy, or to secure his own party. Amongst which this is related for one. The
Syracusans having laid siege to Gela, Agathocles one night with a thousand
commanded men gets into the town by surprise. Sosistratus, that then was
Governor of the place, being alarmed by the surprise, speedily collecting the
stoutest and best-disciplin'd men of the Garrison, sets upon those that had
entered, and killing about three hundred of them, put the rest to flight. Who
being to make their retreat through very narrow lanes, were in great hazard of
being all cut off, having neither room to fight, nor leisure to fly.
Agathocles beyond all hope frees them from this danger; for though he himself
had received seven wounds, and was weakened with the loss of much blood; yet not
fearfully yielding to his present adversity, he gives command to the
Trumpetters, that they should go to the opposite part of the town-wall, and
there sound a Charge: which being speedily performed, the Geloans, that then
pressed hard upon Agathocles, hearing the Charge given in another place, and
through the darkness of the night not being able to discover the truth of the
matter, conceived the City to be assaulted in another part by another body of
the Enemy. This made them slacken their eagerness in assailing Agathocles, and
to divide themselves to succor the other parts which they imagined were
assaulted; and by this means suffered him and his party safely to return to
their Camp: where he was received with much honor, for having preserved the
lives of so many of his own party from an evident ruin.

Had Agathocles abounded with these honest arts, he had trodden the right way
to Glory; and would he have been contented with what the Laws and his Country
would give, he might have received that as a reward of his Virtue which he
labored to make a spoil of his Violence, and by the common consent have been
thought worthy to reign, if he had not sought it too greedily. So Gelo before
him, and Hiero after him, received the Empire of Syracuse as a reward of their
generous actions, not as the aim of their designs. And Timoleon, though he
strove to be a private person, yet was forced to be a Prince. Heroic Virtues
being as the Patent of Heaven for Dominion: and men willingly submit to them
that receive, not take the Power; and think their Freedom preserved, not
infringed, by a just Prince, there being no greater Liberty then to be well
governed. But the desire of Greatness was too importunate in Agathocles. For
ambitious spirits are not easily contented with what is offered; to whom the
present enjoyments seem contemptible, when greater things may be hoped for; and
at last they endeavor too hastily to exceed their own hopes: which is the
ruin of many, that might have attained to Supremacy, had they not preferred
too speedy and dangerous courses to such that are more slow, yet sure, mediums
to power. And therefore these arts which would have covered moderate crimes in
others, made him more suspected by his Citizens, that he was a person of too
bold hopes, and no longer fit to dwell in a free City: for he made use of all
his Successes and abilities to render himself great in the common fame, and
popular among the Soldiers. So that his Virtues, as well as his Vices, made
him unfit for that Society. For Industry and Sagacity are no less dangerous
then Vanity and Luxury to a Commonwealth, when they are used to attain a
Tyranny.

To prevent therefore the ambitious designs of this and other her Citizens, the
Commonwealth of Syracuse had invited from Corinth Acestorides, a person of a
clear fame and unquestioned Honesty, to take upon him the Government for a
time, that he might balance the several Factions of their State, and give vent
to those swelling hopes of her most turbulent members, who now were grown too
big for a civil and ordinary management; hoping to find him like to Timoleon,
that knew how both to conquer Tyrants, and to submit to a civil Government, a
rare agreement in one breast: for the nature of man is willing to indulge that
in himself which he hates in another. But Acestorides, though he wanted not
integrity for his trust, yet failed in courage and resolution to perform it.
For finding Agathocles the greatest object at that time of the common
jealousy, and that Liberty and he were inconsistent in one City, (For that
City cannot be accounted free, where any one Citizen can terrify the public
Magistrates,) he did not dare to remove him by a Trial and course of Justice,
but intended to take him off by a secret Conspiracy: and therefore published an
Edict, whereby he banished him from that Commonwealth; and commanding him to
leave the City by night, he laid an Ambush in the way that might kill him in
his passage, supposing the darkness would conceal the authors of his death, and
his Banishment would occasion an uncertainty in all reports that should be
divulged, whether he were alive or dead, and so suspend the minds of the Vulgar
rabble (to whom his Vices as well as his Virtues had indeared him, and) who
would be forward to mutiny in his revenge. Agathocles, that was not
unacquainted with any fraudulent practices, did easily suspect the plot: and
therefore to prevent it, chooses out one of his servants that was most like to
himself in the outward proportion of body, and harnasses him with his own
armor, mounts him upon his own horse, and sends him out of the City that way
which he conceived was forelaid, and he himself disguised with poor and ragged
apparel departs in a more unfrequented path. Those that were appointed to
dispatch him, conjecturing by the arms and horse that they had encountered with
their designed prey, set upon the Servant and kill him, supposing that they had
rid Syracuse of their fears and hate. But Agathocles's following actions soon
made them sensible of their error, and did upbraid the weakness of
Acestorides, who did not dare to use the sword of Justice against him whom he
thought unworthy to live, and put the security and Liberty of the Commonwealth
upon the uncertainty of a Plot.

Agathocles being gone, the unsteady multitude grow weary of that war which
he had persuaded them unto against the Banditi, who assisted by the power of
Carthage, were able to renew their invasions after many defeats. Therefore they
immediately receive them into the City again, and conclude a Peace with the
Carthaginians: but revoked not the sentence of Banishment against Agathocles,
which now by the return of his enemies he conceived would be irreversible. He
therefore has recourse to his old auxiliaries of Thieves and desperate
Vagabonds, whom necessity and his former conduct had fitted for any Villainy;
who readily flocked about him in hopes of more licentious rapines: and to these
he gathers all the disbanded Soldiers, whom the present Peace had made
useless, and forming an Army of these, he grew terrible both to the
Carthaginians and Syracusans, wasting their Territories, firing their Villages,
and plundering the weaker and unfenced Towns and Cities. And that he might
color his outrages with some pretext of Justice, he espoused the quarrels of
all those Cities that were either enemies to or emulous of the power of
Syracuse; and to this end was made Praetor of the Murgantines, who had an
ancient hatred against them, and had been his sanctuary in his Banishment.
Under the species of their quarrel he did so eagerly prosecute the war and
his own designs, that he took Leontium, and blocked up Syracuse it self. This
reduced them to such streights, that they were forced to seek for succor and
aid from Amilcar the Carthaginian General. He, either to keep alive those
flames wherewith the Sicilians did consume one the other, was willing to add
some fuel to the fire; or else in humanity and of a generous spirit, would
assist a noble, though adverse, City, when distressed by her own Citizens;
sending thither such a sufficient supply as made Agathocles despair by force to
bring it to his subjection. He therefore applies himself to his more safe and
secret arts of deceit; and desires Amilcar that he would mediate betwixt him
and Syracuse, that he might be restored again to his own City and household
Gods, and not be necessitated by such unpleasing ways to preserve his life and
liberty. But together with these honest pretexts, he made more obliging
promises of service and gratitude to Amilcar, if he would be the happy
instrument of his return home.

Amilcar undertakes the office, and easily persuades the wretched Syracusans to
consent to that which, without his assistance, they should be forced to submit
unto upon more unequal conditions. His restitution therefore was agreed unto by
the People, upon some seturity of their Peace and Liberty; which to give them,
he was led into the Temple of Ceres, the most sacred Deity among the Sicilians,
and there solemnly swore, that he would do nothing contrary to the
Democratical Government of Syracuse. This was the only security which they
could at that time have from Agathocles. Which is indeed a sufficient tie upon
such souls as are endued with a sense of Virtue, or have any fear of a Deity:
but Oaths are too weak fetters to restrain ambitious Spirits, or such as intend
a Tyranny. For He that resolves to be unjust toward men, will slight the
testimony and vengeance of Heaven. But though the people had been acquainted
with the Arts and impiety of Tyrants, and were not ignorant of the impious
converse of him whom they admitted; (For from the former conversation may be
best valued the force of any man's oath) yet were they now in such a condition,
that it was as dangerous not to believe as to be deceived: and they chose
rather, as conceiving it a relief of their miseries, to be undeservedly abused,
then to leave him any color of justice for his Injuries.

But it was the greater Wonder among the Speculativi, that Amilcar, a person of
such experience in humane converse, and by a long Government not unacquainted
with the distance of aspiring minds from their Oaths and Promises, that he
should rely upon the Oath of Agathocles; who likewise swore to him by touching
the kindled Tapers, (the form of swearing among the Carthaginians) that he
would promote the Punick interest, and obey their commands. For how could he
imagine that a Person so faithless to his own Country, would observe any faith
with strangers? that he which sought for Dominion in his own City, would
quietly bear a foreign yoke? Yet the Carthaginian might promise to himself
advantages to his Republic either from the Perfidiousness or Observance of the
Tyrant. If he were faithful, then the increase of his power over the Syracusuns
extended the Dominon of the Africans, and would give some splendor to their
yoke, in that they had a King for a minister of slavery. If otherwise he should
be false to both, then might Carthage rejoice at his Perjuries, because they
would occasion eternal hatreds and quarrels among her common enemies, and so
make her Victory easy when she should attempt it. And it would be more
advantage for the Punick Empire, if Agathocles together with infamy and hate
should possess the power of Syracuse, then if he had acquired it by virtuous
actions, and had been seated in it by the people's affections; for so being
mutually jealous, they would afflict and weaken each other, that at last the
Tyrant would not be able to hold his Usurpation, nor the City to maintain her
Liberty: so that in the end it must necessarily fall into their bosom. These
might be the too subtle speculations and fine hopes of Amilcar: but they could
never be esteemed wise counsels, wherein so many accidents might intervene, as
might justly make him doubt of the expected issue. For the Tyrants Cruelty and
Fortune eluded all his hopes, and justified the Carthaginian Censure, who for
this action condemned their Commander.

Agathocles being returned home, covered his revengeful and ambitious Soul with
a dissembled Modesty, neither awakening the fears of the people, nor raising
the jealousies of his enemies by complaints of his unjust banishment, and the
unprovoked injuries which he had received; but burying all in silence, as if
the love of his Country had defaced all private animosities, he rendered all
secure, and suffered them to embrace that error, That Malice may be worn out
with time, and appeased by Benefits. And knowing that the speediest way to
overthrow the present Government was to pretend Liberty, and when the
Government was once shaken, it might easily be attempted on; he applies himself
to such courses as might render him in the Vulgar esteem the Patron and
assertor of the common Liberty. Therefore in all his harangues he still
expressed his great affection to the people. Who being most eager in two
desires, one, of having their Liberty, and the other, of taking revenge on
those that are the instruments of their bondage; he tickles and feeds these two
humors in his speeches, pleading the great equity of restoring the Government
to the multitude, that every freeman should have his share in the common
interest; and then inveighs against those that had been and were in power,
accusing their insolences and miscarriages in Government, and so forms his
discourses as one that rather knew how to rule, then desirous of it. For he
that accuses would be supposed clear in himself from what he objects to another
as a crime, and he is conceived skilful in that wherein he observes another
errors. Thus playing the subtle Demagogue, and doing all things as a Slave,
that he might arrive at Rule, with more safety and speed he attains that which
open and stout assaies would have rendered difficult. And he that will arise
from a private and low condition to the Supremest fortune, must use more Art
then Force.

The people cheated by these his specious representations of a perfect Liberty,
and cajoled by his reiterated protestations of seeking only the common
utility, soon forgot their former jealousies, and his bold attempts upon their
Liberty; (So strong an influence has a confident assertion even upon
distrustful minds, that it works a belief of what they desire, though contrary
to the evidence of reason drawn from former experience) and bewitched with the
imaginary benefits of Novelty, which the Vulgar are no less desirous of in a
well-ordered then in a corrupted State, did by a public Decree make him their
General, and constitute him their Conservator of the Peace, till such time as a
form of Government should be framed that might satisfy all parties, and
preserve Liberty and Unity among all the members of the Commonwealth. For all
the Exiles being returned home, the City was distracted with various Factions,
and could not agree in any one form of State. Every one, as it is usual,
projecting several methods conducing to the interest of his own party, and the
ruin of the opposite; very little respecting the public security. And when
all would order the Commonwealth, none could please: for some of their Forms
did not please those that were good, and others displeased the wise. In some it
was made easy to do mischief, and in another men could not safely do that
which was good. One left too much authority to the Grandees, and the other made
the Populacy tyrannical and arbitrary. Therefore the multitude, which are slow
in their resolves, unless determined by necessity, were now by the variety of
proposals more uncertain and dubious to make their choice. In the mean while
each Faction striving to advance it self, made an horrid confusion in the
Community. And as in a Tempest each wave striving to be highest rides upon the
back of that which hasted to the shore before it, and is it self also
suppressed by a following: so it happened in this Civil Tempest of the
Commonwealth; each party strove to suppress the other, till a third,
undiscerned before, assaults and suppresses the Conqueror. And each was made
more fierce by their several pretensions to Liberty and the Public good, which
even those that aimed at the severest Tyranny would not neglect: so that all
thinking to evidence the goodness of their Cause by their heat for it, filled
the whole City with tumult and confusion.

The Divisions ran so high, and continued so long, that the soberer part
thought it was now expedient, that the afflicted Republic should have some
rest, lest the wounds thereof should be made wider by such a tumultuous way of
curing. And it appeared that the only way to attain Order was, to confer and
entrust into some One man's hand power to preserve the peace for a time: for it
was evident, that it was almost impossible, in so great a distraction, things
could ever come to a settlement, unless some One, like a Soul and Mind, should
give Order and Method to all the rest. The person chosen for this was
Agathocles, who was still on that party where was the greatest Number, which
was likely to be the most ignorant, and which he conceived he could most easily
delude. He therefore was made Praetor, and entrusted with more then ordinary
power for this great work of settlement. Thus was Agathocles presented with the
fairest opportunity of true Glory that his Soul could possibly desire. For
Heaven cannot give nor any man wish for a fitter occasion for worldly Glory,
then to find a City deformed with confusions, and declining to ruin by its
corruptions, which he may reform and module with wholesome Laws and generous
Constitutions, to render it a peaceable habitation, and make it a theater of
Virtue and Justice; to secure the Magistrates of their Honor, and every
private person of his Wealth and Safety: for this is to be emulous and a rival
of the glory of Heaven, to bring Order out of Confusions, to dispense those
blessings which render Life comfortable, and hedge up the fortunes and goods of
men with a just providence. This captivates the Souls of men to a voluntary
subjection, and challenges an un-envied adoration.

But Agathocles, who was of the temper of every Tyrant, measuring the benefit
of his Power by a license to do mischief, and being no less thirsty of Blood
then he was of Greatness, perverted these advantages of solid Glory to gratify
his Lusts, consulting his own eternal ignominy in his Countries slavery. And
therefore resolved not to let slip this season of erecting his Tyranny, to
which all things in the judgment of his Lusts did seem to invite him. The
people whom he had to deal with were factious and unquiet, restless as the Sea
which did incompass them; whom the plenty of their soil and the riches of
Trading had made so wanton, that they were impatient of Laws and Magistrates:
and as they were unwilling to endure Slavery, so they were immodest in the use
of their Liberty; and by these Corruptions were become like so many wild
beasts, easy to be taken by any watchful and bold hand that could hope to tame
them. Besides, the frequent revolutions of Government, and the successive
inundations of several Factions, had each in their Order, like the Overflowings
of Nile, left so many seeds and spawns of monsters that might easily be formed
to any design; so many disappointed in their hopes and broken in their
fortunes, that they would be contented to be instruments of any change that
should make them whole again. The Soldiers were for the most part mercenary,
and without any discipline; for in Civil wars the discord of the Citizens
abolishes the severity of discipline: besides, being now to be cashiered,
because they were made useless by this Peace, they were envious at the rich
Citizens, and did meditate nothing else but the sacking of the Town, the
pillage of the Country, and the murdering of their Enemies; and so were fitted
for any bold corrupter, that would but lead them to their desired prey. But the
most inviting Occasion was the present unsetledness of the Government, all
things being but in motion to composure, not yet established; which is a vast
advantage for any wicked enterprise, whose counsels and hopes are built upon
troubles. All these Occasions promised much ease in the design, and there was
nothing that he feared would much impede his ascent to Principality, but the
Authority of the Senate of six hundred, which were the wealthiest Syracusans,
and of greatest credit with the people, which he intends to remove out of the
way; not willing any longer to delay, when caution seemed more dangerous then
rashness, and fearing to lose these Occasions which Modern Tyrants name the
Calls of Providence.

All things therefore seeming fit for his purpose, being now Chief Magistrate,
no empty name, but of great moment to execute any enterprise, and having an
actual command of all the forces of the Commonwealth, he wanted only some
pretext to draw them together, with as many as he thought fit for his design,
which either Fortune presented him with, or he himself formed. For news was
brought to Syracuse, that some under their dominion had revolted from their
obedience, and were embodied about Erbita. Upon this the people were summoned
in great have, who surprised with this sudden fear, passed a Decreee, that
Agathocles should take care of the Commonwealth; and that he might prevent the
danger with speed, he might levy what Soldiers he thought fit.

This Commission was as large as his desires, and he presently makes use of it
to his purpose: for he sends for the Murgantines, who were his ancient friends,
but bitter enemies of the Syracusans; he gathers up out of the inland Towns
such as had been his former comrades in his thievish expeditions; and with
these he joins those that had formerly served under him against the
Carthaginians, who he knew were obliged to him by former Benefits, fit for
whatsoever he dared to command, that were of a pertinacious faith to him, but
enemies to the Senate, and haters of the people, because they were forced to
obey their commands: which hatred was therefore more fierce, because it was
unjust. All these made up a number of three thousand, every one of which were
very desirous to ruin the Democracy. To these he adds such of the Citizens as
had no honest hopes, whose poverty or fear of punishment for former offenses
did make them malign and hate those that were in Power, and suggest to them a
necessity of becoming greater criminalls, that by the change of Government they
might gain security, and in licentious tumults alter their despicable fortunes
by the booties and rewards of civil commotions.

These all being fit for his purpose, as if he intended his march toward
Erbita, he appoints to rendezvous at the Tomb of Timoleon; as if he would first
trample upon the ashes and memory of him that had been the most Virtuous
assertor of Liberty to that wretched City, and from thence make his invasion by
Blood and Violence. His Army being met, he sends for Peisarchus and Decles, who
were the most eminent and leading members of the Senate, as having something to
consult with them concerning the public affairs. They coming to him with a
train of about forty of their friends, were immediately secured by a guard that
he set upon them, as if they had come to execute some Treason against him. Then
calling his Soldiers together, and appearing among them with a countenance
composed to sadness, he omits nothing that might move either pity to him, or
fear, anger, and hate toward the Senate. He invokes their faith and compassion
of him, and complains of his hard Fate, that it was never safe for him to love
the People, and that none was ever an enemy to the Commonwealth, but they would
be likewise the contrivers of his destruction. For do you not hear (says he)
how my execution and your punishment is already decreed, and how the Senate
has sent these their most subtle Agents to draw me back to the place of
slaughter, and to contrive the scene of your massacre? They envy us the honor
of dying upon our enemies swords in defense of our Country's Liberty: and we
must brutishly fall as sacrifices to their insolent Lusts, and our blood be
spilt to testify that such Monsters ruled us. In vain do we arm and expose our
selves to death to keep off a foreign yoke, when such ungrateful wretches devote
us to ruin at home. Are we not patient enough in our slavery, when we offer
our selves to all the dangers of war, that they may be secure in their
effeminate pleasures, and wantonly lavish that wealth which is the price of our
blood? but must we also be basely sent out of the world, that they alone may
enjoy it? When will these men know the just bounds of commanding, or we fully
apprehend the misery of our ignominious thraldom?

Then pausing, as if he had been interrupted with tears which he shed, the
Vulgar rout hindered any further progress in his speech, with loud clamor,
each one according to the sense of his Interest or Passion, exclaiming against
the Vices of the Senators: some charged them with Cruelty, others railed at
their Covetousness, and another sort did condemn their Pride and
Perfidiousness; and therefore they jointly cried out, That he should not wait
till such inhumane vipers did return to a love of their own City, but speedily
revenge his own and their injuries: that he had already offended enough against
his trust, in dealing so gently with such as deserved as little of mercy, as
they showed of justice. Agathocles suffers not their present rage to cool,
knowing that wicked attempts are to be done with a sudden fury, though good
counsels gather strength by delay: and seeing they understood the causes of
hatred, he would likewise quicken them with the hopes of Spoil.

Go, (says he) and be your own Avengers, make the Tyrants feel what they
decreed you should suffer. Let the wealth of Senators that know no modesty in
their commands, be the rewards of such generous Souls that can endure no
Slavery. Leave them no friends or confidents which may bewail or revenge their
death, nor children to inherit their Crimes with their Wealth. Then
immediately, not to give space to the bad to repent, nor to the good (if there
were any there) to consider, and in abhorrency of the fact to unite against
him, he commands the Trumpets to sound a charge, as if he were sacking an
Enemies Town. The caitiff Army having this full license to satisfy their
revenge, covetousness and lust, soon fell to the execution, and left nothing
undone that a conquered City feels from an enraged Enemy. They guarded all the
posts of the City, and shut up the Gates that none might escape their fury:
then they slew all the most daring and popular Citizens, who hearing the tumult
came forth unarmed into the streets to inquire the cause. Then the houses
streamed with the blood of the owners, the Innocent fell with the Guilty, and
every one was slain that had something to satisfy the expectation of his
murderer. He that had no enemy, met with death at the hand of his friend; and a
good name was a mark for ruin. The Altars of the Gods were colored with the
blood of those that fled to them for refuge, as Victimes to an incensed Deity.
The aged men and ancient matrons were led about in scorn, by their miseries to
make up the merrier part of this Tragedy. And that nothing of unhappiness might
be unfelt by the miserable Syracusans, Rapes were mingled with Slaughters: he
that was the Assassinate of the Husband, would be the Ravisher of the Wife; and
he that reeked with the blood of the Father, would quench his flames of lust
with the dishonor of the Daughter. Their rage and lust was so high against the
people, that at last it grew hot among themselves, and he was accounted an
enemy that had got the more precious booty. When any Virgin or Youth, whom
beauty made conspicuous, fell into the hands of this barbarous rabble, they
were commonly torn in pieces by the violence of those who contended for their
first abuse; and then became the quarrel, and armed the Ravishers to their
mutual ruin. Others while they hasted away with the gold and silver of the
murdered owner, were themselves a prey to a stronger arm. Thus death and ruin
reigned in Syracuse, and the first day there were no less then four thousand of
the most eminent Citizens, that by honest arts had won the affections of the
people, murdered. Some were apprehended and slain at the gates, through which
they thought to fly. Others met death from which they fled in climbing over
the town wall, by too much fear and have breaking their necks and limbs. About
six thousand escaped, and some of them got safe to Agrigentum and other
neighboring Cities, where the relation of their miseries did move a great deal
of pity: but the inhumane Soldiers would yet make them sensible of their fury
in their remaining parts, with more contumely ravishing their Wives and
Daughters, because they themselves had escaped with their lives.

This Cruelty lasted for two days, Agathocles's thirst of blood being not
sooner to be quenched; or because his authority was not yet so great as to
forbid those crimes which he might with ease command; or he was willing to
indulge the lufts of his Army beyond all hopes of pardon, that so they might
not expect safety but in the conduct and preservation of him who had authorized
their wickedness. But when this base rabble of men did seem to be satiated with
villainy, as having no more subjects to practice on, to conclude the Tragedy, he
sends for all those Citizens whom he had secured, and who had been reserved to
feed his own eyes with their blood. Of these, such as he had most injured, and
whose virtues he might most fear, were slain before him; others less
considerable he banished. Only one Dinocrates, a bold and faithless person, so
like him in vices, that the similitude had been the ground of a former
acquaintance, though now he was a stranger to his design, he freely sets at
liberty: which was not the effect of Clemency or Friendship, Virtues that
Tyrants are not capable of, but to provide a refuge for himself in the future.
For even the most barbarous and bloodiest villains, in diffidence of a change
of affairs, will provide some private favor against the public hatred.

This was Agathocles's first scene of Dominion; and by surveying these
sacrifices to Empire, the state Augurs and prudent Greeks did form a judgment
how bloody and cruel would be the process of his Government. For Sovereignty
must be maintained by the same arts by which it is acquired; and an Empire
wickedly gotten by crimes, was never exercised by virtue and honesty. And as no
good man will seek to be a Prince by wicked practices; so no debauched Spirit,
that by impiety has invaded a Principality, will ever think to use it justly.

For either by his wicked practices to attain to it, his Soul will be
habituated to mischief; or his desires to keep what he has usurped will
present to him a necessity to continue as he did begin. Because Vices when once
they have debauched the souls of men, leave no place for moderation: and he
that in his projects for Greatness has a long time meditated violence and
cruelty, will be like those ravenous beasts, that having once tasted blood,
will become unsatiable, and as Lions that having fed upon carcasses, are still
searching after the like. And this appetite when it is once armed with the
supremest power, will sometimes, when there is no necessity for preservation,
frolic with the lives of men, and in a capricious humor, or boast of
Greatness, drink humane blood, and sport with mischief. If Habits restrain not
an Usurper from just courses, yet the Necessities of State will: and if he were
desirous to abound with those acts which adorn men with the titles of Good, yet
the injustice of his entrance upon Government will make it exceeding difficult,
if not impossible; for that will always give him occasions of fear, fear will
seek for security, security cannot be had by the affections of those to whom he
has given just cause of hate; therefore he must make himself safe by more
injuries, and hence arises increase of hatred: it being impossible that the
Injurer and the Injured should ever be cemented by a solid faith, which is the
surest basis for a moderate Empire and lasting obedience; and that Government
will be always odious and never good, that must be maintained by violence.
Besides, Tyrants meet with obstructions to a virtuous use of their power by
those that assisted them in the acquisition; the instruments of their Greatness
will be their obstacles to Goodness: for they being vicious by whom they did
arise, they must be no other to gratify them, and must neglect those engaging
Virtues that become Princes, because they are obliged to such that are not fit
to be Subjects. His Vices render him not more hateful to the good, then his
Virtues do to those that have been the ministers of his Tyranny, to whom, as
well as to his own lusts, he must be ready to prostitute the lives, honors and
goods of the best Citizens, and sometimes his choicest friends, as to the
authors of his fortune. So that the observation of Tacitus is very true,
Imperium flagitio acquisitum nemo unquam bonis artibus exercuit: and it is
apparent in the Life of Agathocles, and verified in every Usurper.

Agathocles having laid his foundation by rude cruelty, builds the
Superstructures with dissimulation: an art thought so necessary for those whom
Ambition makes thirsty or tenacious of Greatness, that Tiberius, who was well
skilled in it, esteemed it among his choicest Virtues; always appearing a
modest refuser of what he passionately desired; and when all things else died
in him, he strove to keep his dissimulation alive. Andronicus by this only Art
arrived to the Greek Empire, and had found it so prosperous, that he made use
of it when the enraged Multitude were in actual revenge of that Imperial and
Patrician blood which he had spilt, and as he was led to Execution, continued
his feigned Piety, crying out, Break not a bruised reed: as if he thought
dissimulation so powerful a charm, that it would calm a tumult, and that anger
and fury had left a place for credulity. Lewis the Eleventh of France, a Prince
of such an impatient Ambition, that he could not bear with a private condition
though in reversion to the Crown, while his Father lived, nor defer the
jealousies of his own Son, till his age might make him more aspiring and
capable of Dominion, had made such use of this artifice, and was so successful
in it, as by it only he ruined his too powerful enemy Charles Duke of
Burgundy: and therefore commended it to the Tutors of his Son, as the only
lesson he should learn in Latin, Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit Or regnare.
vivere. Agathocles was as great an Artist in this as any man, it being as
necessary for him as for all those who project wicked designs, and whose abject
condition or heinous crimes have set them at a great distance from glorious
hopes. For noble actions and just titles have no need of dissimulation, and
generous spirits will scorn to use it; because it is an evidence of baseness,
and a conviction of fear. But Tyrants are never nice in any thing that is
advantageous. Therefore Agathocles, that feared a present and immediate
exercise of rule would too soon discover the cheat he had put upon the people,
and so make his settlement more difficult, intended so to delude them, that
they should even force him to take that which he so eagerly thirsted for, and
bind the yoke of Slavery on their necks by their own Suffrages, and by their
own Law give him such a power that should force their obedience. For though the
multitude may be easily persuaded to any thing, yet it is difficult to keep
them constant in that persuasion without a power over them. Nothing is more
unstable then Greatness founded only upon another pleasure; nor are the
favors of any more uncertain then those of the Vulgar: therefore though he
would be raised by them, yet would he not be built upon them. To bring this
about, he veils his designs with a dissembled Modesty. A Virtue which when real
is an ornament to the greatest fortunes, but most lovely in those who pretend
the public good: for nothing is more acceptable to men, then those that break
another Tyranny, and modestly abstain from the same attempts.

To this purpose he assembles the People and his Soldiers, to whom he
remonstrates the miscarriages in Government of the Senate, and objected to them
all those Crimes which use to be charged upon those that have been in power. To
deliver therefore (says he) the Commonwealth, the public grievances, and not
any private wrongs, have called me forth: and I could not but compassionate the
Good people, though I did not feel their miseries. In the prosecution of which
I confess we have used extraordinary and unusual means, but yet such which
Necessity and their own arrogancies do justify; for we could not crave helps
from the Laws, when their power and partisans had obstructed the ordinary
course of Judicature. And indeed the Safety of the people is the Supreme Law^:
nor does Justice consist in the formality of processes, but in the equality of
the punishment to the crime. As for my self, I am content to spend my days in
a perpetual banishment, so that the Commonwealth may enjoy their Liberty and
Peace, being unwilling that any concernment of mine should be a firebrand to
new broils, or afford matter to civil dissensions. But if you judge me worthy
to partake of the common Liberty, which with the hazard of my Life and Fortunes
I have purchased for you, I am resolved to lead a private life, being
abundantly satisfied with the glory of this act, that I have recovered the
Liberty of so good a people and so noble a City. And therefore I declare you a
Free State, and that all the Power is in the People.

To procure some credit to his words, he immediately divested himself of his
Imperial habiliments, the badges of his office; and took the Vulgar habit,
thereby declaring himself one of the Multitude, and so offered to depart out of
the Assembly. The subtle Fox was secute that he ran no hazard of losing the
prey for which he had so long toiled, for he knew that Assembly did consist
most of such as were conscious of so much rapine and blood, that they could not
suffer any other Magistrate but him that was equally polluted in the guilt:
therefore all these, and every one that had no understanding of what was good
nor care of evil, such that were to live by the rewards of wickedness and a
ministry to Tyranny, immediately cried out, that He should not desert the good
people of Syracuse, and that he should protect them in that Liberty of which he
had been so glorious an Author. He stood immovable at their first clamours, as
if he were unwilling to part with those imagined delights of his resolved
privacy, or were too modest to command; and with an obstinate silence provoked
their more loud and fierce acclamations, that he should not betray them to
their enraged enemies, nor think he could be safe in private when the public
was in danger. Seeing his Arts so prosperous, composing himself as if he were
wearied with the desires of all, and sollicitous lest his modesty might be
dangerous to the public peace, he does by degrees yield; not as if he would
take the Government, but put an end to his denial and their requests.

I know (says he) how obnoxious he makes himself to Fortune who stoops to the
burden of governing a free people; how easily his best actions and most prudent
counsels may be blasted by sinister interpretations of licentious Demagogues.
For when no man can be sufficiently wise concerning the future, and very often
the worst counsels have the happier events; he that sincerely intends the
public good, may sometimes fail of his scope, and for his cares and hazards,
be rewarded with false accusations and inauspicious surmises, which are very
offensive to persons of Integrity who are tender of their fame. But it is most
intolerable when a faithful servant of the Commonwealth must bear the envy of
their offenses who are his partners in Government. Therefore though I despise
dangers and contemn reproach, that I may serve my Country in those honest and
just ends of Government; yet am I unwilling to be loaded with the crimes of
others, and be accountable for their miscarriages who prefer their private to
the public good.

His party by this understood the condition of their security, and therefore in
the Assembly passed this Decree, That Agathocles should be the Commander in
chief of all the Forces of the Commonwealth, and have the sole management of
all Public affairs. This Decree fully answered his desires: therefore seeming
to be overcome with the kindness and love of so good a people, he thankfully
undertakes the Government, and promises much faithfulness in it, and many
benefits to the people by it. And from this time he publicly exercised the
Tyranny, like an absolute Prince and Lawful Monarch; whenas he was in truth but
a Capo di Banditi, a Chief of Thieves and Murderers: and this Decree could not
be styled the Consent of the People, which when they are free to give it, is
the true foundation of the Supreme Power; but a conspiracy of Traitors and
public enemies. For having killed and expelled all those whose right it was to
convey, and who had most prudence to judge where to trust Authority, as a
reward or guard, for all Virtues; there remained very few but the Associates of
his wickedness, great Criminals, that were fitter to suffer by Magistracy then
to dispose of it, and the dregs of the People, who are the reproach, not
legitimate parts, of a Community; who rather fear then desire Government, as
the great restraint of their licentious lusts, and therefore are willing it
should be conferred on the most corrupted persons, as from whom they expect the
most abusive license. And these likewise Agathocles had cajoled in his
Speeches, promising a new Agrarian Law, and more equal division of lands, that
all debts and bonds should be cancelled, and that Prisoners upon such
obligations should be set at Liberty. Which are the usual tempting promises
whereby Usurpers raise the hopes and get the favor and assistance of the
debauched rabble: but they take as little care to perform them, as they
intended faith when they promised them. And such are the good People which
Tyrants so affectionately mention, and are the authors of their power and
supports of their Empire.

The honester and middle sort of the Citizens, whose obscurity and unenvied
fortune had secured them in the Massacre, and whose spirits were not so high as
to render them terrible to the Tyrant, nor so abject as to be forward
instruments of his Lusts, were so stupefied with the horror of that Cruelty
which yet was in their sight, and affrighted into a sluggish patience, that
though they abounded with indignation as well as grief for the loss of their
Liberty, yet they feared the power and multitude of their enemies, so that they
dissembled their passions, and deferred their revenge till a fitter season,
thinking it more safe for the present, rather to expect then provoke their
fortune. Others preferred present peace and security to glorious attempts with
hazard. To secure and quiet these men's minds, he severely forbad the murders
and rapines of his party, as if he would put an end to all injuries. For
injuries, though great, yet if perpetrated at once, and not every day renewed,
do less affright and offend the minds of men. Then to beget in them a credulity
that he would behave himself but as a common Citizen, with modesty and civil
gravity using that power which he had so barbarously got, he composes himself
to all popular courses: he speaks familiarly to all; some he cajols with fair
and splendid hopes; others, whom he judged more fit for business, and whose
Slavery he might buy with profit, he prefers to such and such places; and to
most he uses proper attractives, specious in words, but void of any reality. In
himself nothing appeared new or arrogant. He forbore the use of a Crown (unless
when he sacrificed, which was as Priest, not as a Prince;) he did not take to
himself a select Lifeguard, either for Majesty or security: nor did he affect
to make addresses to him difficult, nor delighted in the tedious attendance of
petitioners: which are the ceremonies of Greatness, and the pleasures of weaker
Tyrants. But appearing in all the shapes of humanity, and presenting these
pageants of Liberty, he bound the yoke of Slavery stronger. For while he
neglected these shadows of Royalty, he laid a foundation of solid power. He
diverted all his care to regulate and augment the public Exchequer, all the
stores he furnished, and filled the Magazines with arms and ammunition, and
increased the Navy. For he foresaw his new Principality must expect seditions
at home, and invasions from abroad: and if Fortune should disperse them, yet
would not his provisions be fruitless, for with them he might make some
additions to his Dominion, and when Slavery was fastened at home, he might
impose it abroad. Which he might easily promise to himself: for The first steps
to Power are always the most difficult; but when once that is entered on, there
will not be wanting means and instruments to increase and establish it.

By these courses did Agathocles endeavor to draw the minds of men. But to
those that knew the Arts of Tyrants, these false Virtues were more terrible,
because they did but for a time suppress those Vices which with more fury would
afterward break forth. For in so much pride and cruelty there can never be
civility and gentleness without design. It is reckoned among the safer Arts of
Tyrants, to imitate a good and lawful Prince. But in every imitation there is
something which betraies the Violence upon nature, and discovers it not to be
genuine: so that notwithstanding all the industry, a Tyrant's bloody thirst,
horrid lusts and desires of security and Greatness, will make him break forth
into such practices as will upbraid the false colors and shadows of Virtue,
and they will soon recoil to actions answerable to his principles; as did
Agathocles, who in a short time discovered to the whole world that he would not
use that power for the benefit of men, which with their so great ruins and
miseries he had acquired.

While Agathocles was laboring to take root, the Syracusan fugitives in those
Cities of Sicily where they found Sanctuary endeavored his overthrow, and to
stir up all Sicily against him. Some out of a desire to return to their native
soil and houshold-gods, others to break the yoke under which their City
groaned, and some out of hatred of Agathocles's fortune more then his
wickedness. It being an innate displeasure in men, to behold the sudden
felicity of others, and to complain of the excess of their Fortune whom they
have seen in the same level with themselves. From these different principles
every one in his place of refuge, but especially at Agrigentum, where their
number was greatest, endeavored by the Demagogues and most popular Citizens to
persuade the Cities to a war against the Tyrant. These still setting before
the people in their harangues, the necessity of preventing Agathocles with that
war which they were undoubtedly to expect from his ambition and covetousness;
the assurance of Victory from the weakness of his beginnings, and the fresh
hatred of his horrid entrance; the glory of the enterprise, to subdue and
extinguish so great a Monster, and restore so many miserable Exiles to their
own household-gods; the danger of the Example, if so near a wickedness should
pass unpunished. By these motives they easily prevailed upon the people to
decree a war against the Tyrant.

But the greatness of the war made the undertaking slow, which lost the
advantages that at first encouraged the enterprise. For doubting their single
strength, they entered into confederacy with Gela and Messene to the same war:
these Trcaties spent time in the managing, and the confidence that did arise
from their union did lose more. For then, as not doubting the Victory, they
feared that if they should make any one of their own Citizens General of their
Army, he might after the overthrow of Agathocles follow his Example, and either
make himself Tyrant, or raise his own City above the rest. Therefore they would
send some of the Exiles to Sparta, to procure from that City a person fit to be
General of all their Forces. For they supposed a stranger would be more just
and faithful in his trust, not having the same interests and parties that a
Citizen might have; and they hoped to find another Timoleon, or one that should
compose his conduct after his Example. But the fortune of Sicily was not so
benign, for instead of a Deliverer they received an effeminate and stupid
Oppressor, whose Vices betrayed them into the enemies power.

For the Agrigentine Agents coming to Sparta, they found Acrotatus the son of
Cleomenes King of that City, who was very desirous and importunate for this
emploiment. For having incurred the hatred of the Spartan youth, because he
opposed the Decree of the Senate to pardon all those that had not stoutly
behaved themselves in the war with Antipater, he was often assaulted by them,
who conceived themselves injured by his insolency, and was continually afraid
of their plots against him. He was therefore very sollicitous for some foreign
emploiment, wherein by his absence he might give vent to their passions, as if
he had undergone a voluntary banishment, and by removing the object of their
hate, blo^ out the remembrance of their injuries. This man the Agents accept
of, whom nothing but the Nobility of his Family could commend, though his
manners were extremely degenerate from the Virtue of the Spartan royal blood.
He was insolent and high in his speeches, but base and cowardly in his actions;
desirous of fame, but neither skilful nor industrious to deserve it; prone to
evil, and not cunning to conceal it; fierce and severe against another Vices,
yet indulgent to himself in baser lusts; envious at the Glory of another, as if
it were his infamy, and yet a despiser of his own credit. His hatred was
heightened by the glorious memory of his Ancestors. For the base descendents of
worthy Parents, besides the common hate which is inseparable from wickedness,
are loaded with another, for that they have defamed the stock from which they
sprung, and tainted that blood which they received pure. This was the Engine
wherewith the Sicilians were to demolish the greatness of Agathocles: too loose
and weak a hand to dethrone a daring, industrious, and subtle Tyrant, and
therefore proved his advantage, rather then his trouble.

He having undertaken the emploiment without the counsel of the Ephori, who
were the Censors of the Royal family in Sparta, with a few ships sails toward
Sicily: but by an ominous Tempest he was forced into the Adriatic sea near the
territories of the Apolloniates; where he trifles away his time in composing a
peace betwixt them and Glaucias an Illyrian King, that then did besiege their
City. From thence he sails to Tarentum, where to lose time more precious then
unnecessary aid could be to the Sicilians, by the credit of his birth and
Country he prevails with that City to enter into the Sicilian league, and to
send twenty ships against the Syracusan Tyrant. And after so much loss of time
which was employed in these Treaties, he comes to Agrigentum, where with much
applause (as is usual to the Glorious assertors of Liberty) and great
expectation he did enter upon his command. This expectation and opinion of the
people (which wise men esteem prejudicial to any emploiment; because many can
never correspond fully unto it, men usually desiring more then can be acquired,
which does in time turn to their dishonor and infamy) this great undertaker
did labor to increase by his confident boasts, that he would speedily ruin
the Syracusan Potter, and finish that just war. But they soon found how vain
were his boasts and their hopes. For they perceived how he neglected all the
desirable opportunities of performing his trust, and as if he were forgetful of
his enterprise, the Dignity of his Extract, and the Honor of his City, he did
endeavor to erect a more heavy Tyranny then that which he was desired to pull
down. He was wholly debauched to every Lust, and as it were with the air, he
had changed the Laconian Temperance and moderation, (eminent Virtues in the
highest fortune) into Lasciviousness and Pride; more like a soft Persian then
an hardy Spartan; abusing the plenty and Beauties of Sicily with his Lusts and
riots: by which profuse courses and by stealth, he also consumed the common
Treasure for the war. Nor did he abstain from blood and injuries, as if those
who had called him for Liberty, knew nothing of it beyond the empty name. And
to perpetuate his Tyranny, he resolved to murder Sosistratus, who was the most
likely to head the Sicilian fury against him. For he was the most eminent of
the Syracusan Exiles, and had often commanded the Armies of his Commonwealth
with honor and success, being of the Nobless of that City, of a present
courage and resolution, not unacquainted with the Arts and practices of
Tyranny, therefore the more able to observe and oppose such designs. The
Spartan having no color to make him fall by the sword of Justice, nor daring
to assault him by open force, uses the fatal caresses of a Tyrant, and invites
him to a Feast; where when he had disarmed him by wine and gluttony, he causes
him to be murdered.

The news of this Murder being divulged, the whole City was filled with uproar,
and the Syracusan Exiles, whose hopes and fortunes were built upon this war,
and were therefore the most impatient at every disappointment, were highly
enraged at the Death of Sosistratus; whom the common Calamity had indeared to
them, and from whose valor and conduct they hoped for a more speedy return
home. These first assault Acrotatus, and by their example many more were drawn
to the same attempt. So that the whole City being gathered together by this
tumult, vote him out of his Office and Command; and to confirm their Decrees,
they assault him with such weapons as their present fury administered, as stones
and the like, and dealt with him as a common Enemy never to be reconciled unto.
For their offenses are most heinous who disappoint the conceived hopes of a
soft and just Government; and the minds of men being frustrated in their
reasonable expectancies of good, are thereby the more implacable. Acrotatus
seeing himself unequal to the peoples violence, fled out of Agrigentum by
night, and with ignominy hasted to Sparta, leaving behind him a discontented
City, and all his broken hopes of Tyranny, of which he was more desirous then
capable. For to impose Slavery upon a people without a force greater then their
resistance, requires a dexterous wit to manage all occurrences to the present
advantage, tedious arts, and time to form a party, to get some fame of valor
and virtue, and to be esteemed tender of the peoples rights. Otherwise, though
any one by the advantage of a trust, may assume a Principality and Tyranny, yet
he cannot long hold it without such foundations. And as things that suddenly
spring and grow have the shallower rooting, and are soonest pulled up: so such
sudden Tyrants are easily deposed. Which was the fortune of Acrotatus, who by
rioting and injuries would enjoy the Pleasures of Tyranny, before he had
acquired the Power. None are more apt to attempt upon the Liberty of the
people, then such who are vicious and debauched; for they commonly think
Principality but a security of great crimes: yet none are less able to compass
their design. For he that will dare to attempt that which no honest man will,
must be able to do such things which none but a prudent and stout man can
perform. Cato's observation of Caesar, that he was the only sober person that
did endeavor the overthrow of the Commonwealth, was an Augury and fear of his
success in that design. Those that are otherwise qualified, though they may
disquiet and expose their Cities to ruin by their vain attempts, yet can never
establish themselves in any Grandeur, nor meet with any other issue of their
Designs then Destruction or Ignominy; as this Spartan did.

This evil management of Acrotatus was not unknown to Agathocles, and therefore
he provoked them not to fight, but waits when his enemies would fall by their
own vices: wherein he was not deceived, for the league was soon broken, and the
associated Cities divided their Army, and recalled their forces. For
confederacies consifting of several communities have several interests; and if
they last so long till they have some prosperous success, yet are they then
broken by envy and jealousies. But commonly the first adverse encounter
immediately creates a fear that dissolves them; and every one by private
counsels will endeavor to provide for their own safety. Whence it comes to
pass that the forces of many Confederates are less considerable, though more
numerous, then those which one single Power is able to form and raise. And thus
it happened with these Confederates: for the Tarentines recalled home their
ships; and the Sicilian Cities not thriving in their first heat against the
Tyrant, would no longer tempt their Fortune, but by the mediation of Amilcar,
who was able to force the dissenters and impose an agreement, they conclude a
peace with the Syracusan. The Carthaginian, not intending to diminish the
Greatness of Agathocles, as conceiving together with his power the envy and
hatred of him would be increased, and so at last he would fall as an easy and
rich prey to the Punick Empire, and thinking by this Peace he might secure the
rights of his own City without the hazards of war, concludes a Peace upon these
Articles: That Heraclea, Selinus and Himera, which were Greek Colonies, should
continue as before under the Carthaginian Empire; that all the other Cities of
Sicily should be free, and live by their own laws; and that Syracuse should
have the chiefest dignity and precedence among them.

Thus this Tempest, that threatened the ruin of the new Tyrant, being so
prosperously calmed, proved like those winds, which if they are not violent
enough to throw down, do advantage trees, by shaking them to a greater fastness
at the root. For it settled Agathocles upon his foundations; because it having
alarmed him to provide all the means of safety, by so necessary an industry he
was enabled for any enterprise. He had gotten together, besides his
Confederates and the Citizens of Syracuse, a choice Army of Mercenaries
consisting of thirty thousand Foot, and three thousand five hundred Horse, and
had stored himself with all kind of Arms. These Forces, being now no longer
necessary for defense, he was resolved, according to the Inftitutes of Tyranny,
to employ in fastening his Dominion at home, and increasing it abroad, by
invading all the neighboring and less potent Cities: for if he could bind his
yoke upon all the Cities about him, he should remove Liberty out of the ken,
and so out of the hopes of Syracuse: besides, he should increase his Revenues
and Forces against another storm which he foresaw was coming from Carthage. For
from thence he had received Intelligence, that Amilcar's peaceful counsels were
branded with sinister interpretations; and although the Senate did not dare
publicly to condemn him while he was in Command, yet had they passed their
sentences against him, and sealed them up in their Urne, not to be publicly
recited till he returned to a private Condition. Agathocles therefore easily
concludes what their intentions must needs be toward himself; and therefore to
strengthen himself against their invasion, he endeavors to prevent them in the
acquisition of as much of Sicily as he could, not despairing in time to grasp
the Empire of the whole Island, if not by his own valor, yet he should have no
small advantage from his Enemies vices, who he saw could not be unanimous in
their common defense, and when they fought singly for Liberty, they would at
last all be Slaves.

To prosecute this resolution, as also to busy his own vassals in resisting
provoked Foreiners, and that they might vent those passions on some common
enemy which else would swell against him, he sets upon, and easily masters all
his weaker neighbors, and vexes them with his oppressions. For a Tyrant is
like that other judgment of incensed Heaven, a contagious Pestilence, which
still infects and spreads it self upon all that are near unto it. Having
brought these lesser Cities under his obedience, his next design was against
Messene, which had refused to be concluded in the former Peace betwixt
Agathocles and the other Sicilians, and did still retain her just hatred of the
Tyrant, and therefore was become a Sanctuary for the Syracusan Exiles. To
deprive them therefore of this harbor, and to make the Messenians repent even
of their pity to the miserable, he was resolved to make them as miserable as
their guests. To this end he sends Pasiphilus, one of his Captains, with a
considerable party and secret instructions, to invade the territories of
Messene, not using any public declaration of hostility, lest he should give
them time to prepare for their defense, or leisure to consult of honest means
to satisfy his unjust anger; for he sought not Peace with them, but their
ruin; nor cared he for their friendship, but intended their slavery.
Pasiphilus, according to his Commands, unexpectedly falls upon their Country,
surprises many of their Citizens, wastes and plunders all their Villages, and
setting forth all his actions with every advantage of terror, he affrights the
Messenians to a Treaty, which underhand he offered to them by some of his
prisoners. When they came to treat, he remonstrates unto them, that the cause
of the War was their harboring his Master's implacable enemies, the Syracusan
Banditi; and declares, that as they were unequal to his Prince as to the
prosecution of the war, and so were to fear the most danger, so should they
lose nothing by his amity, if they were disposed to peace: that they were evil
Counselors to their Commonwealth, who advised them to a Confederacy with the
despicable enemies of so potent a Prince.

The Messenians considering the present terrors and their own weakness, more
then the faith of him with whom they had to do, and hoping by this overture to
end a dangerous war without any hazard to themselves, did immediately decree
that all the Syracusan. Exiles should forsake their City, and then they set
open their gates to receive Agathocles, who was now come to them with his Army.
The Tyrant at his first entrance covered his inhumane purposes with a crafty
modesty; and as if he had had no arms to force his desires, by all seeming
Humanity persuades them to repeal all those public Acts and Decrees whereby
they had banished certain of their lewdest Citizens for notorious crimes, and
which were now in his Army, the refuge of every villain. Which when they had
done, and received them in, who would be like a Garrison to subject them to the
Tyrant, he presently sends for all such whom he knew, there and at Tauromenium,
to be less patient of Slavery, and had formerly expressed their hatred of him;
all which being about six hundred he immediately slew: for foreseeing the war
he should have with the Carthaginians, he resolved to destroy whomsoever he
could not trust.

Thus the Messenians too late found that there was no Humanity or Equity to be
expected from a Tyrant, and when it was in vain, bewailed their cruel folly in
driving out the Syracusan Exiles, who would have been an obstinate and
impregnable guard against the forces of their enemy; as also that they had
betrayed their best and stoutest Citizens, (for only such hate a Tyrant;) and,
which did most of all upbraid their weakness, that they had by their own votes
put themselves under the basest and vilest Ministers of Slavery, their
condemned and profligate Banditi. But now nothing was left but shame and
indignation at their own Credulity and the Tyrant's baseness, who was not at
all ashamed, that by such unworthy arts he had compassed his design. For
Tyrants that seek after power, and not glory, that thirst for blood more then
an honest fame, refuse not the most wicked, if they be also compendious, ways
to attain their ends. Whereas Generous Spirits had rather maintain their
Greatness by Justice, and esteem that the most evident testimony of Valor and
Power to be at once both great and good, and not by injuries to ascend to
superiority. The Romans denied a triumph to those their Consuls, who to
overthrow their enemies had polluted their arms with unjust and wicked arts,
and never accounted that a Victory which was infamous. Viriathus, they
conceived, fell with more honor then he that finished the war with buying his
life, and hired his servants to his murder: for he seemed to upbraid the Roman
weakness, that could not overcome a Spanish Thief by noble ways. And as they
hated the unworthy ways of poison and Treason to finish a war; so while they
were uncorrupted in their Discipline, they were Religiously scrupulous in the
beginning of any: for they never sent forth their Armies till they had sought
for justice in the tracts of Peace, and after the public promulgation of their
intent. Such also was the Integrity of the Achaeans, before they had
forewarned their enemy to a defense. Machiavel commends the Simplicity of the
ancient Florentines, that enterprized no hostility on their neighbors, till
they had by ringing a Bell for the space of a whole month admonished their
enemy to a peaceable satisfaction, or a brave resistance. But every Tyrant
makes his war impious, if not in the cause, yet in the management; and more
like thieves then Princes, aim only to deceive, not to conquer their enemies.

Agathocles being thus successfully wicked at Messene, designs Agrigentum for
his next prey; his false Ambition not suffering him to continue that Peace
which his Necessity had forced him to make with them. But the Carthaginian
Fleet, consisting of sixty sail of ships, hovering upon the coasts of Sicily,
diverted his arms from revenge, on the Carthaginian territories, whose
Countries he wasted with fire and sword, took some of their Garrisons by force,
and others were delivered upon composition. This Hostility betwixt Carthage and
Syracuse made Dinocrates, (who since Sosistratus's death was become the chief
of the Syracusan Exiles) and the other Confederates, hope for the assistance of
the Punick arms against this restless Tyrant. To them therefore they sent an
Embassy, with bitter complaints against Amilcar, and invectives against
Agathocles. The last they set forth as a merciless, perjured, and bloody
Tyrant. The other they accused as a Traitor, that by secret compact had
delivered up the lives and fortunes of the Carthaginian friends into the hands
of a most cruel enemy: and that as the earnest of this Treachery, Syracuse, a
potent and rich City, an emulous contender with Carthage for the Empire of
Sicily, was first betrayed into his hands; and under the name of Peace many
other confederate Cities had since been exposed to his rapines. If therefore
that Mighty Commonwealth and wise Senate should not be more vigorous to punish
their treacherous servant, and to quench the Tyrant's thirst of Empire with his
own blood, they would soon feel in Africa the dismal effects of their neglect
of Sicily.

This Embassy enraged Carthage, and they were more keenly resolved to make
Amilcar satiate their anger with an ignominious punishment. But either by a
natural or a voluntary death he prevented the unjust fury of his own Citizens,
who had condemned him before he could plead his innocence. So barbarously
ungrateful are most Commonwealths to their chiefest servants: who if they
thrive abroad, are ruined at home by Jealousy and Envy; if they are not
successful, then the Capricioes of Fortune are accounted the miscarriages of
their Generals, and their Unhappinesses esteemed for Crimes. None were more
infamous in this way of cruelty then the Carthaginians, who often expiated the
dishonor of their overthrow with their Commander's head. Therefore Aur. vict.
de viris illust.
Annibal, that commanded the Navy in their first Roman war, being beaten, and
losing his Navy, makes have to Carthage, to prevent any other messenger of his
misfortune, and in the Senate declares only the state of his and the Enemies
forces as they were before the fight, and inquires what they would command to
be done: they all cried out, he should fight. I have (says he) and am beaten:
and so escaped the punishment of the Cross. But this Amilcar was either a
person of a sluggish soul, and so veiled his cowardice under the name of Peace,
and vainly thought that specious name would please a people that made war for
gain: Or else of more fine counsels then resolute action, and thought the
discovery of his mysteries would justify his practices, that he had laid his
designs so deep, that in time they would easily undermine all the power of the
Syracusan Potter, without the cost and hazard of the Punick blood and treasure.
But counsels too finely spun are easily broken, and so deep a contrivance
agrees not with the impatience of the Vulgar, to whom speedy undertakings seem
always most heroic; and slow, yet sure, practices are interpreted by them as
the motions of false or base spirits. Or else Amilcar might be too conscious
that his coverous soul had been corrupted with the bribes and promises of
Agathocles, a vice which Aristotle taxes in the Carthaginian Government, and
therefore neglected the care of an Apology, which too evident crimes did render
vain, and a contempt of death unnecessary. And thus fell Amilcar.

Dinocrates with the other Exiles waited not idly for the effect of their
Embassy and the Carthaginian preparations, which they knew would be slow, but
were very active for their own restitution. And therefore he sent forth a party
under the Command of Nymphodorus to Centorippa, a Garrison of Agathocles, where
he held a Correspondence with some of the City, who promised to deliver up the
town to him upon condition of restoring their Liberty. The Governor had
discovered the plot, yet suffers Nymphodorus to enter the town by night, where
he cuts him off with his whole party. Agathocles was not more glad for the
defeat of the Exiles, then for the opportunity he now had to seize upon the
wealth of the Citizens, as being engaged in a Conspiracy against him, which he
greedily takes from them with their lives, as being too great lovers of Liberty
to breath in the same air with a Tyrant. This loss broke not the courage of
Dinocrates, but he having yet about three thousand foot and not less then two
thousand horse, possesses himself of Calaria, whether he was invited by a party
of the City; where immediately he drives out the Faction that was for
Agathocles, and incamps before the Town. The Tyrant upon the first
intelligence, sent Pasiphilus and Demophilus with a party of five thousand
against him. These engaging with the Exiles commanded by Dinocrates and
Philonides, who led the several wings of their Army, the victory was for some
time doubtful: but at last the Tyrants fortune prevailed, for Philonides being
slain, and his wing routed, Dinocrates was forced to retreat. Pasiphilus in the
pursuit kills many of the enemy, and recovers Calaria. Where, like his Master's
servant, he omitted no act of cruelty and extortion upon the miserable
Citizens. For the Ministers of a Tyrant are educated by him to the nature of
mastives, that they should only fawn upon him that feeds them, and be cruel
and bloody to every one else. Proud with this Victory, Agathocles hastens with
all the forces he could make to fight the Carthaginians, that were drawn out
into the field, and had encamped on the hill Eonome. But the Africans refusing
the battle, as expecting more succors, he returns in triumph to Syracuse, as
being the confessed Master of the Field, and with the spoils he had taken from
the two wretched Cities, he does adorn the best of his Ships.

Thus success waited upon the sword of Agathocles: his designs being still
crowned with an issue greater then his hopes, as if Fortune no less then
Syracuse were become his Slave. Had that slavish and prodigious Flattery been
then invented, which our age has heard practiced to a prosperous wickedness;
he had been called the beloved darling of the Gods, and his creatures would
have persuaded the miserable Sicilians, that Heaven had by this success sealed
a grant of what by blood and perjury he had pre-usurped. But this was too gross
a cheat to be imposed even upon the lying Greeks, and flattering Sicilians: who
though they should have wanted so much light, as might fully discover that the
Patronage of iniquity was incompatible with a Deity; yet common observation
afforded them most clear evidences, that Adversity and Prosperity do not
constitute the differences of Good and Bad; and that the most uninterrupted
Success cannot calcine a wicked action to the purity of Virtue, which is the
true and proper object of the love of Heaven: so that it would have been an
attempt to undermine all honesty, and root out Religion, to attribute the love
of a Deity, which is the reward and ornament due to justice only, to impious
persons, though never so prosperous. Besides, they daily saw that present
successes are never intended by the Supreme Guider of the world, to be as
hostages to secure those which receive them of a perpetual Felicity. So that
neither his Love, nor his Laws of Right and Wrong could be read or interpreted
by the changeable and unsteady light which is found in Humane affairs. Some of
those whose sober breasts were never betrayed by a constant prosperity to
insolence, but have seriously considered the uncertainties of our mortal
condition, have suspected the Prodigality of their own fortunes, and been
jealous even of the too much indulgence of Providence, and like wary Favorites,
who doubting lest the effects of their Prince's love should be afterward the
object of his envy, have therefore professed a satiety in receiving, and
offered to resign what they feared they could not keep. So some of those that
considered the vicissitudes of humane affairs have been so far from
interpreting their sudden and violent Prosperity for the evidence of the
affection of Heaven, that they have doubted, whether by it they were marked out
for the mockeries of Fortune, and that they were raised to such an height, from
whence there was no descent but by a precipice. Some therefore have labored to
prevent their fortune, and leave her before they were left by her, and
contemned her embraces, that they might not be sensible of her strokes. Others
have thought to offer to their evil Genius, and by a voluntary loss or
dissembled misfortune to satisfy their more adverse destinies. Thus the Samian
Tyrant with the loss of his Ring would have bribed his fortune to no more
dismal change. And Augustus bounded the Roman greatness, for fear of provoking
its overthrow; and to divert the envy of his Thundering Jupiter, did dissemble
a poverty, and yearly beg. But Agathocles grew insolent with his present
success, and promised to himself more gainful fruits of his wickedness then he
had as yet received. But fortune that had thus far flattered him, did
immediately forsake him, and discovered the hatefulness of his designs in a
desperate state.

LIB. II.
THE Carthaginians about this time awakened with the daily information of
Agathocles success, decreed to prosecute their war in Sicily more seriously,
and to be more intent upon that glory and interest which they had there so long
neglected. For they gave no heed to the sad relations and Embassies of the
Syracusan Banditi, because they knew such men's hopes and desires to return home
made them believe and relate things far from truth: nor did they value the
faith of Exiles, because such when they find other ways of restitution to
their Country, do betray the interest of those whom they have before excited to
it, and so render all those perils and charges fruitless, which were at first
undertaken for their sakes and upon their promises. But when Agathocles had
through their neglect prevailed so far, as that he could now slight their power
and despise their forces, they were more sollicitous to provide for that war.
They make Amilcar the son of Gisgo, one of their most eminent Citizens, their
General. A Person of a well-tempered courage, in whom the stoutness of a
Soldier was mixed with the wisdom that was requisite for a Commander: he had
been seldom unfortunate, but always faithful, of Candor enough to reconcile
and assure a doubtful friend, and of sufficient resolution to force an
obstinate enemy. They allow him for this Expedition an hundred and thirty
Galleys for service, and send with him two thousand of their own Citizens,
among whom were many of their Nobless, ten thousand Libyans, one thousand
Tuscan mercenaries, one thousand slingers of the Islands called Baleares, two
thousand Chariots, with such a proportion of Money, Arms and Corn as was thought
convenient for the design. The greatness of their Army did almost ascertain
them of victory, and therefore they loosed from the Haven with that alacrity
and jollity, as if they went to spoil Sicily, and not to conquer it. But this
power that seemed so terrible to the Greeks, became the mockery of the winds:
for in a sudden tempest they lost sixty of their Galleys, two hundred Vessels
that carried the provisions, many of their Nobility, and a great number of
their less considerable Soldiers. This news coming to Carthage, caused a
public mourning, which they were used to express by hanging their City walls
with blacks.

The remains of this shipwreckt Fleet weathered out the Storm, and with much
difficulty got into Sicily: where Amilcar by his good conduct and dexterous
management did in some sort correct the malignity of their fortune: for
comforting and chearing up their spirits that had escaped the wreck, he takes
into pay all the mercenary soldiers that he could meet with in the Island,
then out of every City under the Carthaginian Dominion he collects the choicest
youth; all which he joins with those forces of his City that were there before
encamped, and inlarges their camp in the same place, having provided all other
things necessary for the War. By this his exceeding diligence, and the fame of
a fortunate and stout Commander, he soon raised the hopes of his Confederates,
struck a terror into his Enemies, and inspired courage into his own Army,
which now consisted of forty thousand foot, and five thousand horse, so that
Carthage was scarce sensible of the loss at Sea. So brave Commanders do by wise
counsels, as by remedies, heal the wounds which their Countries receive from
Fortune. And Heaven seemed by the Storm to have only presented to Amilcar an
opportunity to Glory, that his great Virtues might appear in adverse accidents.

On the other side Agathocles was not so much troubled at these great
preparations of the Enemy, though they did far exceed his forces, as at the
conscience of his own Perfidiousness, which examples he feared would provoke an
imitation in his own Vassals. For he suspected the revolt of most of the Towns
he had garrisoned, that they being secured to him by no stronger a bond of
subjection then a Fear of his Cruelty, which is but an ill mistress of
Obedience, would soon surrender themselves up to the Carthaginians, and that
the injured Cities would embrace this opportunity of Revenge, and combine with
the Enemy. His greatest solicitude was to secure Gela, of which he was most
jealous, and which was likeliest to give the first Example of a Revolt, and
might most securely do it, the Africans being encamped within their
Territories: and the loss of twenty of his Ships together with all their
lading, being taken by the Enemy in that harbor, increased his fears, and made
him more sollicitous to secure that City by a Garrison. This he did not dare
openly to attempt, lest the Geloans, who watched an opportunity to honest their
Revolt, should take this advantage of delivering themselves up to the
Carthaginians, which would be of great loss to him, and emolument to his
Enemies. He therefore attempts them by Stratageme. Some of his most daring
Soldiers he habits as Peasants and Pedlers, that seemed to mind no business
less then a surprise: these he sends into the Town by several ways and small
companies, with their arms concealed, as coming to traffic, and continues the
supply of them, till he conceived them equal to the Cities strength, and able
to secure the gates for his entrance. After them he follows with his whole
Army, and entering without any resistance, he presently summons the people, and
in a fierce and short speech charges them of contracting with the Old Enemy,
for the slavery of all the good people of Sicily. Then, not to give them time
to prove their Innocence, (for it was not their Faith he desired, but their
Money and their Town) he immediately gives order to his Soldiers to slay the
wealthiest Geloans, which were above four thousand, and makes a Proclamation,
that whosoever had Money or Plate, and did not immediately bring it forth to
him, should suffer the tortures that were due to the Betraiers of their
Country. This Slaughter and Terrors furnished the Tyrant with a vast sum of
Money, but a greater Hatred: for though by these ways he terrified all his
Vassals, yet this was but a weak security for their Allegiance, the Sicilians
being rather overcome then subdued; and it is easier to make Subjects then to
keep them. Men may submit to the force of arms, but they will never obey but a
just power. Agathocles himself also did doubt the effects of this Cruelty;
therefore that the number of the slain might not be known, he buries the dead
bodies in the Town-ditch.

Leaving a Garrison in Gela, he marches toward the Enemy, who had encamped on
the Hill Ecnome, or the wicked hill: for the Tyrant Phalaris having formerly
there kept his Engine of Torment, the Brazen Bull, he had made the place
infamous by his Cruelty; which did now seem to expiate the ignominy, by
affording ground to those that were ready to punish a bloodier Villain then he
that first dishonored it. Over against them on another hill, that had also
been a fortification of Phalaris, did Agathocles pitch his Tent. Betwixt both
Armies ran the River Himera, which either used for their defense, while they
forbore fighting, which was for some time, because the place had struck a
terror into both parties; for at that time there was a tradition of an ancient
Prophecy, that in that place there should fall a great number of men in battle:
and the Prediction not being so clear as to discover on which side the loss
should be, both Armies were suspicious of their fortune, and not daring in a
full body to pass the River, their Superstition and fear kept them from
engaging.

At length this accident drew them forth. The Libyans (whose Valor is wholly
out of themselves, and their confidence in the swiftness of their horses) did
usually pass the River to forage in the Enemies quarters. Agathocles not to lie
idle, nor betray any fear by his quietness, was tempted to the like, and
therefore sends a party upon the same design into the Punick quarters: these
having done their business, returning heavy with booty, a party of the
Carthaginians issued out of their Trenches to recover the spoil. This the
Syracusan had foreseen, and therefore had laid an Ambush near the River, who,
when the Africans were eager in the pursuit, and had inconsiderately passed the
River, suddenly assaulted them, and chased them back to their own Trenches.
Agathocles, who had seen all the action, grew insolent with the success of his
Stratageme, and thought that now Victory courted him; and intending to take the
advantage of this disorder of the Enemy, drew forth his whole Army to assault
them within their Fortifications. Which being done with extraordinary speed,
they had filled up the ditches, broke down the Trenches, and entered the Camp,
before the Carthaginians that were surprised could range themselves in order
for defense. But confusedly (as it is usual in sudden assaults) disposing
themselves in that place and Order which Fortune and their Courage did present,
they stoutly endeavored to avoid the ignominy of being beaten within their own
defenses. But the Greeks as eagerly followed their advantages, quickened with
the hope of ending the War with this one Conflict; so that their courage and
number still increased within the Camp; and the Africans hindered by their own
disorders losing ground, they were not far from Victory, until Amilcar ranged
and in good order opposed to them the Mercenaries of the Balearick Islands, who
slinging stones of above the weight of a Mina, and being exact at the scope
which they intend, (it being their only weapon, and their continual practice
from their infancy) poured such a shower of stones upon the Greeks, that forced
them to quit their ground and forsake the Trenches. Agathocles notwithstanding
despaired not of success, but in another quarter assaults the Camp: and when he
had filled up the ditches, and was almost master of the trenches, behold
another party of Carthaginians, that were but just then landed, as they drew
near to the Camp, hearing the shouts and noise of them that were fighting, made
have, and set upon the Enemies in the back; so striking a terror greater then
their strength upon the Greeks, who were yet stoutly opposed in the Front, that
they believed that they were assailed by a bigger Army then they did assault,
and therefore sought for safety by flight, as despairing of victory over so
numerous an Enemy. Some ran toward their Camp, who being pursued by the
Africans, strewed all the way with their dead bodies. Others fled by the banks
of Himera, and met with as certain a death as that they feared from the sword
of their Enemies: for thirsty through rage and toil of the Battle, which
happened to be at noon in the Dog-daies, they drank so greedily of the brackish
water, that they immediately fell down dead; and they were not fewer who were
found dead without any wounds all along the banks of the River, then those that
were wounded and slain in the rout, Agathocles having lost above seven
thousand, and the Carthaginians but five hundred. Thus Providence did as it
were strive by re-iterated strokes to curb the present insolence of this
inhumane Tyrant. First, by snatching the Victory almost out of his possession,
in such a juncture bringing an unexpected force, that did both confound his
orders and break his vigor: upon such uncertain moments does the fortune of
Battles and the fate of Kingdoms depend. And secondly, he did increase the
loss, and destroy the hopes of a second attempt, by cutting off those whose
unwounded bodies might have renewed the fight.

Agathocles himself, reserved for a longer plague to mankind, escaped to his
Tents, where gathering up the pieces of his broken Army, he burns his Camp, and
hastens to Gela, but caused a report to be raised that he was fled to Syracuse:
this afforded him an opportunity of some small Revenge upon three hundred
Africans, who being informed by the Prisoners that the Tyrant was retreated to
Syracuse, securely entered into Gela, as suspecting no enemy in it; but they
found him and their destruction there together. He had not shut himself up
there because he could not get to Syracuse, but upon design to draw the
Carthaginians to besiege that place, that he might gain time to fortify and
victual Syracuse for the future events of the war. But Amilcar, that at first
had thought to have lain down before Gela, hearing it was well manned and
sufficiently stored to endure a tedious Siege, changed his resolutions, and
applies himself to take in those other Towns which now courted him for
acceptance. Camarinae, Leontium, Catana and Tauromenium, upon the first news of
the Victory gave themselves up to the Carthaginian Commands: a few days after
Messene, Abacaenum, and many other Cities submitted to Amilcar, who courteously
treating all, and imposing easy conditions, made them prefer the Punick, a
noble, though a foreign, bondage, to the ignominious service of an abject
Potter: and generally through the whole Island the Overthrow of Agathocles gave
a liberty to all to express their hatred of him. For when people cease to fear
those that rule only by it, they begin to hate them. And it was not so much
the loss of one Battle, as his own Perfidiousness and Cruelty, that tore the
yoke from the Sicilians necks. Cruel Empires, though they be absolute, yet are
not lasting.

The Tyrant hearing the daily defection of the Cities, and that his own
Wickedness and the Punick fortune had left him nothing but Syracuse, he draws
out all his forces from Gela, and with haft retreats thither, lest the Example
of others and the Terror of the Enemy might tempt it to the same faith. There
he emploies the remains of his Army to repair and fortify the Walls, to fetch
as much Provision as they could from the adjoining Country, and to fit all
things necessary for a long Siege. For his bold and restless soul, that knew
not how to live unless a Tyrant, had revolved all things, and persuaded to
every trial. For to men that have lost their first hopes any thing that is
future does seem best. At last he projected to transfer the War from the Island
to the Continent; and when he was over-matched with but a part of the
Carthaginian force in Sicily, he would dare their whole strength in Africa.

This design, which on another Enemy had been rash and dangerous, did now
appear safe and easy. For the long Peace and Prosperity of the Africans had
softened them to an impatience of enduring the toils of War; and the too jealous
arts of Empire which the Carthaginians used, (as to disarm all their Vassals,
and to embase by cruel Oppressions their less potent Confederates) did assure
him of but a weak opposition, and that by such an unexpected Invasion he should
obtain enough spoil to repair all his losses at home, and that the success of
one Battle would force his Enemies to call home their forces to guard their own
Cities. Therefore when it was the general expectation that he should submit to
the conquering fate of Carthage, his Mind seemed to grow greater by his
Miseries, and that he would still look Fortune in the face.

To execute this project, he chooses out such of his Soldiers as he thought
fittest for the enterprise, and gave order that the Horsemen should provide
themselves only of Saddles and Bridles, that when he should get some African
horse, they might not want necessaries to mount them: for although in the late
overthrow the loss fell most upon the Foot, and he had saved all his Horse; yet
he wanted convenient time and Vessels to transport them. Then to prevent any
Treachery in his absence, he made his brother Antander Governor of Syracuse:
and to secure him from Seditions and Revolts, he divides every Family, the
Children from the Fathers, and the Brothers one from another, carrying one part
along with him as Hostages for their quiet subjection that tarried at home: for
he conceived that though their Hate were never so high against him, yet would
they forbear any practices, lest he should revenge their efforts upon those
their Friends he had with him. Then to increase both his Army and the Garrison,
he manumissed all the Slaves, and put them into arms. At home he thought they
would be ready to discover the secret counsels of their Masters, and so they
are often made use of by Tyrants; abroad they would raise an emulation in the
freemen to a Military hardiness and bold attempts. His next care was how to
get Money, and to this he forbore no Wickedness that he could imagine
profitable. He seizes upon the Stock and goods of young Orphans, forcing it
from their Guardians, declaring that he was fitter for that trust then they,
and promising that when they came of age, he would restore all again more
faithfully: he forced a Loan from the richest Merchants, despoiled the Women of
all their golden Ornaments, and robbed every Temple of the consecrated
Offerings. Then being informed of the discontents of many of the richest
Citizens, who referred all their present Troubles and Dangers to his insatiable
appetite of Greatness, he calls an assembly of the People, and with a
countenance composed to grief and tears he speaks after this manner to them.

That War is always accounted just which is necessary, and then Arms are
deemed pious, when they are the last refuge of those that use them. This is
that which does adjust the proceedings of this Commonwealth against our Old
Enemy, the faithless and barbarous Carthaginians, a people made for the plague
of the World, and with whom Peace is more dangerous then War. For their
Religion is Cruelty, and by a cursed emulation they are more bloody then the
Gods they worship; being inhumane to their own Children, and barbaronsly
ungrateful to their most faithful Commanders. How miserable then must it needs
be to be their Slaves? These, when Africa had nothing left but Sands and
Deserts which had not submitted to their violent and perfidious arts, to
recreate their wanton thirst of blood and treasure, have invaded Sicily,
pretending no other cause of war but our generous love of Liberty, and their
boundless desire of Tyranny. To whose attempts, had the Gods been pleased to
favor our just arms, we had put an issue at the Battle of Himera, and forced
them to bound their Insolences with the Sea. But Fortune, not their Valor,
snatched the Victory frrm us there, and has now brought them to our Walls:
where unless we behave our selves as persons worthy of Liberty, we must endure
the heaviest Slavery, and in chains be the abject spectators of the Rapes of
our Wives, the Murders of our Children and aged Parents, and see them wanton
with that Wealth which has been the price of our sweat and blood. For how can
we expect a tolerable Peace from them, who make War not for Glory, but for
Wealth and Lust? And in vain should we expect Faith from them that are the
Examples of Perfidy to the whole world. So that the continuance of the War as
well as the beginnings are not matter of our choice, but necessity. If any
shall imprudently condemn us, that we rather provoked then expected the Punick
Arms, they are forgetful of the duty of a wise Prince, who ought to foresee
dangers, and not decline a present Hazard to prevent a future Ruin. Nor can
that people escape the censure of being imprudent, which is so in love with a
present Peace, that they will sit still, until their Enemy has by inslaving
all their less potent Neighbors made himself too strong for their resistance.
Such resolutions therefore that are necessary, are not subject to blame or
praise; neither are they to be measured by the Event: for many times sage
Counsels want that desired Success which often attends those that are
indiscreet. And if the approbation of either should depend upon the Issue, men
would be encouraged to err, and disheartened from giving their Country those
safe advices which are the resolves of Prudence. Since therefore it was neither
in our power, nor should it have been our choice, to have avoided the War, and
that the Gods would not give Victory as the Merit of our Cause; if we will
retain our Liberty (which should be more precious then our Lives) there remains
nothing now to do, but stoutly to wait for the return of our Fortune, and with
patience endure the miseries of a Siege, which I doubt will be very great: yet
I that have learned to be unhappy, can easily endure, for it is some
alleviation of misery to know the greatness of our Misfortune; but my spirit is
grieved for those of the Good people that must be shut up with me, and must be
necessitated to endure those unaccustomed dangers and continual fears.
Therefore I require all such as think themselves unequal to so adverse a
fortune, to forsake the Town, and secure themselves and their goods where they
can hope for most Peace and Safety.

All those that were Rich, whose abundance made them soft, and who feared to
hazard their Wealth to maintain the Tyrants Greatness, and such whose Hate of
him made them willing to leave the den of such a Monster, were credulous of
what he said, and accepted of this profer'd Liberty. But they soon learnt that
a Tyrant is never to be believed, even in his most melting expressions, or
lowest condition: for he had appointed his Mercenaries to kill them as they
offered to depart, and to seize their goods. Thus by a compendious Villainy he
delivered himself of sixteen hundred men which he did not dare to trust in the
Town, and enriched himself with their Goods, which they were removing farther
from him.

Having by these wicked arts provided all things necessary for his purpose, the
rest that he could not order he permits to Fate, knowing that something must be
ventured, and that many things which exceed the providence of man, are often by
Fortune disposed for the best. These his provisions and Soldiers together with
himself and his Son Archagathus he brings a shipboard, so waiting for an
opportunity to get out of the Haven; resolving to take his counsels for that
from the accidents of Fortune: for many times such counsels do discover
themselves in working, which in a bare expectation had been for ever lost. The
concealment of his Design was no less wonderful then the boldness of it; for he
had communicated his intentions to none, either through his natural Pride, or
fear of discovery and disappointment, or doubting the contradiction of his
Friends and Counselors, which is the common bane of Counsels: For men commonly
through opiniastrete dislike and labor to overthrow those designs which,
though never so noble, proceeded not from themselves. Or fearing the
discouragement of his Army: For Vulgar spirits are always enemies to difficult
undertakings. Therefore for some or all these reasons, he suppressed his
Intentions, only giving forth that he had found out a new and safe way of
Victory. This great concealment caused several discourses among the
Speculativi. Some conceived that this way was to sail into Italy, and there
gather up such whom great necessities made hazardous, and with them to attempt
the fortune of a second Battle. Others, that his intent was to land his little
party in some other places of that Island that were under the African Empire,
and so divert the Enemy from the Siege of Syracuse. But all concluded those
unhappy men as lost and devoted to destruction, that were forced to follow the
Rashness of such a Commander that seemed infatuated to ruin. So they wept over
their Friends and Kindred, whose miserable departure from among the living
seemed to be respited only by the Carthaginian Fleet that then lay in the
mouth of the Haven.

This Obstruction had so long delaied Agathocles, that he grew almost mad: to
get forth he saw it was impossible, and to stand still was dangerous. Therefore
when his restless Mind had presented many plots, and upon the rejecting of one
had suggested another, and none would attain his end; at length Fortune
administered such an advantage, as his own Reason or Power could never have
invented or made. For some of the Victualling vessels that had been sent forth
to bring Provisions to the City were now returning, and being come somewhat
near the shore, were discovered by the Enemy, who presently with their whole
Fleet made up to take them, and by this means left the mouth of the Haven open
to Agathocles; who not to let slip this joyful season, with a full spread sail
made out to Sea. The Carthaginians, that had now almost attaqued the
Victuallers, seeing the Greeks coming out with so many Ships, at first thought
they intended the rescue of the Victuallers, and so left off the chase of them,
and prepared themselves for fight. But seeing they kept a straight course, and
that they had now gotten some distance from them, they then set themselves to
the pursuit of Agathocles; and by this means gave opportunity to the
Victuallers, being thus strangely delivered, safely to unlade at Syracuse, and
to store that City, which already began to suffer scarcity. And Agathocles
encouraging his Sailors to the greatest diligence of keeping that advantage of
distance which they had already gotten before the Punick Fleet, was preserved
out of their hands all the day, till toward Evening the Enemy, who were better
Seamen, coming up close, and being almost ready to engage him, the approaching
Night rescued him out of that danger. Thus this bold attempt had as wonderful a
success: and Heaven intending to humble the Carthaginian Pride by a baffled
Enemy, removed those obstructions which seemed invincible. Hence it was
evident, that though men cannot resist Providence, yet they may administer unto
it, and may weave the webs though they cannot break the threads thereof:
therefore they ought never to abandon themselves, not knowing their end: and
though Providence traverseth unknown ways, yet have they reason to follow it,
and to hope in whatsoever condition they find themselves.

But though they had thus passed over the dread of the Africans, the next day
his whole Army was assaulted with a new Terror. For there happening an
exceeding great Eclipse of the Sun, whereby it was so dark that it appeared
like the return of Night, and many Stars did appear, the ruder Soldiers
ignorant of the reason, apprehended it as a sad Omen of their present Affairs,
and were the more fit for such impressions by the as yet fresh fears of their
late dangers. For affrighted spirits are easily moved to Superstition; and that
which in Peace had been looked upon as a Chance or the ordinary course of
Nature, was now called Fate and the Anger of the Gods. First Religion, then
Fear invaded their minds: for they bewailed this as a portent of a most dismal
and comfortless issue, and the design was such, as the Sun would not afford
light, being contrary to the minds of the Gods drawn forth to unknown Coasts.
Agathocles, though he (as all Tyrants) was not subject to the fears of Heaven,
nor capable of any apprehension that looked like Religion, and so was apt to
contemn these affrightments of the Vulgar; yet doubtful how far such might work
the fears of the common rout, to a revengeful fury of turning all the mischief
of this Prodigy upon his head who exposed them to the dangers, was therefore
sollicitous to take off the Terror by a dexterous Interpretation. For such
insignificant signs, which the Vulgar take for the messages of Heaven, may
receive contrary comments, according to the humor and interest of him that is
the Augur: and it is the Event only that gives them the authentickness of an
Oracle. He therefore himself turns Augur, and expounds this obscure Text to his
own advantage. For he tells them, that if this Portent had happened before they
began their Expedition, then might they justly have feared the sad effects
thereof; but it now coming after so fortunate a beginning, it must be conceived
to presage all its dangers to those against whom the Expedition is intended.
Besides, such defects of the natural Luminaries always note the change of
affairs; but a change could not be terrible to them that were beneath the level
of Danger, but to the flourishing estate of victorious Carthage. And that this
Portent did directly strike at them was certain, because they were the
Worshippers of the Sun, and the labors of a God did always signify the
agonies and ruins of his Idolaters. This Exposition did relieve the spirits of
his Army, and made them with more cheerfulness endure the hazards and toils of
six days and nights continued sailing. For nothing more strongly leads the
Multitude then Superstition; and when this has seized on them, they will with
more readiness follow their Priests, then their Captains.

On the seventh day in the morning they were within ken of the coast of Africa,
and at the same time discovered the Carthaginians not far from them. Thereupon
both parties plying their Oars and Sails, strove which should first compass
their design. The Carthaginians hoped to make this the last act to the conquest
of Sicily, all the opposition of which was carried in those Bottomes. Fear
quickened the Greeks to avoid most bitter Tortures in themselves, and the
Slavery of all that was dear unto them at Syracuse. Therefore each side
contended and doubled their diligence, according to their hopes or fears. The
Africans had the advantage of Oars and Sails; the Sicilians in the nearest
distance to the shore, and the number of fighting men aboard. The foremost of
the Tyrant's Vessels had attained the shore, and landed some men, when the
hindermost were attaqued by the Enemy. But many Greeks having now a firm
footing on land, by their Bows and Slings forced back the Punick Fleet, and
made them forsake the Vessels they were almost seized of, not having an equal
number of men; nor could they so certainly direct their Arrows out of the
Ships, as those that had a stable footing.

The Tyrant being got upon the Continent, presently lands all his men at a
place called the Quarries, and having raised a slight Trench drew all his Ships
aground; which with another act of boldness answerable to his design he was
resolved to burn. For if he would preserve them, he must weaken his small
strength by leaving a guard for their defense, otherwise they would fall into
the hands of his Enemies. Besides, by this means he should necessitate his Army
to a Victory; for when they had lost the means and hopes of a Return, they must
either conquer or perish. To perform this, he saw he must proceed by Art, for
the Soldiers would not easily consent to lose all hopes of return to their
Native soil. Therefore he first deals with those Captains and Masters of the
Ships he did most confide in, and inviting them to a Sacrifice which he made to
Ceres and Proserpina, the Sicilian Goddesses, he acquaints them, and persuades
them to further his counsels. Then calling the whole Army together, he comes
forth amongst them habited with Priestly garments, and a Crown on his head,
(which he wore as a Priest, for he had not yet assumed that ensign of Royalty)
he acquaints them with his design in coming into Africa, and speaks to this
purpose.

Our happy and safe arrival in Africa cannot make either you or me forget the
dangers of Syracuse, where we left the good people of that Commonwealth, with
all that can make us desirous of life, and sweeten our toils for wealth and
glory, besieged by our Old bloody Enemy the Carthaginians. To deliver them and
our selves from present Ruin there was no way left, but either by unworthy
conditions to lengthen out our lives in Slavery, for which we could have no
security from a perfidious Enemy; or to trust to our own swords, and by a brave
resistance of our adverse fortune wrest the Victory from our Conquerours. To
execute this Heroic resolution was not to suffer our selves to be pent up in
the walls of a Town, for there we must have fought with Famine no less then
with the Enemy, where our wants would have broke our faith: The fears and cries
of our Wives and Children would have disarmed us, and quenched our noble heats
for Victory, and importuned us to a present, though uncertain, security with
Bondage, rather then to continue the dangers of a Siege for Liberty and Glory.
But the surest and easiest way is to transport the War int Africa, and carry
that flame which would have consumed us in Sicily, to the gates of Carthage.
For the advantages in that War which is managed in an Enemies Country are far
greater then in that which we are forced to wage at home. In this last we can
expect no succors but what that remnant of our wasted Country, which our
Enemies will leave unto us, can afford. But abroad you shall see that the Enemy
may be overcome by his own strength, through the revolt of their oppressed
Vassals, the discontents of their injured Confederates, (who are continually
panting after a foreign hand that may help to break their hated yoke.) Besides,
we have to do with an Enemy whom security has made weak, and the desires of
Profit and Pleasure have drawn away from all defenses: For their Towns and
Cities have not the fortifications of Art or Nature, neither encompassed with
Walls, nor built on Hills; but seated in pleasant fields and champian
countries, hedged about with vineyards and retirements of Pleasure, which will
rather invite then keep off an Enemy. So that your very sight will make them
sensible of their weakness, and the fear of us will persuade their softened
spirits to a subjection and compliance with us to the ruin of Carthage, which
shall feel the War to burn hotter here then that she has kindled in Sicily,
while every hand conspires to root up that proud City, that has hitherto born
up her Tyranny by an empty name of Greatness, and the credulity of her abject
Slaves, then by real Valor or solid Strength. Thus shall we gather up that
force which we brought not with us. Besides, the suddenness of her Terrors and
the bravery of our Courage will facilitate and ascertain our Victory, when she
shall tremble at the invasion of that Enemy whom she despised and reputed her
Slaves: and she will grow stupid, when the flames of her Villages, Castles and
pertinacious Towns shall give them light to see, that Destruction has as easy
an access to them as they have made for it to others. This is the art not only
to pull down the Punick greatness, but also to put an end to the miseries of
Sicily, where the Enemy will no longer stay to overthrow her Liberty, but
hasten to prevent their own Slavery. And as we cannot defire an easier War, so
we cannot hope for richer booties; for in the sacking of Carthage we shall
plunder all the wealth of Africa, and recover all the spoils that they have
stolen from Sicily. Nor will our Glory be less then our Profits, whenas all
succeeding Ages shall be taught by the present, that we were the first that
invented and bravely practiced the Heroic Art of transferring that War to our
Enemies doors, which we were not able to endure at home; that chased our
Conquerours, and besieged our Besiegers: so that we shall still live in their
imitation. To expedite this easy War, to gather these infinite Treasures, and
to raise up such a lasting monument for our Fame, the Gods require no more then
bold hopes for our selves, and just Piety toward them. For they have assured
me of Victory and Success in the whole War, not only by auspicious signs in
the Sacrifices, but also in hearing my Prayers, and accepting my Vows, which I
made to Ceres and Proserpina the Patronesses of our beloved Island, that if
they should safely conduct you to the shores of Africa, I would burn all my
Ships as an offering to them. Therefore since they have made so full a return
to my Prayers, and have so carefully preserved you to the acquisition of Wealth
and Glory, it is fit that I do not provoke their anger to blast this enterprise
by a sacrilegious neglect of my Religions Vows.

When he had said thus, one of his Servants puts into his hand a lighted Torch,
and he commanded the like to be delivered to all his Captains: then invoking
Ceres and Proserpina, he set fire to the Praetorian Ship, and all the Officers
did the like to theirs; and when the flame had kindled upon the Ships, he
orders the Trumpets to sound a charge, and the whole Army gave a shout, and
every one prayed for an happy return home. But this sudden joy was violent and
short, too like the flame with which it began and wasted. For the Sicilians,
though at first they were bewitched with the speech, and cheated with the Arts
of the Tyrant, who had called that Religion which was but his Necessity and
Design, neither giving time to consult, nor expecting their consent; yet at
last, when they turned their eyes from the perishing flames, and looked upon
the Sea, they began to measure in their thoughts the vast distance betwixt them
and home; they compared the merciless waves with the dangers on the land, where
so small a number were to be exposed to the fury of a mighty Commonwealth: the
memory of the Battle of Himera, and the late terrors of the Carthaginian Fleet
grew fresh, and appalled all those sanguine hopes their false Leader had
suggested: and when they reflected again upon the ashes of their burnt Ships,
and saw all the means of a Return cut off, they cursed their cruel destinies,
and their Joy (as it is usual with all sudden Passions) expired into Despair
and Madness, and had any one dared to begin, they were all disposed to mutiny.
Agathocles perceived the change, and feared the effects; and therefore to give
vent to that dark and melancholy humor, which like a dismal cloud threatened a
Tempest, he led them out to invade the African Empire, that it might spend all
its fury upon the Enemy, and not be troublesome to their Commander. So
designing the first attempt against Megalopolis, he leads them thither with a
moderate march: not too slow, lest he should confess a fear by delays; nor too
hasty, both that he might give leave to Fame to render him stronger then he
was, (For distant terrors are always believed greater then they are; and when
the truth cannot be discovered, Fear does conjecture many false dangers) as
also that he might permit his Soldiers to take a full prospect of the Country,
which through their whole march appeared so delightful and rich, that it did
rather refresh then weary their drooping spirits. For the whole Country
abounded with Vineyards, Orchards of all kind of Fruits, Gardens and places of
Pleasure. The Fields and manured grounds seemed to labor under the burden of
the crop, the Pastures with variety of Cattle boasted the riches of the owners;
every piece of ground was exactly watered with Rivers and Aqueducts, adorned
with stately and magnificent houses, which bragged of as much Riches within as
there was plenty without. This being the Country whither the wealthier
Carthaginians made their diversions, when they were wearied with the tumult and
business of the City. The happiness of the soil soon raised the hopes of the
Sicilians, when they saw there were equal rewards for their labors, and large
booties for their Victories. Then all began to praise and commend the prudence
of Agathocles, and duty with the love of Obedience returned to every breast. So
unsteady are the motions of Vulgar souls, whose considerations being fastened to
the present objects, vary according to their appearances.

Agathocles makes use of this present temper, and therefore gives a sudden
storm to the City, which through long Peace had outlived the knowledge of an
Enemy and all experience of War, and at this time thought of nothing less then
an Invasion, and so was soon mastered by the desperate Greeks; to whom their
Leader gave the plunder of the Town, that so he might raise their Courage, and
feed their hopes by the booty. From thence he marches to a City called White
Tunis, which was about two hundred and fifty miles from Carthage, and makes it
fall under the same fate as the other did; they being also circumvented by the
security of Peace, and mischiefs of War. The Army being now enriched by the
spoils of these two Cities, would have them garrisoned as places to deposite
their pillage. Agathocles (that knew how destructive this would be to his
enterprise, and that the more hopes they had of a refuge, they would have the
less courage to fight) tells them, that the booty which they had as yet got,
was but poor and contemptible to those vast treasures one Victory over the
Enemy would afford; and that until that were past no place could be secure, but
afterward every Village would be a safe depository to the conqueror. And
urging this with such authority as his success had now heightened, he causes
them to demolish those two Towns, and incamps in the field, lest the
retirements of the City should soften them by Luxury before the encounter which
he expected from the Enemy.

In the mean while the Carthaginian Fleet, that rode about the shore to wait
the issue of the Sicilians landing, when they had seen them burn their Ships,
did at first triumph, supposing that their fears had driven them to such
desperate counsels: but when they saw them draw off from the shore, and march
up into the neighboring country, they then conjectured at their design, and
judged that the flames of those ships would kindle a fire in their
Commonwealth, and therefore wished they could have quenched them with the
Sicilian blood or their own tears. Thus expressing their fears and sorrows with
great lamentations, and hanging the prowes of their Galleys with skins, (which
was the ceremony of sadness when any great misfortune befell their City) they
gathered up the brazen beaks of the burnt ships, and sent them with the
Intelligence of what had happened to the Senate. But before this advice came,
Carthage was alarmed by the affrighted Peasants and Fugitives of the sacked
Towns, who fled thither for succor and shelter from the destructive Greeks;
and, as it is usual, they had magnified every thing to the greatest terror.
The whole City was amazed with this unexpected Invasion, and could not
reconcile this sadder news with the Intelligence of their late Victory at
Himera, but by supposing their condition worse, and that by the fortune of a
second Battle they had lost all their forces both by Sea and Land. For
otherwise they conceived Agathocles would never have dared to assail his
Conquerours at their own gates; or could have been so rashly greedy, as for
some hasty spoils of Africa, to have left Syracuse a prey to the besiegers; nor
could he have passed the Sea, had his enemies Fleet been yet unattempted.

These sad apprehensions filled all minds with horror and confusion. The
Senate with fear and have was gathered into the Piazza, and the people with
hideous clamours flocking about them, requiring them maturely to consult the
safety of their Republic, which seemed now upon the Verge of Ruin. The excess
of fear in every Order made them undervalue their own strength; and the greater
diligence and the more arts every one used to conceal it, made them appear more
evidently fearful. They discoursed how that they had no Army of Mercenaries
ready to oppose the Enemy; their Nobless was sluggish, luxurious, and by a long
Peace softened to effeminacy; their more hopeful Youth were either lost in the
Shipwreck, or employed in the Island; the Populacy were wholly ignorant of
arms, and now so terrified, that they would never dare to flesh themselves on
an experienced Enemy, hardened with former perils, heightened with spoils, and,
as they suspected, with a mighty Victory. Therefore in this doubtful state of
affairs, some were of advice to send Commissioners to treat with Agathocles
concerning Peace, and by that advantage to inform themselves fully of their
Enemies strength: Others were of opinion that they should defer any such
Treaty, till they were acquainted with the state of their own Army, and so to
manage themselves accordingly. But while they were distracted with these
different counsels, the messengers from the Admiral arrive at the Haven; who
giving them a particular account of what had happened, and showing them the
beaks of their Enemies Ships, did allay their fears, but heightened their
indignation against their Sea-Officers, that through baseness or folly had
suffered a baffled Enemy to invade Africa; and venting their fury in a censure
of them, with more calm spirits they fall to consult of fitting Remedies for
the present Mischief.

The knowledge of their own and Agathocles's condition made them despise their
half-conquered Enemy; therefore scorning to treat with him of Peace, they
resolved upon the finishing of the War. To this end, as more jealous of their
Liberty then doubtful of Victory, (which is seldom obtained by divided
Commands) they appoint two Generals, Bomilcar and Hanno; Persons of different
tempers and opposite Factions. The first cruel, faithless, ambitious and
impatient of equality: the other more desirous of Glory then Power; of a civil
Modesty, fierce against an Enemy, but tender of his own Citizens. Bomilcar was
chosen, because his Greatness made it dangerous to pass him by in so honorable
an emploiment; but Hanno, to watch over the others actions, which not only the
love of his Country, but also an ancient fewd betwixt their Families, did
assure them would be with the most exact circumspection. His Integrity they
hoped would so temper his Passions, that he would not to his private Discords
sacrifice the Public Safety in the maladministration of his charge; and his
hate of Bomilcar promised a sufficient balance to his aspiring soul, who was
suspected to affect the Tyranny, but as yet wanted an opportunity to satisfy
his Ambition. Therefore they durst not trust him alone with such an
extraordinary power, as they must expect only from his Modesty when he would
lay it down.

A Virtue sometimes wanting in the Carthaginian Nobless, who often attempted
upon the Liberty of their Commonwealth. Which some refer to the vicious
constitution of their Government, that preferred such to the highest trust
whose cense was largest, and so made Wealth, not Virtue, the mark for Honor.
For they thought the greatness of their interest in their Country would oblige
them to a greater industry for its preservation. This indeed is a remedy proper
against a foreign yoke, but an incitement to domestic Tyranny. For such, as
they will be watchful guardians to preserve their City from others, so will
they often make attempts upon it themselves. And those that abound with Wealth,
when they see Glory and Power are the attendants of it, grow insolent, and
esteem the Supreme power but their due: Equality of Honor being not competent
with the inequality of Fortune. It was accounted the great preservative of the
Roman Liberty, that Riches came into no consideration when they came to choose
the Commanders of their Forces, but they would fetch their Dictators from the
plough, and nominate those for Consuls whose estates were so scanty, that the
public stock must defray the charges of their Funerals, and provide portions
for their fatherless Daughters. These men after they satisfied the public
charge, and eminently served their Commonwealth, hasted home to look after
their narrow fortunes and their few acres; when they had yoked the Enemy,
returned to do the like to their Oxen, and to finish the Tillage they had
begun; and so became private persons, and were obedient to the ordinary
Magistrates, contented with their turnips, and desiring no more of the spoil of
the conquered then a wooden goblet to use in Sacrifices. So that they gave not
the least jealousy of Tyranny to the people, who still making their choice by
the Merit of the persons, had so many Virtuosi among them, men glorious with
several Victories, that they were a guard for the Public against each other.
Thus spoiling Riches of that glory which is given to it in a corrupt State,
they preserved their own Liberty and the Patrician Modesty, till the love of
Wealth entered; and then followed the desire of Empire.

Others referred this to the base Ingratitude of the People, which is the usual
disease of all Democracies, who rewarded their victorious Commanders with
seditious Accusations, and afterward with the Cross, and often did too
severely punish the mischances of the unprosperous. So that many that had the
chief Command of their forces, have prevented their unjust sentences with a
voluntary renunciation of life and emploiment; or to defend their Dignity,
sought to extinguish those flames which would have consumed their private
houses, with the ruin of the Public, and pulling down the frame of
Government. So that this Ingratitude and Severity did diminish the infamy, and
somewhat necessitate such undertakings. But this infirmity never fell upon the
Roman Commonwealth; for while it was not corrupted by too great an Empire, they
were far from such unworthy Jealousies, rewarding the prosperous Valor of
their Commanders with such glorious Triumphs as did both satiate their thirsts
of honor, and not force them to seek the shadow of a name by being great
Oppressors; and also raised the hopes and spirits of their other Citizens to
the like achievements. Which did both increase their Strength and Empire, and
also secure their Liberty by so many rivals of glory. If ever they punished the
unsuccessful, it was with much humanity. Such as lost their Armies by any
criminal failance, had the light corrections of a pecuniary mulct, and were not
forced to wash away the ignominy of an Overthrow with their own blood. Such as
through Misfortune, Inadvertency, or Ignorance brought wounds upon the
Commonwealth, were rather caressed and cheared, then dealt severely with; and
had sometimes their charges renewed, that they might redeem the Glory they had
before lost. He that by a rash and indiscreet desire of Victory, had occasioned
that terrible Overthrow at Cannae, when he returned home, in stead of a
triumph, had the Consuls and the whole Senate met him; who though they could
not congratulate his Victory, did yet thank him for his valor, that he had not
despaired of the Commonwealth. This proceeding of theirs toward their Generals
was upon a good consideration: Because they judged it to be a matter of great
importance, that such as were entrusted with affairs of so great moment as
managing a Battle, should, when they were to make their resolutions, have their
minds free, and without solicitude of their Cities censure of their actions:
and therefore they would not increase their difficulties; supposing that none
could be gallant under the load of so many doubts and fears. And as Carthage
wanted this Wisdom of Rome, so did she the Glory and Power, and was afterward
forced to serve her rival of Empire.

The Generals being chosen, they conceived too great dangers in the least
delay, and therefore made too much have: for they tarried not to levy soldiers
from the Confederate Cities, nor to take up such that were hardened with the
country labors; but took those of their own City, whom the pleasures and
abject arts of the City had made unfit for the toils of war; such also whom the
fortune of their Commonwealth and the news of the late Victory in Sicily had
raised to so high a confidence, that they conceived it rather a journey to fetch
in Slaves, then an encounter to conquer an Enemy: therefore advising one
another to give quarter to as many of the Greeks as were not obstinate to
ruin, they carried along with them twenty thousand pair of fetters to bind
their Captives. And they seemed to be careful of nothing more, then lest their
delays would give opportunity to the Enemy to get away out of Africa, and so
defeat their hopes of spoil. By this great confidence in themselves and
contempt of the enemy, (in whom nothing can be safely despised; for a
neglectful contempt will always make him stronger) they were precipitated to
an Overthrow. For they immediately drew out into the Field, being about forty
thousand Foot, one thousand Horse, and two thousand Chariots; and pitching upon
an Hill not far from the Enemy, they ranged all their Forces for a Battle.
Hanno commanded the right Wing, and with him was the Sacred Band of
Carthaginians, the Chariots and Horse being placed in the Front; and Bomilcar
commanded the left.

Agathocles was glad the Enemy was so forward to engage, and that their
Confidence made them neglect those safe counsels, of permitting his desperate
Army to spend it self in its own fury, and waste by delays; therefore declines
not the fight, but uses his greatest diligence in his preparations and orders
of this Battle, upon which depended the fortune of Syracuse and all his hopes:
knowing that Fear and Confidence have their birth in the first events; and that
by the issue of this first encounter he should administer to Fame, to
preoccupate the minds of men in concluding the fortune of the whole War. He
orders his Battle according to the manner of the Enemy. For having learned the
temper of the two Generals, (a necessary part of the arts of a Leader, and of
which Annibal afterward made great use in his war in Italy, forming his
designs according to the humor of him who commanded the Enemies battle) he
commits the charge of his right wing to his son Archagathus, that was to engage
against Bomilcar, where an insolent, treacherous Captain, and diffident
Soldiers, promised the fewest dangers, and least opposition: and he himself
commands the left, to confront Hanno, where were all things that are to be
expected in a good Leader and resolute Soldiers. And because many of his party
wanted arms, he supplies them with this invention: he causes them to take the
coverings of shields, and to distend them with sticks and rods, and to stuff
them out in the form of a shield, and gave them to such as wanted, and were in
the rear; not as fit for use, but to elude the Enemies sight, who at a distance
could not judge them other then real shields. And lest his Soldiers should be
discomfited by that terrible prospect of their enemies number and horse (For
the eyes most commonly are the first that are overcome in every battle) he had
another invention to secure their minds of Victory: for he caused many Owls,
which he had provided for that purpose, to be let fly in several places of the
Camp; which flying round about the Army, and alighting sometimes upon the
helmets, sometimes upon the shields of the Soldiers, was taken for an
auspicious augury, because this kind of bird was consecrated to Minerva a
warlike Goddess. And withal he causes it, as an interpretation of the Omen, to
be rumoured that she had assured him of an happy success.

These devices, though they seem trifles and empty projects, yet often prove
great moments to wonderful successes; they raising in the spirits of an Army
great Confidence, and by that Confidence they overcome. For a Confidence that
is derived from the conceived care and promises of Heaven, and to which a Deity
gives the first Original, is most active and vigorous; because a Prediction
does not only raise an infallible hope, and promise an assistance from Heaven,
but also does, by those hopes, tacitly admonish to brave resolutions.
Therefore the Romans, who could boast of more Victories then any other Nation,
used to raise a Confidence in their Forces by the ways of Religion: for they
never would create their Consuls for their Expeditions, levy their Armies,
begin their marches, or join in Battle, without their Auguries and Auspicies.
And without doing some such thing never did any of their wise and noble
Captains attempt any great action; conceiving it difficult to be successful in
it, unless their Soldiers did first apprehend that the Gods were on their
part. And herein does this Confidence differ from that which arises in an Army
from the consideration of their own strength, and contempt of the enemy: this
commonly is pregnant with neglect of discipline, and too much security; but the
former never disarms it self either by negligence or rashness; for the
Commanders, who knew the uncertainty of human affairs, and how much vanity
there was in such Auguries, used them only to heighten the rude multitude, and
themselves in the mean while were careful of taking every advantage for Victory.

Agathocles (that had omitted no part of care; for his Army was ready and
prepared either to fight or chase, not heavy with luggage, not greedy of spoil,
intent upon the commands of their Leader, and observing his very nods, not
anxious for safety, nor too presumptive of Victory) soon found the effects of
his invention to have raised the confidence of his Soldiers. For upon the
first charge they stoutly repulsed the Punick Chariots upon their own Foot, and
bravely receiving their Horse forced them to flight: and when Hanno had brought
up his Foot, doing all that the Love of his Country and Glory exacted from him
(for he thought to have gotten the Victory by his alone Wing) with many wounds
they slew him, being sooner forsaken by Fortune then Valor: and with him fell
the courage of the whole party, which were put to flight; only the Sacred Band
did for a while stoutly endeavor to make good the retreat. In the other wing
Bomilcar did but faintly assault the Enemy, and scarce stood upon his own
defense, not seeking the Victory, but the Empire of Carthage, which he
conceived their overthrow would facilitate, and their low condition impose on
his shoulders; and then he doubted not with ease to send the Syracusans out of
Africa. Therefore as soon as he heard of Hanno's death, he divulges it among
his own party, and commands them to retreat to a neighboring Hill: which being
very disorderly performed, the Sacred Band being now no longer able to sustain
the victorious Greeks, they were at last all totally routed, every one running
the next way to Carthage, and casting away their arms which they had taken for
their defense, as if they feared their own assistances.

The Sicilians pursued them not far, but greedily returned to the rifling of
the Camp; where among the other spoils, they found the preparations not for
War, but for Victory, those Fetters which had been provided for their Slavery.
This increased the hatred of the Enemy, and heightened the joy of the Victory,
by the prospect of the dangers they had escaped. For although we rather wish an
uninterrupted flourishing fortune; yet such does not affect us with so high a
sense of pleasure, as that which Providence raises us unto from the utmost
dangers. This likewise administered occasion of discoursing and wondering at the
Justice of that overruling power of the World, that had thus showed the vanity
of humane power and counsels, and bound the proud Carthaginians in those
fetters which they had provided for a despicable Enemy. As also how quick the
returns of Prosperity may be after the most desperate misery. That there is no
condition so low, but may have hopes, nor any so high that is without the reach
of fears. The Tyrant while his forces were entire in Sicily, was overthrown by
the Carthaginians: yet with the remains of that Army he beats his Conquerours.
Two emulous Cities, Carthage and Syracuse, both at one time Conquerours and
conquered, straightened and besieged by their mutual forces. The loss of the
Carthaginians in this Battle was very great, but uncertain: for some say it was
but one thousand, others relate three, and others six thousand. Agathocles
bought this great Victory with but little blood, for he lost at most but two
hundred, and others say but two.

The Carthaginians amazed at this unexpected overthrow by so weak an Enemy,
referred their misfortune to the anger of their neglected Gods. They conceived
Hercules the Patron of their City to be offended with them, because they had
long disused to send the Tenths of all their Revenues to that God at Tire, from
whence they were extracted, which they had most religiously observed at the
first Plantation of their Colony. But when their State was increased by a
continued Prosperity, and their Riches grown to a vast height, their
Covetousness also enlarging with their Wealth, they envied their Gods so great
a sum as their Tenths did then amount unto, and therefore sent little or
nothing: either thinking their Gods would be pleased with the parsimony of
their Idolaters, and not delighted in an un-emploied Treasure; or else that by
their present Felicity they were now able to stand by themselves without the
care of their Gods. Such is the common weakness of humane minds, as to think
the present fortune puts them out of a dependence on Heaven; and so great their
Ingratitude, that proud with their happiness, they conceive themselves the
authors of their own fortunes, and neglect the testimonies of acknowledging
from whose bounty they derived their Blessings. And being thus insolent toward
their Gods, they grow injurious to men, and so open all the Avenues to
destruction. This Salust observes of his Romans, who in their first beginnings
were Magnificent in their Devotions, Parsimonious in their Families, and
Faithful to their Friends: but when their Greatness feared no rival, and their
fortune had left no Enemy, first the love of Riches, then Ambition of Command
taught them to neglect their Gods, and be perfidious to men, destroyed their
Religion, corrupted their Converse, debauched their Discipline, and at last
overthrew their Commonwealth. For Religion being the Reverence of a Deity,
which is supposed able to reward and punish according to the merits of the
Worshippers, is productive of good Orders. These cement the minds of men, and
lay the obligations of a solid faith, which fits them for great actions, by a
mutual confidence, which seldom fails of good success. But where Religion is
contemned, there the people are not far from ruin, or some heavy scourge; for
that being the foundation of Society, when it is once shaken by contempt, the
whole fabric cannot be stable nor lasting.

But Religious rites that are worn out by Prosperity, when security makes men
more desirous of pleasures then careful of Religion, are recovered by
Adversity. And Fear, though it does not (as the Atheists say) make Gods, yet it
revives their worship. For these Carthaginians awakened with the clamours of
their Misfortunes, sent a great sum of money with other most precious
offerings to Hercules, and Golden Shrines for all their other Gods at Tire,
thinking to buy off their fury, and corrupt their Justice. And neglecting no
part of their barbarous Superstition, they endeavored to reconcile their
Saturn also, whom they conceived peevish likewise. For whereas of old they were
used to sacrifice to him their most beautiful and hopeful Children, nobly or
honestly born, they had of late put him off with common and supposititious
births. Therefore by a cursed Superstition which extinguished humanity, (such
is the fury of a devilish Worship, that when it is most exact it increases
their Crimes) they chose two hundred Children of their most eminent Nobless for
a public Sacrifice. Besides many others that lay under some misfortune, or
were afraid of some great accusations, offered their blood for their Cities
safety, which were no less then three hundred. All these were consumed in a
Sacrifice. For being bound and laid upon the arms of their Idol, which was a
great Image of brass with his hands stretched downwards to the earth, the
unhappy wretches rolled off, and fell into a furnace of fire that was
underneath. This cruel Superstition the Carthaginians had brought from Tire,
from whence the Jews also derived their worship of Moloch.

Though they were thus busy in their Religious, yet were they not negligent in
their Secular provisions: for they sent to Amilcar in Sicily, that he should
speedily send them what forces he could spare; and withal they sent to him by
the same Messengers the brazen beaks of Agathocles's Ships, which their Admiral
had brought to Carthage, with instructions how he should use them. Amilcar
having received the news, commands the Messengers to suppress the misfortunes
of their City, and to divulge in his own Army that Agathocles with his whole
party were utterly lost. And some of the same men he sends into Syracuse to
move them to a surrender of the Town, which could not now hope for any
succors, for Agathocles was totally overthrown, and his Ships taken and burnt
at Carthage; for an evidence of which they showed the brazen beaks which had
his mark upon them, and were generally known to be his. The people through the
present miseries of the Siege were the more capable of any, though false,
terrors; and such as desired a change of the State were most greedy after
news. These thronging about the Punick Messengers and place of the Treaty, had
got some inkling of the news: it was soon divulged; for in a public
expectation all were impatient of any great secret, and easily believed. And
the Commanders in the Town laboring to suppress, did increase the fame of it:
for all discourses being forbidden were the more multiplied; and those who, if
it had been lawful, would have related no more then the truth, because it was
not safe, did by their ill-suppressed fears and secret whisperings make more
heavy things to be conjectured.

The Governors of the Garrison suspecting some Sedition and Mutinies might be
formed by these sad tidings, as soon as ever they had dismissed (which was
speedily) the Carthaginian Envoies, forced out of the Town all the unprofitable
mouths, and all whom they suspected as friends or kindred of the Banditi, which
were about eight thousand. This filled the whole City with tears and confusion,
and every house had something to bewail, either the supposed deaths of
Agathocles and their friends that were with him, or else the misery of those
that were now to be driven from their City and houshold-gods, and exposed to
the cruelty of a besieging Enemy. These sad considerations forced many bitter
execrations upon ambitious Tyrants and their hateful ministers. But Amilcar,
that was a Generous Enemy, and had a greater sense of humanity then was in the
breasts of Agathocles's agents, did safely permit those expulsed wretches to
remove from the walls of their unhappy City; but did more strictly besiege the
Town. And supposing that the want of so many, whom they had turned out, had
weakened them as to the defense of their works, and that the terrors of his
Message had abated the obstinacy of the besieged, he sent in another summons,
with a tender of good conditions to Antander and the Officers of the Garrison,
if they would quickly surrender. Antander, that was a Coward, and had all his
Brothers Vices, but none of his Courage, was for the delivery of the Town, and
covered the baseness of his spirit with the honest name of Pity to the people.
But Eurymaon an Aetolian, whom Agathocles had left in Commission with his
Brother, was of a contrary judgment, and persuaded all the rest to hold out
till they might have some better Intelligence of the state of the Tyrant. For
it was a madness to form any counsels upon an information from an Enemy, who
for their interest will suggest falsehoods for truth, or at least render things
worse then in truth they are.

Amilcar understanding how his arts had miscarried, and that the besieged were
still obstinate, prepares all things to storm the Town. But in the mean while
there came into the Haven of Syracuse two Galleys which Agathocles had built
after his Victory, and manned with the stoutest and most expert Sailors, under
the command of Nearchus, one of his Confidents, to carry the news of his
success to Sicily. These having a lucky sail, came the fifth day in the evening
near to Syracuse; and at break of day the next morning, crowned with garlands,
singing, and wanton with all expressions of joy, they made toward the City.
The Punick Fleet which lay in the mouth of the Haven, upon the first discovery
sent out some Vessels to take them; where the flight of the one and the pursuit
of the other party made so rare and strong a contest, that it called both the
besiegers and besieged to be spectators; each with prayers and wishes favoring
his own party, and by a vicissitude of gestures expressing their hopes and
fears, terrifying and encouraging, as they imagined cause. Each party did their
utmost, and the Galleys were then touching the shore, when the Carthaginians
had laid hold on them; and had then carried them away, had not the Syracusans
that stood on the shore, with their darts, weapons and stones forced them back,
and made them leave the jolly messengers to tell their lucky news. Amilcar
supposing that season convenient for an assault, when the sight at Sea and
great expectations had diverted their minds, and drew many of their soldiers
off from their guard, did immediately clap his Ladders to the Walls, and had
just then possessed them, when discovered by some of the Watch that were going
about to settle the Guards, they were stoutly incountred, and the alarm being
given to the whole City, the Carthaginians were beaten off, and those killed
that had already gotten up. Amilcar vexed by this disappointment slackens the
siege, and sent away five thousand of his Army to the defense of Carthage, and
permits Syracuse for a time to please it self with the joyful news. Where all
the discourse now was in extolling the wisdom of Agathocles; and what before
seemed to be but capricios and effects of despair, were now by success so
adorned, that they appeared the Counsels of the Gods, the only safe resolves
that could be made, and the Contriver was magnified to the Heavens, that he
could do more in an Overthrow throw then the Enemy in a Victory. Success is
the only Optic by which the Vulgar survey and judge of Counsels.

While these things were done in Sicily, and Carthage wearied her adverse Gods
with inauspicious Sacrifices, Agathocles makes use of his Victory, which the
Punick Pride and Perfidiousness rendered more advantageous. For that
Commonwealth did use to treat their conquered neighbors as foreiners, and
their less potent Confederates like Subjects and Vassals. Which was contrary to
the Roman prudence, who the same day had many people both Enemies and Citizens,
and made not wars nor sought conquests for Tyranny, but for their mutual
strength and common safety, and being mingled together by the same customs and
affinity, joined also their Interests with their Wealth, and were concerned in
a common fate. Those Cities that observed not this method to Greatness, their
Empires might be large, yet never strong nor lasting, and they perished at last
by their own arts. For no possession is durable which the Sword only gives:
but Benefits have a perpetual obligation. So was it with Carthage, when the
fame of their overthrow had filled Africa with wonder, how so great an Empire
could receive so mortal and sudden a blow by a conquered Enemy; and not finding
any more obvious solution, then that that City's Name was greater then her
Power, their admiration turned into a contempt of the conquered, and their
former Injuries persuaded them to an obsequiousness to the fortune of the
Conqueror. Therefore many Cities did readily confederate with him, and sent
him supplies of Provision and Money for his Army. He also, to increase the
terror, and give new matter to Fame, marches within five miles of Carthage,
and there pitching his Tents, wasted and destroyed by fire and sword all round
about, that they might see the burning Villages from the walls of Carthage.
Then resolving to take in all the Maritime Towns that yet were tenacious of
their faith to Carthage, and would not comply with him; he fortifies his Camp
about Tunis, and marches to Neapolis, which he takes by assault: but, contrary
to his nature, he did temporize with his Fortune, and as the reason of War
required did use them gently. For the fame of Clemency is profitable for those
that design the erecting of a new Empire.

His next attempt was to besiege Adrymetus: during which Siege he enters into
Confederacy with Elymas, one of the Libyan Princes, that had forsook the
Friendship of declining Carthage, and intended as little faith to his new
Associate; who received him, though he knew he brought more name then
assistance, being of no assured trust. The Carthaginians when they thought the
Tyrant so far engaged at Adrymetus, that he could not with honor leave that
enterpize, hoped in the mean while to recover Tunis; and therefore sending out
their Forces, they soon mastered his Camp, which was before the Town, and then
applied themselves to take the Town it self. Agathocles hearing this, after his
usual manner, being sudden in Counsels and happy in the Events, was resolved
both to continue the siege at Adrymetus and to relieve Tunis. Therefore taking
with him a small party, and leaving enough to make good the Siege, with great
diligence and secrecy he possesies himself of an Hill which lay open to the
prospect of the Adrymetines, and also to the besiegers of Tunis, and at night
caused his Soldiers to make many and great fires. By this slight Stratageme,
which was managed only by the knowledge of the Country, (a necessary part of
Military skill) he did deceive his Enemies at both places. For those that lay
before Tunis thought he came with his whole Army to raise the Siege, and
therefore they quitted it. And the Adrymetines imagined that they were more
Forces gathered to strengthen the Siege, or force the Town, and upon that
apprehension made an immediate surrender upon composition. After this he
assaults Thapsus, and takes it by force; and by force, and credit of his former
Victories, and his other arts, he got the power of no less then two hundred
garrisoned places.

Having gathered the spoils of all that Country, he marches up into the Upper
Libya, both to increase his plunder, and strengthen himself with new
confederacies. Where when he had continued some days, the Carthaginians
encouraged by the coming of some of their forces from Sicily, renew their hopes
and designs to besiege Tunis, having already recovered many of the neighboring
places that had been taken by the Enemy. But Agathocles having received
Intelligence of it, hastes back, and when he was not far from the Enemy,
incamps himself to refesh his wearied Soldiers a while; but commanding them to
make no fires, he marches a way by night, and at break of day comes upon the
Africans like a clap of thunder, while they were secure, disordered, and di^d
to forage. This sudden appearance filled them with an immoderate fear, for
they were fitter for a journey then a Battle; and while they hasted to take
arms, their very have increased their fears. In this confusion he kills two
thousand of them, takes no small number, and so broke both the Siege and their
spirits, who had before conceived too highly of their own strength by the
access of their Veterane Soldiers from Sicily. Heightened with this Success he
sets upon Elymas the Libyan King his Confederate, who had either broken his
League with him, as was not improbable, the Libyans being so unconstant and
barbarous that they did not understand Faith or Peace; or else the Tyrant
feigned that he did so, that he might have a pretense for blood and spoil,
which is as likely. But the ruin of that faithless King did not a little
please the Africans, when they saw Perfidiousness went not unpunished.

But as one blow or favor of Fortune seldom comes without another of the same
kind; so the Sicilian affairs followed the predominant fortune in Africa. For
Amilcar impatient that Syracuse alone, which was the only place there left to
the Tyrant, should so long stop the course of his Victories, and hinder him
from those Triumphs at home which he had deserved abroad, was too eager to
snatch at that which in a short time must have fallen into his hands. For
having a long while by the Fleet at Sea kept all provision from the Enemy, and
by the Siege wasted all that the neighboring Country could afford; he might
well have expected a sudden surrender. But being inconsiderately desirous of
Glory, and deceived by the hopes of a vain Augury, he hastened his own Ruin,
and his Countrie's Danger. For the Augurs having considered the entrails of one
of the Sacrifices, tell him, that to morrow night he should sup in Syracuse.
His desires made him willing to interpret it as his hopes would have it, and
the great forces he commanded left no suspicion of an unhappy entrance. In so
much obscurity are things future hid from the eyes of man; and it being
impossible to decline the Destinies, makes the knowledge of the future
altogether superfluous. That vain curiosity of seeking after it, is punished by
being often made the instrument of delivering us over to what we fear, and
would avoid.

Amilcar therefore resolving to follow whether the Gods, as he imagined, did
call, prepares all things for a storm; and to increase the terror, designs it
to be done in the Night. But in all humane actions Danger has too near union
with that which appears good and profitable, in which it seems almos^ ^possible
for a man to escape one if he intends the other: as it is in assaults by Night,
which are no less dangerous for the invader then the invaded, when every little
accident or false imagination may confound and disturb those that are led to
the assault, and turn the ruin on themselves. And so it fared with Amilcar.
For the Enemy having notice of his resolutions, sent out in the dark about
three thousand Foot and four hundred Horse to lie in Ambush at a place near
Euryclus, to disturb them in their enterprise, and appall them with those
terrors which they intended to others. The Carthaginians that thought to
surprise the Town, came on about midnight to the storm, led on by Amilcar
himself with his lifeguard; and next to him followed Dinocrates, that was
Lieutenant-Generall of the African Horse. The Army was divided into two bodies,
one of Africans, the other of the confederate Greeks: after these followed a
mixed multitude without any order or discipline, such as were intent upon the
rifling of the Town, and could be of no advantage to the taking of it. These
caused a great noise and bustle, which are often the forerunners of great
Overthrows: and the way being also rugged and narrow, those that were to carry
the luggage and the scaling-ladders began to disturb one another in the march,
and to contend for the way; so that forgetful of the Enemy, they went to
fighting and knocking among themselves; which making a great noise and
confusion, gave those in the Ambush notice of their Enemies approach. Who
prepared for this opportunity, and having the advantage of the upper ground,
fiercely assaulted them, and did easily increase their disorders, cutting off
the way to some, and forcing others to fling themselves down the precipices.
Every place was filled with a confused and uncertain clamor, which together
with the darkness of the night made them conceive the Syracusan Ambuscade to be
far greater then it was. The Carthaginians thus confounded with their own
disorders, the sudden impression of the Enemy, the ignorance and difficulties
of their way, could not tell where to charge, nor whom to fight with, and in
this amazement began to fly. Some of them that had not space to use their
weapons, nor room to fly, were trodden under foot by their own Horse. Others
fell foul upon their own party, the night not distinguishing betwixt Friend or
Foe. Some were broken in pieces upon the rocks, and others were oppressed with
the dying carcasses of their Friends and their own luggage: so that there were
various seenes of Death, and every species of Destruction was there acted. But
Amilcar, that had a long time with those about him made a stout resistance, and
in vain, among so great confusions, incited others to the like, was at last
himself taken by the Enemy, and carried Prisoner into the Town, his whole Army
being thus routed and beaten. And Amilcar had been happy howsoever, though in
misery, if he had fallen under the same fortune with his Soldiers. But he
outlived his Dignity, that with the greater Dishonor he might perish in
Syracuse. So uncertain and fallacious are all humane designs, that when Amilcar
thought he was invited by the Gods to complete the conquest of Sicily, and
consummate that Glory to which no Carthaginian had hitherto made so near an
approach, he should at last conclude his Life and Victories in Slavery, and die
at the pleasure of his besieged Enemies.

The observing Greeks had all their wonder raised and excused in the
consideration of this overthrow. For they could not sufficiently admire the
strange uncertainties of humane Greatness, and sudden changes of conditions.
Who may not fear or hope things different from the present, and contrary to
what are expected, when Agathocles, who was a stout and subtle Commander, and
had a very good Army at the Battle of Himera, was not only defeated, but also
lost the choicest of all his Forces; and now those that were besieged, a party
of those very men that were then beaten, did not only defeat the Army of the
Carthaginians by an ordinary stratageme, and an advantage of ground, worsting
an army of an hundred and twenty thousand Foot and five thousand Horse, but
also took their General prisoner? This made them attest that observation, That
there are many Vanities in War; That the battle is not to the strong, nor does
Victory accompany the prudence of designs: when a weak accident, a contemptible
circumstance, is able to ruin the best-formed projects, and overthrow the
firmest resolutions; and that there was some such power, notwithstanding the
impudent cavils and short discourses of Atheistical spirits, that may be justly
termed the Lord of Hosts.

The Syracusans having gotten this Victory, more by the darkness of the night
and advantage of the place then by their own Valor, used it as barbarously as
became the slaves of an inhumane Tyrant; who besides the other Miseries that he
brings upon his Vassals, does also impress his Vices as brands of their Slavery
upon their Souls; his power and their abject minds inclining them to the most
abominable flattery of Imitation. For they most inhumanely abused their noble
Prisoner: not considering the Dignity or Virtues of the Person, who through the
whole War had done nothing unbecoming a Generous Enemy: they despised the
majesty of his former Command and Success; forgot humane frailty, how soon it
falls from the greatest honors to the lowest miseries; and, which challenges
more pity in humane breasts, that what by many labors and tedious virtues has
been attained, may be lost and perish in one moment. Paulus Aemilius, when he
had overthrown and taken Perseus the great King of Macedonia, wept over his
Prisoner, and gave reverence even to the captived Majesty, and brought his
Children to behold the spectacle of humane frailty, nor to triumph in it, with
this command, that They should learn from thence what Reverence was due to the
Ruling Power of the World, that was able to do such great things. But the
souls of so base a Rabble as were the Tyrant's Officers were not capable of so
virtuous considerations, therefore they exposed Amilcar to all the indignities
and injuries that an half-starved multitude would inflict, or the grief for
their slain Friends could invent, upbraiding him with his false hopes in the
Augury, and objecting that the Gods were faithful to his ruin, that had
brought him to sup that night in Syracuse. They led him bound through the whole
City as the mockery of Fortune, and vexing him with horrid torments, they at
last killed him; and cutting off his head, sent it with the news to Agathocles
into Africa. Thus fell Amilcar, who was before the Terror of Sicily, but now
the scorn of Syracuse; more miserable by the hands he fell into, then by the
cause and manner.

This rout had so broken and scattered the Carthaginian Army, that they could
scarce meet the next day; and when they did, were as far from Union. Their
Overthrow had made them factious, and (as it is the fashion of the Vulgar) each
one was ready to charge another with the common Misery, and object their own
Crimes to another Malice. This was increased by the loss of their General, and
they could not agree of a Successor to him. The Africans would have the chief
command given to one of their own City, that was next in dignity to their late
Commander: but the confederate Greeks with the Exiles contended for Dinocrates
to be supreme. And when neither party would recede from their designed choice,
they followed their several Leaders, and so divided.

The Agrigentines considering this state of affairs in Sicily, were persuaded
that Fortune presented them with a fit opportunity of obtaining the Empire of
that Island. The Carthaginians they conceived were so broken, that all they
could do, was to defend their own City from Agathocles's invasion: Dinocrates
with his Exiles would be contemptible to that power which they should raise:
The Syracusans being half-famish'd, would bend all their cares rather for food
then dominion; or if they should be yet ambitious to retain their Grandeur, yet
their preparations for it would be so slow, that they could make no
considerable attempt before they had rooted their power, and settled their
dominion. The speedy growth of which their own arts promised, and the pretext
which they would use for their design, which was, to set all the Cities in
Sicily at Liberty: for the hate of Foreign yoke, the Tyranny of Agathocles, the
innate thirst of Freedom which was in the Greekish blood, would easily make
their pretext be credited and complied with.

Swollen with these hopes the Agrigentines make one of their own Citizens,
Xenodicus, General, and furnishing him with a sufficient Army send him forth to
execute their counsels. He first marches to Gela, where being received by some
whom he had before practiced with, he enters the Town by night, and becoming
master of it, he there gathers up a large sum of Money, increases his Forces,
and partly by force, partly by persuasions, draws the Geloans into a
Confederacy with the Agrigentines. The fame of this plausible design being
bruited abroad, all the Cities that were not suppressed by a greater force then
their own, greedily embraced this Overture of Liberty, and joined with the
Undertakers. The Ennei and the Erbessites being assisted by Xenodicus drove out
the African Garrisons. Then he hastens to deliver the Camarinaei and Leontini
from the incursions of the Syracusans, who, like thieves broke our of prison,
being delivered from the Siege, were more fierce and bloody, wasting and
pillaging all their Neighbors, and had taken Exetla. Thither the Agrigentine
speeds, drives the Syracusans within their own walls, besieges and takes
Exetla, and restores it to its own Democratical Government. The Syracusans
being thus hindered from forraging by land, took advantage of the Punick
negligence, whose Fleet seemed to be stupefied with the reiterated losses of
their Commonwealth, and so were more negligent in their guards: So that the
enemy got in by Sea some Vessels laden with Corn that did for a time supply
their great wants. In the mean while the Army of the League, to keep up their
growing fame, marches up and down, and delivers several Towns both from the
Syracusan and Carthaginian yoke. Thus while Carthage and the Tyrant contended
for the Empire of Sicily, and wasted each other with repeated fights, there
arises a third party to take the spoils of both. But the miseries of the Island
were still increased by the pretenders to her Preservation, and could not fear
or suffer much more troubles in Slavery, then what now she must endure for the
vain hopes of that Liberty which the next strong Pretender would ravish from
her.

While these impetuous designs for Empire and Liberty wasted and almost drowned
Sicily in blood and tears, the Tyrant's success in Africa made him gay and
jolly: and when he had received the head of Amilcar, (who living was his
greatest terror) he made use of it to terrify his own Citizens; for riding so
near their Camp as that he might be heard and seen, he shows them the remains
of their slain General, and makes up the story of his death with all the
dreadful passages that might augment their fears. The Africans with tears paid
their respects to his unfortunate faith and valor, and bowed down to worship
that head which was their Enemies scorn; bewailing in the loss of him the
unhappiness of Carthage. But the other mischiefs of War which followed did dry
up the tears too soon for this their Noble Captain.

This strange success both in Sicily and Africa made the Syracusan Potter more
proud, so as to persuade himself that he stood above the reach of Danger. But
the great Ruler of humane affairs deals sometimes with Tyrants as he has done
with the Lions of Mesopotamia, whose Fierceness would make that Country
desolate and the ways unpassable, had not Nature provided a little sort of
Flies, that about the heat of day flying into the eyes of those beasts, either
force them into Marshes and Fenny places there to preserve their sight from
those enemies, whom smalness makes invincible; or else exasperating their
revenge to kill them, while they are wounding, make them tear out their own
eyes with their claws, and so starve for want of sight and food. So Providence
restrains the fury, and curbs the Pride of such Monsters as Tyrants are, by
some abject means and inconsiderable circumstances, forming their Ruin from
unsuspected beginnings. Drunkenness and Feasts sometimes revenge the oppressed
world, and overthrow that power which is unresistible by Arms. Thus Agathocles
was almost ruined, when his Enemies were most weak, by an unexpected Mutiny of
his own Army, occasioned by a slight accident which gave beginning to it. And
many times small beginnings have great effects, men being more willing to
follow a motion then to lead it. The Tyrant jolly in his Success and the
obsequiousness of Fortune, invites all his Officers to a Supper; where one of
them, named Lyciscus, being drunk, began to rail at him, and upbraided him with
his notorious Crimes, uttering such speeches that were not safe in a Tyrant's
ears. Whose Maxims are to hate even the liberty of speech, and to suspect
those who speak either boldly or gravely, for underminers of Tyranny.
Agathocles suppressed his Anger, reserving it to grow more beavy in a fit
season of Revenge; at the present he seemed to reverence the man whom he had
often proved very valiant, and therefore imputing his Passion to his distemper,
replies only by jeasts and contempt, the soonest way to blot out reproaches.
But his Son Archagathus (who thought his Father's fortune needed no Patience,
and because the drunken speeches had so much of truth that they left too sharp
a remembrance) with much fury returns the like language mixed with Threatenings.
This heat outlasted the Feast, and every one departs toward his Tent. But
Archagathus following and pressing upon Lyciscus, he did at last upbraid him
also of Incest with his Fathers Wife Alcia. Upon which Archagathus's blood
boiling as high in choler to have his Crimes divulged, as it did before in
Lust, and as he was prompt to do any baseness, so he was equally insolent, and
unwilling to hear of it, he snatches a javelin from one of the Guard, and runs
Lyciscus quite through the body; who falling down dead was by his Friends
conveyed to his Tent. Whither as soon as it was morning were gathered all his
acquaintance, and many of the Officers of the Army; who had a respect for him,
not only for his Valor, but also for the bluntness of his discourse, which
did seem to have in it a show of a free Soul. These resenting the injury done
to their Friend, and measuring their own danger by what he had suffered, fill
the whole Camp with Sedition; which was more inflamed by all the great
Officers, who feared the Tyrants wrath for some slight offenses. So that at
last every one armed themselves to punish the incestuous Murderer, and to
appease the angry ghost of their Friend with his enemy's blood; threatening that
if Agathocles would not deliver him up to Justice, they would satisfy their
fury with his head. Then did their anger invent new causes of quarrel, and
clamoured out for their arrears; and to show their intentions for a real
satisfaction, they chose them new Leaders, seized upon all the Forts and Gates
of Tunis, and set a guard upon the Tyrant and his Son. Thus, as it is the
nature of the Multitude either basely to serve, or proudly to domineer, they
had in a moment cast off all that fear and reverence of the Tyrant, which so
many terrors and so long a Conduct had habituated them unto.

Agathocles all this while, in the conscience of many Wickednesses which every
mouth now spoke of, did not dare to appear, to restrain those that were most
fierce, or reconcile the doubtful, or animate any of his Confidents; but
fearful and sluggish, watched when this humor would spend it self. But the
Carthaginians, that had intelligence of the Mutiny, labored to advantage
themselves by it, before the love of Obedience or the knowledge of the
necessity thereof should return: and therefore sent some secret instruments to
practice them to a Revolt, promising to pay all their arrears, and ample
rewards to the Agitators in it, so that many of the Officers undertook the
emploiment. Agathocles startled at these practices, thought his life and
fortunes were now at the utmost verge, and fearing if he were delivered up to
his Enemies, he must with ignominy and torture end his days, he conceived it
better to commit himself to the fury of his own Army; and since his Life was
gone, he would only provide for the decency of his Death, and withal try
whether his old arts of dissembling would still prove lucky. Only the doubt
was how he should proceed: whether he should go and oppose to their Fury the
Majesty of a Commander, which might force a reverence, when they saw a Person
of so great experience, and that had for a long time been the chief fountain of
severity and reward; or whether he should go by such a way of fear and
trembling as would conceal all his arts of dissembling and speaking, and so be
more powerful to mitigate the incensed Rabble. For it is the custom of the
Vulgar to be changed by sudden and unusual appearances, and be as prone to pity
as they were immoderate in anger. This last way was thought most expedient; and
therefore laying aside all his Robes and ensigns of Power, squallid and
deformed with fear, with a countenance composed to tears, yet full of Pride and
Anger, he comes into the midst of the Soldiers, who were presently moved with
the miserable habit of him whom before they enyied. He speaks to this purpose.

Had the Gods exacted my life as a Sacrifice for my Armies safety, or destined
me to fall in executing revenge on the Enemies of Syracuse, their Decrees had
been but the answer of my Prayers, who have already devoted my life to yours
and my Country's service. But to be sold by those whom I have preserved in
Liberty and made Lords of Africa, that my death should be their ignominy whom I
have led and taught the ways of glory, gives me just canse to complain of
their severity. It is not that I fear death, for I need no other witnesses then
your selves how often I have provoked it for your emolument. Nor am I frighted
to become the mockery of that Enemy on whose Ruins I have already raised such
pillars of Glory as cannot be wasted by the malignity of Time, or undermined by
the dishonor of my Grave. But your eternal infamy that have sold your Captain,
and the Slavery of our Commonwealth, which will lose a most industrious and
faithful instrument of her preservation, are the greatest terrors my
destruction brings. Besides the dismal effects that it will have even upon
Virtue it self, and be destructive to the society of following generations: for
my blood spilt in this mutiny will confirm the licentious insolence against
Magistracy, and discourage the pious zeal of Children for their Fathers honor.
It is true indeed, the too much Piety of my Son has raised this Tumult by more
duty then consideration. For dangerous events do follow even honest actions, if
Prudence do not moderate the course of Justice. But his greatest crime was,
that he anticipated your fury, and prevented your revenge of your own injuries.
For though the Majesty of a Prince and the honor of a Magistrate were but
empty names and vain shadows, yet it is your concernment that He which is your
Commander should not be esteemed the worst of men, as that drunken Railer would
have rendered me; because that Society is near a dismal dissolution, whose Chief
or Prince may be safely defamed. But it is in vain to complain, since the Gods
have decreed the end of this glorious Enterprise by my death. For who will dare
to lead you to fire the Gates of Carthage, and to find your arrears in
ransacking her Riches, when you have applauded the dishonor, and conspired the
betraying of your most faithful Servant? Or what need the Carthaginians fear
your arms, when by these base arts (for by better they cannot) they can ruin
your best Officers, and make you bind their yokes upon your own necks? I desire
to live no longer to see your Infamy, nor will I experience the Cruelty or
Clemency of any other, but free and satisfied with my own integrity and glory
will anticipate all danger. Only I desire you, that the short time your cruel
and faithless Enemy will suffer you to survive me, you will remember Me among
the brave Examples, and put me in the number of those that by an honorable end
have escaped the public Miseries.

Having ended his Speech, he drew out his Sword, and put it to his breast, as
if he had intended to have killed himself: which was acted with so much life,
(for he was an excellent Mimick) that the rude Multitude, unacquainted with the
arts of Tyrants, and their too much fear of death, thought it was real.
Therefore with loud acclamations, and striking their spears upon their shields,
which was the way whereby the Greek Soldiers did use to express their desires,
they cried out that he should forbear the ruin of himself and them, that they
did acquit him of all accusations; and with a shout begged and gave pardon at
once, desiring him to reassume his Royal habiliments: which while he puts on
he weeps, and thanks the changeable Multitude, that so soon was differing from
it self, and that before being nothing but Fury, did now become all Patience.
For every Multitude is moveable, especially that of Soldiers; so that the
remedies of Sedition are as easy as the beginnings of it. The Tyrants Speech
having recovered so much pity as served him for Authority, and seeing the
return of Obedience, and that the Soldiers were now fit to receive commands,
he presently turns the remainder of their fury upon the Enemy, who were
expecting the issue of their practices, and the Revolt of the whole Army, of
which they had received some already. Whom when they saw marching out, they
conceived to be such as had forsaken the Tyrant, and were coming over to them;
for the speed of Agathocles had prevented any news of the change in the City:
and when he was come near them, he tells his Soldiers, that now they should
expiate their seditious fury, and blot out their treason with the blood of the
authors, and turn their crime to their honor. Then sounding a charge, he
chaces the Africans to their own tents; who being deceived with this surprise,
made no resistance, but left many of their fellows dead upon the place, as
testimonies of the Sicilians Repentance.

Though Agathocles had thus dexterously escaped this great danger, and revenged
himself on the Africans, without any other loss then of two hundred Authors of
the Sedition, that had revolted to the Enemy; yet was his hatred still alive of
the whole Army, that had put him to such affrightments: and could he have been
safe, he would have contrived their universal ruin. So implacable are the
Spirits of Tyrants. Yet notwithstanding he intends to divide them, whom the
contemplation of their number often incites to Sedition, and makes them scorn
to ask that pay which they see they can force. Therefore leaving the rest of
the Army with his Son, to secure Tunis and the acquisitions thereabout; he
takes with him eight thousand Foot and four hundred Horse, and follows the
Carthaginian Forces, who were gone into Numidia to suppress some Insurrections
among their revolting Subjects. Where though by their speed they had reduced
many to Obedience, and by moderating their commands recovered the Affections of
others; yet did they not dare to give battle to the Greeks, but encamped
themselves on an Hill defensible by nature, and encompassed about with Rivers
of a difficult passage. Then they commanded their Numidians that were in arms
for them, after their manner of fighting, still to follow the Sicilians, and by
many sudden assaults to retard their march. But Agathocles sending out his
Slingers and Archers to encounter with them, leads his other Forces forward to
find the Enemy; who being certified of his approach, sent out a party to hinder
his passage at the River, where they slew many of his men. But the Sicilians,
though less in number, yet greater in resolution, and heightened with many
Victories, forced their passage, and stoutly maintained the fight with the
Carthaginians.

In the mean time those Numidians that were on either side, forbore the fight,
being of an unsteady Faith, like their sandy soil, neither united among
themselves, nor constant adherers unto others; and standing like Spectators of
the Combat, and as so many Vultures watching to prey upon the falling
Carcasses, they determined to rifle the Camp and luggage of which party soever
was worsted. At last the day inclining to Agathocles, he pursued the Africans
to their Camp, which being well fortified, they bravely defended, and returned
more wounds then they did receive: yet was the Tyrant obstinate to force them
within their defenses, hoping to complete the Victory so happily begun. The
Numidians seeing the Carthaginians so well preserving their Camp, though they
lost the field, immediately turn their hopes upon Agathocles's Tents; where
killing those few that were left for the guard of them, they took all the
Prisoners and spoil, and, like birds of prey, when they had got the spoil, made
no delay, but hasted away. The Tyrant hearing of this, drew off from the
Carthaginians to succor his own Camp; but their haste and the approaching
Night delivered them from his revenge, and they escaped with the greatest part
of the spoil. Agathocles therefore to supply the loss his Army had sustained by
the Numidians, did equally divide among the Soldiers his own booties, lest
they should mutiny. In this Battle were taken a thousand Greeks, whereof five
hundred were Syracusans, who in hatred of the Tyrant had served the
Carthaginians. These being all imprisoned in a Garrison, fearing the Cruelty of
the Tyrant, by night set upon the guards; but being worsted, retired into a
strong place, which they intended to defend till they might have good Articles.
Agathocles hearing of it, draws up his whole Army against them, whom the fear
of present death made forgetful of the Perfidiousness of the Tyrant, and so
they yielded up themselves upon his Oath that he would spare their Lives: which
they had no sooner done, but he kills them every man.

Notwithstanding all these Overthrows, the Carthaginians were not broken in
their Courage and Resolution for Empire; (which is always the guise of great
spirits, not to vary with their fortunes) and therefore did so little repent of
their unhappily-defended Liberty, that they chose rather to be overcome then
not to attempt at Victory. A temper they retained as long as they had a City.
For in their last War with the Romans, before ever they would yield to quit
their City, they pulled down their Houses for timber to build a Navy; and when
they wanted Iron and Brass, they melted their Gold and Silver for the same
uses; and their Matrons cut off their Hair, to make cordage for their Engines.
This undaunted resolution, their sending forth fresh Armies, their wariness of
engaging, the hardiness and experience which by their continual Conflicts they
had acquired, the difficulties of this last Skirmish, and the much blood the
Victory cost him, made the Tyrant see how unequal such a petit Prince as he,
and a single City that was blocked up, and could afford him no support for so
vast designs, were to so mighty a Commonwealth, that seemed inexhaustible in
her Treasures, and store of men, and that at this rate they could longer hold
out with their Overthrows, then he with his Victories: for his Forces were worn
out with the Successes, and there could be little trust in the Soldiers he
gathered from the conquered people. He therefore casts about to get those
succors somewhere else that he could not expect from home. Among those whom he
thought on, none appeared so fit for his design as Ophellas, who having been
one of the Commanders of Alexander, in the partage of that Empire had seized
upon Cyrene in Libya, and had made himself Prince thereof; with which it was
known that he was not contented, and therefore had many projects to enlarge his
Dominion, and make himself eminent.

This man Agathocles judged fittest for his purpose, and easiest to be imposed
upon. For Ambition infatuates, and while it presents the luster of Greatness,
dazles the Reason, that it cannot see the dangers and difficulties in the
acquisition, nor look into the practices of those that tempt them. To him
therefore the Tyrant sent Ortho a Syracusan as Ambassador, to cajole him into
this war, and as a reward of his dangers makes profer of all the acquisitions
he had already made, or should hereafter make by their joint Forces in Africa.
For he conceived Sicily an Empire large enough for his ambition, who modestly
thought too great a Command was dangerous, and in great possessions men made
themselves too obnoxious to the strokes of Fortune. He had made this war upon
the Continent only to divert the Africans from the Island, and to blot out the
ignominy of his overthrow at Himera, not to settle a Kingdom there, which was
divided by so vast a Sea from his principality of Syracuse. If hereafter his
desires should be enlarged with his Fortunes, he had Italy nearer him, a place
fitter for his designs, and where he had better pretensions, and there he
should exercise his valor, and enlarge his Empire; but all Africa he would
leave to Ophellas, as fittest for the King of Cyrene.

This wrought the desired effect on Ophellas, who having been long waiting for
such an opportunity, greedily swallowed the bait. For men are more desirous of
acquiring that which is another, then careful to preserve their own. This made
him not reflect upon the party with whom he had to do: but as one of the
lesser birds of prey, who are eager to seize on that which their nature incites
them to, but do not look unto a greater fowl which is above them, and seeks to
swallow them with their spoil; so he only considering the Empire of Carthage,
did not mind the infamous Perfidy of Agathocles, but hastily concludes a League
with him, and provides for the Expedition. To this end he sends Money and
Officers to Athens, from whence he had married a Wife of the stock of the
famous Miltiades, that by the favor of her Friends they might levy Soldiers
there, and gather up some other un-emploied Grecians; who were easily persuaded
to this enterprise, for they found Greece a most troublesome place, wasted and
harrassed by the several pretensions and wars of Alexander's Commanders, and
therefore hoped for a more safe and easy Warfare with richer spoils in Africa,
and promised to themselves the pillage of Carthage. With an Army made up of
such Ophellas marches from Cyrene with above ten thousand foot, six hundred
horse, and a hundred chariots that were furnished with three hundred men; and
besides those that were listed there followed above ten thousand with their
Wives and Children in hope of booty and spoil, as if they went to plant
Colonies, not fight Battles, in Africa. These traveling through the dry and
sandy Deserts of Libya, where they were often in great distress both of water
and victuals, and often hurt by those Serpents which are natural to that soil,
at the end of two months came to the Camp of Agathocles, tired and half
famished.

The Tyrant went out to meet Ophellas; whom he entertains at first with
prodigal caresses, sends him convenient and seasonable Presents, often
entertains him at Feasts, in tenderness persuades him to rest and refresh his
Army before he brought them to action, and agrees with him in all the Counsels
concerning the management of their Enterprise. One through Fraud, the other
through Facility, mutually grant and receive every thing. Ophellas adopts
Archagathus for his heir to his hoped Kingdom; and Agathocles suppresses for a
while his bloody and greedy disposition; which was impatient in society of
Command. Yet all the while he had an eye upon his new Guest; and having
intelligence about him, when he understood that Ophellas was most secure, and
that the greatest part of his Forces were gone forth to forage, he suddenly
calls together his own Soldiers, and to them declares, that he had found by
experience, how impossible it was that there should be Faith and Concord
betwixt two Commanders in chief: for Ophellas, whom he had called to their
assistance, and invited to a Confederacy in that rich War, had notwithstanding
ungrateful practices to cut them and him off; and of this he was assured by the
Intelligence he kept about him: that therefore they should advise what course
was fittest for their safety. They were soon exasperated by this false
accusation, and desired him to lead them out to revenge: Which he presently
did, and found Ophellas, suspecting no such usage, without any strength about
him, and therefore easily mastered, though he made a stout resistance, till he
was killed. When he was dispatched, Agathocles forced and persuaded the rest to
lay down their arms, and surrender themselves to his conduct, promising them
that they should find better hopes under his Command then was to be conceived
from Ophellas: and so wrought over his whole Army. Of which such as were unfit
for Service (together with the Spoils of Ophellas) he ships for Syracuse: but
they were all lost by Shipwreck; so that the Tyrant enjoyed not any benefit of
his Perfidiousness, either of what he had sent away or what he kept; for it was
not long after that those men whom he had deprived of a Captain, did revenge
the injury in the blood of his Son.

At the very time that Agathocles was unfaithful to Ophellas, as if some
perfidious influence did then work upon all corrupted minds, did Bomilcar
attempt the like upon his own Citizens. Who though he was suspected to have a
long time intended the Tyranny, yet was still suffered to continue in the City;
either a more powerful Enemy and greater Fears employing all their thoughts,
and so caused a neglect of his practices: or else Carthage, as all
Commonwealths, was too slow in their determinations, less wary in their
proceedings, and much respectful of their greatest Citizens; which make
Conspiracies against them more secure in the management, then such as are
formed against Princes. He had often sought an opportunity to satisfy his
Ambition. But great Crimes are full of Fears, Delays, and frequent change of
Counsels; and that which in the projection seems full of its reward, when it
comes to be acted looks big with danger. Therefore he had long deferred his
Enterprise. But now, when the City was dejected by the increase of their
Enemies in the coming of Ophellas, and the most eminent of the Nobless were
employed in Numidia to keep their subjects quiet, he thought the afflighted
Multitude would tamely submit to him, and that now there was no reason to delay
those counsels, which are never praised till they be acted.

Therefore when Agathocles was busied in the murder of Ophellas, he began his
enterprise. And it was for the happiness of either State that these Crimes were
acted in the same juncture of time, and that each were ignorant of the others
attempts and troubles. For had Agathocles known the practices of Bomilcar, he
might have easily wrought him, upon the failure of his attempts, rather to have
given up the City into his hands, then trusted himself to the mercy of his
incensed Citizens. And had the Carthaginians been acquainted with the
Syracusan's perfidious dealing with Ophellas, it had been more possible for
them to have drawn that injured Army to their side, then for Agathocles, that
had provoked them with an unparalled Baseness. But the Wickedness and danger
of either Act hated the light, required secrecy, and fastened the attentions of
the Actors from considering what was done by others.

Bomilcar therefore not seeking for aid abroad, nor mingling Counsels with
Agathocles, who he might suspect would be as faithless as himself, but relying
on his own strength, which was five hundred of the baser Citizens, that were
easily allured with the hopes of Spoil, and a thousand Mercenaries that he had
gotten, proclaims himself King. Then marching from the place where they at
first rendezvous'd, which was in that part of Carthage which was called the New
City, he divided his party into five bodies, and sent them by several avenues
into the Piazza, commanding them to kill all they found in the streets, that so
he might affright the people, and make his design easier. For if the Multitude
be not affrighted, they become terrible; but when they begin to fear, they grow
weak to contempt. And accordingly the Citizens were at first affrighted,
supposing this Tumult was caused by the Enemy, to whom the City had been
betrayed; and so fled, and hid themselves. But being at last acquainted with
the truth, Hatred and Anger (the two strongest and most sudden Passions) that
one of their own City should increase their Misery, and attempt their Bondage,
while they were resisting a foreign Tyrant, expelled their fears, and armed all
the Youth to revenge. Who gathering together in several bodies, led by the
wisest Citizens, who would not suffer the consent and first indignation of so
great a multitude to languish, set upon the Tyrant in the Piazza, whither he
was then arrived. He being bravely assaulted by these, and there being also
from the Houses round about the Marketplace poured all the instruments of
death and anger that Women and Children could manage, upon his party; so many
of them were killed or wounded, that he was forced to quit his ground, and draw
off to the place from whence he at first set forth. But his flight emboldened
and increased his Enemies, and in his retreat through the narrow Lanes many
more of his men were much wounded from the Houses; and when he came to the
place he intended, they closely besieged him. Bomilcar seeing his design broke,
parlies with his besiegers, and with as much Baseness as he had begun with
Villainy, he puts an end to his ambitious hopes, yielding himself up upon
Articles of Impunity.

All the rest that had been his Instruments were pardoned, their Ministry to
his Wickedness being imputed to their Weakness: and it was not safe now to draw
much blood within their walls, when such rivers were spilt without. Only the
Tyrant himself must by his death seal the security of the Commonwealth, and
satisfy the public hatred. For hatred that is raised by danger out-lasts the
fear; nor does the conquered cease to be hated till he cease to be. Therefore
notwithstanding the Public faith for his impunity, he was most cruelly
tortured, and afterward crucified. He showed himself consentaneous in life and
death; for from the Cross, as from a Throne, his Imperious and Proud spirit
declamed against the Ingratitude and Cruelty of the Carthaginians: Objecting to
them how they murdered Hanno, whom they had falsely accused with the
affectation of Tyranny; banished Gisgo, whose Innocence their Wickedness could
not endure; basely passed private sentences of death against his Uncle Amilcar,
who wisely endeavored to make Agathocles rather their Friend then their Enemy:
and in this fury, because he could not revenge the Crimes he objected, he
breathed out his restless soul. Thus Conspiracies, if they do not ruin, yet
defame the Magistrate; and when they thrive not against them, are supposed to
come from them as inventions to cover their Avarice in seizing upon the Estates
of others, or to hide their inhumane thirst of blood. This was the end of
Bomilcar, who following the same designs with Agathocles, had yet a different
issue; for the Cross rewarded his Wickedness, when Power and Greatness was the
price of the others. Not to refer this difference either to the Justice of
Heaven, by conceiving one to be more wicked then the other, and that he which
thrived was less impious then he that perished in the undertakings; for this
would injure that immaculate Justice and Purity of Heaven: nor to ascribe it to
the pity of Providence, who would not afflict the miserable Carthaginians, that
labored under the fury of a most bloody foreign Enemy, with those greater
mischiefs that follow a change of Government, and of necessity flow from a
Domestic Tyranny. But we may in reason assign this cause, that the different
events did arise from those diverse Occasions which either took for his
Enterprise. The Syracusan found a corrupted State to work upon, (for in none
but such do Tyrants arise;) but the African did not: For whereas a State is
corrupted either through a long Prosperity, or variety of Factions in it, both
which make the People decline from their ancient Constitutions; Carthage at
this time was delivered from both these springs of Corruption; because being
pressed with a tedious and cruel War, they were all united against the Common
Enemy, and being to fight for their preservation, they could not attend the
satisfaction of those Lusts which are most petulant against the established
Laws. Which Bomilcar's impotent ambition not considering, nailed him to the
Cross, in stead of fixing him on a Throne.

About this time all the Family of Alexander the Great was quite extinguished.
His Brother Aridaeus with his Wife Eurydice were killed by his Mother Olympias:
She afterward besieged, and by Famine forced to deliver up her self to
Cassander, was by him murdered. Roxane his Wife, with her Son the younger
Alexander, fell by the same hand; and so also Hercules his Son by Barsine. His
Sister Cleopatra was also put to death by the practices of Antigonus. So that
there remained no Heir unto that great Troubler of the world. And he that had
shed so much blood for an empty Name, had nothing but that Name left. His
Commanders, who as long as any of these did survive were contented with the
portions only of that Empire, did after their death assume the Name and
Majesty of Kings. Which Agathocles hearing, the Potter also, who thought
himself equal to them in Exploits and Conquests, and not inferior in Dominion,
would also be styled King, and wear a Crown as the Ensign of Majesty, which he
had never before used but as a Priest. But Royalty, which is the reward of
Heroic Virtues, may be the Usurpation, yet can never be the Propriety of a
Tyrant: the Ensigns may be worn by a vicious bloody Villain, but the Majesty
never adorns but a Lawful Just Prince. For Crowns do not create, but elicite
that Reverence which the Virtues of the wearer first formed in the minds of
men: without which umpress Diadems do but provoke the indignation of the
beholders, and upbraid, not honor, the baseness of the Usurper.

The assumption of the Royal Title made no alteration in the nature of
Agathocles, but in his next enterprise he exceeded his former Inhumanity. For
intending to reduce Utica that had revolted from him, he suddenly lies down
before it, and surprises three hundred of the Citizens that had employed
themselves in the neighboring Country. By these men he offers oblivion and
pardon, if they would return to their Obedience. The Citizens that were
sensible of his actions in Africa, that his Faith was to be measured by his
Lust; that no greater misery could happen to them then what they should run
into if they did expect his Mercy; that they should perish if they were
conquered, and they must do so if they surrendered; that there was no choice to
be made but this, whether they should lose their blood with scorn and
contumely, or spend it in a gallant defense and revenge; did therefore refuse
all Peace with him. When he saw they would not be deluded by false hopes, he
endeavors to reduce them by their affections, and would sack the Town by a
force upon Nature. For making Engines of wood, on them he hangs the surprised
Citizens, under the shelter of whom he sets his own Soldiers, and so brings
them close to the Wall: so that whatsoever arms the besieged did direct to kill
their Enemies, must first wound their dearest Friends. The Uticenses were at
first stupefied by this inhumane art, and in pity durst not shoot those arrows
in their own defense, which would spill the blood of those they desired to
save. But the Enemy pressing hard upon them, they preferred Liberty to such a
dangerous compassion; and desiring the Gods to impute the Cruelty to their
barbarous Enemy, they for a long time stoutly defended themselves. But their
adverse Fates suffered them not long to survive their miserable Friends. For
the Town was taken by storm; which the Tyrant soon fills with the blood and
carcasses of the defendants: some he killed in the heat of blood, many he
hanged, he dragged out and murdered those that fled to the Altars of the Gods
for refuge, vainly thinking that he might have some Religion that had divested
himself of all Humanity. Thus Tyrants manage their Wars not so much against
particular Persons and Cities, as against the Nature of man. Nor did Agathocles
think it enough to overcome the Uticenses, unless he had also made them pollute
their just arms in the blood of their Friends and Kindred. The Romans bewailed
and cursed those Civil Wars which did expose the Father's life to the sword of
the Son, and grieved that the Law of War did forbid that punishment which the
law of Nature required: (He fell with glory like a Sacrifice for the public
safety, that slew himself when he knew he had killed his Brother) Nor did they
more abhor those vices in their own Citizens, then they did hate them, and
scorn to make use of them in their Enemies. For they conceived that no Victory,
where Justice and Virtue were not preserved entire. And by their just practices
even to their Foes, they overcame those Cities, and subdued those Spirits,
which no force of arms could ever have subjected: and one Generous Example of
Virtue has flung open those Gates, which no humane power could have pulled
down. Thus Camillus received the Falisci to obedience; Fabritius removed
Pyrrhus from Italy; and Scipio's Continency reconciled all Spain to the Roman
Empire. Men more willingly submit to those whom, being owners of so great
Virtues, they esteem it an impiety to overcome.

LIB. III.
AGathocles having by those bloody arts, nefarious practices, and force of
arms, brought to his obedience almost all Africa, and left the Enemy little or
nothing but their own City, he neglects the attempting of that, and abuses the
obsequiousness of his Fortune in more inconsiderable designs; infatuated in his
counsels, and not considering that the Members do more easily follow the Head,
then on the contrary the Head the Members: that if Carthage had been taken, the
inferior Cities must necessarily have followed her fortune; but that being
left free and entire, she might provide for the cure of her wounds, and watch
opportunities for the recovery of her Empire. But either the difficulties of
assaulting Carthage, or the necessities of Syracuse, did divert him from such
an enterprise, and solicit him to a return into Sicily, where the Free League
had confined his Tyranny within the walls of his own City. For Xenodicus had
hitherto prospered, and restored the Democratical power to many Cities, and
raised up the confident hopes of all the Sicilians to live by their own Laws,
which is the true foundation of Liberty.

To stop therefore this current of freedom, Agathocles hastens into Sicily
with two thousand Soldiers, leaving the command of his affairs on the
Continent to his Son Archagathus. At his landing he was entertained with the
news of a Victory which his Captains Leptines and Demophilus, with eight
thousand two hundred foot and a thousand two hundred horse, had gotten on
Xenodicus, who had lost a thousand five hundred of his men, and was forced to
shelter himself within the walls of Agrigentum. The Tyrant makes use of this
Victory, and marches against those Cities that had shaken off his yoke, and
with the credit of the former Victory reduces Himera, Selinus and Thermae. Then
drawing forth before Centorippa by night, he was in hope to have surprised it
through the practices he had with some of the Citizens: but the plot being
discovered, he was forced by the better part of the City, which were not
polluted with such infamous Counsels, to retreat with the loss of five hundred
of his men. Then being solicited by some persidious inhabitants of Apollonia
to come and take their City, before he could reach thither the Conspiratours
were discovered and apprehended, and he was disappointed for the first day of
his expectation. But the next day, not to depart without some attempt, he
assaults the Town, and not without exceeding loss of men he takes it; where
killing most of the Apolloniates, he plundered the whole City, and left it as a
monument of his Cruelty.

But the desires of Liberty, though overwhelmed with all these Ruins, were
like fires less carefully extinguished, which revive with a greater flame. For
the universal hatred of the Tyrant and thirst for Liberty moved Dinocrates to
be an assertor of the Free League; and he appeared like another Rock to dash in
pieces the violent successes, and to be a remora to the Tyrant's Security. To
Dinocrates therefore flocked all such as either desired to be free men, or
hated the Tyrant; which were so many, as Dinocrates's Army consisted of twenty
thousand foot and fifteen hundred horse, all Veterane Soldiers, and Actors in
the late troubles of Sicily, accustomed to the discipline and difficulties of
War, or hardened with the miseries of Banishment. With these he pitches his
Camp in an open field, and offers battle to the Tyrant: but he knowing himself
too weak to engage, retreats to Syracuse, still followed by his daring Enemy;
who cuts off his rear, and wins upon him without loss of blood. This was a
great obstruction to Agathocles's designs: for wars are managed much by fame,
and he that retreats is supposed to fly.

Together with this check to his affairs in the Island, his fortune wholly
declines on the Continent, and that success which had so importunately followed
him there, did as suddenly leave him. Where his Army continually wasted both in
strength and courage: Archagathus either failing in his Father's arts, and the
virtues of a Leader; (For an Army is to be valued at the rate of the Commander,
whom they will contemn if he be weak, and ignorant of his charge, and so
neglect their duty, and become insolent and contumacious) or oppressed with the
sins and fates of his Sire; the punishment due to wicked Parents being entailed
by the Divine Vengeance on their hateful Children. He soon found his
Insolences undermined that had been built upon his Father's fortune. His first
enterprises were auspicious, but the issue was full of despair. For having sent
out a party under the conduct of Eumachus, they had mastered many Cities in the
upper Africa with much slaughter, they had demolished their Walls, captivated
and sold the Inhabitants, burnt their Houses, and wasted their Fields, and so
proud with Victory and laden with Spoils returned to Tunis. But being sent out
again, the second Expedition proved not so fortunate: for going beyond the
bounds of their former Conquests, and setting upon the City Miltine, they were
from thence driven with exceeding loss. Then turning themselves against the
Pithecusans, (a kind of people in Africa that have their names from the Apes,
whom they worship with the same reverence as the Egyptians do their Dogs) they
took one of their strongest Cities, and the rest yielded. But the Libyans
awakened with the continual clamours of their wasted Neighbors, gathered into
a great body, and forced them with more terror and less spoil then they had
before, to retire toward Archagathus, that was now amazed with Ruins on every
side.

For the Carthaginians by their frequent Incounters arriving to more experience
and greater hardiness, and by their many Losses learning safer counsels, had
wholly changed their arts and customs of fights. They were now more wary in
their engagements, forbore forward onsets, and used the arts of a Veterane
Army. For many wars that are too violent in their first fury, vanish by
delays: and Armies that cannot charge their Enemies are consumed by their own
wants, and wast in their own fury. They likewise resolved no more to venture
their whole force in one body, but divided them into three several parties;
whereof one was to march by the Seacoast, the second was appointed to secure
the Inland Towns, and the third was employed in the upper Libya. By this
counsel they secured their City from the dishonor and molestation of a Siege.
For the Enemy would not dare to lie down before it, when so many parties were
unconquered in the Field. Nor did they fear a storming of it, wherein there was
such a multitude, their walls and fortifications very strong, and the Sea
affording much protection by washing the foundations of her rampires. Besides,
by sending out these Parties they should ease that scarcity of Provision which
began to afflict them; all the Country about being wasted by the War, and the
number of people almost infinite that fled thither for safety from the Cruelty
of the Sicilians. Their Credit also, which is of great moment in all Wars,
would be kept up by having so many Armies in the Field. And lastly, which was
of most advantage, it would necessitate their Enemies to divide into so many
small Parties, as would be less considerable and easily baffled. All which Ends
they did attain. For their Stores were proportionable to their lesser number:
Their Confederates now revered that power which could not be spent by so
sepeated Losses, and were encouraged in their Fidelity, when they saw so
powerful a defense ready to protect their faith; so that many who before were
afraid to own any correspondence with them, now freely administered large
Succors. And Archagathus, as they expected, to keep up his Fathers fame, was
forced to break his Army into as many pieces as might obviate the enterprises
of his Enemies: one whereof was to secure the Seacoast; another was commanded
by Aeschrion; and He himself, leaving a guard at Tunis, marched with a third.

Thus all Africa was filled with arms, and now raised in expectation of a
speedy issue. Hanno, that commanded the Punick Forces in the Inland
expedition, meets with Aeschrion, and drawing him into an Ambuscade routs him,
and kills him with four thousand foot and two hundred horse; those that escaped
sled five hundred furlongs, till they came to Archagathus. Himilcon, that was
sent into the upper Libya, waits at a certain City for Eumachus, who was
returning with his Army heavy with plunder. The Greeks no sooner came near the
Carthaginian, but they offered him battle. Himilcon refuses not, but knowing
their prosperous greediness had made them proud and unwary, intends to assault
them by a stratageme; which proved as happy in the event as it had been in the
project. For leaving part of his Army in the Town, with orders to sally forth
when he began to fly, and to charge the Enemy in the rear when they pursued
him, with the other part he marches forth, and fights the Greeks near their own
Camp; whence after a small opposition be flies, as if he were worsted.
Eumachus, as confident of the Victory, (though he could see little reason for
the Enemies so speedy flight, and therefore might have suspected some unusual
arts) without any order follows them. Which being seen by that party which was
left in the Town, they immediately issued forth with a great noise, by that
giving notice to Himilcon to stop his flight; and so terrified the Sicilians,
that they being charged on all sides, and daunted with the surprise, presently
fled. But not being able to recover their Camp, the way to it being intercepted
by the Africans, they drew up on a neighboring Hill, where there was no water:
where their Enemies besieging them, they were partly by thirst and partly by
the sword almost all consumed, so that of eight thousand foot, scarce thirty,
and of eight hundred horse, not forty escaped to carry the sad news to
Archagathus, a Person too insolent in his Prosperity with any equality of mind
to bear these great Losses. He having this intelligence, draws back all his
forces to Tunis, gathers up the relics of the beaten Parties, recalls the
other that he had sent out, and fortifies himself, till his Father should come
to relieve him, to whom he had sent this afflicting news.

These great Losses were more dreadful in the consequences; for most of the
Confederates that were the friends of the Syracusans Fortune, not of his Cause,
soon withdrew themselves, and fled farther from his ruins: only some few that
did more fear the Punick Revenge then affect the Friendship of the Greeks,
stayed till they might reconcile themselves to the Carthaginians by a more
seasonable and treacherous Defection. The Enemy also drew up all their forces
close to his Camp, both to heighten his necessities and increase his sears.
Himilcon besieged him so as he could not forage abroad; and Artabas, that had
the charge of the Seacoast, came up so close, that he cut off all hopes of
relief by Sea. So that the Army not being able to break out, nor having
Provisions to sustain them within, raged among themselves, and languished by
their own force through want of action. Terror, Famine and Sedition filled the
whole Camp; and the baffled Soldiers, as is usual in such distresses, referred
their Miseries not to their own Baseness, but to the Vices and Weakness of
their Commander. His former Cruelty made him suspected, that he betrayed those
Soldiers to the Enemies sword, who would have formerly bathed theirs in his
blood for the murder of Lyciscus. Afflicted spirits are capable of any
jealousy. Though it is probable he had no other guilt then the want of a
Commander's Virtues. For by the defects and Vices of a Ruler the most
prosperous condition of a Society may be overthrown; as by his Virtues the most
oppressed may be easily raised: and there is nothing either good or bad in a
Commonwealth, which may not be altered or alleviated by the Virtues of the
Prince.

Agathocles hearing the desperate condition of his Army in Africa, prepares to
hasten thither, to apply some Remedies, and therefore commends his affairs of
Sicily, which Dinocrates's good conduct of the Free League had extremely
disturbed, to the care and fortune of Leptines. And having gotten as many
Soldiers as he could aboard seventeen Vessels, he waited for an opportunity to
get out of the Haven, that was then blocked up by thirty Carthaginian Ships:
which was made more prosperous and easy then he could have hoped; for at the
same time there had gotten into the Haven by night eighteen Ships which he had
hired of the Tuscans. Their fortunate coming raised the Tyrant's courage to a
resolution of fighting the Enemy. To perform it he commands the Tuscans to
continue in the Haven, till he had drawn the Africans in pursuit after him. So
making out with full Sails, the Carthaginians made up toward him, and the
Tuscans after them. Agathocles, when he saw the Tuscans near the Enemy, turns
back his Vessels upon them also: which unexpected assault both behind and
before did so break their spirits, that they thought not of fighting, but of
flight; five of their Ships being immediately taken, and the Admiral also ready
to be boarded: who to prevent the ignominy and misery of Captivity, presently
killed himself. An act more rash then stout. For it is the temper of a brave
Soul always to hope: which if he had done, he had escaped, as did his Ship,
which a brisk wind brought off from the Enemy without any farther loss.

This success at Sea made the passage to Africa safe, opened the Trade of
Syracuse, which was very sensible of her wants, and so raised the Tyrants hopes
in his Fortune, that he designs another attempt upon his Enemies at Land.
Therefore he commands Leptines forth to wast and forage about all the Regions
of those Cities that were at fewd with him, but especially of Agrigentum; where
he was informed that the late defeat given to Xenodicus had broken no less his
credit then his force; his Adversity having heightened the clamours of an
opposite Faction against him, which the envy of his Prosperity had first
formed. If Leptines therefore could draw him forth to fight, the Tyrant
promised himself an assured Victory over a factious Enemy. For where the
Soldiers distrust their General, and he likewise is displeased with them, his
Orders are disputed, and their Obedience given according to their own counsels:
Every one will be ready to command and advise, and none to execute. It is the
mutual confidence which begets resolution in all parties, and draws success
along with it. Leptines acts according to his instructions, and by fire and
sword wasting the Regions of Agrigentum, forces into the Town many sad
informations where the Enemy was. Xenodicus, whom his former fortune and the
present odium had made more wary, did forbear any attempts to restrain the fury
of the provoking Enemy, nor would he lead his forces to another trial of
fortune with those that were so lately their Conquerours, preferring safe
counsels with Reason, to rash which only Chance could make prosperous. He
would not hazard the Safety and Liberty of his City for the spoil of the
Country, nor gratify his Enemies so far as to satisfy their expectation by
accepting of a Battle. For he considered that though the Number of his men were
not inferior to the Enemy, yet their Courage was, and the Softness of men bred
on Stalls and Shops, not to be compared with the hardiness and experience of
such that were acquainted with the toils of War. But being pressed on by the
Factions of his own Citizens, and continual reproaches of Baseness and
Treachery from his own Army, which when it has laid aside the modesty of
discipline, is extremely impatient of not fighting, he was forced to be the
companion of other men's Rashness; and therefore leading out his Army, he did
engage the Enemy, and was as soon routed. For those that were so fierce before
the encounter, were fearful in the dangers of it, and being more fit for a
Sedition then for a defense of their City, they soon fled, leaving behind them
of their fellow-Citizens five hundred foot and fifty horse. Xenedicus with the
loss of this Battle lost his Country also; for being continually assaulted with
the accusations of his Enemies, he was forced to leave his own City, and by a
voluntary exile planted himself at Gela.

These two Victories could not yet make the Tyrant secure, but he designs a
more base and bloody upon his own Vassals, who he doubted in his absence might
open their gates to receive in Dinocrates. Thus wicked men always fear, and
expect what they are conscious they do deserve: and though some Tyrants may be
safe for a while from the punishment of their Crimes, yet none can ever be
secure. To provide therefore against such practices, he projects how he may
find out and murder those who were most averse to his Government. In order
whereunto he appoints a public Sacrifice and Feast, in pretense of a Religious
gratitude for those two Victories, that so the public Jollity and excess of
Wine might take off that guard which the Vassals of a Tyrant should observe and
set upon their words; and provokes them to a greater liberty of speech. By this
means he should more indear the Rabble unto him, who commonly receive such
public Feasts as the base price of their Slavery, and esteem such Rejoicings
among the blessings of Peace, and as the adequate wages for their many years of
Bondage. And besides, he should discover the minds of such as had freer souls,
and their inclinations toward him. His Preparations were answerable to his
Design, and the whole City being resolved into Mirth, to provoke them to a
greater freedom of speech, himself lays aside his Imperial Vestments, plays
the part of a Mimick, and was profuse in Drollery, jearing some of his company,
and acting their most ridiculous postures. So that he did tickle the Vulgar
rout as much as a Stage Play, or the tricks of Jugiers. And it was usual with
him at other times, to come into the public Conventions and Assemblies without
any guard, and there to provoke the laughter of the people by trivial and
plebeian jeasts, and by mocking and personating some of those that were about
him. But at this time he made use of all his arts; and the more to excite the
petulancy of others, he fell a jearing himself. For taking up in his hands a
golden Goblet, he told the people that he left not off his Potter's trade till
he found the way of making such Pots as those. Glorying thus in his low
beginnings, because it boasted the subtilties of him that had raised himself
from such an abject depth to so great an height; or to show how patient he
would be of another's liberty in scoffing him, that did make sport with his own
Infamy; or, which is most likely, it was in him as in all that have sinned
beyond shame, Ignominy is their last pleasure. So that he was never moved nor
did blush at that which was the fortune of his birth, when he gloried in the
wickedness of his life: For when he lay at the Siege of a great Town, the
Soldiers in the Garrison (as it is usual to extimulate their adversaries with
reproaches, and the Vulgar wits are pleased with petulant scoffs to vex those
whom they cannot strike) would call Agathocles Potter, and Kilneman, and ask
him when his trade would furnish him to pay his Soldiers. He would unmoved
reply, that he would do it as soon as he had taken their Town. With such
pastime did he entertain his guests.

These tricks of the Tyrant were variously interpreted, according to the
humors of the Spectatours. Some that were of a credulous and slavish temper
took them for the evidences of a Popular spirit, and a Civil habit of mind, and
comparing him with Dionysius, he seemed more like a just and lawful Prince
(whose Right and Innocence is his guard, and who uses the ministry of men for
Majesty, not Security) then a Tyrant, to whom Distrust is his greatest and most
singular defense. For Dionysius was so afraid of giving any opportunity to the
people's hate for revenge, that he suffered the hair of his head and beard to
grow to an indecent length, because he did not dare to trust his throat to the
razour of a Barber; and when it came to be troublesome, he singed it off with a
Candle. But this his Successor did seem to them to have more noble arts and
freer ways to secure himself and his Empire. Others, who remembered his former
Cruelty and Pride, and were acquainted with the arts of Tyrants, did look upon
these present practices as very ominous. For Usurpers never seek to please the
people but while they are binding the yoke upon their necks, nor are they ever
kind but when they are about to kill. And as the Tragical Poets never bring the
Gods on the Stage, but to make some dismal Catastrophe; so Princes when they
descend so low as to practice upon the people by becoming their mockery, some
horrid scene is to be acted by them. They esteemed not his appearing in public
without a Guard to be any effect of a Virtuous management of his Power, but
rather an insolent triumph over their Liberty, that it might appear he had so
debased their spirits, as that they did not dare to assault a naked Tyrant. By
these and the like discourses every one discovered his judgment, which
Agathocles either by his own Observation gathered, or by the information of his
Spies, persons whose baseness was esteemed beneath caution, whom he had
dispersed about among the people, to provoke and watch others to their Ruin.
And the number of those in whom he found any footsteps left of their dying
Liberty was about five hundred: whom together with some other of the most
eminent Syracusans he invites to another Feast; and by his Mercenaries murders
them, mingling their blood with the wine. Besides the deliverance from so many
supposed Enemies, and the seizure of their Wealth, the Tyrant supposed he had
gotten another advantage, that by this means he had raised such a Distrust and
Jealousy among the Citizens, (which is one of the most especial Arts of
Tyrants) that they would not dare to trust one another with any secret practice
against him; who had such diligent Observers and so exact Informers, that would
betray the most simple speeches of a Feast and Mirth to their inhumane Master.
By this appears the curse of Heaven upon that miserable people who are subject
to an Usurping Tyrant; who, conscious of the greatness of his own Crimes, and
that no condition can alleviate the public hatred toward him, will no less in
his joyful then sad times practice their Miseries. To secure that condition
which is prosperous as well as to prevent an approaching Ruin, still
habituates him to murder the innocent and oppress the miserable; either his
Pride or his Fear driving him to inhumane courses.

After this bloody Feast the Tyrant together with his Son Heraclidas hastens to
Africa, where he finds his Army half famished, all filled with confusion and
despair, and capable of nothing but fears. To raise up their Spirits, and
relieve their Wants, he would have led them out to some action; but there was
no way either for Victory or Plenty, but by first breaking the Punick Forces
which had blocked up all passes, in such sure defenses as were impossible for
so profligated an Army to overcome. He therefore applies himself to all those
arts which might tempt the Enemy from their Fortifications to give him Battle
in the Field, and presents them with many advantages. But the Carthaginians
that abounded with whatsoever was necessary, cheerful in the fresh remembrance
of their late Victories, and faithful among themselves, would not hazard a
Battle, to overcome that Enemy who, pressed by wants and weakened with
Seditions, would fall by their delays. Agathocles when he saw all his attempts
made the scorn of his Enemies, that the credit of his Arms was now fallen into
contempt, that Victuals did more and more fail in his Camp; to recover his
glory and recall the spirits of his Soldiers, he was resolved to try rash
counsels, since good advices succeeded not, and he would force the Enemy in
their Trenches. Therefore sick with delay, and impatient of hope, he leads out
his Army, which consisted of twelve thousand Greeks, as many Gauls and Tuscans,
ten thousand Libyans, who were of no settled faith to either party, and with
these he assaults the Carthaginian Camp. Though their impatience for their
wants, and their dejected spirits were not to be allaied or raised by any
charms of Courage, nor would admit any formal speech; yet did he, as briefly
as he could, while he drew them out, desire them to Remember their former and
later Victories; that they now stood upon the theater of their Glory, and
trampled upon the ashes and bones of the Punick Armies; therefore now they
should go with courage, and for ever cut off that faithless and conquered
Enemy, who did confess themselves their vassals, by not daring to look upon
them in an open Field. They were now not so much to think of a Battle, as to
execute revenge; and that by taking those despicable Prisoners within their own
Tents, they did scale the Walls of Carthage, put an end to that tedious War,
and reap the harvest of all their toils. With these sick hopes he led them on
to the assault, which the Carthaginians were prepared to receive; and having
the advantages of ground, of their works, and the excess in number, did easily
repulse the Sicilians, who a long time maintained their Charge and followed
their attempt, but all in vain. Agathocles seeing no hopes, drew off his
starved Legions to their own Tents, but was pursued by the Carthaginians, who
spent all their fury upon the Greeks and the other Strangers, but spared the
Libyans, that by such an indulgence they might be invited to a revolt. They
continued the execution as long as the day and their anger lasted, having
killed three thousand of the Enemy; the rest with sorrow and fear got safe to
their Camp, where they found the same wants they left, but made more
intolerable by their wounds and shame. The loss of this day and the terrors of
the following night made the Tyrant quite desperate, and drove him out of
Africa.

The night following this Battle was unquietly spent in either Camp. The
Africans proud of the return of their Fortune gave themselves up to Feasts and
Sacrifices, and with Songs and triumphant noises made the Valleys and
neighboring Woods to resound their mirth. And, not to provoke their Gods, in
an inhumane gratitude they offered up the choicest and comeliest of their
Prisoners in a sacrifice to them. While these abominable Victimes were
consuming on the Altar, a strong wind suddenly arises, and carries the flame to
the hangings of their holy Tent, which stood next to the Altar; from thence the
flame spread it self to the Generall's Tent, and afterward caught hold of
those Tents of the Officers that were nearest to it. This unexpected and
violent chance filled all with confusion; and many of the Soldiers who
endeavored to quench the flame, or to remove their arms and luggage, were
consumed by the fire: for the wind growing higher, had spread it upon the
Soldiers huts, which being made of dry earth and thatched with reed, were soon
on a flame, so that it became stronger then the Army could master, and many
were intercepted in it. Heaven as it were exacting revenge for their Cruelty to
the poor Captives, making them perish in those impious flames which they had
kindled for others. Those that had gotten out to the sides of the Camp, and
from the fire, were incountred with another fear, not so real, but as full of
danger. For the Libyans that were of Agathocles's party, being resolved to
leave him with his fortune, and were about five thousand, had just at the time
that the fire began, forsaken the Camp at Tunis, and were coming to surrender
themselves to the Carthaginians. These being discovered by the Scouts and
Guards, were conceived to be the whole Army of the Enemy coming to assault
their Camp by night, and in this confusion by the Fire, which their present
fears made them imagine he might kindle. This news being spread about the whole
Camp, every one thought the Enemy had gotten into the Trenches, and that they
were all betrayed; so that no way of safety was presented unto them, but only
flight: which being done without any order or respect had to their Commanders,
was so confused, that some for have broke their necks down the hill upon which
their Camp was pitched; others were angry at such as stood in their way, and
through the darkness of the night not able to discover whether they were
Friends or Foes, fell foul one upon another. In this darkness, amazement and
confusion, there were many slain, and more wounded; and the number of those
that perished was accounted five thousand. They that had escaped all dangers
but their fears got safe to Carthage, and filled the whole City with terror,
relating the Army to be quite broken, and mingling some truth with their
affrighted apprehensions, made all things desperate, yet very uncertain.
Therefore they set open their Gates to receive their flying Soldiers, yet
carefully watching lest the Enemy should fall into the Town with them. But the
day discovered their errors, and mitigated their fears, though it increased
their grief and jealousies, when they saw the dead bodies of their Friends, and
the ashes of their Tents and goods: they could not conceive it a chance, or
refer it to Providence, but doubted whether it were not some open Enemy or some
false Citizen that had occasioned so much Ruin, it looked so like a designed
Mischief.

On the other side, in the Sicilian Camp the remembrance of the overthrow had
composed all to an horrid sorrow, they had weak and faint fires, a silence like
to that of Tombs and Charnel-houses, their few words were low, and without any
comfort, the groans of the wounded were the loudest noise, their thoughts
various and distracted, walking about their Trenches like men that could not
sleep, rather then as such that desired to watch. Their very quiet was
dreadful, and presently were they deluded with as vain fears as those that had
affrighted the Enemy. For when the revolting Libyans did not dare to venture
farther in the surrendering of themselves to the Carthaginians, because they saw
the Fire, and heard that confused noise in their Camp, they returned back
toward their former quarters in the Sicilian Camp. But their motion being
discovered by the Sentinels and Scouts, who by reason of the darkness of the
night could not discern what they were, the terror of the past day's overthrow
suggested that they were the victorious Carthaginians coming to give a Camisade
to their Army. This Intelligence was carried to the Tyrant, and the Alarm
suddenly passed over the whole Camp. Every one was distracted what course to
take. Some were to make good the Works; others were for drawing forth: the most
still contradicted the rest, without prescribing what else was to be done. And
as it happens in unhappy and disturbed counsels, those things seemed best which
they had neither time nor convenience to act; the continual messages of the
affrighted Scouts did disturb their resolutions, and every unusual accident
altered and confounded their determinations. By this time the flame of the
Carthaginian Tents grew more conspicuous, and the exceeding noise which their
fears made conveyed them also to the Sicilian Camp. Who then thought the Enemy
was so near, that it was in vain to deliberate, but all were set upon flight.
So impetuously rushing out of their Tents, they leaped over their Trenches
which way soever their blind fear did direct them: the noise which their own
have made did persuade them it was the coming on of the Enemies into the Camp,
and this doubled their have, noise and fears. And each one laying hold upon
another, either to force them out of the way, or to help themselves forward by
their neighbors speed, were conceived as apprehending enemies, and presently
were killed by their own fellows. Some were so madded with their fears, that
they knew not which way they ran, nor which to choose, and driving upon the
returning Libyans, fell to fight with one another as with the Foe. This hurry
continued all the night, all which time their terrors and despairs admitted no
deliberation or counsel; till the day discovered the mockery of Fortune, and
that they had lost four thousand men in this confusion.

The Occurrences of this night did upbraid the weakness of an arm of flesh,
when two such potent Armies were routed and driven out of their strengths by a
vain and empty Fear, and put to fly when none did pursue; and when either
party did fear, they were mutually feared. Prudence does sometimes alleviate
the strokes of Fortune, and a wise management may be good Discipline so confirm
the minds of an Army, that premeditated designs and projects of terror may
become weak and contemptible even to the surprised. But a coincidence of so
many various accidents in such a juncture of time neither can the weak sight of
Humanity foresee, nor possibly prevent.

The next day, though the light had shown the Greeks the vanity of their fears,
yet no less confusion remained on their spirits; they were ashamed of their
frights, and unwilling to return to the place of their terror and ignominy,
they walked up and down single and heavy, their eyes cast down, weary of
company, and afraid to be alone, yet fuller of heaviness then shame. Agathocles
perceived this horror, and thought it no less then madness to oppose such
dejected persons to the Carthaginians that were insolent with their Victory,
the memory of which did with the day restore them fully from the affrightments
of the night. Besides, he found all the Libyans and his confederate Africans
had left his hungry Tents and declining Fortune. In those that were left he
could have no confidence, all being concerned either in the murder of Lyciscus
or Ophellas; therefore could not hope that either among themselves, much less
with him, they could have any agreement, which is the only comfort and
alleviation to the conquered. These things considered, the Tyrant was resolved
to temporize with his Fortune, and as he fled from the dangers of Sicily to the
coasts of Africa, so now he would save himself in the Island from the dangers
of the Continent. But then occurred to his thoughts the impossibility of
withdrawing his Army with him. He had neither time nor convenience of Vessels
for so great a charge, nor was the Sea clearer from the triumphs of the Enemy
then was the Land. For they had recruited their Navy, and recovered the empire
of the Ocean, so that without their good leave he could neither stay nor fly.
To make Peace with them in such a low condition of his affairs, was the greater
difficulty; for they were so elevated with their present success, that they
knew not how to temper their Felicity by reasonable Conditions to the Author
of their Troubles, and had already threatened such examples of Severity to the
first Invaders of Africa, as should terrify the future Ages from their
imitation.

Wracked and perplexed with these affrighting considerations, not once
entertaining the generous thoughts, that Adversities are born with greater
glory then deserted; For such are the comforts of unhappy Virtues and innocent
Souls; he at last resolved to shift for himself, and to carry only with him
his Son Heraclidas and some few privado's, ministers of his Lusts, and leave
the rest to the malignity of their Destinies and the Cruelty of Carthage. He
pitied not his eldest Son Archagathus; for his haughty soul and wicked attempt
upon his Fathers Bed, made the old Tyrant jealous lest if he were preserved
longer, he might extend his furious Lust to his Throne, and practice upon his
Life. For knowing him to be his own Son, he concluded him no less Ambitious and
Perfidious then he was Lustful. Which shows the Inquietude of Tyrants, who when
they have murdered all Virtue in others, and by many Crimes secured themselves
from the hatred of strangers, yet want not jealousies of their own Children,
and are affrighted with dangers from their own bowels; whose good and bad fame
are equally dangerous to their cursed Parents. For if by honest arts they
reconcile the affections of the people, they are then esteemed too popular to
live under a Tyranny. And the delays which their Father's lives interpose to
their conceived hopes, are judged too importunate to be born by such as are
able to cut them off. If the evil dispositions of the Sire are traduced to the
Soul of the Son, then do they load the aged Tyrant with more public hatred, or
terrify him with fears of practicing that on him which he has done on others.
And thus was it with Agathocles, who would at once rid himself of his Son and
Fears.

Archagathus, that knew his Father's nature, and that all Tyrants blot out
every impress of Nature, having no affections but for themselves, was very
watchful over his actions, and having some suspicions of the design, he
communicates his Jealousies to some Captains of the Army, and conspires to
intercept his slight. The prodigious baseness of the act easily raised
indignation enough to hinder it. That a General should betray his Army, and
surrender them up to a provoked Enemy, was a Crime not to be paralleled.
Archagathus thought the injustice done to him more full of Cruelty, that he who
had ventured his life for his Father's Empire, had been a partner in all his
Flights and Miseries, should now be left alone to the Danger, whilst his
Brother of lesser merits must be the only companion of Safety. Therefore more
angry that he had not his part in the Villainy then at the Villainy it self, he
watched to hinder it, desiring to be saved or perish together. So that neither
of these Monsters had any natural affection either of a Father or a Son, but
either would have provided for his own Safety, though by the blood and infamy
of the other. When the Tyrant was ready to take shipping, his Son gives
Intelligence thereof to his accomplices; who meeting together came all to the
Tyrant, Upbraided him of his baese purposes, and charged him not to stir from
the place he was in. Then lest he should first practice upon the Soldiers, and
persuade them any thing to their own ruin, (which is no hard task on an unwary
multitude) they presently published and aggravated the treachery of the Tyrant,
that he would have left his Army without any hopes of succor, order, or means
for their safety; whom he had tempted to follow his capricioes, and satisfy
his thirst of power, through such numerous Dangers, and objected to so bloody
an Enemy, he would now barbarously sell, to redeem himself, neglecting the
lives and liberties of those whose carcasses, if dead, he was bound to have
buried.

The Soldiers when they heard this singular example of Wickedness, and
considered the consequences, That none of them should return to his Wife and
Children, Country and Friends, but like an headless trunk, having no Commander,
without life or name, in a strange Land must be the mockery of their Enemies,
were amazed, and trembled no less then if the Camp had been taken, and that
they were now under the yoke. But then Indignation called them from that
Stupidity, and in a great fury they hasted to seize upon the Tyrant, whom they
presently clapped in chains. Then being without any Commander, not knowing whom
to choose or whom to trust, when they had found such Perfidiousness in him whom
they had obliged by so long and dangerous an obedience, they were distracted
with exceeding fears. For a Multitude without a Governor is rash, fearful, and
mad. These were increased by the approaching night, and by a strange and
uncertain report, that the Enemy were coming on to assault the Camp. The care
of the present Danger renewed the memory of the former, and they were frighted
almost to madness, and (as it uses to be in such Confusions) every one hastily
snatches up his arms, and without any order marches out of the Camp
distractedly, leaving their defenses, cursing and railing upon their faithless
Leader, the perfidious Agathocles. The Guard that was upon the Tyrant, no less
amazed then the rest, hearing him named, and imagining that the multitude did
call upon them to bring their Prisoner forth, did immediately lead him into the
midst of the Army laden with chains. This sudden spectacle did strangely
affect the minds of the multitude. Some were moved with Pity and Reverence of
him who had so long commanded them. [For great emploiments leave a luster even
upon that person that has lost them, and Majesty does accompany those in their
distresses whom Fortune has before proposed to admiration. And sometimes, if
they be virtuous persons, they, like the Sun, appear greatest at their setting;
and the refraction of a moist cloud of tears does serve to enlarge their
Greatness. Marius's glory in his former commands could not be stifled in the
Dungeon at Minturnae, but once more overcame the Cimbrian Slave that was
appointed to be his Executioner. Mithridates's imprisonment had not so disarmed
him, but that the authority of his looks and the memory of his former Empire
did affright the Gaul that was sent to murder him; till by his own hands he
confirmed the trembling Slave to execute the wicked commands of his perfidious
Son. Though Agathocles had no Virtues that deserved Pity, yet his fortunes did
excite a Reverence.] Others moved with the fear of the Enemy, and hope of his
Conduct, joined with the rest, and together cried out, that they should take
off his Chains, and set him free.

This unexpected mercy and deliverance, together with the miserable sight of
the Army's fears and confusions, would have wrought a commiseration in any
breast that had had the least sense of humanity, to have provided for the
common safety, or obliged to the same fate. But Perfidiousness acknowledges no
Merits, and every Tyrant does abjure Gratitude and Justice. Therefore
Agathocles was no sooner out of his Chains, but while the Army was yet in
confusion, and none at leisure to observe him, he makes have to the shore. And
because he had before endangered his own preservation by endeavoring to save
one of his Sons, he now hates that natural Affection, and leaves them both to
endure the punishments of his Villainy, and with some few of his servants gets
into a Ship, and undiscovered sails away. The Soldiers hearing of his escape,
seize upon both his Sons, with their blood to satisfy for their Father's
Crimes. Archagathus thought to stop the execution, by asking Arcesilaus, that
was the Tyrant's friend, whom grief and indignation had now made the forwardest
to revenge, What Agathocles would do to his Children that should murder his
Sons. The Syracusan answered, it was enough for him that his Children did live
some time after Agathocles's were slain. And therefore to reap this comfort, he
speedily sheaths his sword in Archagathus's body. Heraclidas was killed by
those that had been the Soldiers of Ophellas. The Greeks observed in this
execution the exact Justice of Heaven, that in the same month and on the same
day that Agathocles had contrary to all faith and rites of Hospitality murdered
Ophellas, and seized upon his Army, did he lose his own Army, and had both his
Sons slain. Providence like a just Lawgiver exacting double punishment for so
great a Crime; for he that had wickedly killed one Friend, had two Sons justly
destroyed.

Thus having satisfied their Revenge, they provide for their Safety; and
therefore choosing new Officers, by them they treat with the Carthaginians, and
conclude a Peace upon these Articles. That the Sicilians should deliver up all
those places which had been taken in Africa. That for the surrender they should
receive three hundred talents. That such of them as would serve the State of
Carthage should be taken into pay. That those who desired to return to Sicily
should be transported thither, and have houses and places to live in assigned
to them at Soluns, which was a City of their Dominion in the Island. This
Composition was faithfully observed to those that did submit unto it; but such
as were left in Garrisons, and would not surrender, vainly hoping the deceitful
Tyrant would shortly relieve them, were soon reduced by force. The Captains
whereof they crucified, but yoked the common Soldiers like beasts, to plough
that ground, and repair by their labors that Country, which they had wasted by
their arms. This was the issue of the African War, which had continued four
years; all which time Carthage with undaunted courage and various success
maintained her Liberty, and labored to preserve her Empire against a subtle,
industrious and bloody Tyrant. And Agathocles had the trial of the vicissitudes
of all humane affairs, having a long time been the terror of Africa: He had
broken many Armies, ruined great Cities, depopulated large Countries, moistened
the parching Sands with blood, humbled the Pride of Carthage, and scarce left
them any thing but their own walls; yet was twice a Prisoner to his own
Soldiers, and in danger of death from his own Army; and at last blotted out
all the honor of his Achievements by a most cursed Perfidiousness, and too
great a desire of Life, deserting a brave Army, betraying his own Sons,
ignominiously flying with one Ship and few attendants, trembling in the memory
of his Chains and the terrors of his Enemies; as if he had been designed to be
the example not only of the Crimes, but also of the Punishments of a Tyrant.

Stripped of all his forces, with shame and fury Agathocles lands in Sicily;
where, like a dying Viper, his last bites were most fierce: Ruin and
destruction of others being the last pleasures of a falling Tyrant. And as if
the air and soil of Africa (that is fertile of Monsters) had made him more
Monster then he was before, that miserable Island felt a sharper fit of Cruelty
when he was thus half destroyed, then when he was in his more flourishing
fortune. He seemed now not so greedy of the Rewards of Wickedness, as delighted
with Wickedness it self; not being more angry that he had lost his own, then
that he had not got another's substance, or that every one had not lost as well
as he. The first that felt his Inhumanity was the City of Aegesta, toward
which he leads out those Forces he had, and demands a contribution so heavy as
would wholly have impoverished the City, though it was great and populous, and
had ten thousand families in it. This Injustice did so exasperate the
Aegestans, that they often met among themselves to complain of such usage. That
though they were in Confederacy with him, and so should be willing to relieve
the necessities of their Associate; yet were they not his Slaves, that he
should conceive all their goods to be his own. They acknowledged that a League
with a more potent party was but a kind of Subjection; yet were they not so
absolutely to obey, as if they had been conquered by him. The Tyrant was not
ignorant of these complaints which their Grief made too frequent, and the hopes
of Moderation from a Confederate made too bold. For it is safer to resist then
to complain of the Injustice of a Tyrant; and it is more dangerous in such
counsels to be understood then to attempt.

Therefore while their thoughts and anger languish'd in complaints only, he
thought it was too great a liberty to be grieved at his commands; so he
pretends that they were forming a Conspiracy against him, and declares that he
will be avenged in the Ruin of them and their City. And because he knew them
to be innocent, according to the practices of Tyrants, he used them more
cruelly, that others might conjecture there was some great Crime by the
bitterness of the Punishment. Those that were the poorest of the people, he
leads out to the river Scamander, and upon the very banks, as if he had had a
frolic to color the streams with blood, he cuts all their throats. The
poverty of these men made their passage out of life less irksome. But those
that were supposed to be rich he kills with most exquisite Tortures, to make
them confess what and where their Money was; and to make the terror greater, he
had his several Engines of Torment. Some he breaks upon the wheel; others he
bound upon battering Rams, then forcing them off he dashed them in pieces;
others he makes to die by degrees, and forces death through every member: First
he cuts off their Legs, and as their Confessions were slow or quick, or
answerable to his ravenous expectation, so he proceeds to the rest, pulling off
their Hands, putting out their Eyes; and every degree to death was the more
sharp, that they might feel themselves dying, and denied them the comfort of a
speedy death. Besides, that he might outgoe all examples of Cruelty that ever
the world saw before, in imitation of Phalaris's Bull, he made a brazen Bed
proportionable to the body of a man, wherein the Wretch that was to be tortured
being closed with a grate, and having fire under it, was exceedingly tormented:
and by this Engine the Tyrant could feed his eyes by beholding the tortures;
and it was a great part of the misery of the Sufferer, to be seen, and see such
an horrid Villain triumph in their pains, and urge their Torments. It is some
modesty in a Tyrant, if he look not upon that wickedness which he commands. As
for the Matrons and rich Widows, he broke their Feet with burning Pincers,
pulled off their Breasts, and upon the Loins of Women with child laid bricks to
force them to cast their birth. Besides those that did die at the will of the
Tyrant, who would rather perish by another's wickedness then by their own,
there were many others that scorned the ministry of such cursed hands to set
at liberty their free Souls. Of which some burnt themselves, Wives and
Children, together with their Wealth, that it might not be the prey of the
Tyrant. Others embracing the Altars of their Gods, invoking their Justice and
Revenge as the last comfort of dying men, did there let out their own blood.
And others went and hanged themselves, that they might escape greater miseries.
So that by these several ways there was an end put to that flourishing City.
The whole face of the Town was ghastly even to the spoilers; but it was
impossible for any thing to check their Covetousness, who in the sad Ruins
sought for the Wealth of the destroyed owners: and to increase the gain of his
Crimes, he sold the Children and Youth of either sex to the Italians for Slaves.

The City being thus depopulated, he appoints it as a refuge for such desperate
and needy persons as should desert his Enemies, and come under his subjection.
And lastly, he changes the name of the place from Aegesta to Dicaeopolis, i. e.
the City of Justice. This he did either to profane the sacred name of Justice,
and show his Contempt of those eternal Laws of Right and Wrong, by attributing
so glorious a title to so horrid a Crime; which is the last pleasure and
delight of those that are prodigiously wicked. So Polybius relates of one
Ditaearchus an Aetolian, who being made by Philip of Macedonia General in an
Expedition to break the League that was between the Islands called Cyclades and
the Cities of Hellespont, (a design so apparently abominable, that the
Undertaker could give no honest account of it) to show how his soul delighted
in the greatest Crimes, and to defy both the Gods and men, before he took
shipping, he built two Altars, one to Impiety, and another to Injustice, and
sacrificed to them as to his Deities. But the Historian observes, that in those
cruel tortures wherewith he ended his days, he met with the provoked justice
both of God and Man. And so also did Agathocles, for from a brand plucked out
of the fire of this City was he and his whole Family consumed. Or herein the
Syracusan intended no more then to practice the usual arts of Tyrants, who to
divert the Hatred of the present, and the Infamy among future ages, are wont to
put the specious names of Religion and Justice upon their most detestable
actions. So Tacitus observes of Tiberius, that he would put upon the new Crimes
which his Jealousy or Covetousness objected to others, those names which the
Laws had appropriated to great Offenses, and so gild his Cruelty and Rapine
with the titles of Justice. And as we have seen our modern Tyrants style their
attempts to ruin Piety the Propagation of Religion. Such Cheats indeed do for
a time quiet the Vulgar spirits, who more stick upon names then things: yet
when discovered, do so much the more increase their Hatred, as they upbraided
and abused their Ignorance. And the nobler and more discerning minds think
their miseries under Tyrants the greater, by the injuries that are done to
Virtue and Goodness.

The next Tragedy was acted at Syracuse: for while Agathocles was busy in
these Butcheries, he receives the news of the death of his Sons. He grieved not
so much for them, who he suspected were too near his rivals of Empire, but
feared lest the kindred and friends of the Soldiers whom he had betrayed in
Africa would be excited by their Example, to attempt that upon the old Wolf,
which they had executed upon the Cubs. Therefore by a private messenger he
commands his Brother Antander speedily to murder the Friends of all those that
had followed him into Africa. Antander, who was of a base temper, and who
accounted Cruelty for Valor, did exactly perform the command, and endeavored
to outvy his Brother in blood. For he gathered together for the slaughter, not
only those of their Kindred who were of an age fit to take revenge, but even
their aged Parents, that were so near the grave as that they had long lost
their Senses: and the sucking Children, that were not capable to know the
difference betwixt Slavery and Freedom, the Women also, that could not be
feared to overthrow the Tyranny, yet if they had any relation to those whom
they desired to grieve, were all driven to the Seashore. Where that
promiscuous multitude, (that forced Pity from every eye but those of their
Butchers,) while they did expect the stroke of death, did wash that place with
their tears first, that afterward was to be polluted with their blood; and by
their cries and supplications drowned both the noise of the City and the Waves.
Thus tortured with the expectation of Death, and the horrid spectacle of their
murdered Friends who preceded in the execution, they had at last all their
Throats cut, and their bodies were thrown into the Sea; which for a great space
was colored with blood, and the marks of the Cruelty were carried to
far-distant Coasts. And, which was most inhumane, none dared to bewail the
miserable, nor bury those carcasses which the waves refused to hide, but cast
back on the shore; lest they should be thought of kin to the murdered, and be
forced to the same destiny: so that the Commerce of humane Nature was broke,
and Cruelty grew the higher from Commiseration. Upon such actions as these does
the security of Usurpers depend; so that those that have had any sense of
Virtue or Humanity, do rather choose to perish in an obscure Privacy, then aim
at Power that must be obtained and preserved by so much Impiety, and so great
Misery to mankind.

Syracuse and Aegesta being thus made sensible of the Tyrant's return, who like
a dismal Plague brought death and destruction wheresoever he went; he goes to
all the other Cities that were either under his Dominion, or in Confederacy
with him, and by extorting Money from them, taking off the suspected, and
re-inforcing his Garrisons, he labors to keep them from a Revolt, which either
his Wickedness or his contemptible Overthrow might excite them unto. But yet he
could not prevent the effect of misfortunes, which shakes the faith and cancels
the obligations that are between wicked persons. For Pasiphilus, either by the
inconstancy of his nature, or fearing his Master's ruin, and willing therefore
to provide for his own safety, did revolt to Dinocrates; and, as a pledge of
his faith, delivered up to him all those strong holds and forces which he
commanded for the Tyrant. This did so strangely affect and in jealous
Agathocles, and present to his fancy such terrible consequences, that mad with
fear lest Pasiphilus might have more Accomplices, he thought of quitting the
Tyranny, and therefore presently sends to treat with Dinocrates, and propounds
to him these conditions of Peace. That he would part with his Kingdom, and
restore liberty to the Syracusans; That Dinocrates should return to his own
City; That there should be granted to Agathocles for his security the two
Garrisons of Thermae and Cephaloedium, with the territories thereunto belonging.

These Articles being divulged, afforded matter of discourse to the
Speculativi. Some applauded the Moderation of the man, and attributed this
prudence of temporizing with his fortune to his long experience in various
successes, which uses to render the great Actors in the world more wary, and
suspicious of future Events; and the more prosperous they have been, the less
will they permit to Chance. That although he might hope for a change of his
present low condition, yet he was also to fear a greater fall. On the other
side, some required his Constancy, and wondered at his change from himself;
that whereas in former Perils he seemed always of a present courage and
tenacious of hope, yet now he should be so transported with fear, that he did
not dare to hazard one encounter for that which he had by such difficult Crimes
got, and hitherto preserved. And, which was most strange, that he should
despise his own advantages, being still Master of Syracuse and many other
strong holds, stored with no small Treasure, furnished with a force that was
not contemptible in Number, but yet more considerable in Experience and the
arts of War. They therefore concluded that he was never endued with true
Valor, and that his former resolutions were either but the insolences of a
present fortune, or the eager hopes of a future; which were but spurious signs,
not genuine effects of a brave Generosity. And as good men prevail by Virtue,
so many base persons do sometimes by their Vices. Another sort judged that all
these Overtures of Peace were but to conceal more secret practices in his
Enemies Army; that Dinocrates had hitherto either basely, or falsely, by
various delays, betrayed the seasons of war to his adversaries, and that this
Treaty was but to continue him in that negligence. That the Tyrant knew well
enough how dangerous it was for a private person to have once born the name of
a King, and that such when they part with their power, do abjure their safety:
for if not the public Hatred, yet private Revenge forbids Security. The memory
of Dionysius was yet fresh; who when he had lost Syracuse, and was besieged in
his own Works, and did so despond that he offered to redeem his life with a
voluntary Exile out of Sicily, was yet encouraged to a pertinacy by his friend
Eloris, who told him that Tyranny was a specious Epitaph; and by his Father in
law Megacles, who dictated this Apophthegm, that a Tyrant should rather be
drawn by the heels out of his Government, then voluntarily to recede from it.
Which so confirmed that Tyrant, who was in greater distress then the present,
that he retained his power, and weathered out the Storm that threatened his
shipwreck. That sure this wily Monster was as far from intending what he did
offer, as ever his unfaithful Soul used to keep a distance from his Tongue.

The event gave some credit to this last conjecture, for it happened that the
Treaty came to no effect. For whether Agathocles did seriously intend it or no,
yet Dinocrates's Ambition made it frustrate. Peace cannot please those whose
desires are immoderate or corrupt: and the desire of Greatness where it is,
extinguishes all other Affections. Dinocrates was no less desirous to be a
Monarch then Agathocles had been, and was as little pleased that the Democracy
should be restored at Syracuse, where none that were Great could ever be safe.
His present command of twenty thousand foot and three thousand horse, together
with the disposal of all the Cities that were of the League, of which he was
called the General, but in truth was little less then the Lord, was not to be
parted with for the privacy of Peace, which equally obscures the brave and
base, and makes no difference betwixt noble and ignoble Spirits. Syracuse was
indeed his native City, but she would be no better then his Enemy, that would
reduce him to the equality of a Private person, make him obnoxious to the
harangues of unquiet Demagogues and the censures of the giddy Rabble. Upon
these considerations he was as untoward to admit of Peace as he had been
negligent in prosecuting the War, and therefore found out many difficulties in
the Treaty. Sometimes he denied the Garrisons upon jealousy of his future
pretensions: sometimes he urged that he should for ever depart from Sicily: and
another time he required his Children for hostages. Agathocles, though he
perceived the drift of the man, and that he should prevail nothing by this
Treaty, but make them more eager in requiring what they knew he would deny, did
yet continue his practice, that by his Commissioners he might debauch the Army,
buy off the faith of some, raise diffidence of their General in others, and
stir up Seditions and Factions against him in the several Cities. He insinuates
by his agents, that Dinocrates did not faithfully intend the liberty of Sicily,
but sought to have that power in himself which he envied and fought against in
another; that he was the great obstruction of the public Peace and Happiness
of every City, by refusing such Articles which a Conqueror would not have
denied to the vanquished, and so he neglected the safety of all those Cities
whose servant he was.

Whiles he lays these grounds for Victory there, he concludes a Peace with the
Carthaginians, and delivers up all their Forts and Cities which he had seized
upon in Sicily for the sum of three hundred talents and two hundred thousand
measures of corn. By this composition he was at liberty to employ all his
thoughts and forces against the Free League, with whom he was resolved to try
what his secret arts had done, and offer them a set Battle in the Field,
although he had no more then five thousand foot and eight hundred horse, which
he did not so much trust to, as he did unto his own practices, and the Vices of
the Enemy. The Confederates were well pleased with the Tyrant's confidence, who
seemed to offer up his small number to the swords of twenty five thousand foot
and three thousand horse, which was their strength. Therefore both parties did
willingly engage at a place called Gorgium. The Fight was stoutly maintained on
both sides for some time, and the Victory doubtful, whether it should fall
where was the greatest Number, or the bravest Courage: but at length the
practices of the Tyrant began to work, for two thousand of Dinocrates's Army,
that were corrupted by the Treaty, in the very heat of the Battle went over to
Agathocles's side. Which did both raise the hopes and courage of his party, and
so terrify the other with this unexpected Perfidiousness, that every one
doubting whether his next comerade were a friend or foe, they trusted more in
their flight then in their companions, and were immediately routed. Agathocles
would not pursue his flying Enemies, but by a seeming humanity to spare his
deceived Countrymen, he sounds a retreat from the slaughter. So that all the
horse were gotten safe to Ambicus, many of the foot by the benefit of the
approaching night escaped quite away; but the greatest part of them that were
left in a body together, had possessed themselves of an hill, which they had
fortified for their defense.

To these the Tyrant offers hopes of Pardon and Peace, lest despair might
kindle them to a dangerous obstinacy, Necessity many times forcing men to
miraculous acts: therefore by some messengers he desires them to come to a
Treaty. Which as before he had entertained with them only out of a desire of
Peace, so now he had no other motives, but by that means to put an end to the
miseries of his Country. That although his condition were now better then it
was then; yet he knew, how it became not just persons and generous spirits to
change their honest desires with success. He had never thought any cause of War
could be just against the Sicilians, and that therefore he chose rather to
maintain their common interest, and to undergo so many dangers for them in
Africa, to break the Punick yoke; which he had done, had not some that envied
the public Happiness of the Island, distracted him by assaulting his estate
here, while he was faithfully serving them there. That now if they were weary
of a tedious and fruitless War, and were desirous to return to the comforts of
Peace, and the pleasures of their own homes, laying down their arms, they
should find a free and safe passage. But if they preferred the hatred of him to
all the blessings of Quiet, and would still retain their hostile affections
together with their weapons, they must make their way with the sword; and he
would extinguish their hate of him with their own blood: For they had found (by
a sadder experience then he could have wished) that there was no hope of
success against him, who with so small an handful of men, through the
assistance of the Gods, (without whose favor there could be no prosperity,)
had overthrown their mighty Army. The poor wretches, though they knew that not
any word was true, and had many testimonies that not any Promise he would make,
he did intend to keep, yet because they were hopeless of Victory, desirous of
Peace, and contented with Safety, were easily deluded by their hopes and fears
to try once more his faith, and accept what he offered before they desired, a
readiness which might justly have moved their suspicion. For Tyrants are never
forward to do an act that becomes a virtuous person, but they intend some
horrid Impiety which would move blushes in a Fury. The credulous Soldiers
accepting his Oath for a safe convoy, left their works and arms upon the Hill,
and came down to require the performance. When they had thus parted with all
their means of safety, the Tyrant incompasses them about (being to the number
of seven thousand, others say but four thousand) with his own Soldiers all
armed. Then the miserable men perceived themselves cheated to their Ruin; when
they saw that they were hemmed in by an Enemy insolent with Victory, and
terrible with their Arms, and they themselves naked, without any instrument
either for revenge or defense, they concluded themselves devoted to
destruction. Therefore falling upon one another's necks, and shaking one
another by the hand, they gave and took the last salutes, each one desiring his
Friend and neighbor not to seek a different fortune in a common cause. So
invoking Heaven and the injured Gods to revenge their blood, they were in that
posture all killed by the command of the perjured Tyrant.

Thus was the Religion of an Oath used by Agathocles, and constantly practiced
by all Usurpers, only to deceive men whom they fear, should their intentions
be open, while they contemn that Deity which they invoke and attest. So that
Perjury is the evidence of base spirits and wicked souls, and never falls upon
those that fear no enemy, or reverence any God. Regulus shall be for ever
memorable, as long as Piety or Virtue are in the world, that would not break
his oath, though made to such enemies who he knew would punish those Virtues
which they should have admired, and would reward his reverence of Heaven with
such tortures as would have been cruel to beasts. And Rome was thought worthy
of her Greatness, while she bred up her Citizens in honest arts, and would not
suffer the Religion of an Oath to be profaned by any unworthy collusion. For as
she needed not such arts of falseness for Emprie, so would she not permit them
to her Citizens for Safety. But they justly merit the eternal hatred of
mankind, who undermine society and all humane commerce by violating the sacred
obligation of an Oath, either to attain at power, or to ruin an Enemy that
cannot be overcome by honest courses.

This great Army being only by the frauds of the Tyrant thus broken and
defeated, some few of the Exiles he received to mercy; but they were such as he
could not suspect for perilous persons, whom their fears and not courage had
herded among the other champions of Liberty, that would be contented only with
Life, though it were under Slavery. And to such Tyrants easily permit the
enjoyment of their misery. For their safety is founded on the baseness of their
vassals; and they are always more in fear of those that are brave and noble,
though on their side, then of those that are against them. Only the great
wonder among the Greeks was, that Agathocles did admit Dinocrates to a
composition, and kept that faith with him which he did with none else: and
whereas he was so jealous of all others whom he had wronged, or that had
opposed him, that he never permitted them to live, if he had power to put them
to death; yet after so long an hostility he admitted Dinocrates to places of
trust about him, and committed to him the command of some of his forces. And
their faith (if the correspondence that is between faithless persons deserve
that name) was preserved inviolable by either to their death. Some thought that
the favors and aversions of Princes happened to men, as all other things, by
the fate and fortune of their birth. Others conceived that the conformity of
their humors, being both ambitious and faithless, had something in their Souls
congenial, which might form a friendship, when their interests were not
divided. Therefore the Tyrant had dismissed him safe at the Massacre at
Syracuse, and now received him again into his bosom at the Overthrow at
Gorgium. For then their Interests did conspire. Dinocrates, that was hated for
refusing the Peace when it was offered in the Treaty, and suspected by all
Cities of the Free League for betraying their forces in the last Fight, could
not hope for security any where but in the Tyrant's protection: And Agathocles
doubted not to make use of that man's Courage and Service, whom hatred and
suspicions had weakened and disgraced so far as never to be trusted with any
designs against him: And using him in all odious enterprises, he should thereby
derive the public execrations from himself. Dinocrates being thus trusted,
because he could hope for no advantage in the deceiving of it, was very
industrious to reduce to his new Master's obedience all those places whom the
desire of Liberty had yet animated to an enmity. And first he seizes upon Gela,
and therein takes Pasiphilus, that had revolted to him. A person neither
constant in his Faith, nor stout in his Perfidiousness. With his blood
Dinocrates assures Agathocles of his unfeigned obedience, and comforts the
oppressed Sicilians, when they saw one instrument of Slavery had met with his
deserts. Afterward he causes all the Forts and Garrisons that had been formerly
in his power to be surrendered to the Tyrant's command, and within the space of
two years brought under his yoke all the Cities that were disaffected to him.

In the mean while the Tyrant, not to forbear Villainy himself, while his Agents
were busy in Sicily, looks about for other places to act some mischief in. And
considering that the Island of Lipara through a long Peace was rich and weak,
and so could not resist his enterprises, and yet afford him spoils; he sails
thither with his Navy, and surprising them, requires fifty talents of Silver as
the price of their Safety. Although they had provoked him by no Injury, nor
owed him any Subjection, yet it was enough that they were not able to resist
his Injustice, and had something to invite his Covetousness. The Islanders paid
him as much money as they had in their private or public Exchequers, and
desired a day of payment for the rest. For although there was enough Treasure
in their Temples, that was consecrated to their Gods Aeolus and Vulcan, as
would satisfy the Tyrant's demands; yet had they never been guilty of such a
Sacrilege, and therefore would not now pollute their private fortunes, by using
the consecrated Money to purchase their Safety, the public Religion prevailing
over their private Interests. The Tyrant that had no Justice in demanding any,
would have no Religion to spare so much, and therefore forced away from them
and their Gods all the dedicated Treasure that was in their Temples, and
carrying it aboard, spread his sails for Syracuse. But being overtaken by a
great Tempest, he lost eleven of his Ships, which were those that carried the
spoils of Sacrilege. The Lypareans were a little comforted that their God
Aeolus, which they imagined was the Deity of the Winds, had (as they thought)
revenged his own injuries, and suffered not the Syracusan Thief to enjoy the
rewards of his Crimes. The Greeks also observed that Vulcan their God of Fire
took his part of revenge in the death of the Monster when he was burnt alive.

So odious were always Sacrilegious persons even to those that knew not the
true God, that all men did curiously observe and exceedingly rejoice at the
Vengeance of Heaven upon such detestable Malefactors, which very often seized
on them in the sight of men. The true God seemed careful to preserve Religion
among men, by avenging the injuries that ware done even to false Gods by those
that worshipped them as true. This he often did in pity to the deceived world.
For without Religion Communities would degenerate into bands of Thieves and
herds of beasts, each one preying upon another, and keeping no more faith then
necessity could enforce. That Religion may affect the minds of men, and draw
them to an admiring obedience and awful reverence of its dictates, it must have
that Majesty and Splendor which may work even upon the Carnal part of man,
(which is most predominant in the multitude.) The luster that is most likely to
have influence on such, is that which is derived from the affluence and greatness
of those things the world accounts desirable. Therefore the riches of
Consecrations and Anathema's have been thought attractive expedients to this
purpose; because they are the testimonies of the munificence of Heaven to its
Worshippers, who in gratitude have by these returns acknowledged the fountain
of all their Wealth and Happiness. So likewise do such oblations commend the
pious Examples and Religious actions of past Ages to Posterity, and provoke
them to an imitation. The purity of Religion, though it most respects the
Rational part, and seats its Throne in the more Intellectual powers, yet does
not disdain the use of such attractives for the inferior Affections, requiring
not only the Heart, but the Flesh also, to praise the Living God. And although
it expects exact Obedience only from the purer Spirits, yet it would prevent
the contempt of more polluted souls: like wise Lawgivers, who frame not their
prescriptions for the public Safety with respect only to the Virtuosi, but
temper them so as they may allure and invite the observance of the dregs of the
people. So great is the interest of Religion in the preservation of its
dedications, that few or none did ever bare-facedly own this Crime, but
endeavored to elude the peoples zeal, and divert the envy of the sin by some
more specious pretext to Piety. That sacrilegious Tyrant who took away his
Jupiter's Golden Coat, and gave him a woollen, did scoffingly pretend the
change was for the God's advantage, because the Gold was too heavy for him in
the Summer, and the Wool was more warm for the Winter: and those that imitate
him want not their pretexts of a more refined knowledge of a Deity; that Heaven
has no need of our Treasure, and is more delighted with a Spiritual Worship.
But yet we shall find none guilty of Sacrilege that are not infamous with other
Crimes: who when they have exhausted their own Revenues in the satisfaction of
their Lusts, invade the treasures of Religion to supply their wants; or being
exceeding covetous, make no difference betwixt things Civil and Divine, and
when they have oppressed men with Extortions, provoke Heaven with Expilations;
which sooner or later takes Vengeance on their Injustice, and in their Ruin
recovers the Honor of Religion.

Agathocles having lost the Spoils of his impious Voyage, could not rest till
he had acted some more prosperous Wickedness. All his thoughts being at present
frighted with the sight of the coasts of Africa, he now turns his designs to
the other shore, and lays his projects for the disturbance of Italy. Which
being publicly known, the smaller and maritime Cities of that coast that lay
most obnoxious to his Invasion and Power sent Ambassadors to treat a
Confederacy with him, that by a present Friendship they might prevent a future
Subjection. The Tyrant receives the Messengers with all his usual false
Caresses, puts them in hope of Peace, and entertains them with several
diversions, that they might not have leisure to observe his Preparations. Which
when they were finished, he invires them to a Supper, and appoints them the
next day for Audience. But he that night took shipping, and so transported his
Army into Italy, while the Cities were altogether unprepared for a Resistance,
because they had received no intelligence from their Agents. The first that
were assai^ed were the Brutii, who lost one of their Cities called Aethas by
the sudden Invasion of the Tyrant; but not discouraged therewith, they with a
great power assault him by night, and killing four thousand of his men, force
him back to Syracuse.

Not succeeding in his open Force, he tries more close and impious Cheats; for
having a design upon the Crotoniates, that he might make them secure, he sends
a Messenger to Menedemus, that then was chief Commander there, and had been his
ancient Host, to acquaint him that he had an intent to accompany his Daughter
Lanassa, whom he had married to Pyrrhus King of Epire, as far as Italy on her
way. And therefore desires him not to be suspicious of the Navy which he had
provided for the safety and honor of the Bride. And while he intended this
soft business of Love, he desired that he might not be troubled by them with
any attempts of War. They easily believed him, who did desire it should not be
otherwise; and by this security they found themselves altogether unprovided for
a Defense, when they saw him lay siege to their City: And after he had made a
small battery upon their walls, fearing lest a stout and vain opposition might
kindle him to a greater Cruelty, they opened their Gates unto him. Where, as
soon as he was entered, he uses the utmost Violence, plundering the whole City,
and killing all that were able to bear arms, he sold all the rest for Slaves.
Having destroyed this flourishing City, he enters into a Confederacy with the
smaller Towns that were upon those coasts, and which maintained themselves by
Piracy, to join with them part of his Ships, and to have his share
proportionable in the prizes. Thus he that affected to be a Prince turned
Thief, his nature recoiling to the sins of his private condition, when his
outward Dignity required nobler practices; as to suppress the common Enemies,
as Pirates are, and to maintain the Commerce of Nations. But a Tyrant does
nothing abhorrent from himself, when he plays a private Thief that was before
a public, and maintains but his former enmity to the nature of Man and
Nations. By his public and private Robberies having recruited himself, he
intends a revenge on the Brutii for the late loss he received from them:
therefore he invades them again with thirty thousand foot and three thousand
horse, and keeps a strong Navy riding upon their Coast. A Tempest broke and
scattered his Navy: but his Landforces had some success for a time, so that he
forced the Brutii to articles of Submission; To give six hundred hostages, and
to receive his Garrisons into their Cities. But the Tyrant no sooner left the
Continent, and departed for Sicily, but they set upon the Garrisons, killed all
his Soldiers, and delivered their Hostages, and so shook off his yoke of
Slavery, which he was never able to lay upon them again.

Agathocles finding such variety in his single fortune, which sometimes was too
liberal, and at other times recalled all her favors by some great loss, like a
tempestuous Sea, when one wave snatches that from the shore, which a former had
brought to it; he was resolved to try what he could do in conjunction with
some potent Ally, whose fortune was more steady. And therefore he sends his Son
the younger Agathocles to Demetrius then King of Macedonia, to make a League
and Confederacy with him. Demetrius, who was not unacquainted of the falsehoods
of the Syracusan, and Fame had not yet suffered a silence of the murdered
Ophellas, could not expect any assurance from such a Confederate; who having
been so often unfaithful, could not without a Miracle be true to any: yet was
notwithstanding willing to follow the Tyrant in his own paths, and ruin him by
his own arts. A retaliation so constant to Wickedness, that scarce any one
perishes but by the ways he sinned. He therefore entertains the young Tyrant
with great blandishments, adorns him with the Royal Purple, and sends him home
loaded with magnificent promises and great presents, and with him Oxythemis a
dexterous Confident of his own; in color to accommodate the difficulties that
might emerge in the Treaty, to project a form of accord, and to keep a good
correspondence betwixt his Master and the Tyrant; but in truth to discover the
intrigues of the Syracusan counsels, and to be a Spy upon the affairs of
Sicily, to discover the easiest way of invading it, and to practice the Tyrant
to some destructive enterprises. Oxythemis had an handsome reception, and great
credit with Agathocles, whose humors and inclinations he soon found, and
dexterously moved him to renew his attempts against Carthage, and follow his
pretensions in Africa. This he eagerly prosecuted, that so the Tyrant leaving
Sicily, his Master with more ease might attack it. This seemed to Agathocles as
the counsel of his Fortune; for he was now free from any Troubles in the
Island. Syracuse by an open and continued Trade, and some years of Peace, had
recovered so much Wealth as defaced all the marks of the former War. He was now
strengthened with the new alliance of a powerful Neighbor, whose assistances
Oxythemis after the Greek manner did augment and enlarge. He therefore embraced
the design, and made preparations answerable unto it. He had provided two
hundred Vessels equipped with all necessary furniture for the transporting of
his Forces, and had begun Hostility by intercepting the Carthaginian Ships that
carried provisions of Corn and other necessaries from Sicily and Sardinia to
Africa. But in the very beginnings of his design that Vengeance of Heaven which
had been long due unto him did at last take hold of him, and blasted his
counsels with his Ruin, which was thus effected.

The Tyrant being now old, and doubting the chances of War, and the varieties
of Fortune, which he had so often experienced, would provide for the Succession
in his ill-gotten dominion before he departed from Sicily. Those whom
propinquity of Blood, the affections of the Tyrant, and the Vulgar report
marked out for the Honor, were the younger Agathocles, and Archagathus the Son
of that Archagathus that was betrayed by his Father, and slain by the Soldiers
in Africa. Both these had great hopes and strong expectations to be the heirs
of the Empire. The first built his upon the indulgent Affections of the old
Tyrant, which he had gained by a specious observance, and continual presence,
accompanied with a quiet industry, in all that was commanded, though he were
unfit for War, and would wear out days of action with words of Obedience.
Besides, his late Embassy and magnificent reception in Greece had made him
more splendid, though they were but the arts of the Enemy, not the effects of
his Merits. And it is not to be doubted but that Oxythemis favored his choice,
whom he saw least able to hinder his Projects. On the other side Archagathus
founded his pretensions to the Succession because he was General of the Forces,
and was now with them about Aetna; he had been in several Expeditions, in which
by his boldness and generous mien he had got the esteem of valiant, and the
affections of the Soldiery. So that the old Tyrant seemed to hold but a
precarious Empire of him, which he could take away at his pleasure. But the
obsequiousness of the younger Agathocles did over-balance all these Merits in
the judgment of his Father. Therefore when Archagathus was abroad with the
Army, the Tyrant commends his Son Agathocles to the obedience of the
Syracusans, as the future hopes of all their Peace and Safety, and whom he had
designed for his Throne. And that he might have the like reverence from the
Army, he sends him with a Letter to Archagathus, commanding him to deliver up
the charge of the Forces into the hands of his Uncle.

Archagathus seeing his hopes deluded, and that all his glorious hazards were
fruitless, when the rewards of danger were conferred on him that was never near
them; conceives an inexpiable hatred both against his Grandfather and Rival,
and resolves to quench it with the blood of both. To this end he sends
presently a Messenger to Maenon his Correspondent at Court, and with whom he
had often treated of dangerous Secrets, and had prepared him for any design he
should advise him unto, and desires him to poison the Old Tyrant, and he
himself would contrive the death of the Younger. This Maenon was a native of
Aegesta, where Agathocles had acted those incredible Cruelties, and in the
Ruin of the City was taken with the other youth that were appointed to be sold
for Slaves. But the comeliness of his Person had preferred him to the Tyrant's
own Lust, who used him as a Bardacio. This he took patiently, and seemed to be
well pleased with his emploiment; and to gain the more Credit with the Tyrant
and advantage of doing mischief, did glory that he was admitted into the number
of his Prince's most beloved Confidents, and professed that the present
Benefits had cancelled the old Injuries. But yet his soul did inwardly burn
with a desire of revenge, both for the abuse of his Body, and the destruction
of his City, and therefore was watchful and studious of a fit opportunity to
accomplish it. Archagathus was not ignorant of his Discontents, and had found
him a fit engine for such attempts as his defeated hopes did stand in need of.
For to enterprise upon a Tyrant by a secret Conspiracy, none are more proper
instruments then such as have a charge about their Persons; because they cannot
be easily ruined but by those whom they most trust, and none are fitter to be
wrought to this then such as have been abused by their Masters in their bodies.
And therefore Aristotle says, that many of those hateful Beasts have been
dispatched out of the world by their forced Pathicks. Besides, he that is to
perform it must be a person of a firm spirit, made so either by Nature or
Passion, and resolved either for Death or Revenge. Maenon had all these
requisites, and therefore receiving the summons, prepares for his work, and
acts it about the same time that his Correspondent had finished his.

For Archagathus not showing any signs of Discontent, but professing a ready
submission to the Command of his Old, and the pleasures of his New King,
invites his Uncle to a Sacrifice, (wherein he used his Grandfather's method, of
making Religion the preface to Villainy) in an Island somewhat distant from the
quarters of the Army, and there making him drunk he cuts his throat, and casts
his dead body into the Sea. As if he would appease it for the pollutions of the
Old Tyrant, who had often defiled it with the carcasses of murdered innocents.
But the waves cast it back to the shore, and it being known to the Inhabitants,
was taken up and conveyed to Syracuse, there to vex the eyes and soul of his
inhumane Father, who by this time also felt the approaches of death. For
Agathocles being accustomed to pick his teeth after Supper, rising from table
called for his Pick-tooth, which Maenon, whose office it was to provide it, had
anointed with a most mortal poison. The Tyrant using it with a great deal of
eagerness, had soon rubbed all his gummes with it, and immediately felt those
exceeding pains which may be easily imagined were in parts of so tender a sense
when infected with poison: while Maenon escaped, and got safe to Archagathus.

The Tyrant's Disease every day increased, and his Body suffering more bitter
pangs then ever his most sagacious Cruelty could have invented for his injured
Vassals, his Soul also had its share of torment in the news and sight of the
slain body of his beloved Son. Heaven as it were providing tortures for every
Faculty and Passion. His Grief was raised in considering the great loss of him
in whom he thought to have established his Empire, perpetuated his Name, and
who, he conceived, would have been a support to the weaker branches of his
Family, that now must all perish and be exposed to Ruin. His Indignation
swelled high at the too near imitation of his own Wickedness, and that his
Grandchild should revenge the mischiefs he had done to his accursed Generation:
That all the rewards of his Perjury and Blood, and the fruits of all his Cares
and Toils should be snatched away from him in a moment, and while he lived to
see and hear it. To be taken off also in the midst of those great Designs which
he had projected, and die now, though not at the command, yet at the pleasure
and desire of all his Enemies, filled him with more Fury then could be
expressed. And to all these we may add those horrid tortures which the sage and
virtuous Greeks affirmed do arise in every Tyrant's breast, from the memory of
their past Crimes, when every Vice makes an incurable and insufferable wound,
not to be healed or assuaged with the softest Pleasures; when the Tribunals
that remain after this life, though to a constant Felicity they appear but like
the vanities of a troublesome Dream, yet in the impetuous approach of Death are
dressed and armed with real Terrors. We cannot but judge this Tyrant and all
such as imitate him have misery enough in their Ends, to make their ignominious
Honors and uncertain Greatness to be unenvied by the most impotent spirits.

Wracked thus in Soul and Body, which were both unequal to such cruel Pangs,
and could not last long under the execution, the poisonous humor having
invaded every nerve and member, and made an intestine war between life and
death; his Mind also torn a pieces with various Lusts and Passions, agreeing
neither with it self nor with the Body, but in common Miseries, and either's
pains increased with the other's tortures: he was perplexed with another care,
how to secure his two youngest Children with their Mother Theagena; a Woman
that was venerable no less for her Virtues then for her Beauty, had no other
Crime but that she was his Wife, and yet made her self more eminent by this his
Fortune. For he well knew that one Wickedness was to be secured by another; and
that he which had conspired the death of the Father, would not suffer the
Children to grow up to a revenge, nor permit the Wife with her tears to keep
alive the hatred of her Husbands murderer, but either divert her Grief with her
Dishonor, or overwhelm it with her Blood. He therefore desires her to secure
her self and the common pledges of their love in Egypt, from whence he had
married her, and to take with her all his Riches, the Jewels and ornaments of
his former Greatness, and the spoils of oppressed and injured Nations, to be
their subsistence in an adverse Fortune, and to leave the prey of his Kingdom
as poor as he could to his violent Successor. That the Tyrant might want no
vexation, even the Piety of his Wife was another affliction to him, who denied
to obey such ungrateful commands, and desired that She might not be divorced
from him till death had sealed the bill, that her departure might not be as
infamous as was the Parricide of another; for she should seem no less inhumane
in leaving her miserable Husband, then he was in murdering his Grandfather. She
could not forget the laws of wedlock, though He had rased out the dictates of
Nature; for She had contracted as well with his adverse as prosperous fortunes.
Nor would she be unwilling to perform her last office, of receiving the
expiring groans of her dying Husband, and taking care for his honorable
Exequies, though she lived no longer to mourn for him, and were buried in the
same grave with him. This undeserved Piety, and the tears of his Children,
increased the distracting sorrows of him that was forced from longer enjoying
so rare an example of Love, and could not express any gratitude for it, but
bequeath Misery to Her and here is. This drew an abundance of unfeigned tears to
repay her last kisses. And when his Children bewailed their tortured Father, he
mourns over their unkind Destinies, who being educated in the supremest
fortune, were now to be exposed to the extremest Dangers. But when for a long
time all sought comforts from one another, and none could give, Necessity
separated them, and the Tyrant was left a miserable spectacle to every eye, but
to such as had been witnesses of his own Cruelty.

After they were gone, and with them all the comforts of his Life, he sought
for some in his Death by revenge. For though all things were consumed in him,
yet his Cruelty strived to be immortal. Therefore calling an Assembly of the
people, his bloody Soul belched forth through his perjured mouth (where almost
all the instruments of Speech were corrupted by the Poison) some half-formed
words of Cruelty and Revenge. Inveighing against the Impiety of Archagathus, he
desired the Syracusans not to let such a cursed Example, which might ruin both
private Families and Commonwealths, to pass unpunished; and that they might do
this, he restores to them their Liberty, and declares them a free State. A
liberality that Tyrants are never guilty of, but when they cannot keep the
power in themselves. Nor did he intend it as a Benefit, but to engage them in
Wars; which with all the consequents should force them to those sorrows after
his Death which he knew they would not have for it; and that a continued
presence of Miseries might make those seem lighter which were past, and the
hatred of a living Enemy might alleviate the infamy of a deceased Oppressor.
Besides, the habits of Cruelty contracted by Tyrants do make them so unsatiable
of blood, and so delighted in public Calamities, that as by them their Lives
and Greatness were maintained, so would they have their Deaths comforted. He
that had made the whole Roman Empire the Stage of his Cruelty, desired that the
world might fall together with him. Herod, that had polluted all his Kingdom
with Massacres, to temper the people's joy at his Death, would have had some
hundreds of the most eminent Jews to be slain at his expiring, that so every
Family might have something to be wail, and shed tears at his decease. So
Agathocles (for all Tyrants live and die with the like affections) would have
intailed Calamities to the miserable Syracusans.

The Tyrant's Tortures still increasing, and Vengeance pursuing him with so
slow a pace, as if it had intended to return his own arts of Cruelty upon
himself, he lived for some time Cruelty upon himself, and a loathed burden to
all that were about him: and having no Friend to provide for the decency of his
departure, or by some care to alleviate his Pains, when the tumors of the
poisonous humor had hindered his Voice, so that neither his Complaints nor
Threatenings could be understood, Oxythemis the Macedonian spy, and the
Syracusan's false Friend, together with his tired Attendants, laid him before
he was dead upon his funeral Pile, and burnt him alive. As soon as he was dead,
the Syracusans pulled down and broke all his Statues; seized upon his Goods and
sold them, and then did by proclamation declare themselves a free People, and
return to their Democratical Government. Thus after he had enslaved his own
City twenty eight years, in the seventy second year of his age he came to such
a miserable end as his hateful Crimes and Impieties deserved; and not only the
Revenge of Men, but the Justice of Heaven did appear in his Destruction.

The lineaments and proportion of his Body are not recorded by Historians,
only by the sins of his youth it appears that it was a moving object of the
Lusts of others, and that it was too fair a fabric for so wicked a Soul. His
actions give us the fullest character of the temper of his Mind. He was quick
and apprehensive of every expedient for his enterprises, industrious and bold
in the execution; fitted for Glory, if he had minded Virtue; powerful to
persuade, but without Faith in his Promises, or Truth in his Asseverations;
adapted to reconcile the Affections of men to himself, but not careful to
preserve their Love or continue their Friendship any longer then he had an
opportunity to injure those that embraced him; insatiably greedy of Greatness,
but a despiser of an honest F^e; of such easy and ductile Passions, that he
could temper and compose them according to the necessities of his Designs, and
put on whatsoever shape his present Interest required. He was of an obstinate
silence to conceal his own Projects, but perspicacious of the counsels of his
Enemies. He was not nice of any Sin, nor fearful of any Ignominy. With all the
methods to Tyranny he was acquainted; and wanted not, in an unquiet City,
fortunate opportunities of attaining Power. But his Crimes were greater then
his Power, and more prodigious then his Fortune: so that he seemed to be born
for the destruction of men and ruin of Cities. For from the time that he began
to appear as considerable in the World, that Age and the Scene whereon he acted
was horrid with various Miseries, terrible, and wasted by many Battles, rent in
pieces with diverse Factions, and even in Peace was full of Cruelty. Deserts
were filled with banished persons, the Sea infected with blood, and the Rocks
polluted with the putrefying carcasses of slaughtered Innocents: the Cities of
Sicily, Africa and Italy defiled with the frequent Murders of their own
Citizens, deformed by many Rapines and Spoils, and some of them buried in their
own Ashes. Nor was his barbarous rage satisfied with the vexations and tortures
of men in their Bodies and Fortunes; but being insatiable with the Miseries of
Mankind, he endeavored to deprive them of the comforts of Religion; by
murdering the miserable suppliants at the Altars of their Gods, rasing down
their Temples, and sacrilegiously despoiling the Sacred treasures of the
testimonies of the Piety of former Ages, he discouraged the future from the
worship of their God. He did extirpate all sense of Virtue, by imputing it for
a capital Crime; and the glorious acquisition of the People's love by honest
arts and generous actions was esteemed by him as a mark for Ruin. Treachery
and Perfidiousness were the only qualities he loved as Virtues in himself, and
rewarded in others. He attempted the extinguishing of all Natural affection: To
bewail the unhappiness of a tortured Friend was accounted as a design of
Revenge and practice of Revolt from the unjust commander. Therefore the tears
of pity were mingled with the blood of the compassionate; the Children were
murdered that the Father might not perish by a single death. He exposed the Son
to the arrow of the Father, and offered the Brother to the Brother's sword.

As his life was spent in these hateful Crimes, so was it ended in horrid
tortures, and he could not be said to Die, but to be driven out of the world,
and forced from among the Living, after he had lived to see his cursed Issue
part miserably perished, and part exposed to a certain destruction. Two of his
Sons he himself had betrayed to the fury of an injured and deserted Army. His
third Son was murdered when he had proposed him to Empire, and his slaughtered
carcass brought to increase the torments of his Soul. His younger Children, who
had lived no longer then to be made sensible of the height from which they had
fallen, were forced with their Mother to the dangers of Exile, and to perish in
an obscure fortune. Archagathus his grandchild fell, not long after him, by the
same Instrument which he had solicited to his destruction. For Maenon proud
with the success of having destroyed the Old Tyrant, resolved to kill the Young
one also: therefore applying himself to the usual arts and ways of alluring
the multitude, which are seldom good, he got such a power in the Army, that he
slew Archagathus, assumed his Command, and would have imposed himself as a
Prince upon the People. But the Syracusans, that had under the former Tyrant
felt the extremest bondage, and since his death tasted the sweetness of
Liberty, were tenacious of it, and hoped to maintain it. They therefore sent
out their Praetor Nicetas with an Army to oppose Maenon. Who doubting his own
Forces were too weak for those of the People, followed the practices of his
Corruptor, and called the Carthaginians to his assistance: and so engaged the
Syracusans in a series of Wars, till Hiero did become their Prince, who in his
private fortune wanted no requisite of a King but a Kingdom, and under him
they found the benefits of a lawful Government, and that Liberty is best
secured under a Just Prince.

Fallitur, egregio quisquis sub Principe credit
Servitium: Nunquam Libertas gratior extat
Quam sub Rege pio --

FINIS.

