A TREATISE OF LEWISHAM ( But Vulgarly Miscalled DULWICH) WELLS IN KENT.
SHOWING The Time and Manner of their Discovery, the Minerals with which they
are Impregnated, the several Diseases Experience has found them good for; with
Directions for the Use of them, etc.

By JOHN PETER Physician.

London Printed by Tho. James for Sam. Tidmarsh at the King's Head in Cornhil.
1680.

REVERENDISSIMO Celeberrimo, ex suis Virtutibus Ornatissimoque JOHANNI EPISCOPO
ROFFENSI, DECANO WESTMONASTERIENSI, TOTIUS ANGLIAE Eleemosinarchoque.
HOmines, inter tot animantia, solos divinis animatos mentibus, in medium
Vniversitatis Globum, ideo esse collo calos, mihi videtur, Reverendissime
Praesul, ut inde, ad omnia extremis Mundi terminis conclusa, oculos
convertentes, variarum naturarum, quas singulae parts Mundi continent,
diligenti perscrutatione, Sapientiam and Bonitatem Dei agnoscerent, atque res
ad recte, beateque vivendum utiles eligerent: Etenim nihil in rerum natura adeo
tenue est, aut abjectum, quod innatis viribus, insitisque a natura officiis
careat, quae diligentius and exactius introspecta, non solum divinam humanarum
rerum curam in bonorum animis confirmant, verum etiam sua Praesidia vitae
adferunt. Quid Aqua vilius, aut abjectius vulgo habetur? adeo enim communis,
atque ubique in manus est, ut vel nolentes pedes lavet; nihilominus ejus virtus
cumque nostris corporibus (...) and (...) a naturae studiosis hominibus
cognita, non minimam in art Medendi parrem peperit.

Diversarum Aquarum praesidio temperatura humorum aequabilis, vitaeque
conveniens in hominum corporibus conservatur. Morbi vero atroces (non tantum
familiares, sed insoliti in tenebris latentes) ita manifest profligantur, ut
earum alias ad membra corporis fovenda, conservandaque; alias vero ad certos
morbos internos depellendos, divinitus ornatas, atque hominibus tempore
praestituto Divina Providentia monstratas esse, pudeat non credere. In talium
numero haec est, cujus propter egregias jam approbatas, investigatasque
virtutes passim, perque tuam Dioesesin perbene notas; atque id porro propter
plurimas adhuc latentes qualitites, diligenti observatione, fidelique
probatione forte investigandas, de illa gratiosa Providentiae benevolentia
optime meruit; quae sequentis impoliti Tractatus materia est subjecta.

Cujus Patrocinium suscipere (gratiori modo non posito (Nil dat quod non habet)
quo animi, non immemoris benevolorum tui favoris radiorum, gratia manifesta
reddatur quae nec te, nec totum Mundum fugat) te (Candidissime Praesul)
supplicari quodammodo cogor: Dummodo verear, ne ingratitudinis Charibdin vitare
studens, in audaciae Scyllam incidam: sed non tam gravis tibi forte videbor,
quum in gratiosissimam tuam venerit mentem; hoc ausum Ordinis etiam ipsius
Naturae esse aemulationem. Omnia Inferiora erga Superiora tam Officio, quam
auxilii, favorisque gratia, movent Corpora; Stellae minores esse Orientales
aliter non possunt, nisi Solis Conjunctionem assequuntur: Sed nil mihi
securitatem ab audaciae and inverecundiae imputatione, nisi ex imia tua
Comitas, affabilitasque (omnium amorem conciliantes) promittere videtur: Sub
hoc tegmine placide recubans, non levis me spes tenet, quod non dedigneris
accipere, and, ut benevolentissime cepisti, indulgere pergas: Hoc etiam huic
Opellae ex hac Dedicatione promittere possum, eam gratiorem omnibus futuram
qu^d tanti, and talis Viri Nomen sibi praescripserit: and si Quidpiam
praestiterim, quale in affectationem aliorum non quadrat, de his non ita valde
laboro; mihi satis est, si tibi uni, Sagacissime Praesul, prober, and ex hac
Opella fuisse agnoscar,

E Musaeolo meo Lewishamiae 8. die Maii 1680. Tibi devinctissimus and
adstrictissimus, tui observantissimus and Studiosissimus Johannes Peter.

TO THE READER.
THough the number of Books in most Sciences are in this Scribbling Age
unnecessarily multiplied, amongst which, also Treatises of Mineral Waters, as
well as others, have had their part in this impertinent Superfluity: yet the
sole Consideration that these WELLS were never before the Subject of any
Public Tract, I presume, will with the ingenious, acquit this of that Taxation.

Various are the Censures which I expect, concerning this Undertaking (to which
I have made my self liable for the sake of the Common Good) some beholding
themselves through false Optics, are so highly conccited of their own
Perfections, that though they light of it in their Dish, stumble upon it in
their way, yet they will stride quite over it, not vouchsafing it a look, as
being of too low a rank to be able to supply their curious Noddles with fit
furniture. I shall leave such to be better tutored by the Omniflorilegous Be,
who in her Chemical Operations deigns to make use as well of Natures homespun
Flowers, as of those of the most curious Florists raising.

Others vouchsafing, perhaps, to give it the Reading, yet may look upon it as a
presumption in me to undertake the Task, since the Subject Matter thereof is
within the influence of our Metropolitan Luminaries of Physic. I confess, it
is a Task beseeming such eminent Persons of more profound Learning and larger
Experience; yet since the Eminent and uninterrupted Employments (suitable to
the Merits of such worthy Persons) will not permit them vacancies for such an
Undertaking, their time being wholly taken up in the active part; I have
adventured (after a fruitless expectation of seeing it done by some such able
Pen) on the ensuing Subject.

Others I expect out of Prejudice and private Interest, to carp at this Brat
for the Parents sake; but for such let them know, that I should much undervalue
my self, if upon so poor and unmanly a score I should triffle away my time in
anticipating their Objections with a Reply. So that I shall with as much
Contempt slight their Empty Noise in this case, as I have done the Personal
Calumnies, they have been so wickedly-witty to invent, and devoutly-zealous to
whisper about against me, in the credulous Ears of their deluded Patients. Nay,
there is a Grenovillatical Fopp, that (taking the Opportunity of my coming, a
mere stranger into Kent, not long before the last Plot was discovered) had the
impudence magisterially to give out (and that in company of some of my
Neighbors at a Public House not far from my own Habitation) that I was a
Papist. What shall I do in this case? What shall I retort? Shall I revile and
calumniate him again? No: But there is large Scope and real Matter; No Matter
for that, I am forbid, I have learnt better things, my Religion has taught me,
That if I am reviled I should not revile again. So that I will only say, A
Fools Bolt is soon shot, which every unprejudiced person will easily conclude,
when he understands how incapable the Man is to judge of what Religion I am, by
his being wholly unacquainted with me, and by being a mere stranger (as it
appears) to all that can rationally pretend to know me; for I here declare he
never had any Discourse with me, tending directly or indirectly to any
Religious Purpose, or scarce of any other Matter, and I am consident, at that
time (whatever he has had since) he never had any Conference with any Person
that was of any intimacy with me, or of Twelve Months standing Acquaintance. So
that without Conjuration it is easy to tell that this Calumny must necessarily
proceed from no other Source then the malicious Efflaviums of his Sick Brain:
and therefore upon the same ground, he might as well have declared me to be a
Turk as a Papist, only his Motherwit was ready to prompt him that the last was
the fitter Stigma, and (as Public Circumstances then stood) might prove most
serviceable for his opprobrious Design; whereas, if he had been so idly
busy, as to pry into my Religious Circumstances, he being within the smoke of
many of their Chymnies, who have known me and my Communication all my Life
time, might thereby, without any cost, or much pains, have been satisfied that
I am of the Religion (the farthest distant from Popery of any amongst the
Reformed) of the Church of England, as it is now established; and therein by the
gracious Disposal of Gods Providence, had the happiness to be Educated (for
which God make me ever thankful) though I do not profess my self otherwise
beholding to my Education than to manuduce me into a Truth, which my riper
Judgment (upon wholly devesting it self of that prepossession) has upon free
choice consented to. To the confirmation of which (as far as the nature of the
thing will bear) I could procure (if need were) a Testimonial from Persons of
such Eminency, Religion, and Learning, that (if there was as much shame in him,
as there was Cowerdise in that Man at the Siege of Spoletto, whom Nature
dissavowing, degraded of his Breeches) would Analogically make his
May-pole-size shrink into a Pigmy's Stature. But as for such like Persons as
this, who eye more the Quis than the Quid, prejudicating the Work out of
prejudice to the Author, they rather give a Badge of their own deplorable
Weakness, than any the least blemish to it; therefore I value not their
Censure: As for the Judicious and Learned, I know they will judge like
themselves, of whom I had rather be deservedly controlled, than by the other
ignorantly commended.

Since we are all Debtors to Truth, the Candid Reader will not think it much,
that I have Obiter spent a little time to set my Reputation to rights, thereby
hoping ere long, to see my self disabused.

The whole Design of this Tract is (contrary to those Physicians, who (under
pretense that they were supersticious Characters) defaced the old Writing over
Cicero's Baths, which declared the names of those Diseases they Cured) to
divulge to the World the manifold and admirable Virtues, which God out of his
Goodness has particularly bestowed upon this Water; Bouum, quo communius, eo
melius. That those that never heard of these Wells, or at least of their
Virtues, might by this means receive information; and if, upon trial, they reap
any benefit, may be added to the number of those that are particularly obliged
to bless God for them.

I cannot omit the taking notice of a very great abuse occasioned by a rabble
of Londoners and others, weekly frequenting these Wells on Sundays, where under
pretense of drinking of the Waters, they spend that Holy Day in great
Profaneness; who after they have (for the most part of them) gorged themselves
with the Water, do drink upon it an excessive quantity of Brandy (that Bane of
English Men) or other strong Liquors, thereby many of them becoming greatly
prejudiced in their Health (to add to their Folly and Crime) have not been
ashamed to impute their Indisposition to this Water; whereas upon a Rational
(omitting the Religious) account, the success in such cases cannot be expected
otherwise. This excellent Water (like other choice Remedies) is liable to be
abused by its undue Administration, many (and those of a soberer rank, than
those before spoken of) thinking thereby to cure themselves, do not only much
prejudice, but oftentimes destroy themselves. For in curing Diseases, if it
were sufficient to know Medicines and Forms of Receipts, the Translator of the
London Dispensatory, has to the meanest Person made the Physicians Employment
useless; and an Apothecary were then most probable to make the best Physicians.
being stockt with a number of Receipts communicated by diverse Physicians. And
in the use of all Medicinal Waters (as well as this) the Physicians Advice by
consequence would be needless; but there is far more Judgment and Skill
requisite to discover the Disease (and other necessary Circumstances, as Cause,
Constitution, Temperature, Age, Sex, Custom, etc.) than the Remedy, and without
such Discovery, how abundant and frequent mischief do we daily see done, even
by applying Medicines of themselves safe? So that as there is a necessity of
Advising with an Able and Learned Physician in all Cases where Remedies are to
be applied, so in particular about the Drinking of this Water; because by
manifold Advantages (reaped by his many years Study in Natural Philosophy, his
many happy Discoveries in Nature, his Anatomical Knowledge of Man's Body, of its
Actions, Use, etc.) he is able by several Signs, to discover the Causes and
Nature of Maladies, and from thence to know how to apply proper Agents to the
Patient.

OF LEWISHAM WELLS.
SECT. I. Of Water in general.
SEeing that Water is the Materia Subjecta, of this Treatise, it is a
pardonable Digression to speak somewhat of it in general; as of its Creation,
Nature, and various Effects. As to its Creation, it is generally referred to
the first Verse of Genesis; which is a brief Description, or a Compendious Mapp
of the Universe. of the whole Globe of Matter thereof, from the Outmost
Circumference to the inmost Center, created in the Beginning: And since we do
not find, that any new Matter was afterward created, we may fairly conclude
that the Waters were created in the Beginning also; to which truth the Original
Word (...) (which is translated the Heaven) methinks gives us some light, which
receiving its Derivation of (...), Fire, and (...), Water, intimates to us the
Subject Matter of the Elementary Heavens; (for as for the Super-aether, and all
other Spiritual created Substances (being possibly too Sublime and Metaphysical
Notions for that Age to receive) it does not appear that they were any scope of
Moses his Design there to treat of, but of the visible Works of the Creation
only; which being obvious, and lying level to their Senses, were the liklier to
receive admittance into the consideration of the besotted and unbelieving
World, and gradually allure them into a belief of the Worlds Creation by the
Almighty God.) Hither may be referred that of Rabbi Bechai (as translated by
Buxtorf. in Lexic.) Accepit Deus Benedictus ignem and aquam, and permiscuit
ista invicem; and ex illis facti sunt Coeli, i.e. The blessed God took Fire and
Water, and mixing them together made the Heavens: So that, if by the word
(translated) Heaven, we have found Fire and Water, the next word (in the Text)
being the Earth, we have gained the time of the Creation of the Elements, Fire,
Water, and Earth, answerable to the Hermetick Principles of Sulphur, Mercury,
and Salt. And further, that Water was signified by Moses to be created in the
Beginning, is evident by the words of the next Verse, where Water is mentioned
under the word Deep, without any intimation of any new Creation, but (as it
were) taken for granted, that it was created in the Beginning; that the word
Deep in Scripture Style is often used for deep Waters, or Seas, is very
obvious; as, only to instance in that one place of the Royal Psalmist, speaking
of the Creation of the Earth ( Psalm 104.6.) Thou coverest it with the Deep as
with a Garment. From whence it is evident, that there was not one Homogeneous
Mass of Matter created in the Beginning, but one Body expressly distinguished
into several Heterogeneous Members, which were distinct and separate in their
Scituations, and not confounded together. It was as Natural for the Water to be
every where about the Earth, as the Air to be every where about the Terraqueous
Globe, the Ether to be about the Air, and the Super-Aether above all, which is
elegantly expressed by the Prophet Amos ( chap. 9.6.) It is he that has
builded his Stories in the Heavens, etc. From which Original Situation of the
Elements we may collect that their several Bodies of Matter were
proportionable; the Matter of Earth most dense, and therefore lowest; the
Matter of Water less dense and therefore above the Earth; the Matter of Air
more rare, and therefore above the Water; the Matter of Ether more rare and
therefore above all other Elements, next to the Super-Aether, which is mo t
rare, and so fittest for the Habitation of pure Spirits. Now the said Elements
(which were created in the Beginning) were then endued with their proper
Elementary Spirits, pure and unmixt, which receiving Disposition by the Holy
Spirit did produce their proper Qualities gradually and successively, a
potentia in actum; whereupon the simple Qualities of Dryness and Moisture in
the Earth and Water, did not actually exist till the third day, at which time,
God called the Dry Land Earth, and the gathering together of the Waters called
he Seas.

The Element of Water is elegantly set out by Pliny, lib c Hoc Elementum
caeteris omnibus imperat; terras devorant Aquae, flammas necant, scandunt in
sublime, and caelum sibi quoque vindicant, etc. This Element challenges a kind
of rule over all the rest; it devours the Earth, extinguishes Fire, it aspires
even unto Heaven, and does, as it were, not only clime up thither it self
alone, but it carries with it whole Sholes of Fishes, heaps of Stones, and
diverse other heavy Substances, which afterward fall down again with it; thus
far Pliny. This is so necessary an Element, that no living Creature can subsist
without it. How wonderfully are all Vegetables enlivened, the Spirits of
Animals refreshed with the vivifying Humidity, and Balsamic Virtue, wherewith
it is impregnated by its Digestion in the Clouds? Hence it was perhaps, that
Thales Milesius, one of the seven Sages of Greece and Empedocles, do both
agree, that Water is the sole Principle of all things; the Spagyrick Masters go
not quite so far, who affirm it to be the material Principle of all Concrete
Bodies.

As to the manifold and wondrous Virtues of Waters, which Authors of good
Credit do relate, it would be an Herculean Labor to recite them all; I shall
therefore only for the Readers Curiosity and Delight, recount the most
admirable and unusual of them, which for Methods sake I shall speak to in this
order. (1.) Of the Coldness and Heat of some Waters (2.) Of their Taste and
Smell. (3.) Of their various Colors. (4.) Of their diverse Currents or
Runnings. (5.) Of their change of Quantity and Quality. (6.) Of some other
Things remarkable in Waters.

1. As to the First, In Corinth there is a Fountain of Water which is always
Colder than Snow; Ptol. Com. Lib. 7. Pliny reports, that there is a certain
Fountain issuing out of the Mountain Nonacris in Arcadia, that is of so cold a
Quality, Vtpote cum profluens ipsa lapidescat. i.e. That as it springs out it
is converted into Stone. Lib. 31. c. 2. There also he tells us of certain
Springs, called Posidianae (near the City Baiae in Campania) whose Waters are
so hot, that they boil their Meat commonly therein. Near the Sea Banks of Cuba
there is a River so large, that it is Navigable, and yet it is so hot, that one
cannot endure to touch it, Martyr. Sum. Ind. And as Ramus relates ( Tom. 3.)
There is a Spring near the Province of Tapala, which runs so hot that one
cannot pass over it; here we ought not to omit our hot Baths at the Bath in
Somersetshire; The hot Spring issuing out of St. Vincents Rock near Bristol;
and other Instances of this nature (which this our Isle does produce) might
here be particularized, if it were necessary.

2. In the Taste and Smell of Waters there is great variety: Aristotle writes
of a Well in Sicily, whose Water is so sour, that the Inhabitants commonly make
use of it instead of Vinegar. The Waters of Eleus and Chocops for Deliciousness
and Sweetness, were famous amongst the Persian Rings, and of them they much
used to drink, Johnst. Cl. 2. c. 3. The Water of Cardia is sweeter than warm
Milk; and so is Vinosa, near to Paphlagenia, where multitudes of Strangers come
to drink of it; Johnst. ibid. The small Fountain Exampeus in Scythia is so
bitter, that it taints the sweet Streams of the River Hypanus, after it has
run sweetly Forty miles, Ibid. In the bottom of the Adriatic Sea, which turns
to Aquelia, there be Seven Fountains, and Six of them are very Salt, Polyb
Hist. But of the Saltness of Fountains we need no further instance than our
Salt Springs at the Witches in Cheshire. The wondrous pleasantness of the
smell of Cabura, a Spring in Mesophtamia, has occasioned the Fable of Juno's
bathing her self therein; Pliny lib. 31. c. 3. The hot Baths that are distant
from Rhegium 26 miles, smell of so gallant a Bitumen, that they seem to be
mingled with Camphire; Johnst. Cl. 2. c. 2. Where also he tells us of a Pit in
Peloponnesus, whose Water smells wondrous pleasantly. In Hildersham there be
two Fountains, the one flowing out of Marble, smells like the stink of Rotten
Eggs, the other from Brimstone, smells like Gunpowder; Agric. de Not.

3. As for Colors they are different in many Waters. At Tungri in France,
there is a Fountain, whose Water, when well heated, turns of a very red Color,
Pliny ibid. Danubius, where it divides Noricum and Windelicia from Germany, its
Water is as white as Milk and Water mixed together equally, Agric. ibid. The
Water of the Maine, especially where it passes the Franks, and is fallen into
the Rhyne, are of a Yellowish Color, Johnst. ibid. In Aethiopia there are Red
Waters, and in Peru as Red as Blood. At Neusola, in a Mountain in Carpathus (an
Island between Rhodes and Candia) runs out of an old Passage under Ground,
Water, that is as green as Grass. At Ilza, the Water that comes out of the
Mountains of Bohemia is Black; so is Allera in Germany; and there be Waters in
New Spain, that are creditably reported to be as black as Ink.

4. The diverse Runnings of Water are wonderful: Strabo says ( lib. 12.) that
Pyramus, a River of Cappadocia (which arises from Fountains that break out in
very plain Ground) that it presently hides it self in a very deep Cave, and
runs many miles under Ground, and afterward rises a Navigable River. Not far
from Pompeopolis, in the Town Caricos, in the bottom of a Cave of wonderful
depth, a mighty River arises with incredible force, and when it has run with
a great violence a short way, it sinks into the Earth again, Mela. l. 1. c. 6.
The Water of Martia, after it has run a long tract from the utmost Mountains
of Peligni, passing through Martius, and the Lake Fucinus, it disembogues it
self into a Cave, then it opens it self again in Tiburtina, and is brought Nine
miles upon Arches into Rome, Pl. lib. 31. c. 3. The River Troclotes in Norway,
makes such a noise, when it runs, that it is heard 20 miles, Olans lib. 2. c.
28. Beca in Livonia runs forth of a Rock with such a fall, that thereby it
makes many Men Deaf, Ortel. in Livonia.

5. Waters have sometimes changed their Qualities, and altered their
Quantities. There is a Fountain in the Island Tenedos, which always overflows
from Three a Clock in the Afternoon till Six at Night, from the time Sol enters
Cancer to his Entrance into Capricorn, and all the rest of the time it cannot
be perceived to run at all. There is another at Dodon which always stops its
course at Noon. Tophanus, a Fountain of Anagnia in Italy, is dry, when the Lake
Fucinus is frozen, and at other times it runs with great quantity of Water,
Agric. ibid. The Waters of the Lake of Babylon, turn Red in Summer.
Borysthenes, a River in Scythia, at some times of the Year seems to be died
with Verdigrease. The Waters of the River Caria, near Neptune's Temple, were
formerly sweet, and are now salt. In Thrace, when Georgius Despota ruled, a
sweet Fountain grew to be intolerable bitter; and whole Rivers were changed in
Boeotia, about the Hill Cytheron, as Theophrastus writes. In the Province of
Cyrene in Lybia, there is a Fountain called Fons Solis, which is very hot at
Midnight, and as the Sun mounts up in the ascending part of Heaven, it grows
gradually cooler and cooler; but every day when Sol is got to his highest pitch
of Altitude, it is frozen, and as he descends toward the Nocturnal Meridian, it
by degrees becomes warmer and warmer, till he is arrived to the Midnight
Circle, and then it is (as I said) very hot; so that the Water of this Fountain
is always frozen at Noon, and very hot at Midnight, and every day as it grows
cold, it grows sweet; and as it grows hot, it becomes bitter, Johnst. ibid.

6. There are no greater Miracles (says Pliny) in any part of Nature, than in
Waters: therefore, if I advance to a step higher, and raise your admiration to
an higher pitch than I have done yet, think me not Hyperbolical. The said
Author relates, that in Hetruria the Water makes the Oxen White that drink of
it, and that Cephissus and Aleacmon, a Fountain in Macedonia; have the same
effects upon Sheep; and on the other side, that Pemus and the River Melas make
them Black. He also tells us, that the River Aleos makes Men Hairy that drink
of it. The River Nus in Cilicia (as Marcus Varro relates) makes Men
Quick-witted; and Pliny tells us of a Spring in the Isle Cea, which makes them
Blockish. Ovid says of Lyncestus, a River in Macedonia ( Mel. lib. 5.)

Quem quicun que parum moderato gutture traxit,
Haud aliter titubat, quam si mera vina bibisset:
He that takes of it but a moderate draught,
Trips, even like him, that with New Wine is caught.
And of Clitorius, a Fountain in Arcadia, he also asserts,

Clitorio quicunque sitim de font levarit,
Vina fugit, gaudetque meris abstemius amnis.
Who of Clitorius drinks, will Wine disgust,
And only will after mere Water thirst.
There be two Fountains in the Fortunate Islands, they that drink of one of
them will laugh till they die, and can have no Remedy, unless they drink of the
other. The Fountain Zama in Africa, causes excellent Voices. At Bonitta, an
Isle not far from Hispaniola, there is a Fountain, that springs out on the very
top of a Mountain, which makes Men Young again, causes Aged Men to be Juvenile,
and recalls their Youthly Vigor; (to testify the truth of which (says Cardan)
we have not only common fame, but the testimony of Peter Martyr Angerius of
Millane, a Privy Counselor to the King of Spain, in his Decades of the New
World. The Lake Argentinum in Sicily, will bear those things that will not swim
on common Waters. And in the Lake Asphaltites, a Man bound Hand and Foot and
cast therein cannot sink. On the other side, there is one in Aethiopia, whose
Water is so thin, that it will not bear the Leaves that fall from the Trees.
Such like Water there is at a place called Cabalus, between Padua and
Vincentia, which is so rare and tenuions, that whatsoever is put into it,
appears at the bottom in the same bulk and figure, as if nothing but Air
interposed. And the River Sylas in India, is of such admirable rarity, that it
will not bear a Ship upon it. In which Rank is Boristhenes, which when it meets
with the River Hypanus, its Water swims above it for many miles together,
Fromond. lib. 5. c. 3. There is a Lake in Ireland, in which if you stick a
Staff or Pole, that part which is in the Mud in few months time will be turned
into Iron, and that part which is in the Water into a Whetstone. There be not a
few Fountains, Lakes, and Brooks in Great Britain and Ireland, that will
convert diverse Things into Stone, whereof some in a short time, and some in a
longer. In the Island Summatra, out of the Hill Bal^lvanus there springs two
strange Fountains, whereof the one runs pure Balsamum, and the other the best
Oil, Heylyns Microcos. p. 689. In Caria (in Asia Minor) there is a Fountain
called Salmacis, which inclines Men very much to Venery that drink of it, or
bathe in it, Pompeius Fest. I have heard it reported by creditable Persons in
Ireland, that in the Province of Vlcester, there is a Fountain, in which
whosoever shall two or three times wash himself, shall never become gray.

Now though I have taken the pains to collect those different Natures, and
various effects of Waters (to show how capable they are of receiving diversity
of Qualifications from the Earth) yet possibly they may appear to some as
improbable, and as much past belief, as the most ridiculous Relations in
Mandeveile. Wherefore to disabuse the Judgments of such, I shall endeavor to
discuss their seeming impossibilities, and make some of those instances, which
seem most Anomalous to Nature, to lie level to Natures Rule and their
Understandings, and shall leave the rest for the Reader to salve, as a
Whetstone to actuate his Intellectuals.

As to those Waters which Pliny, Varro, and other Authors do relate to change
the Color of those Animals that drink of them; What impossibility is in it?
What hinders but that the Qualities of Waters transfused through their Bodies,
should do as much in them, as the solicitous care of one Night, or some sudden
surprise of the Mind should with us? Camerarius relates of a Noble Youth, who
having Ravished a Maid, and being to die for it, he so deeply resented it, that
his Vital Heat and Spirits were so much extinguished, that all his Beauty
vanished, and the Roots of his Hair growing dry for want of Moisture, it turned
Gray, Mem. Med. C. 2. M. 15. The same thing happened (says Scaliger Exer.
212.) to Franciscus Gonzaga, when he was imprisoned for a Traitor.

As to the River Nus, which makes a ready Wit; and that Fountain that causes
Blockishness, does not common Experience teach us, that Wine does the same
things? Which, if moderately taken, its Spirits are exalted into the Brain, by
the Heat of our Bowels, where it quickens its Motion, and produces a certain
Gayety, which raises our Fancies, and gives us excellent Thoughts. But on the
other side, when it is drunk in Excess, the Spiritual part arising in too great
abundance, does circulate in the Brain with such celerity, that then Objects do
appear double, and the Walls of places seem to turn round; and we are prone to
Sleep also, which is occasioned by the Pituita, which being attenuated by the
Spirits of the Wine, glides into the small Meanders of the Brain, and there
condensing does hinder the Circulation of the Animal Spirits: I say, What
hinders but that the like Effects may follow upon drinking of some Waters,
which in their Subterranean Passages may imbibe such like Qualities from the
diversity of Mineral Vapors?

As to the Fountain Clytorius in Arcadia, which makes them that drink of it
loath and abhor Wine, it may not improbably be imputed to a certain viscous
Quality in that Water, which sticking to the Walls and Mouth of the Ventricle,
may cause such a Nauseousness.

As to the intoxicating Quality of the River Lyncestius (which Pliny calls
Acidula, from a certain Winelike Acidity imparted to it) it probably receives
its Quality from the fumosity of Sulphur, which will easily affect the Brain by
its Narcotick Vapors.

As to that Fountain in the Isle of Bonitta, which is creditably reported to
make Men Young again, to cause the Winter of Old Age to put on the Verdure of
the Springlike Youth: that I may not seem to impose impossibilities in Nature
upon the belief of the credulous Reader, I declare my meaning thus, It may by a
Natural possibility, have a certain Physical Virtue, from certain Heterogeneous
parts of which it consists (whereof some by carring off the Sedement of those
Humors, which suffocate the Natural Heat; and others assimulating their
Balsamic Virtue to the Vital parts) which may wonderfully restore the Radical
Moisture, and mightily repair the Humane Fabric, though not in so high a
manner, as the Juice of that Fruit of the Tree of Life in paradise; yet if I
should affirm that the Effects of them both were exerted from the same chain of
Causes, only the later in a more exalted degree; I do not see wherefore I
should be esteemed Heterodox.

As to the Fountain of the Sun in Lybia, which at Sun Rising and Setting is
Warm, at Noon Cold, and at Midnight Hot, Dr. Fulke says, it may be by the same
reason that Well-Water is colder in Summer than in Winter.

As to the Lake in Palestine (called Asphaltites) into which a Man bound Hand
and Foot and cast therein cannot sink, it is by reason of its Saltness (upon
which account it is called in H^ Writ the Salt Sea, (...);) for common
Experience teaches, that the Salter any Waters are, the heavier Burden they
will bear. Our Boiling of Brine till Eggs swim thereon, is a confirmation.

Before I put an end to this Section, the curious and inquisitive Reader will
not think it impertinent, if I spend a little time in answer to those, that may
demand, What Water is best and wholesomest for common use? To which Pliny
briefly and elegantly answering, saves me a labor, viz. That which is most
like to Air, and then it must have the qualities of thin, light, cold, moist,
tastless, smelless, and having its proper Color: Rainwater by Galen and
others, for its lightness, is preferred before others, especially that which
falls in a Thunder-showr; yet because it is not clear, and by reason of the
Exhalations wrapped up together with the Vapors, I cannot give it my Suffrage.
So Hail and Snow-water for the same reason cannot be wholesome, to which agrees
the Opinion of Hippocrates, Aristotle, and Pliny. Some commend Ice-water,
affirming it must needs be wholesome and pure, it being coagulated of the top
and lightest of the Water, the terrestial and faeculent part subsiding at the
bottom: But to this I cannot consent, but must condemn it upon the account that
Exhalations continually falling down from the Air upon the Earth and Water, do
light upon the Superficies of the Water, and mix themselves with it, and by
consequence must needs be gross and impure. The Rarity and Tenuity of Water
(says Hippocrates) is known by its waxing soon cold and soon hot, and wherein
Flesh, Pease, etc. are quickly boiled, for that there is therein a difference
in Waters, every good House-wife knows. The worst Water of all is standing
Water, as Lakes, Pools, etc. But certainly Fountain and River Water are the
wholesomest; especially the last, being percolated or strained through Sandy
Earth, and partaking of no other quality; whose Streams being rapid, and
running with a swift Current upon an hard gravelly bottom, are often broke off
by many crooked turnings and meanders: therefore Avicenna commends those Cities
and places that are so supplied. And Plato (in his Book De Legibus) Prohibites
his Citizens to lodge in that City where there is no Laws, nor any River-Water,
by that (says he) his manners will be corrupted, and by this he will be in
danger of losing his health. For it is certain, that the wholesomness and
unwholesomeness of Places does much depend upon the Water they are supplied
with, as might be here made good by many particular Instances. And I leave it
to the Enquiery of the diligent Observer, Whether upon strict Examination it
will not be found that those Towns or Places of Habitation, which are supplied
with such River-water, are not generally far more healthful than others.

SECT. II. Of the Original of Fountains.
HOw Springs or Fountains, are perpetually supplied with Waters, has puzzled
many Learned Philosophers, both of Ancient and Modern Times. Aristotle thought
they sprang from Vapors in the Air, shut up in the Earth, and condensed by
Cold. Seneca conceited that the Earth was transmuted into Water; others that
they come of Rain. But to enumerate the several Fautores of the several
Opinions, and to re-count their Reasons, would be here in vain and ineffectual,
since we have here a more certain Guide to follow, a surer word of Prophecy,
viz. The H. Scripture, where we find the doubt elegantly cleared by the
infallible Pen of the Preacher; Eecl. 1. 7. All the Rivers run into the Sea,
and the Sea is not full, unto the place from whence the Rivers come, thither
they return again. Rivers (which are nothing else but Fontium Concursus, a
Concourse of Springs) Do all (says Solomon) run into the Sea and the Sea is not
full; how comes that to pass? Because as Rivers run into the Sea, so does the
Sea empty it self by Subterranean Passages into Fountains, which by their never
failing Streams do constantly supply the Rivers, which disembogue themselves
into the Sea again: Whereby it seems, as if to Nature at the first there had
been assigned a certain bulk of Water, perpetually to perform a Circulation in
the Macrocosme, Analogical to the Circulation of the Blood and Humors in the
Microcosme. And I have often thought it somewhat strange, that amongst all the
Learned and Ingenious Worthies (who have employed themselves to give an account
of the manifold Resemblances and Analogies between the greater and the lesser
World) none should hit upon the Application of the before-said Solamons
Circulation to the Microcosme, till our famous Doct. Harvy: How obvious (one
would think) had it been (to those that had their thoughts busied on that
Subject) to apply the Vessels containing the Blood to the Rivers above and
under Ground? The Vasa attrahentia and deferentia, to the Subterterranean
Channels and Rivers above Ground; the former carrying the Water from the Sea,
the later returning it thither again? How answerable, for largeness, are those
Vessels which are near the Fountain of Blood in the Body, to the Channels near
the Sea their Fountain. Again, How Analagous are the Branchings and various
Distributions of the Vessels in our Bodies from several Trunks (subdivided
again into Capillary Branches, to convey the Blood and Humors for the
Nourishment of the Solid Parts) to Rivers, Brooks, Rivolets, and those other
lesser Conveyances (dispersed both above and under Ground) for a supply to
Nature for the generation of all Bodies. And what proportion does the Pulse
hold to the Tide of the Sea, the Systole to the Ebb, the Dyastole to the Flood,
and the Peristole to the space between.

And that there are Gulphs and Channels under Ground, by which the Seawater is
conveyed is evident, when we consider the many great Lakes that have no other
way to vent themselves. What way can the Caspian Sea be supposed to be
exonerated? For the huge Rivers, Volga, Jaxiares, Ochus, and many other
disemboguing themselves therein, it must needs vent it self some way or other.
The Mediterranean Sea, into which the Ocean by the Straits of Gibralter, and
the Fxunine Sea, by the Thracian Bosphorus, with very many great Rives besides
do continually run, must needs also discharge it self by Subterranean Gulphs.
How comes it to pass that some Lakes are full of Seafish, and yet are of a
great distance from the Sea? In Bainoa, a Province in Hispaniola, is a Lake of
Salt Water, which has above Twenty Rivers running into it, yet it never
increases, and it is furnished with Sharkes, and many other Seafish. At
Cajela in Italy there is a Mountain toward the South, under which the Sea runs
with a great noise. At Apamaea, a City in Phrygia, which is far distant from
the Sea, many new Lakes, Fountains, and Rivers, brake forth about the time of
the Mithridatical War, one of which was Salt, and had an infinite plenty of
Seafish and Oysters. Besides we read of Channels and Rivers in diverse
Countries, which run a great way on the Earth, and then ingulph themselves. In
the Province of Cazcium in Hispaniela there is a great Cave in an hollow Rock,
at the bottom of a very high Mountain, in which diverse Rivers (after they have
run near an hundred miles) pass as into an Indraught. What can better salve the
contrary Currents of one and the same Sea in several parts, than Subterranean
Channels, as of the Atlantic, etc? Or what can give a more propable account of
Whirle-pools, in many of which there is such rapid Circumgyrations, that if a
Ship comes over them, they are in great danger of being swallowed up? Such an
one Andreas Moralis (in his Dec. 7. c. 8.) tells us that he happened into, on
the Coast of Hispanicla, where the Water was drawn into the Earth with that
viclence, that with all the Toil and Skill he had, the Ship could scarce escape
sinkink.

Again, To these Underground Caverns are referrable most of the many strange
and seeming unaccountable things, that have been found under Ground, especially
those that have relation to the Sea, as Shells, Bones of Fishes, Masts, parrs
of Ships, etc. Ortelius tells us that at Berna in Switzerland, Anno Dom. 46. in
a Mine Fifty Fathom deep, a Ship was dug up, in which were Forty Eight
Carcases of Men, and much Merchandise. And in Greenland, out of the Top of a
Mountain, was a Mast dug with a Pully hanging to it. Now a more feasible way
for the bringing of these and such like things to such places, then by
Subterranean Passages from the Sea, I do confess I am to seek. So that I hope
by this time the necessary Supposition of Solomans Macrocosmical Circulation,
is sufficiently made good, viz. That there be Subterranean Caverns within the
Bowels of the Earth, wherein the Seawater does make its reciprocal Frisks and
Meanders.

Now though we are thus (as abovesaid) infallibly informed of the Original of
Fountains (for though I must confess that it was not the design of the Holy
Ghost in Scripture, to teach Natural Philosophy, yet however, when obiter (or
by the by) he is pleased plainly to drop any Physical truth, I hold my self
obliged to give my assent thereto) and otherways privileged before all other
Opinions, in that it has the most Ancient of Ethnic Philosophers, as Plato,
Thales, etc. for its Abettors. I say, though it be granted that from the Sea,
through Subterranean Channels, yet there remains a knotty Question, which has
proved too difficult for many searching Philosophical Brain to unty, viz. How
the Seawater should be conveyed to the very tops of Mountains; as that
Fountain which Curtius relates ( lib. 3.) that feeds the River Marsyas, Ex
summo mortis cacumine excurrit, springs out on the very top of the Mountain;
and as that Spring of fresh Water, which streams out on the top of a Rock,
which is in the main Sea near Scotland; and St. Winifreds Well in Wales, on the
top of an high Hill, with innumerable other instances of the like nature. About
the Dihoti, of which Philosophers do not a little differ, Pliny ascribing the
reason of it to the Wind, which forces (says he) the Waters through the Caverns
of the Earth. Scaliger to the weight of the Sea, which pressing upon the
Channels, forces. the weight of the Sea, which pressing upon the Channels,
forces the Waters through the Earth's Meanders. Some refer it to the
attractive Virtue of the Earth drawing Moisture to it like a Sponge, or a
Fleece of Wool. Others to the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea. And if the Poets
Conceit may be admitted amongst the variety of Opinions, he tells us, that

Caerulea per stagna agitant liquentia Nymphae,
Alterius implent undantes roribus urnas,
Alteriusque simul effundant, etc. --
And I hope I shall not abuse Jovianus his meaning, if I thus translate,

The Azure Nymphs in the Subterranean Deep,
Alternately their constant turns do keep;
To fill and empty their light Pitchers, etc. -- so
Fountains do never fail to overflow.
To which Conceit that of Paracelsus and his Followers, is not much unlike, who
would have us believe that there be innumerable Spirits that inhabit within the
Earth (as well as in the Air and Planets) having there their several Offices
and Employments, amongst which there be some busied about the Conveyance of
Seawater to the Tops of Hills and Mountains (within the Cavities of which they
assign their principal Residence) to whose Management they also refer all
Natural and viclent Motions, as Generation, Corruption, Chasms, and Earth
quakes. Now though we ought not to doubt of Gods Power by Spirits, which (being
his Ministers) can at his command effect this and many more Actions, that be
infinitely more difficut; yet to impute all things to them, which do not lie
open and level with our Senses, must needs be but a Sanctuary for Ignorance,
and prove a mighty Impediment to all Ingenious and Philosophical Disquisition.

Though amongst the many Phenomenon, there are here, or possibly may be
produced of the Original of Fountains, it may be difficult to assure which is
the true one. Yet if I shall propose one that can give an account of all
Appearances, and is not contrary to what the Holy Scriptures do any where
insinuate, I think I have reason to be content, and the Reader will have no
cause to complain.

All Philosophers do truly hold that the Earth and Water do make one Globe,
which they demonstrate by the Moon's Eclipse, which being caused by the said
Terraqueous Globe's interposition between her and the Sun, and causing what is
darkened on the Moon's Body to be round or globous, is an evident Argument,
that it must needs be round and of a circular form it self, of which thing the
Holy Ghost in Holy Scripture has not been wanting to inform us. There is but
one Body of all the Waters, for every part of the Waters, as the many Seas,
Lakes, Rivers, Brooks and Fountains, are joined unto the whole, as Members of
one Body. So that either above the Earth, or under the Earth, they are all
conjoined together; as the wise King testifies in the before-recited place (
Eccl. 1.7.) which thing the Royal Prophet elegantly describes, Psalm. 104.6.7.
The Waters stood above the Mountains, at thy rebuke they fled; at the Voice of
thy Thunder they hasted away (agreeable to the Almighty's. Ipse dixit, at the
Creation, And God said let the Waters be gathered together unto one place, and
let the dry Land appear.) But whither did they fly? Whither did they haste?
Into what place were they gathered together? God himself resolves us ( Job.
38.10) I brake up for it my decreed place, and set Bars and Doors; and said,
Hitherto shall thou go and no farther, and here shall thy proud Waves be
stayed. As if he should say, I have by my word caused those vast Channels to be
cut in the Earth, those great Banks, huge Rocks and Mountains to be cast up to
make way for the gathering together of the Waters, that I might, as it were,
marry the Earth and Waters together, that so they might be made one Globe, Upon
the Circle whereof I might sit and view the Inhabitants thereof, as
Grasshoppers, ( Esai. 40.22.) which thing ( viz. That the Water helps to make up
the Roundness of the Sublunary World, is evident to sense, as is proved by the
familiar practice of Seamen, who when they go about to discover Land, send some
body up to the Main Mast, from whence he can discover it, when no body else in
the Ship can.

Thus far, I hope, we have by this time gained, that the Earth and the Water do
make one Globe: And therefore as to that Question so much bandied amongst
Philosophers, Whether the Water be higher then the Earth? I thus resolve. As,
we find the Earth in its Superficies to be very much indented with Mountains,
Valleys, Hills and Plains; so is also the Surface of the Sea much unequal,
occasioned by the Motion which God in the beginning by Nature Assigned it; in
which Motion the Mass, or Body of Water, forms it self round or Circular,
according to its Natural Property: for the whole is like its parts, and every
one knows, that a drop of Water let fall on a Table will form it self round: So
that it is not against Reason to conceive, how the Sea in the roundness of its
Figure may Mount as High, if not Higher, than any Mountain on land is High: nor
against the Infallible Oracle, which assures us, that God gathers the Waters
of the Sea together as an heap ( Psalm. 33.7) and that, he lifts up the Waves
thereof, they Mount up to the Heaven, they go down again to the Depths ( Psalm.
107, 25 26.) and why should this Circular Mounting of the Sea be more
Inconsistent with the Globous Constitution of this Terraqueous Globe, than the
Mountains on Land, some whereof o retop the Clouds? nay, without those
Mountains of Water to Balance (as it were) those on the Land, it puzzles me to
conceive, how there should be made up a consistent Regular Globe of the Earth,
and Water.

So that upon this rational Suposition, that the Sea (from whence all Fountains
are supplied) is as high, if not higher, than the highest Mountain on Earth; it
cannot rationally be denied, but that according to the Rules of Hydrology, it
may by the Correspondency of its level Force its Water through the various
Conduits Veins, and twining Crannies in the Earths Bowels to the top of the
highest Mountain, answerable to the Experiented Maxim; Vna Aqua premit alteram,
er tantum surssum elevat, quantum ipsa est elevata, i e. one Water presses
another forward, and raises it as high as its own Level is: For that it cannot
be ascribed to the conceit of the learned Scaliger, who would have the weight
of the bulk of the Sea-water-press the Water through the Earths Subterranean
Channels, till it find away out, is Evidently proved by this familliar Example,
lay an horn on the back, that both ends be equally and Horizontally high, and
then fill it full with Water; now though there be much more Water in the
thicker end, than in the smaller, yet the greater Water cannot drive the lesser
up higher then it self is elevated.

There being some seeming Objections to this Hypothesis, which I foresee may
possibly arise in the Readers mind, it will not be amiss here to anticipate
and answer: As

(1.) How comes Fountain Water to be fresh, when the Seawater (from whence
Fountains are Supplied) is Salt? I answer all Metals, and Minerals in the
Earth, being produced of Salt, and the Earth it self having its fatness, and
fertility, from Salt, do greedily attract the Saltness out of the Seawater, as
it passes through the Earths Bowels, for their Maintenance (even as our Flesh
draws its nourishment from the Blood in our Bodies) by which means being
deprived of its Saltness it at length comes out pure and fresh at the Fountains
mouth: and that the Earth naturally draws Salt unto it, is proved by this
Artificial Experiment, If you bind a piece of course Linen Cloth over one end
of a bottomless Cask, and fill the Cask with Earth, and pour thereon a quantity
of Salt Water, and let it sink through the Earth two or three times, the Water
at last will come out fresh, the Earth having drawn to its self the Salt
thereof.

( 2ly.) It may be objected, Whereas we see that all Rivers run into the Sea,
how can then the Sea be higher than the Land? I Answer, that only proves the
Sea lower than the Land near the Shore, where it is terminated by the dry and
solid Body of the Earth; as we see in a drop of Water put upon a Table, where
the edges and extremities of the Water, being terminated by the dry substance
of the Table, are depressed, and lower than the middle, like an half Globe. For
if a Measure was to be taken of the Terraqueous Globe, it must be taken from
the tops of Mountains, and from the highest Sea, and not from the Valleys, nor
the Seacoasts.

( 4ly.) If these should fall into the hands of the Readers, so over
Phylosophical, that they would not admit of Scripture Testimonies (such as
Psalm. 104.8, 9. Jer. 5.22.) for a sufficient Answer to those, that object, that
if the Sea were higher then the Land, the whole Earth would consequently be
overwhelmed therewith. Let such consider, that the Natural place of Waters is
above the Earth, as being a Body not so heavy as Earth; and being terminated by
the dry Land, it there willingly receives a Check, and being Natureally
Propense to a Globous Circulation, it flies back from the Shore, and betakes it
self for that end to its own Homogeneous Mass, which according to its Natural
Law may sooner, and with more facility mount in the roundness of its Figure
above the Clouds, than out-pass its sandy bounds.

Though (as I have endeavored to make out) all Springs or Fountains do receive
their Original from the Sea, whose Water by its secret Passages, and various
Percolations through the Earth, is made fresh and clear, yet I would not be
accounted so unphylosophical, as not to admit of some secondary and adadjuvant
Causes, such as these:

(1.) Great Rains may be a Cause of the increase of their Currents; for it is
observable, that in Rainy Weather there is a greater flush of Waters out of
Springs, than in a dry time; nay, sometimes some Springs are dry, and yield no
Water, as in a long time of drought. And these things happen by reason of the
Harmony that is between the Air and the Earth; for when the Air is resolved
into Moisture, the Earth and Minerals are then affected (as may be seen on
Stone-Walls, Glass-Windows, etc.) and being moistened by the Air, they suck
from the Seawater in its Subterranean Passage nothing but Salt; but when the
Air is a long time dry, the Earth and all the furniture of its Caverns (in the
most secret Recesses of which the Air will have admittance) are so likewise,
and being thirsty, they eagerly suck in not only the Salt but the Water also;
whence it is that little Springs are dried up in long Droughts, but where there
are great Veins of Water, the Water is diminisht, but not quite dried up.

2ly. Fountains may receive augmentation from the Vapors of Subterranean
waters, which lighting in their passage upon Earth repleated with Mineral
Seeds, and receiving actual heat from the fermentation of Minerals in soluris
principiis, whilst they are in generation; by the force of which heat, Vapors
are raised up in the Caverns of the Earth, which fly upwards to the tops of
Mountains (as water in distillation to the heads of Alimbicks,) where being
refrigerated by the air included within the Cavities of the invironing Rocks,
they are reduced to the natural density of water; First into drops, then after
the manner of Rain, they unite into one Torrent, and so by a longer passage
collecting their forces, they break out into a full stream: Our Catarrhs, and
Rheumes do bear herewith a great Analogy, for they by the heat of our Viscera
being evaporated into the head, and there condenst by the coldness of the
brain, do fall down into the body again in Rheumatick and gouty humors: Our
Tears also do the like, Whereunto the Prophet Jeremy alludes; making our Heads
as the Hills, and our Eyes, as the mouths of Fountains: and the saltness
thereof may be ascribed to their short Ambages from the Head to the Eyes, like
as the saltness of some Springs, to their vicinity, their short and strait
passage from the Sea. St. Clement has a pretty Allusion concerning Springs,
(in his Epistle to the Corinthians, (which Cyrill Patriark of Constantinople
presented to our Royal Martyr, King Charles the First, which was annexed as
Schedule, to a Manuscript of the Bible, fairly writ in Parchment by Theca, a
noble Egyptian Woman, about the year 320) p. 50. Edit. Oxon) (...) i. e. The
perpetual Fountains do hold forth their never failing Breasts to sustain the
life of man, being made for his use, and health. Thereby, methinks, intimating,
as if the Subterranean Abyss was (as) the Liver; the Subterranean heat, it is
Native heat; the Vapors thence arising, the Blood; the Conduits through which
it passes to the Fountain's Mouth, the Veins, which lead to the two Hills, the
Breasts. And as the Blood by the quality of the Breasts is changed into Milk,
so the Subterranean Vapors by the density they receive from their various
Meanders through the Hills and Mountains, are converted into Fountain Water.
Whereupon,

( 3ly.) Something also may be asscribed to Aristotle's Opinion of Air included
in the Caverns of the Earth, which being condensed by Cold, is converted into
water; Though by no means it is to be allowed, as a principal Cause, by reason
that the Air cannot rationally be supposed to undergo so quick and sudden a
Corruption, as is requisite; neither can so many Vapors be any ways afforded
for so vast and perpetual a supply of Waters, yet we may not on the other hand
totally exclude it, but must admit it as an adjuvant cause, as may Analogically
nalogically be collected from that Example of Cardan ( lib. Variet. 8. c. 44.)
where he tells us of a certain Sick man in Italy, who, in the year of our Lord
1481, did vent by Urine for 60 days together, 36 pounds of water every day;
when as the Meat and Drink he daily took exceeded not 7 pounds: So that the
overplus which he voided by Urine was 29 pounds a day, which in that space of
time amounted to 1740 pounds; and the weight of the man's whole Body was not
quite 150 pounds. Now the Reason hereof is supposed to be the Air contained in
his Arteries, which being converted into a watery substance, was emitted by the
Urinary passages; and so being ejected, there was a successive Supply of Air,
and by consequence of water.

Though there be these, and possibly many more secondary and accidental causes
of the Supply of Fountains with water; yet the primary, constant and
never-failing cause is from the Sea, which being as high, if not higher, than
the highest Mountain (as is before intimated) easily and naturally raises its
water through the subterranean Channels to the tops of the highest Hills,
Rocks, or Mountains; which Hypothesis is not a little strengthened by the
examples of many Fountains, and Lakes on the tops of Mountains, which have
ordinary ebb and flow with the Sea; as the Fountain Inopos in the Island Delos;
which Pliny reports to keep its course with Nilus; also he mentions ( lib. 2.
c. 103) a little Isle over the River Timavus, in Italy, which has certain
Fountains in it, which increase, and decrease, with the Ebbing and Flowing of
the Sea: which doubtless must have larger Conduits, than other ordinary Veins
of water, that so they may uninterruptedly keep touch with the Rise and Fall of
the Sea

(SECT. III.) From whence it is, that Medicinal Waters do receive, their
various Qualities, with the manner how.
WAter is either Simple, or mixed; and seeing the simple qualities of the first,
may serve as a Rule to discern, and judge the last by; it will not be amiss
toward the furtherance of our search after contaminated Waters, to define what
simple water is.

Simple water is thin, light, cold, moist, tasteless, smelless, and having its
proper color. Now where any of these Properties be wanting, or redound; it is
then mixed and stained by receiving and imbibing some other quality or
substance, from some one, or more Subterranean Mines. Pliny says ( lib. 31. c.
4.) Tales sunt Aquae, qualis terra per quam fluunt. Waters do partake of the
quality of the Earth they run through: But the manner how they should be
impregnated with such various properties has been so hard to discover, that
the Ancients have wrote little of it, holding them to be sacred and holy, as
judging them to have their virtues immediately from God, having possibly
retained that Notion from the fame of the River Jordan, or of the Pool of
Bethesda, being indeed real Miracles, having in them a supernatural power. But
we, (who acknowledge with St. Austin. Civit. Dei. lib. 7. c. 30) Sic Deus
administrat omnia quae creavit, ut etiam ipsa proprios motus exercere and agere
sinat, i. e. that God so orders all things which he has created, that he
leaves them to exercise their own Natural powers; I say, we, discarding such
Phanaticism in Philosophy, ought to look out amongst the Treasures of Nature
for a Rational account.

That all Medicinal Waters receive virtues from Subterranean Mines, is granted
by all Modern Philosophers, but the difference amongst them lies in the manner,
how Minerals do impart their said virtues to water; which thing, that we may
the better and more methodically discuss, we will in brief give a touch of the
Generation of Minerals.

As to their Creation, it is greatly probable, that they were created at the
same time with the Plants, seeing there is no particular mention of it in
Moses: What fitter time for the Inside of the Earth to be stockt with Mineral
Seed, than when its outside or superficies was first furnished with vegetable?
and as (by Genesis 2.5.) vegetables do not seem to be created perfect, so neither
is it probable, that Minerals were, but that their seminary Spirits were so
disposed of in the Bowels of the Earth, that they might perpetuate themselves
in their several kinds. And that they are daily generated is confirmed by
common experience; our Tinners in Cornwall, filling up their Pits with Earth,
after they had wrought out all they could, and within 30 years after opening
the same again, have found more Tin generated: the same is observed in our
Lead-Mines in Darby-shire; and for many generations, it has been observed in
Ilva (an Island in the Adriatic Sea) that Iron continually breeds as fast, as
they can work it out; nay, the Tools of Miners in no very long time have been
oftentimes observed, to have been converted into the substance of those Mines,
in which they have been left.

In treating of the manner, how the diverse sorts of Minerals do impart their
qualities to subterranean Waters, we will, for Methods sake, rank all Minerals
under three heads: (1) Earths, under which we comprize Chalk, Ocre, Bole,
Sulphur, Bitumen, etc. (2.) Concrete Juices, as Salt, Nitre, Alam, Vitriol,
Mercury, Arsnicks, etc. (3.) Metals, as Gold, Silver, Iron, Copper, Tin, Lead
etc. how the first and second sort do it, it is not difficult to conceive.
Those Earths lying in the way where those waters have their current, are washed
away therewith, by which means the waters become confused, and thick, and by
reason of the corporal substances of those Earths they carry along with them;
after a little standing, they will have either a settling at the bottom;
Sulphurea Nar albus Aqua -- -
It is the Sulphureus Water,
That does make White the streams of Nar.
as, Sulphur, Earth, etc. or swim at top, as Bitumen. The Concrete Juices, as,
Salt, Nitre, etc. they will either dissolve and so mix themselves corporally
also with water, or else by their infusion they will tinge the waters with a
spiritual quality, and so Quicksilver, Arsnick may do; and not so only, but
oftentimes, (like the following Menstruums) bring along with them some
tincture, or Spirit from other Minerals.

As to Metals, various have been the Hypotheses and endless the Disputes of the
Learned about the manner, how they communicate their qualities to water. But
methinks, the readiest way to Salve this, and all other difficulties of this
nature, is to bring all to the Rule of experimental Philosophy to deduce the
causes of things from such Originals, as (we observe) are producible by Art.
Art is the Ape of Nature, and certainly the works of that must prove the
reasonable discoveries of this: And since he that is verst in Spagyrical
Experiments can prepare his Acetum Philosophicum, his Elixir Subtilita is, and
other such like Menstruums which by their penetrating virtues will dissolve the
hardest Metals, and be impregnated with their qualities; methinks, Nature her
self, which is the Art of God, should do as much: Nature cannot be behind hand
with Art, (which is but her off-sp ring, and is beholden to her for what it
has) but must needs out do her by virtue of her many powerful ferments,
productive of such potent Menstruums, such appropriate saline Liquors, as are
able to reserate those secret virtues which are locked up in Metals, and set
them so at liberty that they willingly unite and easily suffer themselves to be
imbibed by those streams, that happen to glide that way: thus I conceive, by
Menstruums of Natures preparing within the womb of the Earth, are Metals
reduced to a dissolution, and by a fermentation of Nature, are made capable of
imparting their qualities to Waters. And thus also it is not difficult to
conceive how the Waters of many Springs become actually hot, and imbibe their
several qualities, and how by their long subterranean passages, and many
Meanders from the place of their Imbibition, to the place of their eruption,
their heat may be utterly lost, and at last gush out, as cold (as we say) as
Rock-water.

There is an Experiment of Mounsieur de Rochas, which because it clearly
demonstrates these things, I will take the pains to transcribe, (out of Dr.
French's Art of Distill. lib. 5.) As I was (says he) with some of my Companions
wandering in Savoy, I found in the Valley of Luzerne betwixt the Alps a hot
Spring; I began to consider the cause of this heat, and whereas the vulgar
opinion is, that the heat of Fountains is from Mountains fired within, I saw
reason to think the contrary, because I saw Snow upon a Mountain from whence
this hot Spring came, unmelted, which could not possibly but have been
dissolved by the hot furnes of the Mountains, had they been fired; Whereupon
being unsatisfied, I with my Companions and other Labors (whom I could hardly
persuade to undertake such a business, by reason they were afraid that fire
would thereupon break forth out of the ground and consume us) got Tools and set
upon digging to find out the true causes of the heat of this Fountain. After we
had dug 15 days (having before perceived the water to be hotter and hotter
by degrees as we came nearer the Source) we came to the Original of the heat,
where was a great ebullition: In three hours more we dug beyond this place
of ebullition, and perceived the water to be cold, yet in the same continued
Stream with the other, that was hot; upon this I began to wonder much at the
reason of these things. Then I carried to my lodging some of this hot water
(which was both saltish and acid) and evaporated it, and of 40 Ounces I had in
the bottom 5 Drams of saltish matter, which I then yet further purified, and
extracted thence 3 Drams of pure Nitrous Hermetick Salt, the other two Drams
being a slimy sulphurous substance: Yet with this I was not satisfied, but
with my Laborers went again to the place and dug 12 days more, and then we
came to a water, which was insipid, as ordinary fountain water, yet still in a
continued stream with the saltish and hot water: At this I wondered much,
whereupon I dug up some of the Earth, where the cold and Saltish stream
runned, and carried it home with me, and out of an Hundred weight of it, I
extracted a good quantity of Nitrous Salt, which was almost fluxile: When I
extracted as much as I could, I laid the Earth aside, and in 24 Hours time it
was all covered over with Salt, which I extracted, and out of an hundred weight
of this Earth, which I call Virgins Earth, I had four pound of this kind of
Salt, which it contracted in the foresaid 24 hours; and so it would do
constantly: Now this satisfied me in one doubt, for before I was unsatisfied,
how there could be a constant supply of that Salt, which made the water
saltish, seeing there was but a little distance betwixt the insipid water, and
the hot water, and the constant stream of water washed away the Salt, which was
in that little space; For I perceived that this kind of Earth attracts this
Universal Salt of the world, partly from the air in the Cavities of the Earth,
and partly from the Vapors that constantly pass through the Earth. After this,
I took some of the Earth where the ebullition was, and carried it home and
proved it, and I perceived it to be a Sulphur-Mine into which the former acid
Saltish water penetrating caused an ebullition, as do Salt of Tartar, and
Spirit of Vitriol, being mixed together, and as water poured on unslaked lime.
After this I began to question, how it was that this Sulphur-Mine was not
consumed, seeing so much matter passes from it daily; but when I began to
understand how all things in the Earth did assimilate to themselves whatsoever
was of any kind of affinity to them, as mines convert the Tools of Miners into
their own substance in a little time, and such like experiments of that nature,
I was satisfied. And after all this I understood how this universal Salt of the
world was to be had, and I could at any time mix it with water, and pour that
water upon Sulphur, and so make an artificial hot Bath, as good as any Natural
Bath whatsoever. Thus far Mounsieur de Rochas.

By which account it appears that that Earth, through which the insipid water
run, did impregnate the said water with an acid Nitrous Salt, which running
through a Sulphurous Mine caused the ebullition; not far from whence the Spring
making its eruption, it issued out hot, but by consequence, if it had kept its
subterranean passage much longer, before it had burst out, it would have come
out as cold, as ordinary Fountain water, and impregnated with its diverse
virtues from the beforementioned causes.

That we may understand the Difference betwixt Mineral Springs, it is
requisite, that we consider the Nature of Minerals, that so we may orderly
proceed, from the cause to the effect, or at least may follow the Effects to
their true Causes: and herein, following our former Method, we will begin with
Earths, which if they be simple, are cold, dry, and astringent: if mixed with
Niter; as, Fullers-Earth, Marle, etc. they are abstergent. All sorts of Boles
are Astringent, and desiccative. Turfes, Peat, etc. are fat and unctuous. All
Bitumina, as Amber, Terra Samos, Jet, Camphire, Coals, Rofin, Naphta, etc. are
hot and dry: but Sulphur, moderately, and somewhat cooling.

(2ly) Concrete Juices are of different natures: Salt is astringent, detergent,
Purging, etc. Niter, Sal Ammoniac, Borax, Alum, Vitriol, are very Astringent
and cold. Mercury and all sorts of Arsnicks are extreme hot and putrefying, and
very venomous.

(3ly) Metals are of different qualities: As for Gold and Silver, upon what
account the Ancients so superstitiously overvalued them, I do not well know,
but by reason they are so sparingly bred in the earths bows, I will also spare
to speak any more of them: Iron is Opening and Astringent: the opening quality
lies in the volatile Salt, as appears in Chalybeat wine; the Astringent in the
Crocus, or Terrestial part, as is evident by the filings thereof, after their
Infusion in wine, (the Volatile Salt being departed from them) for then they
are very Astringent, and stop all manner of Fluxes. Copper is temperate in
heat, less Astringent, and more opening than Iron. Tin and Lead, are cold and
dry: the former moving sweat; Antimony, a kind of Metal; Dioscorides says, it
cooles, binds, and opens Obstructions; and though neither he, nor Galen wrote
any thing of its Purging quality, yet experience tells us, that it purges
violently both upwards, and downwards: And although the Ancients tell us of no
water, that participates with it; yet that Argument is with me of as little
force, as if it should be denied, that it has any purging quality, because not
mentioned by those Worthies in Physic. There be many more mixed Bodies,
Flores, and Recrements of Metals, which are to be referred to the simple Bodies
from whence they proceed, as Tutia, Minium, Cerussa, etc.

Out of all these Subterranean Substances some Waters draw contrary faculties,
and from hence it is that oftentimes one and the same Medicinal Water cures
diverse Diseases, which are contrary one to another; which is occasioned from
the Heterogeneous parts, of which it consists, some of them relieving, or
blowing up the sparks of Natural heat, whilst others are restoring the Radical
Juice with their Balsamic virtues; So that it is of this, as it is of Treacle
and Mithridate, which consist of a multitude of Simples of opposite natures,
(hudled together, as it were by chance) which having received their due
Fermentation, and wrought one upon another, are made excellent for many
Distempers: Or like, as it were, to the Chemical Elixir, or Panacaea (which
though it is not easy to confute, yet very difficult to acquire its Process, so
as to bring it to perfection; if not as yet unattainable, though Claudius
Deodatus writes ( Panth. Hygiast. lib. 3. cap. 20.) that Crollius to his great
astonishment, and admiration, saw a man just at the point of death, laboring
for life, with one only drop of that divine liquor in one nights time to be
recovered to his pristine and perfect health, and though such a thing is
mentioned by the most Ancient Authors, as Mesue, who flourished in the East
long before Avicen, and calls it Perfectum Magisterium; Anaxagorus Clazomenus
(who was before Aristotle) terms it Summa Medicina: Democritus has a Copy of
Greek verses extant of that Subject; and our Roger Bashon calls it The Elixir)
I say, the Reason, that some Medicinal Waters cure diverse Diseases, which are
contrary one to another, may bear some Analogy with the Reasons, which the
Spagyrick Philosophers bring for their Universal Medicine.

(SECT. IV.) Of Lewisham Waters in particular, with the time and manner of
their Discovery, the Minerals they consist of; with a Catologue of Diseases,
they are approvedly found good for.
NAture has seemed to single out of all the Counties of Great Britain, Kent,
and particularly to endue it with such a fit Soil, and happy Clime, that it is
productive of an abundance of all sorts of the fruits of the Earth, but even to
a Miracle of Apples and Cherries, especially the latter, for which it has been
so peculiarly prepared by Nature, that Providence, lest she should (as I may so
say) be tax't of neglect, or ill-housewifry took care betimes, that it should
not lie idle, or un-improved: For as Pliny affirms, lib. -- cap. -- Cerasi ante
victoriam Mithridaticam L. Luculli non fuere in Italia, ad urbis annum DCLXXX.
is primum vexit e Ponto: Annisque CXX. trans Oceanum in Britaniamusque
pervenere. So that Cherry Trees being brought from Rome, about the Year of Our
Lord 48 into England; It is greatly probable that they were put on Shore at
their usual and much occupied Port Dubris (which we now call Dover) and so
planted in this most proper Soil, as being the most Meridional Clime of any
County of England; I say, as Nature has blessed the superficial Soil of this
County with a wonderful fertility for all sorts of Fruits; So has She not been
behind hand in furnishing its Womb with various Minerals prouductive of not a
few Medicinal Waters; amongst which this water we are treating of, is very much
beholden to God and Nature for its admirable Virtues. It is conveyed to us into
several Wells contiguous together upon a Common Ground belonging to the Parish
of Lewisham (known by the name of Westwood Common, as lying West from the
Parish Church from which it is distant about 2 Miles) fed by Springs issuing
from an Ascent, which the Golden Rays of the Sun salute at his first rising
all the year round. These Wells are commonly, though improperly, called
Dullwhieh Wells, but why Dullwhich should so surreptitiously invade Lewisham's
Right, as to have this water called after her Name, and so unjustly to assume
that honor to her self, which she well knows belongs to her Neighbour-Parish,
I know no reason; for though through the simplicity of some, and the design of
others, it has generally for about 30 years went under the Name of
Dullwhich-Water, that is, ever since the time of the first Discovery of its
Medicinalness: Yet that (in this case) is too short a space of elapsed time to
ground a Plea of Custom upon. Now considering in what danger the beginnings of
things (though we use our greatest skill to prevent it) are of being swallowed
up by Oblivion, and how irrecoverably gone, when a little o'regrown with time;
but especially the reason of the first Names of things, which not being rightly
and properly transmitted to posterity, may cause various, and to us now
unthought of, disputes, and differences in the Ages to come: I say, these
things consiciered, we ought to be so charitable to posterity as not to lead
them into an error. Besides we should even confront Providence it self, if we
should not stamp the Name of the Parish upon these Wells, where the disposing
and digitating hand of Providence has destined the eruption of those Springs
that supply them. The first terminating or setting out of the Bounds of
Parishes, were not so void of Providential direction, or so casual as some may
opine. Upon which consideration; I take it to be a Right due from every one to
give these Waters their Proper Names. viz. Lewisham Wells.

As to the time when, and manner how the virtue of this Water came to be found
out and discovered: The more Intelligent of the Ancient Parishioners do affirm,
that they never heard of any peculiar quality it had, till about the year 1648,
a famous Empirick in London, who being tired with the fruitless importunities
of a poor Female Patient, whose habitation was near this water, directed her
thereto, as to a Remedy nearer home, whose effects by outward and inward
application were so remarkably manifested in her recovery, that thereupon they
grew famous, and has ever since become the subject of such Empirical
Experiments, as any would be pleased to make trial of.

The Distemper this Woman (whose fortune it was to be the first occasion of the
divulging the Medicinalness of this water) was afflicted with, was the Lues
Venerea, or French Pox, (as it is generally reported) attended with malignant
Symptoms, her Nose being ulcerated, and her whole Body very much emaciated,
from all which Symptoms by the use of this water she was delivered in a few
Months, by washing her Ulcers with it, and by daily taking of it inwardly.

But it is observable what the Ancient Inhabitants thereabouts do inform us,
viz. that in that very place, where now the Wells are, there used to be only
gushings of water constantly trickling down, where multitudes of Pigeons used
daily to frequent, which place thereupon had gained (amongst the vulgar Swains
thereabouts) the Name of Pigeons Quillet: which haunt of those Creatures was
enough to give intelligence to any observing and inquisitive Naturalist, that
there was something more there, than simple ordinary water, something wherewith
the water was impregnated, that did invite, and delight them, some Saline
Aluminous Liquor, of which those Fowls naturally love to be tippling.

As God has freely bestowed his favors upon this water, so is it now
dispensed gratis to any that desire it, either to themselves, or to any they
shall send for it, every one being left at liberty to gratify the Poor people
that attend there daily to cleanse the Wells, that the water may be taken up
fresh and pure) as they shall think fit, there being no customary usage, or
fixed gratuity apportioned: There is a credible but somewhat unaccountable
report, that a little after the Medicinalness of this Water was (as abovesaid)
found out, that by the instigation of a forward and active person (whose
habitation by reason of its propinquity, was situated very advantagiously for
the entertainment of any that would drink the water,) there was a Collection
made of a considerable Sum of Money, with a design to enclose and monopolize
the water, under pretense that the profit thereby accruing, should be for the
Poors use, and to that end a Well was dugg handsomely wrought up with Brick and
Stone, about which a convenient Plot of ground was designed to be enclosed with
a Brick-wall, and such Conveniences added, as should be afterward thought
requisite. But it is positively affirmed by the most intelligent of the Ancient
Parishioners, (who are the most faithful Registers of what was then done) that
no sooner was the Well finished, though supplied with water very plentifully,
but it lost its taste its odor and effects, which was so manifestly
observable, that there upon there was immediately a final end put to that
specious Project: from which undeniable matter of fact, give me leave to draw
this observation, that in behalf of the Poor (incapacitated to right
themselves) God oftentimes immediately steps in for their assistance. Of the
Truth of which Proposition, the Royal Prophet assures us Ps. 140.12. Sure I am,
that the Lord will avenge the Poor, and maintain the cause of the helpless.

Thus in short having given you a Traditional account of the time and manner of
the discovery of the Medicinalness of this Water; I am now by my Method engaged
to give my Opinion of what Minerals it consists of, and to ennumerate the
several Diseases they are approvedly found good for, and succesfully used
against; offering such Reasons therefore, as are fairly deducible from the
Natural Energie of the said Minerals.

The Observation and Experience which I have hitherto made from the Corporal
substances, which I have found by Evaporation, Sublimation, Precipitation etc.
induced me to judge this Water principally to consist of Nitrous Salt, Alum,
and some Sulphur (for there not having been, as yet, any digging, nothing can
be collected that way; though an expert Artist assisted with a good Purse might
much dilucidate and further this Discovery) and by tracing the known experience
of its effects, I have found them to be such as aptly, and suitably agree with
the nature of these Minerals; For though I do not altogether dissent from Galen
who judged the quality of Waters to be rather discoverable by experience, than
Reason; (so making them Remedium Empiricum) yet I shall not handle these waters
so Empirically, as altogther to exclude Reason, but shall endeavor to discover
the genuine and proper causes of its effects, which experience has already
found out.

The sensible operation of this Water is mostly by Seige, whereby many are as
effectually purged, as if they had taken a strong Cathartick Potion, sometimes
by vomit, and more seldom by Sweat, and sometimes by all three ways of
evacuation the Property of it, being to vary its operation according to
thematter it meets with in the several Bodies into which it is taken. The cause
of the Purgative quality of it, is not (as many vainly and groundlesly affirm)
ravione ponderis, by reason of the great quantity of it being drunk; for so any
water may purge: but it is by reason of son its Nitrous Salt, wherewith it is
infected, which stimulating the expulsive faculty of the stomach and guts,
provokes to Stool: And the reason of its operating by vomit, may be attributed
to the foulness of the stomach, and the inclination of Nature to help it self
that way: and that it should sometimes move sweat is no marvail, since all
Niters are naturally apt to do so.

The Enumeration of this waters Specific virtues you may take in this
Catalogue of Diseases, for which daily experience finds it effectual: It
effectually opens, and reserates all obstructions in the Intestines wherever
latent, especially those of the Liver, Spleen, Mesaraick veins, Panereas, the
Biliary Vterine and Vrinary Passages, by which means such long, lingering, and
almost incurable Distempers are bred, as the Schirrus Hepatis and Lienis, the
hard Tumors of the Liver, and Spleen, the Flatus Hypochondriacus, the Black
and Yellow Jaundice, the Cholick, the stone and gravel in the Kidney and
Bladder, all obstruction, difficulties, and sharpness of Urine, the
Haemorrhoides, Choleric passion, Tenasmus, Cachexia, Scurvy, the Dropsy,
Chlorosis or Greensickness, stoppage of the Terms, Suffocatio uteri, Fits of
the Mother, and many such like Distempers (which being the unavoidable
Consequents of the Obstructions of the said noble viscera) may by the due and
proper use of this water, find an admirable and approved Remedy: for there is
not one of the Distempers above enumerated, upon which in my short time ( viz.
within two years last past) I have not had the opportunity to experiment its
effects, whereupon I affirm, that if properly, and with due caution it be used,
it is an absolute remedy, for the more slight, and hugely instrumental toward
the eradicating of the most stubborn of them.

Now the Reason why it should be so very excellent in all these forementioned
Distempers, is (1) From the cleansing, and attenuating quality of the Nitrous
Sal^; (2) From the Astringent and cooling faculty of the Alum, and (3ly.) From
the healing and the detergent property of the Sulphur: And to every one of
these Concrete Juices severally, since Physicians do attribute the faculty of
opening of Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Mesaraicks etc. how much more
efficacious for the reserating all the said obstructed Passages, must this
Water needs be, which ( Nature playing the Chemist) has impregnated with all
their united qualities.

The Femal Sex are more especially beholding to this Fructifying water, there
being no Medicinal water ever yet known in this Kingdom, that could justly
pretend to foecundate the womb and cause Fruitfulness, like this: If sterility
be caused from the Coldness and Moisture of the Womb; here is the heating and
drying quality of Sulphur to rid the Matrix of its frigidity, and Super fluous
humidity, that made it intenacious, whereby it is made capable of Conception:
If from an hot and dry Constitution of the womb, the spirit of the Sperm be
dissipated, and become exhausted of its Spermatick virtue, here is the Cooling
and attenuating faculty of the Nitre, to moisten and cool it, thereby making it
a fit Receptacle for the virile Seed. If from its plenitude of gross, clammy,
and excrementitious humors, which is a very frequent and ordinary cause of
Barrenness (the Matrix, being, as it were, the Canalis, whereinto all the parts
of the Body do discharge their Superfluities) here is the absterging and
cutting qualities of the Nitrous and Aluminous Salts, to cleanse, divide and
carry off all viscosity, and so to make way for Conception. In fine, this water
is furnished with such apt qualifications to take away sterility, and cause
fruitfulness, that it seems destined by nature, as an universal Remedy against
Barrenness, from whatsoever cause it be, by virtue of the diverse Mineral
Impregnations, with which Nature by its powerful Ferments has endued it.

This water excellently extinguisheth all manner of inward inflammations, it
sweetens all sharp humors, is good for salt distillations, admirably helps
scalding urines (as is before hinted) and is approvedly beneficial for the
Running of the Reins, whether simple, or virulem, and for other Diseases,
which have Analogy with these.

This is the most absolute and surest Remedy for the Gout (as I have great
Reason to believe) that is yet known, let the Body be but prepared before hand,
and then properly used: For we must not expect (as I shall show hereafter) that
it can do any great feats of it self alone, but assisted by Art, in many
cases, (and particularly in this) it does wonders. Nature and Art must serve
each others turns, as the Poet intimates.

Praevenit humanum Stabilis Natura laborem,
Servit Naturae legibus Artis opus.
Nature man's labor often does prevent,
And Art again does serve Natures intent.
The real experiments (which many are able to testify they have made in this
case viz. of the Gout) seriously commends the use of it, to all that labor
under the tyranny of that mercyless and implacable Distemper. And the Reason
hereof, I take to be from the Nitre, (which in this Water I hold to be ex
Praedominio) which by quieting the vaporous humors, that are too much in
motion, and by fixing the sharp Volatile Spirit, that is in the Blood, does
prove so excellently effectual for present ease, and future prevention.

Very excellert must also this water be against all sorts of Worms in your
Bodies, since each of those several Minerals (with which it is tinged) is
commonly known to destroy them of it self alone; therefore much more effectual
must this water needs be (which Nature, being the Art (as I may so say) of the
Almighty, has so Artificially compounded) in utterly destroying those
pernicious Vermin, which cause so many various Distempers, and frightful
Symptoms in old and young; And that it is so very excellent in this case I have
had sufficient experience.

This Water corroborates the Brain and Nerves, and so prevents or cures the
Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Palsy, Dizziness, Ach of the Head, andall such like
Symptoms; (so that it be not taken actually cold, as I shall show hereafter;)
It strengthens the stomach, causes good digestion, consumes Crudities, it
makes gross and fat Bodies lean, and the lean fleshy; In a word, this water
will effect whatsoever by any intention in a Medicinal way is to be performed
by opening Obstructions, evacuating superfluous humors, allaying Vapors,
cleansing the Blood, and corroborating all the parts of the Body.

There is a Corporal Substance which I extract from this water, of which after
serious and diligent Consideration, I have with admirable success made use for
the Cure of Intermitting Fevers, which (I may with great truth averr) does
more infallibly answer the Intention, than the celebrated Cortex Indicus, or
Jesuits Powder; For out of 125 Experiments upon old and young, which I have
made within 19 Months last past, there was not above 4 that failed to answer
the desired effects: It has not only allayed the fury of the present, or next
succeeding Paroxism, but has totally ejected that unwelcome guest, that
Tyrannical Intruder, viz. the Ague, which it performs (as I take it) by
depressing the power of the Morbifick, and by advancing of the Natural ferment,
and by supplying the defects of the Blood, by communicating that to it, which
is by Nature consimilar to its own preservative Salt. I know the process of
this extract the Reader will here expect; but I have some private Reason, that,
at present forbids it; not that I envy the world the happiness of knowing it,
there is a time for all things, and a season for every purpose under the Sun.
And when by a longer time and further opportunity I have collected a just
amassment of Experiments, so firmly grounded that they will endure the test of
the Spagyrick Critics, and the Candid entertainment the World shall give this
Treatise, shall induce me to publish them also, then it is probable I may
therewith pleasure you with this Process, and in the Interim be content with
what I have offered, and know that I respect the Public good before any
private Interest whatsoever.

This water outwardly used is very good for most Cutaneous Distempers, as
Leprosy, Itch, Scabbs, Pimples, Ring-worms, Scurvy, etc. It also dissolves
tumoures, and cures old Ulcers, if the Parties ill-affected be washed, or
bathed therewith: or if the Curd made by boiling Milk therewith, be applied;
And I am persuaded, it being used by way of a warm Bath, it would be of great
efficacy to consume Hydropical tumoures, to ease or Cure Gouty, and Rheumatick
dolours, and far more effectual also in the above said Cutaneous Distempers; I
have not as yet made any Experiment of it this way, but shall not omit the
first convenient opportunity, because it appears to me highly rational.

Thus have I enumerated the several Diseases, for which the Experience of many
has found this water effectual: But for the Reason of its effects which are so
various, I have adventured to give you a short hint of my own Conceptions, only
drawn from such observations, as the time of mine acquaintance therewith, and
fitting opportunity has offered to make; and shall take the boldness to
engage, (if time and opportunity shall by real experiments, and from
conclusions rationally deduced from thence, furnish me with grounds for any
different Reasons) to endeavor to superstruct a more consistent Fabric: For
Day unto Day utters speech, Night unto Night shows knowledge, (Psalm 19.2.)
This Day may be the Disciple of To morrow; and To morrow of the next following;
therefore I shall not be so positive, as peremptorily to commend my present
Opinion, lest Time (Truths Touchstone) should supply me with a better. For it
is here, as it is with the Art of Physic in general; The chiefest of the two
Legs it goes upon, is experience: and I must confess, that it is in this case
a surer way of arguing from the Effect to the cause, than econtra.

Per varios casus Artem experientia fecit,
Exemplo monstrante viam, etc. --
The Art of Physic by experience came,
Without Examples guide it had been lame.
But though Experience was the first in order, and ought in this case to march
in the Front, yet effectually to make good the Fight against the strong and
numerous Army of our innate Enemies, (which are daily drawing up their Forces
to storm our frail and decaying Tabernacles) we must upon necessity make Reason
the Rereward: lest trusting to much to Empirical aid, we too sadly experiment
our folly, and irrecoverably become Captives to our merciless Diseases; and so
I will pass to the time, and manner of taking this water.

(SECT. V.) Of the time and manner of drinking of this Water, with the Diet to
be observed, and Exercise to be used in drinking of it.
THE Time for drinking this water, is to be understood either in reference to
the Season of the Year, or to the time of the day. As to the Season of the
Year, I prefer neither Summer, nor Winter, Spring nor Fall, but as Occasions,
and every Ones particular Circumstances shall require, but in general,
whenever the Weather is clear, and dry, then the water is best, as well in
Winter, as in Summer; yea, in hard frosty weather, the water is commonly
strongest, by reason of the Air's Antiperistasis, keeping its Mineral Spirits
from evaporating away; and then it is of more quick, and speedy passage than in
the midst of Summer, when the Air by heat is adapted to draw unto it self, and
deprive it of its volatile Spirits. And therefore since heat is so apt to
attract those spirits, the fittest time of the Day (more especially in Summer)
to drink it, is any time between Sunrising, and till it be an hour high, or
therebouts, and so you will be sure to receive it in its strength; and to take
it oftener, than once a day, I hold very injurious to Nature, and prejudicial to
most Constitutions. But as to the drinking of it cold, which is the general
custom, I confess, I cannot but declare my Dislike, unless to strong and very
robust Bodies. For the stomach being a Nervous part, is easily offended by that
which is actually cold, and is thereby impedited from exercising its functions
aright, by which error many must needs be the ill Consequences, the Defect of
the first not being to be made good by the other Concoctions. Cold destroying
the faculties of the Stomach, (which are maintained by heat) breeds therein
many crudities, whereby Gouts, Dropsies, Rheums, Coughs, Colicks etc. must
needs be produced. To drink it cold also I hold it mightily inimical to all
persons, that have, or that are inclinable to the Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Palsy,
Lethargy, Convulsions, Tremblings, etc. For any thing actually cold, passing
down the Throat must needs affect the Brain, the innermost Coat of the Jaws,
being common with the Membranes of the Brain, the cold taken in, thereby is
easily communicated to them, which thing is confirmed by Hippocrates (Aphor.
Sect. 5.18.) Frigidum inimicum ossibus, cleatibus, Nervis, Cerebro, Dorsali
Medullae; Calidum vero amicum. i. e. To drink water cold is hurtful to the
Bones, Teeth, Sinews, Brain, Marrow of the back, etc. but warm is good, and
profitable: Not to insist any longer upon this matter, I take it to be the
safest course in all cases to take this Water warm, since other ways it cannot
rationally be supposed so easily to pass through the small Meanders of the
Body: we by familiar use do daily see that warm water externally used, will
deterge and scour off those filthy adhesions, which water actually cold cannot;
and what hinders the like preeminent effects in our Bodies? It certainly
insinuates it felt the better through the smallest passages, and more
powerfully dissolves the Coherence of such clammy, tough, and sticking
substances, (which like Glue adhere to the walls of the Stomach and Coats of
the Intestines) preparing them and making them the fitter for expulsion by
Seige. It also passes the sooner to the Reins, and cleansing them by its
abstersive quality, it carries along with it through the Vrinary Passages,
whatsoever lies lurking there, as a fit matter to cause Obstructions, and does
the better qualify that heat, which is so efficacious toward the Coagulation
of Gravel and Generation of the Stone.

But in advising to drink this Water warm, I do not mean, that it is dangerous
and absolutely inconvenient for all Persons whatsoever to drink it cold, for
they whose Constitutions are strong, whose Ventricle and Viscera are firm and
robust, (thereby being the better enabled to undergo the great exercise,) may
questionless with benefit drink it cold; But for those of weak Constitutions,
etc. it is better and safer to drink it warm, so that it be done with as little
loss of its Spirits, as may be. For as this water does consist of preceptible
Mineral Vapors, so does it also of subtle and insensible Spirits, or Atoms,
and these by a small heat will easily evaporate, and take their flight into the
open Air, though the other by heating, or boiling, will not budge, which is
collective from common experience; for if Beer be made of this (as of ordinary
water) it is commonly known to operate effectually by stool, which is
occasioned by a fixed Salt disguised therein (remaining after ebullition) which
excites the expulsive faculty of the Guts; For this kind of Salt cannot be
evaporated by the strongest Fire, but is the last substance that remains
therein, being incombustible and inevaporable;) So that in some cases you may
make Posset Drink of it with Milk (which the Poor People which constantly
attend at the Wells will easily procure you) after the usual way: But in other
cases were it is not safe to drink it cold, and yet requisite to retain as much
of the abovementioned subtle spirits as may be, I take it to be the best way
to get some Milk (which the Poor People that constantly attend at the Wells,
will easily procure you) and to 3 Pints of Water, put about a quarter of a Pint
of Scalding hot, or Boiling Milk, whereby it will become of a convenient warmth
to be drank, and so you may proportion the Milk to what quantity of water you
please; But I instance in that quantity, because for a Body of middle Age, and
competent strength, I hold it a fit proportion to begin with; and so increasing
every day gradually till he rises, to 8, or 9 Pints more, or less, as he shall
be able to bear it: and so again to decrease by degrees, ending where he began:
As suppose such a person should design to allott himself 20 days to drink the
water, and the first day he should begin with 3 pints; then to that proportion
I would have him add half a pint daily for the next six days, 3 quarters of a
pint for the eighth day, almost a pint for the ninth day, and a whole pint for
the tenth day, (which being your greatest Rise will amount to eight pints and
an half) and so for the remaining ten days daily to drink the same proportions
backwards, as what quantity you drank the tenth day, you are to drink the
eleventh, and what proportion you drank the ninth day, you are to take the
twelfth, etc. which brings you to the same Proportion for the twentieth and
last day, with which you began the first day.

But the just and convenient quantity of water to be taken at one time, is a
thing that cannot possibly be justly ascertained in regard of the several
Differences of Age, Sex, Strength, and other manifold Circumstances; yet
generally they reap the greatest benefit by it, that can drink most and
thoroughly concoct it.

And since by drinking the water too fast, by allotting too short a time for
taking the full proportion, diverse symptoms are caused, (through the
over-charging, and compressing the Vessels) as Gripings, Cold Sweats, Tensions,
Giddiness in the head, and the like: I would advise to take at first a third
part of the proportion, and then exercise half an hour, then another third
part, and exercise the same time, and then the last, or remaining part, with
exercise till all be past out of the Body, or till Dinnertime.

It is good before the taking of the Water to excite the Natural heat by
walking (yet not as to Sweat) for thereby the water will find the quicker and
better passage: Whilst the water is taking, the properest exercise to be used
is also Walking, or bowling, pitching of the Bar, or leaping as strength shall
permit, so they be used moderately. And when all the Proportion of Water is in
the Body; the like exercise is necessary also for the better digestion thereof,
by stirring up the Natural heat, whereby the internal Vessels being heated, the
water will be more forcibly attracted, and excited for expulsion, but a great
care ought to be taken that the exercise be not so violent as to provoke Sweat,
for thereby many inconveniences may accrue: And that you sleep not, till it is
digested, and wrought off: standing still in the Sun, and sitting on the ground
are very injurous and hurtful.

For those that have the convenience of Coach, or Horse, it will not be amiss
for such to alight about a mile before they come unto the Wells, and walk it
thither, and so exercising after every proportion of Water, the time and manner
before mentioned; and when they have taken the whole proportion for that time,
they may walk homewards about a Mile, or better; and then take Coach, or Horse
again. For when by thus walking, the Passages of the Body are, by the excitation
of the Natural heat, laxated, Riding in Coach, or on Horseback by compressing
the Muscles of the Abdomen, will very much further its operation.

After every Draught or two of water it may be convenient, to take a few
Carroway-Comfits, Coriander-Seed prepared, Elicampane, or Angelico preserved,
etc. to help the digestion of the Water, to promote its passage, and to comfort
all the Vessels through which the water passes.

And above all, temperance in respect of Diet is to be observed all the time of
drinking it; The Italian Proverb is to be taken notice of, viz. He that will
eat much, must eat little: Meat for the most part offends more by its Quantity
than Quality: a sober Diet as it prevents many Infirmities, so it is able to
cure many Diseases by diminishing the Crudities, which intemperance has bred
already, and to reduce all the humors of the Body to its true Natural
temperature. And on the other side, Excess in Diet to take in more meat and
drink, than Nature requires, or can digest, by hindering the Concoction of the
Chyle, does cause it to pass crude through the whole Body; from whence of
necessity, great Obstructions, and all manner of Hypochondriacal distempers are
caused.

As for the Quality of Meat, let such be used as may not hinder the effects of
the water, such as be of good nourishment, of easy digestion, and may freely
pass through the vessels, which serve for its distribution. In more particular
manner, all salt meats, Ducks, Geese, Bacon, Tripes, all salt Fish, Eeles, old
Cheese, Leeks, Onions, Cabbage, Muskmillions, Cucumbers, etc. are to be
avoided; And good young succulent Beef, Mutton, Lamb, Veal, Chickens, Pullets,
Turkeys, Partridges, Phesants, young Conies, etc. are to be used. Also Apples,
Pears, Plums, Cherries, ripe Gooseberries, Rasp-berries, etc. are allowable, if
sparingly eaten, and that a little before supper, and then they help to temper
the Blood.

As for Drinks, I commend Beer or Ale, that is neither too stale, nor too
small: I approve also, that those whose Stomachs are used thereunto, may use
Spanish, French, or Rhenish Wines, since it may prove of very ill consequence
to thwart and cross Custom all on a sudden. But I am of an Opinion that the
custom of drinking so much white and Rhenish wines at meals, occasions
multitudes of Distempers, because they being Diureticall, and very penetrative,
do carry down with them the raw and crude juice of the meat to the Liver
before it be concocted.

Let the Supper be larger than the Dinner, 6 or 7 hours after it, because by
Supper-time the Stomach will be less relax, and be more capacitated to concoct
a greater quantity of Meat.

After the ending of the waters it will be necessary for a month or six weeks,
to use a very spare Diet to keep out, and prevent all Crudities.

(SECT. VI.) Of the Necessity of the learned, and skillfull Physician's Advice,
both before, at, and after the taking of the Waters.
THough this Water proceeds from such Minerals, as make it highly convenient,
and proper for the several Diseases abovementioned: Yet we are not to imagine
it such an absolute Remedy, as that of it self it is able to cure Diseases
without any rule for the use of it, or without any other helps to be sometimes
joined with it. But it is necessary, that the learned and skilful Physician
(especially such an One as is well acquainted with the water) should be advised
with, both before, at, and after the taking the water.

First, before you take it, as you love your life and health, be advised what
Preparations are requisite to prevent the great inconveniences, which
otherways may fall out: For if you should take this water upon a foul Stomach
into a Body replete with gross humors, it (by carrying them with it, with a
speedy impetuousness, into the veins, which, being not capacious enough for the
reception of such a quantity of collected matter, do become thereby obstructed)
instead of doing good, and reserating Obstructions, does, for want of due
preparation, wedge those gross humors into the veins, which give rise to many
stubborn Diseases, before perhaps altogether unknown to the Patient: and upon
this account it is that many (either receiving no benefit, or perhaps no small
damage by this Water) are apt to complain of it, and thereupon do dehort
others from the use of it, and so ungratefully blaspheme the great blessing of
God bestowed upon these Wells.

Secondly, Whilst you are taking it, the Physicians advice is also necessary,
by reason of the unexpected success, and unlookt for appearing of Accidents,
which may fall out. As if upon taking of it, it pass not freely through the
body, but is accidentally retained; it is to be considered in what part of the
body it is at a stand, that it may be evacuated by some appropriated means: for
if it be retained in the belly, or Hypochondries (which will be apparent by
wind rumbling up and down, and oppressure) a Clyster is convenient for its
evacuation: if in the Stomach (which will appear by a disposition to vomit)
some opening and cleansing Cathartick will be convenient to make a free passage
for it from thence. If it be retained in the habit of the body, (which is
evident by a heaviness, and chillness over the body without the aforesaid
rumbling wind, and oppressure) some Hydragogall Medicines will be necessary. So
that as, upon the aforesaid Account, the Physicians advice is necessary to
excite the water to a quicker passage; So, in other cases, he may have reason
to hebetate, and stop its too active operation, or may find it necessary to
rectify some other emergent ill Symptoms, or perhaps to advise you to desist
for a time from drinking it, or it may be, he may hold it requisite to use with
the water some Cathartick, Diuretic or Deoppillative Medicament, appropriated
to the Distemper for which it is drunk; So that by reason of the variety of
particular Accidents, which may happen, and the various Circumstances incident
in so many several cases, it being impossible for any one to intimate
particular Directions, without dangerous mistakes to the Patient, I must referr
you (as properly appertaining) to your skilful Physician.

Thirdly, and lastly, the Physicians Counsel, and help is as necessary, when
you have finished your Waterdrinking Course; for directing you, how to carry off
the terrene Sediments and crude serosities, which the water must needs have
left behind it in your Bodies: which would else be carried down into the
smaller Vessels and cause obstructions, whereby many great inconveniences and
Symptoms may follow; which if by a right course carried off, will perfect the
Cure, which the water perhaps has but happily begun, and made preparation for;
but of these things I can say nothing, but in general terms, and therefore must
(as before) commend you to your Physician for more full, and particular
Instructions, as occasion shall require.

Since the disposing hand of Providence has settled me in Lewisham, the place
which God, out of his liberal bounty has blessed with this Medicinal water, and
there freely dispensed it; I look upon it as a Providential intimation to
oblige me not only to use my utmost endeavor to investigate its virtues for
the general good, but also freely to afford my advice for the Direction of such
that intending to drink this water shall desire it.

So that I shall take leave to give notice that if any Persons shall be pleased
to conferr with me, about taking this water, if I am not at the Wells, I shall
be God willing ready at my house every day (till 10 a Clock in the Morning, if
no more than ordinary occasion intervene) to afford my best Advice gratis,
where also (if there shall be found occasion) they may be supplied (without any
further trouble) with variety of Medicinal preparations, appropriated to the
several Distempers, this water is to be used for.

For I am not ashamed to confess that I have met with some Diseases so
inveterately fixed, so stubborn and difficult to be eradicated, that all that I
could do by the use of Artificial Medicines have proved succesless, till being
assisted by this (of Natures own preparing) and then in no very long time have
they given place, and been quelled. So that I think it no discredit to fight at
all lawful Weapons against such inveterate and implacable enemies.

FINIS

