ENGLAND'S Present, Great, and most Incumbent DUTY: VIZ. To meet God in the Way
OF HIS Judgments.

By Robert Perrot, Minister of the Gospel.

Who would set the briars and thorns against me in battle? I would go through
them, I would burn them together.

Or let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me, and he
shall make peace with me,

Isa. 27. 4, 5. Quem, nullae munitiones nostrae, a perficiendo judicio
aversurae sunt, nos ipsi unica resipiscentia, amolituri sumus. Junius. LONDON,
Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and three Crowns at the lower end of
Cheapside, and at the Bible upon London-Bridg. 1676.

READER,
THOU have here, though plainly, yet faithfully and impartially held forth unto
thee, thine and every ones (that tenders the Nations weal) Present, Great, and
most Incumbent Duty. viz. To meet God in the way of his Judgments: In which he
has often, and is still coming forth; and in which, unless we speedily meet
him, who knows how far he may proceed, His anger not being turned away, but his
hand ( several ways) stretched out still? The Lord has made us not only
Ministers, but Watchmen, Ezekiel. 3. 17, Son of man, I have made thee a Watchman
to the house of Israel -- And as such we are to warn and make people aware,
what the great God is doing in the World; and to excite and stir them up to
their duty, accordingly, we are to dict^te, not only what is seasonable at all
times; but what more especially at such a juncture of time, which judging that
which follows so to be at this time. viz. To meet God in the way of his
Judgments: yea, so, as nothing can be more: has occasioned this discourse: and
therefore as for Apologies for what is here made Public, especially by one so
unfit for so great a work; let the too great seasonableness, as well as
usefulness and concern thereof, serve at once for all. The public weal not
only warrants, but exacts the doing our utmost as to what especially has more
than an ordinary tendency thereunto. Here Is no despising of Dominions, no
speaking evil of Dignities, nor pleading for Parties, but only for what is
every ones great duty and concern. viz. Our speedy betaking our selves to that
which may help to secure the whole, and yet save a sinking Nation. It is said
of Croesus his Son, that though he was dumb, yet seeing his Father about to be
slain, the dumb child spoke: And surely the serious consideration of the
deplorable estate that this Nation is at present in, both in regard of the many
heinous and grievous sins daily perpetrated in it, as also the heavy Judgments
impendent over it; is enough to make even a dumb man speak, if possibly he
might dictate ought that might prevent its final ruin. And what can be dictated
as more seasonable, or sovereign, than what the Lord himself in such a case
dictates, viz. To prepare to meet him?

And surely the many gray hairs that are here and there at this day upon
England (as sometimes upon Ephraim, Hosea 7. 9.) at home, and that Universal
Deluge of Affliction which has well nigh overwhelm the Church of God abroad;
speak it high time to awake out of sleep, and now if ever, to stir up our
selves to take hold of God, and humble our selves, and reform at a more than
ordinary rate. And in that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping and
mourning, etc. And what day was that? Ver. 5, A day of trouble, and treading
down, and perplexity, by the Lord God of Hosts, in the Valley of Vision, etc.
And where almost is it not so? And should not this be something to us at home?
And therefore we may now say of laughter, it is mad; and of sensual mirth what
does it? And if ever, That of the Apostle James is now seasonable, Chap. 4. 9,
10, Be afflicted and mourn, etc. Woe (says one) to our jolly, hardened
professors, who have no brokenness for sin, that threatens the destruction of
the Land of their Nativity; and if such be Penitents, (says the same) they are
gaudy ones, fitter for the Stage and Tyring-room of Vanity, than the House of
Mourning. I have read, that one of the wisest Statesmen of this Kingdom that
ever was, had this Verse written upon his Study door,

Anglica gens est optima flens, and pessima ridens. The English Nation is best
weeping, and worst laughing. I am sure we are never in more danger, than when
most secure. And what Ocean of tears is sufficient to bewail our sins? It is
notably, and no less truly observed by a worthy Writer Englands Imminent
Danger. p. 55.
a-late: That We in this Nation ingross, and set up a Monopoly of Vice, and
have made this Land the Stews of the whole World, and the very drain and sink
of the sins of former times; as if all Miscreants were here met, as at a
general Rendezvous: And how (says the same Author) have the filthy streams and
channels of all Nations, disgorg'd themselves in this Common-shoar of Iniquity.
We may here behold the old Worlds oppression, the fullness of Bread, idleness
and filthiness of Sodom, the pride of Jerusalem, the drunkenness of Holland,
the vanity of France, the uncleanness of Spain, the Iron-yoak of Egypt, the
furnace of Babylon, etc. And we are building up the confused Babel of our sins
and guilt, to such a prodigious height, that we seem to threaten Heaven it
self, and as if we meant to pull God himself off his Throne. How many know no
other breeding but to sin with impudence? nor bravery, but to brave it out
against the great God, and charge upon their own ruin? So that former times
brought forth but Punies to our Anakins in wickedness. And how do sinners
strive for mastery in sin, as if there was an excellency therein? Never was
there a Nation more signalized with Gods goodness, nor more prodigious in
wickedness, fuller of stupendous sins, and yet fuller of stupid impenitency;
being deaf to the loudest cry of Gods sorest judgments, and making no other use
of them, but to defeat their design. And shall not the great God visit for
these things, and his soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Can such sins,
and a Nations safety; such impiety, and a Nations impunity, stand long
together; surely was it not that Gods Mercy is great above the Heavens, and his
Patience Infinite as himself, we had long ago been as Sodom, and like unto
Gomorrah; but bowels of mercy have hitherto prevailed against the pleas of
Justice, as to an utter overthrow. How shall I give thee up England? how shall
I make thee as Admah? etc. And let therefore these riches of the goodness,
forbearance, and long-suffering of God, at length lead us to repentance and
amendment. Gather your selves together, O Nation not desired, before the Decree
bring forth: our Repentance had need run, lest Gods sentence outrun it. Currat
poenitentia ne prae currat sententia.

I have studied plainness, and given but an hint of what I might much more have
enlarged; That this being so much the duty and concern of all, it might not
exceed the capacity of any; and that neither the Price nor prolixity thereof,
might discourage any from the procuring and reading thereof. We have many hot
disputes, and controversies at this day among our selves. But it were well, we
all now jointly and unanimously set our selves to comprimise, and take up that
controversy which the great God has with us, and to appease that wrath, which
by reason of our many, great and crying sins, is so justly incensed against us,
and has a-fresh a-late broken out several ways among us; to put us upon which,
is the main purport and design of the ensuing discourse, to which that it may
prove subservent, shall be the prayer of him, who is, and remains

Studious and desirous of thine and the Nations weal. R. Perrot.

An Advertisement.
THere is extant by the same Author, a Larger Treatise, Entitled, Englands
sole, and Sovereign way of being saved, grounded upon Psalm. 80. 19, Turn us
again, O Lord God of Hosts: cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.

England's present, great, and most incumbent Duty, viz. To meet God in the way
of his Judgments.
Amos IV. 12, 13. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: and because I
will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.

For lo, he that forms the mountains, and creates the wind, and declares
unto man what is his thought; that makes the morning darkness, and treads
upon the high places of the earth: the Lord, the God of Hosts is his Name.


CHAP. I. The general Scope, Coherence, Parts, and Explication of the Words.
THE Lord had inflicted several Judgments upon this People already, 1. He had
given them cleanness of teeth, and want of bread, ver. 6. 2. Withholden the
rain from them, ver. 7, 8. 3. Smitten them with blasting and mildew, ver. 9. 4.
Sent among them the Pestilence, (as he has among us.) 5. Slain their young men
with ehe sword, and taken away their horses, (as he has done ours,) ver. 10.
Yea, 6. He had overthrown some of them, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah;
and they were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning, ver. 11. And yet
they, notwithstanding all these Judgments, remaining still incorrigible, and
not returning to the Lord: The Lord thereupon resolves, (...): Therefore thus
will I do unto thee, O Israel^ and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to
meet thy God, O Israel, etc.

In the words, we have 1st, The Lords Minatory Resolution; Therefore thus will
I do unto thee, O Israel.

2. His seasonable Admonition, and that is, that Israel (because he will do
this) prepare to meet him.

3. We have this Admonition backed and enforced, by an Argument drawn from the
Consideration of Gods infinite Power, Might, Majesty, and Greatness; of which
we have here a most ample Description, ver. 13, He forms the mountains, and
creates the wind, etc. and he that does all this, the Lord, the God of Hosts
is his Name.

Explication.

Therefore thus will I do unto thee, etc. this therefore refers to their
incorrigibleness under former Judgments, as the ground of the Lords present
Resolution: Thus will I do unto thee: How? This Interpreters several ways make
out, 1st, thus, i. e. say some, as I have before threatened, Verse 2, 3, Or
thus, i. e. as thy incorirgibleness deserves, and calls for: Or 3dly, thus, i.
e. worse then ever I have done, yet I will come with a severer struck so Calvin
and others: Or 4thly, the Lord by expressing himself thus, would the more point
out the dreadfulness of the stroke, as being above what could be expressed; and
therefore wraps it up in silence, and leaves it to them to imagine what it
would be.

-- Prepare to meet thy God: I find Expositors Interpreting this in a double
sense: 1st, As spoken Ironically, i. e. in a way of holy derision at this
Peoples obstinacy, and fool hardiness; as if the Lord had said, Seeing then you
will not be reclaimed, but still stand it out against Me, and I also am
resolved to go on, to do as I have said; and do Proclaim open war against you,
as Enemies and Rebels, Prepare then to meet me: muster up your forces, and
gather together your strength, and make the best preparations you can, and see
if you be able to withstand Me, or keep off that final Destruction which I have
determined to bring upon you. And so this is like to the message which Jehu
sent to the rulers of Jezreel, and those that brought up Ahabs children, 2
Kings 10. 1, 2, 3, etc. And this agrees well enough with the sequel; for lo, he
that forms the mountains, etc. as if the Lord had said, And you had need to
make all, and the best preparation that you can; for you have a God to contest
with, and he a God of infinite Power, Might, Majesty and Greatness; he forms
the mountains, etc. and the Lord, the God of Hosts is his Name.

But others understand it rather as spoken in a plain genuine sense, viz. that
Israel should meet him in an humble penitential way, so as to endeavor to
appease him; and so prevent that final overthrow, which else was like to come
upon them: and so we are to look upon the words, not so much as a challenge,
but as seasonable counsel and advice to Israel, to prevent yet, if possible,
their ruin, and so I shall understand it at present: and thus it seems the
rather to be taken, because the Lord does in the very next Chapter, several
times invite them to seek him, that they might live, as ver. 4, Seek ye me, and
ye shall live, and ver. 6, etc. Indeed their case seemed even desperate, and
God seemed to have shut up against them the gate of mercy; but the Lord hints
yet to them, that if they did but timely prepare to meet him, there might be
hopes yet of pacifying of him.

CHAP. II. The several collateral Observations.
Obs. 1. WHatever is done to a people in a way of Judgment, It is the Lord that
does it: Therefore thus will I do unto thee: and ver. 6, I also have given you
cleanness of teeth, etc. and Amos 3. 6, Shall there be evil in a City, and the
Lord has not done it? Our sins indeed they occasion and procure what is done;
put him upon such work, as he tells Jerusalem, Jer. 4. 18, Thy way and thy
doings have procured these things unto thee: this is thy wickedness, etc. and
the Lord makes use of what Instruments he pleases, in executing what is done,
but still he does it: whoever are the Instruments, he is still the great Agent,
and Efficient: Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble
spring out of the ground, Job 5. 6. Judgments are not casual, but providential.
Isa. 42. 24, Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? did not the
Lord, he, against whom we have sinned, etc? and the Lord still observes what he
does in such a way, and sets down and keeps as it were a Catalogue of his
Judgments, as well as of his Mercies, and of peoples deportment under them, how
they carry it; as here in this Chapter: The Lord declares all he had done, and
all their incorrigibleness notwithstanding: Yet have ye not returned unto me,
says the Lord: and Jer. 8. 6, I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright;
no man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? Every one
turned to his course, as the horse rushes into the battle.

Use 1. Let us then in all that is done, see, own, and acknowledge the Lords
hand, and humble our selves under the same: thus it is said, The man of wisdom
shall do, Mic. 6. 9, The Lords voice cries unto the City: And the man of
wisdom shall see thy Name, i. e. he shall see thee, and own thy hand in what is
done: the not doing of which, the Lord complains of, and threatens, Isa. 26.
11, Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see; but they shall see,
etc.

2. Let us turn to him that smites, and seek the Lord of Hosts as he often
invites, Hosea 14. 1, O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God, -- Take with you
words, and turn to the Lord; say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive
us graciously, etc. So Joel 2. 12, Therefore also now, says the Lord, Turn ye
even to me with all your heart, etc. and seek ye me, and ye shall live, Amos 5.
4, 6. And this the Lord expects, Hosea 15, In their affliction they will seek
me early. Lord, in trouble have they visitod thee, Isa. 26. 16. And peoples not
doing of this, is the great matter and ground of his complaint, and it rolls so
in his thoughts, that he knows not how (as it were) to digest it. As here in
this Chapter, it is five times together the matter of the Lords complaint, --
Yet have ye not returned to me, says the Lord, ver. 6. So ver. 8, 9, 10, 11.
So elsewhere, Hosea 11. 7, Though they called them to the most High, none at
all would exalt him. They looked after, and minded other ways and means of
help. Isa. 22. 8, Thou did look in that day to the armor of the house of the
Forest, etc. ver. 9, 10, 11. And they thought in this they were very wise and
politic; but they neglected the main, To look to the Lord, and to seek and
turn to him, ver. 11, 12, 23. And for this the Lord threatened to bring upon
them final ruin, For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still: For the people turns not to him that smites them;
neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts. Therefore the Lord will cut off from
Israel head and tail, branch and rush in one day, Isa. 9. 12, 13, 14.

And therefore, as ever we would prevent our own, and the Nations ruin, let us
speedly set upon this; yea, and encourage one another to this, as the best
course we can take, as the best way we can go: as those, Hosea 6. 1, 2, 3,
Come, say they, let us return unto the Lord: for he has torn, and he will heal
us: he has smitten, and he will bind us up, etc. And why gaddest thou about
(says the Lord) so much to change thy way, i. e. the way which I have
prescribed thee, and that which should be thy way; but thou triest other ways
and conclusions: but in vain, and to no purpose, they shall avail thee nothing,
Jer. 2. 36, 37, Thou shall be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of
Assyria: Yea, thou shall go forth from him, and thine hands upon thine head (a
sign of shame and sorrow), for the Lord has rejected thy confidences; those
ways and refuges thou confidest in, and thou shall not prosper in them.

Observe. 2. Whatever the Lord does, or threatens to do, to a people in a way of
Judgment, it is not without cause; there is a therefore for it: Therefore thus
will I do unto thee, O Israel: and therefore has he poured upon him the fury
of his anger, Isa. 42. 25. Therefore the Kingdom of God shall be taken from
you, Mat. 21. 43. And so I might give you hundreds more of such therefores, and
wherefores, but they are every where obvious, and therefore I shall not stand
to mention them; and all declare, that whatever the Lord does in a way of
Judgment, it is not without cause: But does not the Lord tell Satan, that he
moved him against Job, to destroy him without cause, Job 2. 3? It was indeed
without cause, as to what Satan did alledg, and pretend as to Job, which was
gross Hypocrisy: so without cause, but not absolutely; for if God narrowly
search the best, there is ever cause, so as to justify God as to what he does.
God indeed sometimes afflicts without respect to sin; but still there is cause
enough from sin in the best to merit it, though not always the moving cause,
etc.

Use 1. This then lets us see the vast difference between Gods acting in a way
of Judgment, and the sinners in a way of sin: For the one is not without cause,
there is a therefore for it, but none for the other; There Is no therefore for
that: we do not indeed suffer without cause, but we sin without cause: Gods
Judgments are not without cause, but man's transgressions are; and hence is it
that the Lord does so Expostulate with his people, as concerning their sinful
carriages toward him, as being without cause, nay, as having given them great
cause to the contrary, as Jer. 2. 5, Thus says the Lord, What iniquity have
your Fathers found in me, that they are gone from me? and Verse 31, Have I been
a wilderness unto Israel, a land of darkness? say my people, We are lords, we
will come no more to thee. So Mic. 6. 3, 4, 5, O my people, What have I done
unto thee? and wherein have I wearred thee? Testify against me. For I brought
thee up out of the land of Egypt, etc. As if the Lord had said, I have done
indeed much good for thee, shown a great deal of kindness toward thee: But
what evil or hurt did I ever do to thee? So that if it be ask't here, Who has
wounds, who has grief, who has offense without cause? It must be answered, God
haes. O the disingenuity, Ingratitude, and unreasonableness of sin and sinners.
Gods Service is indeed most reasonable, as that we should love him, and live
and devote our selves to him -- Which is yur reasonable service, Romans 12. 1.
But sin is unreasonable, and sinners: That we may be delivered from
unreasonable and wicked men, 2 These 3. 2. Solomon advises, Prove. 3. 30, Strive
not with a man without cause, if he have done the no harm. But how do sinners
strive with God without cause, when he has done them no harm, but much good?
And how sad is this? for shall evil be recompensed for good? Sinners (it is
said) love those that love them, and do good to those that do good to them,
Luke 6. 32, 33. It is thus indeed as to Men, but not to God. Sinners (as one
expresses it) carry themselves as Men toward Men, but as Devils toward God,
acting below the very principles of common humanity, and their own nature as
Men, as if they had not the hearts of Men; no principle being more deeply
engraven in the hearts of Men, than this, to do good to those who do good to
them; but sinners do evil to that God, who does good to them, and never did
them hurt. They load, and weary him with their iniquities, and make him to
serve with their sins, who daily loads them with his benefits; and sin against
a Thousand mercies: So that God may say to sinners, what Christ sometime said
to the Jews; For which of my good works is it that you stone me? John 10. 32.
That you go on to sin against me, is it because I made you? or because I have
ever since preserved you? (For we could as soon make our selves, as preserve
our selves) or is it because I daily still sustain you, feed you, cloth you,
and every way take care of you, and provide for you? O the reflection upon this
another day, that there was no Cause, no Therefore, for sinners carrying it so
toward God as they did, will be a great part of that worm of Conscience in
Hell, which shall never dye. And this made those in Judges 2, when the Angel of
the Lord had convinced them of the unreasonableness of their actings, Why, says
the Angel, have ye done this? This made them lift up their voice and weep, and
make the place where they were, a very Bochim, verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Use 2. Then let us justify the Lord in all he does, and acknowledge that he is
righteous, not doing what he does without cause; but there being a Therefore
for it. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel. Has the Lord sent among
us the Sword? and after that the Plague? Yea, and after that, Fire, and several
other judgments, as Gripes, strange sicknesses, Seasons, Storms, Tempests,
Breaking us at Sea, and causing strange Inundations at Land? And is not his
anger yet turned away, but is his hand stretched out still? As we have seen
a*late, in that dreadful Fire in Southwark; and again, a*late at Northampton,
to the great consternation of that people. None of these are without cause, but
there is a Therefore for them all; and therefore let us say as the Church, Lam.
1. 18, The Lord is righteous, for we have rebelled, etc. And as Daniel ^. 7, O
Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee; but unto us confusion of faces, etc.

Use. 3. Let this then quiet us, and cause us patiently to bear what ever the
Lord has, or may further inflict upon us; as the Prophet Micah resolves chap.
7. 9, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him. That is very observable to this purpose, which we read, Ezekiel. 13. 22, 23,
where the Lord says of a Remnant there that should escape, That as concerning
all the evil he should bring upon Jerusalem, when they should see what cause
there was for what he did, they should be comforted concerning it all; a
strange expression! The Lord had done fore and heavy things against Jerusalem,
inflicted grievous judgments, he mentions four, viz. The Sword, Famine, noisome
Beasts, and Pestilence: And not only against the Land, and City, but against the
Temple: Read the Book of Lamentations. And yet when that Remnant should see the
ways and doings of those against whom God had done it, they should see such
cause for what God had done, that it is said, as concerning all that God had
done, They should be comforted, i. e. contented, silenced, well satisfied, and
not have a word tosay, as concerning all that the Lord had brought upon them.
Pray peruse the place, it is worthy your serious observation, Verse. 22, Yet
behold, therein shall be left a remnant that shall be brought forth, both sons
and daughters: Behold, they shall come forth unto you, and ye shall see their
way and their doings (Their manner and course of lise and conversation, how
evil it has been), and ye shall be comforted concerning the evil that I have
brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning all that I have brought upon it. And
they shall comfort you, when ye see their ways, and their doings: and ye shall
know that I have not done without cause, all that I have done in it, says the
Lord. And truly such have been, and still are at this day, the daring, crying
sins, and abominable wickednesses of this Nation, yea, and of this City, as to
the generality of us: Such is our pride every manner of way, in our Gait,
Habit, Hair, Apparel, yea in our very Nakedness; such are our garish, ranting,
flanting, immodest Attires and Dresses, so contrary to the fear of the Lord,
and the profession of Godliness: Such our Luxury, Sensuality, Excesses,
Revellings, Drunkenness, desperate Security; such our horrid and open
profanations of Gods Name and Day, such our Atheism, Oaths, Errors, Heresies,
Blasphemies, Perjuries, Superstitions, Idolatries, Oppressions, Cruelties,
Thefts, Murders, Whoredoms, Adulteries, Uncleanness, Hatred of God and his
Ways, and the power of Godliness. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and
stealing, and committing adultery, sinners breaking out, and blood touching
blood, Hos. 4. 2. In a word, such are our prodigious and execrable impieties of
all sorts and kinds whatsoever: That whatever evils the Lord has, or may yet
further bring upon us, or what ever he do with us; we have cause to be
comforted, i. e. silenced, satisfied, and never open our mouths more. Why
criest thou (says God) for thinc affliction? Thy sorrows are incurable, for
the multitude of thine iniquity: because thy sins were increased, I have done
these things unto thee, Jer. 30. 15. And wherefore says the Lord, will you
plead with me? Jer. 2. 29. They were ready to plead against God, as if he had
been rigorous toward them; but wherefore, says the Lord, will you plead with
me? ye have all transgressed against me, and let that silence you, and well it
may: For there is more true real evil in one sin, the least sin, than in all
other evils whatsoever: the evil of punishment being little to the evil of sin;
the bitterness for sin, to the bitterness in sin; one strikes but at the
creature, the other at the Creator, at God; one at what is finite, the other at
what is infinite, etc.

Use. 4. Let us labor then to find out the Cause, and get it removed: Let us
not stand complaining, but sall upon searching and trying, for there is a
Therefore for what the Lord doe^: For what ever he has done, or goes on still
farther to do. As the Lord said to Joshua, when Israel fled before the Men of
Ai, and were smitten, and Joshua fell to the earth upon his face, and was much
troubled, Get thee up, says the Lord, wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face?
Israel has sinned, etc. As if the Lord had said, Is there not cause for what
is done? And let us therefore bespeak one another as they did, Lam. 3. 39, 40,
41, 42, Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his
sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord: let us lift
up our heart, with our hands, unto God in the Heavens* We have transgressed,
and we have rebelled, etc.

Observe. 3. Although the Lord has inflicted several judgments already upon a
people for their sins; yet unless they return unto him, he has more and
heavier still to inflict; yea, and will inflict them, unless they return unto
him. How many judgments does the Lord here reckon up, that he had inflicted
upon this people already? Want of bread, of rain, blasting, mildew, pestilence,
sword, etc? And yet he had more and heavier still to inflict. Therefore thus
will I do unto thee, O Israel. And how often does the Lord tell his people, in
Levit. 26, that if they yet walked contrary to him, and would not hearken to
him, he would bring seven times more plagues upon them, verse. 21, 24, 28, etc.
The Lords quiver is full of Arrows. We have Four mentioned together, Ezekiel. 14.
21, The sword, the famine, the noisome beast, and the pestilence. And has not
England experienced this, That the Lord has variety of judgments to inflict?
For how many has the Lord inflicted upon us, one after another, and sometimes
several together? The Lord he sent the Sword, which did eat the flesh, and
drink the blood of many; and when that would not do, he sent the Pestilence,
That walked in darkness, and wasted at noonday: Did execution continually;
laying waste whole Families, and making desolate all their company, sweeping
away in and about this City, in less than a years space, near, if not above, A
Hundred Thousand; making burying-work, till there was scarce room to bury in.
Thus the Lord first sent fire into our bones, as the Church complains, Lam. 1.
13, From above has he sent fire into my bones, and it prevails against them.
And when this would not do, he sends a dreadful Fire into our Habitations,
which swallows up both them and our Estates; so that before we were scarce got
out of one Fire, another devours us; one our Houses, another our selves; one
our Persons, the other our Portions and Estates; as the Lord threatened the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 15. 7, And I will set my face against them,
they shall go out from one fire, and another shall devour them, etc. And when
these would not do, how many more judgments has the Lord inflicted upon us
since? So many, that it is hard to reckon them up, strange Gripes, and other
grievous sicknesses; strange Seasons, grievous Storms, Tempests breaking us at
Sea, and causing strange Innundations at Land, such as have not been in our
days, no not in our Fathers days before us. Thus that the Lord has many and
various judgments to inflict upon a people for their sins, Gods dealing with us
here in this Nation, abundantly evidences.

Use 1. Let us all then learn to fear this God, who has so many, and so
various judgments to inflict on a people for their sins; who though he has
inflicted several already, has yet more to inflict and heavier, whose quiver
is so full of Arrows. I will, says the Lord, heap mischiefs upon them, I will
spend my arrows upon them. The sword without, and terror within, etc. Deuteronomy.
32. 23, 25. There are many Plagues, that are written in this Book, and many
that are not written; Deuteronomy. 28. 61. And shall not all then fear him? O let all
the earth fear the Lord, let all the inhabitants of the world stand in aw of
him, Psalm. 33. 8. Who would not fear thee, O king of nations? for to thee does
it appertain, etc. Jer. 10. 7. And you know what Christ says to his friends, Be
not afraid of them that can kill the body, and after that have no more that
they can do: But fear him that has more yet that he can do, that after he has
killed, can cast into Hell, Luke 12. 4, 5. And therefore Christ's says again,
fear him.

Use 2. Let us no longer then stand it out against him, but speedily and
forthwith come in, and submit unto him; for if we do not, he has still more
judgments to inflict, more mischiess to heap, more arrows to spend, his quiver
is not emptied, nor are his arrows all drawn out, or exhausted; but will
therefore overcome when he judges, subdue, or destroy. If devouring us as a
Lion will not do, he can be as a Moth, as he threatens, Hos. 5. 12, Therefore
will I be unto Ephraim as a Moth, etc. secretly and insensibly consuming us. If
whips will not do, he has scorpions; if not footmen, he has horses, Jer. 12. 5.
If not winds to fan and to cleanse, he has winds utterly to lay waste. He can
bring over us, the same judgments again, as Sword, Pestilence, Fire, Flames,
the last of which he has eminently done a-late, as (not to mention other) at
Northampon: which (our mother City being before consumed) was next, (as being
one of her principal daughters) dreadfully consumed also; and where very lately
the Fire has broken out again, and burnt a great part of the remainder
thereof. So lately in Southwark, in a few hours how many hundreds of Houses
were there suddenly consumed? And a dreadful and lamentable Fire was there
alate in Warwick Lane? So I call it, because though there was but one House
burnt, yet Seven Persons were consumed in
that One House: Dreadful indeed! for we do not read of so many consumed, no
not in that great desolating Fire in 66, when 87 Parishes were burned down to
the ground within the Walls, and several without, and according to the
computation of some, above Thirteen thousand Houses, and yet not so many
Persons consumed as in this one House! O! it is lamentable and dreadful indeed,
when God by Fire shall consume not only our Houses and Estates, but our selves;
not only our Portions, but Persons; not only dead Walls, but living Wights! Or
God can inflict yet other and heavier, as Famine, a sore and heavy Arrow
indeed! one of the dreadfullest Arrows in the Lords Quiver; which (blessed be
God) we have not as yet experienced, at least in late years: though formerly in
the year 700, History tells of a Famine here in England, of three years
continuance, so violent, that not only many daily died for hunger, but great
numbers joining hand in hand, 40 or 50 in a company, threw themselves headlong
into the Sea. And this judgment star'd them a-late in the face, in New England,
as one writes, several Horses being there eaten, in pursuit of the enemy, for
want o^ provisions. But though the Lord has some times threatened this, yet
blessed be God he has not yet inflicted it. How dreadful an Arrow this is,
appears by the monstrous and horrid effects thereof, as Lam. 4. 10, The hands
of the pitiful women have sodden their own children, they were their meat in
the destruction of the daughter of my people. O tremble ye women that are at
ease, and hear and be troubled ye careless daughters, Isa. 32. 9, 11. For what
are we better than they? This cannot but be looked upon as exceeding sad,
heavy, and horrid, as indeed it is! But what is sin then, that occasions this?
Thus the Lord has this, and several other judgments yet to inflict; as
Captivity, Earthquakes, of which, in several Counties there has been somewhat
a-late: Or the Lord can punish, by resolving to punish no more, I mean with
outward punishments: As he threatens, Hos. 4. 14, I will not punish your
daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your spouses when they commit
adultery, etc. and verse. 17, Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone. And
Isa. 1. 5, Why should ye be stricken any more? etc. And this is very sad! For
though former judgments have not wrought upon a people, yet there may be hopes,
God pursuing them still with judgments, that they may at length be prevailed
with; but where Remedies are no more used, it argues the case desperate: And
God has not only temporal, but spiritual judgments to inflict, which though
least feared, or felt, are the sorest and heaviest of all. As to be under a
spirit of slumber, to hear, but not to understand; to see, but not perceive; to
have hearts made fat and gross, and ears dull of hearing, etc. Romans 11. 8, etc.
To be given up to strong delusions, and to believe lies, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12,
as many are in these days, because they received not the love of the truth that
they might be saved: nor believed the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. So for people to be given up to their own hearts lusts, and to
walk in their own counsels, as Psalm. 8. 12, So I gave them up to their own
hearts lusts, etc. A dreadful so indeed! one of the saddest in the whole book
of God: worse than to be given up to the Plague, Sword, etc. So we read of a
spiritual judgment upon Egypt, Isa. 19. 11, 12, 13, 14, etc. God having mingled
a perverse spirit, a spirit of frowardness, foolishness and madness, in the
midst thereof; so as to deprive them of all wisdom and understanding, that they
could neither give counsel, nor know which way to turn themselves, but erred in
every work of their hands, and were like a drunken man lying in his Vomit, who
the more he stirs, the more he defiles himself; and so the more they went on to
give counsel, the more harm and mischief they did: So that all were confused,
and neither persons of high nor low degree, had their wits or senses about
them, neither did any of their businesses prosper, or were brought to
perfection. Herodotus writes of a certain King of Egypt, called Psammetychus,
that he lay with a mighty Army 29 years complete before the City of Azotus: A
wise enterprise, was it not? Thus the Lord wants not plagues still to inflict
upon an incorrigible people; so that if we still stand it out against him, we
shall certainly fall before him, and he will carry it, and have the day.

Obser. 4. If Gods Israel, if his people refuse to return to him, they must
expect no more to be spared than others. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O
Israel. God is here no respecter of persons. Jer. 15. 7, I will destroy my
people (such they professed themselves to be), since they return not from their
ways. And chap. 12. 7, I have forsaken mine house: I have left mine heritage: I
have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies: and as I
live, says the Lord, though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah, were
the signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence, Jer. 22. 24, 25,
etc.

Use. Let not any then bear themselves up with this, that they are Gods Israel,
his People, as if this would secure them, for it will not; Therefore thus will
I do to thee, O Israel. And Jer. 7. 12, Go ye now (says the Lord) unto my place
which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to
it, for the wickedness of my people Israel. So may the Lord say, Go to
Jerusalem, go to those Seven once so famous Churches of Asia, yea, go to
Germany, and go now to New England, and see what God is doing there -- Nay this
is so far from securing a People, that this the rather more incenses his wrath,
and necessitates his punishing of them. Amos 3. 2, You only have I known of all
the families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.
And Ezekiel. 9. 6, Begin at my sanctuary, etc.

Obser. 5. God does not willingly inflict more and heavier strokes upon his
people. For while he threatens here to deal severelier with them, he does
withal admonish them to meet him; which shows he had rather be so prevented,
and that mercy rather pleases him, his usual and ordinary work: And he does
indeed threaten, that he may not inflict. Lam. 3. 33, For he does not afflict
willingly, etc. And how shall I give thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee
Israel? etc. Hos. 11. 7.

Use. Let us not then by our incorrigibleness, force him to what he is
unwilling, and has (as it were) a reluctance.

CHAP. III. The main and principal Observation.
Obser. 6. WHen God is in the way of his judgments, it is his Peoples great
duty and concern for to meet him: As here he admonishes them. Therefore thus
will I do unto thee, O Israel: and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to
meet thy God, O Israel. And that the Lord does here invite his people to meet
him, it does in a word denote, 1. His being angry with them. 2. His coming
forth as a formidable enemy against them. 3. His being yet placable, and that
there is a possibility yet of appeasing him, if his people do but timely
address themselves to him. But 4. That he will else certainly go on to do what
he threatens.

Now in the further carrying on this Proposition of so great importance, I
shall do these Three things.

1. I shall show you how we are to meet God. 2. Why we are so to meet him; give
you the Reasons and grounds thereof. And then 3. Apply it.
1. How we are to meet God in the way of his judgments.

1. More generally, We are so to meet him, as may best appease him; and
therefore so meet him, as others have met those who have been incensed against
them; as Jacob met his incensed Brother Esau, bowing himself even seven times
to the ground, Genesis 33. 3. As Abigail met David, falling down at his feet, with
I pray thee forgive the trespass of thine handmaid, etc. 1 Samuel 25. 23, 24. As
they who brought up Ahabs Children met Jehu. We are, say they, thy servants,
and will do all that thou shall bid us, 2 Kings 10. 4, 5. As Benhadads servants
met the King of Israel, with sackcloth on their loins, and ropes upon their
heads, etc. 1 Kings 20. 31, 32. As that King which had but ten thousand, went
to meet him which came against him with twenty thousand, who while he was yet a
great way off, sends an Embassage, and desires conditions of peace, Luke 14.
31, 32. As the Prodigal Son met his Father. Father, says he, I have sinned
against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son,
etc. Luke 15. 17, 18, 19. Thus we are to meet God, not so as to oppose him, but
pacify him; not so as to fight him, but fall down at his feet, and humble our
selves before him; not to wage War with him, but supplicate grace and mercy
from him, that we may find grace in his sight, and we will be his servants. Not
with Arms, not with Swords and Spears, but Prayers and Tears, the proper Arms
and Ammunition of his people; and but with which there is no contending with
him, nor overcoming of him.

2. And more particularly, we are to meet God these Six ways.

I. With Preparation, As the Lord himself here admonishes, -- Prepare to meet
thy God, O Israel. A provoked incensed God is not to be met at an adventure,
hand over head, any way, or after any fashion; no, his People are to prepare to
meet him; they are to do so in the way of his Ordinances, and so in the way of
his Judgments: For 1. He is a great God, he forms the mountains, creates the
wind, etc. And it is a great work to meet him, and to meet him aright, and as
we ought, so as to appease him; and therefore we are to prepare to meet him.

And 1. we are to get habitually prepared, which is by getting out of that
estate wherein we are all now by nature. For that is no estate to meet a
provoked, incensed God in: It is not a state indeed fit to meet God in, any
where, or in any way, not in the ways of his Ordinances, in his ways of Grace
and Mercy; for such as are yet in the flesh, i. e. in their corrupt state,
cannot please God, Romans 8. 8. How much more unfit are they to meet God in the
way of his Judgments? As unfit as briars and thorns to meet devouring flames;
stubble fully dry, a consuming fire. Who would set the briars and thorns
against me in battle? I would go through them, and burn them together, Isa. 27.
4. And therefore for People to be, and abide still in their sins, when God is
in the way of his Judgments, how sad is it! and what a dreadful meeting must
such expect? We may say to such, as Isa. 10. 3, And what will ye do in the day
of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far, etc? And
therefore hasten out of such an estate, for it is not a state Ista preparatio
sub se complectitur veram renovationem cordis, etc. Calv.
to be rested in a moment longer; and therefore escape for your lives, Deliver
your selves as a Roe from the hand of the Hunter, and as a bird from the hand
of the fowler: Give not sleep to your eyes, nor slumbet to your eyelids, till
you are delivered.

2. We are actually to prepare our selves to meet God, 1. By getting upon our
hearts a sense and awe of the Infinite Power, Might, Majesty and Greatness of
that God we are to meet. It being he that forms the Mountains, and creates the
wind, etc. And therefore after what sort, and in what manner is such a God to
be met? And the Lord does therefore thus on purpose express himself, to produce
such an awe and sense of his Greatness, etc. 2. By getting our hearts affected
with those judgments he has, or is about to inflict, and the sins which
procured them. And this has been much the frame of the People of God formerly.
As of those in Ezra. 10, Who gathering themselves together unto Jerusalem to
meet God: It is said, verse. 9, That all the people sat in the street of the
house trembling; because of this matter, i. e. 1. Because of their sin. And
then 2. For the great rain, which though (as most Expositors suppose) it fell
in November, and the beginning of December; they beginning the Months in March,
a time usually of much Rain; yet it being great and extraordinary, they are so
affected therewith as to tremble. But who among us, has been, or is so
affected either with our sins, or judgments, as to tremble? Never so great
calamities made less impression upon the hearts of Men, as if given over to
hardness. How different was the frame of the Saints formerly? O Lord, says the
Prophet Habbakkuk, I have heard they speech, and was afraid. And verse. 16, When
I heard, my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the voice: rottenness entered
into my bones, and I trembled in my self, etc. Habbak 3. 2. And David, though
he was a King, and a man of a Warlike undaunted Spirit; he feared not the
Bear, nor the Lion, nor great Goliath: yet, says he, My flesh trembles for fear
of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments, Psalm. 119. 120. Though other things
did not daunt him at all, yet Gods Judgments did; and no wonder, there being
wrath in them, and that is dreadful, and we are to tremble at his word, Isa.
66. 26. and how much more than at his rod? And if we are to serve him with
fear, and rejoice with trembling, Psalm. 2. 11. How much more then being
incensed by our sins, are we so to meet him? At his reproof the pillars of
heaven are said to tremble and be astonished, Job 26. 11. and shall not we? And
this holy fear does not only prepare to meet God, but puts people upon it, as
it is said of Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3, That he feared, and set himself to
seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah. Which we are to
understand of a holy godly fear, relating to God, and not merely natural,
relating to men. And this put him upon meeting God: so it is said of Noah, that
moved with fear, he prepared an Ark to the saving of his house, etc. Heb. 11.
7. But how little of this holy fear and awe of God and his Judgments, is to be
found among us! No, generally we fear nothing, we are stupid, senseless, and
regardless of God and his Judgments, nothing affects us. Were there not those,
who sat Drinking and Singing in the very face of those late dreadful Ruins in
Southwark! O the daring impudency of sin and sinners in this Age! The devils
believe and tremble, but men do not: And this deadness and deep security, when
all things speak an approaching storm, as it evidences, says one, a great
Judgment, and spiritual plague from God upon our Spirits; so it presages no
less than remediless Ruin: for Sinners having no fear nor dread of God nor his
Judgments, they never mind to meet him in the way of them. They cast off fear,
and hence restrain prayer, Job 15. 4. A sad frame, when Ephraim spoke
trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he died,
Hos. 13. 1. Fearless persons are ever careless, and regardless to meet God in
the way of his Judgments.

3. By considering and advising what to do, and what course is best to be
taken. As the young man Counseled Abigail, when evil was determined against her
Household: Now therefore, says he, know and consider what thou will do, etc. 1 Samuel 25. 17. And the Lord is not wanting herein; he has shown us in his word,
what is good, and what it is he requires of us, and we should hearken to him.

4. By setting our selves with all seriousness to do it; we must up and be
doing. The Lord complains of those, Hos. 5. 4, They would not so much as frame
their doings to turn unto their God.

5. By laying aside our weapons. I mean our sins, by which we oppose, and as it
were fight against God; and to speak of meeting God, and not to do this, is as
if one who had incensed another, and made him his enemy, should go to appease
him with his offensive weapons in his hand; which instead of appeasing him,
would certainly the more incense him: and therefore in our addresses to God, so
as to appease him, this we are still put upon, Isa. 1. 16, Wash you (says the
Lord) make you clean, put away the evil of your doing from before mine eyes;
cease to do evil, etc. and come now (says the Lord) and let us reason
together: Now I will enter a parley with you, and now you are fit to be treated
with: So Jam. 4 8, Draw nigh to God, etc. But how? Cleanse your hands ye
sinners, purify your hearts ye double-minded, etc. and thus Samuel calls upon
Israel, to prepare their hearts unto the Lord, by putting away their strange
gods, etc. 1 Samuel 7. 3. And Zophar counsels Job, If thou prepare thine heart.
etc. If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, etc. Job 11. 13, 14.

6. By seeking the Lord to prepare us, to fit us for, and help us in that great
work: for the way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that walks to
direct his steps, Jer. 10. 33. The preparations, or disposings of the heart in
man are from the Lord, Prove. 16. 1: and as the King's, so all our hearts are in
the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water; he turns them whither soever he
will, Prove. 21. 1. And he can turn them to, and tune them for the work in hand:
prepare them to meet him, Thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine
ear to hear, Psalm. 10. 17. And quicken us, and we will call upon thy name,
Psalm. 80. 18.

II. By Prayers and Supplications: These both prepare to meet God, and are
themselves one special and singular way of meeting him: and hence the same
Hebrew word that signifies to pray, or intercede, signifies also to meet; it
being by prayer that we do indeed meet God: and the word is especially applied
to our meeting God when he appears angry: as Jer. 7. 16, -- Neither make
intercession to me, or do not meet me: do not interpose between me and them, to
mediate for them, for I will not hear thee: What a sad condition was this
people in? and our meeting God consists so much in this, that the Seventy
render it here, (...). to call upon thy God; and this at such a time the Lord
in a special manner calls for, Seek ye me and ye shall live: Seek the Lord and
ye shall live, Amos 5. 4, 6. And take with you words, -- Say unto him, Take
away all iniquity and receive us graciously, Hosea 14. 4. And thus have his
people met him formerly: How often did Moses thus meet him? He thus stood
before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, and that he might not destroy
Israel. So Jehoshaphat set himself to seek the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. Lord, in
trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastning was
upon them, Isa. 26. 16. And this the Lord expects, that when he is in the way of
his Judgments, and visiting us, that we should thus visit him, meet him, by
praying, and interceeding: Hosea 5. 15, -- In their affliction they will seek
me early. And for people at such a time to restrain prayer, is exceeding fad,
and argues great impiety: For what is it but to despise God and his Judgments?
For the great God to come out against a people in the way of his Judgments; and
they will not so much as stir a foot to go out to meet him, so as to divert and
turn him back, but he may come on and destroy all, for all them. They fear not
at all his anger, nor regard his displeasure: Thus it is said of Jerusalem, as
an heavy crime, -- She drew not near to her God, Zeph. 3. 2. And this Daniel
bewails, All this evil is come upon us, yet made we not our prayer before the
Lord our God, etc. Dan. 9. 3. And upon this account, the Hypocrites in heart
are said to heap up wrath: They cry not when he binds them, Job 36. 13. i. e.
they do not call upon him, or at least not fervently, when he punishes them.

Q. How must our prayers be qualified, so as to prevail?

1. They must be sincere, and in truth: Let us draw near with a true heart,
etc. Heb. 10. 22: and the Lord is nigh unto all that call upon him, in truth,
Psalm. 145. 18. As 1. When we pray, and call upon him indeed, and not only seem
to do it; when we not only say, but pray a prayer, pour out our hearts in
prayer. 2. When our inward disposition, answers our outward expression. 3. When
we prosecute what we pray for, and pray on our feet, as well as on our knees;
and let not our practices confute our prayers.

2. They must be the Prayers of such as know every one the plague of his own
heart, and so are humble, as such ever are. And this Solomon puts in as one
qualification of those prayers which he begged of God to hear, 1 Kings 8. 38,
What prayer and suplications soever be made by any man, or by all thy people
Israel, which shall know every man the plague of his own heart; etc. i. e. the
sin, for that is the plague of the heart, and to know it, is to see it, and to
have a due sense of it: to be affected with it, and afflicted for it, and to
complain and cry out of it: Romans 7. 24, as Paul, O wretched man that I am, etc!
And such are ever humble, and such the Lord hears: Lord thou have heard the
desire of the humble, Psalm. 10. 17. And if their uncircumcised hearts be
humble, Levit. 26. 41.

3. Of such as abandon sin, and regard not iniquity in their hearts: For if,
says the Psalmist, I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me,
66. 18. God will never be a prayer-regarding God, to a sin-regarding sinner.
The blind man knew this, that God hears not sinners: i. e. that live and lie
in sin, make a trade of sin, etc. But if any man be a worshipper of God, and do
his well, him he hears, Joh. 9. 31. Lifting up holy hands, etc. 1 Timothy 2. 8.

4. They must be in Faith, with comfortable affiance in Gods bounty, goodness,
and mercy, of being heard, Jam. 1. 6: so as that after we have prayed, we rest
thereon for Audience: Thus he that comes to God, and meets him, must believe
that he is, i. e. what his word reveals him to be, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him: Thus we must pray with good and high thoughts of
God, though with low and mean thoughts of our selves.

5. Fervent, we must not only pray, but cry, yea, cry mightily, Exodus 14. 15.
Lift up a prayer, Jonah 3. 8. Strive and wrestle in prayer, Set our selves to
pray, weep and make supplication, Isa. ^7. 4. Hosea 12. 4. Press and urge our
prayers with arguments upon arguments, as Moses, How many arguments does he
make use of in that short prayer? Exodus 32. 11, 12, 13, -- Why does thy wrath
wax hot against thy people, and which thou have brought forth out of the land
of Egypt, etc? And wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say, etc? and
remember Abraham, Isaac, etc. And the word which signifies to intercede, or
meet, notes properly such a kind of meeting, as is with force and violence;
intimating thereby, with what holy violence, fervency, and earnestness, we
should meet God, both in prayer for our selves, and wherein we become
intercessors, and stand before him for others, and these are the prayers that
prevail: The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much: or the
working prayer, that sets the whole man a work; heart a work, affection a work,
and all the graces a work; and is not so much the labor of the lip, as the
travel of the heart: as it is said of Hannah, She spoke in her heart, etc. 1 Samuel 1. 18. And Daniel set his face to the Lord God, to seek by prayer and
supplication, etc. Dan. 9. 3. Want of this, the Prophet bewails, Isa. 64. 7,
And there is none that calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to take
hold of thee: None! surely there were some; they were not come to that height
of Profaneness, as to cast off prayer quite. Many no doubt prayed, but not to
purpose; it was as if they prayed not, they did not put forth themselves in
prayer, pray with all their might: as it follows, -- That stirs up himself:
it was in a cold formal way, there was no life, vigor, nor activity in their
prayer: though God manifested his displeasure against them; and seemed to be
going from them, yet such was their deadness, sluggishness, and stupidity, that
they were not awakened thereby.

6. Chiefly for spiritual mercies, so as to have our desires mainly carried
forth after God, his favor, grace, pardon, peace, reconciliation with him,
that we may be turned away from our iniquities; that he would turn us again to
himself, and cause his face to shine; and that so we may be saved: as the
Church prays thrice, Psalm. 80. 3, 7, 19. and Isa. 26. 8, In the way of thy
judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee; the desire of our soul is to thy
name, etc. And this the Lord much invites unto: Seek the Lord, and seek his
face, etc. Psalm. 105. 4. Seek righteousness, seek meekness, etc. Zeph. 2. 3.
Say unto him, take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, Hosea 14. 1,
2. And to this the promise is made of Audience, -- If they shall seek my face,
etc. 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. And the Lord complains of those that assembled for corn
and wine, Hosea 7. 14: but minded not him, nor his favors: and how should we
bless the Lord, that gives us this counsel and advice, and puts us upon seeking
that which is not only sovereign and excellent in it self, but of so great
importance, and absolute and indispensable necessity as to us: In his favor is
life, yea, it is better than life: and without it, we are but dead while we
live. Spiritual mercies must be had, or we dye, we are undone, we are lost, and
perish for ever, though we should spend our days in gathering up Pearls and
Jewels.

7. Preferred in Christ's Name; which is of such infinite worth, and of fo great
force, interest and efficacy in Heaven, that Jesus Christ himself has assured
us, that whatsoever we shall ask the Father in that name, he will give it us,
Joh. 16. 23, 24. And then we ask in his name, when we ask for his sake; and
draw our encouragement therefrom: when in prayer we lay the whole stress of our
hopes of Audience and acceptance upon him, and him alone, and his merits and
mediation; and that interest which he has in, and with the Father in Heaven:
and this was long ago fore-tipified in praying toward the Temple, 1 Kings 8.
30, 38, etc. and with hands spread forth to it, which was a Type of Christ our
mediator: -- and spread forth his hands toward this house, etc. and, in thy
fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple, etc. Psalm. 5. 7.

8. With perseverance, so as to hold on, and hold out therein: Praying always
with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance, etc. Ephesians. 6. 18. We must continue in prayer, Col. 4. 2. Pray
without ceasing, 1 These. 5. 17. As Acts 12. 5, Prayer was made without ceasing
of the Church to God: and Christ spoke a parable to this end, That men ought
always to pray, and not to faint, etc. Luke 18. 12, etc. As the Church in Psalm.
80, they pray, and pray again, and again, that God would turn them again, and
cause his face to shine: Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord,
etc. Hos. 6. 3. This is a token for good indeed, that we shall have what we
crave when we hold on and will not be beaten out, nor take denial, as that
woman of Canaan, Mat. 15. 22, 23, etc. Christ could not shake her off, neither
by silence, nor by what he said, but she still persists in her suit; and Jesus
answers and says to her at last, O woman, great is thy Faith, be it unto thee
even as thou will, etc. Take what thou will, I have not met with such a woman
as thou art, that wilt not be said: Luke 11. 8, I say unto you, though he will
not rise and give him, be* cause he is his friend; yet because of his
importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he needs: The Greek is
impudency, and so some render it, nevertheless for his impudency sake, his
immodest persistance, taking no denial: As you have some sort of Beggars, that
are so importunate, and even impudent, that you cannot get gone without an
Alms; say what you will, speak them fair, or foul, all is one, they will weary
you out, till they have it. And such an holy impudency in prayer, so as to take
no denial, as it is very acceptable to God, so exceeding prevalent with God.

Thus as we are to meet God by prayers and supplications; so our prayers, if we
would prevail, are to be thus qualified: and being thus qualified, how
prevalent have they been? and what great things have they done in the world?
when God has come forth against a people, and been preparing to do great things
against them, how have such prayers put a stop to his Judiciary proceedings.

III. By true Repentance and Conversion, with deep humiliation, and by through
and unfeigned reformation, which are the two main essential parts of
Repentance: and thus we are in a special manner to meet God; this being a main
and principal thing therein, and that which he in a special manner, when he is
in the way of his Judgments, puts his people upon, and calls, and invites them
to, to repent and turn to him: Therefore also now, says the Lord, Turn ye even
to me with all your heart, etc. Joel 2. 12. And O Israel, Return unto the Lord
thy God, etc. Hosea 14. 1. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Turn ye unto me, etc.
Zeph. 1. 3. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings, etc.
Isa. 1. 16, etc. Amend your ways and your doings, Jer. 7. 3. And so in many
other places: this is still his call, that when he is in the way of his
Judgments we should learn righteousness; that when he is punishing, we should
be repenting, amending, and reforming. And thus several Interpreters Expound
it: Prepare to meet thy God, i. e. by serious repentance, with true conversion.
By prayers, and penitential tears, and amendment of life: So Calvin, Drusius,
Mercerus, Piscator, Junius, Dutch and English Annot.

And here, 1. We are to search and find out our sins. Those Achans that trouble
our Israel, and threaten our ruin, we should say as those, Lam. 3. 40, Let us
search and try our ways, etc. And so some read those words, Zeph. 2. 1, we
render them gather your selves together, yea, gather together: but others,
search your selves narrowly, yea, search your selves narrowly, yea, search your
selves narrowly, i. e. get atoned and reconciled to God; and that you may do
so, enter into your selves, and make a diligent and narrow search into your
hearts and ways, so as to find out those sins which have so heavily provoked
the Lord, and offended him. 2. Having found them out, and being convinced of
them, we are to confess and acknowledge them, and that with shame and confusion
of face: If they shall confess their iniquity, etc. Levit. 26. 40. Jer. 3. 13.
1 John 1. 9. Prove. 28. 13. 3. We are to mourn for them, bewail them, and be in
bitterness for them: Turn to me with weeping and mourning, and rent your heart,
and not your garments, Joel 2. 12. I will (says David) declare mine iniquity,
and be sorry for my sin, Psalm. 38. 18. And I have surely heard Ephraim
bemoaning himself -- and after I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, etc.
Jer. 3. 18. And this sorrow must be chiefly for the offense done to God, that
we have sinned against him, that so great and good a God and merciful Father has
been offended; it must be for the bitterness in sin, more than for the
bitternese for sin; and it must be for others sins, for the Nations sins as
well as our own: As Rivers of water run down David's eyes, because others kept
not Gods Law, Psalm 119. 136. But our sins fetch few tears from our eyes; we
have hard hearts and dry eyes, many complaining, but few weeping Penitents: we
have many rivers, but in this respect a dry Island. And the Lord has a mark
for such in the saddest times, That sigh and cry for all the abominations that
are done in the midst of them, Ezekiel. 9. 4. 4. We are to judge and condemn our
selves for them. 1 Cor. 11. 31. Luke 15. 18, 19. 5. We are to beg, and
earnestly seek the pardon of them: How earnest was Moses for this? If now I
have found grace in thy sight, pardon our iniquity and our sin, etc. If thou will forgive their sin, and if not, blot me, etc. Exodus 34. 9-32. 3. He knew
they were an undone people, unless the Lord did this: So Number. 14. 19. And how
earnest was David for this, as Psalm. 51* 1, 2, etc. 6. Above all, we are to
abandon them, reform them, and turn from them to the Lord; to forsake them: it
must be not only repentance of sin, or for sin, but from sin: Let the wicked
for sake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, etc. Isa. 55. 7. And
upon this God has promised to hear from heaven, and pardon, and heal -- To
repent of the evil he thought to do: And that iniquity shall not be our ruin, 2 Chronicles. 7. 1. Jer. 18. 8. Ezekiel. 18. 30 And this is that which has proved very
effectual, and that when a peoples case has seemed even desparate: as Judge.
10. God has told that people, he would deliver them no more: Go, says the
Lord, and cry unto the Gods which ye have chosen, etc. ver. 13, 14. But ver.
16, it is said, They put away the strange gods from among them, and served the
Lord, and his soul was grievea for the misery of Israel. So Jonah 3. 4, Yet
forty days, and Niniveh shall be overthrown; but ver. 10, it is said, God saw
their works, that they turned from their evil way, and God repented of the evil
he said he would do unto them, and he did it not. But however otherwise we
pretend to meet God, unless withal we do this, we do nothing; neither will all
else that we do avail any thing, as to put a stop to Gods Judiciary
proceedings. And therefore we are thus in a special manner to set our selves to
meet God, by a speedy breaking off our sins, and amending our ways; and we
should, as I said before, encourage one another to this, as those Hosea 6. 1,
Come, let us return unto the Lord, etc. and then a troop of mercies comes;
there will be healing and binding up: and verse 2, 3, reviving, raising up, and
living in his sight: and then his going forth shall be as the morning; and he
shall come to us as the rain, as the latter and former rain unto the earth. But
without this, we must expect inevitable ruin: as the Lord threatens again and
again, see Isa. 9. 13, 14. Jer. 15. 7, Ezekiel. 24. 12, 13, 14. You know what
Christ said to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 5, Remember
therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent and do thy first works, or
else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his
plaee, except thou repent. And woe to us, if he and his Gospel go from us. Psalm.
22. 27, It is there said, All the ends of the world shall remember, and turn to
the Lord. And O that at length we might remember, and do so; remember our
selves, and how much it is our own, and the Nations concern, and turn unto the
Lord. Shall we always forget God, and our selves too? How long shall our sins
be a snare to us? Know we not yet that England is in danger to be destroyed?
And do we not see his anger is not yet turned away, but his hand is stretched
out still. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement; I
will not offend any more. That which I see not, teach thou me, if I have done
iniquity, I will do no more, Job 34. 31, 32. And till we do this, we do not
only forget our selves, but we are not our selves, we are not only out of our
way, but out of our wits: Sin being so great an evil, yea, the greatest and
chie^est, and indeed only true evil; the cause of all other, and it self the
worst punishment: the work of the Devil, yea, worse than the Devil and Hell,
and which nothing can expiate but Christ's blood, etc. And then to repent and
turn to the Lord, is every way so much our concern, and that which makes so
infinitely for our own and the Nations weal, that were we but our selves, or in
our right minds, we could not but resolve on it: as it is said of the Prodigal
Son, that as soon as ever he came to himself, He said, I will arise and go to
my Father, etc. So that before, he was not himself, no more are we till we
repent and turn to God: then, and not till then, is it, that we are our selves;
and do indeed remember our selves, and our own, and the Nations great concern:
and O that the Lord therefore would be pleased so to remember us, that we might
at length thus remember our selves, and him too, so as to turn to him by
conversion, without which will follow inevitahle destruction.

IV. In and with a Mediator: even that One, and only Mediator between God and
man, the man Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 1. 5. For so great is the distance between
God and us, and such is our sinfulness and great unrighteousness by reason
thereof, that there can be no meeting God with acceptance, without a Mediator:
and this Mediator is Jesus Christ alone: and hence we are said to come unto God
by him, Heb. 7. 25. And in him to have boldness and access with confidence, by
the faith of him, Ephesians. 3. 12. And but in, and with him, there is no coming to
God with acceptance.

In him: i. e. b^ing in him by faith, united to him; as Paul speaks often of the
Saints, as being in Christ, Col. 1. 2. Romans 16. 7, 11, etc. and of himself he
says, I knew a man in Christ, 2 Cor. 12. 2. And how happy is it to be indeed in
him, especially in such evil days, and perilous times as these are: for can we
be better, he being the hiding place from the wind, and the covert from the
tempest: As rivers of water in a dry plece, as the shad w of a great rock in a
weary land, Isa. 3^ 2. and The peace when the Assyrian comes into the land,
Mic. 5. 5. And being in him, are we safe, whatever dangers come: happy whatever
miseries come, and shall be found in peace whatever troubles come: And what
then can we know more, or better than this? or what avails all else we know,
unless we know this, That we are in Christ? and when we are in him, then are we
fit to meet God indeed, and not till then: for without him, or severed from
him, we can do nothing; and to such as are out of him, God is as a consuming
fire: and what then will such do in the day of visitation, that have not as yet
fled to Christ for refuge, and gotten into him? If a man abide not in me, he is
cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather them and cast them into
the fire, and they are burned, Joh. 15. 6.

2. As we are to meet God in him, united to him by faith; so with him: i. e.
God being incensed by our sins, we are, when we go to meet God, to take him
along with us, and present him, and make use of him, who is so dearly beloved,
and with whom the Father is so well pleased, and in and through whom alone, he
comes to be well pleased with us; and therefore in our addresses to God, we
must be sure not to pass him by, God having made him, to be for us, in things
pertaining to him, as the Scripture declares. For every high priest taken from
among men, is ordained for men in things pertaining to God, etc. Heb. 5. 1. And
that he might be a merciful and faithful highpriest, in things pertaining to
God, or to be done with God, chap. 2. 17. And we have many things to be done
with God, and things of very great concern, and O! what a mercy is it, that we
have such a one made, ordained, and appointed for us, as to whatever
appertains, and is to be done with God; and among other, this is one main
thing, The rendering us, in our addresses to him, acceptable: And being incensed
by our sins, to get him appeased, and pacified; and now, Christ as to this, is
made, and ordained by God for us; and therefore in our addresses to him, as
ever we would find acceptance, and have him meet us in mercy, so as to find
grace in his sight, we must be sure, as I said, not to pass him by, but take
him along with us, and present him, tender him, and make use of him, and to beg
os God to look upon us in, and through him. As David, Ps. 14. 9, Look upon the
face of thine anointed, i. e. of thy Christ, of thy Messiah, and let me for
his sake find acceptance. So Dan. 9. 17, Cause thy face to shine upon thy
sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lords sake.

Thus if we would meet God so as to pacify him, we must carry Christ as it
were in our Arms, in the arms of our Faith, as old Simeon got him once into his
bodily Arms; and then, Lord, says he, now let thou thy servant depart in
peace, Luke 2. 28, 29. And so we shall then meet God in peace; and this is a
mystery we should
more study, and get better acquainted with; how in our addresses to God, to
make use of Christ. I am, says Christ, the way, etc. and no man comes to the
father, but by me, John 14. 6. Not with acceptance, neither so as to appease,
please, and pacify him, but with me, and by me. In our addresses to God, he
says, as it were to us, as Joseph sometimes said to his Brethren, as in
reference to their Brother Benjamin: He did solemnly protest unto them, that
except he was with them, they should not see his face. And therefore say they
to their Father, If thou will send our brother with us, we will go down; but if
not, we will not go: For the man said unto us, ye shall not see my face except
your brother be with you, Genesis 43. 3, 4, 5. And therefore they took Benjamin
with them. And verse. 16, When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the
ruler of his house, bring those men home, and slay, and make ready, for these
men shall dine with me, etc. I see they have brought Benjamin with them. So
unless Jesus Christ be with us in our addresses to God, our elder Brother,
there is no seeing Gods face, no finding grace in his sight, favor in his eyes;
but if he be with us, then we shall have welcome.

We are bid, What ever we do in word, or deed, to do all in the name of the
Lord Jesus: And how much more then so great a thing as this, to meet God in the
way of his Judgments? And if we are to give thanks to God by him, much more by
him are we to apply our selves, to appease and pacify him, being incensed by
our sins. And therefore let us be sure so to meet God, 1. As being in Christ,
and then 2. with Christ, i. e. so as for acceptance, to present him, tender
him, and plead, and press, and urge him, and his merits, mediation and
satisfaction; and that is the way to meet God to purpose, and to prevail as to
what we meet him for: He being the true (...), mercy-seat, or propitiatory,
through whom alone the Father is propitious and merciful to such who so meet
him. See Exodus 25. 17, 21, 22.

V. With Presents, as Jacob met his incensed Brother Esau, and Abigail David,
Genesis 32. 13, 20. 1 Samuel 25. 18. And here the main and principal Present is
indeed what I have mentioned already, Jesus Christ: but yet there are other
also, which in and through him, are very pleasing and delightful to God: As 1. A
broken and contrite heart, an heart kindly touched and affected with sin, and
afflicted for it: and which in a deep sense of it, and sorrow for it, heartily
sighs and longs for the pardon thereof. This is said to be The sacrifices of
God, Psalm. 51. 17, to denote its singular acceptableness above all other: None
so pleasing as this, nor without this. -- But to this man will I look, even to
him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word, Isa. 66.
2. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, etc. Jer. 31. 18. i. e.
bewailing his sins. And Josiah's heart being tender, and he humbling himself
before God, how pleasing was it to God? Because thy heart was tender, and thou
did humble thy self, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. And this is mentioned again, to show
how grateful it was. See Psalm. 34. 18. Isa. 57. 15. Matt. 5. 3, 4, etc. Such
seal to what the Scripture says of sin, that it is no light or slight matter,
but an evil and bitter thing, etc. But how few such Presents have we? We have
many broken estates, and broken credits, but few broken hearts. Oh! that there
were more.

2. A willing and obedient heart, ready in all things to comply with the mind
and will of God, yielding up it self to him. Lord, what will thou have me do?
Act. 9. 6. And speak Lord, for thy servant hears; and I am thy servant, and
will do all that thou bidst me. This is very pleasing -- Has the Lord as great
delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord?
Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, etc. 1 Samuel 15. 22. In Micah 6, We
have a People there asking the question, verse. 6, Wherewith shall I come before
the Lord, and how my self before the high God? Wherewith shall I meet him, so
as to appease him? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings? with Calves of
a year old? verse. 7, Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with
ten thousands of rivers of oil, etc? No, Verse. 8, He has showed thee, O man,
what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? i. e. to obey, and readily comply
with him in the duties of both Tables, coucht in those expressions: To be a
willing people. Who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me? Jer.
30. 21, That has such an hearty desire, and ready, and willing resolution to
comply with me? This is that which pleases God indeed. But those mine enemies,
that would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them
before me, Luke 19. 27.

3. A sincere and upright heart, For the Lord has pleasure in uprightness, and
the upright in heart are his delight, 1 Chronicles. 29. 17. Prove. 11. 20. Thou
desire truth in the inward parts, etc. Psalm. 51. 6.

4. A merciful compassionate heart toward others in their miseries and
necessities, so as to pity them, and to be ready to succor and relieve them,
Heb. 13. 16, But to do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased. They are acceptable presents, bowels of mercy,
kindness. When we go to meet God, What do we go to meet him for, but that we
may obtain mercy? And if we would obtain mercy, we must show mercy: For with
the merciful, God will show himself merciful, Psalm. 18. 25. And they shall
obtain mercy, Matt. 5. 7. But he shall have judgment without mercy, that has
showed no mercy, Jam. 2. 13. When Gods judgments were denounced against
Nebuchadnezzar, that yet there might be a lengthening of his tranquillity,
Daniel counsels him, to break of his sins by righteousness, and his iniquities
by showing mercy to the poor, Dan. 4. 27. And this is said to be the fast God
has chosen; Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the
poor that are cast out, to thy house; when thou see the naked, that thou
cover him; and that thou hide not thy self from thy own flesh? And then shall
thy light break forth as the morning, etc. Then shall thou call, and the Lord
shall answer; thou shall cry, and he shall say here I am, etc. Isa. 58. 6, 7,
etc. Our showing mercy to others, and therein imitating God in his own goodness
and kindness, though it be not the cause, yet is it a comfortable pledge and
evidence of our finding mercy with God our selves. The Lord give mercy to the
house of Onesephorus, for he often refreshed me, etc. 2 Timothy 1. 16. And the
gratefulness of this to God, appears from the many, exceeding, great, and
precious promises that are made unto it, see Psalm. 41. 1, 2, etc. 112. 5, 6, 7,
8. Prove. 11. 25. 19, 17, etc. And that of all other evidences of Faith, this is
that especially which Jesus Christ will take cognizance of at the last day.
Come ye blessed, etc. for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, etc. Matt. 25.
34, 35, etc. And therefore the loss of such is very sad, That merciful men, men
of kindness are taken away, Isa. 57. 1. And the good man is perished out of the
earth, Micah. 7. 2. Such as for whom, some would even dare to dye, Romans 5. 7.

VI. By extraordinary fasting, afflicting, and humbling our selves before the
Lord. And this the Lord does in a special manner, in such a day call for, and
invite unto. As in Joel, God was there in the way of his judgments: And
sanctify ye (says he) a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the elders, and
all the inhabitants of the land, unto the house of the Lord your God, and cry
unto the Lord: Alas! for the day, the day of the Lord is at hand, etc. And so
Joel 2. 15, Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly,
etc. And thus we find his people still have done, when God has been in the way
of his judgments. See 1 Samuel 7. 5, 6. 2 Chronicles. 20. 3, etc. And thus the very
Ninevites did; They believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth
from the greatest of them even to the least of them. For word came unto the
king of Niniveh, and he arose from his throne, and he laid his robe from him,
etc. and caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh (by the Decree
of the King and his Nobles) Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste any
thing; let them not feed nor drink water, etc. Jonah 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, -- And O
that the Lord would put it into the heart of our king, and into the hearts of
our Nobles, to decree, and cause it to be proclaimed, that in such a way we
might all meet the Lord, by fasting, afflicting, and humbling our selves before
him: And certainly in such a day, for people to be still feasting and making
merry, what is it but to walk quite contrary to God, and in a direct opposition
to what he is doing, and calling for, which much provokes him, and which
therefore he severely threatens. And in that day did the Lord of hosts call to
weeping, etc. Isa. 22. 13, 14. What day was this? You may see, Isa. 22. 5, A
day of trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity, by the Lord God of
Hosts, in the valley of Vision, etc. And then did the Lord God of Hosts, call
to weeping, etc. But behold, joy and gladnefs, slaying oxen, and killing sheep;
eating flesh, and drinking wine. Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall
dye. And Verse. 14, It was revealed in mine ears, by the Lord of Hosts, surely
this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye dye, says the Lord God of
hosts. And woe to them that are at ease in Sion, etc. that put far away the evil
day, that drink wine in bowls, etc. Amos 1. 3, 6, etc.

CHAP. IV. The Reasons why we are thus to meet God.
1. BEcause the great God commands it, as. here, and so after elsewhere; yea,
and dictates withal the way and manner thereof, as Hos. 14. 1, 2. O Israel,
return unto the Lord thy God: for thou have fallen by thine iniquity. Take with
you words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and
receive us graciously. And 2 Chronicles. 7. 14, The Lord there prescribes the very
platform thereof, If (says he) they shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek
my face, and turn from their wicked ways, etc. and Isa. 27. 4, 5, Fury is not
in me: who would set the briars and thorns against me in battle, I would go
through them, I would burn them together. But he gives them better advice, i.
e. to make peace with him, and directs them the way, Or let him take hold of my
strength, that he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me. And
now God commanding us to do this, and directing us withal how to do it, surely
this sufficiently declares it to be our duty and concern both: And not to do
it, What is it, but disobedience to God, and a kind of slighting and despising
of his Sovereignty and Authority?

2. He expects it -- In their affliction they will seek me early, Hos. 5. 15.
And when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will
learn righteousness, Isa. 26. 9. However they neglected to do it before, he
expects, and looks they should do it then: And therefore is it then in a
special manner their duty to do it.

3. Others formerly have done it: How often did Moses thus meet the Lord, when
incensed against Israel? He stood before him in the breach, to turn away his
wrath, lest he should destroy them, Psalm. 106. 23. Thus Samuel and all Israel
met him, 1 Samuel 7. 5, 6. Jehoshaphat and all Judah, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. * Ye the
Ninevites, Jonah 3. 5, 6, 7. And it was not without success: And surely what
others have in such a case done formerly, it is no less our duty and concern to
do now.

4. Because when God is in that way, our great work and business is, and lies
with him; he being the great Agent, and Efficient in all judgments felt or
feared, threatened or inflicted. I (says the Lord) form the light, and create
darkness; I make peace, and create evil; I the Lord do all these things, Isa.
45. 7. And, Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth, in
the seas, and all deep places, Psalm. 35. 6. And so he does still, at home and
abroad, by Sea and by Land: There is a wheel in the middle of the wheels, as
Ezekiel saw, Chap. 1. 16, which as the Spring in a Watch, orders and sets a
going all the other; and according to the motion of that, (which is Gods
secret, Divine Providence) so are all motions regulated and ordered, and all
things are, and shall be as he will, who works all things after the counsel
of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. Who is he that says, and it comes to pass,
when the Lord commands it not? Lam. 3. 37.

And therefore our great work and business is (as I say) with him, more than
with Men, with creatures, instruments. And therefore it is our great duty and
concern, to have recourse to him, to say, as the people of God of old, Come and
let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has
smitten, and he will bind us up, Hos. 6. 1. And let us lift up our hearts, with
our hands, unto God in the Heavens, Lam. 3. 41. Lord, in trouble have they
visited thee, etc. Isa. 26. 16. Thus when Absoloms servants had set Joabs
Barley on fire, he goes not to the servants, but to Absalom; so Abigail hastens
to David, Benhadad's servants to the King of Israel, they of Tire and Sidon to
Herod, and so should we to God. -- Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel; as
Eliphaz counseled, Job 5. 8, I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit
my cause: And indeed we cannot do better. Whither should we go else? Thus
Moses, when Israel by their sin had incensed the Lord, Now, says he, I will go
up unto the Lord, Exodus 32. 30. And it is best for us all to do so, And hither
we call and invite you, as the Prophets of old, They called them to the most
high, Hos. 11. 7. So do we: And when we have but once overcome him, appeased
him, and gotten him our friend, our work is done: When he is at peace, all is at
peace. When he gives quietness, who then can make trouble? etc. Job 34. 29.
Then (says Eliphaz) shall thou be in league with the stones of the field: and
the beast of the field shall be at peace with thee, Job 5. 23. Tranquillus Deus
tranquillat omnia, If God be for us, who can be against us? Romans 8. 31.

5. Because when God is in such a way, he is wroth; and surely when he is so,
it is our great duty and concern to labor all we can to appease him, as Moses
still did. And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord why does thy
wrath wax hot against thy people, etc. Exodus 32. 11, 12, 13. And how earnest is
he, and how many arguments does he make use of for the appeasing of it? Shall a
Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid, etc? The Lion has
roared, who will not fear? Amos 3. 6, 8. i. e. God has made known his anger,
and his anger is formidable and dreadful, as the Scripture every where sets it
forth. For we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled.
And who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is thy
wrath, Psalm. 90. 7, 11. How dreadfully does the Prophet Nahum set it forth?
Nahum 1. 6, Who can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the
fierceness of his anger? his fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are
thrown down by him. And when he hides his face, who then can behold him,
whether it be done against a nation or a man only? Job 34. 29. -- And ye perish
from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little, Psalm. 2. 12. The kings
wrath, says Solomon, is as the roaring of a Lion, and as messengers of death:
but a wise man will pacify it, Prove. 19. 12, 16, 14. What is the wrath then of
the great God? And will it not be our wisdom to pacify it? Scornful men bring
a City into a snare, but wise men turn away wrath, Prove. 29. 8. We find Act.
12. 20, that Herod was highly displeased with them of Tire and Sidon, or bore
an Hostil mind toward them, and intended War against them; and what did they?
It is said, but they came with one accord to him, and having made Blastus the
kings chamber lain their friend, desired peace, because their country was
nourished by the kings country. They could not abide his displeasure, neither
could they subsist without peace had with him. And the great God being highly
displeased with us, shall not we much more with one accord, having made Jesus
our friend, desire Peace. For is not his displeasure far more dreadful and
formidable than Herod's? And is not our Country nourished by his, our Country
here below, by that better and heavenly Country above? And can a man receive
any thing, unless it be given him from Heaven? Joh. 3. 27. Are we not
continually sustained by him? And can we possibly subsist a moment without him?
And we by our sins having incensed his wrath, surely there is all the reason we
should seek to appease it. Shall we not labor to quench the fire which our
selves have kindled? And to allay the storms which we our selves have raised,
etc?

6. Because unless we meet him, he will certainly go on to do as he has
threatened. As David told Abigail, That unless she had hasted to come to meet
him, he had done as he had said, 1 Samuel 25. 39. And so will God, as he did to
Jerusalem, And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and
stand in the gap before me for the land, but I found none. And what then? It
follows, Therefore have I poured out my indignation upon them; I have consumed
them with the fire of my wrath, etc. I have executed what I threatened, Ezekiel.
22. 30, 31. And that is very observable to this purpose, Zach. 1. 5, 6, Your
fathers, says the Lord, where are they? and the Prophets, do they live for
ever? No, they were dead, and gone, but my words, did they not take hold of
them? did they dye with them? No, not turning to the Lord, they took hold of
them, And they returned, and said, like as the Lord of hosts thought to do unto
us according to our ways and doings; so has he dealth with us; So Lam. 2. 17.
And it being thus, the Lord wonders that there should be no intercessor: As if
some formidable enemy was coming against a Place, whom there was no opposing by
force, but good probability of appeasing by an humble address; would it not be
matter of wonder if none should do this! one would think all should do it, when
else inevitable ruin must ensue. And did people but believe this, and
seriously weigh and consider this, it would be a special means to put them upon
this great duty. As the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast,
etc. Jonah 3. 5. But the not believing nor considering of this, makes sinners
careless and heedless, and so to expose themselves and the Nation to inevitable
ruin.

CHAP. V. The Application of the point: and 1. By may of Reprehension.
WHen God is in the way of his judgments, is it his peoples great duty and
concern to meet him? Then here is matter of just reproof to Two sorts of People:

1. To such who are so far from meeting God, in the way of his Judgments, that
they scarce ever so much as mind or regard him; but let him do what he will,
they care not; they mind the World, and their interests and concerns there on
the Earth, but never regard what heaven does. As the Duke of Alva once told the
King of France, when he had asked him, whether he had observed the late great
Eclipse, in the Heavens? No, said he, I have too much to do on Earth, to mind
the Heavens. And how many such are there, who Gallia like, care for none of
those things? They are so far from meeting God, so as to stay his hand, that
they will not so much as see, or once take notice of his hand. As the Lord
complains of those, Isa. 26. 11, Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will
not see, etc. And of Ephraim, Strangers have devoured his strength, and he
knows it not; yea, gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows
not, Hos. 7. 9. That is, he has no sense of it, neither does he mind or regard
it, or lay it to heart. And how many such sottish, senseless, stupid souls are
there among us, who regard not the works of the Lord, nor consider the
operation of his hands, but are settled on their lees, and secure, and put far
away the evil day? But woe (says the Lord) to them that are at ease in Sion,
that put far away the evil day, Amos 6. 1, 3. And because they regard not the
works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, he shall destroy them, and
not build them up, Psalm. 28. 5. See Isa. 5. 11, 12.

2. To those who instead of meeting God in the way of his judgments, so as to
appease him; do rather by going on still in their sins, more and more provoke
him: and instead of endeavoring to quench the fire themselves have kindled, do
rather add more suel to it. Who say in effect as those Jer. 18. 12, There is no
hope, but we will walk after our own devices, and we will every one do the
imagination of his evil heart. And come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we
will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and
much more abundant, Isa. 56. 12. And let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
shall dye, Isa. 22. 13. Thus they spoke in a scoffing way. The Prophet tells us
we have not long to live, we shall soon be slain; and therefore let us be
jovial while we may. O! the daring-impudence of sinners! Solomon says, The
wrath of a king is as messengers of death, but a wise man will pacify it. What
Fools and Bedlams are those then, who still more and more provoke the wrath of
the great God, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who cuts off the spirit
of Princes, and is terrible to the kings of the earth? Psalm. 76. 12. And yet
how many such are there, who having trodden down the hedge, and opened the gap,
are so far from making it up again, that they more and more widen it? And
instead of endeavoring to put a stop to Gods judgments, do rather more hasten
them? And how justly are such to be reproved as enemies, not only to
themselves, and to their own souls; but to the Nation, to Church and State, to
King and Kingdom? For these take the ready way to undo all. As Samuel told
Israel, But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and
your King, 1 Samuel 12. 15.

II. By way of Exhortation. When God is in the way of his Judgments, is it his
peoples great duty and concern to meet him; as has abundantly been made good?
Then God being, and still continuing and going on in that way, let us all in
the name aad fear of God, set our selves to that, which is so much our duty and
concern, as indeed there is nothing more; I mean to meet him in the way of his
Judgments: and let us meet him aright; and as we have had it made out unto us,
and set before us, with preparation, by prayers and supplications, and those
aright qualified; by true repentance and conversion; in, and with a Mediator,
even that One, and only Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,
whom God has made for us, in things pertaining to him, or to be done with him.
With Presents; such as in, and through Christ the chief Present of all, are
pleasing to God: as of a broken and contrite heart: a willing and ob dient
heart: a sincere and upright heart: a merciful and compassionate heart toward
others in their miseries and necessities: For we go to God for merey for our
selves, and the Nation; and we should then show mercy to others. And lastly, by
extraordinary Fasting, Afflicting, and Humbling our selves before the Lord: And
thus let us answer the Lords call here in the Text -- And because I will do
this prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. And surely after all the Judgments
which the great God has inflicted on us, he has as great cause to complain of
Englands incorrigibleness, as here of Israel's, Yet have ye not returned unto
me, says the Lord: and therefore may justly resolve, as here concerning
Israel, Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O England. Truly what the Lord will
do, I know not, neither am I able to say: what he has done a-late, we see he
has broken out against us again, by several Fires, and dreadful Flames, not
only in the City, but in several places in the Country: He has called Home
several of his Ambassadors a-late, taken away several of his Ministers (two in
one day), and others of his choice Servants, and that very suddenly; such as
should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before the Lord for the Land,
that he may not destroy it: which though little considered and laid to heart,
bodes very ill; and is one of those gray-hairs which are here and there upon
us: we may fear it is even night when the Lord gets his Children so fast to
bed; and that the storm is very near, when he gathers and houses so fast his
corn: our Fathers, the Chariots of our Israel and the Horsemen thereof, go off
a-pace, and we shall see them no more here, 2 Kings 2. 9. This now, and a great
deal more the Lord has done a-late; but what he is yet about farther to do, who
can tell? But we have great cause to fear he may do worse, and deal severelier
with us, than ever yet he has done: For we turn not (as least very few of us)
to him that has so often smitten us; neither, as we ought, do we seek the Lord
of Hosts: And therefore how justly might he bring final ruin upon us: and cut
off head and tail, branch and rush, in one day, as he threatens, Isa. 9. 12,
13, 14. And therefore, that if possible we may yet prevent this, let us do as
we are here admonished, meet God, so as to appease and pacify him, and make up
the breach, and take up the controversy between him and us; that so God may be
atoned, and reconciliation made. The Lord sends his Judgments as his troops
against us, and there is no fighting, or frighting them away; but our way is to
Pray them away, to Repent them away, to Fast them away; there is no raising the
Siege by opposition, but by humble submission; no raising it by force, but by
an humble falling down at his feet: to which let us all address our selves.

CHAP. VI. And now in the farther prosecution of this Use, I shall only do
these Two things, 1. Propound some Directions for the better managing of what
we do: and then, 2. Some Motives, the more to prevail with us to do it.
Direct. 1. LET us do what we do Jointly: Unite our forces together, and
besiege, as it were, the Throne of Grace: Gather your selves together, yea,
gather together O Nation not desired, Zeph. 2. 1: as it is said of those of
Tire and Sidon, that Herod being highly displeased with them, they came with
one accord to him, Acts 12. 20, so let us to God, it being every ones concern;
and that which tends to the weal of all: and the more here, the better; and
likelier to prevail. And thus we find the people of God have done formerly: It
is said of Judah, that they gathered themselves together: and out of all the
Cities of Judah they came to seek the Lord. And all Judah stood before the
Lord, with their little ones, their wives and their children, etc. 2 Chronicles. 20.
4, 13, and Ezra 10. 9, Then all the men of Judah, and Benjamin gathered
themselves together, etc. We have all one way or other helped to kindle Gods
wrath; and we should all therefore join together in laboring to quench it: We
have all helped to break down the hedge, and we should all help to make ir up;
we have all helped to open the gap, and we should all stand in it. And this the
Lord calls for: Joel 2. 14, Call a solemn assembly, gather the Elders, and all
the Inhabitants of the land into the house of the Lord, etc. So Chap. 2. 15,
Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctify a Fast, and call a solemn assembly: ver.
16, Gather the people, assemble the Elders, gather the children, and those that
suck the breast. This was the more to affect the parents, and stir them up to
Repentance: those poor infants being like to suffer no small share in that
common Calamity, caused by the sins of their Parents, etc. Shall a trumpet be
blown in the City, and the people not be afraid; or, as it is in the Margent,
run together? Come and let us return unto the Lord, else all are like to share
in the Judgment: See Isa. 24. 1, 2 - 9. 14, etc.

Direct. 2. Speedily, without farther delays. For the matter is of too great
moment and importance to admit thereof: there is no demurring in such cases.
Gather your selves together, etc. before the decree bring forth, before the day
pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, etc.
Zeph. 2. 1, 2. Thus when Abigail went to meet David, it is said, She made
haste, and except (says he) thou had hasted, etc. 1 Samuel 25. 18, 34. And thus
he that with ten thousand, went to meet him that came against him with twenty
thousand, while the other was yet a great way off, he sends an Embassage, and
desires conditions of peace, Luke 14. 31, 32. And when wrath was gone out from
the Lord against Israel, it was Moses his counsel to Aaron, to go quickly to
the congregation, and make atonement for them: and it is said, he ran:
necessary things fall not under deliberation, but require present expedition:
and this the Lord still puts us upon, as to this great work, That we do, what
we do, now, quickly: Therefore also now, says the Lord, Turn ye even to me,
etc. Joel 2. 12. And return ye now every one from his evil way, etc. Jer. 18.
11. Today, if ye will hear his voice -- Agree with thine adversary quickly,
whiles thou art in the way with him, Mat. 5. 25. Seek ye the Lord, while he may
be found, call ye upon him while he is near, Isa. 55. 6. And give glory to the
Lord your God, before he cause darkness, etc. Jer. 13. 16 -- And if ye will
enquire, enquire ye, i. e. speedily, there is danger in delays. Boast not thy
self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27.
1. And therefore when the Lord gives us signs and alarms of war, we are to
hasten to meet him, and make our peace with him, lest putting it off, it prove
too late. Our Repentance must not only be true and thorough, but speedy and
timely: say we then as those: Zeph. 8. 21, Let us go speedily to pray before
the Lord, and to seek the Lord of Hosts: I will go also. It is too late to
think of a treaty, or to call for a parley, when the battle is joined, and
Drums are beating, and Trumpets sounding: So when Judgments are actually come
upon us, and have taken hold of us: Or if we yet should have peace, we may
smart soundly, and pay dearly, before we have it: and therefore do we speedily,
what we do.

Direct. 3. Very humbly, and self-abasingly. For God loves to see the creature
stoop and lie low before him: He puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there
may be hope, Lam. 3. 29. And therefore in our addresses to God, being incensed
by our sins, we should go clothed with humility: that should be the wear and
garb we meet him in; our frame should be such as Abraham's of old, when he made
intercession for Sodom: Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the
Lord, who am but dust and ashes, Genesis 18. 27. As Jacobs, I am not worthy of the
least of all thy mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed to thy
servant, etc. Genesis 32. 10. As Jobs, Behold I am vile, -- and I abhor my self in
dust and ashes, Job 40. 4. and 42. 6. As Daniels, And I set my face unto the
Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplication, with fasting, and sackcloth, and
ashes, Dan. 9. 3. Thus we should meet the Lord, as I hinted before, as Jacob
met his incensed Brother Esau: He bowed himself seven times to the ground. As
Abigail David, She fell before him on her face, and bowed her self to the
ground, and fell at his feet. As Benhadads Servants the King of Israel, with
sackcloth on their loins, and roaps on their heads. As the Prodigal his Father
-- and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired
servants. And God being angry, and in the way of his Judgments, this is a
postu^e very suitable and acceptable to God, that when he is humbling us, we
should be humble; and that when he is laying us low, we should be lowly. If my
people which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, etc. 2 Chronicles. 7.
14 And if their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they accept of the
punishment of their iniquity, etc. Lam. 26. 4. He resists the proud, but
gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5. 5. And Lord, thou have heard the desire of
the humble, Psalm. 10. 17. And, he shall save the humble person, Job 22. 29. So
that it is both our duty and security to humble our selves, especially when God
is humbling us. Ahab doing this, though but Hopocritically, yet the Lord
refpited the evil in his days, 1 Kings 21. 29. See thou, says the Lord to
Elijah, how Ahab humbles himself before me? (this was but in outward
appearance) because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in
his days, etc. But how acceptable then is the hearty humiliatinn of a true
penitent? And according to what appears of this, it bodes good or ill to a
Nation. When the Lord had manifested his displeasure against that people, Exodus
33. 5: It is very observable what the Lord there fays to them, Put off, says
he, thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee. But does not
God know what to do to a people, and what he will do with them? Yes, but his
displeasure appearing against this people, he speaks as one unrefolv'd, either
for sparing, or destroying: and as willing to be determined, as he found their
posture and demeanor to be: As if he had said, If thou do indeed humble thy
self, and repent, I will show thee mercy; but if thou still persist in thy
pride, and impenitency, I will execute my Judgments upon thee: So that by what
a people are, as to this, they may guess and conclude how it is like to be with
them, and what God will do to them: and if so, how sad may we judge it is like
to be with England, with London! For do we put off our ornaments, lay down our
pride? nothing less: for was there ever more? does it not testify to our
faces? is it not visible and apparent? And that even now, when God goes on
still to testify his displeasure against us, as he has severely a-late;
verily we so carry it, as if we would not be humbled, though God humble us; nor
lie low, though he lay us low: and the Lord forgive it to us Ministers, that we
do no more reprove it in our Assemblies, which some sadly resent: trading
indeed is low, and men's estates low, but we carry it as high, or higher than
ever: God says to us, as to Pharaoh, How long will thou refuse to humble thy
self before me? Exodus 10. 3. I have laid your health low, your strength low,
many of your lives low, your City low, your houses low, your estates low, your
trading low: O! when shall your hearts be humbled and laid low? certainly if we
do not humble our selves and lie low, God will yet lay us lower.

Direct. 4. Doing what we do very humbly, Let it be yet Hopefully;
Self-abasingly, but not disparingly: As Shechaniah said to Ezra, We have
trespassed against our God, etc. yet now there is hope in Israel concerning
this thing, Ezra 10. 2. And who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn
away from his fierce anger, that we perish not? etc. Jonah 3. 9. And the Lord
does here in the very words themselves so express himself, as yet to encourage
his people. For 1st, he names Israel twice here, O Israel, and again, O Israel;
as a name that had been, and still was very dear to him; as David, because
Absalom was dear to him, he names his name thrice: O my son Absalom, my son, my
son Absalom, etc. 2 Samuel 18 33. 2dly, He says, Thy God to show the Covenant
still continued firm, if they did but repent, and all to keep up hope, and that
his people might catch thereat; as it is said the servants of Benhadad did
diligently observe whether any thing would come from the King of Israel, and
did hastily catch it, 1 Kings 20. 33. Oh our iniquities are indeed great,
exceeding great; and are increased over our heads, and our trespasses are grown
up unto the heavens, Ezra 9. 6. But Gods mercy is great, not only to the
heavens, but above the heavens; and many and great both, are his tender
mercies: And as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are his ways and
thoughts higher than ours, Psalm. 108. 4. And he delights in mercy. It was
part of the Lords Name which he proclaimed before Moses, The Lord God, gracious
and merciful, abundant in goodness, forgiving iniquity, and transgression and
sin, etc. Exodus 34. 6, 7. And, Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord
there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption: And he shall redeem
Israel from all his iniquities, Psalm. 130. 7, 8. And the Lord likes well of
this, that his people humbling and abasing themselves, should yet hope in his
merey, and not despair; the Lords eye is said to be upon them that fear him,
and withal, hope in his mercy; yea, he is said to take pleasure in such, Psalm.
33. 18. and 147. 11. Expecting all from it, and encouraging themselves in it;
which is so great, and withal so free.

Direct. 5. Perseveringly, unweariedly, resolving to persist in our suits, till
we prevail, as the Saints of old: I will not, says Jacob, let thee go except
thou bless me, Genesis 32. 26. The Lord bids Moses, Let him alone, and offers him
fair, that he would make of him a great nation, Exodus 32. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
But that would not take him off, but he still besought the Lord his God, and
prevailed: we should resolve as the Prophet, Isaiah 62. 1, For Sions sake I
will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalems sake I will not rest, until the
righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a
lamp that burns. And ver. 6, 7, I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night: And ye that make
mention of the Lord, keep not silence: And give him no rest till he establish,
and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth. As it is said of the
Macedonians, that Alexander being displeased with them, they not only laid by
their Arms, and put on mourning apparel, and came running in troops to his
Tent, but there continued for near three days together, beseeching his pardon,
till they obtained it. And God forbid that we should sin against the Lord, in
ceasing still to pray for England, for London, etc. but strive together in our
prayers still for them, with all perseverance: and this the Lord is well
pleased with; we never give him more rest, than when in this sense we give him
least: when we still pray, and do not faint, but follow on with our prayers
till we prevail.

Direct. 6. and last, That we may Effectually do what we do, and make peace,
Let us take hold of the Lords strength, as himself advises us, Isa. 27. 5,
which I hinted before, but now shall open and explain: or let him take hold of
my strength, i. e. (as some) of my self, who is called the strength of Israel,
1 Samuel 15. 29, and in this sense it suits with that of, Isa. 64. 7, And there
is none that calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold of
thee, i. e. either to keep thee back from going on still in thy Judiciary
proceedings, or to keep thee, that thou do not depart from us. And thus we
should in an humble submissive way take hold as it were of the Lord, or his
arm, that he does not still go on to smite, or that he do not depart: for woe to
us if he depart from us; it is the very sum and completion of man's misery, for
God to depart as to his special and gracious presence.

Or 2dly, Of my strength, i. e. of my grace, and the help and assistance of my
Spirit; as his strength and sufficiency, to this great work, without which he
cannot as in reference thereunto do any thing: and taking strength in this
sense, then we may be said to take hold of it, when we humbly and earnestly
beg, and entreat it; and as our sufficiency, hold to it, and rely on it; to fit
and qualify us to make peace with God, by working in us Faith and Repentance.

To oppose the strength of God, is indeed dangerous; but thus in an humble way,
by Prayer and Faith to lay hold on the Lords strength, as our strength, so as
to make peace with him, it is both our duty and advantage, and it may be read,
or let him take hold, in, or with my strength, i. e. my help and assistance:
Some read it, let him be strong in my strength: and we cannot indeed be strong,
but in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6. 10.

Or 3dly, By the Lords strength, We may understand, the Lords Christ, and the
riches of his Grace and Mercy, in and through him, who is called, as the
Wisdom, so also the Power, or Strength of God, 2 Cor. 21. 24. The Lords
strength to pardon, and save sinners, lies in his mercy and grace, and that
grace and mercy is in and through his Son, and in and through his Merits,
Mediation, Satisfaction and Intercession; by which he is empowered and
strengthened thereto, without any (...) of his Justice. And therefore that we
may make peace with God, we must in this sense take hold of his strength, i. e.
of his Christ, and of his grace and mercy in and through him: and this we take
hold of by believing: and when upon any breach made between God and us, we
apply our selves to God in and through him, and plead and urge him, (as I
hinted before) and his Merits, Mediation, Satisfaction and Intercession, and
wholly, and only gro^nd our hopes thereon: And O! what goodness, and
condescension is this in the great God, that whereas he might trample upon
sinners, he should thus treat them, and bespeak them, and advise them, or let
him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me! etc. Let heaven
and earth, Angels and men, admire and adore this goodness, and wonderful
condescension of the great God! and how shall we escape, if we refuse to
hearken to him, thus graciously and condescendingly advising us what to do, as
to that wherein we are so infinitely concerned!

CHAP. VII. The Motives.
THE relation we stand in to God, Motive 1.
And this God himself here urges, -- Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel: He is
thy God; and it is as if God had said, I have not as yet utterly rejected thee,
^or cast thee off; neither is my Covenant with thee quite disannul'd and made
void, though thou have sadly Apostatized from me: and therefore being yet thy
God, let this prevail with thee to meet me; for should not Israel meet his God?
and being angry, make his peace with him, and be ashamed to continue any longer
incorrigible under his hand? The Prodigal Son, as soon as ever he came to
himself, resolves, I will arise and go to my Father, Luke 15. 17, 18. It is my
Father, and should not children go to their Father? a people to their God? and
this Argument the Lord often makes use of elsewhere: O Israel, return unto the
Lord thy God, etc. Hosea 14. 1, And, return ye back: sliding children, Jer. 3.
22, 23. And shall not our hearts echo back again, as theirs did, Behold we
come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. Truly in vain is salvation hoped
for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains: truly in the Lord our
God is the salvation of Israel. And what indeed more beseems a people, than to
meet their God, and being angry, to seek to appease him, especially others
going on still by their sins more and more to provoke him? and that they at
least should labor to quench his wrath, and save the Nation, whiles others go
on more and more to incense it, and destroy the Nation?

Mot. 2. The consideration of Gods infinite Power, Might, Majesty and
Greatness: Which are here in several clear and perspicuous demonstrations, most
notably and magnificently described and set forth, and with a great deal of
State and Solemnity displayed; and all the more to affect and move our dull and
stupid spirits: and indeed it is one of the Stateliest and most Magnificent
Descriptions of God, that we find in all Holy Writ: For lo, he that forms the
mountains, and creates the wind, and declares unto man what is his thought:
that makes the morning darkness, and treads upon the high places of the
earth: the Lord, the God of Hosts is his Name. And it is as if the Lord had
said, And if my Mercy cannot move thee, let at least my Majesty; if not my
Goodness, my infinite Power and Greatness, who am he that forms the
mountains, etc.

And now these glorious Titles and Attributes which the Lord here Assumes to
himself, being here on purpose brought in, the more to put us upon this great
work, that they may the more awaken us, and influence us to so good a work, I
shall a little open and explain each of them in order as they lie: and this is
all I shall do at present, in reference to this 13 ver.

1. He forms the mountains: Those huge, high and massy bodies; indeed he
forms all things, the meanest, Jer. 10. 16, and the mountains also; yea, he is
said, To weigh the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance, Isa. 40.
12, i. e. he can turn them which way he will, or overturn them as easily as we
do the smallest matters which we weigh in scales, and put in, or take out of
the balance as we please: O quam magna and tremenda vertus Dei! O how great and
tremendous is the power of God!

2. He creates the wind, That strong and boistrous creature, and which though
invisible, and not conspicuous as the mountains are, has, and does do such
strange executions both by Sea and Land, breaking the Rocks, tearing the
mountains, forcing up Trees by the roots, and tossing the mightiest Ships as a
Tennis-ball: and this God creates, brings out of his Treasuries, raises,
stills, quiets, and orders as he pleases, Psalm. 135. 7, and 107. 25. Some
render it the spirit or soul, which he alone in a special manner forms, and has
command and power over, as well as over the body, -- and forms the spirit of
man within him, Zach. 12. 1. And hence he is said to be in a special manner the
God of the spirits of all flesh, Number. 16. 22. And the Father of spirits, Heb.
12. 9.

3. He declares unto man what is his thought: 1st, He knows what is his
thought, what is in man; and needs not that any should testify of him: He
searches the heart, and tries the reins, Jer. 17. 10. And all things are
naked and open to him, Heb. 4. 13. 2dly, He declares to man, namely, by his
word, and by awakening his Conscience, what is his thought. The fool has said
in his heart, there is no God, etc. Psalm. 14. 1. Their inward thought is that
their houses shall continue for ever, etc. The world lies nearest their hearts,
-- Thou thoughtest I was altogether such a one as thy self, etc. Psalm. 50. 21.
And with their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their
covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. 31. Thus the Lord declares to man his thought: He
discovers deep things out of darkness, and brings out to light the shadow
of death, Job 12. 22. And therefore there is no hiding any thing from him: Some
refer this to God, -- what is his own thought; he by his Spirit makes known to
man his mind.

4. He makes the morning darkness, i. e. say some, the night to succeed the
day, and darkness the light; and hence the day and night are said to be his,
Psalm. 74. 16. Naturae ordinem gubernat and distinct vices temporum inter se
distribuit, He governs the order of nature* and distinctions of times, etc. or
he makes the brightest morning, all on a sudden darkness, by covering the
Heavens with Clouds, and drawing them as a Curtain or Canopy between us and the
light: Thus he clothes the heavens with blackness, and makes sackcloth their
covering, Isa. 50. 3. Or we may understand this in a figurative metaphorical
sense, He makes the morning darkness, i. e. the comfort thereof,
disconsolateness; turns its joy into sorrow, its mirth into mourning; as he
threatens, Amos 8. 9, etc. That he would cause the sun to go down at noon, and
darken the earth in the clear day; that he would turn their feasts into
mourning, and their songs to lamentation, etc. Thus he overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah, he made the morning darkness: They had a lightsom morning, The sun,
it is said, rose upon the earth, Genesis 19. 23. But what dismal darkness did the
Lord soon make that morning? And how often, and how many of our mornings has
the Lord thus in this sense made darkness? What darkness in a spiritual sense,
did he make our morning, when the sun went down over so many Prophets at once,
and the day became dark over them? And for God, so to make the morning
darkness, is exceeding sad indeed! So in time of the Plague; How did the Lord
then make mornings darkness, many having their dear Relations well, it may be,
over night, but dead in the morning? Yea, what by reason of continual fears,
frights, mournful sounds and sights, how was every morning then (as it were)
made darkness, and afforded matter of mourning? So when that dreadful Fire
brake forth, Sept. 2. -- 66, What darkness did the Lord make that morning, and
several other after? Light they were indeed, in regard of Fire and Flames; but
dark in regard of trouble and distress; a morning never to be forgotten: And so
a-late in Southwark, and Warwick Lane, etc. And it is of the Lords mercies, and
because his compassions fail not, that every morning is not made darkness. And
therefore let none presume, nor be secure, as to their mornings, for God can
soon make them darkness, though never so light and bright at present. I was at
ease, says Job, but he has broken me asunder, etc. Job 16* 12. And David, In
my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved; but thou did hide thy face and
I was troubled, Psalm. 30. 67. The watchman said, the morning comes, and also
the night, Isa. 21. 12. And give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause
darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while ye
look for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross
darkness, Jer. 13. 16. Jonah was exceeding glad of the Gourd, but a worm when
the morning rose, smote the Gourd and it withered, Jonah 4. 67. Some read the
words, he makes the morning, and darkness, i. e. prosperity and adversity,
according to that, Isa. 45. 7, I form the light and create darkness: I make
peace, and create evil, etc. Hence, says Solomon, In the day of prosperity be
joyful, but in the day of adversity consider, Eccles. 7. 14. What should we
consider? That both are of God: for it follows, God also has set the one over
against the other; and so should we, both being from him, and therefore we
should take both well, and bear the latter patiently, as well as entertain the
other comfortably; especially, we deserving more than all the evil we suffer,
but never deserving the least of the good we receive.

5. He treads upon the high places of the earth, i. e. Those high places and
precipices of the earth that are so far above our heads, are under his feet; he
treads upon them, as being himself most high, exalted far above all: Or as some
read it, He treads down the heights of the earth. 1. The highest places of the
earth: The highest and strongest Edifices, Castles, Towers, Steeples, as in
this City. He brought down them that dwelt on high, the lofty City he laid it
low, he laid it low even to the ground; even the highest and most towering
places thereof: So Garnsey Castle, etc. The very rocks are thrown down by him,
Nahum 1. 6. 2. He treads down the highest powers, rules, and dominions of the
earth' with all their splendor, grandeur and glory. Dominion and fear are with
him, Job 25. 2. He rules in the kingdoms of men, and gives them to whom he
will: he puts down one, and sets up another, Psalm. 75. 7. His is the
kingdom, power, glory, victory, majesty, greatness. He is exalted as head above
all, and reigns over all. I will cause, says he, the kingdom of Israel to
cease, Hos. 1. 4. And at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and
concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it, etc.
Jer. 18. 7. 3. He treads down the highest persons of the earth, He comes upon
princes as upon mortar, and as the potter treads clay: he brings princes to
nothing, he makes the judges of the earth as vanity, Isa. 40. 23. He cuts off
the spirit of Princes, he is terrible to the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76. 12.
Thou have trodden down all them that err from thy statutes, Psalm. 119. 118,
119, though never so mighty. And therefore be m^n never so great, Conterens
superbos. Grotius.
or high, this cannot secure them, nor set them out of his reach, who treads
upon, and treads down the highest places, powers, and persons of the earth. And
those that walk in pride, he is able to abase, as Nebuchadnezzar acknowledged,
Dan. 4. 37, Yea, And in the thing wherein they deal proudly, to be above them,
Exodus 18. 11. The loftiness of men he boweth down, and the haughtiness of men
he makes low: He tells Edom, Obad. 3. 4, The pride of his heart had deceived
him, that dwelt in the clefts of the rock, and whose habitation was high, that
said in his heart, who shall bring me down to the ground? But says God, Though
thou exalt thy self as the Eagle, and though thou set thy nest among the stars,
yet thence will I bring thee down. And it is said of the wicked, Though his
exeellency mount up to the Heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds; yet he
shall perish for ever, like his own dung, etc. Job 20. 67. And thus he treads
down the heights of the earth, and is most high for evermore, Psalm. 92. 8.
There are high, and higher then they; but God is highest of all, higher than
the highest, Eccles. 5. 8. than the Heavens, yea, the highest Angels in Heaven.
And hence he is said, Psalm. 113. 4, 5, 6, to humble himself, to behold even the
things that are in Heaven.

6. He that does all this, the Lord, the God of hosts is his name. 1. The Lord
Jehovah, which denotes, 1. His Self-existency, that he has his Being of, and
from himself, and gives being to all his creatures. And 2. His eternity, that
he is everlasting.

2. The God of Hosts: All the creatures in Heaven and Earth, being (as it were)
his Hosts, under his power, and at his beck and command, as Soldiers under
their General, to order, dispose, and employ, as he pleases: And he has his
Hosts above, and beneath, Celestial, and Terrestrial: And being such a God as
before he is described, He that forms the mountains* etc. A God of such
infinite power, he can muster them up when, and as he pleases, and make them do
what execution he will. And this is a Title often in Scripture given to God: we
have it thrice in one Verse, Zach. 1. 3, Thus says the Lord of hosts, turn ye
unto me says the Lord of hosts, and I will turn unto you, says the Lord of
hosts: which shows there is much in this, to move us to turn to him: For he
being The Lord, the God of hosts; if we do so indeed, he is every way able to
save us, and do us good: but if we do not, to punish and destroy us. The Lord,
the God of hosts is his name.

And shall not all this now prevail with us, to prepare to meet this God, who
does all this, who forms the mountains, creates the wind, etc. and whose
name is, The Lord, the God of hosts? For if we do indeed meet him, what cannot
so great a God do for us? Surely he can disperse and drive away all imminent
evils from us, and communicate all good unto us; but if we refuse to meet him,
what cannot he do against us? and what evils cannot he bring upon us? He that
forms the mountains, etc. And therefore if his mercy cannot move us, let yet,
as I said, his Majesty; if not his Goodness, his Greatness; and seeing all that
is here said, fully declares, that there is no opposing nor resisting him by
force, our only way then is so to meet him, as to appease him* For with God is
terrible majesty, Job 37. 22. Behold the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and
are counted as the small dust of the balance; yea, all nations before him are
as nothing, and counted to him less than nothing and vanity, Isa. 40. 15, 17.
The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is burnt at his
presence; yea, the world and all that dwell therein, Nahum. 1. 5. And who would
set the briars and thorns against me in battle, I would go through them, and
burn them together, Isa. 27. 4. The most steely and flinty spirits in the
World, can no more stand before God, than Briars and Thorns before a consuming
Fire. How easily does he break in pieces all opposite power? By strength shall
no man prevail, 1 Samuel 2. 9. Where Is the Man that ever was able to carry it
against him? or, has got any thing by contending with him, but blows, and
utter overthrow? Pharaoh contended with God, but what got he? So Julian the
Apostate, but was he not forced at last, throwing up his blood toward Heaven,
to cry out, Vicisti Galilee, Thou have overcome, O thou Galilean. Others, even
the mightiest, have one time or other met with their match; but never did God.
Before him the mightiest Giants are but as Pigmies and Potsherds, and let the
Potsherds strive with the potsherds of the earth, but not with the great God.
Shall weakness contend with strength? Impotency with Omnipotency? It is said of
a creature, Lay thine hand upon him* remember the battle; do no more. And, None
is so fierce that dare stir him up: Who then is able to stand before me? Job
41. 8, 10. You know what they said, 2 Kings 10. 4, Two Kings stood not before
him, how then shall we stand? Why, a whole World could not stand before God. He
is wise in heart, and mighty in strength, who has hardened himself against him,
and has prospered, Job 9. 4. And therefore there being no withstanding him by
power, nor carrying it against him by force, let this prevail with us so to
meet him, as to labor by all possible ways and means to pacify him: And then
that power which cannot be withstood by us, will be employed for us; both for
averting all imminent evils, and for procuring all desirable good.

Mot. 3. The great God when he is in such away, seeks for such that should so
meet him, as to appease him, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap
before him for the land, that he should not destroy it: Which as it shows the
great scarcity of such, that they are but few: For else, what need they be
sought? So his great solicitousness for such, and their great acceptableness to
him, and how unwilling he is to go on to execute what he threatens, and that he
had rather by such be prevented. Now that the Lord seeks for such, see Ezekiel.
22. 30, And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and
stand in the gap before me, for the land, etc. Peoples sins do as it were break
down the hedge, make breaches, open gaps for judgments to come in at: They
unfortifie Cities, unarm States, unhedg Churches, and render them as it were
naked: as Exodus 32. 25, It is there said, that when that people had sinned,
Moses saw that they were naked, i. e. they lay open to Gods judgments; and the
greater a peoples sins are, the more they break down the hedge, and the greater
and wider gaps and breaches do they make. And now, says the Lord, I sought for
a man among them that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me,
for the land, that I should not destroy it. God had bid others search and see,
Jer. 5. 1, Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and
know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man. Why were men
so scarce in Jerusalem at that time? And was there such a dearth of them, that
a man could not be found? Surely no, Jerusalem had men enough, such as they
were. It had throngs of men in every Street, but the meaning is, a Man so and
so qualified; if there be any that executes judgment, that seeks the truth,
and so should stand in the gap; but they could find none: But this did not
satisfy God, they might be careless in this work, or overlook such a one; and
therefore he here seeks himself. And I sought for a man, etc. And how desirous
is God then of such? And shall he not find such, shall he seek in vain? God
forbid, how sad would that be?

Mot. 4. If we do not thus meet God, but still go on by our sins more and more
to provoke him; God will meet us; but how dreadfully, and in a terrible manner,
in anger, wrath and displeasure? Meet us, but not as a man, as he threathens,
Isa. 47. 3, I will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man, i. e.
after the manner of men: what is wrapped up in this expression, I shall open in
these Two or Three particulars, not as a man, i. e. 1st, In the weakness of a
man, man being weak in power, but as a Powerful Almighty God, non viribus
humanis sed Divinis, etc. thou shall find thou have to deal, not with a man,
but a God; and so with one who is every way able utterly to consume and destroy
thee: Thou may bear up against men, but can thou bear up against me? Or,
can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong in the days that I shall
deal with thee? etc. Ezekiel. 22. 14. Or 2dly, Not as a man, i. e. not with that
clemency and compassion that men many times use and show, but as a revengeful
God; so that mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity; and though
they cry in mine ears with a loud voice* yet will I not hear them, Ezekiel. 8.
18,-9. 10. Thus not only shall thou not find the mercy and kindness of a God,
but not so much as that of a man; neither will I meet thee in the weakness of a
man, nor in, or with the compassion of a man. Or 3dly, Not as a man, i. e. but
rather as some Salvage devouring Beast, as a Bear, Lion, Leopard, or such like
Beast of Prey. As the Lord threatens elsewhere: Therefore will I be unto them a
as Lion, as a Leopard by the way will I observe them. I will meet them as a
Bear that is bereaved of her whelps: I will rent the Caul of their hearts, and
there will I devour them like a Lion: the wild beasts shall tear them, Hosea
13. 7, 8. Thus will the Lord meet, and thus will he deal with all proud,
refractory, stout-hearted sinners, that turn not to him, but go on still by
their sins more and more to provoke him. He will wound the head of his enemies,
and the hairy scalp of such a one as goes on still in his trespasses. The Lord
shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them, Psalm. 68.
21-21. 9.

And when the Lord does this, 1. There will be no escaping of his hand, no
securing of themselves from his wrath, neither by power, nor policy; by force,
nor flight; by strength, nor stratagems; He that flees of them shall not flee
away: and he that escapes of them, shall not be delivered; though they dig
into hell, thence shall my hand take them, etc. Amos 9. 1, etc. The meaning is,
that by no means they shall be able to secure themselves from the wrath of God.
So Chap. 2. 14, 15, Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, and the
strong shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty deliver
himself, etc. And in vain are Mountains and Rocks called upon to secure here.
Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see* him, says the
Lord? do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord? Jer. 23. 24. 2. As there
will be no escaping his hand; so there will be no being delivered out of his
hand; and, There is none* says the Lord, that can deliver out of my hand, Isa.
43. 13. If we fall indeed into men's hands, God can yet rescue and deliver us,
as often as he did David, Paul, and others: But who shall deliver out of Gods
hand, who is greater than all? None ever did or can. And hence is it said, That
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10. 31. i.
e. as an enemy, as an avenger, into his wrathful hands. It is a blessed thing
indeed, and that which is best for us, to fall into the hands of God, with
respect to his mercy, as a correcting, chastising Father, and as looking for
mercy from him, in and through a Mediator: And thus David chose to fall into
the hands of God, rather than of men; but to fall into the hands of God, with
respect to his wrath, and vengeance, as contenders with his power, and as
contemners of his offers of mercy, and tenders of peace; so it is a fearful
thing. For he is the living God, and for ever lives to execute what he
threatens, and there is no being de ivered out of his hand. Fain they would
indeed flee out of his hand, Job 27. 22, extricate* themselves from those
miseries which have taken hold of them; but in vain do they attempt it: They
would give no diligence at all to meet God, so as to appease his wrath; and
now they shall give all diligence in vain, either to escape, or flee out of
his hand. Now consider this, ye that forget God, lesthe tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver, Psalm. 50. 22.

Mot. 5. If we do indeed thus meet God, he will meet us comfortably,
graciously; his meeting of us will be very sweet and reviving; for he will meet
us so as to be appeased toward us, and we shall make peace with him, as he
has said, Isa. 27. 5, Or let him take hold of my strength, that he may make
peace with me: And what then? Shall it be in vain? No, it follows, And he shall
make peace with me: He shall find me exorable, and easy to be entreated: If I
be treated with in such a way, and in, and through such a one, as I offer
sinners to be treated with: and never indeed was there a treaty with God in
Christ for peace, in a right way, in vain: And therefore the Lord inviting us
here to prepare to meet him, shows us what is good, even that which he requires
of us, to prepare to meet him; so that whil^s many are saying, Who will show us
any good? Here Is what is good indeed, and not only our duty, but our great
interest and concern: David prays, Psalm. 86. 17, Show me a token for good: and
if we were once brought to this, this would prove a token for good indeed; for
good to our selves and to the Nation; for God who is now in the way of his
Judgments, would then return to his ways of Grace and Mercy: and then we thus
meeting God, he will so meet us, as to own us, bless us, accept us, and
graciously receive us; he will* meet us with loving kindness and
tender-mercies, with the shinings of his Face, with the light of his
Countenance, with his Favor and Love, in which is life; yea, which is better
than life, Psalm 30. 5-63. 3. With his blessing, and choicest blessings; with
Grace, Pardon, Peace, Reconciliation, etc. and then as his going forth is
prepared, so shall it by us be experienced, as the morning, or Sunrising to
the world, and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the former and latter rain
unto the earth: And what a complete blessing are Sun and Rain to the earth? and
the same in his accesses will he be to us; and then he will meet us, as Esau
met Jacob, Who ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck, and
kissed him, Genesis 33. 4. As Aaron met Moses, Who when he saw him, was glad in
his heart, Exodus 4. 14. As Joseph met his Brethren, when he made himself known
to them, Genesis 45. As the Father met his returning Prodigal, who when he was yet
a great way off, saw him, and had compassion on him, and ran, and fell on his
neck, and kissed him, Lnke 15. 20. As David met Abigail, Who accepted her
person and presents, and said to her, Go up to thy house in peace: See I have
hearkened to thy voice, etc. 1 Samuel 25. 35. And ver. 33, Blessed, says he, be
thy advice, and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from coming to
shed blood, and from avenging my self with my own hand; for in very deed, as
the Lord God of Israel lives, except thou had hasted, and come to meet me,
surely, there had not been left, etc. So will God say to you, Who shall indeed
thus meet him, You are the blessed of the Lord, who made heaven and earth: And
blessed be you, and blessed be your work, and blessed be the way and course you
took to meet me in the way of my Judgments: for in very deed, unless you had
hasted to come to meet me; unless you had made up the hedge, and stood in the
gap before me for the Land, I had destroyed it: I had poured out my indignation
upon them: I had consumed them by the fire of my wrath, and their own way had I
recompensed upon their heads.: But blessed be you who prevented me. And what an
honor, and what a blessed thing is this? What ground of singular comfort may
it afford, to be instrumentally the faviours of a Nation, and to keep it from
ruin; and to have the salvation thereof, as instrumental to lie at our door,
and to prevail with God for m^rcy, not only for our selves, but others, the
Nation?

Mot. 6. Sixthly and lastly, The Lord will not only so meet us, but remain and
still abide with us, and build up mercy among us for ever. Then the hope of
Israel, the savior thereof in the time of trouble, will not be as a stranger
in the land, nor as a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry for a night; but
as an home-dweller, and will perform that everlasting Covenant, That he will
not turn away from after us to do us good; but continue to do us good with his
whole heart, and his whole soul; and we shall be his rest, and his rest shall
be glorious, and therein, will he say, will I dwell, for I have desired it: And
then Glory shall dwell in our land, and mercy and truth shall meet together,
righteousness and peace shall kiss each other; and then this City, the City of
our solemnities, shall recover its pristine glory and grandeur, and become
famous and renowned, a City sought out and not forsaken, Isa. 62. 12: and as
iniquity brought it low, and was its reproach; so righteousness shall again
exalt it, and be its praise; and we shall then see our Jerusalem a quiet
habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down, nor one of the stakes
removed, or cords broken; but there the glorious Lord will be unto us, a place
of broad rivers, and streams, etc. Isa. 33. 20, 21. And in that day, shall that
song be sung, We have a strong city, salvation will God appoint for walls and
bulwarks, and upon all the glory shall be a defense; yea, the Lord himself will
be its defense and keep it, he will water it every moment, lest any hurt it, he
will keep it night and day: And then the name of this City, yea and Kingdom
too, shall be what God once said should be the name of that City, which we read
of, Ezekiel. 48. 35, (As that wherein its happiness and chief good should consist)
Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there: Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside.
Books 4to.
THE Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, by George Swinnock,
M. A. Horologiographia optica; Dyaling, universal and particular, speculative
and practical; togetheu with a description of the Court of Arts, by a new
Method, by Sylvanus Morgan. A seasonable Apology for Religion, by Matthew Pool.
Separation no Schism, in answer to a Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, by
J. Clarkson. The Morning-Lecture against Popery, preached by several ministers
of the Gospel in or near London. Four useful discourses: being an Appendix to
the art of Contentment in three Sermons, by Jeremiah Buroughs. Dr. Wilds
Letter of thanks and Poems. A new Copy-book of all sorts of useful hands. The
Saints privilege by dying, by Mr. Scot. The new World; or new-reformed Church,
by Doctor Homes. The Virtuous Daughter, a Funeral-Sermon, by Mr. Brian. The
Miracle of Miracles, or Christ in our Nature, by Dr. Rich. Sibb^s. The unity
and essence of the Catholich Church visible by Mr. Hudson. The intercourse of
Divine Love between Christ and the Church, or the particular Believing soul in
several Lectures on the whole second Chapte^ of Cant. by John Collins, D. D.
Large 8vo.
The sure mercies of David, or a second part of Heart-treasure. Heaven or Hell
here in a Good or Bad Conscience, by Nath. Vincent. Heaven taken by Storm, by
Tho. Watsen. The Child's Delight; together with an English Grammar. A^sop's
Fables, with morals thereunto in English* Verse. The Young-mans Instructor, and
the Old-mans Remembrancer; being an Explanation of the Assemblies Catechism.
Captives bound in Chains made free by Christ their Surety; both by Tho.
Doolittle. Eighteen Sermons preached upon several Texts of Scripture, by
William Whitaker. The Saints care for Church Communion; declared in sundry
Sermons, preached at St. James Dukes-place, by Zech. Crofton. The Life and
Death of Fdmund Stanton, D D. To which is added a Treatise of Christian
conference; and a Dialogue between a Minister and a Stranger.
FINIS.

