Dr. PETER's Judgment, OF Dullidge or Lewisham Water.
THIS Water was taken notice of about the Year 1648 and a certain Person would
have Monopolized it, by Bui^ding and Enclosing it; and thereupon it was
observed that it lost it is Taste, it is Odor, and Effe^ts, and People left off
Drinking it: Sometime ^^^er it was observed to return to it is Primitive
Goodness, and bestowed upon the Poor, and it has held it is Virtue ever since,
this is the Traditional Account.

I judge this Water principally to consist of Nitrous Salt, Allom, and some
Sulphur.

It Purges strongly, sometimes causes to Vomit, sometimes* but seldom by Sweat;
sometimes by all three ways of Evacuation, the Property of it is being to vary
(...) it is Operation, according to the matter it meets ^ith in Peoples Bodies.

It Is Virtues.
IT opens all Obstructions within, what ever latter, especially those of the
Liver, Spleen, Mese^^ick, Veins, Pancreas, the Billiary, Vterine and Vrmary
Passages, by which means such long lingering and almost Incurable Disterupers
are bred as the Sch^rrhuo, Tepatick, Lienis, the hard Tumors of the Liver and
Spleen, the Flatus Hypocondriacks, the black and yellow Jaundice, the Cholick,
the Stone, the Gravel in the Kidneys and Bladder, all Obstructions,
Difficulties and Sharpness of Urine, the Haemorrhoi^es, Cholick Passion,
Tenas^^ Cachexia, Scurvy, Dropsy, Green Sickness, Stopness of Terms, Fits of
the Mother, and many such ^ad Distempers, whereof my Author says he has seen
the Effects; and the reason he says why it should be so excellent for the
Curing the above named Distempers, (...) from the cleansing and attenuating
Quality of the Nitrous Salt, from the Astringent and Cooling Faculty of the
Allom, and from the healing Property of the Sulphur. It Fecundates the Womb
beyond any other, and seems an Universal Remedy against Barranness, it
Extinguishes Inflammations, it sweetens sharp Humors, is good for Salt
Distillations, helps admirably scal^ing ^rines, and is approved by most very
Beneficial for the ^unning of the Reins, and for other Diseases that are like
to these, it is an absolute Remedy for the Gout, if little assisted by Art,
Excellent against all sorts of Worms in the Body. This Water strengthens the
Brain and Nerves, prevents or cures the Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, P^lsie,
Dizziness, Headache, and such like Symptoms, it strengthens the Stomach,
causes good Digestion, consumes Crudities, it makes gros^ and fat Bodies lean,
and the lean fleshy; in a word, this Water will Effect whatsoever by any
Intention in a Medicinal way is to he performed by opening Obstructions,
evacuating superfluous Humors, allaying Vapors, cleansing the Blood, and
strengthen all the parts of the Body.

This Water outwardly used, is good for most cutaneous Distempers, as Leprosy,
Itch, Scabs, Pimples, Ring-worms, Scurvy, etc. It dissolves Tumors, and cures
old Ulcers, if the Part afflicted be well or bathed therewith; and I am
persuaded, it being used by way of a warm Bath, it would be of great Efficacy
to consume Hyduropical Tumors, to Ease or Cure the Gout, and Rheumatick
Dolours, and far more Effec^^al also in the abovesaid Cutaneous Distempers.

The Time of Drinking it.
^S either Winter or Summer as Occasions requires; (...) but in general when
the Weather is clean dry it is best, as well in Winter as Summer, and in Frosty
Weather the Water is strongest.

In Summer drink it betwixt Sun rising and 'till It Is an hour high, or
thereabouts; then you will have it in it is full Strength, and take it but once
a Day, and in my Opinion, it is much better drank warm than cold; to drink Water
cold Hypocrates says is hurtful to the Bones, Teeth, Sinews, Brain, and Marrow
of the Back, etc. but warm is good and profitable. In short, I take it in all
Cases satest to take it warm, though Strong Constitutions may questionless
receive it cold with great Benefit, but weak Constitutions do better to take it
warm, so it be done with as little loss of the Spirits as may be. In some Cases
you may make Posset Drink of it with Milk; in Cases where it is not safe to
drink it cold, you may put a quarter of a Pint of scalding or boiling hot Milk
into three Pints of Water, whereby it will become of a convenient warmth to be
drank, and so you may proportion the Milk to what quantity of Water you please;
but I instance in the quantity, because for a Body of middle Age and complete
Strength, I hold it a fit proportion to begin with, and so increasing every day
gradually, 'till he rises to 8 or 9 Pints, more or less, as he shall be able to
bear it; and so again decrease by degrees, as suppose you design to allot 20
Days to drink the Water, and the first day you begin with 3 Pints, then I would
have you add half a Pint a day more for the next six days, three quarters of a
Pint for the eighth day, and almost a Pint for the ninth day, and a whole Pint
for the tenth day; which being your greatest Rise, will amount to eight Pints
and a half, and so for the rem^^^ing ten days daily drink the Proportions
backw^rd: As what quantity you drank the tenth day, you are to drink the
eleventh, and what proportion you drank the ninth, you are to take the twelfth,
etc which brings you to the same proportion for the twentieth and last day,
with which you began the first day; but the just quantity to be taken at one
time cannot possibly be ascertained, in regard of Age, Sex, Strength, and other
Circumstances, yet general they have the most Benefit by it that can drink the
most, and thoroughly concoct it.

Drink not the Water too fast, but allot a short time, which will prevent
Griping, cold Sweats, Giddiness in the Head, and the like; take at first about
a third part of what quantity you design, and then walk half and hour, then
take another third part, and Ezercise half an hour more; and then the last or
remaining part, and walk 'till all be past out of the Body, or 'till Dinner
time; walk moderately, but not so as to Sweat; but let not your Exercise be
violent, and Sleep not 'till your Water is wrought off; stand not still in the
Sun, nor sit on the cold Ground, which are hurtful; you may eat a few
Caraway-Comfits, Coriander Seeds, Elicanpane, or Angelica preserved, etc. to
help the Digestion of the Water; above all be temperate in your Diet; eat Beef,
Mutton, Veal, Lamb, Chickens, Pullets, Turkys, Partridge, Pheasant, Conies,
etc. forbear all Salt Meats, Ducks, Geese* Bacon, Tripe, all Salt-fish, Eels,
old Cheese, Leeks, Onions Cabbage, Muskmelons, Cucumbers, etc. are to be
avoided; also Apples, Pears, Plumbs, Cherries ripe Goose-berries Rasberries,
etc. are all agreeable, if sparingly eat, and that a little before Night, and
then they help to temper the Blood. At Supper, for Drink, Beer, Ale, or Wine
may be moderately drank; let Supper be larger than Dinner, and 6 or 7 Hours
after it.

After the end of the Waters, use a spare Diet for a Month or two, which will
prevent and keep out all Crudities.


