INDULGENCE not JUSTIFIED: Being a Continuation of the DISCOURSE OF TOLERATION:
In Answer to the ARGUMENTS Of a late Book, Entitled A Peace Offering, or Plea
for Indulgence: And to the CAVILS Of another, called The Second Discourse of
the Religion in England.

August. Epist. Quinquages. ad Bonisacium. Quomodo Reges Domino serviunt in
timore, nisi ea quae contra jussa Domini fiunt, Religiosa severitate prohibendo
atque plectendo?

LONDON: Printed for R. Royston and James Collins, MDCLXVIII.

A CONTINUATION OF THE DISCOURSE OF TOLERATION.
SECT. 1. Our Laws for Uniformity justifiable.
REligion being acknowledged by the Experience of all ages to have an effectual
Influence upon the civil Conversation of men, the measures of a Peoples mutual
Confidence, and so consequently of their Quiet among themselves, will be
according to the Degrees of Purity, and Unity, which are observed in that
Religion, professed by the State. Christianity though it be the only true and
pure Religion, and therefore where it is observed in its Simplicity, is most
beneficial to mankind; for all its precepts oblige Believers to the exactest
Justice, the most compassionate acts of Mercy, and the strictest Peace, by
which Societies are preserved and advanced: Yet being to be professed by men
encompassed with Infirmities, and not secured from Corruptions, it is obnoxious
to Heresies, and Divisions; because there will be always ignorant and unstable
men who will wrest the Scriptures to their own damnation, and there will be men
of corrupt minds, who having put away a good Conscience, concerning the Faith
will make shipwreck. And when Contentions arise in this, they are more bitter
and fierce then upon any other account, because the Honor of God seems
concerned in the Quarrel, and the glory of Heaven is conceived the Prize for
the highest Zeal. Therefore all Christian Princes, have seen a necessity to
preserve as much as they could the Unity of Religion as one of the Foundations
of their Subjects Peace: And when Divisions have happened within their
Territories, by consulting such Persons who might be presumed the fittest
Judges in the Case, they have searched for the Truth; which being once found,
they have maintained it by a restraint upon all Contradictions to it.

This has been the known practice of our English Princes since the
Reformation, by which they kept the Dissentions about the Latitude and Extent
of Reformation in so low a Condition, that though they required the public
Cares; yet they did never effect any common Trouble, till this our last Age: in
which men grew weary of their Peace, and glutted with too great a Prosperity
(the chief cause of all Civil Wars) they grew impatient of Laws; and not
satisfied with that just Liberty, wherein they enjoyed their private Rights
with as great, if not greater security, as any Nation under the Sun, they
invaded those of the Throne.

Their method to such an Enterprise was to cause a Confusion, in which they
hoped by base Arts to form their Fortunes agreeable to their Lusts. To
introduce Disorder they first attempted upon Religion, and by ruining and
dissolving the Government of the Church they opened a breach for all Heresies,
and encouraged all Schisms: Thus they got a party engaged to them for their
License, and by their force and fraud a Power, which through the just Judgment
of the Righteous God, attained their Cursed ends.

But when it pleased the Almighty Goodness by breaking them to pieces with his
own arm to restore our Rightful Prince, and our ancient Laws; to ascertain our
Peace, those just rules of Government to effect Unity in Religion, were again
practiced; His Majesty and the Parliament enacting such Laws as did enjoin
Uniformity in Religion. In making of which as they did cut off all those
Jealousies (which are dangerous to Magistrates) of being unconcerned for the
Worship of God; So in the Laws themselves they have prevented all Calumnies of
Cruelty and Persecution.

For by them No man is forced to profess any thing contrary to his Persuasion,
which he calls his Faith. No man is denied the Liberty of his own Worship in
his own Family, with so limited a Company as may not enjealous the State of
contriving a Public Disturbance.

Besides there is no Condition imposed upon our Communion but Conformity with
the Church as to the Outward part of Worship, without any express or formal
Declaration of their Opinions concerning it. And by this Moderation all the
clamours of Force upon Conscience, and Compulsion to the Faith, are rendered
false and unreasonable.

All that these Laws extend unto, is to secure the Truth and Peace; 1. By
forbidding any to be admitted to the Office of Teachers and Ministers, but such
who secure the Church and State by their Subscriptions or Oaths, that they will
not hold or teach any thing contrary to the Public profession: and that they
will consent to the Use of the prescribed Forms of Worship. 2. By hindering of
Conventicles and meetings, wherein such Errors might be published, and the
public Tranquillity designed against.

Which Laws as they are justifiable by the continued practice of the Church in
all Ages, by the Examples of the most Religious Princes: so also are they far
beneath that rigor which the men who now complain of them, did use when and
where, they had or have power. Who has forgot the Tyrannies of the Covenant? We
have heard of the Terrors whereby the Decrees of the Kirk of Scotland exacted
Obedience. And New England shows us what we were to have expected from the
Independents here, had they attained to the issue of their Designs (which they
speedily hasted unto) and gotten a fixed power amongst us. But how just soever
the Laws are in themselves, yet because they are against the Interest of men of
unlawful Hopes, and they obstruct the recovery of that Grandeur which others
had in our miseries, they have been written against in several books; more
particularly in one entitled a Discourse of Religion, as not having settled
Reformed Christianity in its due Latitude, nor provided for the Stability and
Advancement of this Kingdom. To justify the Counsels of our Lawgivers in
these Acts, there was published a Discourse of Toleration in answer to that
Discourse of Religion, which was to show, That the Causes of Dissentions in
Religion, which are the Subject of Toleraration, being infamous and sinful, and
their Effects full of Destruction to Piety, and the Commonwealth; That
therefore every one was bound in their Place, and Order, to endeavor their
Removal and Extirpation; And that this was not to be effected by Toleration,
was proved by several Arguments, and by showing the weakness of all those
reasons which were urged in the Discourse of Religion. Since that, there is
come forth another Book entitled a Peace Offering, or Apology and Plea for
Indulgence, which proceeds upon other grounds to show that all External Force
by Civil Laws upon the account of Religion is not to be justified. To adjust
therefore that Discourse of Toleration against all the Arguments that are
brought in the Apology for Indulgenee, and to vindicate it from the Exceptions
made to it in a second Discourse of Religion is the business of this present
Treatise.

SECT. 2. An Answer to the Book called the Peace Offering, That Indulgence is
not justified by the Law of Nature.
THe Book called the Peace Offering bears the name of several Protestants; but
what sort or party of Protestants it leaves us to conjecture. Some passages in
it persuade us that they are Independents, but they being so comprehensive a
Sect of those strictly so called, and of the other who crowd under that name,
as Anabaptists, Socinians, Antinomians, etc. We are still in the dark what sort
of men they are; therefore we can take no notice of that great kindness they
show to themselves, in being free in their own commendations. Nor will we of
their Principles, they being various, according to the several Sects, and still
changeable by the Increase or wane of the light they pretend unto. To gratify
them also we shall wave the objecting to them, how great a part of the late
Troubles of this Nation flowed from their Counsels and Designs, and wish that
they were buried in an eternal Oblivion, never to rise up to the reproach of
Christianity and Protestantism, and not be remembered, but to a Caution of being
abused by the same Arts, and of falling again into the like Miseries.

The only thing therefore we shall take notice of, in this Plea for Indulgence,
shall be to examine the reasons and arguments they bring to prove, that All
outward violence, and severity upon the account of Dissensions. (For the
differences of these men from the present establishment are not bare Dissents
in Religion,) is destitute of any firm Foundation in Scripture and Reason.

Their first Argument they will have to be from the Law of Nature, which to
raise a dust, and amuse the less wary Reader, is drawn out to a needless
length, and clothed with an affected obscurity; for to what purpose was it to
have been tedious in proving what all grant, that Every single person to
prevent mischiefs destructive to a Community, is to forego his particular
conveniences, if they be in things in his own power. Nor was a long discourse
necessary to show, that a Community is not to require of its members, things
not in their power, since no sober man ever dreamt that any thing impossible
could be the subject of a Law.

But when they assume, That men's Apprehensions of things Spiritual and
supernatural, such they mean as have no alliance to the ingrafted light of
nature, are not absolutely in their own power, and from thence conclude, that
those Apprehensions and the exercises of Conscience toward God upon them,
cannot be the subjects of the Laws of civil Societies, they endeavor to impose
upon us several fallacies, particularly these two. 1 Their argument supposes, "
that the Laws are made against men's Apprehensions, Whereas the Apprehensions of
men are not the subject of the Laws, but their Practices answerable or not
answerable to the Apprehensions.

2. Their Conclusion contains more then was in the Premises, for their
arguments had only aimed to prove, that men's Apprehensions of things Spiritual
were not in their power: So that their Diversity was unavoidable; but when they
conclude, they join with these apprehensions the " Exercise of their
Conscience, of which there was not one word in the premises. And as their way
of arguing is fallacious, so are the propositions themselves not true; for

1. This proposition that " Men's Apprehensions of things Spiritual and
supernatural do not depend on the Liberty of their wills, nor, are in their own
power, As thus crudely proposed is false. For all those to whom the Gospel is
preached, if they do not apprehend the truth, their not apprehension is (1)
imputed unto them as their sin, and wilful transgression; For it is said of
them, that their Hearts were waxed fat, and their Ears are dull of hearing, and
their Eyes have they closed. They are said to resist the Holy Ghost. That they
received not the love of the truth, etc. But this could not be charged upon
them, had it not been in their power to apprehend those Spiritual things when
preached unto them. (2) They are punished for it; for it is said that God for
this cause sent them strong delusions that they might believe a lie, and the
sentence of Damnation is passed upon them, That they all might be damned who
believed not the truth. But it is injurious to the Divine Goodness to say that
he damns men for that which was notin their Power to avoid. And that he should
send them strong delusions to believe a Lie, when it was not in their power to
apprehend the Truth. And if it be in the power of men to apprehend the truth,
having the Doctrine of Christ preached to them, then it is not impossible to
have the same apprehensions: because the Truth is One and the Same, and varies
not in it self, and so the Apprehensions must be all the same in their nature,
i. e. in a conformity to the thing apprehended: although there may be
difference, as to the degrees. It may be indeed more clear in one then another,
one may apprehend all the parts, see further into the consequences of things
then others: yet still the apprehension may be the same in essence, if men will
lay down their prejudices, part with their lusts, repudiate their carnal
interests, and cast off the tyranny of custom.

That which they offer for a proof is full of ambiguity, as if they were afraid
to be understood; For when they say that " the Will of God in things
Supernatural and Spiritual "cannot be known, but by Revelation from himself; We
do not know whether they eanm that General Revelation which is made unto us
from him the Scriptures, or a Particular Revelation to every single person: if
they mean this latter, they should have proved it. And when they say " that
Divine Revelation can not be apprehended or assented unto, but according to the
nature and measure of that Light which God is pleased to communicate unto them,
to whom such Revelation is made, We are again at a loss, for they do not prove
that there is a Light different from the Revelation of God; for the truth which
God reveals, is the light it self, which like the light of the Sun, makes it
self as well as other things to be seen. When they say this light does not
equally effect the minds of men. We grant it, but yet we cannot, as they do,
deny that it is possible it should do so: for although there be diverse ways
and means of Communicating the Truth. Yet however, God may give to all them to
whom the Word is Preached, sufficient means to Apprehend and acknowledge his
Truths. And although there be different Dispositions of them, to whom the Word
is proposed. Yet those dispositions whereby men resist, and will not apprehend
the Truth, are from themselves, and to their own Condemnation, which they may,
and ought to lay aside. So that they have not proved what they intended. And if
they had done so, yet they would gain nothing by it.

Because the 2 d. proposition (which they included in their inference) The
exercise of men's consciences, or the Practices of men upon their apprehensions
of things Spiritual, are not in their power. Is also false. For the practices
of Men (which are the Subject of Laws) whether conformable or not to their
apprehensions, are within their power, either to act or not act, as shall seem
most for the benefit of the Society, the Church. This is plain by that
principle of Order which the Apostle lays down, 1 Cor. 14.32. The Spirits of
the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, where by the Spirits of the Prophets,
the Context shows, were signified some Inspirations, and gifts of the Holy
Ghost as to Prophecy, or to sing a Psalm, or to speak in an unknown Tongue;
and these certainly were more vigorous, had a stronger impulse, and more
efficacious impressions upon the mind of the Prophet, then a bare apprehension
of a thing could effect: and yet the Apostle says, these Spirits were subject
to the Prophets, whether it were the Prophets that received it, so that they
might forbear, or speak as it seemed most for Order, and edifying; or else to
the other Prophets that were to judge, so that they might give Rules, and Laws
for the use of those gifts. Of which sort soever you take these Prophets to be,
to whom the Spirits were to le subject, it argues that it was in their power;
and therefore the Apostle commands that they should use it to the benefit of
others.

The same is in the Apostles counsel, when he directs him that had a particular
persuasion of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of some things, to restrain that
to his own breast. Romans 14.22.
Have thou faith? have it to thy self; and therefore he was Master of his own
practice, notwithstanding his persuasion. This the Apostle supposes in all
these admonitions which are given to men of different persuasions, to preserve
the peace of the Church. For if they were by their persuasions to be acted
violently, like the Enthusiasts among the Idolaters, that were not able to
contain themselves in their ecstasies, it had been in vain to have given
counsels to them who were not able to observe them. Besides if God should have
concluded us under an Impossibility of having all the same apprehensions of
Spiritual and supernatural things, and bad also condemned us all to such a
slavery to those apprehensions, as that it should not be in our power to manage
our selves under them, to the peace and tranquillity of the Church, it had been
in effect to have created us to mutual Destructions, concluded us under a worse
condition then Brutes, and given us Apprehensive Faculties only to destroy our
selves and others; all which are contrary to the Divine goodness, amd the
gentle, meek, and charitable commands of Christ.

But say they To teach men that their consciences toward God, are not
concerned in their not acting according to their Light in his Worship, or in
acting against it, is to teach them to be Atheists. We answer, That to teach
men not to be over confident in their own apprehensions, but to be so moderate
as may be for the Peace of the Church, is not to act contrary to their
Consciences, but most agreeably to a well ordered Conscience; this being a
plain, clear, and confessed duty by all Christians: the particular
apprehensions of one person or party being subject to many suspicions, whether
they be the right measures of a duty or no. And in doing this they are so far
from being Atheists, that they become the better Christians, following the
Rules of Christ and his Apostles.

SECT. 3. Indulgence not justified from the Example of Christ.
THeir second Argument is drawn from the Example of our Savior, in which we
confess we are not only to adore and admire, but also to imitate all that
Meekness, and Lowlyness, which rendered his life glorious in holiness; yet these
men dare not say that the number of our duties is bounded by his example, and
that we are to forbear every thing, whereof we have no pattern in his holy
Conversation. For then they should not keep holy the first day of the Week, nor
Baptize Children, nor gather particular Congregations, nor impose
Congregational Covenants, all which these men do, and we no where read, that
Christ did. Besides, these men are not so ignorant, as to believe a negative
argument to be of any force, though they make use of it to commend this
doctrine of their interest, to the Vulgar; and therefore when they say Coerce,
Fine, Imprison, Banish those that apprehend not aright all and every thing that
I would have you instructed in, are words that never proceeded out of his
mouth, etc. We reply, (1) That this does not enforce, that no Church and State
by good Laws, and well proportioned Penalties, should reduce erroneous and
disagreeing Christians to Peace and Order. 2. This makes nothing against Our
Laws, who do not say Coerce, Fine, etc. those that apprehend not aright all and
every thing which Jesus would have us instructed in; for there be many
different opinions in the Church of England which the Laws of the State and
Church take no notice of. And it is not their intent to make men of one mind
in all and every thing, (Which yet is to be wished:) But coerce those who do
things contrary to the Peace of Christians, and will not submit to their Lawful
Superiors, when they command things just, and in their power. And this we are
sure may be collected from the words that proceeded out of our Saviors mouth.

Nor is it any more to the purpose when they say That it is a marveilous
difficulty for any to think seriously, That he who was so full of compassion
toward all the sons of men, should ever give the least consent unto the
Punishment, and gradual Destruction of those who in sincerity desire to Love
and Obey them, and do yet unavoidably mistake in their apprehensions of some
few things pleaded to be according to his mind. For 1. It is our duty, and
also the duty of all who do pretend to be true Christians, seriously to think
of those many and very pressing commands of our Lord Jesus Christ, that his
Disciples should preserve unity among themselves; and it is our great marvel,
that these men who pretend so high to the name of Christ, should yet take no
notice of those Precepts.

Secondly, when we seriously think of them, we cannot but conclude, That these
Commands of Unity preceeded from the fullness of his compassion toward the Sons
of Men. 1. Toward those men who should desire to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; that these should not be distracted in their choice, what party to
apply themselves unto, with whom they might join themselves to seek the Lord,
and where they might most assuredly receive the Word of Life. Which
distractions it was not possible for them to avoid, if the Christians were
divided into several parties. 2. Toward those of the World, who though they
would not believe, and so should not be concerned in the truth of Christians;
yet they must be in the Quiet and Peace of them. For experience shows, that
when Divisions and Contentions turmoild the Church, the State and even the mixed
company of unbelievers soon found themselves under many miseries, while the
contending parties mutually armed to a destruction of their Opposites.

Thirdly, These commands of Christ, and this compassion to mankind, do oblige
every man to endeavor to preserve that unity by all ways proper for them in
their several Callings. And therefore Christian Kings may and ought to do it in
their way which is by just Laws, and the Church by wise and pious Injunctions;
and all are to avoid, and mark them that cause Divisions among them, to
restrain their furious and carnal heats in prosecuting their own private
apprehensions, to the reproach of Religion, and Disturbance of Mankind.

Fourthly, Such ways to preserve Peace, can never be to the destruction of
those who in sincerity desire to Love and obey Christ, although they should
mistake in their apprehensions of some few things, etc. For (1.) It is not true
(which these writers say) that such persons are concluded under " an
unavoidable mistake; and being not so, they will in sincerity endeavor after a
full and clear information in those things that are pleaded to be according to
the mind of Christ. (2.) All such persons will in that Christian humility which
the Spirit of Christ works, not oppose their private apprehensions to the
judgment and practice of that Church of God, from which they have received the
Doctrine of Salvation, and therefore will not think of themselves above what
they ought to think, but think soberly according as God has dealt to them the
measure of faith. And being thus lowly in their own eyes knowing themselves
liable to mistakes and errors; they will not be so fond of their own
apprehensions, as for their sakes to bring a scandal upon the Church of God,
and set the World in Flames. Besides, (3.) having a desire to Obey God, they
will be careful to testify their obedience in a manifest and undeniable Duty,
as is the Peace and Unity of Christians, and obedience to Governors: and not
think to justify the breach of that, with the observance of what their singular
and private apprehensions represent; especially being secured, that the Church
from whom they differ, do retain all things necessary to salvation: as these
men do profess they agree with the Church of England in all things of that
degree. Therefore such persons are secured enough from those severities which
are necessary to preserve the Peace of a Church and Nation. And such sincere,
humble enquirers after Truth, and those that walk up to what they have already
attained, are the only persons dear to Christ. Not every one that cries Lord,
Lord; that pretend to preach and prophecy in his name; for he himself has
told us, that he shall reject the pleas of many such to his indulgence. And
indeed should every one that is so kind to himself, as to publish to the
World, that he in sincerity desires to obey and love Christ, be believed upon
his own word, and have an indulgence for his differing practices, the greatest
Impostors that ever appeared among Christians, must be permitted to practice
their Cheats and Impieties. For the Gnostics, the Manichees, Montanists,
Circumcelliones of old, and those among us who are yet Red, and polluted with
the blood of their Lawful Sovereign, that violated the known Laws of the Land
of their nativity, robbed the Churches, and invaded the just rights of every
one, within the compass of their lust, and their power. These I say would have
persuaded the World, and, it may be, were so mad as to believe themselves, that
they were the men that loved Christ, when in their works they did deny him. And
yet (4.) It cannot be said that the gradual destruction, even of these men, is
intended by such Laws, as do command nothing but what may be for the Security,
Peace, and welfare of Christian Communities: and it is an high slander of any
Lawgivers, to say that they intended Punishment and not Obedience.

That instance of Christ's reproof to his Disciples, for being so forward to
call Fire down from Heaven upon the neglectful Samaritans, is altogether
impertinent; especially as they interpret those words. You know not of what
Spirits you are, To be an unacquaintedness with their own Spirits, imagining
that for Zeal, which was indeed self-Revenge. So that in their Sense Christ
reproved their revengeful Spirits. Now it cannot be said of Laws made to
restrain violations of Peace, that they are the Dictates of Revenge, since
Revenge looks at acts past, but Laws endeavor to prevent those to come.

SECT. 4. No ground for Indulgences in the Practice of the Apostles.
THe third Argument is drawn from the practice of the Apostles, whom we may
well wonder, that they should be suspected as Patrons for indulgence of
Dissentions and Schisms in Religion; Since we find them describing the Authors
of them, as Monsters and Prodigies, that dishonor the Generation they live in,
and fill the place wherein they appear with confusion and danger, and threaten
a Tempest at their first rising. Therefore the Apostles dealt with them as such
in their days. For although they did not exercise on them Coertions,
Restaints, and Corporal punishments, as these Writers wisely observe; because
indeed they had no Temporal power: yet they used their Ecclesiastical power and
delivered them over to Satan, which in those times was a giving them up to that
Tormenter to be afflicted in their flesh, a severer punishment then the Sword
of the Magistrate can inflict. Romans 16.18. 1 Timothy 6.4.
They commanded the sound Christians to avoid them as contagious Pests, and to
cut them off as cankerd and infested members, that would bring destruction to
the whole body of the Church, if a just severity prevented them not; nay they
called for Gods assistance to cut off these troublers of the Israel of God:
Gal. 5.12.
I would they were even cut off that trouble you. They also commended nothing
more to the conversation of Christians then Peace and Unity, to mind the same
things, to walk in one mind, to follow after those things that made for Peace,
and Edification, which are impossible to be attained in Dissentions. It would
be very strange therefore, to imagine, that they who do all this to
Dissentions, should yet give any ground for an Indulgence of them.

But yet these men have found out, that St. Paul is for this forbearance Phil.
3.15, 16. Which Text, if they had faithfully set down, would have discovered
their Sophistry. For the Apostle says, Let us therefore as many as be perfect,
be thus minded; and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, the Lord shall
reveal even this unto you. Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let
us walk by the same rule; let us mind the same things. Here it is plain that
those to whom the Apostle commends Forbearance one to the other, were those
whom he calls perfect; and such certainly could not be persons that had
separated from a mutual Communion, for all such Divisions he brands as carnal.
1 Cor. 3. And the Dividers as men not perfect, and at best but babes; nay he
calls them in the beginning of that very Chapter, Dogs, Evil workers, and in
scorn, the Concision, and therefore bids them have a care, and beware of them;
and in the following verses weeps over them as Enemies of the Cross of Christ,
whose end is destruction. These are not words of forbearance and Indulgence,
and therefore that place gives no countenance to it.

But then they urge, That the whole Society of the Apostles observing the
difference between the Jewish and Gentile Believers to prevent any Evil
Consequent in their Assembly at Jerusalem, assigned to the several parties,
their particular bounds how far they should accommodate themselves unto one
another by a mutual Condescension that they might walk in peace. What is all
this to an indulgence of those who have forsaken the Communion of the Church,
and who write, preach, and do all they can against it. The Case is far unlike.
The differences between the Jewish and Gentile Believers had brought, as yet,
no evil Consequent, for they themselves say, the Apostles consulted to prevent
any evil Consequent. Let the world judge whether the Differences among us have
not brought upon us a large series of such Consequents. The Apostles
determined, and set bounds and measures of forbearance to prevent a Schism,
then which nothing was more dreadful to the Church; and these men would have
forbearance and Indulgence to a most dangerous schism already made, that so it
might with impunity be continued.

SECT. 5. The Primitive Christians did not allow Indulgence.
WIth far less success, but with more art do they endeavor to make the first
Christians to speak for them, from whom they bring some passages: yet do not
tell us where we also may find those Testimonies, nor give us the words of the
Authors, for fear they should be deprehended. Socrates the Historian (say they)
gives us a long Catalogue of differences in External Rites of Worship, which
they looked upon as no breach of Union at all. l. 5. c. 22. (...), etc. (...),
etc.
To which we say, that That Historian does tell us indeed that the Churches of
several Provinces, had different observations of the feast of Easter, of the
measure of Fasts before that Feast, and of the different meats they did abstain
from, but so that one observation was in the whole Roman Church, another was
kept by those in Illyrium, all Greece and Alexandria, etc. Which we easily
admit, for we grant to every Church their particular Rites. Our Rites in the
Church of England, are not pressed upon those in Scotland, nor those in
Ireland; and we do not think our Union with the Protestant Churches abroad, is
broken by their different Ceremonies. Therefore the Practice of the first
Churches, is maintained by us and not violated. But they can neither out of
Socrates nor any other Historian of those times give us an instance of any one
National or Provincial Church, that did indulge those within their jurisdiction
who professing Christianity, did yet contemn her Orders, and separate from her
Communion, and did declare her Rites in Worship, Idolatrous, Superstitious, and
Antichristian, which is now our Case.

Then they bring in Victor Bishop of Rome is branded for disturbing the peace
of the Churches by dividing their Communion. They tell us not for what he was
censured, either because they knew it not, or because they know it would do
them no good; The Case was this. All the Churches of the lesser Asia by an
ancient Tradition did on the fourteenth day of the Moon observe the Feast of
our Saviors Passover, and upon whatsoever day of the week that happened to
fall, they ended their Fasts. This custom was observed in no other Church
throughout the whole World; for in all the rest, that custom which was
delivered by the Apostles, was continued, as Eusebius says, to his time.
Notwithstanding this difference, the several Churches had preserved Peace and
Communion; among themselves, as Irenaeus says of Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus,
Telesphorus, Sixtus, Bishops of Rome, who had received Polycarp and others of
the Asiaticks that came to Rome, to Communion not contending about that Rite.
But afterward when a controversy was moved about it, and both sides in
different Councils decreed for their own practice, and sent their Letters to
justify themselves to the other Churches. Eus. l. 5. c. 25. (...).
Victor heated with the letter of the Asiaticks, without consulting the other
Bishops of his own Persuasion, excommunicates all the Churches of Asia as
Hetorodox: This displeased all the other Bishops, who commanded him to consult
the peace and union of the Brethren. Now what in all this concerns us. Victor
was to be blamed for breaking a long continued Peace, for invading the Liberty
of other Churches; but none would have condemned him, had he required obedience
from the members of his own Church, to the Orders and Canons made by Councils
of those who were over them in the Lord.

For Irenaeus in his Epistle to Victor to dissuade him from breaking Communion
with the Churches of another observation, tells him that his Predecessors
Anicetus, Pius, etc. kept the Communion entire, Jul. l. 5 c. 26. (...).
although they did not observe those Churches Rites, nor suffered those among
them to observe them. And if the infamy of Victor is to be a terror to any, it
must be to those who break the Communion; and it is plain who they are that
have done that among us.

Origin is the next whom they would make the world believe, is for their cause;
but they are forced to make a testimony for him which he himself never writ,
viz. That there ever were differences amongst Professors of Christianity from
the beginning; and that it was impossible but that there should so be, which
yet he shows, hindered not their Faith, Love, and Obedience. For when Celsus did
upbraid and reproach the Christians, because of their many Sects, (as Atheists
and Papists do now to us) Origin gives some reasons of them, and then confesses
indeed that There were Differences among Christians from their beginning, but
then he does not say what these writers say for him, That it was impossible but
that there should so be; for this would have been to have given the lie to the
Holy Ghost, who in the Acts c. 4. v. 32. says That the multitude of them who
believed, were of one heart and one soul; and therefore what was then, might be
again, and so could not be impossible. Neither does Origin say, much less show,
that these differences, hindered not their Faith, Love, and Obedience. For the
Heresies which he thought Celsus had respect unto, and grounded his reproach
upon, were the Ophitae and Cainitae to whom Origin denies the very name of
Christians.

They pretend also a kindness from Justin Martyr, who, (they say) in his second
Apology, declares his forbearance and the Churches of those days, toward
those who believing in Christ, yet thought themselves obliged to the
observation of Mosaical Rights and Ceremonies. But this is an open abuse both
of Justin and the Reader, for there are no words in that Apology tending to
that purpose, and such indeed would have been impertinent, and besides his
subject in that Apology; and lastly had he said, what he does not, it would not
have been of advantage to Indulgence.

Ignatius also is used no better by them, whom they would have to say, that to
persecute men on the account of God and Religion, is to make our selves
conformable to the Heathen that know not God. Whereas Ignatius says no word
like it, but that which makes against them. Ignat. Ep. ad Phila delphinos (...).
If any one (says he) follows him that has made a Schism, he shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. If any one walks in a different opinion, he is not
complyant with the sufferings of Christ. These are the words of Ignatius, who
in that place by many arguments urges them to continue in the Unity of the
Church, and therefore could not at the same time speak for indulgence of those
who did break that Unity. But those words which they refer to, are the words of
the Interpolator of Ignatius. For they are not in Vossius's Edition of
Ignatius, nor in that Latin Copy which Bishop Usher thought to be Authentic:
but they are in that corrupt Copy, set forth by him; yet so set forth and noted
in Red Characters, that no man could take them for Ignatius's, but he that had
a mind to prevaricate. Which in civil converse is an infamous crime, but in
Religion we want a name to express its buseness.

Then they huddle up many witnesses together, Tertullian, Origin, Arnobius, and
Lactantius Who (say they) pleaded for a Liberty in Religion, as founded in the
Law of Nature, and the inconsistencie of Faith with Compulsion. But where these
Authors say such things, they do not tell us; and the former discoveries show
how little reason we have to take their bare Words. But whatsoever those
Authors may say to justify Christian Religion, even by the Law of Nature; and
that the light of Reason could find nothing in it that deserved persecution:
Yet I shall not believe, that they ever said, Ter^de Praescrip. Haeret. c. 37.
Si Haeretici sunt, Christiani non sunt. Ib. c. 32. Ita omnes Haereses, nec
recipiuntur in pacem and communionem, ab Ecclesiis quo quo modo Apostolicis.
the Law of Nature did give to any persons ground for Liberty of different
Opinions, and practices, contrary to the Rules and Orders of that Christian
Church, wherein they lived, until I see their own words for it. And of these
certainly Tertullian can have no great favor for them, who is so severe
against Heretics in his Book de Praescriptione, that he will not allow them
the name of Christians; and says, that they were not received to peace and
Communion in the Churches that were any way Apostolical. If therefore we may
judge of the rest by one, we have no reason to think they are for the the
Indulgence, till we see it under their hands.

After these they bring the Synod of Alexandria in the Case of Athanasius, who
did (as they say), Condemn all External force in Religion, and Reproached the
Arians as the first Inventers, and Promoters of it. The shamefulness of this
Allegation will appear to the Reader; If he take notice, that this Synod, made
no Acts nor Canons, for the Histories of it mention none, nor are any Extant;
and therefore their Judgment in this Case was not definitive. Their main
business was to inquire into the Sclanders which the Arians had raised against
Athanasius, and to bear witness against them, they being competent to this, as
being Members of the same Church, and conversant with him in his offices. This
their Testimony they published in a Circulatory Letter to all the Bishops of
the Catholic Church, and to their beloved Brethren in Christ. In this Epistle
they speak not at all concerning External force in Religion, nor do they say
the Arians were the first inventers of it. For they only complain of the Arians
for offering to the Emperor, Letters that did accuse Siquidem jam denuo
Accusatrices Literas contra Athanasium Imperatoribus porrexere, iteratis
calumniis homicidia ei objicientes quae aunquam facta sunt; ac denuo illum
conjurationibus suis opprimere student.
Athanasius of Murders which were never done, that by that means they might
take away his life by the Sword of Justice. And as to this, not to any force of
the Emperor about Religion, they say, Tota enim eorum accusatrix Epistola
nihil aliud nisi necem spectat, aut necem moliuntur si ipsis liceat, aut saltem
exules facere, etc. Ista opera Ethnicorum sunt, and non vel tenuiter
Christianorum, and minime omnium Episcoporum, quos aliis justitiam commonstrare
oportuit.
Their whole Libel designs nothing else but slaughter, as much as in them
lies, or else banishment, etc. Those are works of Heathens, and not of the
meanest Christians, much less of Bishops, whom it becomes to be patterns of
Justice to others. Now what is all this which is spoken of bloody Slanders, to
the force which restrains different Apprehensions from disturbing Practices.
Let the Reader see if he can, for I cannot, find any thing to their purpose in
that Synodical Epistle; and if these Writers had intended sincerity, they would
have given us the very words which made for them, and I conceive they did not,
because they could not. Thus of these Testimonies out of that ancient
Christians, some are mere Fictions, the alleged Authors having no such words
as these are cited to have. Thus Justin Martyr, Origin, Ignatius, and the Synod
of Alexandria are abused. Tertullian, Arnobius, Lactantius, brought in as
Witnesses without any Testimony. Socrates the Historian, and the Instance of
Victor impertinently mentioned. Truth stands not in need of such low shifts.

SECT. 6. The first Christian Emperors were against Indulgence.
HAving done with Churchmen, They come to Emperors. And first they lay hold of
that Edict of Constantine, who having a mind to deliver the oppressed
Christians from the persecutions of the Gentiles, and not finding it safe,
Eusebius. Hist. l. 10. c. 5.
as yet to appear particularly in their favor, having then Licinius and
Maximinus Colleagues in the Empire, both still inclined to Gentilism, He
prevails upon Licinius to join with him in this Public Edict, That Liberty of
Worship was not to be denied to any; and that it should be permitted to every
man's will to embrace what Rites and Institutes of Religion they pleased; and
that the Christians as well as all others might observe the Faith of their own
Religion. But when he found that this did not fully secure the Christians, and
it being general, as also ambiguous, so that for all this, many of them for
fear did deny the faith. When they came to Milan, they did make another
Explanatorie Edict, more fully in the favor of the Christians, That the
Liberty of Embracing the Religion of Christians should be denied to no man. Now
let any reasonable men judge what they can gain for their Cause, from this
Edict, which only gives a liberty to Christians in General, as well as to
Idolaters, and speaks nothing of any Sects and Dissenters among the Christians.
But they say, until the latter end of his Reign, there were no thoughts of
exercising Severity, with reference unto any Divisions among Christians about
the Worship of God. Where they will fix the Epoch of the end of his Reign,
they do not tell us; but this we are certain of, from the best Authors, that
having not made his Edict for the Liberty of Christians in gene. ral, till the
8th. year of his Reign; Aug. Cont. Epist. Parm. l. c. 7.
and so publicly owned their Profession: He did in his 11th. year, and not
long after the first Council of Arles, make severe Edicts. For Parmenianus the
Donatist complained that Constantine commanded those of that Sect, to be led
forth to Punishment. They were also banished by him, about the same time. For
in the Conference at Carthage, they urged the Letters of Constantine to
Verinus, otherwise Valerius the Prefect of Africa, Aug. Brevic. Collat. 31.
Diei c. 5.
that he should free them from Banishment, and leave their fury to the Judgment
of God; Which Letters St. Augustine says, were dated four years and six
months, after the decree of Banishment: 30. Non. Maj. Crispus and Constantine,
being the second time Consuls. And therefore Constantine had dealt severely in
such cases, in the eleventh year of his Reign, which was long before the end of
it; Aug. Cent. Literas Petil. l. 2. c. 92.
for it lasted about 32 years. Besides, Constantine took from them about this
time, those Churches, which by their flattery of Julian, they afterward
recovered; by all which it appears, these Gentlemen are foully mistaken in the
forbearance of Constantine.

They err as grossly when they say, that After the rise of the Arian Heresy,
when the Interposition of Civil censures upon the account of Difference about
things Spiritual, had made an entrance, by the Solicitations of some for the
Banishment of Arius, and some of his Copartners, it is not easy to relate what
miseries and Confusions were brought upon the Churches thereby, etc. For this
is contradictory to their own testimony which they brought from the Syned of
Alexand; whom they will have to reproach the Arians as the first Inventers of
external force: and now they will have the Orthodox make an entrance for it,
(which in common sense is to begin it) for they were the zealous Sollicitors
for the Banishment of Arius. But as that was a false Testimony; so this is a
false remark on the Histories of those times. For if by External Force they
mean the Use of the Civil Power, to remove men of different apprehensions from
their Offices and the Emoluments of the Church, this was used by Christians
long before the Arian Heresy arose, or the Emperors became Christians. For
when Paulus Samosatenus was condemned for an Heretic by a second Synod at
Antioch, and deposed from his Bishopric, yet refusing to deliver up the
Bishops House that belonged to that Church, they craved aid from the Emperor
Aurelianns an Heathen. Who commanded that possession should be given to him, to
whom the Bishops of Italy and Rome should determine, and so says Eusebius,
Paulus Samosatenus was with great disgrace turned out by the secular Power.
Eusebius. l. 7. c. 30.
To no other end was the Civil Power solicited in the Case of Arius. For after
all means used to reclaim the Heretics, by private Admonition, by Provincial
Councils, by Exhortatory Letters from the Emperor to peace and Unity; yet
Ambition, Vanity, and Opiniastrete still propagated the Error, to the shame of
Religion, the disquiet of the World, the grief of that Christian Prince, and
his Obstruction to noble designs. The Emperor is solicited to call that
Famous Council of Nice, wherein Arius his Heresy was condemned, and a Creed
composed to which all subscribed at first, except five. Who notwithstanding
afterward did in a Petition present their recantation, and subscribed to the
Creed, so that the Catholic Faith was agreed to by all: and all subscribed to
the Condemnation of the Heresy, as also to the Anathema of the Heretic,
except Eusebius of Nicomedia and Theognis of Nice, who thereupon were by the
Council condemned and deprived of their Sees, and others substituted in their
places. Constantine interposing nothing herein, but putting the Decree of the
Council in Execution, and expelling these men from those places where they
might disturb the peace of the Church. Yet afterward these persons upon their
submission were restored again to their Churches. This was all the External
force which the Orthodox Christians made use of, in which no Sect can find any
thing blameable, since they all have, and will still, use the same in their
seasons.

But if by External Force they mean the violencies of Fire and Sword, and all
those tortures and rigors, which enemies mutually use one against another: this
the orthodox gave no entrance to, but the Arians did first practice it, and did
go beyond all pattern and provocation from the Catholics. For these only
secured the public peace, against such who were in some lawful Synod condemned
as corrupters of that Faith once delivered to the Saints: by depriving them of
their Offices in the Church, removing them from those places of their
Conversation, where they might either corrupt others, or make a public
disturbance, and restraining their Conventicles and meetings. Now this could
not justify the Arians, who beyond all this, having prevailed with Constantius
to embrace their Heresy, did put a force upon Councils to determine what they
pleased, as the Council of Arles, the Council of Milan, and Byterris: in which
having refused to admit an enquiry into the Faith and Doctrine of Athanasius,
and denying to subscribe to the Nicene Creed: they would notwithstanding force
the Orthodox to subscribe to his condemnation against common reason. And upon
this account they banished Liberius Bishop of Rome, Osius, and Paulinus, the
most eminent Bishops of the World. Besides the cruelties they committed at
Alexandria, and branding Churchmen with the marks of those condemned to the
Mines: they sent out their Notaries to force both Bishops and people to
subscribe, upon the pain of Plundering, Imprisonment, and public shames. So
that Hilarie says, the Emperors war against Persia was shorter then that
against Alexandria, where the Cruelties of the Heathen Persecutors were acted
over again. This was the External force of the Ar^^ns, for which the Catholics
gave them no precedent. And this was that force for which Hilarious writ both
to, and against Constantius. For he wrote after the Council of Milan, and was
banished in that of Byterris. And therefore his words to Constantius concern
not our Magistrates who use not his Cruelties, but condemn his practices. These
doing no more then what Orthodox Princes have done ever since there were such
in the Church. Besides, I must mind the Reader that the words of S. Hilarie
cited by these Writers, are not a continued part of Hilaries discourse, but a
Rhapsodie out of several places, which if considered with the context, will
appear not to serve the ends they were brought for.

Valens his cruelty was no more justifiable by any practices of the Catholics,
then that of Constantius could be. Arianism found his nature cruel, and did, as
all Heresies, inflame him higher to a more importunate thirst for blood, and
direct all his savageness against the Orthodox. But these Gentlemen are
miserably out, when they say Themistius the Philosopher upon the principles of
Common Reason and Honesty plainly told Valens, That by the way he used, he
might force some to venerate his Imperial Robes, but never any to worship God
aright. For this was not spoken to Valens, but in a Consular speech to Jovian,
to whom Valens succeeded. And that not to restrain his Cruelty, but to extol
that Prince, as being above all the arts of Flatterers; in that he told the
several parties of Christians (whom Themistius meant by flatterers) making
their first addresses to him when he was Emp rour. That he would trouble none
of what Faith soever, but he would have the greatest kindness for those who
should endeavor most for the Unity of the Church; Soc. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 25.
And the observation of Themistius thereupon was not grounded on the Principles
of Common Reason and Honesty: but was a mere Scoff and Jeer, (so much contempt
does Dissentions expose Christianity unto) for his Words are, They worshipped
not God, but the Emperial Robe; and they were like an Eddie or Whirlpoole, that
was hurried one while this way, another that. It is true indeed, Themistius
labored to restrain the cruelty of Valens toward all, as well as toward
Christians, even in the beginning of his Reign; and he made the same attempt
toward the latter end of it, advising him, Socr. Hest. l. 4. c. 32. Sozom. l.
c. 36.
That he should not persecute the Orthodox Christians, because they differed
from him. And that by this Argument, That he ought not to wonder at the
Dissentions in Church-mens Opinions; because it was much less then that which
was among the Gentiles, with whom there were above 300 different Opinions, and
from such a multitude there must necessarily arise very many Contentions; and
perchance it seemed fit to God, that it should be so; for when he would not
easily be known, every one would the more reverence him, because they could not
exactly comprehend him. But I think this argument would not do well in the
mouth of a Christian; Howsoever, this prevailed not upon him, wholly to forbear
his Cruelty, though it somewhat allayed it; for he still was Barbarous to the
Orthodox Clergy, and it was the troubles of his Empire, that hindered the
further Executions of his Wrath on them.

There is no more truth in what they say next But the best Emperors in the
mean time bewailed those fierce Animosities, whereby every Sect and Party
labored to oppress their Adversaries, and kept themselves from putting forth
their Authority against any Dissenters in Christian Religion, who retained the
Foundation of the Faith in any Competent measure. Cod. Theodosian 16. Tit. 5.
Edit. Lugd. 1664.
For let the Reader but look in the Code of Theodosius. and he shall find that
there are no less then sixty two Laws made against Heretics and Schismatics;
and that of all the Emperors from Constantine the Great to Valentinian the
Third, except, Julian the Apostate, (who sought by a Toleration to ruin
Christianity) Constantius and Valens, who were reputed Heretics, and made Laws
against the Catholic Christians. And these Laws were not only against such
Heretics as destroyed the Foundation of the Faith: but those also who, in a
competent measure did retain it, as the Aeriani, Audiani, Novatiani, Euchitae,
and several of the same Nature; And besides these 62 Laws against Heretics in
general, There are Several Laws against those that did Rebaptize. How securely
therefore, (not to say unfaithfully) do these men say, that " the best
Emperors did not put forth their Authority against Dissenters in Religion.

But they say, Valentinianus by public Decree, granted Liberty of Religion
unto all Christians. For which they cite Sozomen, and Ammianus Marcellinus. But
this is said by neither. For Sozomen, l. 6. c. 6. (And the Adversaries tell us
not any other place, there we should find this Testimony) Says only this, He
was of the same Opinion with those of the Council of Nice, and these he did
benefit, and to those that were otherwise persuaded, he gave no trouble. Here
is no mention of a Public decree. Neither does Ammianus speak of any such
thing, Amm. Marc. l. 30. Inter Religionum diversitates medius stetit, nec
quemquam inquietavit.
but among the other Characters he gives that Prince at his Death, he describes
his Moderation. That he unconcerned himself in the differences of Religion, nor
did he disquiet any, etc. This of Ammianus, a Gentile, is to be understood of
Valentinian's Toleration of Gentilism, which having been so much revived and
caressed by Julian, was not presently to be depressed, lest it might burden the
beginnings of his Empire, with too great difficulties. Besides, by such a
general permission for a time he should more safely deliver Christianity from
the Injuries the Apostate had done unto it. But I cannot see what reason these
Protestants have to boast in a Toleration, that gives equal Privileges to
Idolaters, or Atheists, as themselves. As to that which Sozomen says, that he
gave no trouble to those that were otherwise persuaded it was in the beginning
of his Empire also: for that he did not persevere in that Humor, appears by the
several Laws, he made against Heretics and Schismatics. C^d. Th. l. 16. Tit.
5. l. 13.
That against the Manichees, for he commanded that wheresoever the meetings and
company of Manichees should be, their Teachers being censured, the House and
dwelling, where they were taught, should be confiscated in the ninth year of
his Reign, and in the tenth he made another against Rebaptizing; (2) Ib. Ti^.
6. Lex prima.
Besides his Rescript to Olybrius, that he should forbid the Dissenters at
Rome, to meet within twenty miles of Rome, And that to Praetextatus, whereby he
commanded to banish Ursicinus: So that this, one of the Best Emperors did put
forth his Authority against Dissenters in Religion.

The next they name is Gratianus, who they say made a Law, that Religion should
be free to all sorts and Sects of Christians, except the Manichees, Photinians,
and Eunomian. This instance makes against themselves; for their reasons which
they use for sorbearance, will make as well for Indulgence to the Manichees,
Photinians, and Eunomians; because their apprehensions are not in their own
power. Christ did not bid Coerce, nor banish those Sects; and the Apostles
spoke nothing of them, nor against them: and yet they produce Gratian for one
of the best Emperors that did except them from all Indulgency. And indeed, he
did not only except these, Cod. 16. Tit. 5. l. 4, 5. Olim (pro Religione
Catholicae Sanctitatis, ut Coetus hareilcae usurpationis quiescerent) jussimus,
sive in oppidis sive in agris extra Ecclesias quas nostra Pax obtinet conventus
agerentur, publicari loca omnia in quibus falso Religionis obtentu altaria
locarentur, Quod sive dissimulatione Judicum, seu Profanorum Improbitate, eadem
erit ex utroque pernicies. Cod. 16. Tit. 5. l. 5.
but he made three Laws against the Conventicles of all other Heretics. Two of
these Laws are in Codex Theodosianus; The first there expressed does imply a Law
made before against them; For these are the Words We have heretofore commanded
for the good of the Holy Catholic Religion, that the Assemblies of the
Heretical Usurpation should cease. Whether these meetings were held either in
Towns, or in the Countries, without those Churches which are of our Communion;
all those places to be returned into our Exchequer, in which by a false
pretense of Religion, Altars were placed, which if it should happen (to be
neglected) either by the Connivence of the Judges, or by perverseness of the
profane (Heretics) there shall be the same punishment for either cause. Here
is a Law implied, which is confirmed by this, and that Law is proved to be made
by Gratian, about the end of 375 year of our Lord, in which his Father being
dead, he was Supreme in the Western Empire; and the Law here set forth, was
about the year 378. While Valens was yet alive. But after the death of Valens,
he going into the Eastern Empire, and finding the Corruptions there very high,
he was necessitated to Temporize, and there at Sirmium he made that
Constitution which Socrates and Sozomen speak of, of granting Liberty to all
but the Manichees, Photinians, and Eunomians. But he was not long in that
mind, for he reversed that, and made another Law against all Heretics; which
is the fifth Law against Heretics, in Cod. Theod. Thus it appears that this
other best Emperor Gratianus did put forth his Authority against Dissenters in
Religion; and they have not found any one among those ancient Christian
Emperors, that has been for their Indulgence, but against it.

SECT. 7. Indulgence not to be grounded upon the practice of the Modern
Emperors and Princes.
BUt the Apologists having been abused themselves, or desiring to abuse us with
an Opinion, that the Best Ancient Emperors were for Indulgence, with strange
ill luck, or a Monstrous inadvertencie say, They ( i. e. Ancient Emperors)
have not been without their followers in those Ages, wherein the Differences
about Religion have risen to as great an height, as they are capable of, etc.
And the following Princes whom they name are Popish Emperors, some of whom,
they themselves brand with Perfidiousness and cruelty, as Sigismund and Charles
the Fifth, and of the others Ferdinand, Maximilian, Rodolphus; they bring no
clear Testimonies, that they did grant Liberty to all, and every Religion: or
that they did abate the Cruelty and Rigor of the Laws that were made by their
Predecessors, and were urged by the Popes, against Dissenters in Religion. So
that they urge these great names only to amuse the unacquainted Reader: which
judicious men will plainly see, are Witnesses, either that signify nothing, or
else against them.

As for the blot upon Sigismund's Honor, in breaking his Word of Safety and
Liberty to John Huss, and Jerome of Prague, it can no whit stain those Princes,
who by public Laws do openly forewarn their Subjects of falling into danger,
and do not surprise them by any false, and base Practices.

Nor are we more concerned in the Events of Charles, the Fifth's filling the
World with Blood and Uprores, for the Extirpation of Protestantism. Since our
Laws are not writ in Blood as his was. Is there no difference betwixt an
Emperors Invasions upon Free Princes, and Cities, and a Kings and Parliaments
giving Laws to their own People? Suppose he were unhappy in the use of Power
beyond the limits of Justice, is it not therefore Lawful to use a Power within
its due bounds? But how can these Writers apply his Losses and Disappointments
toward his latter end, as the issue of his designs against Protestantism? How
do they know, (as they used to say) the mind of God in that Providence; Since
as great persecutors of the truth, as he was, went to their Graves in outward
Peace and glory. They cannot gather it from the Instruments of his Losses and
Disappointments. For Maurice of Saxony had been one, though a Protestant, who
had assisted him in his War upon the other Protestants, and had received as a
reward of his ingratitude, the Dominions and Electorship of John Frederick Duke
of Saxony, his kinsman; and this man did rather surprise him, then deal as a
Generous Enemy. Charles's greatest Losses, was from Henry the second of France,
a man more greedy of Protestants blood, then Charles had appeared to be.
Lastly, His loss were applied, by some Jesuits to his Injuries to Pope Clement
the eighth, whom by his Armies he besieged in St. Angelo. So little ground have
men to fix the Providence of God upon what they dislike. That they are
casually aplyed to contra^^ with equal probability.

Ferdinand (they say) his Brother and Successor, kept the Peace of the Empire,
by a constant Peace, granted to the Consciences of Men. They should have proved
this by some Authentic History, for Sleidan tells us he was not very Indulgent
to the Poor Bohemians: But they neither show us how, and when he changed his
mind; and when he gave an Indulgence, and reversed his Brothers decrees.
Maximilian's saying (which they do not tell us from whom they learned it) i. e.
That the Empire of Conscience belonged to God alone, wherein he would never
interpose, Signifies nothing, unless his practice were agreeable to it, which
they do not assert. His Counsel to Henry the Third of France returning out of
Poland, was, Thuani Hist. l. 58.
(as Thuanus says) That in the beginnings of his Reign, and first entrance to
France, he should establish Peace; for so said he, the dreadful memory of the
past actions, would be abolished, and the Blame of them would be imputed rather
to others then him. This amounts to no more then an Act of Oblivion, which yet
we see among us, does not settle our Peace. Or if it be to be understood of a
Peace, as to Religion, it may be understood of a Forbearance, as to those Acts
of Blood, which Henry had been guilty of; for he was one of the prime Actors in
the great French Massacre of Protestants. For there we find no Words of
Maxmilian, that signify granting an Indulgence to all Religions.

Neither do we find what they say of the same Henry the third, that he left it
as his last Advice to his Counselors; that they should no more with Force
interpose in the matters of Religion. For Thuanus an Historian of
unquestionable Credit, Thuan. Hist. l. 96.
gives us his last Speech to his Counselors, after he had been stabbed by
Clement the Friar; in which there is not one word to that purpose. All that he
says is this, that the Cause of Religion should not terrify them from
accepting Henry of Navarre to be their King, who had a right to be so; Ib.
Protestants irreconciliabili odio usque ad Ultimum Spiritum prosecutus est.
and in the Characters of this Prince, Thuanus says, that he Prosecuted the
Protestants with an irreconciliable hatred to his last End. How miserably are
these Apologists put to it, to find Friends for their Cause, when they are
forced to pretend to a Kindness, that never was, from such an Enemy of
Protestants as this was.

They do not tell us from what good Author they received the saying of
Rodolphus the Emperor upon the defeat of his Forces. That he looked for no
other Issue, since he invaded the Throne of God, by imposing on the Consciences
of Men. But suppose it true, he might justly expect it, if he broke his Faith
given to the Protestants before, or unjustly took from them the Peace his
Predecessors had granted; And yet this is nothing at all to prove a necessity
of Indulgence to those various Dissenters, to whom the Laws always have denied
it, and no Prince of ours ever granted to them, and who only had forced
impunity to themselves, by an unjust Arms.

We condemn, as well as they, the Butcheries of the Duke of Alva: But we think
the Toleration granted by Henry the fourth, can be no precedent for Indulgence
to them; The Protestants in France had their Toleration granted long before,
and were unjustly used in the breaking of their Peace. Henry the Fourth
therefore restores them what was their own: and it had been strange if he
should not, for he was obliged to it, by all the ties of Gratitude. He had been
bred up in the same Religion, they had been his Support in all his Dangers, and
were a Considerable part of his Strength against the Holy League. Let but the
merits of our Dissenters to the Crown, be weighed with those; and if they can
possibly appear equal, let them have what they deserve.

These are the Wise and Mighty Monarchs, whose practices they appeal unto,
these are those that were followers of the Best Ancient Emperors; And yet none
of these make any thing for them. It is a wonder that they could find no
Protestant Princes to be their Patrons, but they must be only for the Popish.
It might have been expected, that among the Best, Mighty, and Wise Monarchs we
should have found Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and King James; who by the
confession of all sound Protestants, deserved well of their Profession: But
these are left out of their Catalogue of best Princes, because these were not
for their Indulgence. They conclude with an empty boast; " The World is full of
Instances of the like kind, which we cannot believe; for sure in such a
multitude they might have found many more less impertinent then those they
bring, or else they have no good judgment in their Choice: but such a confident
boast was necessary to hide their real want.

Thus having examined their reasons, and Instances for Indulgence, I think it
unnecessary to reflect upon their Corollaries Harangues, and their other
observations; for their grounds being found false, and naught, all their
superstuctures will fall of themselves. Neither do I envy them the praises they
make for themselves, (the greatest arguments they use to the People;) and
therefore shall not contradict them: my design being only to search for the
truth, which I desire they may embrace, and no longer seek to perpetuate their
Schisms, to the unspeakable Dishonor of Christianity.

SECT. 8. A Vindication of the Discourse of Toleration, from the Exceptions in
the Second Discourse of Religion.
HAving confirmed the Discourse of Toleration against those Arguments that are
for Indulgence, It is requisite to justify it also against the Exceptions that
are made against it in the second Discourse of Religion, whose Title boasts an
Answer to it, but the following Treatise shows how frontless the Title Page is.
For he has not considered at all, those grounds upon which Toleration is
unjustifiable, nor those reasons which show it against the Interest of this
Nation; but rather endeavoring to delude his Reader then answer his Adversary,
he has selected only some few passages for the Subjects of his Contradiction,
with out considering that order and method, in which they stood, (and from
which they received strength,) or the reasons which were added to their
support. And against these Passages he seldom offers any reasons, but they are
the matter of his Declamation, and occasions to suggest an Odium against his
Opponent. He has not been able to show any Testimony that was cited, to be
false; or any Instance alleged, to be Impertinent. Therefore the Discourser of
Toleration did not think himself obliged in point of Reputation to reply to
such weak exceptions, because he cannot distrust so far his Readers judgment;
and for that he thinks that neither his own, nor the Adversaries credit is of
that moment, as to spend his time, and concern the World in his writing for it:
But he conceives his Obligations and Duties to the Truth, require that he
should not desert it in so great an affront, nor suffer the People to be
imposed upon by importunate Writers, to think that Comprchension and Toleration
are proper methods for the Union, and fit means for the Establishment of this
Church and State. For these are conceived to be Originally the Projects of
such, who guilty of our late Troubles, have not yet laid down their Enmity to
the Establishment: Although they may by some in the simplicity of their hearts,
be embraced for such as they are pretended to be. By these last sort of men I
would not be misunderstood, as if I intended to obstruct the way to any who
desires to enter into the Peace and Communion of the Church. For I shall esteem
it a great mercy, if God should be pleased to incline the hearts of those that
are Dissenters, to the true and proper ways of Peace: and to join with us in
promoting Truth and Righteousness in the Land, so that together with us they
may enjoy the Comforts of Gods service, and the Emoluments of the Church.
Although I cannot agree with them to think that these ways proposed by them
will lead us to so happy a state. So that having no animosity against such
Persons, nor even with this mine Adversary, all other Considerations, but those
of the Cause in Controversy, being laid aside, the task will be but short. For
avoiding all repetitions as much as may be, because tedious and nauseous to the
Reader; I shall not meddle with what is a fresh printed on the Subject; Because
therein the Author seems to judicious men Cantilenam Canere, repeat other words
to the same Tune: but shall only answer to the exceptions he has made.

SECT. 9. The Dissenters are guilty of Dissentions.
FIrst he would put of so much in the consideration of Toleration, as shows the
Subject of it to be Dissentions in Religion which are remonstrated to be
infamous in their Causes, and dreadful in their Effects, and did therefore
require the Magistrates care to obstruct the ruin they threatened, which could
not be done by a Toleration, as appears by Instances new and old. All that he
would wave with a most pitiful Shift of distinguishing between Dissentions,
and Dissents, and says, That those whose Liberty is in question, are not
touched with that which is Written of the Nature of Dissentions, with their
Causes and Consequences, and the Magistrates duty concerning them. Dissent
indeed and Dissentions differ as the principle, and the actions flowing from
that principle, as the Cause and the Effects, and may be separated one from the
other. But with what faith, and what hope of being believed could this Author
say, that the Dissenters among us are not chargeable with Dissension; Since in
the greatest Schisms, and most confessed Dissentions, there have not been worse
Effects, then the Differences among us have produced. Has not Religion by
reason of them, been the scorn of Atheists? What a multitude of Sclanders do
the divided parties raise upon those from whom they dissent? What Ruins did
they bring upon the State, and what Persecutions of those who adhered to the
Church? Besides the present practices, show how little the Non-Conformists rest
in a bare Dissent from the Public Rule, when they have and do use their utmost
endeavors to abrogate that Rule, to repeal the Laws, which establish it, When
all those Ministers have relinquished the places of your Ministry, and most of
them have set up private Congregations, by which they forsake the Communion of
the Church. What truth or justice has he, that dares deny these to be
Dissentions, and that those men are not touched, by what is said of them?

It appears more fully that these men rested not in a bare Dissent, since their
practices upon their Dissent, proceeded unto Faction, in State, and the several
Kinds and measures of Dissentions were so many Factions: which was one of the
four reasons that were given, why a Toleration of them was not for the Interest
of this Nation. All the rest the Courteous Replyer passes over in silence, and
to this only he says that They are not so Originally and Radically, but by
Accident. Some may take advantage to raise, and keep up Factions by them. If
they come to be such any way, the manner how they become so, is no alleviation
to the misery they bring upon us. But besides the other reasons which were
before given, it is plain, that there is in Dissentions of Religion, a natural
aptitude to form a Faction; because we see Ambitious and Enterprizing men do
always make use of them, and that with success to such an end. For let but the
Designer pretend the benefit of any one, or more Sects, and then he has all
those that are combined in their Conventicles, ready for his correspondence,
and united to administer to his Ambition. Therefore those Factious men which
lately overthrew our Laws and Government, did but pretend for the Liberty of
Godly, and Tender Consciences, and break down that Government which was set in
the Church to restrain them, and then all those were presently devoted to them.
And this was done before they did dare to make that breach between the late
King, and Parliament, and this was the opening of an Avenue to all our
miseries, though it was some time after, that they did enact a Toleration for
all persuasions except Popery and Prelacie.

This Gentlemen answers not the reasons, which proved that Dissentions among us
were become Factions, nor did he take notice that all those who have no good
will to the State, are scattered among them that are Enemies to the Church. But
he only proposes a different Consideration of the Non-Conformists, from the
Papists, These last he says, acknowledge a Foreign Jurisdiction, and have the
refuges of Foreign Princes or States; But the Nonconformist have not. Suppose
this were true, yet Dissenters in Religion as we have seen, can form a Faction
without the help of Foreigners, which by fraud and Force ruined the Ancient and
Legal Government. And when these Factious Persons have been disappointed; they
have found Refuge in Foreign States, which have reserved them as fit
Instruments to renew our Troubles, while they assaulted us. The late rising in
Scotland does evidence this; for all those that escaped the Public Justice
found entertainment in the Low Countries.

SECT. 10. That there is no Stability in the Principles of the Dissenters.
AFter this he is angry that it was affirmed, That the Principles of the
Presbyterian Persuasion, do not admit of any Stability, but may be drawn out to
Patronize the wildest Sects. He rejects for this the Testimonies of Archbishop
Whitgift, and Mr. Hooker, as being their eminent Adversaries; but he says
nothing of the argument brought from our own Experience. They were the first
party among us that broke the Peace, and we know how their principles were
flung in their Faces by the other Sects, who proceeded further and further upon
their positions. The ground of those Wise Men's Observation, to whom may be
added Dr. Sanderson, was this principle of the Non-Conformists, That the
Scripture is, adaequata agendorum Regula; so as nothing might lawfully be done
without express Warrant, either from some command, or Example contained
therein. And let judicious men consider how far this may be drawn.

But then against this he instances in the French, Dutch, and Helvetian Church,
which though Presbyterian keep themselves in Orthodox Unity.

To this we answer, that the Integrity and Unity of the Protestant Presbyterian
Churches beyond the Sea, do not conclude to the soundness of the principles of
that Party among us, no more then their miscarriages can disparage those
Churches who disclaim them. For some do undertake to prove, that that Party
among us, is a particular distinct Sect from all of that name beyond the Seas.
Pub. Disp. Salm. Part. 3. de Liturg Nuperririme exorti sunt in Anglia Morosi,
scrupulosi, etc.
And they produce this Testimony of a Foreign Learned Man Ludovious Capellus
who says, There are of late arisen in England certain Morose, Scrupulous, and
too tender (not to say Superstitious) Men, to whom that Liturgy which their
Church has hitherto used, seems not only reprovable, but they have wholly
abolished it, together with the whole Hierarchical Government of Bishops: and
in its place have substituted that which they call their Directory. And however
they may agree with those abroad in some things: Yet they do not in this
principle, which was observed to be the reason of their Instability. For 1. The
French Church's sense, is expressed by Mr. Calvin. We confess all and every
Church has just Authority to make Laws and Injunctions, Confess. Fidei oblata
Caesari, etc. Inter opuscula Calvini. Fatemur tum omnes tum etiam singulas
Ecclesias hoc jus habere, ut Leges and statu ta sibi cond^nt Spanhem de Labert
Christiana. These. 23.
to Constitute a Common Polity among themselves. 2. The Dutch Church does not
countenance such a principle. For Spanhemius a Professor among them says,
Every Church has a Power that is not abrogated to make Laws,; nor are all
humane Traditions to be utterly prescribed, for Traditions of Doctrine are to
be distinguished from those of Rites: the Church indeed has no Legislative
power about those things; yet it has about these. 3. As for the Helvetian
Churches, this Discourser has been told by the Learned Durel, in his Treatise
p. 6. That they are not Presbyterian. For they have a Subordination of
Ministers, as Antistites, Deans, Canons, Pastors who have the Care of Souls,
and Deacons, as here amongst us in England; they have set forms of Prayer, Holy
days, Organs and other instrumental Music; and sure the principles of these
men as well as their Practices are not Presbyterian, and those Churches that
are, have not the principles of giddiness, which are maintained here. If the
Scotch Church were so pure as the Author says, we may assign their Purity to
their Severities, which frighted all Dissenters of drawing their principles
farther than they would endure.

In the next place, this Maxim, That an Indifferent thing becomes unlawful by
being commanded; which was said to be common among the Dissenters, gives us
little hopes of Stability. For since some things Indifferent, ( i. e. neither
commanded nor forbidden by God) will necessarily fall into practice in the
Worship of God, and through the weakness of men there may, and will arise
contradictory Opinions, and so consequently through Interest, Humor, and
Corruptions, Dissentions about them: if there be no power left to the Church to
determine those things, and whatsoever she determines does therefore become
sinful, as these men imagine, what way is left to us to come to an
Establishment, and what hopes of Peace and rest between the contending Parties,
when none can determine and enjoin? That this Maxim is common among them this
Author does not deny, but only gives us the Speech of some of them, out of
Papers they have printed, Which does not disown what was imputed to them, but
by several ambages seek to hide their sense in that point. But I conceive their
judgment in this point is clear under their own hands; when in the Conference
at the Savoy, Where this Proposition, That command which commands an Act in
it self Lawful, and no other Act whereby any unjust penalty is enjoined, nor
any Circumstance whence directly or per accidens any Sin is consequent which
the commander ought to provide against, has in it all things requisite to the
lawfulness of a Command, and particularly cannot be guilty of Commanding an Act
per accidens unlawful, nor of Commanding an Act under an unjust Penalty, was
denied by the joint Consent of those who disputed for the Non-Conformists. Let
this be considered whether this be sound speech that cannot be proved?

Another ground of discouragement from having any hopes of Stability, by
admitting their Comprehension, is their shyness to give us the particulars
wherein they will rest, and what will satisfy them to an acquiescence. For
though the Discourser says that the propounded Latitude, leaves out nothing
necessary to secure the Churches Peace: Yet he refuses to give us the
boundaries of his Latitude; and putting us off as he did before with these
General things, necessary to Faith and Life, and godly Order, he quarrels the
Answerer for saying this Establishment is not enough for settlement, because it
does not secure the Churches Peace. Yet he does not answer any thing to that
which proved it, as the Instance of the present Dissentions: Wherein though the
Church of England and the Presbyterians agree in things necessary to Life,
Faith, and Order: Yet we find no peace betwixt them. To which we may add, that
the Presbyterians, and Independents have a further agreement, yet there was no
peace among them, but they mutually writ and preached one against the othrr,
the first declaring and petitioning, that the last should not have a
Toleration, and the last by Subtlety, and force weakening and exposing the
first to Contempt and Ruin. And therefore sure there is something else
necessary to Peace.

It was also instanced that in Government and Worship in both which some
particulars are not absolutely necessary, there might arise Differences. This
he does not disprove, but replies with gravity, Verily it may much amuse one to
think what that thing should be in the Ecclesiastical Polity which is not
necessary to the Christian Faith, and Life, or Godly Order in the Church; and
yet necessary to secure the Churches Peace. To take of this amusement, let it
be considered how the Great things of Christianity, differ from the peace of
the Church. The Principles of Faith, Good Life and Order are the Foundation of
that Christian Society which is the Church. But Peace being as the agreement
and mutual fitness of all the parts of the edifice must necessary be of larger
extent. There may be breaches in an House, where the Foundation remains firm
and entire; and there have been often fierce contentions among Christians that
yet have agreed in things necessary to Salvation, and essential to Christian
Worship. These truths of Faith, and principles of Life have a continual
existence; and though the World should not receive them, and wicked men
Contradict them: yet they have still their being in Nature, and are
commensurate with Eternity. But peace may be, and (as experience tells us) is
but Temporary. In civil Societies the meanest and vilest Persons have been able
to make Seditions and Mutinies, even to the overthrow of an Established
Government; and we may find Schisms and Divisions have been made in the
Societies of Christians by persons, who through Ignorance have wrested the
Scriptures, and men of perverse minds whose glory was their shame, and that
also upon things of the least moment. Look upon those Catalogues of Heretics
and Schismatics that are given us by Epiphanius, Augustine and Philaster, and
you will find many of them have been not only Infamous in their Authors: but
also Contemptible in their Occasions and grounds of their Separation. Nay, if
you will look upon those recorded in Scripture, you may soon perceive, from how
small occasions the Contentions, and divisions did arise in the Church of
Corinth, about Paul, and Apollos, and Cephas, and Christ, about the vayling of
Women, at Religious Assemblies, and those contentions in the celebration of the
Sacrament. He that is a considering person, will not be amused to think that
there is something necessary for the Churches Peace, that is not necessary for
Faith and good Life and Order.

We are yet further discouraged as to any hopes of Stability by the Position
published by some of the Dissenters, and particularly by this Discourser, That
the Church does not claim an Infallibility; and therefore she cannot settle the
Conscience, by her sole Warrant, but still leaves room for doubting; and this
he urges as a reason why she should not prescribe forms and Rites of Religion,
and if she does, the Conscience that does its office will interpose and concern
it self; and it being unsatisfied, Jarrs, and Rents will follow. This Argument
is borrowed from the Popish Writers, who to reduce the Protestants that deny
the Infallibility of their Church to an absurdity, argue that If the Church be
not Infallible, she can propose nothing whereof any man may be assured it is
True or False, but is left to his own Wit and Discourse. Thus those who
profess so great an hatred of the Papists, do yet take up their Argements for
Doctrins and Positions, when they will serve (...) against the Church of
England; But to prove (...) that Whosoever is not infallible, cannot settle the
(...) that by to Settle, this Author understood (...) was showed how many
absurdities must needs follow; for all Government in State, and Families, and
the grounds of mutual Commerce, would be overthrown by it. To all which he
answers by a pitiful Distinction, betwixt Obliging or Binding the Conscience,
and settling it or leaving no room for doubting; For Conscience (says he) may
be obliged, when it is not settled. By this reply I am now satisfied, that his
Ignorance is greater then his Malice which I doubted before. For 1. Here he
supposes, that to settle, so as to leave no room for doubting, is the effect of
a Law commanded by a just and Lawful Authority, which is false. Because many
of the Laws of God, and of our Savior, who are Infallible, did not nor do
attain this effect; For there have been, and may be doubts concerning them in
the consciences of holy and good men; And of this we have an Instance in the
Apostles. Christ had given them a Command Togo and Preach to all Nations, and
Baptize them, etc. This Command did oblige them to teach the Gentiles: yet St.
Peter doubted whether he should go to Cornelius a Gentile: to show him the
things of Christ: and was therefore taught by a Vision not to scruple it. The
same doubt did also perplex the other Apostles and Brethren, who therefore
called St. Peter to an account, as having done that which he ought not to do,
and were not settled, that is left not of their doubtings, till St. Peter had
acquainted them with the Vision, and miracle of giving the Holy Ghost to the
Gentiles. So that it is evident that to settle the Conscience, is not the
effect of Law even from an Infallible Authority; this rather is to be the work
of a Teacher, then of a Lawgiver. For the proper and immediate effect of a Law
is to Oblige and bind, that is, to impose a Necessity of Obedience upon Men,
who if they do not obey, do sin, athough they doubt. 2. He has now rendered his
opinion far more odious, and of more dangerous, and absurd consequence, then it
was before. For if whosoever cannot settle the Conscience, so as there is left
no place for doubt, ought not to prescribe, or give Laws: and if they do give
Laws, although the Conscience is obliged by them, yet it may interpose and
concern it self, so as to cause Rents or Jarrs; Then neither an Infallible, nor
Fallible Authority can prescribe Rites, and forms of Religion; because it may
so be, that the Conscience may still doubt, and so not be settled. Now what
hopes of stability from men of such a persuasion? Since the Stability of every
Society is founded upon the just Commands of Superiors, of things within their
Power, and the Peoples Obligation to obey such Commands: which is overthrown by
this position: and a doubting Conscience can strip the Magistrate of his
Authority, and quit the People from Obedience.

SECT. 11. There was a necessity of Enjoining, and there is also of Continuing
the Ceremonies.
WHen these men have called the Churches Authority into Question, then they do
her prudence, for making Injunctions that are not at all necessary. To this was
showed, that at the beginning of the Reformation there was a necessity of such
Injunctions; because there being Controversies about them, the Church was to
consult her Peace, and did it, by cutting off some Ceremonies, and retaining
some which were enjoined to the Common observance of all. That the number of
those for Ceremonies was the greatest, as comprehending all those who staid at
home, and did not fly in the time of Queen Maryes persecution. That they were
the greatest Number the Adversary did not dare to deny, but without any
Testimony he says, that such as Dissented from the Ceremonies at that time had
their Assemblies for the Worship of God in this Land. If he had proved this by
some good Record, it had been more for his credit: but when he only says it,
we do him no wrong, if we believe him not, when he asserts that which he could
not know without a Witness.

It was said also, That the Party against Ceremonies was but small, Ecclesia
Rest. An. Reg. Mar. 3. p. 59.60.
as being but few of those that fled beyond Sea. For the number of those that
fled are computed to be but 800. These were dispersed in the several Cities of
Germany as Embden, Stratzburg and Frankfort and among the Switzers at Arrow,
Zurick, and Geneva. At Frankfort it is said, they first begun the Alteration of
the English Liturgy; those at Geneva complied, it is like, with the Authority
of Mr. Calvin; yet not satisfied with what was done at Frank fort. But those of
Stratzburg, Zurick and Embden plainly sgnifyed to those of Frankfort, that they
resolved to maintain the Order of the Church of England; So that by this
account they could be but few. But the Discourser says it is not true, Because
the same Historian says that many who were disaffected to Episcepacy, were
raised to great Preferments. But the many there spoken of, were only of the
Number that had spent their time of Exile in such foreign Churches as had
followed the Platform of Geneva; and those he reckons to be but five, the
Queens Professor in Oxford, the Lady Margarets in Cambridge, Whittingham,
Sampson, and Hardiman. Of which the two last were soon turned out again as
incorrigible Non-Conformists: the rest it seems did conform, notwithstanding
their Different Persuasions; which was an evidence that they did not think the
Ceremonies to be so contrary to a good Conscience, that they were bound either
to desert their Station in the Church, and Ministry to Gods Glory; or to
disturb the Peace of Christ's flock, rather then observe those enjoined Rites.
So also did those mentioned in the Letter to Mr. Hooker, and therefore can be
no Instances of Nonconformity, and of disturbing the Peace in the Church.

It is also true, Calv. Ep. Angl. Francofurt. Valde absurdum est, inter fratres
ob eandem fidem a patria Exules ac prosugos dissidium oriri.
and therefore no wrong done, That the Party against Ceremonies, caused the
Troubles at Frankfort, and brought a dishonor to the Reformation, and Infamy
on the Nation; for Mr. Calvin's Letter to them at Frankford, charges these
things upon them, and this was Written, Feb. 1.31. and Dr. Cox with his party,
who brought in the Liturgy, came not thither till March 13. following;
therefore if Mr. Calvin wrote truth, there were troubles among them, before the
Conformists came thither.

It is a strange Confidence this Author takes, to deny, That in the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth 's Reign, things were so settled in the Church of England,
to please each party in the abolishing some, and the retaining other
Ceremonies. For the Compilers themselves, (who certainly deserve in Charity to
be credited in what they say concerning their own motives and Sentiments,) do
after they had declared the different opinions of men about Ceremonies, say, It
was thought expedient not so much to have respect how to please and satisfy
either of these parties (that is, singly,) or gratify their humors, as how to
please God, and to profit them both. Therefore they intended to Profit each
party (which in the Apostles sense is, to please our Neighbor to Edification;)
And that none might be offended, whom Good reason might satisfy; They rendered
Causes why some Ceremonies were put away, and some retained. Against so evident
a Testimony, he replies, that " the Ceremonies then abolished, were offensive
to all Protestants. Whereas the compilers themselves say, that there were some
among those whom they would profit, that did think it a great matter of
Conscience to depart from a piece of the least of their accustomed Ceremonies.
Thus this Author has failed in his attempt to take off the reasons of
necessity for the first enjoining of the Ceremonies.

He is no more successful against the Necessity of the Continuance. For when
it had been said, that They who are for the Church, are unwilling to have the
Ceremonies taken away. He replies, such as delight in them may enjoy and use
their Liberty, but let them not lay stumbling blocks before others, or entangle
the Conscience, or hinder those of a contrary Persuasion from the Ministry, and
from teaching, etc. This is easily said, but he should have also proved it
practicable. For Instance, If in one and the same Parish the Minister be
against Ceremonies, and the people for them; how shall each of these enjoy and
use their Liberties? What contentions and variances, must needs arise? If you
say, the People may make use of a Minister of the same Judgment with
themselves. (1) They cannot do it for all Offices. (2) This must lay a constant
ground of alienation, and so of Quarrelling betwixt People and Minister, and
betwixt the Ministers themselves. How can this Writer forget that this was a
frequent Case in the late troubles, almost in all Parishes? This therefore is
to multiply divisions; that at last must overthrow all. And there is no
considering Person but sees a necessity that all Ministers should be bound to
the same Rule.

Another reason for continuing the Ceremonies was, because it would be in vain
to comply with them, who will never be satisfied. To this he answers, With what
soberness can this be said, when hitherto the Dissenters were never tried with
any Relaxation, etc. But with what truth can he say they were never tried? When
they had a Relaxation at the Kings first coming home; and it was left to them,
to conform in what they could have no scruple of Conscience, yet this did not
satisfy them. But he had said before, That some of them did comply with the
Kings desire. Yet he does not tell us who, or how many; and in deed when this
was objected to their Friends that labored for an Indulgence for them, they
could not give an account of any considerable number that did so. Others (he
says) did not perhaps for the prevention of Scandal. And we say perhaps, The
same Perhaps to prevent a Scandal among their own Party, whose Spirits they
have imbittered with an hatred of the Church of England, may still prevail upon
them to be-unsatisfied. So that the Honor of the Church and State must be
prostituted, by repealing their Laws and Injunctions, to the Fortuitous
pleasure of them that do not conform. Besides, this Author will not give us the
bounds of his desired Latitude, nor assure us where that Party will stand; How
far we must go to satisfy all the several Sects, and how many will be gained;
all these things are requisite to assure us, that they intend to be satisfied.

It was also said that the Imputations of Idolatry, Superstition and
Antichristianism to the things enjoined, persuade us not easily to part with
them, as being so guilty. These Calumnies have been engraven with Swords, and
written in blood; and to renounce what we believe to be innocent, as criminal,
is plainly to declare that we have no love to the Truth, that we tacitly
condemn what we approve, and we should likewise Calumniate all those whose
Communion we pretend to, the former Church, who did observe them as indifferent.

The Discourser does not deny, that these Calumnies have been raised, nor does
he condemn the slanderers, but he says, Shall their value be so exhanced, as
to be thought of more worth then the Unity of the Church. To which we answer,
That though we account the Church's Unity to be of an infinite Value above
them, yet we cannot promise our selves to procure her Unity by a thing that is
not just in it self; that is by justifying false imputations in taking away,
what we, and other Christians have thought clear and praiseworthy. The
expedient which he has proposed, for salving the Churches honor, by her
declaring, that she remits her injunctions in compliance with weak consciences,
Will be an envidence of her very great weakness: unless those Weak Consciences
declare also, that she has not been Idolatrous, Superstitious, or
Antichristian in her former enjoining of them, and that the things contended
about, were but indifferent, (for so St. Paul's declaration concerning
abstaining from meats, did conclude both sides to such apprehensions of them)
As also that they confess, and bewail the Schism which they have already made;
and take shame to themselves, for all those practices which they have done
against the Church. Such a Declaration as this may serve to repair the Churches
Honor, and move her to remit her Injunctions, to men that give such evidence
of having tender Consciences. But the Non-Conformists are so far from such a
declaration, that this Author says in the next Section, that They account
these things not indifferent but unlawful. So that this expedient will only
cast shame on the Church, and leave them to the boastings of their own
Godliness.

It was also urged for the Continuance of those Injunctions, that a War was
undertook to remove them; and that if now they were yielded up to the pleasure
of those that fought against them, they would in the next place charge all the
blood of that War upon the Church, and her Party. To this he replies, that it
is easier said then proved, that the late War was undertaken to remove the
Ceremonies. To which we say, that if there was any Faith in the Declarations of
those that managed the late War, or in the Sermons of those who were to
encourage the People to it, and did therefore beg for money and men, etc. For
Jesus Christ, and those that did denounce Curses from the Lord, on such as not
come forth to his assistance against the mighty, If those Articles about
Religion which were proposed in every Treaty of Peace had any truth; then it is
as easily proved as said, that That War was undertaken, (though not solely) to
remove the things in difference betwixt the Church and the Dissenters; and it
is an Impudence, equal to their other practices, to deny it. And as this is
clear, so it is as clear, that they charged upon his Late Murdered Majesty,
all the blood of that War; because he had made concessions in the like nature,
and we have nor eason to expect otherwise now. I Will leave this Author to please
himself in the Malice and Envy of the argument he has made from these my
premises.

Although the controverted Ceremonies are no Foundation of the Church of
England, yet far less changes, in the last edition of the Liturgy have been
taken by Popish Priests, (to my own knowledge,) as advantages to brand her of
Inconstancy, to dissuade some ignorant persons, to forsake her, as still
various: and to come over to their Church, which was founded upon a Rock. And
this was urged as a reason not to take them away. In stead of a satisfying
answer, this odious inference is made. It seems that greater care must be
taken, that the Papists be not offended, then that many thousands of honestly
minded Protestants should be relieved. Is there no difference betwixt taking
care, that no advantage be given to Popish Priests to seduce Protestants, and a
taking care that the Papists be not offended? The Author knows there is a
difference, but he was to gratify his Hatred, and he has done it. The like
design of exposing his Adversary to the Odium of a kindness to the Papists, he
had practiced, Sect. 8. For when the grounds which he had laid of denying a
Toleration to the Papists, were applied to the other Dissenters. He neglects to
show the Disparity; or that the application was injurious: but makes this
Demand. What greater advantage can be given to the Papists, then that a
Protestant Writer should declare, That so great a part of Protestants, are
equally envolved with them in those heinous Crimes, etc? The answer is obvious,
For they that did those things, have given the Popish Party a far greater
advantage. He that declares it, does tell them no more then what they have been
told before, even by Foreign Protestants; who detested such Acts of those men,
who among us falsely pretend to the honor of that name. Besides, he that
declares it, does tell them no more then what they know before. Do you think
the Papists had lost their Senses and Reason? Did they not see a Rightful
Prince, first driven by Arms from his Throne; and afterward hurried to the
Slaughter? Nor do I think that the Crimes of those men, or the declaring of
them, to be more a reproach to the Protestant Profession; then they are to
Christianity, to which they and other Criminals do equally pretend. Those that
were true and knowing Christians, did then abhor those practices; and do not
take the mentioning of them for a reproach to themselves.

There is no reason that the Discourser should be astonished at the last
Reason, That Dissentions about things indifferent, have necessitated the Church
to make those injunctions. For it was apparent before, in the reasons that the
Compilers of the Liturgy gave; That because there were different persuasions of
the Ceremonies; therefore some were enjoined. And in this our Church did no
otherwise then the Catholic Church has done in like Cases. I shall give him
one Instance, I might give more. The Dissensions in the primitive times, about
the Feast of Easter, moved the Council of Nice to determine and enjoin one time
for it to all Christians; for no other reason, but that there might be an (...)
i.e. an agreement among Christians. Let learned and good men judge, on which
side lies the Animosities: who has the best Pretentions to Equity, Charity,
and good Advice.

SECT. 12. Non-Conformists are less capable of Comprehension than other men of
Different Opinions, who are tolerated in the Church of England.
THe Contenders for Comprehension, and Toleration, do urge, that the Indulgence
of the Church of England, to men differently persuaded in the points of
Predestination, Free Will, etc. may be extended to them. In answer to which it
was said, The Moderation of the Church as to those, was grounded upon the
Difference betwixt those Diverse Opinions in the point of Predestination: and
the Dissensions about her Orders and Ceremonies, That those were Difficulties
in all Ages and all Religions. These required but one single Resolution,
whether an indifferent Ceremony might be enjoined? To this he answers, That the
matters of Inconformity are not things only indifferent, but accounted by them
unlawful. This is to beg the Question; for if they be indifferent, they cannot
be unlawful; and it is not enough to account them unlawful: but they must prove
them to be so, which the Author wisely declines.

But then he questions the truth of that Assertion; That the Dissenters cannot
name one Church besides ours, in which there was a Schism made for a Ceremony.
Yet he makes the assertion good, for he has not, nor can he name one
particular Church as ours, in which, for a Ceremony, there was made a Schism,
and a division of the members, from one another, and of one part from their
Pastors and Bishops. He said indeed, That a great Rent was made in the
Christian Church throughout the World, about a Ceremony the time of Celebrating
the Feast of Easter. Which if true, is not pertinent; for that Dissension was
not betwixt Members of a particular Church: but betwixt the Afiatick and all
other Churches. Secondly, there was no Schism made; For frenaeus showed plainly
that the former Bishops of Rome did preserve their communion with the
Asiaticks. And although Victor had been so hot as to publish an
excommunication; yet the Dissent of the other Bishops from such a course, soon
hindered the effects of it, as to a Schism.

There are also differences Tolerated in the Church of England, but not of
those Effects, and Principles, as are the Divisions about the Disciplinarian
Way. The Arminians and Antiarminians never broke Communion among themselves,
nor that of the Church; they loaded indeed one another with horrid Consequences
of Pelagianism on one side, and Manicheism and Stoicism on the other; but still
kept a common Reverence to the Church, and appealed to her Articles. The
differences of Bowing or not Bowing, of useing Conceived, or Bidding Prayers,
never so far prevailed as to harsh censures, Therefore the Church was never put
to a necessity to consult her peace by determining, and enjoining. But it has
been far otherwise in the Differences of the Conformists and Non-Conformists,
these last have all ways attempted the destroying of the Government, altering
the Worship, and Discipline of it; have gathered, and do gather, separate
Congregations. They refused the Public Communion as a continuing in Babylon;
exalted their own way as the Kingdom of Christ, and by these courses did bring
an Universal Confusion. Which brought a necessity upon the Church to determine,
and to secure her self, by hindering such persons from the Opportunities of
divulging these their Opinions in a Constant Ministry. As for those that have
only different Apprehensions from her in these things, and yet do secure her by
subscriptions from troubling her, they always did, and may still be admitted
to the Offices and Emoluments in her.

There is yet another reason which makes us afraid of a Comprehension, and that
by it we cannot attain the pretended ends of Unity and Peace, Because it will
permit men of such Contradictory Persuasions, to different Practices, in almost
all the daily Offices of Religion; (Which cannot be said of the other
Differences which are tolerated in our Church.) And to think that such men on
both sides will content themselves in their own Opinions, and rest satisfied in
the Liberty they enjoy, without attempts upon their Opposites, is vainly to
suppose that Men will be wise on both sides. To which it is replied, that We
need suppose no more but that the State and chief Guides of the Church be wise;
that the Eminent Persons of both sides be Moderate and Prudent, and the Public
constitution so well Stated and settled, as to be able to Curb the Imprudent,
and to encourage the well advised. If this Author did consider how tender, and
nice a thing Peace is; how hardly it is kept, while men have different Lusts,
divided Interests, and bad Hopes; how easily it is broken, even by the lowest
and vilest parts of a Society; and that in despite of the wisest Princes, and
greatest Counselors, he would also grant that it is as necessary that the
Foundations of it should be laid in the minds of the Community, as well as in
the breasts of Great men, and the Rules of Government.

The first Massacre of the Protestants in France began from the Rabble. For as
the Duke of Guise was passing by Vassey in Champaigne (where the protestants by
the Edict of January, 1562. had the Liberty of their Religion,) and heard their
Bell which called the Profestants to the place of their Worship; He went into
the Town, intending by his Presence only, without any Violence to dissolve
their meeting, But staying in the Streets, to talk with the Officers of the
Town, his Lackques and the inferior part of his Train (which then used to be
very great with the French Nobility,) went before to the Place where the
Protestants were assembled, and there first beginning with revilings, and
answered in the same manner by the Protestants, they proceeded to fling stones,
and after that alighting from their Horses with their Swords and Pistols they
assaulted that unarmed company; and although the shreeks and cries of Women and
Children for help, had brought the Duke to the place, yet neither his
entreaties, nor threatenings could prevail till all the Protestants were either
slain, or fled. Where the Historian says, there were 60. killed, and 200
wounded, the Duke himself having been hurt in his Face, while he sought to
appease the Tumult. The wisdom of States and Guides cannot possibly prevent
popular commotions which are sudden and violent. Besides the Dissenters from
our Church render the State and Guides of the Church incapable of hindering the
sad effects of differences in Religion. One party denies that the Guides of the
Church can command an indifferent thing. The other Party which are these of the
Congregational Way, deny that the State has any power in things of Religion,
What then shall become of the wisdom of the State, and Guides of the Church,
and well Stated constitution to form or keep Peace? Moreover, there was another
reason given, which this Author mentions but does not answer. That Dissenters
upon Conscience will be prevailed with by the same Conscience, to endeavor the
propagation of their own way in these differences, to the Depression of others;
Especially when their apprehensions of their own way, put such a value upon
them as to render them the Kingdom of Christ, the Worshipping of God in the
Spirit. And on the other side they think their Opposites to be guilty of those
crimes against which God has declared his jealousy. This is a thing daily
seen in all the divided Parties, and then what hopes can we have of Peace? The
Replyer gives no other answer but this. If some offer to disturb the Peace, can
no Rule of Government restrain them? The Magistrate in this case can do nothing
but by Force; and that is declaimed against, as Compulsion of Faith, Tyranny,
and Persecution. Besides, the Supreme Magistrate may be often diverted from his
cares of these things, by the more pressing Exigences of State; and so not be
able to take notice of the first assaults on the Peace, till the wounds of it
becomes dangerous, and almost incurable.

SECT. 13. Necessity only can justify a Toleration, and a standing Army must
make it safe.
THis Position had been asserted, that Only Necessity can give color to
Toleration; For that it is by the Confession of all, one of those things that
are not good in their own nature. Which the Discourser says, " he cannot yield
unto, but he would not have been so Pertinacious, if he had considered that
Unity in Religion is commanded us, that we are enjoined to practice all the
methods of it, as that which is most for the Glory of Christ, and the honor of
Religion; that at best it is but our infirmity, if we are not all of one heart
and one Soul: and who dare deny, but that it were best that all Christians were
so? But when after all Essays we cannot root them out, then we must bear with
them, yet so as to set bounds to the Dissenters, and circumscribe Dissentions,
which I conceive is a Toleration; So that this is the last resort, and
therefore is like War and Oaths which nothing but Necessity can justify. But
this Author thinks it a branch of Brotherly Love. We say Brotherly Love may be
used indeed, in the first arising of Dissentions, as means to allay them, and
to prevent a Toleration, or may be exercised in it: but there is no reason to
think it is a Toleration.

In the next place be quarrels, that it was said, that we want an Instance of
the safety of Toleration, in any Nation, where the Supreme Governor had not an
Army to Circumscribe, and confine the heats of Dissenters in Religion to their
own breasts, and keep off the destructive effects of Schism. In stead of
answering this, by showing an Instance; for I appealed to the Practice of the
Ancient Emperors and Modern Princes and States. He replies, that such a Maxim,
makes little for the safety and Liberty of True Religion, and then rants
against it as an injury done to Protestants that live under Popish Princes, and
as the dictate of Prejudice and Partiality. This is a very uncouth way of
answering arguments, 'and it is a brutish way of considering things as to our
present advantage, or as they possibly may be used, without any reslections on
the former practices of Mankind. But I shall take off the Odium he usually
flings when he has no reason to return, by assuring him, that a Standing Army
is necessary to suppress those Tumults which often on a sudden like
Earthquakes do arise among the dissenting Parties, which if not immediately
crushed, may gather strength, while a force is to be formed against them. And
that such Tumults may arise from that party which is Established by Law as well
as the Tolerated, who may be insolent in their own power and advantages, and
seek to violate the Faith of the Prince which is given to the Tolerated. And
therefore the Sword of a Standing Army is to be a terror not only to the
Tolerated, but also to the Established Parties, and secures the safety and
Liberty of the true Religion, if either be true. And although the French King
has more assurance of the Loyalty of his Protestant Subjects (while they
retain the true doctrine of Protestantism which is not to acknowledge any power
above Sovereign Princes, either of the Pope as the Papists, or of the People,
as our Dissenters,) then of the Popish party; yet there is a Necessity upon him
to maintain constant Forces to keep both Parties in peace, and to secure the
Protestants who are weak and less Numerous, from the daily attempts of the
Romish Priests to stir up the People to a Massacre. Therefore Henry the fourth
of France thought it necessary for the security of his Protestant Subjects (who
had showed themselves loyal to his Interest) to allow them several strong
fortified Towns for their Security in all France, which were called Les Villes
de surete; whereof Rochel was chief. And every Prince has need of an Army to
make good his promise, if he once has passed his word for a Toleration. And
although Toleration is not the reason of a standing Army among the Dutch; yet a
Standing Army secures it.

The other passages out of the Discourse of Toleration, which he afterward
mentions, are matters of his remarks and advice, rather than of his objections;
and therefore I shall no more concern the Reader with them. He concludes with a
Complaint of the Answerer, that he has used Many hard speeches against him,
and charged him with Malice. Do but consider the Passages, and judge betwixt him
and me, and if the charge be not true, I shall not be ashamed to crave his
pardon. I wonder how he can say, that he has written these things, as knowing
that the Judge stands before the Door; for surely such a Consideration would
have persuaded him to another frame of Spirit. But howsoever, I do in sincerity
commend him to the Grace and Mercy of him, who is the Great Shepherd of the
Flock, who has commanded us Peace and Unity; And who shall One day judge the
World in Righteousness.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 35. for eanm r. mean. p. 17. l. 19. r. baseness p. 18. l. 34. f.
that r. the, p. 23. l. 4. r. Kindness, p. 27. l. 23. r. contraries, p. 32. l.
13. f. your r. their, p. 35. f. of r. from, l. 38. r. reproved, p. 40. l. 36.
f. either r. thither p. 44. l. 1. r. did not.


