A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen, IN Their MAJESTY'S Chapel at St.
James's, on the Twentieth Sunday after Pentecost, October. 25. 1685.

By the Reverend Father JOHN PERSALL, Of the Society of JESUS, Professor of
Divinity.

Published by His Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty,
for his Household and Chapel. 1686.

A SERMON Preached before THEIR MAJESTY'S, On the Twentieth Sunday after
Pentecost, October. 25. 1685.
Erat quidam Regulus, cujus filius infirmabatur.

Joannis c. 4. v. 48. There was a certain Nobleman, whose son was sick.


THE Holy Church, in this Days Gospel, invites us all to the Bedside of a
Rich, Noble, Young, but Dying Prince, who lies groaning at Deaths-door, and
notwithstanding his Plenty of other things, is become a Beggar for a little
Breath, which all the Power of the World is not able to afford him. I wish,
that the Followers of Sensuality, who make Pleasure their God, live as if they
were never to die, imagine Time to stand, and laugh at Discourses of another
World, as Fables only for the Entertainment and Pastime of this: I wish (I say)
they would turn their Thoughts hither a little while, and behold the dismal
Theater, whereon every one of them must one day infallibly act the same Part,
which now this Noble Youth represents before them; trembling betwixt two great
Eternities, of Happiness above, and Misery below, and uncertain which of the
two is to be their Lot. Now, though we go no further, certainly the Pangs of a
dying Prince, and Death triumphing over Wealth, Nobility, and Youth, is an
Emblem, clear enough, of the Vanity and Uncertainty of Worldly Happiness, and
might well deserve to be the Subject of our present Consideration. Sermon. 44. de
Verbis Domini.
But because I hear the Great St. Augustine (speaking of our Savior's restoring
the Widows Son to Life) advise us, That it was our LORD's Intention, that, by
what he acted visibly toward the Body, we should understand his invisible
Operations on the Soul, applying all his exterior and Corporal Performances,
to an interior and Spiritual Sense: Dominus noster JESUS CHRISTVS ea, quae
faciebat corporaliter, spiritualiter volebat intelligi. It shall therefore be
my present Endeavor, First, by the Sickness of this Youth, to lay before your
Eyes the Sickness of a Soul in Sin; and, Secondly, from the Circumstances of
his Cure, we will gather the Means for the Curing of our Souls. But because I am
too conscious of my own Weakness, to hope for any Fruit from my Words, unless
the Holy Ghost vouchsafe to put them in my Mouth, and speak them again to the
Hearts of my Hearers, I must have recourse to the Blessed Virgin, whose
powerful Intercession is an Aquaeduct or Channel (as the devout St. Bernard
assures us) through which Celestial Gifts are conveyed unto us. Wherefore let
us humbly invoke the same, saluting her with the Angel, Ave Maria, etc. Erat
quidam Regulus, etc.

IT being then my intent by the visible Sickness of the Body to discover the
invisible Sickness of the Soul, let us enter a little into the Chamber of this
Dying Prince, which probably you will find adorned with the richest Tapestry,
beautified with choice Cabinets, and set out with other Movables of the
highest Price: The Curtains, Vallence, and Canopy of the Bed, all
proportionable to the Nobility and Greatness of their Master; but approach a
little toward that stately Bed, draw open those Royal Curtains, and see what
lies within: A gasping Life, an half-living Death, a breathing Carcass! His
sinking Eyes already seek their Grave: his pale and wan Countenance puts us in
mind of his Winding Sheet: the feeble and unactive Condition of his Body
declares, that he is Death's Close Prisoner: the Panting of his Heart is a sad
warning, that the fatal Stroke is ready to be given, which must break asunder
the Gordian Tie betwixt Soul and Body. And is this He, on whom so much
Gallantry does attend? Is it to him, those Hangings, Cabinets, and Embroidered
Curtains do belong? This certainly is the Fable inverted, and not a Pearl on a
Dunghill, but a Dunghill in the midst of Pearls.

These were the visible Effects and Consequences of this Prince's Corporal
Sickness: Let us now try, how far they will lead us toward the Discovery of
the invisible Effects of a Spiritual Disease. If you view the Chamber or Bed,
wherein a dying Soul lies gasping, what for the most part more glorious? It is
one perhaps of these trimm'd-up Beauties of the World, which seem to outshine
the Suns brightest Beams. Gold, Silver, Pearls, and whatsoever the blind World
calls Precious, is all too little to set them out. But turn hither the Eyes of
your Understanding, draw open those gay Curtains by a serious Consideration,
and look on that Soul, which lies within them. O quale Monstrum! What a
Monster! Had we Eyes of Angels, it would appear far more hideous to us, than
the expiring Carcass, which we just now beheld. The Poison of his Disease had
dried and withered up his Body, consumed all his Spirits, and the Soul being
now ready to depart, all the Train of Beauteous Features had already taken
their leave. But the Poison of Sin is yet far ranker, and its Effects upon a
poor infected Soul far more deplorable. It consumes to nothing all her
Substance, all the Stock of Grace whereby she flourisht. The Sun of Justice,
her only Life, is ready to withdraw his Divine Rays, and consequently all the
Flowers of Virtue must needs dry up and wither; so that she, who before had
Beauty enough to enamour the very Fountain of Beauty, is now become the Source
of a Poison, rank enough to infect the whole World. She is a mere Sink of
Loathsomness and Corruption. What is she else, but a putrefying Carcass,
feeding the Worms of a bad Conscience, and engendring innumerable venomous
Infects, I mean, the cursed Brood of vicious Habits? She breaths forth such a
Stench, that were our Corporeal Senses capable of being wrought on by Spiritual
Objects, it would not be possible for us, to live within the Sphere of its
Activity. For the truth of all this, I appeal to those Saints, to whom Almighty
God has given a more peculiar Light, for the discovering the Horror and
Ugliness of Sin. St. Chrysostom calls Sin the only Evil, asserting, That we
ought to abhor nothing but Sin, no not even Hell it self. And the Reason hereof
will appear clearly, if we consider the Nature of an Humane Soul. She is
created to the perfect Image of her Creator, and participates in an high Degree
of his Divine Essence, Divinae Particula Aurae: Hence she has in her a strong
and forcible Appetite of being united to her God, and consequently cannot be at
rest, whilst she is separated from him; but in this Night of Sin, the Fogs,
arising from a corrupted Will, do so obscure the Understanding, that, though the
Soul perceives an unquiet Appetite within her self of some great Good, yet what
that Good is, or where to find it, she knows not, and falls on that which comes
next, Sensual Pleasures, Riches, Honors, mistaking the Rivulets for the
Fountains, but still ends with a Restlesness and Dissatisfaction. So Solomon,
after he had glutted himself with all the Pleasures so great a Knowledge could
invent, and so great a Power could procure, Quicquid desideraverunt oculi mei,
non negavi eis, quin omni voluptate fruerentur; he experienced in all
Vanitatem, a certain Emptitiness, Afflictionem spiritus, an Affliction of Mind;
because Nothing is good, or according to the innate Appetite of the Soul, but
GOD; on the other side, nothing is ill, or contrary to this innate Appetite,
but Sin. And hence it was, that those Paul's, Anthonies, Hilaries, who lived on
raw Herbs, lay on the hard Ground, spent their Days in Prayer and
Mortification, and were deprived of all the Delights of Sense, never complained
of Misery, because having God, and being united to him, they seemed to want
nothing; whereas Solomon, though abounding with Riches, being without God, seemed
to have nothing. So true it is, that there is nothing satisfactory to the
Rational Soul, but God; and nothing hurtful or grievous to it, but Sin. The
Holy Archbishop of Canterbury, St. Anselm, protests, That he would rather leap
into the eternal Flames of Hell purus a peccato, free from Sin, than peccati
labe pollutus coelorum regna tenere, defiled with Sin to possess Heaven. St.
Augustine has many things to the same purpose; but none more emphatically
describes this Plague than St. Peter Chrysologus. It Is the nature of Sin, says
he, to breathe forth a certain venomous Vapor in the Soul, which so dims the
two Lights of Faith and Reason, that it leaves her wholly in Darkness: So that
being led by Passion, she throws her self from one Precipice to another, till
she comes at length to the very Brink of Hell, and yet sees not all this while,
whither she has fallen, or how near she is to her eternal Ruin. Besides this,
her Fever afflicts her with an insatiable Thirst of all those things which
increase her Disease; and, on the contrary side, Fontibus dulcissimis amara
salsedo, it so spoils and vitiates her Taste, that those Fountains of Graces
and Spiritual Comforts, the Sacraments, Sermons, Spiritual Books, and the like,
which to a Soul in Health are most savory and delicious, to her are as bitter
as Gall. To this purpose St. Chrysologus. By which sufficiently appears the
deplorable Condition of a Soul in Sin, had we a Sense or Understanding capable
of conceiving it. But as the Sickness of the Body is never the less dangerous,
because the Patient perceives not the Malignity of his Disease: So the
Condition of a Sick Soul is never the less miserable, because in this Lethargy
of Flesh and Blood, she discerns not her own Misery. And now, if nothing else
will serve the turn, let at least the Danger of an Everlasting Death move us to
look after a Cure, and that as earnestly and efficaciously, as the thing
deserves. When a wise and skilful Physician tells his Patient, that he is in
Danger of Death, it makes him presently seek a Remedy, attend to the
Physician's Prescriptions, and put all diligently in execution. But what is the
Death of the Body, compared with the Death of the Soul? That is only Temporal;
This, Eternal: That implies a Separation of the Body from a Rational Soul;
This, the Separation of the Soul from the Fountain of all Happiness, Almighty
God: That leaves the Body, bereaved indeed of Sense, yet without Pain; This
buries the Soul in Hell, there to suffer, and for ever, such Torments, that all
the Pains and Torments of this Life are nothing to them. When I sometimes
consider with my self, that it may be, it is not impossible, that I should one
day groan under the heavy Burden of Eternal Damnation, though I go no farther,
reflecting only on a mere Possibility of so great a Misery, it makes my whole
Body tremble: My Hair stands an end, my Heart pants, and my Bones are almost
disjointed with Fear. But forasmuch as concerns a Probability thereof, and such
a Probability too, that the contrary is improbable, who is there that is not
dead already, or quite void of Sense, who can live with such a Thought, under
such an Apprehension? And yet certain it is, that those who follow their
sensual Inclinations, and scarce ever seriously think of their Souls, are in a
Probability, and in a very great Probability of being damned. Damned! Oh what a
Deluge of Misery is included in that little word, Damned! Let these
Considerations, Beloved Christians, sink into our Souls; Let a just Horror of
Sin seize upon our Hearts: And so disposed, let us pass to the Second Part, and
learn to cure our Souls, by weighing the Circumstances, and considering the
Particulars of this young Prince's miraculous Cure.

The Father of our Sick Youth no sooner heard of our Savior's coming that way,
but he presently went unto him. The first thing then, we are to do, is to have
recourse to the Physician. Abiit ad eum, says the Text, He departed unto him;
the word Abiit here signifying not only a Going to, but a Going from. Many are
willing enough to go to the Heavenly Physician, on condition that they may not
go from the World. They will (I say) go to him, but not follow his Advice, in
parting with their Riches, Honor, Pleasure, the Source and Origin of their
peccant Humor, and consequently the Cause of their Distemper.

The second thing is to Present him with our Petitions: Et rogabat eum: And he
asked him. Some come to him, but, like the proud Pharisee, ask him nothing,
justifying themselves, and scorning to acknowledge their Wants, or any need
they have of a Physician. Quid rogaverit Deum, quaere in verbis ejus, and nihil
invenies: Examine a little (says St. Augustine) the Pharisee's words, and see
what he asked of God, and you shall find, that he asked nothing. This is not
the way: But, on the contrary, we must with Humility own our Misery and
Sickness, if ever we expect a Cure. We must rogare, beg with an humble
Confidence, ut descendat, that he will come down to us; at least, that he will
be pleased to cast down an Eye of Mercy upon our sad and helpless Condition;
and then we ought not to doubt of a Remedy from that Hand, which is so far from
repelling us when we ask, that its Omnipotent Bounty is always beckning to us,
and encouraging us to ask.

The third thing which we ought to do, is of very great moment, and that, for
want whereof, many have been eternally lost; and it is, not only to Go, nor
only to Ask, but to do Both in time. It Is a dangerous thing to delay the Cure
of our Souls. Alas! how many are there who at this instant fruitlesly deplore
in eternal Torments, that ever they put off so important a Concern? We must
then in this imitate the Father of our Sick Youth, who was careful in the
beginning. Incipiebat mori; His Son began to die; and he was sollicitous that
our Savior might come, before he had quite given up the Ghost. Descend,
priusquam moriatur Filius meus: Come down (says he) before my Son dies. I am
not ignorant, that diverse Interpreters, and some Holy Fathers also, accuse
these Words of want of Faith, as if an Omnipotence could not as easily have
restored him Dead to Life, as Sick to Health; yet they must all grant, that
it is an excellent Prayer for a dying Soul, Domine, descend, priusquam moriatur
Anima mea; Lord, vouchsafe to come, before my Soul dies.

Consider all the Cures, which our Savior wrought, and you will still find the
appearance of most Difficulty, where the Disease had made the greatest
Progress. Lazarus was dead, and now four days in his Grave, and how much is to
be done to raise him? First, Our Savior must come in Person, though his
Disciples dissuade him from exposing himself to so much danger. The Jews, said
they, did but just now endeavor to stone thee, and will thou again venture thy
self amongst them? He goes notwithstanding this, and being come to the
Monument, First commands the Gravestone to be removed, Then he afflicts
himself, turbavit semetipsum, and even weeps, lacrimatus est JESUS: Then he
prays to his Eternal Father; and at last voce magna clamavit, he cries out with
a loud voice, Lazare, veni for as; Lazarus, come forth. What was all this for?
Would not a Lazarus vivit, Lazarus lives, have done the Business, though our
Blessed Savior had been as far distant from Lazarus, as he was now from our
Sick Prince? It were a Blasphemy to affirm the contrary. But Lazarus, Dear
Christians, was the Type of an inveterate and hardened Sinner; and our Blessed
Savior on this occasion was not so careful to let us see the
Uncontrollableness of his Omnipotence, as he was to show us, how much it goes
to his Heart, that a Sinner should delay his Conversion, till he becomes buried
in ill Habits, and is kept under Ground by the weighty Gravestone of his own
Obstinacy; and withal, how difficult it is, that such an one should be again
restored to the Life of Grace.

The Widows Son was not yet buried, but only carried out to Burial: Efferebatur
filius unicus Matris suae. And consequently our Savior raises him with a far
less appearance of difficulty: He comes, but neither afflicts himself, nor
weeps; he only touches the Bier, and commands the dead Youth to rise;
Adolescens, tibi dico, Surge: and his Commands were presently obeyed; for the
dead Youth arose, Resedit, qui erat mortuus.

The Daughter of the Prince of the Synagogue was but newly dead, neither
buried, nor carried out to Burial. Our Savior comes, and without speaking to
her, took her by the Hand, and raised her; Tenuit manum ejus, and surrexit
Puella.

But our young Prince was not so much as dead, but only incipiebat mori, he
began to die, and so deserved the easiest Cure of all; for our Savior neither
comes in Person, nor commands his Disease; but only tells his Father, Filius
tuus vivit, Thy Son is well, and at that very hour reliquit eum Febris, his
Fever left him. By all which our Savior would teach us, how willing he is to
hear a Sinners Petition, when it is presented to him in time; and how
unwillingly he hearkens to those, who put off all to the last Point. Daily
Experience teaches us this Lesson, there scarce being a Country which does not
afford us most terrible Histories of those, who, delaying from time to time the
Amendment of their Lives, have felt the heavy Hand of God's Judgment, being
taken at unawares out of this Life, and in a moment they least suspected,
swallowed up, and buried in Hell: Momento descendunt in Infernum.

It is true, we have a good God, a merciful God, a patient God, who expects day
after day the Conversion of a Sinner; but we must know, that a certain Period
is pitched upon, and decreed from all Eternity, that will wholly stop the
Current of Mercy, and open a way to Justice: for tho, as long as any Sinner
lives in this Life with the use of Reason, Almighty God never denies him his
sufficient Grace; yet after such a determinate Period, he either takes him out
of this Life, or permits him to fall into such Blindness and Hardness of Heart,
that he never will recover, though he always may: Sic enim (says St. Augustine)
excaecat, sic obdurat Deus, deserendo, and non adjuvando, quod occulto judicio
facere potest, iniquo non potest: God does so blind and so harden a Sinner, by
forsaking him, and withdrawing his Help from him, as that his Judgment indeed
is secret and hidden, but never unjust. For, Hoe eorum voluntatem meruisse
Respondeo: I answer (says the same Saint) to those who complain hereof, That
this is what they themselves ( viz. by their own perverse Will) have deserved.
Poor Samuel, with Eyes and Heart lifted up to Heaven, prayed for Saul; but it
was too late: Why do you ask me for him, (says Almighty God) when abjeci eum, I
have cast him off? Remember the two first Chapters of the Prophet Amos, where
our Lord speaks thus to seven different Countries, viz. Damascus, Gaza, Tire,
Edom, Ammon, Moab, and at last even to his Elect People Juda and Israel: Super
tribus Sceleribus; for three heinous Crimes, Patience: but super quatuor non
convertam, to the fourth no Mercy. Who knows, but this very Moment may be the
last Period and Admonition, the last Grace which Almighty God has decreed for
some one or more of us here present, in such manner, that, if it be neglected,
we shall perish irrecoverably for all Eternity? Super quatuor non convertam.
No, the Period is come, Mittam ignem, and nothing now remains, excepting only
the dreadful Torments of an unquenchable Fire.

O let us then, every one of us, enter into our own Souls, and make an exact
Scrutiny into their present State and Condition. Let us examine whether Terrene
and Sensual Pleasures have not cast them into the Pestilent Fever of a violent
Passion, so that incipiunt mori, they begin to die, to die (I say) to God and
Heaven. If so, let us forthwith have recourse to the Physician; Abeamus ad eum;
let us go from all other Entertainments and Concerns unto him: Rogemus, let us
throw our selves at the Sacred Feet of our Crucified Lord, acknowledge our
Misery, and beg his Assistance: Domine, descend, priusquam moriatur Anima mea;
O Lord, vouchsafe to come down to me, before my Soul be dead. O my Lord, my
God, who did esteem Sin to be so great an Evil, that thou thoughtst it worth
thy Labor to come down from Heaven to Earth, to agonize and die upon a Cross,
that thou might free us from it; For what did thou open Five Divine
Fountains of thy Sacred Blood, save only to cleanse us from so foul a Stain?
Ah! show us now, that non est abbreviata Manus Domini, that thy Mercy has as
great a reach as ever. Pardon us what is past, assuage the violence of our
present Passion with one drop of thy most precious Blood, and preserve us from
all Sin for the future. Descend, look down into our Souls, and behold, how we
all endeavor to cancel our Offenses by an Act of perfect Contrition, being
sorry from the bottom of our Hearts for having ever displeased so good a God,
and this merely for the Love of thy infinitely amiable Person: And for the same
Motive we purpose to suffer whatever can be suffered, rather than hereafter to
offend thee in the least. Methinks, Beloved Christians, methinks I am sensible,
that the Bowels of Divine Mercy are already moved toward us; and I doubt not,
but every Soul, that is seriously converted, feels a Pledge of Almighty God's
Mercy, by perceiving within her self a more perfect Union with him, who is her
Life, and by hearing from him after a peculiar manner, Anima tua vivit, Thy
Soul lives, thy Soul is recovered from her Distemper. Which Happiness, through
the Intercession of the Virgin Mother, God of his infinite Mercy grant us all.
Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most
Excellent Majesty, for his Household and Chapel, 1686. And are to be Sold next
door to his House in Blackfriars, at Richard Cheese's.
REflections upon the Answer to the Papist Misrepresented, etc. Directed to
the Answerer. Quarto.

Kalendarium Catholicum for the Year 1686. Octavo.

Papists Pretesting against Protestant-Popery. In Answer to a Discourse
Entitled, A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Vindication of
the Papist Misrepresented and Represented, and the Reflections upon the
Answer. Quart.

Copies of Two Papers Written by the late King Charles H. Together with a Paper
Written by the late Duchess of York. Published by his Majesty's Command. Folio.

The Spirit of Christianity. Published by his Majesty's Command. Twelves.

The First Sermon Preached before their Majesty's in English at Windsor, on the
first Sunday of October 1685. By the Reverend Father Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of
the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and of the English Congregation. Published by
his Majesty's Command. Quarto.

Second Sermond Preached before the King and Queen, and Queen Dowager, at their
Majesty's Chapel at St. James's, November 1. 1685. By the Reverend Father Dom.
Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and of the English
Congregation. Published by his Majesty's Command. Quarto.

The Third Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, in their Majesty's
Chapel at St. James's, on the third Sunday in Advent, December 13. 1685. By
the Reverend Father Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and
of the English Congr. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. Published by His
Majesty's Command. Quarto.

The Fourth Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, in their Majesty's
Chapel at St. James', on Newyears-day, 168. By the Reverend Father Dom. Ph.
Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and of the English Congregation,
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty. Quarto.

Sixth Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, in their Majesty's Chapel at
St. James's, upon the first Wednesday in Lent, Febr. 24. 1685. By the Reverend
Father Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and of the
English Congregation. Published by his Majesty's Command. Quarto.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church in Matters of
Controversy. By the Right Reverend James Benign Bossiset, Counselor to the
King, Bishop of Meaux, formerly of Condom, and Preceptor to the Dauphin: First
Almoner to the Dauphiness. Done into English with all the former Approbations,
and others newly Published in the Ninth and Last Editions of the French.
Published by his Majesty's Command. Quarto.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, in Their Majesty's Chapel at St.
James's, upon the Annunciation of our Blessed Lady, March 25. 1686. By Jo.
Betham Doctor of Sorbon. Published by his Majesty's Command. Quarto.

An Abstract of the Douay Catechism, for the Use of Children and Ignorant
People. Now Revised, and much Amended. Published with Allowance. Twentyfours.

A Pastoral Letter from the Lord Bishop of Meaux, to the New Catholics of his
Diocese, Exhorting them to keep their Easter, and giving them Necessary
Advertisements-against the False Pastoral Letters of their Ministers. With
Reflections upon the Pretended Persecution. Published with Allowance. Quarto.

The Answer of the New Converts of France, to a Pastoral Letter from a
Protestant Minister. Done out of French, and Published with Allowance. Quarto.

The Ceremonies for Healing of them that be Diseased with the Kings Evil, used
in the time of King Henry VII. Published by His Majesty's Command. Quarto in
Latin, Twelves in English.

A Short Christian Doctrine. Composed by the R. Father Robert Bellarmin, of the
Society of Jesus, and Cardinal Published with Allowance. Twelves.

A Vindication of the Bishop of Condom's Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church. In Answer to a Book Entitled, An Exposition of the Doctrine
of the Church of England, etc. With a Letter from the said Bishop. Permissis
Superiorum. Quarto.


