SOME FRUITS OF A Tender Branch, Sprung from the Living Vine: Being A
COLLECTION Of Several Sound and Godly LETTERS, Written by that Faithful Servant
of God, Benjamin Padley.

WITH Diverse Living Testimonies to that Innocent Life, in which he walked, and
continued to the End of his Day.

London, Printed for Tho. Northcott in ^

This is my Testimony concerning my Dea^ Husband, Benjamin Padley, wh^ departed
this Life the 25th. of the 6th. Month, 1687. being in the 29th. Year of his Age.
WHo the Lord has been pleased to separate from me, whom my Soul ha^ true
Union with, and many swee^ Opportunities we had together and we have often
rejoiced together, when we did behold the Wonderful Kindness of our God; and
now the Lord has been pleased to separate him from me, and take him unto
himself, I can say of a Truth, he was a dear and loving Husband unto me, and a
true Lover o^ all that feared the LORD; and it was that which his Soul
delighted in the Prosperity o^ the Truth, and would say many times, he could
even spend his Time continually in waiting upon the Lord, and freely leave all
outward things to go abroad to Answer the Will and Requirings of the Lord; and
he was one that was not idle in that Work and Service, which the Lord called
him to, but his great Care was, That he might be faithful in what the Lord
required at his hand, and that he might neither be too forward nor too
backward, but ^o fulfill the Work of the Lord faithfully, and ^is great desire
was, that Friends would be ^ery diligent in meeting together, and not ^nly so,
but that they would be diligent and watchful when they were met together, ^o
wait upon the LORD, and not be ^othful, but to consider for what end they ^et
together, that the Lord might be honour^d by them, and that they might receive
the ^enefit and Comfort which they all do receive that is watchful and
obedient; and his Mind ^as, as I may truly say, clearly weaned from ^ff all
Worldly Things, and set upon things which is above, for he was freely given up
^o the Will of the Lord, to his disposing, to ^ispose of him, as he see good;
for as he ^id declare to me on his dying Bed, If the lord have any further Work
or Service for ^e to do, I desire to be faithful, and if not, ^am very well
satisfied; and so the Lord has ^een pleased to take him unto himself, and ^ow
he has received a Crown of Joy, and though I find it a great Exercise and
Trial to ^art with such a dear Husband, and one whom* any Soul with his and
many dear Friends more ^ere often refreshed together in the presence of the
Lord, but since it is his Will to call ^im from me, I desire to be satisfied
with the Will of the Lord, and that I may not murmur against the hand of the
Lord, but be willing to give him up, being well satisfied that my Loss is his
great Gain, and even return Praises unto the Lord, who orders and disposes of
all things as he sees good; and as Job said, The Lord gives, and the Lord take
away, blessed be the Name of the Lord; for he alone it is that knows what is
best for us and so I desire to be satisfied with his Will for he alone does
work wonderfully, beyond the Expectation of either Man or Woman (...) for when
I consider how wonderfully he was pleased to carry my dear Husband through his
great Exercise, and what Patience he bore i^ with, it caused me to bless the
Lord for it for he bore it with great Patience, and the Lord was pleased to
raise up his Spirits wonderfully, to the refreshing and satisfaction o^ my
Soul, and many more. The day before he was taken out of the Body, several
Neighbors and Friends came in, and he desired hi^ Neighbors to stay, and
sitting a pretty while to wait upon the Lord, he opened his Mout^ in
Exhortation to them to fear God and depart from Iniquity; and he spoke many
precious Words to them in declaration, and also went to Prayer, which, to see
his Weakness, made us to admire, and it was to the admiration of them that were
there present for it was the wonderful Work of our God for to all outward
Appearance his Strengt^ was almost spent, but the Lord was please^ to raise up
his Spirits very wonderfully, b^^ many of his Expressions cannot be remembered;
but this he spoke, which is remembered ^am glad, said he, to see so many of your
faces, ^hought I should not have seen so many of you (...) I have done, being
the Lord has been pleased (...) visit me with sickness, so that I am brought
so ^^ak, that I am not likely to continue many ^^ys here, but I feel nothing
but all is well; ^^d when we were looking for help for him from ^^an, he said,
I have a Physician the World knows (...) of; and while he lay sick, when I had
^^en weeping besides him, he would say, O ^^oy d^st thou so, thou must not do
so, keep but to (...) Truth, and fear not but all will be well; and ^ould say
at nights, Go to bed and take thy ^^t, and be not troubled about me; And when
^^iends came to see him, he would say, My ^^ar Love is with you, and remains
with you all: and I know his dear Love was to all that ^^ved the Truth, and it
was that which his ^^ul traveled for the prosperity of, and Sions ^lory; and
the Lord was pleased to call him ^^^th, into his work and service abroad, to
^^sit Friends, and to bare his Testimony for ^^e Lord; and his desire was, That
he might ^^ar it faithfully, and that he might be en^^ed with Power from on
high, and so speak (...) the Spirit gave him Utterance; and the ^^rd was
pleased to endue him with a good ^^derstanding and much knowledge, and of a
^^nd delivery, so that the hearts of many ^^re drawn near unto him, and he was
drawn ^^ar unto many, and many sweet Refresh^^nts we had together, and many
sweer Meetings and Opportunities we had to the Refreshment of our Souls, and
many hearts were made glad, and my soul with his has many a time been truly
comforted together in the Lord; so that to part with such a dear Husband, and
one who I had much comfort in, I find it a hard thing to undergo, for he was a
Man of great Service, and might have been if the Lord had seen good to have
spared him; my Loss is great, and many I do believe will find a Loss of him
besides, but this is comfort to me, that the Lord was with him, and the Lord
had drawn him off all worldly things, and surely had fitted him for himself,
and now has taken him out of this troublesome World, and so he has finished
his Course with Joy, and has received the Crown which is laid up in store for
all the faithful ones; for as Paul said, The Crown of Righteousness he alone
shall wear, that faithful to the end do persevere; and I know it was his great
desire that he might walk so as to obtain that Crown, and I am satisfied the
Lord has answered his desire; many of his sweet words and expressions which he
spoke, cannot be remembered, which is a trouble to me that they were not taken
notice of, but my Exercise being very great, That I could not remember many of
them, and being the Lord has been pleased to strip me of him, which was the
greatest outward Comfort and Support that I had, I desire that I may be willing
to submit to the Will of the Lord, and that my Will may submit to his Will, and
that I may not offend him; for as it is said, If ye love any thing more than
me, ye are not worthy of me; so he is able to make up all our Losses, as we
stand faithful to him, and though my Loss be great, in parting with such a dear
Husband, yet I firmly believe his Gain is great, and he is at rest from all the
Troubles and Encumbrances of this World, for many are the Trials and Exercises
that we meet with here in this troublesome World, and therefore it is my great
desire that I may be preserved through them all, and that the Lord alone may stay
and anchor my Soul, that in all Trials and Exercises, I may look unto him for
help and wisdom, to walk as becomes his Truth, and to order all things to his
Glory, and that I may wait for Council from him, to be ordered and guided by
him alone, and so return him the Praises and the Honor, who alone is worthy of
all Honor and Glory, for ever and evermore.

Susanna Padley.
Northcave, the 28th. of the 10th. Month, 1687.
A Short Account of B. P. his Expressions in the time of his Weakness, taken in
writing from his Wifes own Mouth, etc.
HE took his sickness in the 17th of the 6th Month, 1687. and continued till
the 25 of the same, having long before had a sense upon his spirit, that his
time in this world might not be long, often declaring the same to his Dear
Wife; and the day after he took his illness, he spoke as Concerning his two
Children, on this wise, That the Lord would preserve and keep them, and that
they might if they lived, live to Honor his Name; or otherwise, if it might
seem good in his sight that they might be taken away in their Childhood before
sin was too much rooted in them: On that day or the day following several of
his Neighbors came to visit him, his Dear Wife being by, he said, It is well
for them that can say on their dying beds, their sins and iniquities are
blotted out. At another time a friend coming into see him, he said; my Dear
Love is to thee, and to all friends; and I desire you may be watchful and
diligent in attending Meetings, often declaring his great Love to Friends. At
another time he said, If the Lord have any further work for me to do, I desire
I may be found faithful, and if not I am well satisfied in his will. And
afterward, the pain and sickness being very sharp upon him, he said, O Lord, I
pray thee lay no more upon thy servant, then thou gives him patience to bare;
and I pray thee that thy afflictions may be mixed with mercy. His Wife weeping,
being under very great Exercise because of his Affliction, he said unto her, O
why do thou weep, thou must not do so, for keep but to the Truth, and fear
not but all will be well. And the very day before he dyed, he got up in the
forenoon, and several friends, as also Neighbors and Relations came in to see
him, and he being under a deep sense of Gods love unto his Soul, begun to
declare amongst them, but few of his words is remembered, but there having been
some words given out by some of the worlds people where he lived, while he was
in the work and service of the Lord, abroad visiting Gods Heritage, that he had
Money for Preaching, therefore he spoke on this manner: It is not for any
outward thing we Travel, neither is that by us looked at, nor any man's Silver,
or Gold, sought or coveted after, but it is for the Gain^ng of Souls; for said
he, we have suffered the loss of our goods, scoffings, and scornings, and
imprisonment, so that it may appear, it has not been the looking at any
benefit of any Man's Goods, or Estates, that has ^een in our eye, but for
performing the will ^f the Lord, and now it has pleased him to ^isit me with
great weakness, so that I am not ^ike to continue many days here; but I am ^ell
satisfied, and whether they will hear, or ^orbear, I shall? be clear in the day
of the lord; and although his weakness was very ^reat, and even to the Eye of
outward reason as a spent Man, yet he was helped to his ^nees, and was never
heard to be more power^ul in prayer, which was for all from the King upon his
Throne, even to the beggar upon the dunghill, to the Admiration and
Astonishment of the Beholders; and after that few words proceeded from him, but
weakened very fast, and the next day being 25th of the sixth Month 1687. he
finished, and has left a good Savor behind him, and the Righteous surely
shall be had in everlasting remembrance, alalthough the Memory of the wicked
shall rott.

Elizabeth Leaper, Her Testimony concerning Benjamin Padley, who dyed the 25th
of the 6th Month, 1687.
MY Testimony Concerning this my dear Friend B. P. is as follows, that he was
a Man whom the Lord had endued with true Wisdom, as also a spirit of true
discerning, and therein did he in his day act for the Lord, and for his Truth
and People, and freely gave himself up with his whole substance to spend, and
be spent. Oh the remembrance of this my Friend, is very precious unto me, and I
am made many times to bless the Lord, and to praise the name of Jacobs God, in
that he has made me very sensible, he had fitted and prepared him, and made
him a fit vessel for his Masters use, who called him into his vineyard; and I
am made to say, surely he was a faithful Labourer therein, therefore does my
Soul believe, he has received his reward even a Crown of Glory, which can
never be taken from him, yet I cannot but many times even mourn because of the
want I with many more, feels of him, whom the Lord raised up, to be as an
instrument in his hand many a time to speak a word in due season unto me, when
under great exercises, and besetments many ways; and not only so, but he could
read my condition, and was made willing to bare a part of my burden; yet my
sorrow is not as those who sorrow without hope, being fully satisfied, he had
kept the says, finished his course, and laid down his head in peace with the
Lord, where all sighing, and tears of sorrow comes to be wiped away; so that
although our loss, and the want of him be great, yet surely its his gain, and
in this shall my soul, and spirit be comforted. I well remember when the Lord
was pleased to raise a Travel in my soul for Sions prosperity, and laid a
constraint on me, to cast in my mite into his Treasury amongst my Brethren and
Sisters, at that very time was he made instrumental, to the helping me forward,
and after sometime, it was laid on me; with my dear Sister and Companion Mary
Frost, to visit Friends in Cumberland, and laying it before him, being under a
True Sense of our own weakness, youth and tenderness, Oh! How he encouraged us,
saying, Travel on in your innocence, and in a sense of your own weakness
without the Lord, and I do believe he will be with you, and make your journey
prosperous; which time was the last time we see his face, his delight was to
take the weaklings by the hand, and to encourage the good in all wherever it
appeared, for his care over the Flock of Christ was great; and I have heard him
often say, where he saw a backwardness or slackness in meeting together to wait
upon the Lord; Oh how it wounded, and grieved his spirit within him! often
stirring Friends up to diligence, and faithfulness in serving God. Oh the
Remembrance of his innocence! together with the Lamb-like Nature, which mine
eyes beheld to appear in him is very pleasant unto me; and the many sweet and
comfortable expressions which dropped like Honey from his Lips unto my Soul,
when under great distress, the Consideration of it breaks my Heart, and Melts
my Spirit into Tenderness before the Lord! Oh the sweet Council my Soul
received from him, when in a mournful state, it was even as marrow to my bones,
and as strength unto my sinews; so that I have been made to bless the Lord,
that ever it was my Lot to see his Face, and although it was not ordered so to
be for me, to see him in the time of his weakness, being many Miles distant, as
also under weakness of body, yet at the first hearing of his sickness, I was
made sensible he might be taken away, which at the first came very nigh me, but
after sometime I was made to say, Lord thou has now fitted him for thy Kingdom,
therefore, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, for they do Rest from
their Labor, and their works do follow them; and surely thou art taking the
Righteous away from the evil to come, so being fully satisfied of his well
being, as also hearing the report of some good friends, who were with him near
the time he finished of his comfortable end: I dare not repine, as believing
his life, was hid with Christ in God, and I do feel this time, as at many other
times servent breathings in my heart, and a cry run through my Soul, unto the
Lord, that he will still raise up many more to bare a faithful Testimony to his
Name and Truth, even as I do believe this my friend did in his young and tender
years, and it is my full belief he is now rejoicing amongst the valiants of
Israel who has not only proved Conquerors, but more than Conquerors; so what
shall I say more, but even leave all to the disposing of him, whose mercys are
over all the works of his hands, with True breathings unto the Lord, not only
for my own Soul, but for all his whole flock, and Family, that is left behind
every where, that we may so spend the residue of our time, even as I do believe
this my Friend of whom I am speaking did, that so the reward of the Righteous
we may all receive, when time on this side the grave shall be no more. So unto
him who has been our preservation unto this day, and is able to make up all
our wants, and raise up unto himself many faithful, and living witnesses, does
my Soul return Glory and Honor with humble, and holy thanksgivings, having
cleared my self, and eased my spirit, and so remains a Traveller for Sions
prosperity, and a well wisher to all.

Elizabeth Leaper.

DEar Benjamin Padley was one of the Sons of William and Elizabeth Padley of
Northcave, in the Eastriding of Yorkshire, who in former days (with many
others, in whom true desires toward God were begotten) was traveling and
seeking the Kingdom in Forms and Observations, zealously following them that
cried, Lo here, and lo there, in whom the true Birth being not satisfied with
any empty husk, when it pleased the Lord in his great Mercy to cause his day to
dawn, and to visit a Remnant that sat mourning in darkness with the
Manifestation of his everlasting Light, and to send forth faithful Witnesses
and Messengers of the Gospel of Peace and Reconciliation in Christ Jesus, the
Light of the World, and the only way to the Father. Then I say the said William
and Elizabeth his Wife, were the first (in these parts, that received the said
Messengers and their Testimony, and became faithful Followers of him, whom the
Father has sent to gather in his scattered flock, to wait for his teaching,
and to worship him in Spirit and Truth, and through much Tribulation, in
Patience they endured to the end, and did not deny him before Men for any
Suffering, as, Imprisonment, spoiling of Goods, etc. with the latter whereof,
more especially the Widow, and Samuel their eldest Son, were tried by Means of
Thomas Forge a profane Priest, who was much retained in Williams days, but
after his death break forth in great Rage, and Cruelty against the Widow and
Fatherless, but most especially after Elizabeth's death, against the said
Samuel, who, by means of the said Priest, and his adherents, suffered twice 20
l. fine for Friends meeting in his house to worship God, which (with other
sufferings) when he had endured by wicked men for his love to God and his
Truth, and People, he was taken away in peace out of the World, and his next
brother William stood up in his place in the same Testimony, who met with the
like usage from the same wicked priest, who shut him up in Prison, where he
remained till the death of his said Adversary, and not long after he being
taken out of the World also, this dear Benjamin came in to the place, where his
Parents had finished their course. And in deep Humility, and Zeal toward God,
and servent love to him, and to all that walked in the Truth, he did continue a
considerable time before his mouth was opened to bare a Testimony of the
everlasting Truth of God, in the Assemblies of his People, and after he was
raised in the Power of Truth to bare a Testimony of it. I do verily believe he
did not go before the motion of Life, nor stretch beyond it, nor speak of what
he lived not in, neither did he aspire into high Notions, nor seek to
illustrate his Testimony with high words and expressions, but sound, plain, and
weighty his declaration was, in the demonstration of the spirit and power of
God, which reached the seed; and when he received the aboundings of the
heavenly gift, that in the overflowings thereof he could Minister, and offer
the living Sacrifice on the Spiritual Altar, and sind acceptance; yet he grew
not rich and full, nor wise in his own conceit, but was kept low and humble, in
a deep sense of the daily need, still to wait on God, for the renewings of his
mercys, and the fresh openings of the springs of life, and love from him to
help forward in the Spiritual Travel, and to persevere to the end: and hereunto
he did much exhort, and stir up friends where he came, and to constancy in
meetings, and to watchful diligence therein, that all might come daily to
receive, and truly to enjoy that, wherein the True blessedness is. He sought
not worldly riches (tho he was a man not slothful in business, but in
dustrious); yet above all, seeking the Kingdom of GOD, and the Righteousness
thereof, and the Lord gave him his hearts desire, and withheld not from him,
what his Soul Traveled for, for he helped him on his way to the end, and
Ministered living Consolation to his Soul, when all visible things ceased to be
any more to him. And now his course is finished, and his work is done, and his
reward is everlasting, where none can add thereto, nor take therefrom; and
being sensible of this, I can Truly Testify that I do not write these things
in any vain Ostentation, to set up the N^^^^^ of a Creature, but for the sakes
of those that yet remain; That all may be stirred up (whom the Lord has
visited with the like mercy) in the day of their visitation, to give all
diligence to make their Calling and Election sure, seeing none of us knows at
what time our end may be; but that which is most weighty upon my Spirit,
whereby I have been drawn to bring in this Testimony, is to provoke, and stir
up all the Children of the Lords People, every where to be True followers of
their parents in the Lords way in every thing that is good. O the joy, and
comfort to the Souls of all that Love the Lord, to behold the Children of
Faithful parents that Truly loved, and feared the Lord, now walking in the
same way, and striving for the same immortal Crown! and Oh the grief, and
sorrow of heart to be Children of Good parents loose and profane! Or to turn
aside from the way of the Lord, wherein they have been instructed! Oh great
will be the Condemnation of all such, if they do not speedily return: and
therefore my earnest desire, and Travel is, that my (Children) and all the
Children of the Lords faithful servants, and people great and small may be
hereby Admonished, and put in Remembrance, by the good Example of this young
Man, and his Brethren, whose Memorial is blessed, who Truly followed their
good parents, in faithfulness to God; in doing and suffering what the Lord
required of them; and the Eternal God of power, who helped their parents
through all he called them to, did not fail these young Men their Children, but
was their helper to the end, and I believe is, and ever will be a sure Rock to
all that choose, and abide in his way from Generation to Generation: And I
dearly beseech all young people, Children of the Lords servants, not to count
it enough to get, and Comprehend into Notion, what ye have heard from your
parents or others, and so to follow them only in the outward form, and
profession of Truth. Oh but wait in the Light to feel the Spirit and power of
God, to work in you to judge, work out, and Crucify the worlds Nature in you,
and to renew you in your hearts and spirits, according to his Holy and Heavenly
will, that so of him who certainly knows the hearts of all, ye may be owned and
approved; which that all the called of the Lord, both Old and Young, may truly
attain unto, is the earnest desire and spiritual travel of your Brother and
Companion, in that which abides for ever,

Sebastian Ellythorpe.

THis Testimony remains in my heart, and has been as a Concern upon my
Spirit, many days concerning the Life and Death of my dear Friend Benjamin
Padley; for he was one that the Lord did bless and preserve in great weakness,
when he was in his tenderness, and in his young years, and seeking after the
Knowledge of the blessed Truth, as it is in Jesus, and when he was weeping on
his way, and seeking the Lord, inquiring the way to Sion, having his face
thitherward, who traveled in pain, as a Woman to be delivered, and had a
longing desire after the Lord God, who could not be satisfied until he had met
with him whom his soul loved, and nothing would comfort him short of the
Enjoyment of the presence of the Lord; neither did he regard the Reproaches,
but patiently endured the Cross, and despised the Shame. And all for that Joy
that was set before him, which the Lord had given him a sense and a seeling of
in his young days, and in the Lords due and appointed time he did deliver him,
from under all that which was as a Burden unto him, as that Philistian Nature
that was an Enemy unto Israel, that would be casting stones into their Wells,
and would be damming up the precious springs of divine Life; these things he
knew and met with in his way, but still his dependency was upon Christ the
Beloved of his Soul, who brought him out of the Wilderness, and over the Red
Sea, and over Jordan, and through the Ministration of Death and Condemnation,
which all must pass through before they come into Life and Peace with God, and
to be possessed of that Inheritance of Life and Salvation, Peace and Rest in
Christ, that Canaan was a Figure of promised to Abraham and his Seed for ever,
of whose Offspring and Race in those days are all the Faithful, who is willing
to leave their Fathers House, and all their Kindred, and all that is near and
dear unto them, among whom was this faithful Man, who loved not his Life unto
Death, that he might save his Life unto Eternity; this was before him, and this
was in Moses's eye above Aegypts Glory; this was in Abraham's eye above his
Native Country, and above his Fathers House, because they all had an eye unto
the Recompense of Reward, among whom was this faithful Man, after that he had
turned his back upon all the World and Aegypts Glory, he grew valiant for the
Truth, and bore a living Testimony against the Abominations and all the Pride
and Superstition and Idolatry thereof, the sense whereof still remains, and
does live with me, though he be removed from us, still the remembrance of him
is Chronocled and Engraven in our hearts, that it cannot easily be forgotten,
nor razed out of our Remembrance; the many sweet and living Testimonies that
were given forth, and that ran through him in the precious Extendings of Life,
and sweet Visitations, wherewithal the Lord was pleased to visit him, and to
make him a Partaker of amongst the People of God, of which I was an Eye and
Ear-Witness, and a partaker with him, both in the time of the Ministration of
Death, and in the time of the Ministration of Life and Salvation, and in his
Exercises both spiritual and temporal; but in all he was preserved in the meek
and quiet spirit of the Lamb, holding fast his Integrity in the ancient power
of God, and in the word of his patience, who never failed him nor none of his
faithful Children, in the day of Trial, nor hour of Temptation, though they be
great, and the troubles of the Righteous many, yet the Lord is able to deliver
out of them all, as he has done this my dear Friend, where all sighing and
sorrow does fly away; and where all tears is wiped away, and all sorrows and
pains comes to an end, and the troubler ceases troubling, and the scorner
ceases from scorning, and the troubler of Israel does not appear any more; and
this is our Joy and our Comfort, that which makes up our Loss in parting with
so dear a Friend as he was in his day, which was but short, yet glorious; for
he was taken away in the flower of his age, and in the strength of his youth, I
mean every way, both bodily and spiritually; for he had overcome the wicked
one, and the Word of God did abide in him, and his presence did fill him, until
his Cup did overflow many times, to the watering of the Heritage of God; and
now this is my desire, That all to whom this may come, may be Followers of
Christ in his footsteps, and according to his and many others that was holy
Examples in their days of humility and self-denying, and patience, and long
suffering, and meekness, and Brotherly kindness and charity, suffering all
things, and bearing all things, for the Name of Jesus, and for the Word of God,
as he was given up to do, and now is entered into Glory, where he rests from his
Labors, and his Works do follow him, and his Reward is with him; for thus
says the Spirit, Blessed is the dead which dye in the Lord, for they rest from
their Labors, and their Works do follow them; and the Name of the Righteous
shall be had in everlasting remembrance, and shall be blessed among the
Righteous, but the Name of the Wicked shall rot.

These few Lines opened in my heart, concerning my dear Friend, whose Life was
blessed, and latter End Peace. Now it is time to conclude, and recommend this
with the rest of Friends Testimonies to the serious Readers, to whom this may
come, to the help and encouragement of them that are in Afflictions, that they
they may hold out to the end and be saved.

John Richardson.

A Copy of a Letter sent to his Wife.
Dear Love,
THE Salutation of my endeared Love reaches unto thee with my Children, and I
cannot but desire of the Lord, That he would preserve you, and keep you in his
fear from day to day, and give thee Wisdom and Understanding to order thy
Family in his fear and dread, and to be cheerful, and trust in the Lord, and he
will not fail thee, I am satisfied; for blessed be the Name of the God of
Heaven, his Presence and Power is still with us, and his Arm does still
surround us, that we are carried on with cheerfulness, and freely given up to
follow the Lord whithersoever he is pleased to lead us. So, my Dear, I dearly
desire thee, be not troubled, nor any way cast down in thy mind because of my
Absence; though things may go contrary to thy desire and expectation, yet, my
Dear, be encouraged, and give up to the Lord, and fear him, and doubt not but
all things will work together for thy good. So unto the Lord do I commit thee,
with my Children and Family, with my own Soul, who I desire to preserve and
keep us to his own Praise and Glory, who alone is worthy over all for ever. So
my Dear, I desire thee to remember my dear Love to all our Friends in general,
who is very dear unto me, when I remember them, especially those that are
faithful. So my dear Love, with my dear Companion John Richardson, salutes you
all, and bid you all farewell. We are now at Rousby, and does intend for Whitby,
and so toward Burlington, if the Lord permit. So with my dear Love to thee, I
remain thy dear and faithful affectionate Friend and Husband,

Benjamin Padley,
From Rousby 16th. of 8th. Month, 1686.
Another Copy of a Letter sent to his Wife.
My Dear,
THe Salutation of my endeared Love at this time, with many other times, does
reach unto thee, as also to my Dear Children; and you are often in my
Remembrance; and my Soul is many times bowed down, and my Spirit poured forth
in Supplication before, and in the presence of my God and yours; that you may
be preserved in holy fear and dread, and that he may give thee Wisdom, and
understanding, and strength, and ability, to order thy Children, and to nurture
them in the Fear of the Lord, and keep them in Subjection as much as in thee
Lies; and stand in the Dominion of Truth, over them and thy servants; and wait
for Wisdom, and Council from the Lord to guide, and order thee in all things,
that thee art concerned in. And my dear, be not too careful in driving on thy
business too eagerly, and keep thy hands off as much as thou possibly can,
thou knowing thy own unfitness, and the weakness of thy Constitution; and
although things may sometimes, not go so well on as thou would have them, yet
I would have thee be careful, that thou let not thy mind out to fret, and
grieve at them, but stand in the Counsel of God, that he may give thee
directions to order all things aright, and to keep out of extremes on every
hand: But let thy Moderation appear in all things; and let a moderate care be
had in all things, that nothing be wilfully lost or wasted. And so unto the
Lord, who is only able to preserve, and prosper thee in all things, do I commit
thee with the rest of my family; and my hope, and confidence, and whole belief
is steadfast in him, as ever that as we do keep faithful to the Lord, and his
Truth, and desires to be found in that, and to abide in that, which will bring
Honor to his Name: The Lord will multiply his blessings upon us, and we shall
be as Monuments of his Mercy, and his presence will be with us, and his
provident hand will be seen and felt, in the ordering of us in all things to
his glory, and to our mutual Joy and Comfort: And blessed be his great and
Mighty NAME, that has not been wanting to me since I was called from thee; but
his presence I have, and do enjoy from day to day, unto this very day; and his
counsel he has not hidden from me, in those things which he has concerned me
in, but his provident hand has greatly appeared to me, in ordering of me in my
Journey, and answering my desire greatly beyond my Expectation; for I have met
with a Companion four or five days ago, and I hope we are like to continue
together a pretty while longer, our minds being both inclined one way, before
we did know any thing one of another; and I hope, and am satisfied, that it
will be good for me, for the Lord is felt, and witnessed to be with us in our
Spiritual Exercise, to the ordering of us in his fear and wisdom; and many
sweet and precious Opportunities has be given us, to the uniting us to himself,
and one unto another, and has drawn us into a Spiritual Acquaintance and
Society one with another, unto whom my Soul gives Glory and Honor, who is
alone worthy for ever and ever. I desire thee remember my dear Love to all our
Friends in general, and let me have two or three Lines from thee, by some of
our Friends that goes to the yearly Meeting at York, to know how it is with
thee; for I hope I may get thither, and shall be glad to hear that it is well
with thee; so desiring this may find thee with thy Children in good health, as
through the Lords Mercy I am at present; and in the Sense of the Lords Goodness
toward us, and his Care over us, I do still remain, and in that dear and
unfeigned Love, which length of Miles, or distance of place cannot separate, do
I dearly salute thee, and bid thee farewell, and does remain in the unchangeable
Truth, thy truly loving Husband,

Benjamin Padley.
From Hansworth Woodhouse near Sheffield 28th. of 3d. Month, 1687.
A Copy of a Letter sent to a Brother of his in America.
Dear Brother,
I Dearly salute thee in the Fear of the Lord, in which I desire we may both be
preserved all the days of our appointed time. After my dear love presented unto
thee, hoping these will find thee in good health, as I am at present, blessed
be the Lord; and therefore I desire thee to sink down into Gods pure fear, and
let his pure dread, and Holy Awe be continually upon thy heart, and that will
guide thee in the path of Righteousness, and order thee aright in all things;
it will be as a Cloud by day as and of a Pillar fire by night to lead thee:
Thou knows in the days of our Childhood, when we were left without Father and
Mother, the Lord took care of us, and provided well for us, that we have not
suffered want nor hardships, as many Children have done; and when thou went
first over into that Country, in which thou now art, thou wast then in a Sense
of thy own weakness and littleness, and wast as it were reconciled unto the
Will of God; and when thou wast in this State, then thou wast safe, and the
Lord prospered thee in all thy undertakings, and many People became thy
Friends, and thou did get the love of many; but now I fear thou have lost the
feeling of that which was then thy preservation, and now thou art lifted up in
thy prosperity, and so forgets the Lord that made thee, and has given thee
Breath and Being; and so in Bowels of love to thy Soul, do I write this to
thee, and not for any ill will I bear to thee; the Lord knows my Heart; but
that thou might come to the Consideration of these things, and for time to
come, let them be amended, or else assuredly the hand of the Just GOD will be
for ever: so I dare not but warn thee in the Fear of the Lord; and whether thou will hear, or forbear, I shall be clear concerning thee; for I will assure thee
I have besought the Lord with Tears many times concerning thee, and this I am
persuaded through Gods mercy, that his love is still toward thee, and he still
waits to be gracious unto thee, and to show mercy unto thee, if thou will
return unto him: therefore I desire thee in bowels of love to thy Soul, do thou
hearken to his voice, and return to him with thy whole Heart and Soul, and in
Gods Fear sit down under his righteous judgments, and wait in patience until he
is pleased to appear, and reveal himself unto thee; and he will throw down the
mountains of iniquity, and cause the Hills of Transgression to fall before him;
he will make the Crooked ways straight, and the rough places plane; he will
throw down the partition, which the enemy has built betwixt him and thy soul;
and he will make room for himself to dwell, and make his abode with thee: and
so I desire that thou and I, and all that makes mention of the Name of the
Lord, may depart from evil: for thus says the Lord, Let all that makes mention
of my Name depart from evil. And therefore it is a weighty thing, and we have
great need to eye the Lord in all things, and stand continually in his Council,
that he may be our leader, and our guide to the end of our days; and therefore
let us with one accord Humble our Souls before the GOD of HEAVEN, and sit in
the dust, and with rended hearts cause our Cries to pierce through the Heavens,
and ascend up to him that sits upon the Throne of Glory, and he will hear our
Cries, and answer the desires of our Souls, if in the fervency of our hearts we
pray unto him: and so I desire that we may be preserved in the fear of the
Lord; and therefore in resignation to the Will of God, do I commit my Soul with
thine, and the Souls of all our Brethren and Sisters, and all our dear and near
Relations every where; and the Lord preserve us, and the Lord keep us and
protect us, and guide us continually in his pure Fear and holy Awe, that that
may be the stay of all our minds unto the end of our appointed time, that the
God of Heaven, may be our Portion, and the Lot of our Inheritance, that in the
end of our days we may lay down our heads in peace, where none can make us
afraid, and where our Bread for ever may be sure, and our Water never failing,
that we may Exalt the Name of the Lord in the Land of the Living, and return
living Praises, and everlasting Thanksgiving unto his Glorious Name: for worthy
is he over all to be praised and honored, everlastingly above all, for ever
and for evermore. So no more, but my dear Love to thee, and Good Will toward
all Men; I rest and remain thy dear Loving Brother, and eternal Lover of thy
Souls Welfare,

Benjamin Padley.
North Frodingham in Houllderness in Yorkshire, 20th. of 3d. Month, 1678.
Another Copy of a Letter sent to a Brother of his in America.
Endeared Brother,
OH feel the Bowels of Enlarged Love, which the Lord God Almighty, has opened
in me toward thee; and has laid it weightily upon me to visit thee with a
tender visitation of love; and also to lay open some of the snares and
stratagems of the Enemy, whereby he kept me in bondage many Months, and some
Years: But the Lord in his tender mercy, and infinite compassion, has redeemed
me out of them all; and has set me free, to worship him in spirit, and in
Truth; unto whom my soul does at this time, and for ever desire to return
everlasting glory, and endless praises and thanksgiving, who alone over all is
worthy, for ever and ever: For after he was pleased in his endless mercy to
bring me into the Wilderness, into a place of want, into a bewildred state,
into a wantfull state, and into a sense of the Necessity I had of seeking after
a Savior; the Enemy, through hearkening to his deceitful voice; kept me long
wandering here before I could get through, or arrive within the River-banks of
Canaan; yet can I truly say, the Lord brought me not hither to starve me, but
to try me, for he never left me nor forsook me; but he daily pursued me with
mercy, and followed me with his loving kindness, he fed me with the Manna from
Heaven, and caused me to drink of the Rock that followed me, which Rock was a
shelter unto me, and that Rock was Christ, which daily begot a longing desire
in me of being redeemed out of that bewildred state, and of coming to the full
enjoyment of that living refreshment, which my Soul at times and seasons was
made partaker of; for truly I have many times felt such living refreshments
from the hand of the Lord, both when I have been amongst the Assemblies of Gods
People, and also when alone in secret Places, when my heart has been kept low
in his fear, and when in the sincerity of my Soul I have waited upon him, in a
true Resignation to his Will, that my Soul as it were, has been overjoyed; and
then whilst I have been thus pleasing my self with those Joys, and take a
Rejoicing in those Refreshments, then has the Enemy com'd in, with those
Persuasions, and said, Thou art now come to the full Enjoyment of thy desire;
thou art now come to arrive within the Blessed Land, for which thou so
earnestly traveled for; and thou may now take up a rest here, for thou need
never fear of being deprived of these Enjoyments, or of being driven back out
of the Land wherein thou art arrived; yea, these and many more stumbling
Blocks, has the Enemy cast before me, whilst I was in this Blessed Exercise,
and through lending an Ear and hearkening to his deceitful Voice, in taking up
a false Rest, which the Lord has never ordained for me; I have been led
backward into the Wilderness, and the Veil has again been brought over me, and
the thick Clouds of Darkness has covered me, and the Mercies of the Lord has
been withdrawn from me, and he has as it were for a Season, hid his Face from
me; so that I have sometimes been ready to say, Surely this is Aegypts
Darkness, and to take up a Lamentation, for want of the enjoyment of his
presence, which I did enjoy whilst I was obedient to him, and in the deep sense
of these my Wants, and of the necessity of the saving Power, and Salvation of
the Lord God Almighty, has my Soul been bowed down, under great Weights and
Burdens, beseeching him, that he would again appear, and rend away the Veils,
and take off all Coverings, and let me feel of his wonted Goodness, and of the
fresh Incomes of his Love and Mercy, which formerly I had been partaker of; for
in the sense of these Wants, has my Soul, with David, been ready to say, Lord
have thou forgotten to be gracious, will thou be favorable no more? O then did
he Answer me, and say, My hand is not shortened at all that I cannot save,
neither is my ear heavy that it cannot hear, bu^ thy Sins has separated
betwixt thee and me; through hearkening and lending an ear to the Enemy, in
taking up a polluted Rest; therefore turn from the evil of thy ways, and I will
still have Compassion on thee, and appear to save in all Troubles, and carry
thee through all thy Exercises and Trials, which I will suffer to come upon
thee, and set thee as a Pillar in my House that shall never be removed; O then
his Words were strength to my soul, and more desired by me than my necessary
Food; and now can I truly say the Lord is become my chiefest delight, and the
object of mine eye; he is the God of my Salvation, therefore will I trust in
him, and not be afraid; though he was angry with me, his anger is turned away;
though in a little wrath he did his face from me, yet with everlasting loving
kindness he will have Mercy on me: And now the Lord having brought me out of
the Wilderness, out of a Place of Want, into a Land of Plenty, and given me to
drink of the River of his pleasure, which is set open and freely tendered to all
that will come; he has taught me not to sit at ease, and take up a Rest as the
Enemy would have persuaded me; for though the Enemies be subdued that were
within the Borders, and that hindered me from arriving within the Blessed Land;
yet GOD has showed me there are yet many Enemies within the Land, which if
there be not a continual Watch kept, will come suddenly upon me, and drive me
out: This is the Philistine Nature, which will dam up the Wells of Jacob, which
will stop the Passage of the Fountain of Life from running into my Soul; there
are the Pleasures of the World, and the Cares of this Life, and all vain
Traditions, and Customs of Men, which must be forsaken; and Sufferings both of
Body, and spoiling of Goods, Scoffings, and Scornings, Revilings, and evil
Entreatings, which they that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must endure: And
now the Lord having set before me Life and Death, I will rather choose to suffer
affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a
Season; for when I lay wallowing in my Blood, and nothing but Wounds and
putrefying Sores, and when the Priest and the Levite passed by, and regarded me
not, nor none could speak a word of Peace to my Soul, O he was the good
Samaritan! Who took me up, and had Compassion on me; he was the skilful
Physician, who knew my Infirmity, and poured forth Balm from Gilead upon all my
Wounds, and healed me of mine Infirmities; O therefore has he engaged me to
love him! and to give up all for him, and to follow him through the Loss of all
things; yea, to give up my Life for his sake, if he should require it at my
hand, and it is but all what I owe unto him, it is but the sacrifice of a
reasonable Service, and all nothing in comparison of what he has done for my
soul, and I desire with all my Heart and Soul, that I may for ever be kept and
preserved in this holy Resolution, that I may count nothing too dear to part
with for the Lords sake, who is worthy over all to be worshipped, served and
obeyed, praised, glorified, honored and exalted, of me, and of all that have
tasted of his Mercy, and knows how good he is, both now, for ever, and for
evermore.

And now dear Brother, the Lord laid this weightily upon me, to lay open before
thee (if happily thou not being fallen into these snares, might be preserved
out of them, or if fallen into them, that thou might see how to be redeemed out
of them again); and therefore I entreat thee, as one having Charge of thy soul,
that thou slight not the day of thy Visitation until it be overpast, but while
it is called to day, hearken, and turn not away thine Ear from the Counsel of
the Lord, nor harden not thine heart against Instructions, nor cast not his
Reproofs behind thy back, lest thou provoke the Just God to anger, and cause
him to withdraw his good (...) from th^^ for of a Truth God will not be mocked,
but he said I will be glorified in all that draw near me; And they that make a
profession of him in Words, but in Works deny him, he will glorify himself in
destroying of them, as he did Nadab and Abihu, who offered a strange Fire unto
him; for he has said, His Spirit shall not always strive with Man, but the
Candle of the wicked shall be put out: O who can express the Misery of that
Man! O sad and deplorable is his Condition! Oh! It even causes my heart to
relent, and my Spirit to bleed within me, to consider the miserable, sad, and
lamentable Estate of that Man, or Woman, whom God has ceased striving with,
and whose Candle is put out; Oh surely utter Darkness will be their Portion,
for ever Woe and Misery; bitter and anguishing Pangs shall take hold of them,
as of a Woman in Travail, when they shall be cast into utter Darkness, never
more to behold the Brightness of the Glory and Excellency of our God; And
therefore, dear Brother, in the sense of these Miseries, which shall assuredly
come upon all that will not Obey the Counsel of the Lord, do I entreat thee,
for the Lords sake, and for thy poor Souls sake, be obedient to his Counsel,
and give Attention to his Call, for the Bowels of his Love yearns toward thee;
and he still waits to be gracious, Oh therefore embrace his Love! and wait for
his Appearance, though he may appear as an Enemy, yet it is but to destroy sin;
and therefore fly not at his appearance, to hide thy self as Adam did, when he
had transgressed his Commandment, but wait for his coming, to destroy sin in
thee; for therefore must he first appear before thou can be a sit Vessel for
him to dwell in, and then thou will come to witness the saying of the Prophet
fulfilled, which he prophesied of in the days of old, saying, The Lord is our
Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, and he will save us; so
(Mark) he is first to be known as a Judge, and a Condemner of Sin in the
Members, and to take away that which makes a separation betwixt him and thy
soul, and then must he be known a Lawgiver to give Laws, and establish Laws,
and Commandments in the hearts of his People; and here also comes another
Scripture to be fulfilled, which God promised in the days of old, saying, I
will write my Law in their hearts, and put it in their inward parts, and I will
be their God, and they shall be my People; and then, as there is an obeying of
these Laws, and a keeping of these Commandments which the Lord has given unto
us, and written in our inward parts, then do we witness him, to be our King who
will save us, and bring salvation with him: And blessed be his Name for ever,
who is not awanting this day, unto them that really fears and obey him; for the
Fountain of his Mercy is open, and the Sluices of the River of his pleasure is
drawn, and the Floodgates is set wide open, and the Call is gone forth to all
the World, and the Sound thereof to the ends of the Earth, Come you that will
come, come he that is a thirst, and he that has no Money, come, buy Wine, and
Milk, without Money, and without Price; Oh this is the Love of our God! Oh what
manner of Love is this, wherewith he has loved us, that he should thus freely
tender his Mercy unto us who has not deserved it at his hands! Oh surely it
may well engage all who have felt of these his Mercies, and drank of this
blessed Fountain, for ever to love him, and never to let him pass out of our
Remembrance; O that it might for ever be as a Seal upon all our Souls, and as a
double engagement upon our Spirits, for ever to wait upon him, in the true
Poverty of our Spirits, and in the true Nothingness of our selves before him,
to bow at the Footstool of the Throne of his Grace, and there pour forth our
Supplications day and night before him; beseeching him, that he may never
withdraw himself from us, but for ever let us feel of these his Mercies, and be
Partakers of these his Blessings, that in the Eenjoyment of the same, our Souls
may be daily obliged, and daily feel fresh occasion of returning Glory, and
everlasting high Praises and Thanksgiving unto him, who over all is worthy, is
worthy for ever.

And now my Brother, there is still something livingly arises in my heart, to
lay before thee; that I may be clear as to the discharging my Conscience, in
Obeying the will of the Lord; in faithfully doing that, which he commanded me,
and that I may not do the work of the Lord deceitfully; he also having many
times brought into my remembrance the charge, which he gave unto his Prophet;
when he sent him to forewarn the Children of Israel, in the days of old,
saying, If thou forewarn them of their evil, in speaking the things which I
command thee, and they turn not from the evil of their ways, then shall they
dye in their iniquities, and their blood shall be upon their own heads; but if
not, they shall dye in their wickedness, but their blood I require at thy
hands. Now these are the things, which I have to lay before thee.

1st. That thou let not thy mind out into the earth, in striving to gather
great riches; for many times pride does attend that spirit; that as soon as
people are grown rich and full as to the outward, then do they come to be
exalted, and puffed up, and look for Honor, and Esteem in the world, saying in
their hearts, I am full, and entire, lacking nothing, when they are naked,
blind, and miserable, wanting all things. And therefore it is so; he that
strives to heap up Treasures of this World, runs himself into a snare, and
shall fall into a pit. Also said Christ, how hardly shall they that are rich,
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Verily, I say unto you, it is easier for a
Camel, to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the
KINGDOM of GOD; and also he says in another place, Seek ye the Kingdom of
Heaven first, and then all things needful shall be added unto you: And take no
thought for to morrow, for to morrow shall take thought for the things of it
self; and therefore I desire thee, let not thy mind out after these things, but
labor, to lay up Treasures in Heaven, where the Thief cannot Steal, nor the
Moth cannot Eat, nor the Rust cause to decay; and let the fear of the Lord
possess thy heart, and then thou will indeed know that the Lord cares for his
Children, and will not suffer any who puts their trust in him, ever to be
ashamed, or to want any good things; for he fills the Hungry with good, when
the rich and the full he sends empty away.

Secondly, That thou let not out an evil spirit, to watch over any, with an
evil eye to look out at the weakness of others, or when thou can spy a fault in
another, to take an advantage against them, or to give thy self any
encouragement to give self any liberty; but watch over that spirit, to keep it
down, lest while thou art thus watching over others, the Enemy get in, and so
deprive thee of the blessing, which the true waiters do receive, and are made
partakers of.

3dly, Take heed of Murmuring at the prosperity of any, or because, as thou may
think, another may be accepted of above thee; but watch over that, to keep it
down, for that is Cain's Nature, by which the world is guided, and whereby
every one are striving to be greatest; and if that get power in thee, it will
eat out thy life, and peace with God, and Union with his People: For God is no
respecter of persons, but every one as they come truly to walk uprightly
before him, are accepted of him; neither does he require more of any, then he
gives them power to do; for where much is given, much is required: so as there
is but an improvement of the Talent, which God has given to profit withal, all
shall be well at the latter end; and therefore they that do well shall be
accepted, but they that do evil, sin lies at their doors. And

Lastly, I desire thee, take heed of letting in an evil spirit of prejudice,
against me, as to say in thy heart, as the Rebellious Israel did of old, Who
made thee a Judge, and a ruler, over me; for that is that spirit, which would
Fly the Cross, and escape the Judgments, which must come upon it, before thou
can be accepted of the Lord, or be a fit Tabernacle for him to dwell in: for
the Lord God Almighty, who knows the secrets of all hearts, knows and is my
witness, this day, that I have no such design, as either to judge thee, or rule
over thee; but to the contrary, I desire that I may be as a servant to thee,
and help to bear thy burdens in any thing, that may tend to the welfare of
thine immortal Soul; and therefore I desire thee sink down into Gods fear, and
let his dread possess thy heart, and read it in the coolness of thy spirit, and
in singleness of heart without partiality; then thou will come to see that I do
not write to thee these things, by the invention of my own brain, or in my own
will, but the Lord is pleased to make me an instrument in his hand, to stir
thee up to remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, and to seek after a
Savior, while he is to be found; and therefore do I once more beseech thee,
slight not the day of thy visitation, nor put the day of the Lord afar off, nor
trust not in lying vanities, to say in thine heart, thou shall have long life,
and thou may take a little pleasure in thy young years, and then thou will
serve the Lord, in thy old age; and after such, and such a thing is
accomplished, thou will leave off thy life of vanity, and then thou will serve
the Lord; Oh! take heed of giving way to it, the more it overcomes thee, and
the further thou goes on in that way, the harder will be thy return, and the
danger is great, whether ever thou may return or not; therefore bend the twigg
while it is young, and turn to the Lord before sin be too much rooted in thee;
for as an old Crooked Tree cannot be made straight, and fit for the building,
without much hewing; even so, they that sin is much rooted in, and have long
persisted in wickedness, will hardly be redeemed from under the bondage of it;
but however, not without many stripes; therefore, whilst the Lord in his mercy
is thus calling, and inviting with so many tender invitations of love, hearken
unto him, for the day hastens upon all, wherein it shall be said, He that is
holy, let him be holy still; and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still:
yea, the day of the Lord will come, that shall burn as an oven, and all the
proud, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble before the fire, and shall
be utterly consumed; so that there shall be no place found for them: and so I
desire thee, deal justly, and truly with thy own soul, and learn a bridle to
thy Tongue, that in all thy Spiritual, and Temporal Exercises, thy Conversation
may be ordered aright, both before God and Man: For says, James, chap. 1. v.
26. If any Man seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives
his own heart, this Man's Religion is vain; so it is not a profession, that will
serve any, though he may have the form of Godliness, yet if he want the power,
God will not accept him, but will cut him off as an untimely Grape, from the
Vine; for it is not leaves, but fruit that God looks for; therefore let us
labor to bring forth fruit to the glory of the Lord, lest when he comes to
look for fruit, he find nothing but leaves, and so curse us as he did the fig
tree, and like dead branches hew us down, and cast us into the fire. So dear
brother! I desire thee, deal faithfully, and uprightly with all Men, with whom
thou have to deal, and the Lord will bless, and prosper thee in all thy
outgoings, and incomings; but if thou deal otherwise, thou need expect nothing
but a Curse from his Hand; Remember Joseph of Old, who being a Just Man, and
faithful to God, though he was a bondslave, brought a blessing upon the whole
Nation of the Heathens, that when all the Nations about him, was ready to
perish with famine, they did abound with plenty; and how much more may thou,
being a Just man, and faithful to God, bring a blessing upon thy self, and upon
thy own house; and now here is the sum of all these lines contained, To love
thy Neighbor, as thy self aend to do unto all men, as thou would they should
unto thee, to love mercy and to do justly, and walk HVMBLY with thy GOD: Which
if thou truly observe, and do, the Lord will plant thee as a Tree by the River
side, and as a Lilly by the Water courses, which neither toil nor spin, yet
feed and grow, and is beautifully Arrayed; for Solomon in all his Glory, was
never Arrayed like one of these. And now I have cleared my Conscience, in doing
the message of the Lord faithfully, according to the Ability which he has
given me; and if the Lord should call me to visit in general* as he did to thee
in particular, I desire that I may never be slack, but ever ready to answer his
requirings, and do his will in all things; and I pray God set it home upon
thee, that it may answer the end, for which it is sent, that I may cast my
bread upon the waters, and after many days find it; and so unto that power,
which is only able to save to the uttermost, all that will come unto it, do I
commit thy Soul, with my own, and all that have any desires of righteousness in
them; and I desire with all my Heart and Soul that we may for ever, be kept
upright before the Lord, unto the end of our appointed time: That when he is
pleased to put a period to our days, and when time unto us on this side the
grave shall be no more, that we may give up our accounts with joy, and lay down
our heads with peace, where none can make us afraid, and where our bread for
ever may be sure, and our water never failing; and that with Paul we may
conclude, and say, We have fought a good fight, we have kept the faith, and
funished our course; and henceforth, there is laid up for us a Crown of
Righteousness; and not for us only, but for all the Righteous; for the Crown of
Glory he alone shall wear, that faithful to the end persevere. So this, with
dear love to thee, is all at present, from thy ever loving brother,

Benjamin Padley.
North Frodingham in Houllderness in Yorkshire, 20th. of ^th. Month* 16^^*
The Copies of part of two Letters to his Brother John Padley at London.
The First Letter.
Dear Brother,
AFter our dear Love to thee, these may let thee know, That I received thine,
which I suppose came by the hand of John Yates; but it was but two weeks since,
yesterday, and it did rejoice me greatly, to hear from thee; but more
especially, to hear how it was with thee: for I can truly say, it is that which
my Soul has and does travel for, that we may be preserved in Uprightness before
the Lord unto the end of our days; for blessed be his Name, his Tender Care has
been over us, and his Compassion has been toward us in the days of our
Minority, and in the time of our Youth; that though he was pleased to strip us
of our Faithful Parents, and to leave us destitute of a Habitation, yet he
never forsook us, but his provident hand has gone along with us, and taken care
for us beyond what we could ever have expected; that with Jacob we may say, The
Lord has fed us all our Life long; and now it is the desire of my very Soul
and Spirit, that we may walk worthy of those Mercies and Blessings that the
Lord has bestowed upon us, and that we may truly answer the end for which he
has thus visited our Souls, in faithfully performing that Duty and Service,
which the LORD has called us unto, and requires of us, and herein will the
Lord be glorified by us, and our Souls will receive the everlasting Reward that
will countervail all our Labor and Exercise; so into his hand do I commit our
Souls, together with the Souls of all his Faithful Children every where, who is
only able to preserve and keep us unto the end of our days,

Benjamin Padley.
Northcave 20th. of 1st. Month, 1687.
The Second Letter.
Dear Brother,
MY Dear Love is unto thee, desiring thee may enjoy thy Health, as through the
Lords Mercy we do at present, and not only so, but inward Peace, Comfort, and
Satisfaction; I do daily witness and feel in my own particular, and Truth does
grow and prosper amongst us, which is Matter of great Joy and Comfort unto my
Soul, and it is the breathing Desire of my Spirit, that the Lord may preserve
thee, with my own Soul, and the Souls of our Dear Friends and Brethren in the
Truth, in Uprightness before him, unto the end of our days, etc.

Benjamin Padley.
Yorkshire, the 29th. of the 11th. Month, 1689.
A Copy of a Letter to his Brother, John Padley, at London.
Beloved Brother,
THe Salutation of my Endeared Love does reach unto thee in that inseparable
unity and fellowship, which length of miles or distance of place cannot
separate; as we dwell and abide in that blessed Truth which the Lord has
convinced us of; and not so only, but through his great mercy, and loving
kindness has brought us into obedience in a pretty large measure, to the
requirings of it, and it is the very desire, and Travel of my Soul and Spirit,
that we may be ever kept and preserved in the same obedience, to the end of our
days, that as the Lord has been pleased to give unto each particular of us a
Tallent, to profit with all, that we now may be truly and faithfully
exercised, for the improvement of it to the glory of God, and to the benefit
and advantage of our immortal Souls; that when the Lord is pleased to call us
to an account, that we may appear before him with joy, and receive the answer
of Well done into our bosoms; and this will be more cause of joy, and gladness
unto us, than though we could gain the whole world and want this.

And now my Dear Brother, by this thee may understand, that I have received
thine baring date the 26th. of this month, as also two, that my Wife received
before I came home; the reading of which has greatly gladed my heart, as also
the account that I had of thee by our dear Friends, John Whitehead, John
Bouram, and Robert Lodge, which all did give me a very good account of thee;
and I can truly say, it did abundantly rejoice me to hear of thy welfare, and
prosperity every way, but more especially of thy growth in the Truth, in which
I pray God preserve, and continue thee with my own Soul, and every one whom he
has called, that his work may prosper in us, and that we may stand as living
witnesses for him in our age and generation, amongst those whom he has placed
us; for blessed be the name of the Lord our God for ever, that has not left us
to our selves, nor suffered the enemy of our Souls to destroy us, neither has
he cut us off in our Transgression, but has spared us to be as Monuments of
his Mercy; and not only so, but his blessings is largely extended toward us to
this very day, that my Soul can say that he is become an open fountain, and a
place of broad Rivers, unto them that truly fears him, and is given up to
serve him; he is making them to drink of the waters of a full cup, to the
glading of their Souls, for which my Soul is engaged to return Glory, Honor,
and Thanksgiving unto him, who is God over all blessed, for ever and ever, Amen.

Friends, here about, are generally well, only Christopher Hutton lies a
dying, if he be not dead; his Son Emanuel was taken away last winter, he dyed a
very honest young Man. So desiring these may find thee in good health, as
through the Lords Mercy we are at present, we remain with our dear Loves to
thee, desiring to hear from thee, which is most at present, from,

Thy truly Loving Brother, Benjamin Padley.
Northcave 29th. of 4th. Month, 1687.
A Letter sent unto his Brother, John Padley.
Dearly Beloved Brother,
THe Salutation of my endeared Love is unto thee desiring of the Lord, that he
may preserve thee, with my own Soul, in Faithfulness before him, in answering
his Requiring, and doing those things which he makes manifest to be our Duty,
though it may be never so great a Cross to our own Wills; for they that will be
Christ's Disciples, they must come truly to Witness a daily taking up of his
Cross, and a daily dying unto those things in which we have formerly delighted,
and give up truly to follow the Lord in the true self-denial to be truly acted,
ordered, and guided according to his Good Will and Pleasure: And now, dear
Brother, that which is upon me at this time, to lay before thee by way of
caution, is, to desire thee to be careful, lest the Enemy beguile thee, by
drawing thy Mind into some visible thing or other; for it was my Loss when I
began to set up an Employment for my self, my Mind being hasty and desirous to
gain Wealth, and to accomplish great things; I was altogether frustrated, for I
did not only lose in outward things, but I partly lost my inward Condition,
that I did not enjoy the Presence of the Lord in so large a Measure as I had
formerly done, but blessed be the God of my Life forever, who has not left me
to this day, but he has preserved with his Righteous Judgments, that has been
greatly mixed with Mercy; and now blessed be his Name for ever, whose Blessings
and Mercies I do enjoy this day in my measure; and therefore unto him be the
Praise and Glory, who alone is worthy over all; and so it is the desire of my
Soul, that we may both be preserved faithful before the LORD, however it may go
with us as to outward things, that we may first seek the Kingdom of Heaven, and
the Righteousness thereof: And I do believe the Lord will not suffer us to want
those things that is needful for us, but they that makes have to be rich, do
run themselves into a Snare, and is in danger to fall into a Pit; but it is my
Hope and Considence in the Lord, that as we stand in his Council, and dwells in
Humility, desiring to be preserved faithful in all our Undertakings, the
Blessings of the Lord will be with us, and he will still delight to show Mercy
unto our Souls, that we shall have fresh occasion to bless and magnify his
great and powerful Name, who alone is worthy over all, for ever, Amen.

Benjamin Padley.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for and Sold by Tho. Northcott in
George-Yard in Lumbard-street.
JOhn Burnyeat's Works, Price 2 s. 6 d. G. Keith's Presbyterian and
Independent, Visible Churches, in New England, and elsewhere, brought to the
Test, and examined, according to the Holy Scripture, Price 1 s. 6 d. -- His Way
to the City of God, 1 s. -- His Fundamental Truths of Christianity, Price 8 d.
Stephen Crisps Alarm sounded in the Borders of Spiritual Egypt, which shall
be heard in Babylon, Price 3 d. -- His Epistle concerning the Present and
Succeeding Times, Price 2 d. G. Fox the Younger's Works, Price 1 s. 8. d. Eliz.
Bathursts Truths Vindication, Price 8 d. Sam. Fisher's Works, Price 12 s.
William Tomlinson's Innovations of Popery, Price, 6 d. Buds and Blossoms of
Piety, Price 1 s. G. F's several Treatises, worthy of every true Christian's
serious Consideration, Pr. 6 d. R. Barclay's Apology for the True Christian
Divinity, Price 4 s. Robert Barclay's Works, Price 12 s. Francis Howgil's
Works, Price 10 s. Isaac Penington's Works, Price 12 s.

