A VOICE FROM THE Close or Inner PRISON, UNTO ALL THE Upright in Heart, Whether
they are BOND OR FREE.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1662.

A Voice from the close or inner Prison unto the upright in heart, whether they
are Bond or free.
THe night of thick darkness, or ignorance, bondage and affliction is far
spent; the day of Redemption, the welcome year of general Jubilee, and glorious
liberty of the Sons of God is at hand; the Day Star of the lightsom Morning is
already risen in the hearts of hundreds and thousands of Saints: Yea clouds of
Angels, or ministering Spirits are empowered, and coming from the heavenly
Temple, to proclaim and publish it by sound of Trumpet.

By terrible things in righteousness will the God of Salvation now answer them
that have waited on him: His swift messengers from above are commissionated to
pour their Vials forth, and destroy the third part of all that grows in the
earthly nature, or bodily form of things, as also of all creatures whose life
is in a troubled boiling Sea; and many men must die by the bitter waters of
affliction, who have not faith to sweeten them by the tree of Life, being cast
into them: yea the very heavenly Lights themselves, whether that rule by day or
by night, viz. Sun, Moon and Stars, must lose the third part of their luster;
and woe, woe, woe, to the Inhabitants of the earth, by reason of the other
voices and trumpets that are for to follow.

But oh ye meek ones of the earth, that have sought righteousness and meekness,
who therefore have been, are, and shall be hidden in the day of the Lord's
anger; the time is coming, and now is, when the Holy one of Israel shall
beautify you with Salvation to the astonishment of earthly kindreds and
people. You that have sown long in tears, the time of reaping the joyful
harvest of all your labors, travels, hardships and sufferings, inward and
outward, is at hand, and your joy is of that new nature, that no man can take
from you.

Oh ye that have long obscured your selves in silence to seek the pearl of
price, even the innocent, harmless, patient, long-suffering suffering life (by
the blood) of the Lamb, which as it lost its living luster in earthly ease,
power, and prosperity; so of late has it shined forth to all beholders in
burning fiery trials, and having discovered this inheritance of the Saints in
light, have forsaken and sold all to purchase it. Behold the clear evidence of
your matchless wisdom, and immortal state will soon appear, for all that is
mortal will shrink and consume, in that fervent heat, whereby the old worlds
Elements or Foundations shall melt, and the heavens of visible worships
themselves will pass away with a great noise; then will that which cannot be
shaken or consumed remain; not impaired but improved in virtue, strength and
power, convincing both apostate Professor and open Profane, between whom ye
have suffered as fools gladly, that you have wisely chosen the better part, by
keeping the word of Christ's patience without fainting.

To you shall come the first Dominion, that stand as Towers or Hegoats of the
flock, having withstood all encounters both within and without against Satan
and his instruments; enabled thereunto not by a sound of words, but by an
Almighty power, whereby through weakness being made strong, and willing by
resisting even unto blood, to overcome; you have not minded the conquest that
saves Life in stead of loosing it, but with a ready willing mind yielding to
the loss of all in that war, wherein is no discharge.

You that can stand still in this manner resigned and sincerely given up into
the will and custody of your faithful Creator, without a double mind that
consults to hear what flesh and blood can say, which cannot inherit that
glorious kingdom of God, consisting in righteousness, peace, and joy in the
holy Ghost; nothing can hinder your admittance thereunto, whose union in death,
and sufferings is so firm with Christ, who is the resurrection and the life;
that over worldly distress and tribulations of all kinds, you are become more
than Conquerors through him that loves you.

The Captain of our Salvation has led the way before us, and all you that have
thus followed, the gates of hell it self can never prevail to hinder your
interest in his reign and glory: Nevertheless Satan's winnowings and siftings
of you may be for some small time frequent and many, until by your finishing
upon the Cross your Fathers work, your hearts and souls become dry places,
wherein though the unclean spirit of this world seeks its rest, yet finds none;
and the Prince thereof, being thus judged has nothing, when he comes in you:
for as there is no way to kill the fear of Death, but by loving it in order to
an abiding life, so, no resurrection can be to life, but by dying to all on
this side it; and in this Grave mystical or litteral, wherein no man of the
mere first or natural birth, which is of the earth earthly, ever lay, are
always buried those carnal fears, vain hopes and false joys, which are Satan's
various Engines of deceiveable unrighteousness, to corrupt and beguile unstable
souls, whose conversation still is only in the changable glory of the first or
second heavens, but are not yet taken up into the third, where the hidden Manna
remains incorruptible within the Vail of all transcient ministrations, though
pure and beautiful in their kind and season; there only stands the true tree of
everlasting life for all that come to feed upon, even in the midst of the
Paradise of God.

This is that pleasant lovely food that causes to hunger no more after carnal
husky comforts of the old world, without which, man may live but not by bread
alone, though spiritual meat, and Angels food, but by every word coming forth
from the mouth of the living God, not as it is only written on paper, but on
the fleshly tables of his heart, where God has set the world, which being
restored, or renewed by a right spirit within him, does become an inward
Paradise, and in that is Christ the living Word, who makes to live for ever,
yea outlive all storms as well as sun-shines of this lower outward world, with
a growing youth and beauty.

But to such as have not yet gained this Crown incorruptible, and nevertheless
are still lawfully striving for the mastery, by a holy temperance in all
things; this time of general restitution, which is at hand, will much
facilitate their course, because the brethrens accuser shall be bound in
chains to his place, not only from bruising the outward man with trouble and
torment, but also from seducing the inward man with his false glass or gloss,
which he is wont to present before, as well refined, as gross self-lovers,
thereby enticing souls who are not fixed upon their invisible rock of Ages, to
those ensnaring treats and entertainments that are abundant in his airy
principality.

Behold also the time is come that the Bondwoman and her seed are to be cast
out, the true Heirs or Children of the Free must now inherit, who have hitherto
stood still in an obedient Child-like freedom, to be offered up as Sacrifices,
yea, slain all the day long for the Lamb's sake, and led as sheep to the
slaughter: For although the Sons of Concubines have been sent away into the
world with gifts, whereby they have, as rich and full, published their own
glory, rather than in the Cross of Christ Jesus; yet the more enduring
Substance that fades not away, or the Inheritance, which can never be lost or
alienated, belongs to those Freeborn Children of a greater than Abraham, who
like Princes have wrestled and prevailed, because anointed with that spirit
which suffers no foil, but by being in deaths often, and willingly receiving
the sentence thereof in themselves, are grown too strong for the King of
Terrors, and much more for all petty Kings or Rulers on earth, that must yield
to him.

You are the regenerate Generation of just and upright ones, who have days and
nights in prisons, holes, or corners, made it your work to become true learners
of your gentle Lord and Master, to be meek and lowly, and by bearing his easy
Yoke, of self-denying love, are become bound in Spirit, not to avoid, but
freely embrace all others; bending your minds to that holy stillness and
silence, wherein ye are instructed to commune with your own hearts, and by
doing so have escaped the flattering inticements of the strange woman, whose
ways are moveable to hinder the simple in heart from pondering the path of
Life: and having countermin'd the subtle evil one in all his secret coverts of
the self-loving nature, and by renouncing all hidden leagues with the lustful
bondage of corruption, have let the immortal oppressed seed of God in you go
free; Behold, even in that true freedom of the Son, you are become free indeed.

Free from all creature-intanglements, that would engage and anticipate your
affections, and hinder your minds from making those continual ascents, and
descents, which only concern the will and work of your heavenly Father. Free I
say to follow the holy innocent, patient Lamb of God wheresoever he goes, even
into those untrodden paths of daily death to eternal Life, which uncrucified
flesh may boggle at and account uneasy: and all this to no other end, than
that by straitning your selves by this fiery Baptism, and contracting your
selves within the narrow gate of self-denial, your hearts and souls may become
the more enlarged in universal love to God, and good will to men, in true
bowels of pity, mourning over the poor blind and their blind-leaders; as also
willing to direct them both in all humility, to him that is ready to lead them
as he has you, by a way unknown till it be tried, and telling them with a
brotherly kind of tenderness, that this glorious liberty wherein you are new
made and freeborn, Christ has purchased and obtained for them also, if they
will but accept it in his obedience.

O ye Freeborn Citizens of the New-Jerusalem, your time is come to awake and
come out of the dust, where ye have lain long among the pots; put on your
beautiful garments of praise, lay aside your sackcloth O ye slain, but now
living Witnesses of Christ, who is the Truth and Life, and in this cloud that
now arises of earthly trouble coming upon all Nations and Countries, previous
to the much longer calm and quiet which will follow, ascend into the highest
heavenly conversation while your enemies shall behold you, yea, ascend so as to
descend no more, but for his sake whose voice draws and calls you up thither,
even Christ who is your Life, who as he appears in you, so will you with him,
not in a vain, but real glory, even that glory upon which there is a defense
both night and day; a defense of Lambs from Wolves, but offensive to none,
save only such as in stead of yielding or casting themselves into that gentle,
warming, and nourishing heat of Divine Love, which should cleanse and purify
them from enmity and all other uncleanness, do but kindle a fire of lustful
wrath to devour their own souls, whereby they intended to consume others.

It has been the great joy of present and past ages to such, as by Faith,
which is the evidence of things not seen (by the carnal eye or darkened
understanding) could take a pleasing prospect of the New-creation-glory, as
well as the restitution of the old before it is to pass away, the mystery
whereof has been always hid from the wise and prudent, in Christ, who reveals
himself to babe and sucklings: These things were beautiful and lovely in their
root, but much more as they grow manifest in the branch of righteousness, the
very leaves of which shall heal the Nations, and recover all that are not
incurable by reason of their fixed and irreconcilable enmity against him, that
is unchangable in his love and goodness: whereby a good time of refreshing
shall come now, no less to answer the longing expectance of the weary oppressed
Creature, which remains as yet subject (though not willingly) to bondage, then
to raise and heighten the spiritual glory of such as are renewed in the spirit
of their minds; an earnest of which redemption, both general and special, all
you have received, who have willingly quit what is old, and are contented it
should pass away, that you might be made new to all things, and all things new
to you both within and without you.

O you to whom this changable world yields no content in its most alluring
smiles or flatteries, nor terror in its frowns, but have still amidst all its
variety, sought for the one true unchangable being, and an unchangable union
with it; behold now all vails and coverings will be worn away, the shadows must
fly apace, and the true substance appear, so as every eye shall see him, though
at present he comes in clouds, even he whom the earthly kindreds, and breed of
but seeming Saints and sinners, have pierced; but they shall mourn because of
him, who shall be admired in all them that wait for and believe in him.

The force of Arms nor Armies, nor yet the carnal Policy or Grandeur of this
world can any longer withstand that work, which now is to be wrought in the
fight of all nations, not by might nor by power, but by the spirit of the Lord;
which work is neither outward or inward singly, but both, even the one as well
as the other, and therefore, room no further remains for craft or subtilty to
practice and prosper; no enchantments against Jacob, nor divination against
Israel shall hurt the remnant that is redeemed from the earth, and undefiled in
the way; but the wicked shall be ensnared in the work of his own hands, and the
righteous whom they plot against, even by standing still in pure obedience to
the will of God, abstracted from all self-motions or desires, shall see the
salvation of the Lord.

Yea the Nations shall see it, and a mere man shall say, there is a reward for
the righteous, verily he is a God that judges in the earth. But the Eagle-eyed
Saints of the most High God, that do already see beyond all vails and coverings
that are not of the Spirit, can now say that Babylon is fallen, yea the Towers
thereof are now fallen, she is sunk as a millstone in the Sea, she shall rise no
more; even that Scarlet-colored Whore that has for so many ages together,
intoxicated the Kings of the Earth with her filthy Cup of Fornication, and as
well her Supporters, as her Merchants that were supported by her, are both
ready to cry, Alas, alas, and stand aloof off from her, not daring, if desiring
to give her any help, or show her any kindness or pity.

It Is blood of Saints she has long had, and blood she shall have now to drink
her self, for she is worthy, and that doubly filled unto her by such as are
taught of God to shake their hands from holding her bribes, whether Gold or
Silver, or any of her carnal delicacies, pleasures or preferments; but shall
execute the Vengeance written, in that holy zeal for Gods House against her
false Temple-worships, that it shall even eat them up that do it, and cause
them to cease from a desire of being, but in the Will of him that calls to
work, and gathers his sanctified ones together from all quarters and corners,
whither the winds of strife, and dissension of Sects and Parties has carried
them; for whose sake, the many Waters, or multitudes of People and Nations
shall quickly divide and stand upon heaps, for the Ransomed to pass through the
tumult and noise thereof, into that holy stilness and rest, both inward and
outward, wherein they may lie down quietly, and none shall be able to make them
afraid.

Nor shall the single work of Vengeance upon the seed of Enmity be all that
Christ has now to do in the world, but his holy meek ones that have been his
faithful servants in giving the word of their Testimony, crying aloud, and not
sparing great or small, and therein have walked with God (not before him in the
hasty wrath of man, nor staid behind him or tarried longer in a severe
ministration, than to see Justice and Mercy kiss each other) such I say shall
be taken on, and translated to the more higher or more excellent way of love to
Righteousness, Truth and Peace that passes understanding, and being enabled to
sing the song of Moses, and of the Lamb, shall cease to strive any longer with
men in an outward warfare, as having obtained the victory over the Accuser or
evil-one within them; but in stead of maintaining Feuds and marks of
distinction or enmity, shall imitate the good Samaritan, in pouring Wine and
Oil into the wounds of any that refuse not to be healed: being big with desire
to see all as entire by love, as they themselves are by patience, that the very
whole race of mankind, if it were possible, might join with them in singing the
new Gospel-Song of praise; Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, and
good will toward men.

For as all flesh is grass, and the glory of man, consisting in the wisdom of
words or thoughts, but as the flower of grass, the one withers and the other
fades, so the living word of God, that lies deeper in the heart than both the
other, abides for ever; and they whose union is perfect therewith, cannot but
desire it for all else, even in his will and love that is the Savior of the
world, and will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the
truth; so are they the true publishers or preachers in good works as well as
words, of the everlasting Gospel to all Nations, who ere long shall bring all
their honor to the Lamb, and the very wealth or forces of the Gentiles, must
come freely to Christ's Church and followers.

O ye followers of the Lamb whithersoever he goes, who have girded up the
loins of your mind, in true sobriety and hope to the end of all things which
is at hand; hasten to come forth of all Sects and Parties, wherein the cunning
adversary has beguiled and detained you, tempting to retain unbrotherly
distinctions between members of the same Body, which is but one, whose hope
also, calling, Lord, faith, baptism is but one. Live therefore as if ye were
all of him, and he all to you, as well as in all else beside you, though some
indeed are worthy but of single, as others are of double honor: Join ye hands
and hearts, to countermine the Seducer, and at once convince the world whose
disciples you are by loving one another.

Come ye off with one consent out of all particular by-ways or forms, to the
power and life, even the true end of the Commandment, which is charity out of a
pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: ye have too long
sown the changeable wind of strife and contention among your selves, and reapt
the whirlwind of fierceness and cruelty one upon another; learn ye at last to
sow besides all waters, or people, and so send forth your affections like the
feet of the Ox for labor, and the Ass for bearing burdens; learn, oh
diligently learn to preach the everlasting Gospel to all Nations, in fewer
words and better works of universal love, and brotherly kindness, then the mere
hireling could ever practice.

It Is but a little, yea very little while, and he that shall come will come and
will not tarry, who has already broken down the partition wall between God and
man, between man and man, between Jew and Gentile, and has by his own precious
blood, made of one blood all Nations, who are his offspring, before the
whotish spirit of this world claims them, and a division of them, as the false
Mother did of the child unto Solomon: behold a greater than Solomon, has
bounded all habitations, to the end that none might invade or violate others,
or cover the enlargement of their own dominion: The earth is the Lord's not
ours, but as we are his, and being so, all things are ours, and become subject
to us, without force or striving.

When we dwell in love, we dwell in God, for God is love, that is his white Name
and pure Nature, whereby we are to know him, as also to be known of him, and
each to other, whether among brethren or strangers, for this being in the
heart, strife of tongues, and division of language will abate quickly.

This is that which makes most desirable, not the upper but the lower seat,
whether at the feast of fat things, which Christ makes, or in the Synagogue
which consists not of Satan's followers, who are the outward Jews only, but
inward ones, circumcised in heart, seeking their praise not of men but God, who
sees in secret, but rewards openly, but does first train up his sons and
daughters in the form of servants, before he makes them Lords of all.

The greatest favorites to the King of kings, subject their inward man to him
only, but their outward to every one that treads upon and bruises it, by which
suffering and no otherwise, they come to reign, in this manner, by conviction,
taking them captive whose captives they were: As their Captain leads, so do
they follow, under his skirt and banner displayed, the motto whereof, as it was
written in his blood, so are they content it should be in their own, viz. Love
your Enemies.

Oh what pen can write, or tongue express the transcendent joy, the surpassing
glory of such conquests, that are begun in self-hatred, and conclude in
universal love to the whole Creation of God! in which kind of ascent we gain,
as by descent into the lust we lost the true dominion; and as the true
knowledge failed in the one, and the false or deceitful spread it self in stead
thereof, as a painted face or covering over all flesh; so in the other, will
all false vails vanish or wear away, and the true real knowledge of the glory
of the Lord, cover the earth as the waters cover the sea: yea, new Names will
be given to all things when they become new, and their natures intuitively
known by this redemption, after their long burial and obscurity in or by the
bondage of corruption.

What strength, power, or wisdom is of value, that springs not to a new Life,
or appearance by death of the old? and that which does, what can master it?
being too strong for death, it prevails against the very gates of hell: and
who would not love death for the resurrections sake to a new life, wherein the
clog of flesh and blood that can never enter, much less inherit the kingdom
that consists in righteousness, peace and joy, is wholly put off, whereby the
soul becomes clothed upon with a new spiritual house from above, that is not
too strait, but large enough for entertainment, (and that not for a night as a
wayfaring-man, but even perpetual) to the King of Glory.

Let us therefore bid farewell to the old house of clay and all its sensual
supporters; the fools Paradise of full barns, and earthly plenty, must never
bend the mind to any longer lingrings or delays in this Sodomitical old world;
the bread of a Fathers house is now a loud call from husky vanities, the
continued diversion whereof cannot but be very burdensome to any soul that has
fed at wisdoms table, and tasted her mingled wine of the kingdom, that glads
the heart both of God and man.

An End is now proclaimed of all perfection under the Sun, and nothing is now
of value but that Commandment, and keeping it, which is exceeding broad; of no
less breadth than between Heaven and Earth; for it is the seed of Jacob's Ladder
that reaches both, and not only gives light, but strength also in the
angelical life, to ascend by Faith, and descend by Love even at pleasure.

This New Commandment of Love is the still voice of the great Shepherd, whose
sheep hear him, and know it from the loud voice of a stranger, and by following
him that loves them, they cannot only go in, but out also, and find pasture.
They know their time to retire, as also to go forth, and in both, they desire
to honor, serve, and please him, not themselves, for it is their meat and drink
to do his will, but not their own.

O ye true self-denying, crucified, and (in spirit) already risen Christians,
bear with the fond expressions of a Brother, whose bonds are grown easy with
wearing, who has had his midnight sighs and songs, in some hope that the fear
of death and hell are conquered by an acquaintance with that love which can
visit both without danger, even in that life, which can abide devouring fire,
and dwell with everlasting burnings.

Where is it that he would not go to meet the true fraternity folded up
together in the unity of the spirit, even the bond of lasting peace and love,
married or joined to Christ their head and husband, who is Lord of all, whether
male or female, bond or free? yea thrice happy and worthy are all ye to be
sought out, who in pure chastity have kept the bed undefiled during the night
of apostasy, wherein the adulterers and adulteresses of this world, either by
frowns or flatteries have too much prevailed to seduce or affright the unstable.

What should hinder harmony of spirits, where a fellowship in sufferings is
freely owned, even with strong and weak for his sake whose divine love makes us
debtors to the wise and unwise, and as ready to share the penny to him that
comes in at the eleventh or last hour, as that came at the first of the Lamb's
warfare; this not being the day of vain-glorying, or self-arrogance, to any
that have led or born the brunt either in doing or suffering, since the pride
of the one is as much accursed as of the other; nay, if any glorying be at all,
let it be in the Cross, whereby the world, and all its honor or esteem is
crucified to us, and we to it; but if any will be greatest, let him be the
minister; or he that would be accounted chief, for any hazard, travel, or
hardship, performed or undergone without fainting or reluctance, let him be the
servant of all; desire of Lordship or Dominion, is as little comely in the
Jewish as in the Gentile world; and as its exercise is uneasy to be born by
Saints from Sinners, so no less by Sinners from Saints, but least of all by
Saints over each other, unless it be in that abiding Love, that refuses to rule
but in form of a fervant, and even hides it self with Christ in God from a
worldly kingdom.

The true Nobility by heavenly birth and breeding in Christ's School of
long-suffering and fiery trials, appears most by stooping low, not climbing on
high, which is the property of the Thief that would be robbing both God and man
of their due: for, as Love only that can bear subjection is most fit to reign,
so does it show it self by descending first, yea, below it self, into that Life
which must period and conclude, before it ascends where it was, or higher than
at first. But why need words to multiply? though the Lord has been forsaken
and his holy Mountain (where is no dividing or destroying) forgotten by some
that prepare a Table for this or that Troop, and furnish the drink offering to
that number; yet behold they are now newborn, that could freely traverse the
world, to seek unity with Indians, Barbarians, Turks, Jews (so called) and
Papists as well as Protestants of all sorts and sizes.

Unity, I say, in Spirit, not of this world, or the god thereof, even the false
deceiver (that maintains his wicked Principality in the hearts of men by his
engine of the selfish nature) but of the true holy One, that tastes death in
every man, as well as for him, and yet sees no corruption; whose light shines
in the very darkest of mankind, though they comprehend it not; but when that
Light, which is the same also of them that love and live in it, shines by good
works, as it ought, before mere men, that as yet remain in darkness, then they
may be induced to glorify the heavenly Father of Spirits, and Lights of all
degrees or measures, as well that rule by night as by day, or of seven days
together gathered into the glory of one.

It Is love, even love universal that has imbreathed, and its beauty inamoured
the souls of some that are but few of many, whereby they do as it were burn
with holy desires to live in union with all mankind, yea with the whole
Creation, and not an Ox or an Ass, or any other Creature, that groans and
travels together in pain till now, but as it waits for, so it rejoices in, this
glorious liberty of the sons of God, who will ere long be better known among
the sons of men than heretofore, even by going forth, and growing up as Calves
of the stall, not to be marked out for slaughter as they have been, but by
treading down the wicked things and persons like ashes under the soales of
their feet, when the Lord shall by fire and his spiritual sword plead with all
flesh, and the slain of the Lord, rather then of his People, in whom he shall
be admired, will be very many; because now the weapons of the Saints warfare
will appear daily not carnal, but more and more spiritual, inabling them to
single out and encounter those spiritual wickednesses in the high places of
their own hearts and others, thereby bringing down the mighty from their seats,
and exalting them that are of low degree; and all this without any destroying
in that holy mountain of God where they converse, which in this respect is
lifted up above all others, and will suddenly fill the whole earth.

O ye Victorious Army of the Lamb, who on white horses, as Emblems of Peace and
Love, and in linen white and clean, (which betokens the innocence and
righteousnesses of Saints) have followed him that is now gone forth conquering
and to conquer; glorious is and will be the triumph, by the death of the Cross,
over all created excellencies, as well as impure defilements, by abandoning the
adultrous spirit of this world: O ye that witness the conquest of desire to any
carnal pleasure, which tends but to stupifie the immortal soul of man, and
bring it into the sleeps or slumbers of eternal death; great is your wisdom in
determining to know nothing but Christ and him crucified, and in standing
always delivered up to death for Jesus sake, that the life of Christ might the
more be manifest in your mortal flesh; great is your power and authority in the
world, as you appear already risen with Christ, by seeking those things that
are above; as ye are living witnesses of the first Resurrection mystical, so
you tell the world that the literal is not far off: and therefore, what Prisons
or Inquisitions can longer hold you, what outward Chains can bind you that are
inwardly free? who is it that will harm you, that are followers of good, but
eschew the evil in every appearance?

O ye that have chosen the most solitary paths that an earthly pilgrimage could
yield, therein to meet your Beloved, whose love is better than wine, that does
but refresh and exhilerate for a season, and then the natural man that is
served, becomes as heavy as before 'twas tasted, but the pleasure of your love
and espousals with the Lamb knows no end, it grows in you, and you in it, with
such divine increases, till it swallows up words and thoughts, as those narrow
medium's which are far below, and too strait for the expression of that loving
life which is incapeable of any confinement, but enlarges it self freely in and
unto all that entertain it.

You that have conquered the great and last enemy, and that by yielding daily
to it; what other enemies, but either are or will be at peace with you? because
you fear not them, but love and fear him that commands all hearts and hands;
yea, the very stones of the street, and beasts of the field will be in league
with you, not to offend but defend you; though because your munition of rocks,
and wall of fire is never wanting, all other help from without is wholly
needless, and such as offer it, do rather express their own love than your
desire of any guard or regard, but what always comes from heaven before you
call or ask it.

Your Wisdom is from above; What Serpent can beguile you? you are redeemed from
the Power of all things below; What Scorpion or deadly Poison can hurt you? ye
are past the Fear of Pain, no Tyrant can torment you; yea, you have past through
Sorrows, Sighs, and Tears beyond them, you are neither to be exalted or abased
by any thing which Flesh can give or take; your Life, Peace and Joy is endless,
because your Love is stronger than Death.

Who will not bend or yield to you, and take hold of your skirts, O ye inward
Jews, circumcised in heart, and be called by your New-name? for all your Names
are given by Him, whose Name is One, that no man knows but he that has it;
Your Language one, and not divided; Your Church but one, and not rent in
Schisms, Sects or Divisions; And therefore not Carnal, but Spiritual, unknown,
invisible to the World, but well known to Christ your Head, and one another.

O ye that admit no Buyers or Sellers in your inner Man, the Lord's Temple, but
are freed from Cares and Cumbers of this World, having sold all your
Possessions personal, to gain the real; and therefore have not spent your Money
for that which is not Bread, and does not satisfy, but laid it all down at the
great Apostles feet, with a free willing mind, to quit all single selfish
property that is from beneath, for that universal equal Liberty that is from
above; and as well to distribute or communicate your Wealth of good Works to an
Enemy or poor Stranger, as unto a Friend or Brother: What man or sort of men
under the Sun, when they see you walk by this Principle, but will desire your
ruling with, if not over them? You are the Governors of Judah that rule with
God, because God rules in you, and always checks the entrance of any other,
that is strange or foreign, to his All-pure impartial Spirit; you that have
learned of Shiloh the prosperer, to heal Breaches, and restore Paths to dwell
in; What People, Nation or Language will not ask your Help to new lay their
Foundations, renew their Landmarks, to re-build the wast Places, and
Desolations of many Generations?

All Government in things spiritual you yield to Christ only in things
temporal, to Him and the Nations, whereof he is as well King as of Saints; yea,
the Heathen are his Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth are his
Possession. You are so far from that degenerous practice of Plotting either by
fraud or force, against the Life of Prince or Peasant, that you follow his
steps that saves the Life both of man and Beast; yea, abhorring the very
Thoughts of any Contrivance, to impose the most apparent Good against, or
without Consent of such, for whom it is pretended; and because you are already
free in Christ's Freedom, you choose to dye rather than be imposed upon by your
own Consent, to derogate from Him who has made you free indeed. In this Spirit
you stand always armed with the Armor of Light and Righteousness for all
essays, whether to do what is lawful, or suffer what the Captain of your
Salvation determins to be expedient for your nearer Fellowship with him: You
are linked fast together in a holy Band of Union, which is inward
Brotherly-love, rather than any outward Confederacies, and by being continually
in the pure Simplicity, and keeping a good Conscience toward God and all men,
you cannot but carry all things of Satan's Work down before you, not so much by
force as by conviction, breaking in pieces all Leagues that are made with Death
or Hell, and such as would maintain them; refusing Peace while and wheresoever
the Whoredoms and Witchcrafts of the well or ill-favored Harlot remain, but
seeking it with all men, even of all degrees, High and Low, Rich and Poor; for
ye deny Leagues of Amity with no Person or Nation, that will admit the King of
Peace to reign in or over them, although his Titles, (Authority and Power)
given him by the Father, and his Name above other Names, be not in that manner
or Scripture Language known, as to your selves.

You know who it is that has made you to differ From other men; and therefore
for his sake only (and never else) you differ With them: but because God in
Christ is already reconciled to the world, your great Work is to reconcile the
world to God, and as you find that Difference ended, you let fall all others;
yea, rather than you can strive or contend, that are the Lord's Servants, you
serve them that call you Masters, not desiring so much to rule with, or over
Princes, as to sub-serve the meanest of their Subjects; for you count it no
honor to see heads bare, or knees bowed to you, but to go about doing good,
and yet obscuring your selves from them to whom you are as Benefactors,
treading his steps that did so, and who long since rejoiced in the habitable
Parts of God's Earth, whose delights were with the sons of men; And therefore
while many that talk and pretend much of common good, but do indeed seek their
own more than the things of Jesus Christ, you do even naturally care for the
State of others, and employ your selves without hope of any Reward, but in the
Kingdom of God, to heal the Sick, relieve the Poor, end Quarrels or
Contentions, make Enemies Friends, and convert Souls to him, that has offered
himself as a Ransom for, and a Savior unto all, and yet came to call not the
Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance.

O ye living Witnesses of Christ's Kingdom, and Instruments in his hand to
reduce the Kingdoms of this World in quiet free Subjection to him, not by the
Battle or confused Noise of the Warrior, and Garments roul'd in Blood, but by
such kind of burnings and fiery Trials, as will neither mix and confound, or
consume the precious with the vile, but only separate each from other, and
leave both to him that judges righteously: What can hinder you from taking the
Kingdom? for unto you Saints of the Most High God, is it given, and greatness
of the Dominion under the whole Heaven; take it within and cover your selves,
and all without will quickly appear given unto you; take it within by force
against your selves, and all without shall be given you by consent; for when
you are not your own, all is yours, because you are Christ's, and Christ is
God's.

Behold, our King of kings comes lowly, he that has been long under, must now
reign over all; and who will not meet Him with a Palm Branch, and cry Hosanna
to the Highest: He that was dead does now begin to appear risen in his meek
lamb-like holy Ones, and shall die no more, but be for ever admired in them,
because they have believed on Him, whose Faith will now appear not Fancy or
Notion, but the clear Evidence of things not seen, by such as say they see more
than others; the Mystery of God that has been declared to his Servants and
Prophets will be revealed suddenly, because well nigh finished, and the seventh
Angel is about to sound his Trumpet; yea, the Vision that has been long waited
for, will tarry no longer, but appear plain upon the fleshly Tables of all pure
hearts, and they that run so as to obtain, may read it.

The high way of the upright to depart from evil, will now be free from the
prevaling Power of the great Robber, and the peculiar way of holiness so well
known, and cleared from Stumbling Blocks of Babels Merchants laying therein,
that the poorest Traveller of Wayfaring-man, though a Fool for Christ's sake,
yet shall not err therein; because the Anointing that instructs him in all
things, is his inward Teacher, which being the Truth and no lie, and so
understood as well as an obedience yielded thereunto, his Bread is sure, his
Waters cannot fail though his outward Teachers be removed to corners.

The crooked Ways also of all humane converse in general shall be made
straight, and the ruff Places of learning or teaching Knowledge, of any kind in
particular, shall be made plain; for the mear Hireling and Deceiver must be
excluded from bearing rule in all Studies, Arts, or Sciences, as well as vulgar
Trades or Callings, by the coming of Elias, who is already born, that will
prepare the Way of the Lord in all things and persons, so as Uprightness,
Honesty, and that kind of Self-denying-Love, or Charity that seeks not its own
in any thing, but the common Good of others must take place among the Sons of
men, whose Dealings each with other are to be regulated by the Lord's Standard,
and Balance of the Sanctuary; for out of Zion shall the Law go forth, and the
Word of the Lord which will call all Nations from Jerusalem.

The Pen or Tongue of Men and Angels cannot declare the Glory of the
Restitution of all things, to their first Innocence and Purity; muchless of
that new Creation which will follow it, when the old is subjected by Fire to
him; that as he was the first Maker of all in the Beginning, so is the
New-maker of all in the End, for He is the same yesterday, to day and for ever;
but before that passes away which is not perpetual or abidiag, his Sovereign
Power will appear in saving it to the uttermost, whereof it is capable; and
thereby let the more numerous part of Mankind know something of an earthly
happiness, that have refused the heavenly, though they have been called to the
latter, as well as have lost (though possessed of) the former; and likewise cause
those few to inherit Incorruption, who being chosen thereunto (in him that saw
no corruption) have according to their good deeds done in the body, desired
their corruptible part to put it on, and their mortality to be swallowed up of
immortal Life, rather than (in doing evil) of eternal Death.

An earthly (I say or temporal) happiness that is real, not that only seems so,
by letting loose the selfish nature to feed upon any thing forbidden that
perishes, but by bridling it, and so preserving mankind in that abstinence and
forbearance, which may prepare them to sustain that fiery trial which the
Cherubims and flaming sword, that is previous to the enduring supplies and
substance that never fail, from the Tree of Life, which Christ is to every one
that waits upon, and believes in him.

For the time is at hand when open iniquity shall stop her mouth, and
wickedness have no longer place upon the house top, but be driven from corner
to corner, and from one Nation to another, till at last it find no room in the
world. But justice, equity, righteousness, and temperance shall spread it self
among all people, as that common salvation of all men, which, though now the
great multitudes that live more like beasts than men, seem to render as a thing
impossible, yet those redeemed ones from the earth and among men, in whose
mouths is found no guile, that witness a life of faith, above (though not
contrary to) that of reason and morality in the best of mere men, do already
see it more than probable.

The knowledge of the Lord's glory covering the earth as waters cover the sea,
leaves no room for ignorance on the one hand, or for a false vain appearance of
knowledge or glory on the other; but when the fear of the Lord shall be
acknowledged as the beginning of wisdom by all that desire it, not for their
own sake, but of Christ in whom the treasure thereof is hidden, as well as for
the good of their neighbor; then will men understand, that Wisdom dwells with
Prudence, and finds out the knowledge of witty inventions, which are to be
subject and subservient to his ends only, that freely teaches the plowman,
and instructs him to discretion, both to sow and reap, as well as to thresh and
bruise the bread-corn: yea the mysteries of both Kingdoms, even of grace and
nature, shall disclose themselves, that have hither to been locked up and
hidden from the self-seekers of both or either; such mysteries as will in a
manner astonish the world, and make poor brainsick mortals that have been long
captive to vain traditions and false methods of knowledge of many kinds, to be
like them that dream, when they shall after much wandering be returned to some
clearer prospects of what they labor after, than the wise and prudent could
ever attain, who for building of Babels Fabrics in the Antichristian world,
have hitherto had pre-eminence.

But time would fail to tell what is now in the Womb of Providence, and of that
Nation which shall be born in a day, ready to come forth and be sown among the
people in all parts of the world, where they now ly scattered under various
trials, which tend but to wash and whiten the garments of their outward
conversation, whereby they may be better known, as well as by their inward
principle of life, in the blood of the Lamb, to the end that by the honor of
his livery, and marks of dying or mortification in their bodies, and Christ
being risen in their spirits, they may be also better trusted by those that
have hitherto esteemed them deceivers of men, while they have been true to him,
and walked as he walked, who was in the world without guile, and yet reported
to have had a Devil.

Oh let not my Lord Esau be longer angry with the younger brother, that has
supplanted him both of birthright and blessing, since thereby he does but
wrong his own soul: For Saviors must now come upon mount Zion to judge the
mount of Esau, but the Kingdom shall be the Lord's.

Even the Kingdom that is everlasting, to which all others must give place, and
that speedily, for the Lord is nigh who has his fan in his hand, having
determined to sift the nations with a seive of vanity, and to skreen the
People, or separate the chafe from his true seed; yea it shall come to pass,
that in all the land says the Lord, two parts therein shall be cut off and
dye, but the third part shall be left therein. And I will bring the third part
through the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them
as gold is tried: they shall call on my Name, and I will hear them, I will say,
it is my People, and they shall say, the Lord is my God.

This word of Prophecy is sure, and will now be sooner understood than in
former ages, because its fulfilling and accomplishment in all Nations, but
especially in England, as the first fruits of righteousness to God, and pattern
to others, seems very near at hand.

All which is witnessed by a Prisoner of hope, that is learning of his heavenly
Master in every state to be content: and therefore to lose his old
acquaintance, kindred, country, name and nature, in suffering travels, by
seeking all new, to the end he may be found no more in lustful anger, but in
love without dissimulation, to the worst of enemies as well as the best of
friends, and so to blunt the Sword of wrathful Ministers, not by shunning or
resisting, but in patient meekness quietly yielding thereunto, that either in
life or death as the Lord shall choose, he may by faith get victory over
himself and the world.

Remaining still a Servant of Christ Jesus, and a hearty well-willer to his
whole Family, new-named of him in the earthly as well as in the heavenly
Nature. THE END.

