PERSECUTION FOR CONSCIENCE CONDEMNED, By the Light of Nature. Law of God.
Evidence of our own Principles.


Jam. 2.12. So speak you, and so do, as they that are judged by the Law of
Liberty, for they shall be judged without Mercy, that have showed no Mercy.

LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis, at Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey's-Head near
Fleet-bridge. MDCLXXXIII.

PERSECUTION FOR CONSCIENCE, etc.
HAving met lately with a Book Entitled (Compulsion of Conscience Condemned)
so much stuffed with Digressions, which gives an Umbrage to the Scope of the
Matter, and renders it tedious to the Reader, moved me to set down these
sentiments in short, for the better Proof of the argument upon so material a
Subject, not wronging the Original, nor reflecting upon any particular
persuasion, but for the the general good of all, Which is as follows.

Since we have so happily shaken of that intolerable Yoke of Popish
Infallibility (which neither we nor our forefathers were able to bear) it is
become to us not only Tyrannical, but Absurd, to compel others to a way, that
our selves confess, may possibly be erroneous.

If any opinion be probably true, persecution in that case is certainly
unlawful, because otherwise both sides, for both are probable, if one be, might
justifiably persecute one another, to the utter destruction of all Society.

We see one Parliament repeals those Articles of Faith, which a former Enacted,
that form of Worship which the Laws had introduced in after times was generally
exploded, and since that a Reformation Sealed with so solemn a Covenant, and
carried on with so furious a zeal, was soon discovered to better lights to be
merely human, and therefore deservedly laid aside, how preposterous is it then
to constrain a soul not only to forsake his conscience, which may be truth, but
drive him contrary to his own heart, to a way that may be error.

Since the Word of God is the sole Rule of Faith, and no human Authority so
highly empowered, as to bind up our assents to whatsoever Interpretation it
shall please to propose: It clearly follows, that as all the Children of God
have equal Interest in the Testament of their Father; so no one amongst them
has any right to impose or force upon the Judgment of his Brother, one holds
Baptism of Children to be necessary; another esteems it unlawful; a third denis
both these Opinions, admitting well that it may, but not that it must be done:
They confer Texts, look into Original Tongues, pray incessantly to God, and
profess solemnly the sincerity of their intention; yet after all their
dilligences and Devotions, steadfastly remain in their former persuasion; truly
for my part he that should advise Persecution in such a Case (unless his Fire
brought Light too with it to demonstrate the Truth) would scarce satisfy my
suspicion, that his Coals were fetched from the Infernal Pit.

If we reflect upon the Difficulties that encounter us in the way to truth, for
strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Path, and withal consider the shortness
of our sight, for here we see but in part, and understand but in part: There
will appear more reason to endeavor the mutual Assistance and support, than
malicious ruin and destruction one of another.

However since all have neither equal depth of Natural Judgment, nor the same
measure of supernatural Illumination, but the Spirit blows how and where it
pleases, we ought not to attempt so high a presumption, as to despise or
persecute our Brother for his innocent and blameless mistakes, lest we be found
to fight against God, who is the free Disposer of his Gifts; we know the way of
man is not in himself, Jer. 10.23. but his steps are ruled by the Lord, Prove.
20.24. Therefore certainly did we bear a due respect to God, we would be
content to wait his Leisure, who have engaged himself by his Apostle, Phil.
3.15. If any man be otherwise minded, God shall in time reveal even this unto
him; Let us therefore entertain such an one, who proceeds in the simplicity of
his heart with Milk, till he grow stronger to digest strong Meat.

All Compulsion upon the Conscience returns us flatly to our old Slavery under
the Prelates, nay more to the implicit Faith of the Papists, with this only
difference, that we are worse than either, because our Consciences accuse us of
doing that which we condemn in others; for whatsoever I am convinced of,
proceeds from as great a Tyranny as the High Commission and is as blind an
Assent, as can be matched in the grossest Popery, and dare we think that doing
the same things we judge in others, we shall escape the Judgment of God, Romans
2.3.

Force is punishment and consequently not just, unless the offense be
voluntary; but he that believes according to the Evidence of his own reason, is
necessitated to that belief, and to compel him against it, were to drive him
to renounce the most essential part of Man, his Reason? Why should we be
commanded to try the Spirits, 1 John 4.1. To prove all Things, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
If there be not a Faculty in the Soul to judge for her self, why are we
enjoined to hold fast that which we find to be best, if after our most serious
and deliberate Election we shall be whipped out of our Conscience by penalties;
to what purpose do we preach poor Souls into just so much Liberty of Scripture
as may beget their Tortures, and not permit them to rest, where they find
satisfaction either prohibit to search at all, or leave us sensible of some
benefit by teaching to believe what appears untrue, seems to me impossible, to
profess what we believe untrue, I am sure is damnable?

As it is certain, whosoever swerves from the Dictate of his Conscience commits
a grievous Sin, Romans 14. so without question they that endeavor by force or
artifice to draw any Man to profess or act contrary to what his Soul believes
are as deeply guilty of the same crime: When you wound the weak Consciences of
your Brethren you sin against Christ, 1 Cor. 8.12. how dangerously then do they
expose themselves to the just Indignation of God who by Oaths, Imprisonments,
Forfeitures, etc. both drive others and fall themselves into eternal perdition;
how desperately do they attempt to extinguish the Light of Nature, which
indispensably obliges all men to deal with others, as they would be dealt with
themselves, a Light placed by God in clear and candid Souls to shine and guide
them, but in the black ones to condemn and burn them: I shall close this
Discourse with the Advice of the Apostle, Romans 14.13. Let us therefore use our
judgment rather in this, that no man put a stumbling block before his Brother.

In this my second part I will set down unanswerable Texts of Scripture against
the ill practice of Coercency in Religion.
Nor are these so excellent and important Truths built only upon the firm
Foundation of solid Reason, but also upon the Infallible Authority of evident
Scripture, 2 Timothy 2.24. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle
unto all men, apt to teach forbearing, in Meekness instructing those that are
contrary minded, if God peradventure will give them repentance, to the
acknowledging of the Truth, that they may convert themselves out of the snare
of the Devil, who are taken Captive by him at his Will: And another Apostle
forbidding us to condemn one another, says Jam. 4.12. There is one Lawgiver,
who is able to save and to destroy, who art thou that judge another Servant,
to his own Master he stands or falls, yea he shall be holden up; for God is
able to make him stand, one Man esteems one day above another, another
esteems every day alike; Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind,
have thou Faith, have it to thy felf before God, happy is he that condemns
not himself in that which he allows, that is, whose Conscience inwardly
accuses not his outward Profession: The same most zealous of the Gospel
returns so condescending and moderate an Answer to a Case of a far harder sound
than we undertake to maintain, that it sufficiently proves, he took his gentle
Pen from the soft wing of the Dove, 1 Cor. 7.12. If any Brother has a Wife
that believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with him, let him not put her
away, and the Woman that has a Husband that believes not, and he be pleased
to dwell with her, let her not leave him, but if the unbelieving depart, let
him depart, a Brother or a Sister is not in Bondage in such Cases, but God has
called us to peace, for what know thou O Wife, whether thou shall save thy
Husband, and what know thou O man, whether thou shall save thy Wife; as God
has distributed to every Man, as the Lord has called every one so let him
walk, and so Ordain I in all Churches: What can be said more efficaciously to
oblige Christians in charity and meekness to forbear one another, than so
express an Injunction of so great an Apostle, to live peaceably even with an
Infidel, and again, 2 Cor. 1.24. he denis that even the Apostles themselves
have any Sovereignty over the Conscience, but only Commissions to assist the
Conscientious, not that we have (says he to the Corinthians) Dominion over your
Faith, but are helpers of your Joy, therein exactly observing the Orders which
Christ gave to his Apostles, Go and Teach, not Compel, and if any one receive
you not shake off the Dust of your Feet, not trample upon them, as dust under
feet, Mat. 10 14. constant to which Doctrine of Meekness our Savior thus
instructs his Disciples, Mat. 23.9. Be not called Rabbi (that is Masters in
spiritual matters) for one is your Father, even Christ, and all you are
Brethren. To this belongs the patient forbearing the Tares, and letting them
grow together with the Wheat, till the time of Harvest, as also that admirable
president of mildness toward the Samaritans, who refused to receive even
Christ himself, whereupon the Disciples James and John would immediately
command fire from Heaven to consume them, as in the days of Elias, but our
merciful Lord rebuked their zeal, with this sweet and tender reply, you know
not what manner of Spirit you are of, The son of man is not come to destroy
men's lives, but to save them, Luke 9.54. which one example abundantly satisfies
all objections drawn from the practice of Elias, Jehu the Sons of Levi, etc. in
the old Testament for us, they had an express command from God to warrant their
zeal, we have an express Warrant from Christ to command us Meekness. If any one
shall shuffle in a suspicion, that this moderate temper was meant only for the
times of persecution, when the Christians had no temporal power, let him first
confess that those were the best and purest times, and then show a Warrant
dormant under our Saviors hand (that is in his Gospel) to commissionate his
Disciples, as soon as they should get the sword into their hands, to cut the
Throats of all dissobeyers and I submit, but if they can cite no such
Authority, let them freely acknowledge that Persecution for Conscience is an
unwarrantable Tyranny over the just Privileges and Liberty of a Christian.

As for the truth and power of Religion, it being a thing intrinsecal between
God and the Soul, and the matters of Faith in the Gospel being such as no
natural light does reach unto, we conceive there is no human power of Coertion
thereunto, nor to restrain men from believing what God suffers their judgments
to be persuaded off, for it is the Office of him who is the Lord of Conscience,
to lighten and change men's minds, when and how he pleases, Phil. 3 15. Let us
therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded, and if in any thing you be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal this unto you, by inciting another by like
forcible means, to Will and to Act against his conscience, and much more by
Imprisonment, Mults, Terrors or Threats, Romans 14.15, 20, 21. For this is to
make him destroy his Soul, Verse 20, 23. We may not disturb the peace of men's
Consciences, or make their hearts sad with our invectives, or Menacing them
causelessly with terrors, from the Lord. Ezekiel. 13.22. Because with lies ye have
made the hearts of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad, etc.

We would not have you assure to your selves, or attribute unto others, a power
to Lord it over men's Faith and Consciences, especially when men walk obediently
toward those that are in places of Rule and Authority, and live a Godly,
Sober, Honest peaceable and unblameable life. If men will do wickedly and
defend a liberty in Christ so to do, let them be liable to the sword of Justice
for so doing, but far be it from us, so much as by example, to draw a weak
Brother, a Saint, a Fellow Servant of the Lord, whom no Man can accuse, but for
his differing judgments, to do any thing against conscience, whereby he should
condemn himself, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 14. How much more ought Governors
to be tender and abstemious in the use of violent and coercive Means, to
precipitate men into such perilous and destructive courses, all authority is
given of God for men's welfare, and much more for the Preservation, and not the
Destruction of the soul.

By these considerations (I conceive) is clearly demonstrated, the freedom of a
Christian soul in her commerse for Heaven, which since the merciful bounty of
God, holds forth indifferently to all, the cruel covetousness of Man, ought not
to obstruct to any, surely it is the worst of Monopolies to lay impositions
upon the way of Paradise; Christ by his death removed the Angel, that chased
from thence our first Parents, and shall any of us take the flaming Sword into
our hands, to sheath it in the bowels of a poor Pilgrim, who with a sincere
heart travels to the same Country, only because he goes not in our Company: In
my Fathers house are many Mansions (says Christ) why may there not be as many
paths that lead to them, if they that have no Law shall be judged without the
Law, certainly they that unblameably mistake the Law shall be tried according
to those Expositions which appeared unto them, to be the meaning of the
Lawgiver (for the Sense is the Law, and not the Letter) especially having so
gracious a Judge, who has already declared by his Apostle, 2 Cor. 8.12. and if
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a Man has, and
not according to what a Man has not; wherefore let us not by a sudden
violence break into pieces the Consciences of our Brethren, but mildly thaw
them into a cordial and ingenuous Unity, that righteousness and peace may flow
together in the same Channel, and not as broken Ice dash one against another,
let us patiently expect, till the Lord be pleased to take off the Vail from
their hearts that are otherwise minded, and not by forcing their Judgments add
to their Vail of Ignorance a worser fort of Hypocrisy, it being now a common
experiment that generally, the Issue of compulsionary and forced Conformity
closes in this, to make some few counterfeit Protestants, and a great many real
Atheists, whence it is clearly concluded, that the only true means of winning
Souls to God, is the Gospell-like way of meekness and persuasion, and indeed it
may worthily be esteemed the prime Miracle of Christianity, that a person so
humble as our Savior appeared, without the assistance of Kings and Princes,
without the enchanting words of Man's Wisdom, without the affrighting threats of
Fines, Imprisonments and Deaths (though all these were absolutely subject to
his pleasure) should conquer Powers and Principalities, should outcharm the
Magic of Human Eloquence, and by the admirable Success of his Mildness,
condemn all those politic Religions, that confess their own craziness by using
cruelty to support them, whereas to reduce the disobedient only with the Spirit
of Gentleness and Admonition, or at most desertion, argues indeed a Divinity in
the Author and a purity in the Ordinance, and here we may fitly apply the words
of our Lord, John 14.2. If it had been otherwise, I would have told you, if the
means of preserving Religion had been by watering it with the blood of refusers
to embrace it, rather than of those that sought to propagate it, I would have
told you either by my example (all the world being in the power of my Deity) or
by my Doctrine, all justifiable proceedings concerning the Government of my
flock, being derived from the Warrant of my Word; thus we see our gracious
Lawmaker, faithful and constant to his own Principles, the Son of man came not
to destroy men's Lives, but to save them: Thus we see our own Duty to learn of
him, for he is meek and humble of heart, let us not therefore judge one another
any more, but use our Judgment rather in this, that no man put an occasion to
fall, or a stumbling block before his Brother, Romans 14.13. Let us always
remember the Advertisement which the beloved Disciple gives to all his Fellow
Servants of the Lord Christ, John 13 16. The Servant is not greater than his
Lord, if you know these things happy are you, if you do them.

These few unpolisht Lines, which I here present for Encouragement of
Tenderness, I desire may not be stretched to draw in a wild and an extravagant
Licentiousness, since they aim no farther than to hold up a Liberty to such
only as profess Christ, and walk before the Lord in the Integrity of their
heart, who by the following marks are easily discernible from all those that
for their blasphemies in Doctrines, and Debauchery in manners are worthily
excluded from the benefit of this Indulgence.

Supposing first as confessed by all understanding men, that Tenderness of
Conscience is not the same thing with Truth of Judgment (else there could be
but one only kind, because Truth is but one) but it signifies a proceeding
bonafide, without sinister respects or dissimulation, seeking before all things
to know God, and fearing above all things to offend him.

And secondly since in our Inquiry to whom belongs so honorable a Title, we
cannot pierce into the inward thoughts of men, we must give Sentence as they
appear to us, which rule in Cases of this quality is in it self sufficiently
certain, however it is the only means God has allowed for nature to guide her
resolutions in the judging of others.

The Signs then of tender Consciences are these; if they lead regular, virtuous
and peaceable Lives, if their Opinions be not justly accusable of self-interest
or Licentiousness, but rather require of them a prudent and religious severity
against the Inclinations of corrupted Nature, if their Judgments be steady, not
fanned to a new Sense with every breath of wind, if they continue in the same
persuasions at their death, which is no time for dissembling, at least we ought
to judge so, if they not only die in their Faith, but for it, not only give
away good part of their Estates charitably, but suffer all to be taken away
patiently, and all this for Christ's sake, or (to speak more closely) for that
which they believe to be his Will and Commandment, no higher Testimony of a
true and real Sincerity can possibly be given, or easily imagined, and
whosoever doubts after such Evidence (chiefly if many concur in the same way)
deserves to be condemned, as the most passionate, malicious and uncharitable
person in the World, for though one man may value his fancy above his Life or
estate, yet it is very near an absolute Impossibility, that many (especially if
they be discreet and rational in other Negotions) should agree to undo
themselves for a mere conceit, did they not seriously believe it more imports
them to keep their Faith, than lose their Fortunes.

By these Rules we may easily conclude the admission of those pious and
religious Persons, who were imprisoned and persecuted by the late Prelates, who
into the number of tender Consciences, as also those precious Servants of the
Lord, who by a voluntary banishment left their Friends and Country, to place
the Liberty of the Gospel amongst the savage Heathens of America.

How are we degenerated from the primitive Believers, who would rather have
given their own Lives, to persuade their Enemies to Piety, than sought to take
away the Lives of their Brethren, to force them to Hypocrisy.

Which have been occasioned by infringing the Liberty of Conscience, by violent
means to alter Conscientious men's Judgments, and their present persuasion,
which kind of severity I fear may at last find the Truth of Gods Threatening, if
you bite and devour one another take heed you be not consumed one of another,
Gal. 5.15. Wherefore it shall be my daily Prayer to our great and good God,
that he would graciously inspire the Governors of the Earth, his Servants, who
now sit at the helm to prevent those heavy Judgments upon themselves, and
seriously considering that both their Allegiance to reason, their Duty to God,
their Engagement to their own Principles, call so loudly upon them, that they
would fulfill now our Joy, and complete the good Work, by putting the tender
Conscioned and peaceable minded people of this Nation into a Condition of
perfect security for matters of Religion, which cannot be effected without a
general Act of Conscience-Indempnity, for all that profess the Gospel of Christ.

For encouragement of which Holy design, out of the bowels of Mercy, I have
endeavored in this short Discourse to demonstrate, That Persecution of
Conscience amongst Christians, is clearly repugnant to the Light of Nature, the
Law of God, and the Evidence of our own Principles.

FINIS.

