SAMARITANISM OR, A TREATISE OF Comprehending, Compounding, and Tolerating
SEVERAL RELIGIONS IN ONE CHURCH, DEMONSTRATING, The Equity and Necessity of the
Act, and Late Vote of Parliament against Non-conformists. From Reason, the
Ancient Church, and the Opinions, and Practice of Papists, and Puritans, now
Plotting, and Pleading for Toleration.

LONDON Printed for Robert Clavel, and are to be sold by Henry Broom, in Little
Britain and Westminster Hall.

Of Liberty of RELIGION.
CHAP I. A Preparative Enquiry into the Nature of Human Ecclesiastical
Societies, in general.
MAN being a Sociable Creature, according to the Observation of the
Philosopher, and Common Experience; That Human Societies ought to excel Herds
and flocks of Cattle, is most reasonable to conclude. For, a Multitude is one
thing, and a Society another; and differ as much as a Common, and a
Commonwealth. Yet, as such is the sagacity and subtilty of some Animals as that
witty Philosophers have had enough to do to distinguish the supreme acts of
some Beasts from the reasonable actions of Men; so have some acute Observers of
the nature and order of certain Animals in community, discovered so much
Decorum and perfection that they have entitled merely sensitive Creatures to
the dignity of Human Societies: and do espy a semblance of Monarchy in the
Regiment of Bees, and Popular Government in that of Ants. But the definition
which Bodin gives of a Commonwealth, Bodinus de Rep. lib. 1. init. Respublica
est Familiarum rerumque interipsas communium summa potestate ac ratione
moderate multitudo.
does sufficiently put a difference between them, which is this. A Commonwealth
is a multitude of Families and Common Matter administered by a Supreme Power and
Reason: For what ever we may judge, there is in some brutish Communities a
Supreme Command; and that is founded on Sense and natural Instinct: And in
Human Societies there is, and of necessity must be, a Supreme Authority founded
on Reason and Natural Instinct. For as Common Sense proceeds from Natural
Instinct given to Beasts; so Reason proceeds from, or is the Natural Instinct
in Man: The Supreme act in Man being termed Reason; and the highest in Beasts,
Sense. Though I confess the matter remains very difficult still, to distinguish
clearly the one from the other; not in a definition (for that is easy enough
to frame) but in the exercise of Acts, whether they belong to, or may be
comprehended in the definition of Reason or no? Let others strain their Wits to
that purpose; our present Subject calls us another way. And in the first place
to note freely the pretty, pitiful, and fine presumptions of diverse enquirers
into the grounds and occasions of Human Societies; which because, forsooth,
taken from Reason at first, some Men have imagined that Natural Instinct in Man
was not principal in the Constitution of Commonwealths. Some therefore have
wittily (at least as they suppose) said, That necessity was the cause why men
combined together in one: Necessity of heat drove diverse straggling Men to the
same fire; and meeting there, they took up several Discourses and Counsels for
their common Welfare. Others more seriously, if not more wisely, are of
opinion. That self-defence and preservation against common Adversaries impelled
many persons to associate together, and to elect some principal Defender of
their Persons, and Directer of their Affairs. But they consider not, nor give
any account how such Enemies to some, came first to conspire into such a
powerful Society, as to be able to offend others. Was this occasioned likewise
from fear of others? If so, I will demand perpetually, How came those others so
together? And at length it must of necessity be answered, From some other
cause, and that cause must be at length, Natural Reason, Justice, and Law;
whereby, according to Man, some were obliged to Subjection, as some had right
of Dominion. Now what manner of Dominion that was, I leave to be inquired into.

Yet withal I cannot but smile a little at the boldness and vain presumption of
such who passing over the most visible original of Government, and what de
facto it first was, (which certainly in all reason must needs be the most
natural way of making out the truth) do betake themselves to the uncertain
mazes and labyrinths of human imagination, which we find to be swayed and
bribed to argue and conclude according to Self-interest, and particular cases
of their own. Thus we read the Assertors of the German Empire to strain their
Reasons to prove the Constitution of that Government according to the famous
Golden Bull of Charles the Fourth, Emperor, to be most perfect, and natural.
But Experience shows us plainly, that nothing has divided, and consequently
weakened, more that once most potent and flourishing Nation, than those
Immunities and Laws have; and rendered the Supreme Power so uncertain and
obscure, that it is an hard matter to find where it is seated; or, if so to find
that to be a Monarchy, and not a Commonwealth, or at lest a Combination of
Monarchies and Commonwealths.

The like course has Contarenus taken in his description of the State of
Venice, (for that too must be held to be most natural) bending his Wits to draw
the Law and course of Nature to a conformity to his reason, and his reason to
the condition of that Commonwealth.

The same course has Bellarmine (and other, especially Jesuitical Authors of
the Church of Rome) followed in his Previous Controversies to his Disputations
of the Power, and Regiment of the Pope, contending hard, that the Government is
most Reasonable and Christian, which suits best with the Actual Power of the
Roman Bishop and Clergy. And some have proceeded to that degree of admiration
of that Form, that they have ventured to affirm, That Christ had not done
wisely, if he had not ordained and disposed matters just as they now stand
among them. And are not there to be found amongst us, who have delivered the
very same expressions in behalf of the Presbytery?

And this eying of instances rather than following the clue of his own most
rational Wit was that which caused the Philosopher Aristotle to be so
inconstant to himself in his Politics. For when he handled the case
abstractly, he judged excellently of the true nature of Government, and the
most natural Government. But then, having before his eyes what great offense he
must necessarily give to his Country of Greece, which abounded with several
Polities of a strange nature; he found it requisite to strain his Leather to
their Lasts. Especially considering, that if those Nations, who were for Wit
and Learning, the most eminent of all the World, should disrelish his Schemes
(as in all probability they would, as they disagreed from their plat-forms) it
might prove an incurable prejudice to his Works. For, as it is seen in
Religion, it happens in Civil Polities too, that the more it is with acuteness
and subtilty penetrated, and discussed, the more corrupt and degenerate it is
in the use and practice.

For that there is a Government of Divine appointment, as well in Secular as
Religious Societies, is not to be much doubted of; and that all in specie
cannot be such, is evident from the variety and contrariety of them: For the
voice of God is either that innate direction, and natural, and indeliberate
election and inclination to which Men by a tacit universal consent do tend,
and plainly is to one kind of Political Government only, and not indifferently
to any, as by instances may be given from all people, whose first Governors
were always Monarchs without exception. For that after a State has for a long
time been founded and selted, Men out of several regards and motives set their
Wits on work, and changed the same, not to that Form which really was best but
best pleased them, cannot prejudice the title it has to be Divine and Natural:
for as much as we see that nothing is so natural or indisputably divine, but it
may be, and has been altered, and thwarted by the bold and unquiet Wits of
Men; and no where are such alterations oftener to be found than where Wit and
Learning most flourish; for from an opinion these breed in men, are they
tempted to despise the simplicity, and direct path of Natural reason to seek
more fine and curious ways of administering the common Interest; Or, the voice
of God is that Scriptural word of God which gives neither precedent nor rule,
nor precept for above one Government in either of the Polities.

Some suppose to moderate and compound the matter by affirming, that Government
in general is of Divine Institution but God has left it to the liberty of Men
to make choice of one Species or kind of Government, according as it shall suit
best with the Genius and Humors of the people to be governed. But against this
I have more to object than may be proper for this occasion. I shall therefore
demand first, By what Rules of Reason, or Philosophy such Men proceed? for,
hitherto in other things it was never heard of that God should positively
create or ordain a thing in the Genus or Species, and so that the Individuum
under them should take its being and subsist; when as, what ever Being is in
the Genus or Kind is owing to the Particular subsisting by it self. For more
plainness: Can we say, that God first made a living Creature in general, and
from thence sprang Man and Beast? or an Horse, and Socrates? Did he not rather
first of all create this Man in particular, and so Human Nature had its
original specifical; and first create this Individual Beast, and so from thence
that nature of Animals take its denomination and being. And thus was it in the
Institution of Governments. God cannot rationally nor truly be said to make
Government in general, or ordain it, and not first institute some one
particular Government, from whence the like might be termed Divine, and the
Species it self such.

Consider we farther, how more than ridiculous it were that Divine Institution
should be of such immense extent and capacity, as that it were impossible for
the boldest and wildest wit of Man to invent such a form as should not be
divine? Which must of necessity follow, or the quite contrary, that no
Government is of divine appointment in specie; both which are equally and
utterly false and absurd. The former, in that it makes Divine Right like the
fabulous fiction of Poets concerning Victory between two Armies engaging,
hanging in the Air, and hovering over men's heads, until the main stroke be
struck, and Men have voted especially for one sort of Government, and then
forthwith down comes Divine Right amain, and lighting on it makes it
undoubtedly Divine. And to hold that no Government is of Divine Original, is to
destroy all Right of Rule; and, as some enemies to Mankind have with impudence
and stupidity (even while they seek nothing so much as to appear transcendent)
proportionably to reduce all kinds and actual possession of Empire to the base
principle of Beasts, strength and force; and his it is, as well in Justice as
Act, who can catch it. Such a Philosopher indeed as this (and, as Reason and
Religion now goes, such an one is no small fool amongst us) deserves to have
the edge of his acute wit turned against him, and to be disputed with, as Men
are wont to do with his fellow beasts destructive to Mankind, with a Kennel of
hounds, spears, and staffs.

But I return to demand further, Whether that Charter is extant, to whom it
properly and by divine intention pertains, that Men may chose what Government
they please? That which God would have is sufficiently made known unto us from
the nature and form of that which by his special Providence first, and only
appeared for hundreds of years in the World. Those which succeeded and excluded
the Primitive, were the effect of passions principally: But no sooner had Lust,
Interest, and Error caused men to introduce their own devices, but instantly
Nature and Scripture were drawn to assert and sustain them; as Bastards left in
distress and helpless, are put to honest Women to Nurse and bring up.

I know very well, and readily grant that all sorts of Governments have
somewhat Divine in them; but this they have not as several sorts, nor as such
Forms, but in respect of the matter they are concerned in, which principally is
that truly Divine Law, Justice; which as to the matter of it, may as really,
though not so regularly, be administered in one kind, as another.

But he that would faithfully and successively settle his judgment in the true
and genuine kind of Government, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, ought not to
proceed in that long, tedious, and most uncertain way of Men's minds and
Interests, of enquiring, which of all seems most reasonable, most equal, most
holy, and beneficial to the ends of all Rule; and conclude that to be so, which
seems to their understanding, to be blessed most plentifully with these; but
must impartially and sincerely enquire after the Fact immediately; which of all
these have the fairest and clearest proofs of being de facto institututed of
God. For, a quite contrary method may be observed in the Will and Laws of Men,
and of God: Man choseth and decrees a thing because it is good and laudable;
but on the contrary, because God wills and ordains a thing, therefore is it
good of necessity; according as Gerson has excellently observed, Deus non ideo
vult res ed extra fieri quia bonae sunt, Gerson de Consolatione Theologiae.
Pros. 2.
quemadmodum movetur humana voluntas ex objectione boni, vel very vel
apparentis. Est e contra potius, quod ideo res ad extra bonae sunt, quia Deus
vult eas tales esse: Ideoque si vellet eas vel non esse, vel aliter esse, id
quoque jam bonum esset, etc. Thus he. For instance, We all, or mostly agree,
that the Parts of Man's body are placed most aptly for use and service of the
whole, and most beautifully for ornament placed in the same. Yet supposing that
it had been the will of God to have set the Nose of Man behind him, his Eyes in
his Breast, his Ears on the Crown of his Head, and his Mouth on the Navel of his
Belly, without dispute this had been the most wise, beautiful, and useful
order. In like manner, had it seemed good to God to cast Civil and
Church Government into any other shape, form, or condition than actually he
has, it were not to be questioned but it would be most perfect and excellent.
From all which (ending this Chapter) I infer these Conclusions as certain and
pious:

First, That both Polities have a Government especially Divine.

Secondly, I conclude, That Government so Divine is not to be altered under
specious pretexts, and Human ratiocinations and presumptions offering
themselves, that another sort would serve the ends of Community better: For the
fault may be, and most commonly is, in the knottiness and cross-grainness of
the piece of Wood, and not in the Tool, or Artificer. And more reasonable it is
diverse times, the People should be changed, than their Laws or Government;
though the contrary is commonly seen, that when they offend in untractableness,
they cast off the accusation from themselves, by chastising the Laws,
controverting Titles, and quareling at the imperfections and inconveniences of
that Government they live under, as not good enough for them.

CHAP. II. A Second General Preparation to the determining the Question, by
removing vulgar mistakes concerning Tyranny, Antichristianism, Christian
Liberty, Extremes, and Moderation.
IT is too plainly seen, that words, which at first were instituted to serve
Man's understanding, and guide it into the knowledge of things, do command,
pervert, and hurry it into many mistakes and errors: Or perhaps, to speak more
properly, the vulgar use corrupting them causes this mischief. And hence it is
that an opprobrious name maliciously or ignorantly given, and commonly applied
is abundantly sufficient to captivate ordinary Minds into an evil opinion of
things undeservedly. Call therefore a Government Tyrannical, Antichristian,
Extreme, Immoderate, and against Christian Liberty; this with the Common sort,
proves such a Government ought not to be endured, though it be not all proved
that such terms properly belong to it, nor indeed such persons who are so
liberal of their ill language know well what they say, or whereof they affirm.
Let us endeavor then to come very briefly to a true notion of some of them.

Concerning Tyranny then, a grand and current mistake there is that it is
properly a Species or kind of Government; which is true indeed if it be taken
in the Ancientest, not Modern sense, for the same with Monarchy, or the
Government of One. And thus in truth diverse have of late taken it, supposing
that Monarchy and Tyranny are the same; and that the Rule of One absolutely
must of necessity be Tyranny, which is altogether as true as the other extreme
they fall into, viz. That all Government by many is a Government of Liberty.
Aristotle when he said, That Monarchy easily degenerates into Tyranny, did not
say or mean that it was so in its own nature: Neither, did he say Polycratie
did not, nor could fall into the same. For he that will be at the small pains
to weigh the matter sincerely, shall easily perceive that Tyranny is no
Government of it self, but the corruption of Government. And Liberty is no more
essential to Aristocracie, or such like Government, Constituted of many Rulers,
than to Monarchy; and that dreadful thing, called Arbitrary Power, is
altogether as incident to the Rule of Many; as when One alone has the Supreme
Power: Nay, there must of necessity be an Arbitrary Power, and Actually is, in
all Commonwealths, Anarchie of mixed Monarchy.
as has been Irrefragably Demonstrated by others already, who are not of the
Clergy, who are often Censured, for driving matters of this nature too high.
For it is impossible any Commonwealth should subsist, or continue without a
Supreme Absolute Power; and where ever this is, there is that we call Arbitrary
Power. Many People indeed, observing the evils of this, have so Framed their
Government, and Constituted Governors as to prevent the same; and have almost
infinitely multiplied Governors, and Inspectors over Governors, and Check over
Check, but could never find success answerable; the last Remedy of all
therefore against Courts, Princes, and Greatest Councills, have been to entitle
the People in Gross, to take account of such Irregularities: but such a remedy,
Populum autem non omnem coetum multitadinis, sed coetum juris consensu and
utilitatis communione sociatum esse determinat. Scipio. Ciceronianus apud
Augustinum de Civitate Dei. Lib. 2. cap. 21.
as it could never so much as take place, for as much as never did, or can the
People concur Universally to such Ends but the Major, or more Active, and
busy part carried the name of all, which commonly is a piece of as great
injustice, and injury, as any they would cure by such jealous Vigilance: and if
it could be done, Were not this as Arbitrary a Proceeding, as the very First of
all?

There is therefore, and must be in all Government an Absolute, and Arbitrary
Power. Now, that, when this Supremest Power is vested in One, it must presently
be called a Tyranny; when in many, Liberty, is a miserable cheat of the
Common People by ambitious, and discontented persons, seeking the advancement
of themselves, by the Oppression of others. For, as the Apostle in another Case
has it; Thou art inexcusable, O man, who so ever thou art that judge, for
wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge,
do the same things. So that if it be unjust for One who is Supreme, to do
such a thing toward such as are Subject to him, it is unjust for Many so to
do; and if it be Tyrannical for Him, it is Tyrannical in Many, even in a
Senate: For, what is Tyranny, but an excessive use, or exercise of Power,
contrary to the Law of Reason, and Justice: So that Tyranny, does not consist
in the abundance of Power, but in the abuse: as other Moral Vices, do not
consist in full power to offend, but in the ill use of such Power. For, as
Drunkenness consists not in having plenty of Wine, nor Gluttony in having
choice and command of rich and various Fare (and so in other things); but in
taking too liberally, and inordinately of them: So Tyranny is not the
uncontrollableness of Power in One Person or more, but the unreasonable and
immoderate use according to Power. For he indeed is a Tyrant that thus carries
himself, and that Council is Tyrannical, yea, that People is Tyrannical, which
contrary to the Law of Reason Invadeth, and Mutilateth the Rights of Dominion
belonging to their Governors, which may be their Property as justly, and
reasonably, as any Goods, or Possessions belonging to Subjects, may be so
termed, in respect of them. A thing, which if it were impartially, and
conscionably considered, methinks People would be more modest, than to think
all those Privileges, and Liberties (they can, by flattery, craft, or taking
advantage of necessities into which their Governors may be brought, gain to
themselves) lawful spoil; or indeed, though at first sight they may appear so,
profitable for themselves: For suppose we, that a people studious of Liberty,
should not only procure a Law that they should be free from all contributions
to common good but what voluntarily they should please to give; August. Devit.
Dei. Lib. 2. ca. 21.

(...). Plutarch. De sera Numinis. and Psalm. 94.20.


but likewise, by such a Law, that they should never be compelled (which we
vulgarly, and corruptly call, Pressed) to the Wars; this surely would seem a
glorious Liberty, and benefit to the common sort, but really would in short
time prove the ruin of the whole. There is such an Immunity claimed by the
Commons of the Confederate Netherlands, which has endangered; and certainly,
had not the Governors found out some pretty tricks to elude it, had
unavoidably brought those Commonwealths to nothing. St. Austin in his Book of
the City of God, tells us, That Scipio in Tullie calls an unjust King a Tyrant;
and unjust Nobles, Governing, a Faction; and speaking of the excess of Popular
Government, to that, says he, Nomen non reperit, nisi ut etiam and ipsum
Tyrannum vocaret, i.e. He could find no name for them, but Tyrants also:
Neither have such just excuse, because perhaps they have a Law on their side.
For the Law it self, may have been extorted; and, if freely Enacted, yet unjust
in it self, as that we last mentioned; and that Law of which the Psalmist
speaks, framing mischief; and that Law, which many vehemently plead for in
Church Discipline, as that wherein consists (as they fondly, and falsely
imagine, or perhaps would seem to believe rather) Christian Liberty, That every
man should do as he pleases, in things so Indifferent that they are not under
any Precept or Prohibition of Gods Word: For this would inevitably produce
differences; and differences, in such inconsiderable matters, will infallibly
proceed to Animosities and Divisions in greater matters, and there terminate in
the overthrow of all Discipline, or Government: I say, All Discipline. Now
there is a Discipline which Mr. Beza held to be a third Essential part of a
true Church, Cartwright in Second Reply p. 53.

Id. First Reply. pa. 14.


if we believe Mr. Cartwright, relating his opinion or his own: Which is, That
matters of Discipline, and kind of Government, are not to be distinguished from
matters necessary to Salvation and Faith: So that however they seem to be of
this destructive Opinion (and indeed, they often and plainly affirm so much)
yet they be no longer of it, than till such time as the Power be in their own
hands: just as the Miller stops the course of the Waters, not that he is
absolutely against Rivers, what ever he may seem to be, but till he shall find
it necessary for his own Grist. Now to return to the Application of what we
have said, concerning Tyranny, which our Church Government is commonly, and
boldly charged with by Sectaries, and particularly, in their Synodical Letters
to Transmarine Churches; They may learn at Length, that no Government in its
Nature is Tyrannical, but the evil Administration of any Government makes any
so, though Democratical. For it is not necessary, that the Persian, Turkish, or
Tararian Government should be Tyrannical, more than That of Venice, or of the
United Provinces. For these have as Absolute and Arbitrary Dominion as they.
It Is true, these have more Moderate and Favorable Laws of Ruling than They:
But who shall constrain them to observe them, if they please to break them? The
People? So may the People bring those Barbarous Kings to more equal dealing, if
they can, as well as the other. If therefore Many in Authority, whether Civil
or Ecclesiastical do the same things, and have as much Power as One; the
Tyranny of this differs from the Tyranny of them, just as much as a pound of
Lead does from a pound of Feathers; which is no small matter with vulgar
Judges. Therefore, until Reformers of Governments deny the power to themselves
which they deny to others, and the exercise thereof; let them accustom their
mouths to more ingenuous and sincere language, and either forbear to traduce
others with that ignominious term, or begin to hallow it by their profession
and practice. (...). Aristot. Ethic. lib. 1. c. 10. Basil. M. in Princip. Prove.
Isido. Pelusiot. lib. 3. Epi. 194. and lib. 4. Epist. 142.
For it is but changing the singular into the plural number, and Aristotle's
description of a Tyrant will suit as well with States and Classes, as with King
and Bishops: viz. The Tyrants seek their own good, but Princes seek the good of
them they govern: Wherein he is followed by Saint Basil; as is he, by I sidore
Pelusiotes. But let us proceed to what follows.

Next in order, nature, and abuse, is infamous Extremity, immoderateness, or
want of moderation, in managing Controversies, and composingand curing
Divisions and Differences: For, whosoever shall go under such imputations of the
Vulgar shall have enough to answer for, though no more be objected against him.
Let us see therefore what is Moderation, and consequently Extremities,
according to vulgar acception. After this manner then, Moderation is the same
in effect with the art of cleaving of Billets, cutting or chopping a thing in
the middle, and dividing the live-Child into two equal parts between the unjust
pretender, and the true Mother, without any due consideration of the cause it
self, Plutarch. in Symposias.
in justice, but the peace of different Parties. For as Plutarch observes,
(...). With Fools and Knaves there is no such thing as the Mean, as to the
Thing. But if Men be extremely distant from, or opposite to a thing or person,
then presently do they accuse the same of Extremes, not considering that it is
in the power of any Man to declare and denominate a thing extreme, by his only
act of extremely departing from it, as easily as it is in his power by turning
himself about, to cause a thing to stand to the left or right hand. If then to
reconcile Matters and come to a Mediocrity, we shall think it fit to clap into
the middle, and give one of the Dissenters one part, and another, the other; we
shall quickly dispatch and destroy all Virtue, all Religion, and all Justice,
in pretending fairly, and intending foully to conserve them. But Truth, as
Plutarch has wisely noted, Plutarch. de Adulatore.
is to be sought out (...), i.e. for Virtue's sake, not for the extreme vice:
Unless therefore Men shall first agree upon a rule and standard to measure
opinions and actions, and accusations, besides what is famed or defamed for
Extreme, it is in vain and foolish to talk of Moderation or extreme. For, had
our Ancestors held only to that kind of trial, and accommodating differences
either in State or Church; we had had neither Justice, nor Religion, to strive
or contend about at present; or, at least, that far from the true. For first,
Judaism may be said to be a Mean between Mahometism and Christianism; Popery a
Mean between Judaism and Socinianism: Again, the Reformation a Mean between
Papism and Socinianism; and the English Reformation, a Mean between Popery and
Puritanism: And, if we must be forced to farther Moderation still, Independency
will be found a Mean between Presbyterism and Episcopal Government, as
Presbyterism is a Mean between Episcopacy and Independency; and Independency a
Mean between Presbytery and Anabaptism, and Anabaptism a Mean between
Independency and Quakerism; and so on, till the wit of Man shall be able to
invent no more Extremes; which whether that will ever be, I know not. Now would
I demand, (if it were lawful) Which of all these is truly eligible for the Mean
sake? and when that shall be pitched on and chosen, Upon what account and
ground? Must it not be rather because of some special Virtue proper to it as
coming nearer to that we constitute and propound to our selves, as a certain
Rule and Principle, than for that it stands between two Extremes, which is
common also to that Religion which we reject? For it is evident by Antiquity,
that by the fair face of Mediocrity the Arians under Constantius the Emperor
prospered to the cousenage of the simpler, and overthrow of the wiser
Catholics. But how well Hilary thought of this method of Pacification and
quieting stirs in the Church, Hilarious contra Constant.
these his words to Constantius plainly testify, Haec ille pater tuus
humanarum mortium docuit, vincere sine contumacia, jugulare sine gladio,
persequi sine infamia, odir sine suspicione, mentiri sine intelligentia,
profiteri fine fide, blandiri sine bonitate, agere quod velis, nec manifestare
quae velis, i. e. This your Father, the mortal Enemy to man taught you, to
Conquer without Fierceness, to Stab without a Sword, to make Profession and yet
have no Faith, to flatter without goodness, to obtain your will, and yet not to
discover your will. Thus he. And this certainly and generally do they, who
contend for Moderation, after so many, and great Instances, as may already be
given of their condescensions and concessions, from whom still boldly and
afresh more Moderation is exacted, as if nothing had been done to seek their
Peace and good Opinion; whose immodesty and immoderateness will not suffer them
to rest, so long as they have any hope left them to obtain their Ends, under
the specious pretext of Moderation: For if what, and as often as, they demand,
be granted; upon that account, they must of necessity, in time (and that not
long) exhaust and quite destroy them insensibly: If they be not gratified in
this, so fair and Popular request; then will they shrewdly endanger their
Reputation and Interest, by bringing them under the Odium and Infamy with the
Multitude, for Persons in Extremes, and who will yield nothing for Peace and
Unitie's sake. But for my own particular, I had rather be Robbed than Cheated;
and suffer the same loss by open violence and aggressions, than by fair frauds,
by which I must believe at the same time I am dealt Friendly, and Equally with.

It being then in the Power of any single Person, and much more of a Faction,
to make a Church, or, more truly, to denominate it, Extreme and Immoderate,
when ever they please to run far enough from it, by their roving Inventions and
Innovations; When will there be any rest, or stability from such accusers; if
such a Church shall presently be obliged by the Sacred Bonds of Charity, Unity,
and Peace, to leave its ground and follow them, at lest in part, and to
relinquish its Possession and Right, lest by the foresaid Engine of show and
pretense of Moderation, it be turned out of doors? Surely, God must be trusted
in such Cases, if there were no other reason (as there are many and weighty)
besides the necessity of discouraging such Attempts, which would never be
wanting, when such success is hoped for, upon such general and weak, though
plausible, Pleas.

It is wont to be said, that all this may be true, for it is not fit all
Pretenders and Opinions should be Tolerated, or yielded to; but this makes
nothing against the Sober, Godly, and Conscientious Party, who can do somewhat,
in order to a Reconciliation; and keep close to the Rule of the Scripture.

I do observe, that the best Arms (even such men have to prevail with), are,
very frequent and large praises of themselves, and profuse self-commendation,
which has had wonderful great success: For if you demand an Argument, and some
competent Proof that they are so Conscientious, or how possibly they can be
said to be so, who have been so enormous in Sins of a Party, and not Personal
Sins; you shall find shameful tergiversation, or more shameful Justification of
such Practices, as, in our estimation no Sober, Honest, or truly Conscientious
man can be subject to, and much less defend.

And as touching the great Regard, pretended to be had to the Word of God, we
see no cause to take them at their Word, or that they should measure, and judge
their own Last. It is a stronger and more reasonable Proof, that they have not
the Scriptures on their side, than any they can bring that they have, That all
indifferent standers by, give it against them: I mean, the Tradition and
Practice of the best and ancientest Churches

Neither will the Doctrine of Christian Liberty relieve these; if better
understood, than vulgarly it is. For, not to make a set Dispute of that Subject
at present, two general Errors may be noted which have evil Influence upon men:
First, That Christian Liberty is only Negative, being completed in a freedom
from Judaical Servitude, or Bondage under Moses his Law; or not doing what was
indispensably Imposed by that Law, on that People: and not in any thing
Positive, or a License to act more than it was free or Lawful for them. Though
I do not find that it was by Moses his Law, made utterly Unlawful, for that
People to Act any thing, besides what was Commanded expressly by it; It is
plain, that in process of time they did contrive many things Extrinsecally
related to the Worship of God. Neither are such their Ordinances any where
reprehended in Scripture; but such are often, which are contrary to their Law,
or justle out the orders of God, and his precepts, and these are the places
brought so against Human Inventions subservient to God's command; very
ignorantly, or peevishly. But however, Liberty of Christians extends as well
to the Affirmative as Negative part; that is, to do those things which are not
prohibited any ways by God's Word, as well as not to do those things which the
Jews were bound to do. Hence it follows, that, were it so, that the Jewish
Church was tied up so strictly (which I do not believe) that it could not act
any thing circumstantiating the service of God but what was directly required,
yet Evangelical Liberty, being as well of a far more ample as noble condition,
does permit such things, contrary to the superstition of late Pastors.

Another Mistake is concerning the proper seat or subject of Evangelical
Liberty. For, diverse there are that suppose that such Liberty we now treat of
(for I know there are diverse other sorts of far more excellent nature, but not
concerning us at present) belongs immediately and entirely, to each single
good Christian; which is far from truth and sobriety to conceive: For Christ
gave this Donative primarily and immediately to his Church and the
Administrators thereof; that they, according to Christ's Charter, should have
liberty to institute, abrogate, order, and dispose matters, such Rites and
Observances as shall seem to them most conducible to the Faith and Worship of
God under the Gospel; yet with such limitations both for number and nature,
that none be introduced contrary to the tenor thereof, or Analogy of Faith, or
tend to the burying of any integral part or practice thereof under such
rubbish; yet are not presently all private Christians allowed to preside over
their Superiors, to the determining what is of evil consequence, and what not,
against public judgment: For Instance, To have power to determine the eating
of Flesh on Friday or not, is undoubtedly a Liberty Evangelical; but it is not
immediately posited in every particular Christian, but the Church
Representative; and private persons have no liberty but as it is dispensed by
public Authority. When I call this a Liberty Evangelical, I mean not as too
many do, as if such an indifferency must properly belong to Christians; for it
does not: For Infidels and Heathen have that liberty as fully as Christ's
Church; and they in Authority amongst them may as well grant or deny this
Liberty as Christians; and no question but such as are subject to them should
offend if they perversely refused to comply with their Superiors orders. Does
therefore, think we, Christian Religion and Liberty exempt us from that kind of
obedience which is naturally due? For my part, that I hold a double obligation,
rather of Christians to submit; and that I can rather pity, than help such as
are of the contrary Opinion, is all that I shall say at this time: Yet we see
that too common amongst us, which Calvin himself end eavoured to scoff men out
of, in these Words, Calvin. Iastitut. Lib. 3. cap. 9.
Videas quosdam quibus sua libertas non videtur consistere, nisi per esum
carnium die Veneris in ejus possessionem venerint, i.e. You may see some who
suppose their Liberty cannot hold, unless they take Possession of it, by eating
Flesh on Fridays. To conclude then, It is directly repugnant to Christian
Liberty to deny, the Church has power to appoint the use, or dis^use of things
Indifferent; and it is absolutely inconsistent with Evangelical Piety, and the
power of Godliness (which consist much in denying our own Wills and Appetites)
to glory how easily we Contemn such Lawful Orders.

I had thought to have said somewhat, against the bold Charge of
Antichristianism laid to our Church; and a reason, why men that cannot Rule us
must not obey it: But I perceive the Feavour of our late Reformers to be
somewhat abated, and like men newly come out of Calentures, they begin to come
to their senses, to see they were monstrously out, though not so much to their
Reason, as to make satisfaction for such Phrantick Miscarriages by a sober
retractation, and disabusing of Men, (as in Conscience they are bound) from
that, and such like Extravagancies.

But for Peace-sake, and to prevent a Schism, we ought to condescend to our
Brethren, who (to use their own Phrase, which they best know what it means) can
come up to us in many things. But what means this great and sudden Change in
these men? Are not they the very same, who formerly made it Criminal, yea
Capital to Preach Peace, and propound Reconciliation? Yes sure, but Times, not
Manners are altered. Surely somewhat extraordinary is at the bottom of all
this. They Act not according to Nature, but outward necessity: and such a Peace
is not worth the having, which can never be held any longer, than men shall be
able to break it, or work their ends by Insinuations and fair Promises; open
force failing them. Like as it is seen with an impure Assailant of Virginity,
the party being Rescued by an extraordinary Providence out of his wicked Hands,
he turns to her again, and tempts her to his Lust by promises of Marriage; but
having obtained his ends, despises, whom he has undone: Or as the Lion and the
man's Daughter, in the Apologue: The Lion sought the Fathers consent for his
Daughter: Very willingly, said the man, upon condition that you will suffer
your Claws to be pared close, and your Teeth taken out, lest you hurt my tender
Daughter: The Lions extreme love caused him to do so; and then demainding his
Spouse, was not only denied her, but, not being able to help himself, was
knocked 'oth' head for his kind Condescentions. When the Church of England has
spoiled it self of its proper and natural Guards, then will the fair Discipline
be monstrously kind to it: and the event every man sees. But what at length do
they intend by their aenigmatical speech of Coming up to us? Will they Renounce
one branch of their Covenant? Will they for ever lay aside one of the Cords of
their Whip with six strings? I have seriously asked and urged some of them, and
could not get any lasting Concession, any longer than they shall be enabled to
exact the whole: And do we admire they should, until that time, seem at least
satisfied with part? Let them name one thing, that for Peace-sake for these
Hundred years, they would give to us more than we had before; But very many
Relaxations have been make already, and are we awhit the nearer? Or is it not
then time to make a stop of Dispensations; when the Dispensation for a time
shall be alleged against the Law, and Canon it self? And it is no kindness at
all (in their opinions) that such Mitigations and Connivance have been; but
Extremity, Tyranny, Injustice, Uncharitableness, to restore the Pristine force
and vigor to Ecclesiastical Laws. Upon these and the like Considerations, I
conclude with Tullie to Antonie. Cic. Philip
Quaeris quare pacem nolo? Quia turpis; Quia periculosa; Quia esse non potest.
Would ye know, why I will have no peace? Because it is dishonest, because it is
dangerous, and because it cannot be. It must needs be dishonest and
dishonorable, because of the conditions required. For they having extremely
separated themselves from us, and standing at that distance firmly, do cast the
odious terms of Extremes, upon them they have so left; and call their dragging
us to them, their coming home to us; and their pulling us down to their
pleasures, their coming up to us. And that it is dangerous, appears from
manifold Tenets, interpreted clearly against their own temporizing Glosses; by
their apparently wicked attempts and practices: And if there were no more then
present ambiguous, John Cerbet's Interest of England. page 24. page 57.
and two-handl'd Phrases whereby they Characterize themselves, and distinguish
themselves from others, they are much to be suspected. For we often do hear
them Magnifying their Capacities and Genius's, as that they are Freeborn
Subjects; they are a free spirited People; a freeborn People; and such like:
which as they are special pieces of flatteries to make the common sort proud of
themselves, so truly, we cannot thoroughly understand what they signify: but
this we know, such Phrases change like water, in Weather-glasses: If it be a
fair and clear time with us, than do they fall down low, to a very tolerable
sense; but if fowl and troublesome, then do they rise to a higher Meaning a
great deal, and Actions suitable. And what possibility of Reconciliation and
Peace durable, is to be expected from those men, whom nothing truly will
content less, than their entire Discipline? but if they accept less for the
present, they take it, only as men do debts hard to be got in, in part of
payment, until they shall be able to recover all. Hear what the above mentioned
Pretended Moderator says, and you will begin to see, what great hopes, or
advantage may be had of them.

The Public State of these Differences is such, John Corbet's Interest. page
109.
that the Prelatists may, and ought to descend to the Presbyterians in the
proposed Moderate Way; but the Presbyterians cannot come up to the Prelatists
in the hight of their Way. For the Prelatists Condescension, stands only in the
omission of certain things, which seem to them laudable; but the Subjection of
the Presbyterians stands, in Subscribing, and Conforming to certain things,
which seem to them unlawful. Thus he. But, according to what Rule does it
appear, which is here weakly and childishly taken for granted, that the
Prelatists (as this Jack-straw miscalls those of the Church of England) are so
high? Let it be showed, what is the Mean they have so far exceeded; and what
Laws of Church Government they have, or do Transcend? If they make their
Interpretations of Scripture, the Law; their Models, the Rule; their
Discipline, the Mean, we ought to compare, examine and judge our selves by, we
must confess we are out; we are in the Extreme, we are very high: but who could
be so bold besides these men, to expect such a fond and absurd concession? And
who so stupid among us, to yield, to that most Ridiculous way of Trial? when We
being the only Legal Visible Church of this Nation, as to outward
Constitutions, in all equal Men's reason have a Right to judge them, and rather
Condemn them of Extreme, on the contrary side, to which, we neither can, nor
ought to descend. But it will be said, The Reformed Churches abroad may direct
us. Ye are to know, and consider, That there is not One Reformed Church that We
can hear of, that (were it their Case, as it is yours) would thus tugg, and
stand out against us: as Mr. Durel has amply showed. Again, Our Church has no
such Obligations, to receive the Sentence of All the Reformed Churches put
together; as you have, to submit to Ours, as being generally Educated in, and
under the same. And Thirdly, I Appeal to all the World, What an unwise, and
ungodly Charity it would be in us, so to condescend to your Pitch, and
conceptions of Church Government, and Orders for the gaining of a very
uncertain Peace with you, and thereby put our selves out of a possibility, of
having any Communion, or Peace with almost infinite Churches abroad; who will
receive into Communion and Fellowship, none that want such things, as you
require us to lay away, for love of you. I speak not so much of the Romish
Church, as Greek and Eastern Chruches; with whom to hold Communion and Peace,
by retaining such Constitutions and Orders as we now enjoy, is ten times more
desirable, and Charitable, than for your sakes to part with them. And we are
assured, under your devices, we shall never obtain it. Furthermore, whence has
this Author, That they of the Church hold those things only Laudable, wherein
it differs from Sectaries? And that it is not as unlawful according to our
Consciences to omit them, as it is with their Consciences to do them? We do
not ('it is true) hold them to have any Moral Good in them, of themselves, and
therefore we call them Indifferent. And the Presbyterians do not affirm they
have any Moral Evil, and therefore grant they may be observed. There must
therefore be something more in the wind than Conscience, on these Men's parts,
which detain them: For as much as neither they, nor any man else, can pretend
an Offense of Conscience, where there is neither real, nor apparent Evil: but
it is a contradiction that any thing should so much as appear to be Evil, or
Sinful, while it appears Indifferent. Therefore according to the Presbyterians
own Tenets, they may come up to us; for it can only be pretended to be against
their Consciences. And if they Alledg any Cause, why that, which in it self is
not Evil, nor against their Conscience, may be, and is, upon another account,
which it is easy to guess at; I will answer, That, just so it is with the
Church of England: Many things which being not absolutely, and in themselves
good, or necessary, and so consequently may be omitted with a safe Conscience;
for certain adventitious advantages, and Exterior Accounts, no whit inferior
to those of the other side, they cannot with a good Conscience be Abolished, or
Omitted. And thus we see the Vanities and Mistakes in alleging Extremities,
Moderation, Tyranny, and tender Conscience, in these Cases.

CHAP. III. A General determination of the Question according to Reason.
THat all Factions, Parties, Persons, or Religions are not to be Tolerated, or
granted Liberty; I think all agree. It will be necessary then in the First
place, to lay down certain Distinctions, serving to judge of the reasonableness
of such Inhibition toward some, rather than others. And they may concern
either the Persons or the Religion, or lastly, the kind of Tolerations or
Restraint, themselves.

Persons pleading for Liberty of Religion are First, either such as are of
themselves altogether Free from any Civil, or Moral Subjection from us, or such
as by Birth and Education being incorporated into the same Body, and Polity,
are, and ought to be, subordinate unto the Head thereof.

Secondly the Religion Insisted on, and Pleaded for, is either Repugnant to the
light and prime Principles of Nature and human Society, or Consistent with the
same.

Thirdly, because all Restraint Moral, such as is Disswasion, Refutation,
Exclusion from the Society of others, is by the concession of all Parties
insufficient to suppress a growing Evil, oftentimes; and therefore outward
Civil Mulcts, and Punishments are in such Case, to be Inflicted; the diversity
of such Punishment is to be considered. For according to the Civil Law,
Punishments are either Corporal, or Non-corporal. And Corporal, are either
Capital, or Not-Capital, Punishment Not-Corporal is that, which divests a man
of any Profits, Emoluments, or Dignities. Corporal, and Not-Capital, is that,
which is Inflicted on a man's Body, without taking away the Life. Capital, is
that which destroys Life. According to these therefore, it may be answered to
the main Querie:

First, That it is not only Lawful and Reasonable to allow a Toleration to
Persons in Co-ordination to us, and not depending upon us; But it is very
unjust, and unnatural to attempt by Force, to reduce them to our way of serving
God: Humani juris and naturalis potestatis est, unicuique quod putaverit
colere; nec alii obest aut prodest altertus Religio. Sed nec Religionis est
cogere Religionem, quae sponte suscipi debet: non enim cum and hostiae animo
libenti suscipi expostalentur. Tertullianus Ad ^^capulam. ca. 2. Vide Thomam
22. qu. 10. Artic. 8.
For such kind of Force, or Violence, cannot be offered, but by Civil Power
assumed; and Civil Power ought never to be exercised, but by Lawful Authority:
and they, whom we suppose to be of distinct Societies and Regiments, can have
no Legal right to Invade, or Usurp upon one another. And this being against
Justice (which always is to be preferred before the best Religion) it would be
a contradiction to advance and build Religion upon the Ruins of that which
Founds all Religion: as Tertullian excellently argues.

And if this holds good in Persons Coordinate, so far that it is most unjust
for Either, to impose upon Other their Faith, or Worship: it can scarce be
expressed, the horrible Crime and Unjustice of them, who being as Legally
Subordinate and Subject as it is possible for People to be, take the confidence
to Arm, to the end, they may reduce their Prince, and Pastors to the Rule of
their Consciences: And having oppressed both, though failing in their Main
design, the Scene changed, to exceed themseves in Immodestie, and demand that
benefit, they would no ways grant others, whom they had no right at all to
deny; upon reasons infinitely Inferior to them, they a while since rejected.
In these shameful straits, they say with one of their late Politicians, The
Presbyterian Party in England, Corbet's Interest of England. page: 57.
never engaged under a less Authority, than That of both Houses of Parliament.
Good Sir, clear up, and speak out. Did they do well, or not, in so Engaging,
even with both Houses on their side? If they did well, then did we very ill, to
Oppose and Resist; Then were all your Enemies Rebels, the King himself not
excepted: Then why do you not Preach Repentance to us, as we do to you? Then
will you, then may you, nay, then ought you to do so again, as we profess we
are bound to do, and always did in our greatest Persecutions: And are you not
well to be looked to, think you? But your Case is still worse: For it will
never be granted, what is here supposed. viz. That those Two Houses were Houses
of Parliament, but a Conventicle of Private Men, after the Expulsion of that
Part of the Lords-House which have been proved to be no less Essential to a
Parliament than the remaining States, had they remained with the Presbyterians:
but it is apparent, not the Major Part continued with them, but manifested
against them: But especially, the Kings Authority withdrawn from them, they
like Sampson the Nazarite being shaven, became as other men, and the Spirit of
Power, and all Legal Authority departed from them. Or if after all these Ruins
and Delapidations, they must still be called Houses; in what does Presbyterian
excel the following Factions, who had those things, they called Two Houses too,
and with no more prejudices?

But my Author proceeds, and indeed speaks plainly. Id: ibid.
I have read (says he), That the Parliament of England, is of a Twofold
capacity. First, Representing the People, as Subjects; and so, that it can do
nothing, but manifest their Grievances, and Petition for Relief. Secondly, By
the Constitution, it has part in the Sovereignty; and so it has part in the
Legislative Power, and in the final judgment. You have read. You may have read,
and that from your own party, infinite passages of Sedition, and Treason: But
had you so little Wit and Loyalty, pretending so much to both, as to Publish
and approve it, and to justify wicked Practices by as bad Principles? But they
are in the Faction still, and though like Water in a sponge or clout scarce
discernible, when let alone, being pressed a little, out they come. But must he
that speaks Treason, speak Nonsense and Impossibilities too? For, it is not
possible that the same persons should consist of such a Contradictory Capacity,
as that of the Subject and Sovereign. But I return:

It is worse than Barbarous to Attach, or Oppress any People, merely upon
account of Religion, not repugnant to the Light of Nature, as I shall show by
and by: For otherwise, Religion, whose chief End is to Conserve Mankind, in
Peace and Justice, would turn the Earth upside, down, and fill the World with
incessant Combustions, and Massacres. For it will be as reasonable that the
Infidel, and Indians should Invade the Christian upon that score, as the
Christian Him. And then where will such Depredations end?

Again, Thom. 22. Quaest. 10. Art: 8. (...). Isidor. Pelusiot: li. 3. Epist.
362 Lactant. Lib. 5 Instit. ca. 19. Christus Apostolos misit ad seminandam
fidem, qui etc. Ambros. In Luc. Lib. 7. Pict. ad Constant. Joan: Duil: De Vero
Vsu Patrum. Lib. 2. ca. 6.
as Thomas has observed, Religion being a Free Thing, there is no Reason
Infidels should be thereunto Compelled. Nay, as Isidore Pelusiotes notes well,
To Force and Dragg others to the true Religion, who are absolutely at their own
disposal; neither is, nor seems, Decent or Convenient. And Lactantius says,
Non opus vi and injuria, quia Religio cogi non potest. There is no need of
Force and Injury, for as much as Religion cannot be Compelled. And St. Ambrose
Testifies truly, That Christ sent his Apostles to sow the Faith, who were not
to Compel, but Teach, nor to Exercise Force, or Power, but extol the Doctrine
of Humility. And agreeable thereunto St. Hillary writes, Deus cognitionem sui
docuit potius quam exegit, God rather Taught, than Extorted the knowledge of
himself. To these, and this effect, I might add such Fathers as Monsieur
Duillee has collected; endeavoring, though in vain, to prove thereby, that
the present Church, has fallen from the Opinions of the Ancient, because they
were against Compulsion in point of Religion; which, with what I have observed
seeming to favor Liberty in Religion, is easily answered by distinguishing of
Persons educated in, and subject to a Church, to whom they never granted a
Licenciousness of his Nature; from such as were not under any Obligation of
Obedience and Conformity to a Society: Of these they are to be interpreted, and
not of them: For herein they followed the Doctrine of St. Paul who says, What
have I to do, to judge them that are without? And of these, are the words of
the Psalmist, 1 Cor. 5.12.
to be understood; abused by trifling Sectaries: Psalm. 110.13.
Thy People shall be willing in the day of thy Power. Which implies, a freeness
of consent to the Service and Faith of Christ under the Gospel, in such as
first received the knowledge thereof.

Secondly, According to the Second Distinction, it may be said, that there
being some Religions not only contrary to ours, but even to the Light, and
commonly received Law of Nature; such are not only, not to be admitted into any
Christian Commonwealth, but it is Lawful for Christians, or not Christians, in
vindication of Common-Laws of Nature, even such, which being once and lightly
offered to the Consideration of such as do not observe the same, do in a manner
constrain Assent thereunto; provided that Interest, Passion, and unnatural
Vices, have not taken away that sight, which Nature had given. For we know who
says, That the God of this World blinds the eyes of some: 2 Cor. 4.4. 2 Pet.
3.5.
and who says, Some things men are wilfully ignorant of. Therefore Actual
Ignorance neither excuses, nor exempts men from Punishment, even of such, as
are not in Political Authority over them. The reason whereof, is, Because,
however the World be divided into several Countries, and those Countries
sub-divided into several Nations and Governments, absolute in themselves, as to
Political Administration; yet, are All Men of the same Flesh and Blood, and
kind, and nature, yea, Commonwealth, Act. 17.26.
and Family, as to certain Principles of Reason, and Nature, which are as Laws
containing men in the same Society; and as to the Design that God had, in
placing Man upon Earth, which was to live at least so Humanely, as might
continue the Work of Gods hands upon Earth, and the Recognition of a Superior
Cause of them, and Power and Dominion over them, which is a Deity; contrary to
which, is that most brutish and degenerous Sin of Atheism. For though Atheism,
be not a Religion (of which we now speak), yet it is to be reduced to this
Subject, as all Privations are there to be handled, where their habits are
properly treated of. (...). Diog ^aert: In Zenone. Ephesians. 2.12.
Now the Stoics, (as Laertius tells us,) were wont to make a Twofold Atheism;
Dogmatical, whereby men not only know no God, but would prove, There is no God:
And Practical, whereby men in general having a true, but weak, and obscure
knowledge of God, do, as the Apostle says, live as without God in the World; as
if there were no such thing Existent. But we shall rather divide Atheists into
Purely Negative, such as have, nor ever had, no knowledge of a God; and
Positive, such as have had the knowledge, and sense of a Deity; and after, are
fallen into such open Apostasy, and Defiance, that they Dogmatize such
Unnatural Opinions. Of these Latter, we hold it just and reasonable, that where
they live mixed with other People who do revere a Deity, they should be put to
Death, after serious and plain Proposal made of their Abominable Errors;
without any laborious, or Learned controverting the Point. And this affirms
Perkins, Perkins Cases of Conscience. Lib. 2. ca. 2.
before me, in these Words, As for those that are commonly called Atheists,
which deny that there is a God, they are to be punished with Death, as not
worthy to live in human Society; and the greatest Torment, that can be devised
by the Wit of Man, is too good for them: For, if they be holden for Traitors to
an Earthly Prince, and are most deservedly adjudged to Death, etc. But I
suppose, a greater reason than this, is, The certain Destruction which such
Embrutiz'd men do bring to human Society it self: which, whoever is a direct
and professed Enemy unto, may be put to Death, as lawfully as Wolfs, Lions, and
Tigers. And yet, not at the pleasure, or Power of every one that meets them, as
wild Beasts may, because Judgment against the most open Malefactors condemned
by the Law, must not be executed, but by Sentence, and Commission from the
Supreme Power. For to make good one part of Justice, we must not destroy
another; nor secure Gods Ordinance in one Point, by endangering it in another.
But it is Gods Ordinance, that the Supreme Power should be respected and
obeyed; and it is scarce possible, that any Commonwealth should be of any long
continuance, where private Persons take on them to administer or execute
Justice, upon their own presumptions And if it be, as the wit of some Atheists
lead them to conceive, that Religion is only a trick of Policy, to keep men in
order, and obedience to their Superiors, and that they do confess, that it is
necessary to keep together a Civil Society; do they deserve any thing less than
Death, who shall treacherously discover, and endeavor to Null such a Mystery
of State, without which, Human Society cannot be maintained? And surely, if
Chrysostom's zeal carried him so far, Matthaeus VVestmonasteriensis, page 182.
as to advise any one that met a Blasphemer of God, or his Worship, to smite
him presently on the Face; yea, though he were sure to be had before the Judge
for so doing: it is more reasonable to bait Atheists and Persecute them, the
Supreme Authority not gainsaying. Escobar tells us the Practice of Spain, to be
against Blasphemers, That for a Light Blasphemy, he only abjures it: Yet, the
Punishment does answer the Sin. v.g. If they Blaspheme out of sudden Anger, or
some other Passion, they are Condemned to the Galleys: or else standing bare
Foot, and bare Head, girt with a Cord, and holding a Light Torch in their Right
hand, they stand in some Festival day in the Church, and the Service being
ended, they receive their Sentence with the rest of their Penances, i.e.
Fastings, Prayers, and Pecuniarie Mulcts. And where Authority is Defective and
Remiss, in this so horrible Provocation; It is observed by many dreadful
Instances, how God himself takes Vengeance: as, amongst others, Matthew of
Westminster tells us How, in the year of Grace 501, Olympus a most Mad Fellow,
while bathing, he Blasphemed the Holy Trinity, that he was consumed with a
Fiery Thunderbolt falling on him from Heaven. Thus he. And that, not only
Corporal, but even Capital Punishment is due to such an one, does from hence
appear; because a man being of a Religion which asserts the Diety under such
and such Forms, Cunaeus DeRepublic. Hebrae. Li. 1. cap. 1. Item Maimonides in
Misna ractat. de Regibus. ca. 9.
or Notions; the Professed dishonouring thereof, implies a self Condemnation,
and with all such an unnatural humor of impiety, which leads him against all
Religions, and human Practice.

And it is observed by Cunaeus, That such was the Force of the Seven Precepts
of Noah, and extended so to all men, that the Israelites were commanded, such
who were ignorant of them to slay by War, and remove them from human Society.

Again, Tertul. Apol. cap. 8. August. Civit. Dei lib. 7. ca. 19 Alex. ab
Alexand, lib. 6. ca. 26. Ludovic. Vives in Aug. de Civ. Dei. Hugo. Grot. contra
Socin. page 200, 201, 202. Bod. De Repub. li. 1. cap. 5. 2 Kings 23.10 Jer.
32.33 36. Psalm. 106; v. 37, 38, 39. Jerem. 7.31. Seldom de diis Syris Syntag.
1. cap. 6. Porphyr. (...) lib. 2.
it were (I suppose) Lawful for any Prince, or Person to compel any People that
should Worship their God, or gods by the Sacrifice of Mankind: And yet we read
how far this Devilish Superstition prevailed over the World, as may appear from
Tertullian, Austin, Alexander ab Alexandro, Ludovicus Vives, Grotius, and
others. In a Word, Learned Bodin tells us, That there was never any People, or
Nation, who imagined not, that the Gods might be pacified with human
Sacrifices, such as the Peruvians, and Brasilians at this day use: And, that
the Canaanites in ancient days Accustomed themselves to such Sacrifices,
Offering their Sons and Daughters unto Molech, that Fiery Idol; the Scripture
Testimonies are many, and express; and not to be eluded, by the vain and bold
glosses of Rabbis, attempting, I suppose, to extenuate the foul Apostasies of
their Predecessors; and that Children were not killed, and burnt, but drawn
only through two Piles of Fire, and so consecrated to Molech, as Mr. Seldom
has observed out of them. But that Molech was the same with Saturn, and the
Phoenicians offered to him such inhuman Human Sacrifices, Porphyrie witnesses;
which agrees perfectly, with the Practice of the Carthaginians, who themselves,
together with their Superstitious Abominations, descended from the Phoenicians.
For that the Carthaginians used to Offer such Sacrifices; (...), Plutarch.
(...) etc.
Plutarch, not only assures us, but tells us who, and upon what occasion,
caused that Custom to cease. For Gelon, King of Syracuse, having Conquered
them, would not make Peace with them, unless, they would first give over
Sacrificing their Children to Saturn. Possibly, this unnatural Religion took
its Original from the Design of Abraham Offering up his Son Isaac; which being
performed amongst the Phoenicians, might be cause of misunderstanding to them,
as Innumerable acts of the Patriarchs and Israclites, were first corruptly
imitated by the neighboring Heathens, and by them transmitted and propagated
into other parts: so that it was not an inward suggestion of Nature, though
very common, so much, as Imitation.

Again, were it so, that any Nation should freely admit, and practice the
unnatural Sin, of Coupling with Beasts after the manner of human Sexes; I doubt
not, but it were Lawful, and Laudable in any Foreign Prince, to endeavor the
abolishing of such a Custom, by Force of Arms, because this is against human
Nature, by confounding the Species of Man.

In the Last place, according to our distinctions, we are to consider, the
kind, and condition of Punishment to be inflicted upon Offenders against
Religion; of which, in the ensuing Chapters.

CHAP. IV. That the Ancients, as well Christian as un-Christian, constantly
denied Toleration of Religions dissonant and contrary.
IT is a most frequent and plausible Maxim which Sectaries have got by the end,
to slip their Necks from the uneasy Yoke of Government, and duty of Obedience
incumbent on them, many times against their Wills and Interests; He is most a
King, that rules in the Hearts of his Subjects; and that Prince is alwates best
served, and obeyed who by gentleness and kindness, gains the good will of his
People. And this, though it has much truth, soberly understood and modestly
taken; yet, as by diverse of late applied, includes in it a world of Knavery
and Mischief. For when will that be, that a Prince shall win the hearts of such
dissatisfied, and fond Persons as these, but when he shall lay the Scepter so
lightly over them, as not to hurt them; when he shall give them so much Line,
as that they may do what they please; when he shall remit, and relax the
curbing and punishing part of the Laws so far, as that they may be dallied
with, and played with at pleasure, without Censure; when they may Inrovate
according to the Phansies of their own Brains, and Lusts of their Hearts: Such
a King as this is fit to Rule over a Free Spirited People, Freeborn Subjects:
and then shall he have their hearts when he requires nothing else, and can
command nothing else. But methinks such should do well, to think sometimes
upon Rules of good Subjects: and that he is a good Subject (according to St.
Paul) who does all things [Lawful and Honest] without murmuring, and disputing;
and that makes a Conscience of limitin; his Superiors in their commands, where
God has not Limited; and should spend some of that time, and show some of that
Piety which they profess, in regulating and assisting their Superiors, by
their Precepts to govern them well, in putting in Practice the difficult Art of
obeying Well; which Flesh and Blood takes so little content in, that nothing is
more ungrateful to them, and an unmortified carnal Man discovers himself in
nothing more, than in that humor. But this, the Learning of the wisest, and
common Experience, may teach us; that, as no Society of men can subsist without
Laws, so no Laws without Coercion and Force; and no Coercion can take place,
without Punishment. For as Tullie in Brutus, and Plutarch after him; All
Commonwealths, continue, and rest upon Two Principal Columns, Punishments and
Benefits. For neither is Virtue so excellent and amiable in the eyes of all,
no, nor Religion, nor Piety; as that men should be so Ravished with their
intrinsic beauty, as to need no External Motives to commend them to us, and
excite our Affections; neither is there such a loathsome Turpitude, or eminent
danger in Vice, Plato in Gorgia.
Heresy, or Impiety as that, no outward Discouragments propounded, men of
themselves, must as necessarily Flee from them, Seneca de C'ement. lib. 1. cap.
21. Paena ad tria respicere debet. Aut ut cum quem pu nit emendet; aut ut poena
ejus caeteros meliores reddat; au sublatis malis securiores caeteri vivant.
Galenw. Quod More sequnutur etc.
as they do from Serpents, or Mad-Dogs.

Plato therefore assigns Two principle Ends in punishing Malefactors: First,
Satisfaction for the wrong done unto the Community, by the Offense committed.
Secondly, Prevention of like Miscariages, by bringing a Terror upon others.
Seneca makes Three Causes of inflicting Punishment. First, that the Punished
may be amended. Secondly, or others corrected by their Sufferings. Thirdly,
That the Evil being taken away, the Good may be more safe. Somewhat, not much
differing from these, does Galen likewise give Three Reasons of Punishment.
First, lest they should mischief the Good. Secondly, That a few being
Chastised, others may be Reformed. Thirdly, That wicked Men proceed not too far
in wickedness: All which, hold no less in a Religious Commonwealth, than
Profane. For, what safety can the sound Sheep be in, amongst whom the corrupt
and rotten shall be permitted to Walk? And what security can the Righteous and
true Believer be in, so long as the Infectious Doctrine and Example of
Heretics and Schismatics, 2 Timothy 2.17.
which do creep and eat like a Grangrene, whereby the whole Body is in great
danger, to be dissolved, and dissipated. 1 Timothy 5.20.
And the Apostle advises Timothy to rebuke them that sin, before all, that
others also may fear. It has been therefore the constant practice of the
Church of Christ, for the better conserving it self in Unity, and Charity;
First, to admonish and rebuke Litigious Dissenters and Dividers; and, that not
taking due effect, to proceed to such severe Punishment, as may render such
unable to Propagate their mischievous Tenets. And not the Church only, has
taken this necessary course, but even Heathens have thought it necessary to
deny a Liberty of Introducing new devices into Religion, to the disturbance,
and Dissettlement of Others. Valerius Max. li. c. 1
For Valerius Maximus shows how that certain Books being found in Rome,
making against the Established Religion; the City- Praetor, by command of the
Senate, caused them to be burned. And Tullie tells us of Protagoras Abderites,
that having wrote certain Books of dangerous consequence to Religion, he was
Banished by the Athenians out of their City and Country, and his Books burnt
in an open Assembly. And what is so manifest, as the sore Persecutions the Jews
suffered under Antiochus for their Religion? and, How many and dreadful
Persecutions Christians suffered under the Heathen Emperors for the Faith of
Christ? insomuch, that it is observed by Polydore Vergil, and others; that from
St. Polydorus Vergil lib. 8. ca. 1. Invent. Rer.
Peter to Sylvester the First, there being Thirty two Bisheps of Rome, all
saving Seven, were Martyriz'd. But when Christian Religion, partly by the
Invincible Fortitude of Believers, and partly by the favor of some Christian
Emperors became so Public and Rooted, and many were sprung up from the Loins
of Christian-Parents, so that they never tasted of Gentilism; it seemed
reasonable to that greatest Enemy to Christians, to constrain none to
Gentile-Worship. For thus he writes to one of his Governors. (...). Julian
Epi. 52
We permit not that any of the Christians should be forced to our Altars.

But to draw nearer, Nec de Vet^ri Testam. profero exempla quamvis etiam
Propheticis exemplis doceri illa dixisti. Il la, in quam, nimis antiqua non
profero; fuerunt enim alterius dispensationis and Temporis. Augustine. Lib. 4.
Contra Crescon: Grammat: Exodus 22. v. 21. Deuteron: 13.12, 13, 14, 15.
Deuteron: 17.12:
I shall with St. Austine disputing this against Cresconius, wave the Instances
which may be brought out of the Old Testament, because they may be said to be
of a diverse Oeconomie, from those of the New. But most manifest it is, that
such as varied from the Religion in which they were Educated, were to be Cut
off from their People; which I know is diversely understood, but by All
acknowledged to be a severe Punishment. And besides it is undeniable, that such
as would not hear the Priests whom God had set over them in matters of
Religion, were to be put to Death. Let us see what was the Practice of the
Christian-Church.

Learned Pedro Paolo of Venice, Pedro Paolo Hidorie of Inquisition. page: 6.
seems to dislike Persecution for Heresy: in that, treating of the
Inquisition he argues against it from the Practice of the Church until
Constantine the Great his time; Non invo itur exemplum in Evangelicis and
Apostolicis Literis, altquid petitum a Regibus Terrae pro Ecclesia. Quis ^egat
non inventri. Sed non dum impleba tur illa prophetia, Et nunc Reges intelligite
etc. Psalm. 2. Aug. Epist. 48.
saying, that until the Reign of Constantine i. e Three hundred and Twnety
years after Christ, no Penalties were inflicted upon Heretics But I cannot but
marvel, such a judicious Person should take that to be an argument of the
Church's Opinion, That Heretics ought not to be punished; when as, until
Constantines days, the Church was never possessed of any Civil Power; and it
knew well enough it was against Christian Religion to Usurp it, though to the
favoring and furthering of the same. But scarce was Constantine rid of that
Tyrant, and Heathen, Lycinius, but, as Lycinius, out of Zeal, persecuted the
Christians (which was the Ground of their quarrel, how ever malicious Zozimus
Fables it otherwise,) Constantine endeavored the suppressing of the Idolatrous
Gentile-Worship, commanding (as Optatus tells us) the Temple Doors of the
Gentiles to be shut up, Optatus Melevita lib. 2. Contra Parm: (...) etc.
Eusebius de Vita Constant. lib. 2. ca: 43, 44: (...) and Socratis Hist. lib. 2.
ca. 6. Nicephor. lib 8. ca. 25.
and that the Christian Religion should be only protected, and maintained
Publicly. And Eusebius tells us, that he not only caused their Idol Temples to
be shut up, but prohibited Sacrifices to them. And this his zeal did not end
only in destroying Idolatry, but extended to Heresy also. For, after the First
Council of Nice had determined the Faith Controverted, Constantine made it an
Offense Capital, so much as to conceal Haeretick Books; as Socrates and
Nicephorus relate. Austine likewise, in an Epistle against the Donatists
shows, Augustinus Epist: 166 Donec Faelix ipse jussu etc.
how after the Donat^sts-Appeal to the Emperor, against Faelix who ordained
Caecilianus, had been heard and rejected, by Helianus the Proconsul, and that
he was declared Innocent, that Constantine the First, made a Decree most strict
against the Donatists; and that his Son after him, followed therein his Steps,
which continued until Julians Reign, who, Desertor Christi and inimicus,
supplicantibus vestris Rogatiapo and Pontio, libertatem perditioni Partis
Donati permisit. An Apostate from Christ, and an Enemy to your Supplicants
Rogatianus and Pontius, gave Liberty to the pernicious Sect of Donatus. And St.
Amb^ose makes it no small matter of his praise of Gratian, Ambros. Epist. 26.
That he brought peace and quietness to the Church, and stopped the mouths (of
Arians:) Id. De Fide lib 3. cap. 3.
and would to God (says he) you could have shut the hearts of such wicked men,
and mischievous; And that, this he did as well by the Faith, as his own Power.
And no wonder that Father should so write, who says also, That Haereticks are
more abominable, than the very Jews that crucified Christ. Histor. Eccles. lib.
5. cap. 16
And Theodoret relates at large, how Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium prevails
with Theodosius, to exclude the Arian Conventicles out of the Cities. And
Bellarmin, in the Life of Theodosius relates, Bellarm. in Vita Theodos. page
285, and 286.
that Hono^ius and Theodosius published an Imperial Edict, whereby they
decreed, that the Pelagians should be wholly suppressed and expelled Rome: and
after sent their Rescript to Aurelius, Bishop of Carthage in which they
Commanded that they should be driven out of Africa. And, as Cardinal Hosius
has observed, Hosius De Coucilio Oecomeu. cap. 24.
there is Extant amongst the Proemial Epistles to the Council of Calcedon, an
Epistle of Pulcheria the Empress to the Governor of Bythinia, to expel out of
the City and Places where that Council was to be held, all Clergymen, Monks,
and Laymen, who would by no means be brought to the Council. It is true,
Bilson, True difference between Christian Subjection and etc. page 19, 20.
what Bishop Bilson has observed, concerning Gratians Toleration of all, at
his First entrance into the Empire, That finding all places full of Arians; and
the Laws of Valens his Uncle, making for them; Fearing some general Tumult, if
he should presently distress so many, gave leave, that every Religion should
have Churches and Oratories, with freedom and immunitie; but being once settled
and joined with Theodosius, he commanded that all Haeresies should keep silence
for ever. And this was the Course, as Beda well observes, which Ethelbert the
Saxon King, took; who being converted to the Christian Faith himself, gave
order, that none of his Subjects should be compelled to become Christians; only
he showed them most favor, Beda lib. 1. cap. 26. Hist.
and kindness, who embraced that Faith which he did. And the reason hereof, is
observable in the same Author, Didicerat enim and a Doctoribus, Autoribusque
suae salutis, servitum Christi voluntarium, non coactitium esse debere: For he
learned from the Masters and Authors of saving Doctrine, That Christ's Worship
ought to be Voluntary, and not Compelled. But the First of our Nation, That by
Law destroyed Idolatry, was Ecombertus, in the Year, 640. who also commanded
that the Fast of 40. days should be observed through his whole Kingdom. Quae ne
facile a quopiam possint contemni, dignas punitiones fieri in transgressores
jussit, Matthew Westmonasteriensis. page 224.
says Matthew of Westminster. And because it may be that some Heretics will
plead for favor, from the carriage of Ethelbert above mentioned, it is to be
noted, that there is a vast difference between Heretics and Schismatics, and
Heathens who never had Knowledge of the Truth, as Bishop Bilson has truly
noted, upon the like occasion; saying, Heretics of all sects and sorts, Bilson
Difference between Christi-Subj. etc. page 26.
may be compelled to follow truth, though Infidels might not; and so your
Inference fails when you say, No Law forces Jews, or Pagans from their
Persuasion, therefore not Christians. Nay rather, if we grant Jews, and Turks
excusable for these two Reasons, Lack of Knowledge, and Want of Promise;
certainly, Papists being neither void of the First, nor free from the Last,
may, yea must, be compelled of Christian-Magistrates, for dread of Punishment
tempered with good Instructions, to forsake their Heresies, and forbear their
Idolatries wherewith Christ is dishonored, and his truth defaced. Thus he:
Whereby their Plea is further made Void, whereby some argue from Toleration of
Heathen, over whom there is no Authority, the Liberty due to Christians, who do
owe submission as well in general, by being Members of such a Society, as
particular by way of Promise, either Implicit, or Explicit; which each man
makes to the Body, to which he is to conform in all Lawful things in
themselves; not measuring things Lawful by the Bent of our Consciences (than
which nothing can be more proudly contrived) but by the straitness of some Rule
superior to them both. Whence it was, that Cyprian, more ancient than the
Nicene-Council, or Constantine, persecuted so far as he was able the Novatians,
having no secular Power on his sides; and so did other Catholick-Bishops after
him, namely Chrysostom, and Cyril of Jerusalem, for which some Puritans of
our days with a fellow-feeling, as it were, of their brethrens sufferings, and
a never failing Animosity against Bishops of all Ages, have not spared such
speeches as these, against them. Chrysostom, whom none can sufficiently
praise, Meditatio de Autipuritanismo. page 70. Appendicis ad Laudensium (...).
took away many Churches from the Puritans; but this same violence was thought
the Principal Cause, for which that most divine Person, suffering such
calamities as soon oppressed him, died in Banishment: Cyril likewise oppressed
the Puritans [i. e. Novatians] and this man besides many other evils and
adversities which he endured, as well at home as abroad, is branded with this
note of Infamy, that he was the First of all Bishops, that Lorded it; i. e.
Introduced secular Pride and Tyranny into the Church. Let them beware, again
and again, who in these days bear deadly emnity with Puritans, lest they pull
upon their heads the ancient Punishments of the Persecutors of Puritans. Thus
far that Frontless, and Witless Patron of Puritans, of the Scottish Faction, if
I mistake not.

And here before we draw down the Practice of the Catholic Church any lower,
because antiquity abounds with the like grievous complaints of Heretics and
Schismatics being punished, as this age does also; Let us consider a little
what themselves did, when ever their strength served them.

The Arians, as we have showed, were Persecuted by the Catholics, and having
secular Authority on their side, did they not stir up most grievous
Persecutions against the Church, upon all occasions? Are not all Histories full
of their Impious and Bloody Prancks? In so much, Onuphrius in Sylvest.
that Onuphrius on the Life of Sylvester the First by Platina, says, The Nine
Persecutions being taken away by Constantine the Great; the Tenth, from the A
rians, ensued, more dangerous than all the others: which beginning under the
Emperor Constantius, continued upon the Church of God in such manner, for Forty
years together. So far Onuphrius; Whose Opinion might easily be confirmed by
the Authorities of Hilary of Poitiers, Hierome, Socrates, Theodo^et, and
others; were not that superfluous Labor, in a matter confessed.

And were the Donatists any whit more favorable, and mild when they had any,
though but small advantage, over the Catholics? He that reads Optatus against
Parmenianus, the main Treatises of St. Austine against them, the Conference of
Carthage between the Schism of the Donatists and the Church-Catholicks, shall
find, that the fame Faction which was ever most querulous under Persecution,
and moving pity and compassion in those that would hear them, Et maxim
Episcopi and Clerici horrenda and dura perpessi quae commemorare longum est
quando quorundam oculi extincti etc Augustine. Epist 5. Vide and Epistol. 166.
of their hard measure, and of the unreasonableness of the Civil Powers
interposing in such matters which ought to be free, were themselves most Cruel
and Violent against others; and especially, the Bishops and Clergy men suffered
horrible things, which were tedious to rehearse; putting out the Eyes of some;
and they cut off the Hand and Tongue, of one Bishop, and some they slew
right-out. I say nothing of the cruel Slaughters (says he) and Plundring of
Houses by Nightinvasions, and Burnings; and that not only, of Private Houses,
but Churches also, into which Flames there wanted not some who cast in the
Books of God. Do not these words of Austine come somewhat near a description of
our late furious and wicked zeal. And what Possidonius in the Life of St.
Austine, Possidonius in vita August. ca 9. Vide ca. 10. etiam.
adds of this nature against that Holy Bishop, calls to our minds afresh,
the Perfecution of the Tongue against our Bishops: The Donatists (says he)
railed at Austine, called him Seducer of Souls, both Publicly and Privately;
and said, That he ought to be slain as a Wolf to their Flock; and that without
doubt all their Sins should be forgiven them, Augustine Epistol. 68.
who could bring this to pass. And in another Epistle of St. Augustine, is the
Inhumanity of those pure Zelots the Circumcellians, a branch of the Donatists,
against such as differed in Opinion from them, described; concluding, In quibus
omnibus illi non deponunt facta Latronum, and honorem sibi exigunt Matyrum. i.
e, In all which, they cease not to act the parts of Assasins, and yet require
the honor of Martyrs. And, so infinitely Devilish and Malicious was their
humor, that when they could not destroy the Orthodox by Butchering them, they
would needs terrify them, by Murdering themselves; and so, as Austin has,
Quidam eorum miserabili instinctu, and Deo and Homiuibus ingrati, si suis
caedibus nos vastare non ^ossunt, ^uo nos exitio terrere credunt; aut laetitiam
suam quarentes de mortibus nostris, aut tristitiam nostram de mortibus suis.
August. Epist. 61.
either Solacing themselves in the destruction of us, or sadding us by their
own Deaths. And such in some degree, do our days afford, who because they
cannot have their Will Worship, will put themselves into such an untractable
and brutish posture, that if you let them alone they have their ends, if you
attempt to bring them to Justice, they will create great hatred to their
Adversaries, by parting with their Lives, rather than stir upon fair or
necessary means, or motives. To conclude, Legimus, vidimus, quotid^ eque
comprobamus; Quando persecutio contra Ecclesiam oritur, multo pejores
persecutores Judaeos and Haereticos, quam Ethnicos. Hieronymus in Obad. v. 10.
It is the observation of St. Hierome, We have read, we have seen, we have
daily found it true, that when ever Persecution has arose in the Church, the
Jews and Heretics were always more grievous Persecutors of the Christians
than were the Gentiles.

CHAP. V. A Continuation of the former Subject, and particularly, of putting
Heretics and Schismatics to Death.
IN man may be said to be a Twofold Life, Natural and Civil. The First is an
Union of the Natural parts of a man; which being dissevered, death follows;
understanding here the principal which are either simply Essential, as the Soul
and Body or such, as are therefore called Vital, because being corrupted, or
taken away, a separation of the more Essential parts do immediately follow.
Man's Civil Life is that, wereby he being a member of the Civil Body, separated
from that (as all Integral parts of a Body Natural) lofe that life of common
Influence and Protection. Hence it is, that some Civil Lawyers do interpret
Capital Punishment so often denounced against Heretics in the Civil Law, of
the later Death; as does Huckleman, and some others. The Imperial Constitutions
which absolutely inflict Capital Punishment on Heretics, Constitutiones Imp.
Simplici^er capitis poenam instigen^es Haereticis non de Naturali sed de Civili
Capite asserit. Wessembeck: in Vara. number 6. Huckelmanus Illustr. Difput. 34.
These 14. lit 6. God li. 1. Tit 5. God. li. 1 Ti^. 5 Sect. 4.

Volumus esse publicum crimen etc.


are not to be understood of Natural, but Civil Death, as Transportation and
such like. But I make no doubt, but this is too favorable, and forced an
Exposition, as he that shall observe the Practice, the best comment on the Law,
must confess. For when the Code says, Manichaei undique expelluntur and capite
puniuntur. And immediately before, Manichaeo, in loco Romano degere deprehenso,
caput ampuatur. i. e. The Manichees are to be expelled, and punished Capitally,
The Manichee that shall be found in the Roman Territory shall have his Head cut
off; cannot be meant of Civil Head. I confess the most common punishments, are
such, as we read in the same Title against the Manichees and Donatists, made by
Honortus and Theodosius Emperors. viz. 1. We decree it a Public Offense;
because an Offense against Divine Religion, is an injury to all: wherefore we
Persecute such with the Confiscation of all their Goods. 2. We will likewise
that they be Defeated of all Liberality and Succession coming to them by any
Title whatever. 3. Furthermore, we leave such no Power to give, or buy, or
sell, or make bargains, being convict. 4. Inquiry ought to be made at his
Death. For if it be Lawful in matters of Treason, to tax the memory of the
dead; not undeservedly ought there here also to pass a judgment. 5. Therefore
his last Writing is to be Null, whether by Will, or Codicil, or any other way,
he has made his Testament; if found to be a Manichee. 6. Neither do we suffer
his Sons to Inherit, unless they forsake their Fathers Errors. For we allow
Pardon to the Penitent. 7. We like well, that they feel the sting of our
Authority, who shall entertain them in their Houses, by a culpable providing
for them. 8. And we Will, that their Servants be faultless, if avoiding such
Sacrilegious Masters, they pass into the Catholic Church by a more Faithful
Service.

Thus far the Imperial Edict of Theodosius, whereby we may easily discern how
severe the Ancients were in chastising Heretics, and the several kinds of
Punishments devised against them. But the great question is, Whether it be just
to punish Heretics with Corporal Death, according to the Judgment of the
Ancient Church. The first instance of such severity, is that of Priscillianus
who was put to Death for his Heresy: about which I find the Fathers themselves
divided. Hierome against Ctesiphon seems not only to approve of it himself, but
to say, that the whole Christian Church consented thereto, Hierom. Advers (...)
Ctesiphon.
Quid loquar (says he) de Priscilliano, qui and Seculi gladio, and totius
Orbis authoritate damnatus est? Why should I speak of Priscillianus, who was
Condemned by the Secular Sword, and the Authority of the whole World? But
Severus Sulpitius liked not this Fact, as appears by his words, Severus Sulpit.
Sacrae Hist. Lib.
Priscillianus cum soclis Capite plectuntur, pessimo exemplo necati.
Priscillianus with his accomplices were beheaded, being killed with a very ill
precedent. And Theognostus condemned Idacius, or Ithacius Clarus an eminent
Bishop of Spain, Isidor. Hisp. DeViris Illustr. ca 2.
as witnesses Isidorus Hispalensis, because he procured the death of
Priscillian, as did also other Catholic Bishops, as a bloody man: yet, by a
Council held at Triers, about the year 386. Vide Baron. An 386 nu. 25
he was absolved by the favor and intercession of the Emperor Maximus, by
whose Authority it was done. August. Epi. 48.
St. Augustine is known to have been of an opinion once, that Heretics ought
not at all to be Compelled to the true Faith; but afterward his judgment
altered, and that (as he says) from the experience he had of the excellent
effect such coercion had; and especially, in that diverse, who at first took
upon them the profession upon compulsion, afterward embraced it sincerely and
freely: And in the same Epistle, answers the allegation of Pedro Paolo above
mentioned, which the Donatists likewise urged against the Catholics
persecuting them, viz: No example is to be found either in the Evangelists, or
Apostles writings, whereby any thing was begged of Earthly Kings in behalf of
the Church, against the Churches Enemies. Augustine. Epistol. 48.
Quis negat non inveniri (says he)? Sed nondum implebatur illa prophetia, Et
nunc Reges intelligite etc. Psalm. 2. i. e. Who denies that? for as yet, that
Prophecy was not Fulfilled, And now understand ye Kings, etc. Id Epistol. 50
Yet do I not find, that this Father approved of killing Heretics; but in
another Epistle proceeds in a milder, and middle way, that is, Neither to
Tolerate the Heresy, nor Condemn the Heretic to Death; because that were to
cut off all possibility of Repentance, and Reconciliation to God, and the
Church; which is very hard to deny any man, before God does; And that God does,
no man can say, so long as he grants him life. And to me, it seems not very
difficult to answer Thomas his Arguments and Bellarmines who are for the death
of Heretics.

Thus then argues Thomas. Thom. 22. qu. 11 Art. 3.
If he may be burnt who counterfeits money, Why should not he that Forges, and
Publishes false Doctrine? If he that counterfeits the Kings Letters deserves
death, What does he that counterfeits, that falsifies the Scriptures and the
Divine Letters of the Lord? A woman that breaks the Conjugal Faith made to her
Husband, ought to die; and not much more he, who keeps not his Faith with God?
And he that takes away the Life of another unlawfully, suffers the loss of his
own for it; shall not he therefore who destroys his own, and neighbors Soul?
To these pretty Analogies and colorable arguments for the Death of Heretics,
we readily answer, by granting all that the arguments crave, which is, that
Heretics deserve to suffer as much, and more if you please, than such
notorious offenders against the Commonwealth, and Civil Justice. But must
therefore this punishment be necessarily corporal and outward as the other,
whose cause is Civil? this, by Thomas his good leave, follows not. But rather
the contrary. That their Punishment should be Proportionable to their offense;
Their offense was Spiritual, and their sufferings must be such too: their
offense was greater, and so shall their punishment be in Soul by eternal Death.
Bellarm. De Laicis. li. 3. ca. 21.5. Probatur, etc.
And this answers Bellarmines six arguments to prove, that Heretics ought to
suffer such Capital Punishment. First because, as all confess, Heretics may be
Excommunicated lawfully, therefore they may be killed: The Consequence is thus
drove; Because Excommunication is greater punishment than temporal Death. To
which I answer, That therefore it should have a greater death; but that, that
death must be of the same kind, does not follow, that is, temporal. Secondly,
he says Experience teaches that there is no other remedy. But I deny any
such experience: For I make no doubt but the punishments mentioned even now in
the Code, will in a short time extirpate Heretics; and perhaps sooner,
considering what a pride some Heretics take in suffering, even death, for
their errors. Thirdly, His Third is that with Thomas his, viz. Heretics are
Cheats and Counterfeits. And so is his Fourth taken from a Woman's falseness to
her Husband. The Fifth is, because All the reasons that Galen alleged against
Malefactors, hold here. Answ. First, That they should be punished, they do:
Secondly, that they would be punished with death also, but not necessarily with
Natural death; but Civil death may suffice here, and Eternal death hereafter.
Sixthly, (Lastly) he says, It is a kindness to take obstinate Heretics out of
this life: for the longer they live, the more Errors they devise; and increase
greater damnation to themselves Ans. We must distinguish between temporary, and
perpetual obstinacy: And between that which may be, and is, certainly known to
Judges for to be. Judges must proceed according to the Evidence of the Fact,
not the probability. But no man can certainly know, that, how ever a person be
Actually obstinate, he will persist in the same to his Death.

But, notwithstanding there be no more than we have heard in Reason, or
Religion, for their putting to death, and not many examples are to be found in
Antiquity; yet for the last Five hundred years since Christ, has it been but
too much put in practice under Roman-Tyranny. For that Hot-spur Genebrard,
whose design it was to give us an account of the Church's Practice, speaking
in defense of that cruelty showed against the Kathari (or Puritans) who were
burnt at Colen, in the year of our Lord 1163. Genebrard. Chronol: An: 1163.
merely for Religion, and that none of the worse; and endeavoring to justify
that Fact from ancient Precedents of the Church, could, it should seem, find
none much above 60. years older than that; and that was of that Arch-haeretick
Basilius a Physician, who in the last year of Christ 1102 was by the Command of
the Emperor Alexius burnt at Constantinople for his Heresy. But after-Ages
abound with so many sad Instances of that nature, that it were superfluous and
tedious to rehearse them: From all which, I only infer thus much: That they,
who generally approved, and practiced such extreme rigor, could not but much
more commend such more moderate means of reducing, restraining, and
extinguishing them. And I presume, if I can show what much more severe course
has been used toward Heretics and Schismatics since our Reformation in
England, it will not appear so great inhumanity, to put in strict execution
such Laws as have of old and later days been made against them.

In the Reign of Henry the Third, says Hollinshed, were two Impostors hanged,
for giving out, that they were Christ's. In the Reign of Richard the Second, and
Henry the Fourth of England, Statutes were made for the putting Heretics to
death, which stood in force until the Reign of Henry the Eighth, who caused
them to be repealed: but in lieu of them, he made such an Edict (consisting of
Six Articles, called therefore, The Whip with the six strings) that thereby,
the Life's Blood of many a good and sober Christian, was taken from them. But
in the First of Queen Mary, the former Statutes, as more for her Bloody
purposes, were revived and reinforced: of which, as a thing too apparent for
Impudence it self to encounter, I shall not speak at present, and but touch
afterward.

But neither have there been wanting instances since the Reformation, of such
Capital Punishments executed. For in the Fourth year of Edward the Sixth, or
Third (as Mr. Stow has it) Joan Butcher, Stow Chron. Ari. 3. Edw 6
otherwise called Joan Knell, and vulgarly Joan of Kent, was burned for her
Heresy, denying Christ to have taken Flesh of the Virgin Mary. And on the
24th. of April, the same year, George Paris, a Dutchman, was burnt in
Smithfield for Arianism: And in the same King's Reign, an Anabaptist of
Cholchester was burned. And truly, he that is of an Opinion, that no man ought
to suffer death purely for Religion, may notwithstanding approve of the putting
to death, such as shall bear false witness, in such a Caseat least, as that of
professing themselves to be that Person they in truth are not, whereby manifest
and intolerable evils are done to private Persons, but much more to the
Weal-Publick; when one shall pretend himself to be some Prince, or Public
Person: Much more therefore he that shall have the Impudence to give out that
he is Christ (have he a particular Cant of his own to evade the common sense
his words import, when he comes into danger) ought no less to undergo death,
than he that shall seek to Translate the Government of a People, properly
belonging to another Prince, upon himself. And as for Anabaptists, though I
think their Dogm's are a little purged of late, over what some years since they
have been, (as most Heretics, and Schismatics are, when they perceive they
will not take, nor be endured in their original Rankness): yet, if they stick
but to one or two, charged commonly on them, such as are, Denying to the Civil
Magistrates, Power of the Sword; and affirming an Exemption of (their) Saints
from human Laws; suffering corporal death for the same, they have no wrong done
them; neither can they plead Religion to protect them in causes of Civil
cognizance, as they are. And to hold an opinion (as many now adays do) that
their Governors have no Authority Ecclesiastical over them, in things neither
forbidden nor commanded by God's word, is to draw very much nearer to the
pernicious Extremes of the Anabaptist, than can consist with the good opinion
such have of themselves, and would beget in others of being very moderate Men.
But I return.

In the third of Queen Elizabeth, one Jeffrey taught publicly, Stow An. 3d. of
Qu. Eliz.
That John Moor was Christ; who were both first whipped, and then upon repentance
were committed to Prison for half a year. This was a favor shown upon
repentance. The more pitiful and strangely tender conscienc'd Judges were they
in the Houses called a Parliament of late years, who could discharge John
Naylor an Impostor, as foul and blasphemous as any of his Predecessors, without
any considerable notes of true repentance. So far did the Doctrine of Liberty
of Conscience drive many Patrons of it.

Again, in the Seventeenth year of Queen Elizabeth, Stow in Eliz.
twenty-seven Anabaptists were brought to justice, whereof two were burnt in
Smithfield; four renounced their Heresies at Paul's Cross, and thereupon were
released, the rest were condemned to die, but were only banished. In the twenty
one year of the same Queen, Id.
one Hammond, a most insolent Arian, denied Christ to be God, and blasphemed
Him, and the Gospel, and was burnt in Norwich: And about three years after, one
John Lewis was burnt in the same place for the like Heresy. And in the Reign
of King James one Legate was burnt in Smithfield for Arianism.

For King James his Reign, and Queen Elizabeth's, it is generally known how
they put not any Papist to death for their Religion, though presently they were
Sainted for dying in the Roman cause, and, as they will have it, for Religion;
and if they will have it so, so let it pass, for me: But then we must take
leave to turn to, and adhere to our old Notes, which tell us of their Faith,
that it is Faction; and their Religion, Rebellion. For, were it so that the
Laws interdicting Popish Priests of this Nation, bred and ordained beyond the
Seas, from coming into this Nation, this were no such sanguinary practice as
many Popish Ministers loudly and indeed childishly give out. For I would know
whether the Supreme power of this, as well as any other Nation, have not power
to inflict the punishment of banishment upon lighter causes than this? For
instance, Might it not be reasonable for an Act of Banishment to take place
upon all such as should transport Wool, or Fuller's-earth into foreign
Countries? The person that should do this returns into England, and is put to
death, according to the Law. But he cannot be said to be put to death for
having transported prohibited Commodities, but for breaking the Law of his
Banishment. No more can Popish Priests, taking Orders from that Church, and
returning, be said to suffer for taking Orders, or for their Religion, but for
breaking the Act of their Banishment; for, by Law they all stand banished; and
if a greater punishment than banishment be not annexed to that Decree to make it
good, instead of being sanguinary it will become ridiculous and ludicrous, and
so will the Authors of such Laws also. In the year, One thousand, six hundred,
forty and one, Ward, Walker, or Waller (for, as I take it, the man after the
Roman custom had three or four names) being a Popish Priest was hanged at
Tyburn, where he confessed, he had been banished no fewer than three or four
times. Do not such mockeries and contempt of Laws as this, deserve death, yea,
though the Law it self were unreasonable?

And now, as to the other side, with which we have to do, the Puritan Faction;
let us see how they have been proceeded against, before these three last Decads
of years, and whether it be so new and strange a matter that they should be
molested, or oppressed; and the rather because of that Officious Author of the
Interest of England, who puts on the Countenance of a Moderator, and grave and
wise decider of the point of Toleration: but alas, besides his many lamentable
failings, he could not keep on his Mask above a leaf or two; and in a certain
place speaks thus, much more boldly than knowingly or truly. Corbets Interest
of England, page 129.
Take notice that the Episcopal Clergy did not go ab^ut to exterminate the
Puritans before their latter times; and then he that had half an eye could
discern the notable advance and the confiden expectation of the Popish Faction.
And may not he that has never a bit of an eye perceive what is so palpable,
that since the Puritans had such influence, and favor shown them as of late,
that the Popish Faction is advanced ten times more than when they were better
kept under? And, this partly through the infinite scandal given to our
Reformation by them; partly, forsooth, that for their tender Consciences sake
such an indulgence and connivance general must be allowed, that Papists (who
have no less to show for a Toleration than have they) must be comprehended in
it too. But what does this Man mean to write so at a venture? but that which
moves them all, prevailed with him; viz. that the common people would not
trouble themselves so far as to suspect what he says, while he speaks what they
would have him. What think you of those that Doctor Crackenthorp says against
the Fugitive Bishop of Spalato, Crackenthor. Defensio Eccl. Anglicanae Con.
Archiepise. Spa. cap. 33.
(who for that reason, that Puritans were tolerated in England, took a
prejudice against the Church of England) were persecuted for their Consciences?
Was not Cartwright cast into Prison? Was not Brightman degraded, and put from
his Priesthood? Were not Wigginton, Culverwell, Salesbury, Field, Hildersh.
Parker, Stoughton, Smith, Jackson, and others, turned out of their Livings, and
suspended from their Priests Office? Udal and Penry adding to their obstinacy
revilings of the Queen's Majesty, one of them was put to death, and the other
received capital sentence, and was punished? Were all these or any of these of
so late standing as you mean? Do we not hear of most lamentable complaints of
old, made by the Puritans, of the sore persecution they ever sustained, and do
they now accuse later times, holding the former innocent? Fuller Ecclesi. Hist.
The Letters between the Lord Burleigh and Archbishop Whitgift are yet extant,
whereby it appears that there were very many Ministers turned out of their
Benefices in those days, in the County of Essex, only for scrupuling the Rites
and Ceremonies of our Chvrch. And more for the satisfaction of others, who are
apt to think Civil severity too much for the Church to have on their side
against such Men as these, than for this Authors sake; Sir George, his Life of
BishopVVhitgift. page 40.
Consider what Sir George Paul writes in the Life of Bishop Whitgift, and we
shall be easily convinced that our Church acts no new thing, nor the Civil
Magistrates so much as was wont to be done in behalf of the Church in the
earlier days of Reformation. Thomas Cartwright and Edmund Snapo, with others,
were called in question, and proceeded withal in the Star Chamber for setting
forth and putting in practice, without warrant or Authority, Id. page 54.
a New Form of Common Prayer, Administration of Sacraments and Presbyterial
Discipline in the year 1591. Again, the Queen was offended that Cartwright
should preach without Subscription. Again, Good execution of Laws (his own
words) against Puritans kept things quiet; Id. page 55.
especially by the assistance of the Lord Chancellor Hation. And had he who so
lately bare that name and office dealt more sincerely and uprightly toward the
Church, I suppose he had had no more to answer for, either before God or Man,
than now he has. Again, he proceeds. Id. page 58. Id. ibid.
After him, Sir John Puckering was a friend to the Church. And lastly, Sir
Thomas Egerton Lord Keeper was very careful to suppress the foresaid Libels.
And those Libels were none other but the religious stuff invented and vented
against the Church of England, and the Asserters thereof.

And this may suffice to have shown what the ancient Churches judged of
Heretics, and Schismatics, and the allowance of them, and what our Churches
has done in reference to them. It is now more than time that we come to show
what both the opinion and practice of both of them have been toward us, that
so, if there be remaining any Candor in the breasts of these importunate
demanders of the same, they may blush to require it, or at least, give us leave
not to blush to deny the same. And the God of all Justice do that which is
right in his eyes between us. And first let us hear the Papist, as briefly as
the cause will permit.

CHAP. VI. Papists directly and absolutely against Toleration of many
Religions, or any besides their own.
WE have shown out of Thomas and Bellarmine already, that Heretics ought to
be put to death, and why; and he that will be further satisfied therein may
easily turn to Commentators on Thomas, and find his opinion confirmed and
justified, without any further trouble here undertaken, to the drawing out this
discourse to a length more tedious, than necessary to the Reader. Only from
hence we may infer, what is a manifest consequent to what has been said, viz.
That if such may be cut off so by the Secular sword, they, according to such
men's judgment, may and ought to be restrained and suppressed by punishments of
an inferior rank, Johan. Houlettus Praefatione ad Regiam Majestatem: apud
Humphredum Admonit: de Curiae Romanae praxi; contendit, de Evangelicis posse,
de Romanensibus non posse sumi supplicium.
and milder nature; unless it be said by Papists (as in truth it is by some)
what the Presbyterians say for themselves, as we have showed, That Prelatists
may and ought to come to the Presbyterians, but the Presbyterians cannot, nor
ought to come to the Prelatists; That punishment ought to be taken of the
Evangelical [Professors] that is, the Reformed, but the Romanists ought not to
be punished. So Demonstrative are the reasons, and so ingenuous are the
writings of both Papist and Puritan. But we must not altogether be guided by
such Oracles as speak so broadly and vainly; if there be any such thing
remaining or to be respected in the World, sure this is reason that Men's
testimonies should conclude against themselves, when there is nothing but
disadvantage to them which make their cases different. For, neither the one nor
the other can modestly deny the Principles and Doctrine of the Church of
England to be less inconsistent with the Civil Government, and not so rank in
persecution of opinions differing from it, as are they; and yet forsooth they,
where they cannot persecute, must not be persecuted, or touched; where they
can, must not be questioned. Now that the Romanists will not endure
anycompetition in Religion, appears by what is said above; and by these several
instances.

In the year of our Lord Five hundred fifty five, as Funcius tells us, Hic
Hereticos and Schismaticos no^entes ad saniorem Doctrinam reduci rationibus,
seculari manu coerceri posse definivit. Funcius Comment. Chronol. lib. 8.
Ribadeneira de las virtudes del Principe Christiano lib. 1. cap. 24. cap.
23.26, 27, 28.
Pelagius was made Bishop of Rome in the room of Vigilius, by the Emperor
Jestinian. This Man (says he) defined that Heretics and Schismatics who
refused to be brought home to sound Doctrine, were to be restrained by the
Secular Power. And that this has been the current judgment of that Church,
their Modern writers declare. Do they not make this Defense of theirs, and
Offense of their Enemies Religion, one of their First Principles and Documents
which they season Princes with? Let the Work of Ribadeneira the Jesuit speak
for all. In the year 1597 he wrote a Treatise in Spanish, Printed at Antwerp,
Of the Virtues of a Christian Prince; The Subjects of some of the Chapters of
which Book, are these. That it is impossible, that Heretics and Catholics
should make a good League, in one and the same Commonwealth. Chap. 24. Examples
of Certain Emperors, who suffered not many Religions. Chap. 23. The same is
proved by the Authority, and Examples of Saints. Chap. 26. That Heretics ought
to be punished: and how prejudicial Liberty of Conscience most be, Chap. 27.
That Heresies are the Causes of Revolutions and Ruins of States. Chap. 28.
From such Titles as these, it is easy to divine, what is contained in that
Work: I have thought good to leave all to the ingenuity of the Reader to judge,
rather than to exceed in unnecessaries. Becanus De Fide Haeret^^is servanda,
Contra Paraeum.
To this Author, let us add one of the same Fraternity, Becanus, in a tractate
against Paraeus: where he lays down this as a Second Principle, Liberty of
Religion and Faith is unlawful, and contrary to Christian Doctrine, and hurtful
and pernicious to the Commonwealth. His Reasons are these. First, Because, as
Divines teach very right, Heresy is a greater sin than Adultery, Murder, or
Theft. Secondly, The Doctrine of Christ is true: But true and false, are
contrary. Thirdly, Liberty is hurtful: First, In respect of the Salvation of
Souls; Secondly, In respect of outward Peace and Tranquillity: For this cannot
be preserved without Unity of Faith. -- A third Principle of his is this, A
Catholic Prince can neither prescribe, approve, or introduce Liberty of
Religion, but must hinder the same, as much as possibly he can. But yet, if he
cannot hinder it without greater damage to the Public good, he may permit it,
as the less Evil: Hitherto Becanus. And that very Villain Parsons, Parsons
Mitigation. cap. 2 number. 5.
in a Treatise of Mitigation, writes thus, We agree with the Protestants in
this, that there can be no agreement between us and them in Religion. Yea, so
far did this man's Zeal hurrie him for Religion, who himself was by his own side
suspected to be an Atheist in heart, that presuming at length by his many
State-Stratagems, and Treasonable Practices, to subvert both Church and State,
as they were then established, that one of his requests to the Pope was, That
England being reduced to his Model, none other Popish Orders might be Tolerated
in England save the Jesuits and Franciscans, which were not like to disagree
so much as Secular Priests with other Orders and the Jesuits; while these kept
to their particular Rules of having all they can lay their hands on, and they
of having nothing. And I have been told, that even since the Restoration of
his Present Majesty, the Emulation and Animosities have been so great, that
after several Pamphlets, For, and Against Secular Priests and Jesuits, the
Secular Priests with the assistance of some of other Orders undertook with some
Great Persons that, upon condition they might have a Toleration (which is the
most that any Faction did at first Petition for) they would take care, that the
Jesuits should never be admitted in England: of which, Mr. Cressie, that busy
Apostate, can give you a farther account. But when a man considers how that
subtle, industrious, and powerful Faction has bafled all the severest Edicts
against them in such Countries where Popery flourishes, he will scarce believe
that such a device could take effect, or, if it did, could continue long. Could
any Decree be more solemn, or sharp against them, than that, made by Henry the
Fourth of France, whereby, the Jesuits were all to depart Paris within Three
days, and within Fifteen, An. Dom. 1594
to forsake the whole Kingdom; and a Pillar to be erected in Public, for
Posterity to read their wickedness and doom; for the Assasination of that Great
Prince in his own Chamber, by a young bird John Chastel of about 18 years of
age, of the Jesuits bringing up: And yet, such was their Dexterity,
Dissimulation, and Interests with Pope and all Princes of their Religion, that
about Ten years after, the very same King should be imposed upon so far, as to
demolish the Monument of their Wickedness; repeal his Banne, restore them
again: And in the very same year (as most then, and there living, judged) the
same King being Murdered right-out by Ravilliac, instigated by those holy men;
they not only escaped censure, but carried the matter with such artifice, that
the Kings heart must be given to them, as his best Friends; and conveyed to a
Convent of theirs at La Flech: Notwithstanding, thus much Ravilliack confessed
(who would confess but little) that by reading Mariana the Jesuits Book, he
was impelled to commit that Fact: Whereupon Cotton, the Jesuits Chief Father,
wrote a Book to the Queen, endeavoring to show, that they held no such
opinions: But another Author wrote a Book, which he entitled Anti-Cotton,
wherein he manifestly proved the contrary.

And did not the State of Venice in Paul the Fifths time, upon discovery of
their treacherous, and mischievous Prancks, expel them their Dominions, adding
a Law after them, which made it Death for any, to propound any thing to the
Senate, in order to their Return; yet have they so brought it about, by the
Pope their singular Friend; and by the Turk their happy Enemy; and lastly, by
their infinite Treasure, That admittance and welcome is granted them into their
Countries.

But to return: Judge we yet farther of their Opinions, concerning Toleration of
others, from that profane Fop, Author of Fiat Lux, Page 260.
who, in a good humor, professes great kindness to both Prelatical and Puritan
Party; but that forced fained Part being soon laid down, and he returning to
himself, compares them both to the Bond-maid, and her Son Ismael, and then
nothing less will satisfy him, than, ejice Ancillam cum Puero suo. Out with
them both; Surely that the Papists may enter, and have not only free, but alone
Possession! For he adds; This is the only remedy and means of Peace.

But Bellarmine, where we above quoted him, gives us not only his opinion, but
reasons, why Heretics may not be suffered, which are worth the reciting on
this occasion. This then is the subject of one Chapter, Bellarm: li. 3. To. 2.
ca. 19.
Non posse conciliari Catholicos cum Haereticis, i. e; There can be no
Reconciliation between Catholics, and Heretics: And whom he means by both, no
doubt is to be made. First, then he begins with Cassander, and quarrels with,
and confutes him: whose opinion, and design he tells us it was, That Princes
ought to find out an Expedient toreconcile Catholics, Lutherans, and
Calvinists: and that until this could be effected, every one should be
permitted his Faith; provided he received the Scriptures and Apostles Creed.
But herein the Cardinal was mistaken: For in that Treatise, De Officio Pii
Viri, etc. quoted by him, Cassander has neither any such words, nor design: but
this must be rather found in his Consultations; and even there, he does not
propound any thing for the Toleration of diverse Religions, but the reduction
of Religion to Primitive Rule of Holy Scriptures, Interpreted by purest
Antiquity, which was the most equal, and visible outward means of Reconciling
Differences. But his Reasons, why neither Lutherans, nor Calvinists ought to be
Tolerated, because they are such for the most part, that War against himself,
and Pretenders to Moderation at present; we will here set down. First, because
we agree not in the Creed it self. Secondly, Lutherans and Calvinists are no
true Members of the Church. Thirdly, Lutherans and Calvinists differ more, than
in Rites; in such things as are of greatest moment, and yet not contained in
the Creed it self. 4. The Holy Fathers, and the Apostles, require that we
should observe not only the principal, but less Matters. 5. If it be free to
believe as men please in one point, by the same reason they may be suffered to
believe so in others also. 6. This is a new opinion of Cassander, and therefore
to be suspected. 7. This opinion renders the Church altogether obscure and
invisible.

And in his 21th. Chapter propounding this subject, Posse Haereticos ab
Ecclesia damnatos temp ralibus poenis, etiam morte, multari: He first tells us
how John Huss at the Council of Constance affirmed that it was not lawful to
deliver incorrigible Heretics to the Secular power, and suffer them to be
burnt; and how Luther affirmed the same, and that it is no new error; for as
much as the Donatists held the same: after all this he adds, Contrarium docent
omnes Catholici, and aliqui etiam Haeretici; i.e. All Catholics teach the
contrary, and some Heretics; of which sort is Calvin, who caused Servetus to
be burnt at Geneva: and so Aretius caused Valentinus Gentilis to be put to
death at Berne. You may see his Thesis proved afterward by several places of
the Old and New Testament, which I list not here to relate; they are obvious of
themselves. Stapleton in his Sermons confirms this saying, Qui libros
Haereticorum legere, etc. Staplet. Prompta Moral. Domin 7. post Pente.
They who think it no sin to read Heretics Books, or suppose they may be
suffered safely, consider not what that imports which our Savior says, Beware
of false Prophets, etc. And to imprint this the better in our minds, he tells
us with great gravity and seriousness, a Tale out of the common Budget, thus.
'The Abbot Cyriacus Presbyter of Laura Calamon, near the River Jordan, Pratum
Spiritu. cap. 46.
saw in his sleep the Blessed Virgin pass by his Cell; and being very
importunate with her that she would vouchsafe to come in [and surely to take an
hard bed] she replied. How can I enter into thy Cell while thou keep by thee
mine enemy? and, so having said thus, went her way. But he waking, marvelled
what this should mean; but at length having ransacked all his Cell, he found
two Books of Nestorius stitched to a Volume of Jsychius. Surius Commentar-rerum
gectarum in Orb. Au. 1540 page 400.
Answerable hereunto is the applause given by Surius to the Emperor's Decree
made in the year 1540. for the burning of Heretics Books; and his own opinion
largely delivered in justification of such punishment toward Heretics. And
though Guiliclmus Parisiensis were a Man of that moderation and gravity in
other points, Guilielmus Farisiensis, De Fide, cap. 2.
herein he seems to be most severe; saying, Quicquid contra veram credulitatem
est, error est. Consequens igitur est, omnem credulitatem quae c^mmuni fidei
contradicit, errorem esse impietatis; and ideo g^adio and igne exterminandam.
i. e. What ever is against true Faith, is an error. From whence it follows,
That all belief which is against the common Faith, is an impious error,
Consideres deinde^ Ecclesiam Romanam, etc. Episcop. Respons. ad Wadding. Epist.
De Regula.
and to be driven out by fire and sword. So that true is that of Episcopius to
Wadding the Jesuit, whom he advises to consider it; The Roman Church holds this
for an undoubted Axiom according to his confession, and particularly Rosweden
in his late Treatise of the evil Faith of Capellus, that Heretics are to be
put to death, their Books to be burnt, and their Faith to be kept under by
eternal silence.

But this short taste of a plentiful table of such stuff as this, may suffice,
as to the Romanists opinion, which their practices have superabundantly
confirmed; of which to speak a little, as it will not be impertinent, so to
speak much altogether superfluous; the whole being but too apparent.

And here we may begin with the Romish Inquisition constituted of so much
injustice and cruelty as scarce can be matched any where. It began, (says
Pedro Paolo) after the year One thousand, Pedro Paolo, Histor. Inquisit. page 6.
two hundred; the principal Inquisitors being the Dominicans and Franciscans,
who sprang up about that time. And about the year of Grace, One thousand, two
hundred, forty four, Frederick the Second, Emperor, published four Edicts at
Padoa, in favor of the Inquisitors; whereby, obstinate Heretics were to be
cast into the Fire; and, such as repented, were yet to be kept in Prison
perpetually. And this Inquisition in tract of time has acquired so much
strength and sury, that Princes themselves have been subject to it, and
oppressed by it, as lamentably appears in the sad instance of Charles Prince
and Heir of Spain, who upon suspicion only, that he favored Heretics, falling
into the Paws of these merciless Lions, was put to death against his Father
Philip's will, Joac. Ursin. Praefat. ad lib. Reginal. Ursin de Inquisitioue.
and endeavor to the contrary; as Joachimus Vrsinus witnesses. Yet I know
there goes a tradition that his own Father caused his death, upon such a
suspicion: which, if so, the matter is but little mended as to the extreme
rigor used by the Inquisitors, and the Roman Zealots against Heretics. Which
the Duke of Alva (that Butcher of Christians) further demonstrated in his
Generalship over the Netherlands, so that he gloried at his Table, that, for
the extirpating of Heresy, in the space of six years only, he had caused to be
grievously tormented and put to death about Eighteen thousand, Meteranus Histor
Belgic. lib. 4. page 127. Bellarm. lib 3. cap. 12. De Lai cis.

Baronius: An. 1199. numb. 33.

Guilielmus Armon. De rebus (...) ^hilip. gest. apud Bzovium.


besides such as he had destroyed in the War out of hatred, by private murders
also, as Metaranus writes. And long before this, In the days of Innocent the
third, were burnt of the Albigenses a Hundred and eighty at one time, as
Bellarmine testifies, and justifies too: But Baronius out-vies him: for he
says, that in one day in the year One thousand, one hundred, eighty three, in
the City of Bordeaux alone, Seven thousand of them were slain. But another
report much more surpasses his, affirming that in the year One thousand, two
hundred and nine, in the same City were slain Sixty thousand Albigenses. In the
same year, in the Village Minerva an hundred and eighty were burnt alive. In
the year One thousand, two hundred, and a eleven, Four hundred were burnt at
Pulchra Vallis. Again, See Bzovius, Matthew. Paris, and quoted ^y Doctor
Crackenthorp. Defen^. Eccles. Angl. Cont. Spalatens. cap. 18. Sleiden Com. lib 6

Meminimus loco vicino Basileae crematum esse quendam propter esum carnium.

Melancthon Epistola ad Marchiacas Ecclesias Causs. 23. q. 5. cap. Excomm^.
Summar. of Religion, p. 31.


in the same year in Lavarum, Eighty were put upon Gibbets. In the same year
Eighty of the Nobles were beheaded; neither did they spare the Women. Again, in
the year One thousand, two hundred, and thirteen at Mirellum many were cut off
by the Sword, more consumed in the River, twenty ( Prateolus says, Seventy)
thousand were slain. In the year One thousand, two hundred, and ninteen, at
Miromanda were slain 5000. In the year 1236. about fifty were burnt or buried
alive. And in the year One thousand, two hundred, forty two, in a small Village
in the Diocese of Toulouse, about Two hundred were burned. By all which we see
clearly what Execution the Inquisition did, newly then erected. Sleiden tells
us further of one who was burnt, because he could not approve of all the Roman
Rites. And Melancthon of another, who was burnt in a place not far from Basile,
because he did eat Flesh. All which agrees perfectly with the definition of
Pope V^ban, who says, We do not judge them to be Murderers, who, out of zeal to
Catholic Church, shall kill some Excommunicate persons.

And in France Twenty thousand men were slain in, and about Paris, upon the
License given, by the Duke of Guise, to root out the Evangelicks, as Sleiden
reports to us. To this, if we add the inhuman as well as unchristian Fact of
Charles the 9th. of France, by whose Connivence and Concurrence, if not
command, so many thousands of Hugonots were Massacr'd for no other real
Reasons, but because they were of The Religion; however blushing at the
Immanity of the Fact, a pitiful groundless tale was told concerning Plots
should nave been laid by them; we need proceed no further: For such an
intolerable and treacherous piece of Barbarity it was, that our Adversaries,
and their Friends that committed the same, have nothing more, or better, to
answer for it; but that we are too prone to remember it: and they too prone to
commit such Butcheries and Inhumanities against them, that differ from them in
Religion, and are too unwilling to learn of them.

Not long after the First Light of Reformation in Spain, were estimated about
2000 of that Profession, Sr. Edwin Sands.
and were it not, (says a diligent Observer of Men and Countries) for the
Inquisition, all the Country would soon be overspread with them of the Reformed
Religion. In Sevil alone were thought to be 12000, who all by the violence and
vigilance of the Inquisition, have been suppressed and brought to nothing. Let
not Papists therefore wonder and brag both, of their plentiful Harvest they
have of late days reaped of Proselytes, by putting their Sickle into our Corn,
for, were it so, that such remission of Laws, such an indifferency were
cherished and countenanced in Persons, such a permission and favor to Seducers
were granted, as is apparent has been given to our Adversaries, it would
appear in a short time in Spain and Italy, what a great difference there would
be in the success, to the advantage of our Religion.

And can any doubt be made, what favor or Toleration we are to expect from
Papists here, in this Nation; were we in the power of their hands, as they
either are, or might be in ours, how they would dispose of us; when it is so
unanswerably evident how it tolerably they have Persecuted our Religion already
in England: so that, as one observes, in two of the six years Reign of Queen
Mary only, Epistola Ante Ridleium De Coena Domini.
diverse Testimonies and Letters testify no fewer than 800 persons were put to
most cruel deaths in England, for their Religion only. And our Acts and
Monuments, of their Bloody minds and hands are such lasting evidences against
them, that they have no better way to save their reputation, but by scoffs, and
merry Flouts, which with such as are ambitious to be counted Wits, rather
than Religious, is of greatest Force. And that Lack-manners and honesty Parsons
shall be heard upon his scurrilous humor, rather than he, whose Shoes he was
unworthy to carry; as to Learning, Fidelity, or Piety. It Is not denied what is
most colourably objected, that Mr. Fox, might set such down for Martyred
Persons who suffered not. But considering that he, following the Decrees and
Sentence of Death publicly extant against such persons, together, with the
time and place determined for that end, might authentickly deliver that for
done (though peradventure such things might interpose, between the Lips and the
Cup, which might alter Sentence given) which particularly, and precisely to
find out through all England, was very hard.

And to write a History, or rather a Tragedy of what was Acted by Rebellions,
Treasons, and Conspiracies in King Edward the Sixths, Queen Elizabeth's, and
King James his days only, for their Religion, were to speak truths most
pertinent to our subject, but shameful to such, as are of that Communion, and
plead for Liberty. How do we wish for no other testimony, than that of their
own Consciences; how incompatible with Civil Unity and Peace this Design is?
how certainly it would turn, and is by them intended for our Ruin and
Destruction, as well as their own safety? and we needed not such, and so many
sad and invincible Instances of their Irreconcilableness to, and Inconsistency
with us, in any co-ordination or equality of Privileges? How do we wish that
men would be so fair, as to stand to their own Hands of outward Practices, and
then needed there no curious Inquiries into men's judgments, or resolutions: But
when men's Cause and Hearts so far fail them, that they dare stand to the Trial
of neither of these, but will have judgment pass on them by the future, which
is invisible, and impossible to be known but by what is past; and when neither
their Pens, nor their Swords shall conclude, but a sorry word or two in their
straits, shall be taken for sufficient proof of Natures and Wills: then does
there remain nothing for us, to betake our selves to, but our Prayers; and
them, not so much that God would keep us in our Religion, but Wits.

Diverse are their Papers and Pamphlets, whereby they would amuse such as
understand or regard nothing, with the reasonableness of their Religion, and
the merits of their Persons; but both the one and the other have been, with all
ocular Demonstrations, convicted of the contrary by sober and plain replies
made unto them. They Mascarate themselves most frequently under the plausible
and taking Appellations of Old Cavaliers, and having so disparaged the King and
Churches party, they exspatiate with strange levity and vain glory in the
common place of Self-admiration, and highest commendations: Letter of an Old
Cavalier in Yorkshire to one in ^ondon.
viz. What Men of parts, and power, and ingenuity, and fortitude of mind, in
bearing Persecutions, which have been hitherto nothing but acts of Grace and
favor. But they tell us not how they laugh in their sleeves at all
Proclamations and Laws for their restraint, and banishment of their Seminaries,
and Incendiaries, as being secure in the midst of such insignificant thunders,
and presumptuous in the midst of their pretended fears. And from truth and
sobriety of language are they degenerated in their writings into such
frivolous, fallacious, and mere childish humors of moving compassion, where
reason cannot be shaken, that a Man of any insight in the course and causes of
things cannot but despise their empty and groundless Apologies. I shall touch
but two of their more common pleas, and places for themselves, and so leave
them. The one is, That Papists are tolerated in diverse Parts of Germany, in
Holland, Switzerland, in France, and I know not where else: as if that were all
true which they affirm in this particular; or, as if so much as is true were
any whit to our present case: For, neither in the Free Cities in Germany, or
certain Countries (as they would suggest and persuade against the certain
knowledge of the wisest) are either Papists tolerated in Protestant Countries,
or Protestants in Popish. But in the first troubles and dissentions (even to
civil discords and armings on both sides) an accord was at length made, and
composition, That such Churches and Places should belong to Papists, and such
to Protestants; so that they never had one over another perfect Dominion,
either Ecclesiastical or Civil, from the ruptures made amongst them; whence it
is evident, that the one bears indeed with the other, but neither gives
Toleration to other. And this is the Case chiefly of France: where, though the
true Sovereign of both be of the Romish Church, yet cannot it be said that he
freely gives them Toleration, since that was concluded upon when it was not in
the King's power to deny, and was ratified in the Agreement, which they of the
Religion (as they are called) made with their Prince (whether orderly or
irregularly is not now under question) upon the mutual pacification; so that
the Laws of that Nation and the constitution thereof do as truly require the
inviolable observation thereof on one side as on the other, and secure the
Protestants. But our Laws are directly contrary thereunto, and the reason
hereof is well known to be, the unreasonableness and indomitable malice and
mischief of Papists extorting these severe Edicts.

And in Holland, what Toleration have they? Any Legal, or Public Act of Grace
in that behalf, which is pleaded for here? Nothing less: but they and their
Religion are at the disposal of Military Officers to repress, or permit,
according as gain shall arise to them from a Connivance. And let any
indifferent Person judge, whether the Cases be alike: and especially in this,
That such as are Papists in the United Provinces have expended their lives and
treasures to bring the State to that condition it now enjoys; and surely may
with good reason expect some benefit of quiet and ease under the same: On the
other side, our Papists have perpetually machinated, and to their Power
executed Plots and practices pernicious to our present Government both Civil
and Ecclesiastical, and thereby forfeited all Protection of Laws, and common
sufferance.

And whereas they never cease, as with the swelled cheeks of Fame to sound out
their own praises for their late adherence to Charles the First, in his Wars
against the Rebels (which is their Second main Topic for Indulgences;) How do
these their Merits melt away, not so much before the Sun, as Candle; showing
these great Flaws in their pretenses, and Insolidities? First, put Case that
they had done such singular and signal service (though I think that the Kings
Cause was never, in the gross, advanced by the most valiant common Drunkard, or
noted Papist, through the Scandal given to them of sober Manners, or Religion)
Did they rise in their Allegiance above the duty of Subjects? Again, Were they
all on that side? Were they all of that mind? Did none of the Popish Faction,
act to the prejudice of the King? How apparent is it, what a mixture of Papists
heads there was, in the laying the Design of the Rebellion, as well in England,
as Ireland? and how Priests of all sorts mingled themselves, disguised in the
Parliaments Army, to widen and inflame Differences? There are Treatises extant
showing this, which though peradventure, may have over acted their part, yet so
much of reality do they contain, Williams Bishop of Ossory Discovery of
Mysteries. page 52.
which notably may allay the braggs of unspotted fidelity to their King and
Country. Bishop Williams, in a Treatise be wrote in the heat, and height of
Rebellion, tells us upon his own knowledge, that of Fifty, or Sixty Soldiers
that billetted in Adthorp, there was no less than three or four Papists of the
Parliaments Army. Add hereunto the idle, as well as treacherous Piece of Mr.
White, Of Government, whereby he asserted the Right of Rule, belonging only to
the Line of our Kings, to him that villanously Usurped it, or any one else that
could get it; and their faithfulness shrinks into a less compass. Besides, be
it true, that they were so generally Courageous, and Faithful to their King, as
is talked of; Could no sufficient agnition, or remuneration be thought of, but
such as turned to the extreme damage of such, as were no less Faithful and
Loyal, than were they? Or, did they not only purchase glory and benefit to
themselves, but misery and undoing to others, by their Merits? They were not
(it may be as truly, as boldly said) above the Twentieth Part of the Kings
Forces. Whence comes it then, that they make more noise than all others? From
their generous minds which they boast of? And must the Generality of the Nation
be certainly undon that they may receive their just reward? But that the whole
Nation must in short time lose its Religion, and Sacrifice it to theirs, is
most apparent, out of what has been showed of their Tenets, and Facts, who
never rest till they are chief; and being chief, never suffer men of another
Persuasion to live, so much as basely under them. But then, must they not be
requited and gratified for their Acts? Surely, their reward has followed them,
in that their Persons and Estates have been Rescued out of the hands of their,
and our Enemies, by the favorable Influence of the Kings Government; and more
they cannot modestly contend for. Or, if we should grant a Proportion greater
to them, than any of the Kings Subjects else, might it not suffice that they
have personal Privileges of Preferment, Dignities, or Liberty to themselves;
but must their Acts so far preponderate all of another Religion in the same
service with them, that they ought to transmit to Posterity such rewards; and
these immunities from Laws must they for their sakes be granted to all as are
nothing akin to them but by Religion? But consider we lastly, with what
circumstances, and motives, their Loyalties were qualified: and we may easily
discern that Self-preservation might be as strong an argument, as was their
famed Loyalty. For they saw plainly the Rebel-Houses aimed at their Ruin, and
seized their Estates. Had they any more profitable way then left them, or
probable, to oppose their Enemies, than by giving Assistance to the King? And
when their own Interest might suffice to join with him, as is frequent for
neighbors to assist their weaker Enemies, to prevent a more potent and
dangerous Adversary; must this be cried up, as such incomparable good Service,
as can never, nor any other way, be recompensed but by opening a door to our
own Perdition? When they so cheerfully, and clearly espouse the Cause of King
and Country against their Religious Interest, (as hitherto they have only
jointly with it) it will be much more seasonable and proper to demand such
Remunerations (though not so great) as now they expect. But to stretch to such
length, breadth, and height their late Actions by Amplifications and Encomiums,
as if they could as easily merit Earth, as Heaven, by doing scarce their duty;
and to faign themselves even half mad with admiration, and astonishment, that
any of the Friends to the King, should yet suspect them of Disloyalty, is but
to follow the humor of their Religion, which teaches, Because their Church has
not erred at sometimes, therefore at no time must it be thought for to Err.
Which yet, as unreasonable as to all the World it appears, we will engage to
comply with them in, when they shall be able to give but the tithe of Instances
for their peaceableness and loyalty, as we shall for their Seditions, Treasons,
Rebellions, and Conspiracies against all Government not hallowed with their
Profession. In a word, never let their unparalled confidence in justification
of themselves as to Obedience and Loyalty prevail over them, to imagine we
will deny our Senses and Experience, and all Record, and Histories to the
contrary: For, we^e there no more ingenious way to put these things out of
doubt, we would readily pawn our Heads against their Beards, and our Lives
against their meanest Limbs, that so far as writings and actions past can give
any proof of future dispositions, and motions, (I do not say a Papist, but)
Popery cannot consist with the Peace of this Nation or Church, as now
established, we will undertake to Demonstrate; when ever they shall be so bold
as to tempt us to put them to so much just and necessary shame. And in truth,
this has been so far and fully done, and that lately by others, that were, it
my present design (as it is not) to paint them out in their Postures, and
Colors, the labor would be unnecessary: This therefore will I leave for them
to be still astonished at, and me to prove; That a Papist, as a Papist and
following the most received and current Doctrine taught by that Church, (some I
easily grant, as in all other points, may vary somewhat, but they are but few,
and contemptible with them,) and put in practice can never be a Loyal Subject,
under any Prince not of the Romish-Church, any longer than necessity humbles
him, and despair of prosperous success keeps him tame. Let us therefore hear
what the other Extreme, the Puritan, has to plead for, or rather against,
himself; and whether he be a Child of better hopes, who gives us the very same
promises with the other, and himself the same praises.

CHAP. VII. The Opinions and Practice of Puritans, directly opposite to that
kind of Liberty of Conscience they argue for, and at present desire.
IT has been observed by some, that the Jesuits and Puritans had their
Original at the same time, with the difference of one year only. For the
Puritans began to show their Head in the year 1536; and the Jesuits were
admitted at Rome in the year 1537. Sanderus De Haeresih. p. 221. Genebrardus.
Chronol. Anno 1566.
But Sanders and Genebrard affirm they sprang up in the year 1566. And I have
heard the Providence of God toward the Church admired and magnified amongst
Foreign Papists, who at the same time that the Presbyterians arose, stirred up
the Jesuits to oppose and countermine them. And I find it one of the best
popular arguments in the mouths, and lately in the writings, of Presbyterians,
That they ought to be tolerated, and not only so but cherished in this Church,
for their singular enmity and opposition to Popery; which, when they are once
put down, they give out must needs enter in. For thus speaks one of no small
account with them, John orbets Interest of England, page 46.
And verily if there were a design to reconcile England to Rome, let all means
be used totally to quash the Puritans or Presbyterians; but if England will
keep her self pure from Romish abominations, let her be a kind Mother to th^se
her Children; for this Interest is one chief strength of the Reformed
Protestant Religion. Thus he.

An argument, as current as it is, this is, consisting equally of Folly and
Knavery, as will thus appear. First, because we having found by direful
experience that the Presbyterians, as well as the Papists, have not only
contrived and conspired against our Churches welfare, but have actually most
scandalously and cruelly endeavored the utter overthrow of the same, and still
stick firmly to the same Principles, which instigated them to such unnatural
and unjust practices; may not their argument (as indeed it has been) be turned
thus against them for the Papists? Verily if there be a design to become
Presbyterians, then let the Papists be totally quashed; but if England will
keep her self pure from the Dominations of Scottish Presbytery, then let her be
kind to the Papists, who have done as much against them as they have against
the Papists; thus does the extreme vanity of their argument appear; the only
course to preserve our selves in peace and unity being to serve them both
alike. Again, were it so that by accident (for it cannot be said out of design
to the good of our Church) either of them might contribute somewhat to the good
of the Church as now established, the rule which Seneca gives us in such cases
is not to be neglected, Seneca lib. 1. cap. 12.
Non ideo vitia recipienda surt quia aliquando al quid boni ^ffecerunt, Evils
are not to be admitted, because at certain times they have had some good
effect. So neither ought we to run to Popery for fear of Presbytery, nor run to
Presbytery, for fear of Popery. But the way of arguing is likewise very
knavish, in that by implication, a wicked slander is cast upon our Church, that
it must needs favor Popery, if Puritanism be wholly rejected; But if we deny
them such prevaricating Reasonings, we cut them out of all their prime
confidences, and take away their most principal and successful Weapons.
Therefore, leaving this, let us come nearer to their testimonies against
themselves. In which, because they pretend great reverence to Foreign Divines
of the Reformation, it will not be much out of the way to set down one or two
of their Authorities against them.

It is well known that Beza has written a Tractate on purpose, Beza de
Hareticis a Magistratu puniendis.
That Magistrates may, and ought to punish Heretics, which they of his side,
who doubt of this point, may turn to, and be convinced. I shall cite this only
passage out of him, and so leave him. Cedo igitur Christus quo jure flagella
his corripuit? Quo jure Petrus Annaniam and Sapphiram occidit? Quo jure Paulus
Elymam excoecavit? Number Ecclesiastici Minist^rii? Minime profecto. etc. [you
that hold that the Magistrate ought not to punish Hereticks] Tell me I pray, By
what authority did Christ twice take a whip up? By what authority did Peter put
to death Annanias and Sapphira? By what authority did Paul put out the eyes of
Elymas? What, by the Ecclesiastical Ministry? Nothing less truly, unless thou will confound Jurisdictions. Therefore was it done by the authority of the
Civil Magistrate: For, there is no third way.

Peter Martyr writes not only against professed Heretics, but such as call
themselves tender-conscienc'd men too, allowing them toleration no longer than
they may receive sufficient instruction; and adds, Petrus Martyr Loc. Com.
Clas. 2. cap. 1. numb. 32, etc.
Imo neque in ipsis mediis rebus Infirmis est assentiendum, nisi tantisper dum
melius ac per fectius doceantur. Ac cum rem, etc. Yea, neither in things
indifferent are we to yield to the weak, unless for a while, until they may be
better and more fully instructed: But so soon as they have understood the
matter, and yet are doubtful, their weakness is not to be cherished. Besides,
so much ought not to be attributed unto such, as that by our example we should
hurt others, and more of the members of Christ. Thus Martyr. And it is to us
plain (however they must and may be of another opinion) that by giving way to
them that thus pretend tender Consciences, we should offend Consciences a great
deal better settled, and more to be regarded and valued than theirs, which (as
experience from cruel havoc they have made in Church and Commonwealth, assures
us) strain at a guat and swallow a Camel.

And what other course took the Contra-remonstrants against their Brethren in
the Netherlands, after the Council of Dort, but this; when they refused to
submit to the sentence then given? Act. Synodal. page 324.
They decreed, That every one should be deprived of all, as well Ecclesiastical
as. Scholastical Offices, who refused to submit punctually to the Acts of the
Synod; and, Synodal Remonstrat. in Praefat.
that no man should be admitted to the Ministry for the time to come, who
refused to subscribe to the Doctrine there declared, and preach according unto
the same: And in pursuance of that final determination, no fewer than two
hundred of the Opposite Party, who could not conform to the Acts thereof, were
forthwith banished the Country; a Proclamation following them from the
Magistrate, That no Man should afford them any help or maintenance. Does not
this match for a hair the extremest persecution can at present be objected to
the Church against Puritans? Or rather does it not exceed it?

Bullinger tells us with full approbation and commendation, Bullingerus Epist
ad Calvinum Epist. ^^3 inter Call. vini Epi^^olas.
Dudum D. Vrbanus Regius una cum om^ibus Luneburgensibus Ecclesiae Ministris,
edito etiam libro Germanico jure divino and humano coerceri Haereti^^s, tum
etiam ju e civil^; si non desinant impia, etc. i. e. Master Urbanus Regius,
together with all the Ministers of Luneberg has lately published a Book in the
German tongue, whereby he shows that by the Law of God and Man, and Civil Law
too, Heretics ought to be restrained, if they cease not to scatter wicked
Doctrines, or have scattered blasphemies against God. And in the same Epistle
he tells us, Not long since Titian, an Italian Anabaptist, an Hebionite, and
Helvidian was cast into prison by the three Confederate Countries of Rhetia,
and had been burnt, had he not made a Recantation; and yet, notwithstanding
that, was whipped by the Court.

And what Calvin's opinion was in this point we needed not inquire further than
we are taught from his Fact, principally in causing Servetus to be burnt at
Geneva. But his Institutions and Epistles, where he is much displeased with
good Melancthon for straitning the breaches, and qualifying the distempers of
both sides; and on the other side, his Book against the Anabaptists do clearly
show and prove unto us.

But whoever pleases to satisfy himself more fully and particularly
concerning the opinions of Foreign Divines in the case of conscience about the
granting liberty to scrupulous persons in matters of Indifferency, may consult
Mons^eur Durels diligent Collections of several of them, negatively concluding
against Liberty in indifferent things, to any or many single persons, contrary
to the constitutions of a Church: And in truth, they that contend for the same
cannot show a Church upon earth that indulges so far. So equal and ingenuous
are they to tug so undeniably for it of us. Bilson's Difference of Christian
Obedience from, etc. page 33.
But I now draw homeward, where I may be the more brief, because Bishop Bilson
has to any reasonable man's hand, already proved this Thesis, That Magistrates
may compel their Subjects against their pretended consciences to
Ecclesiastical Orders.

Who of them can refuse Mr. Cartwright, the Aurhors of the Admonition compiled
in Queen Elizabeth's days, and many Supplications to the Parliaments in those
days? do not they all run in one strain of abolishing utterly the established
Government? and Cartwright in particular excepting against the Common Prayer
for permitting the people to depart at the time of Communion; says, It ought
to provide that all those who would withdraw themselves, Th. Cartwright Reply
to Whitgist. page 117.
should be by Ecclesiastical Discipline at all times, and now also under a
Godly, etc. (...) by Civil punishment brought to communicate with their
Brethren. And this is the Law of God, and this is now, and has been, the
practice of the Churches Reformed, etc.

And I hope they take not Mr. Perkins to be any of their Enemies, though I
think he had too much Learning and Honesty to be a Fautor of such designs and
practices as are now on Foot: He, in a certain place, Perkins on Galat. 1.
verse. 13, 14. page 201, and 202. vide.
writes thus, In persecution of the Church by Paul, two points are to be
considered, The manner or measure, and accomplishment; the manner is, That he
persecuted the Church extremely, or above measure. That which Paul did in his
Religion we must do in ours. His meaning plainly is, That as Paul in a false
Religion and Zeal did persecute the true, so we in the true (and surely every
man supposes himself of the true Religion) ought to persecute the false. And
afterward he has these words, The Toleration of two Religions in one Kingdom
is the overthrow of Peace. Id. Galat. 5.15.
And in another place of the same Comment upon the Galatians, he has these
words, For this cause, the Jews had but one Temple, Id. Gal^t. 3.23 page 289.
one Mercy-seat, one High Priest, etc. Hence it follows, that in all Godly
Christian Commonwealths where true Religion is established, there may be no
Toleration of any other Religion. For, that which is the end of Gods Laws, must
likewise be the end of all good Laws, in all Commonwealths and Kingdoms, namely
to shut up the people into the unity of one Faith. Thus far Mr. Perkins. And
before all these he gives a notable reason for Constraint. For, says he, The
multitude of people amongst us are like Wax, Id. Galat. 1.6, 7.
and are fit to take the stamp and impression of any Religion; and it is the
Law of the Land, that makes most receive the Gospel, and not Conscience. And as
he brings a reason here for constraint, so does he else where remove an
Objection commonly brought against it; which is this, It may be said, Id.
Galat. 5.15.
that Faith and Conscience are free. I answer (says he) though Faith in the
heart, and Conscience be free in respect of man's authority, yet is not the
publishing of Faith and Profession of Conscience free in like sort, but it
stands subject to the power of the Magistrate.

But it is time now to descend yet lower to the Doctrine of such who were of
the same Confederacy with the present suers for liberty. In the year of our
Lord 1641. Mr. Marshal preached his famous piece on Numbers 23.5. of, Curse ye
Meroz; Mr. Marshal his Sermon before the House, 1641.
which is nothing less than Toleration of tender Consciences (if it be lawful
to suppose any conscience can be tender which differs from them) but drives on
with a fury them who were not backward to oppress men in their Consciences and
Religion. Amongst other things this he leaves with his Auditors, coming to
Application, that being obliged to curse their Adversaries, this Cursing
consisted in two things, Maledicere Verbo, and Malefacere Re. They were to
curse or speak evil of them in Word. And they were to do them mischief in Deed.

Mr. Faircloth, preaching in the same year against Achans Villainy, Sam.
Faircloth Sermon before the House of Commons, Apr. 4. 1641.
and Josuah's zeal against him, declares much against the Achans that hindered
the intended Reformation, and the toleration of the Church-party, yea, against
Procrastination of Severities against them; page ^7. Doct. 4. And page 40, 41.
he answers the argument of delay taken from Fabius Maximus, with Application,
1. of Praise. 2. of Prayer. Then comes he to Motives: page 44, 45.
It is God's will, page 49.
you make speed. 2. Achaus make speed to do hurt. 3. Delay hinders the joy and
jubilee of the Church. 4. Ye shall bring blessings to your selves. page 50, 51.
5. Justice executed on them, is the only end of all your Prayers. Thus he. Now
if they by an usurped authority acting, taught such zeal against their
Superiors; can they hold it unreasonable that Legal authority should proceed
according to their own Maxims? But I shall not need to repeat innumerable
instances which might be given of their impatience at the name of Toleration or
Moderation, which they were wont to brand with the note of Detestable
Neutrality. What was that language or design which Cartwright of old taught our
late sticklers, but a through Reformation? Cartwright Preface to his Reply.
and how did he, and they after him, propound the examples of Ezechiah, Josiah,
and Jehoshap^at, for that they made whole and through. Reformation, etc. and is
there any amongst them, or us, so ignorant that knows not what they meant by
thorow-Reformation? and that in truth, as their Covenants and Actions
demonstrated, was nothing else but the utter exstirpation of the established
Government and subversion of the Church then, and so constituted: But
peradventure they would now for peace sake (and so ought we to) divide and
share alike. I know this is the tale they have got at their tongues end now a
days, whereby they procure the esteem by some, of Moderate Men. But is this
with any serious or discerning man a tolerable argument for them, when as never
were there any persons so violent, rank, or extreme in their principles but
when they found it not possible to obtain what their principles, and design
impell them to contend for, seem at least satisfied with so much as they can
get, though they will no longer rest so than advantage shall carry them
further. But let us hear what Mr. Cartwright spoke, when the Faction was low,
against such a peace as now is preferred to us: And you may not only read the
same design, but words and arguments exactly in these more modern Reformers,
which Mr. Ca^twright had, and the same spirit acting both him and these, Peace
(says he) is commended to us with these conditions. Cartwright Preface to his
Reply.
[If it be possible, if it lies in us.] Now it is not possible it lies not in
us, to conceal the truth; we can do nothing against it, but for it. It is a
profane saying of a profane man. That an unjust peace in better than a just
War? Who sees not from hence most plainly, that nothing but every thing will
satisfy these men? And do they not hold that an unjust peace, whereby they are
kept in quiet without their discipline? and is not that a just War which is
made for its sake? More a great deal (all know) might be added against them
from their own mouths and hands; he that still doubts may look into that
Treatise called Evangelium Armatum; which, though an imperfect, and indeed an
abortive piece in comparison of what was due to such a subject, yet does
sufficiently declare their tempers and constitutions to be against all
mediocrity or compounding of Differences. I have not touched any thing therein;
nor is that famous Mr. Love the Presbyterian Martyr there mentioned (as I
remember) or at least, not his Ranting and Railings at the attempted or
pretended accommodation to be made by the Presbyterian Faction at Vxbridg, with
the King; nor his Sermon at Windsor, where, in the flame of his zeal for the
Cause, he exhorted the people to sell their Bibles, and buy Muskets to fight
against the King, and being (as he supposed) lead to it by his Text, spoke
thus, That if God should go before the King's Party, He should be the greatest
sinner upon Earth: which passage so exorbitant being heard and excepted against
by one of the Church of England, he was called to account for speaking
irreverently of Mr. Love, before the Governor of Windsor Castle; but publicly
affirming and proving the same to be as he reported, by appeal to many Auditors
of his, then present, who could not deny they heard the words; he was rebuked
for not making the best construction of what godly men taught. The same Mr.
Love (so pacifick and charitable a spirit are they acted by) mounting the
Scaffold at the Execution of the most Reverend Archbishop of Canterbury, put
to death to satiate the Scots appetite, and such as symbolize with them, after
Prelatical blood, with greatest exsultation springing at the sight, uttered
these words, Art thou come Little Will? I am glad to see thee here, and hope to
see the rest of the Bishops here e're long: And that most innocent blood being
shed on the Stage at his beheading, he took out his Handkerchief and ^^ained it
therewith; and the Murder being over he rode with it to Vxbridg, and drawing
it forth in the presence of diverse persons spoke thus most triumphantly, Here
is the blood of that proud Prelate; I hope for more of their bloods e're long.
Which Mr. A. F. Commissary to the Earl of Essex hearing, said to some then
present, and diverse elsewhere afterward before his death; that he could not
believe such a bloody man would die in his bed. And so by the strange and just
hand of Providence it came to pass, himself suffered in the very same manner
that he had rejoiced to see in others. But yet because he made use of the
King's name to advance his Presbytery from Sco^land into England, this must be
set on the score as an high instance to prove, what good Subjects Presbyterians
can be, when their Discipline requires it.

But passing simple authorities and testimonies of Puritans against themselves
pleading for Toleration; we may come to a further double self-condemnation of
them. And to this end I might insert here what has been so lately reprinted
and published of the Presbyterian Brethren of Sion-Colledg, A Letter of the
Ministers of London, from Sion-Colledg to the Synod of Divines against
Toleration, ^rinted.
or Ministers of the City of London, to their Brethren of the Synod then at
Westminster, against Toleration of Independents. Which is so pregnant and
cutting a way of arguing against them, that I know not what possibly can be
urged more justly and reasonably by us, or less answered by them. For, I think
they will blush (who have not forsworn it) to say, we have any greater or
better grounds to tolerate them, than they the Independents. For my part, I
could never understand they had any Authority over these, or the separation of
Independents from Presbytery was ever any more a Schism than the Presbyterians
opposition to, or separation from, the Independents. For, though both of them
(I mean some of both Parties) might be said in some sense to be of a Church,
neither of them were ever a true Church, as bungled and patched together by
their novel imaginations. Yet such was the jealousy and emulation of
Presbyterians, that they would be no means have any coordinate Faction with
their own, suffered.

I had once therefore determined, to the end that all the World, and especially
themselves, might stand convicted of the unreasonableness of their demands and
expectations at present, to give the sum of their arguments; but considering
how small a Treatise that is, and how lately it is come forth, I shall presume
that it is already well known. And I shall only give the sum of Mr. Edwards
Reasons, famous for his Pieces called the Gangreen, wherein he argues
strenuously against the Toleration of Independents then, Edwards his Reasons
against Toleration, Anno 1641.
and of his own Party now. To prove this then more methodically and strongly,
he lays these two general grounds against Toleration. First, says he,
Apostolical Practice is against this. Secondly, It causes men to run into the
Violation of the constant practice and example of the Church, during all the
time of the Apostles: and puts Churches upon practices that are absurd, and
unreasonable, and prejudicial to the good of Souls: That Government that is not
of Divine Institution, is not to be received: But the Independent does so,
faith Mr. Edwards; and we much more justly, But the Presbyterian does so. Page
3.4.
And we prove it by Mr. Edwards his words following, They force men to have
Ministers and Officers without being Ordained, contrary to the practice of the
Churches all along the New Testament: as Act. 6. v. 6. Act. 4.23. No man being
Ordained Officer of the Church, without Ordination: Let them produce one
Instance if they can. Thus Mr. Edwards. Now, Mr. Edwards being dead, I in his
stead challenge any, yea, all the Presbyterians, to give one Instance through
all the Old, or New Testament, or the whole Church of God for 1500 years since
the Incarnation, that a naked Presbyter, or Priest, ever Ordained; or, if by
highest Usurpation, they did attempt such a thing at any time, such Ordination
was ever accepted, or held good by the Church. But I desire they would find
some better ground to prove this, than the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter
anciently: For First, this is no less doubted of, than that they would prove by
it. Secondly, If because St. Hierome is thought to have been of that Opinion,
(as some take his words) we should suppose, and not grant, that they were so
once, it proves nothing now: when it is most certain they are not so, nor have
been so, for many hundred years. And therefore men and women both, imposing
hands upon their Pastor among Independents, if the Ordination of these be
condemned by Presbyterians; the Presbyterians Ordination may altogether be of
no account among us.

After this Mr. Edwards proceeds to prove particularly, Edwards. ibid.
That Toleration is not to be allowed: And First, from the Vanity and
Impertinency of the texts of Scripture brought to prove it. For though (says
he) the Scripture speaks much for Tolerating and bearing one with another in
many things, both in matters of Opinion and Practice, as these places tel^ifie.
Romans 14. 1, 2, 3, 5, 13, 14, v. Romans 15.1, 2, 7. Ephesians. 4, 23. Philip. 3. v.
15, 16. Yet, when differences come either to Heresy or Schism, and Points to
be maintaind by men, so as to trouble and disturb the Church, then the
Scriptures are express against their Toleration and sufferance, requiring them
who have Power, to hinder it, as may be seen, Revel. 2.20. Titus. 1. v. 10.
Tit. 3.10. Galat. 5. v. 10, 12. and so on. And are not the differences now
among us come already to Schismatical and Seditious Divisions amongst us? are
they then any longer to be Tolerated? Or were these and the following Reasons,
only intended for the use of Presbytery, but must lose all their virtue and
validity, when that is the Case against which they make directly?

Secondly, he at the same time answers a Principal argument now in great use;
and confirms his Thesis thus. The Toleration desired will not help to heal the
Schisms and Rents of this Church, but will much foment and increase them. For
whilst some Congregations, and they accounted of note both for Ministers and
People, will not submit to the Reformation, and Government settled by Law; this
will breed in the Peoples minds many thoughts ex natura rei, that this Church
is not settled according to the word of God, and is unlawful, etc. Reasons
hereof follow.

3. This Toleration will not only breed Divisions and Schisms disturbing the
Peace of Churches and Towns, by setting them who are of different Families, and
more remote Relations one against another; but it will undoubtedly cause much
Disturbance, Discontents, and Divisions between the nearest Relations of
Husbands and Wives, Fathers and Children, Brothers and Sisters, Masters and
Servants; the Husband being of one Church, and the Wise of another, etc.

4. There will be great danger of continual Divisions, Distractions, and
Disputes among us, not only from the Different Form of Government and Worship
in their Churches and ours; but from other Doctrines and Practices held by some
of them for the present.

5. The most eminent Ministers of this Kingdom for grace, parts, and labors,
can have little assurance of the continuance of their Flocks to them, if such a
Toleration be granted; For they will draw away their People and admit them into
their Churches, and even gather and increase their Churches out of the labors
of the best Ministers, etc.

6. It will be, undoubtedly, a means and way of their infinite Multiplication
and Increase; even to increase them thirty Fold.

7. The prime and Fundamental Principles of this Independent (and likewise
Presbyterian) way, upon which they erect their Church Way, are very prejudicial
and dangerous, and unsufferable to this Kingdom.

8. These Independents, (and much more Presbyterian) men where they have power,
would not give a Toleration for any other Ecclesiastical Government, or
Churches but in their own way: They would not suffer men of other Opinions in
Doctrine and Government, to live within the ^ounds of their Patent, though at
the farthest bounds; but have Banished them, etc.

9. A Toleration may be demanded upon the same grounds for all the rigid
Brownists of the Kingdom, and for all Anabaptists, Familists, and other
Sectaries, who profess it is Conscience in them.

And thus you have the Heads of the Presbyterian Reasons in the Words of Mr.
Edwards: which if they may not be more strongly turned against themselves, now
moving for Toleration, I must profess my self to understand neither Them, nor
their Logic, nor the English Tongue. And if men will still persist in their
unseasonable, unreasonable, and unconscionable demands against all these so
irrefragable Arguments to the contrary; we have nothing left but our Prayers,
Tears, and Confusion, which our notorious Flagrant Sins have brought upon us:
And if Authority deserts us with such advantages on our sides, as nothing on
Earth can minister greater, nor any siqual Judge require better; we shall easily
see from whence this Judgment comes, and why, (not for any wrong in this Case
done to our Antagonists) viz. because we have sinned, and are come down
wonderfully.

I might here conclude all; but that, as I have disputed against them out of
their own mouths and books; so I judge it not Impertinent to show the
insufficiency of their reasons from their answers, or such as they are not wont
to question, unless when they are to express. And having by the way answered
some already; one or two, may suffice to be here touched.

CHAP. VIII. Certain Exceptions, which may be made by Puritans against what
has been delivered, answered.
WE have already prevented the vulgar, and general Refuges, made by ignorant
and undiscerning men against the way of our Church, and in behalf of their
Discipline, taken from the misunderstanding of Tyranny, Extremes, Moderation,
and Christian Liberty: with which Notions, Seducers are wont to make a great
show amongst well-affected, but ill-advised People. We have likewise even now
answered that which they offer to the People plausibly in most of their late
books, though heretoforewe could never wring a syllable from them to that
purpose, from the great benefit of the Peace of the Church; out of Mr.
Cartwright and Mr. Edwards. And that Objection is likewise removed by Mr.
Perkins most clearly, which urges us, that Conscience is Free and cannot be
forced. So that there appears not much to remain behind, alleged by them,
deserving further answer. Yet two, or three things we shall add out of them, to
the former; and so end.

And First, I fore see it may be Excepted, that our discourse generally runs
against grievous Heretics, where we show the Judgment and Practice of the
ancient Church against them, which will not hold against those of our days and
Church, who are no Heretics. To which I thus answer:

First, That according to the sense of the Code, the Laws made against
Heretics do comprehend Schismatics, and such as differ from the Church in
lesser and lighter matters. Haereticerum autem vocabulo continentur, and latis
adversus eos sanctionibus succumbere debent, qui vel levi argumento a judicio
Catholicae Religionis and tramite deetcti fuerint deviare. i. e. Under the name
of Heretics, are comprehended, and ought to be punished by the Sanctions made
aegainst them, all such as are found to swerve in a light matter from the
judgment, and path of Catholic Religion. Secondly, They themselves, (as
appears plainly by Mr. Edwards his Reasons) will no more suffer Schismatics,
(no not their brethren the Independents, whom they dare not call Here ticks,
and who had deserved so well at their hands, (which as yet they never did at
ours) than Heretics. 3ly, The practice of the ancient Church as in part we
have showed, did aswaies persecute Schismatics as well as Heretics. 4ly, The
Pseas and Excuse of our Dissenters are not so allowable in the principle point
of Heresy, as are most Heretics. For, there being two Essential parts of
Heresy generally received, A Formal part, consisting in the pravity of the
mind, and disposition of the heart, and obstinacy of the will; And a Material
part, consisting in the Error it self maintained: Men of our Age and Country,
have more of the Formality of Heretics, than they who are direct Heretics:
Forasmuch as an Heretic erring in Articles of Faith, may be truly said, and
allowed to make a conscience of what he (though Erroniously) believes: for
being matters of Faith, they are proper Objects of Conscience, whose Sphere is
good, and Evil. But they who do not differ, not dissent (as they say) in
Matters of Faith from the Church, but yet keep themselves at a distance from
the Authority of the same, may indeed (whether we will or no) call their
dissenting by the name of Conscience; but it is well known in reason, or
propriety of speech, it cannot be so termed; when there not so much as appears
Good, or Evil, in the thing it self: And therefore it must of necessity be
Resolution not to agree or yield, and that is nothing else but obstmacy, as
their own justifications do imply, when, being demanded, why they cannot in
Conscience comply? They (to my knowledge) answer, They cannot do it. Fifthly,
As Mr. Edwards said against the Independents, we may say against the
Presbyterians, viz. That we know not the bottom of their Reformation, nor where
it will end, nor what it does hold, notwithstanding their published
Confessions, and Catechisms Larger, or Lesser; there being infinite Points,
which, like obstructions to a man travailing by Mapps when they shall come to
put in practice, will arise unexpectedly. And besides Mr. Cartwright, whom they
follow as their Modern Apostle, tells us in their stead, Cartwright's Reply to
Bishop Whitgift, page 5.
Cortain of the things we stand upon are such, that if every hair of our head
were a life, we ought to afford them for the defense of them. Again, in the
same Treatise he reproves Bishop Whitgift for distinguishing between matters
of Faith and necessary to Salvation; Id. page 14. And Reply to the Answer, page
1.
and Ceremonies Orders and Discipline of the Church; as though (says he)
matters of Discipline and kind of Government were not matters necessary to
Salvation and of Faith. Are these men understood, or to be trusted, when they
say, they demand only such things as we may easily grant? Will they lay down
their lives for them?

Secondly, They profess that they are ready to come up to us, if we would grant
certain light matters.

But with what truth and sincerity let their Actions all along speak, which
aimed at nothing less than the ruin and absolute dissolution of our Church. And
let Thomas Cartwright in the next place tell us in these words, Id. Reply page
102.
Indeed it were more safe for us to conform our indiff^rent Ceremonies to the
Turks which are far off, than to the Papists which are so near. And we well
know how altogether Popish we are in our Ceremonies, according to their
opinion. And we being as near their Discipline, as they are to our Ceremonies,
and Government, may we not as well say, Indeed it were more safe for us to
conform our indifferent Ceremonies to the Heathens, than to the
Disciplinarians, which are so near? And thus ye see, how according to their
principles we are like to come to a good agreement, and an happy composure, as
when they would smooth over the matter they dissemblingly speak, calling small
and new Acquifi^ions, Moderation.

Thirdly, They say, that Indifferent things ought to remain so, and they ought
not to be obliged any further than Christ and the Scripture binds them.

The first part of this argument is as false, dangerous and pernicious to all
Churches and all Ecclesiastical Authority, as the wit of man can invent any
thing; and is quite contrary to Scriptures, which require obedience (as
likewise themselves do being in power) to Superiors. And therefore to deny
Superiors that wherein only their power is seen and exercised, is to take away
what the Scripture grants them. Now to the second part. Christ and the
Scripture oblige men to be subject in such cases to men: Calvinus Adversus
Anaba. page 27.2. in ^^tavo.
And Calvin expressly says, Improbare quod nunquam improbavit Deus, nimiae est
hom^ni inquam mortali temeritatis and arrogantia: Hoe autem perpetuo teneamus,
usurpari, etc. i. e. To condemn that which God never Condemned, is too great
rashness and arrogance for Mortal man. But let us hold to this constantly, that
the authority of God is usurped, when that which he has permitted is condemned.
And show where God has not permitted any one of our Rites, or Ceremonies. And
if ye cannor (as we are sure you cannot;) How do ye not take Gods Office out of
his hands in condemning that he has not, being all Private men, and of no
authority over us? To this, let us add Mr. Perkins speaking thus, Perkins on
Galat. 2. v. 3.
Things are not called Indifferent, because we may use them indifferently, or
not use them, when we will, and how we will: but because in themselves, or in
their own nature they are neither good, nor evil; and we may again not use them
well, or ill: Furthermore, there are two things which Restrain the use of
things Indifferent, The Law of Charity, and the Laws of Men, etc. ANd the same
Author in another place says, Perkins Cases of Conscience. Lib. 1. Chap. 5.
Actions Indifferent in the case of Offense, or Edification, cease to be
Indifferent, and come under some Commandment of the Moral Law. In which, St.
Paul says, If eating Flesh will Offend. etc. Thus he. Now eating Flesh does
offend at some times, and that not equals, of whom St. Paul speaks, but
Superiors; And a man would think, that a Sincere Conscience ought to have
greater regard to these, than to other persons. Calvin. Institut. Lib. 3. Cap.
9.
And yet we find true what Calvin laughed at in his days thus, You may see
some, who imagine their Liberty cannot hold, unless by eating Flesh on Fridays,
they stand possessed of it.

Lastly, because they see their own acts to testify so expressly against
Toleration, in raising and acting one of the most sad and unjust Tragedies that
ever England felt, and groaned under; and this principally to introduce a
strange Worship, contrary to the Laws, and Consciences of so many Thousands,
and their Superiors, it not being possible to shake this off them, some of
them shift thus, away: That if they did evil, we ought not to do so too. For
though the matter be so gross, that for arguments sake they do seem outwardly
to relent, and recede from their injustice, and rigor, to the end, they may
with more confidence demand favor at our hands, to whom they could do no
justice; yet in truth they repent of nothing so much, as that they did not use
greater extremities toward us, appears by their reserving to themselves, all
true signs and effects of true Repentance: For to one another or to the People,
whom they have grossly missed so far, that it is frequent with them to say, that
they could conform, but that they have taught the People otherwise, (an
imprudent, as well as an ungodly evasion) they never make any such
acknowledgement: But whereas they, upon the nature of true Repentance, are
obliged to do their plain and utmost endeavors to undeceive, and restore them
to the truth; they on the contrary, use all subtle and secret artifices to
nourish such wicked Errors as they have bred in them, while they themselves in
close discourse being expostulated with, Corbet's Interest.
for the occasion, will say as Mr. Corbet does, There might be some excess
heretofore, by the Presbyterian committed. But to the Point: It no ways
follows, that if the Presbyte ians offended (and that notoriously) in
Persecuting deadly the Church, therefore a retaliation of the same measure
should be called (as they would have it) revenge, or be unjust. For, waving at
present the differences of the Causes (which how ever equal and indifferent
judges would certainly give against them) they no doubt will to the last keep
up disputable) the manner of proceeding and acting make a foul difference. For
there was wanting all Legal Authority both Civil and Ecclesiastical, on that
side; and yet dreaded they not to impose their pleasures and Innovations both,
on their bre^hren; who were no more suject to them, than were they to these;
but also usurped over their Governors too, and brought them either to obey
their Wills, or suffer their Vengeance: Which was an higher piece of iniquity
than that of the Pope himself. For as we of this Church were free from his
power; so have we nothing to do to give law to him: But these men were in all
Lawful and Canonical subjection under those they would give Law unto, as well
in Reference to Conscience, as Civil property. Yet am I not without a Witness
of their own against them, even in this Particular. For thus reasonably writes
one of them. Mysteries of God^^es and to ^abbala. page 2.
We declare it, that it is true indeed we cannot come up in all things to their
judgment who are over us, as we know they could not come up to ours, when we
were advanced over them. As we could not allow them any public employment, or
encouragement, when they could not comply with us, and our Laws and
Constitutions. So we cannot expect any public employment, or encouragement
from them, now we Dissent from them, and cannot close with their Laws and
Constitutions, etc. This has much of Ingenuity, if we compare it with the more
common temper of them, which leads them only to take away Liberty from others,
but to grant none. But neither must we suffer this concession to pass without
Censure. For according to their common and current Craft with the Ignorant,
fain they would shuffle and confound all Power so and Lawful Authority, as that
theirs it should fairly and fully be, who can lay hold of it by Injustice, and
retain it by Violence: And therefore because once indeed by spoil and rapine,
they possessed themselves of Power in Church and State; do they compare
themselves with such, upon whom it descends fairly and orderly, by the received
course of known Justice and Religion. But grant them this, we grant them almost
all: But they must know, there is an infinite disparity, which they can never
remove, though they have put fair for it, some of them in resolving, First, all
Civil-Power, and next, with little more infatuation and boldness, all
Ecclesiastical Government into the power of the People; and the power of the
People, into the power of the Sword. So that Person, or those should be
unquestionably vested in Civil Dominion, and that Society rightly constituted
in Ecclesiastical Rule, who have invaded the same, and are able to hold it: A
Tenet of which I shall speak no more at present than I have already, only that
God would give us if not Grace, human Prudence, and reason so far to judge of,
as may draw us to lament and prevent by humble Suits the unavoidable Disasters
and Confusions it must again cover the face of that Earth with where it abides;
And that God would restore so much of lost man in us, before we pretend to be
Christians (and that of the best sort) as to stand to our own Judgments and not
to alter and vary according to our advantage, and necessities of our espoused
Interests; producing quarrels and babbles to Eternity it self, if we could live
so long; as they certainly would, who will neither yield to Reason, nor suffer
their own Rules and Opinions to take place in them, so as to reduce them to
order.

But the solemn and indissoluble band of their League and Covenunt cast upon
themselves and others in authority, must by no means be violated; and besides,
some Posteriorities are pretended and urged to the great advantage of the
Discipline, and these arising from promises made of having regard to tender
Consciences upon the entrance of his Majesty into his Throne, and some
Disciplinarians great merits.

To the first part of these, it may be reasonably demanded, What that strange
sacredness is, what unheard of Excellency it has, and new divineness that
neither any Oaths or Obligations, wherewith men were bound before, nor any
which they have since regularly taken, should be of any force or virtue at all
against the Covenant? But what ever went before, is made void by the Covenant,
what ever follows is made abortive by the Covenant. How comes this about? Was
the authority of the Inventers, or the just power of the propounders, or the
divineness and sacredness of the matter such that this, and none but this, must
be of any validity or worth with us? Nothing less sure: For, all these are
unansw. Arg. against it; for, neither circumstance, The Covenants Plea against
Absolvers.
nor substance was either legal, or just, or holy; as may appear from the
infinite falsifications, direct falsities both as to History and Reason, with
which that Treatise is fraught to justifieit, and confirm men of little
conscience and judgment, in that bond of Iniquity.

But let their great Casuist Alexander Hirderson be here admitted to speak, and
how easy will it be to resolve this doubt? That King of Blessed Memory to whom
he wrote, to his own confusion; objecting against his New Oath the Covenant,
his old Oaths taken directly to the contrary at his Coronation, was then
answered that the Parliament and people to whom they were made, might free him
from such engagements, (not that the King ever made such Oaths otherwise to
Parliaments in his sense, but as they are the Peoples Representatives.) Which
though as the King solidly replies, is a false Supposition, yet hereby are
evident the principles of such Doctors, that Parliaments may lawfully quit the
Prince of Oaths taken in reference to the People. Therefore, according to them,
the perfect Parliament having not only declared against such Obligations, but
by strong reasons manifested the nullity of them; what pretense can they have
who are, and always were, but private men in such cases to urge their Sovereign
with such burdens and bonds?

But further, The pretended promise was made to tender Consciences, and how
does it appear that the Presbyterians are comprehended under that expression?
We absolutely deny the same. And what force can their bare Assertions and
Testimonies given of themselves be to prove it; when we have such store of
Instances of matter of Fact which no men of good Conscience, much less tender
in the received sense, can willingly commit, and much less persevere to
justify? But if it must be so, that such a sense of tenderness of Conscience
must needs be true because it is common and current, How will they not in
opening that door for themselves let in such a Rabble as they shall have but
little joy in their possessions? Will they multiply beggarly proofs, and say,
They are a sober, a godly, a moderate party; and so conclude just as much as
they did before?

To shut up all, some there are who distinguish of Heretics and Schismatics.
For, they are (say they) either peaceable, or unquiet and seditious: The
seditious and unquiet Heretic or Schismatic (according to these) may not be
suffered, but the modest, and sober, Mentzerus in Exegesi Augustanae Confess.
Art. 10.
and peaceable ought to be born with; and this is Mentzerus his decision; and
the Plea of both Papist and Puritan with us at present. For now forsooth, No
such good Subjects as Catholics. And the Anabaptist himself writes at large,
Saints no Smiters. Thomb's Saints no Smiters.
And now go round about, enter into the midst of all that have been bitter
Enemies to the King, and you must have as rare luck as he that draws a Prize at
a Lottery, if you can pick out a disloyal subject; in discourse, All Factions
contend which should pretend most Loyalty.

But in answer to this distinction, we shall craveleave in like manner to
distinguish of Rooks: for, some Rooks set upon trees, and they pick not up the
new-sown Corn, and therefore may be born with, and not molested; and some Rooks
set upon Lands, and they are not to be suffered, for they do hurt to Corn. Just
such an one, and so to be favored is the Heretic and Schismatic. I confess,
the distinction had been tolerable, had it been made of the Abstracts, Schisms
and Heresies. For true it may be, that some of both sorts contain nothing in
them turbulent or seditious. But to take this in the Concrete, Schismatics and
Heretics, is no less ridiculous than we have made; and no less falsely supposed
of them who at present put it into their Pleas than of any other. Are not they,
think we, of a very gentle quiet, and peaceable Nature and Disposition who
being in power (not else you may be sure) in pursuance of their Schism, turned
out of their Livings but 85 Ministers of the 97 Parishes within the Walls of
London, whereof 16. died with sorrow, and 14 out of the 16. Parishes, without
the Walls, and out of the 10. Out-Parishes 9; and so proportionably where they
were Masters; Plin. Nature. Hist. lib. 11. cap. 37.
especially while they retain the very same Principles, whereby they so acted:
Pliny tells us that the Lion as fierce a beast as it is, may be made very
gentle and tame by severe and seasonable treatments, so that one may suffer it
to lick his very flesh; but his tongue being very rough, if in fawning and
licking he chances to draw the least blood from a man, together with its
slaver, he is so ravished with the savoriness of it, that he is put into rage
and fury. So in truth, no question but the fiercest Scismatick or Heretic may
be brought to a very gentle and familiar condition; but suffer him to have such
near access to Majesty, as to but taste the infinite sweets of Power, and Rule;
through a secure confidence in his general Innocence, so transported is he
beyond his own ordinary, yet unnatural and forced temper, that his Ingenuity
will soon end in injustice, and his fairness in fury: And then shall you beg
Toleration of him, and be sure to go without it and that deservedly.

Some there are of no mean place and policy, who advise seriously, to avoid
the Infamy of Persecuting poor Souls for Religion, and let them be Executioners
of their own Mischief and Ruin: For (say they) Let them (for instance the
Quakers) alone, and in time they will certainly destroy one another. Which I
may easily grant to be true, and yet the Counsel very weak, and unreasonable.
For it is true, that many Religions shall I call them or superstitions rather,
now pleading for Toleration, would in their progress fall foul with themselves,
and they devoted to them confound one another. And it is most probable, if
Wild-Beasts were set at liberty from their Pens into some open place they would
tear and worrey one another to Piece, but not till they had put to flight, or
devoured their Keepers. It is very likely, that Phanaticks, and Schismatics of
the same Denomination, would in time Fight out the truth of Religion amongst
them; but their Common Enemy (as they call us) must first lie gasping at their
Feet. And will it not be a notable Solace to a wise man to foresee, that by
casting away his own life for nothing, preparation will be made to destroy his
Adversary? such is the safety in many Religions.

The Decency (to all sober Christians) is answerable to the safety. For, as
Lucian tells how Ptolemie Son of Lagus King of Egypt pre^ented to his People a
Black ^amel for a Show, a thing, where those Beasts abound most, never seen;
and a Man one half of whom was perfect Black, and the other half of his Body
very Fair. It the Camel they all stood amazed: but at the Man, most of the
beholders burst out into a loud laughter; others in scorn and detestation
turned away from such a ridiculous Monster, and reproach to mankind: and yet
this person differed not from other men, as to parts, or substance, but
Ceremony only, and Accidents: So what ever may be Tolerated, and perhaps
Admired in matters not of divine concernment and nature in Religion to exhibit
a Church to Christian spectators so most strangly divided and dissonant to it
self, though but in things, not Essential or Substantial to Faith, but
circumstances, is to render it ridiculous to one half of the World, the merry
sort; and to the other sort, the sober and judicious, odious, and so
Scandalous, that few of these will ever yield to become Proselytes to it, or
tarry with it long. And we may be sure, that they whose Policy, rather than
Piety, or Prudence incline them to favor such Monstrosities, have nothing so
much in their design as to have us laughed out of the present Religion, and to
make way for No Religion or for another Religion. For to encounter either of
which nothing can be more profitable than by a generous Constancy, to follow
and persevere in our own Religion: For then will the sly underminer of it,
find himself in the end bafled, the impudent opposer ashamed, and the witty
scoffer, ridiculous to himself, having nothing else to bear him out but
boldness, and multitude of Offenders.

FINIS.

