THE LIFE and DEATH OF King CHARLES the First, WRITTEN By Dr. R. PERINCHIEF:
Together with EIKON ASILIK REPRESENTING His Sacred Majesty IN HIS SOLITUDES and
SUFFERINGS. AND A VINDICATION Of the Same King CHARLES the Martyr. PROVING Him
to be the Author of the said (...), against a Memorandum of the Late Earl of
Anglesey, and against the Groundless Exceptions of Dr. Walker and others.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball over against the
Royal Exchange. 1693.

A VINDICATION OF King CHARLES I. etc.
THIS of late is become a Controversy, and has exercised several Pens: and
the Province I have undertaken, is to digest the whole into as plain and
familiar a Method as I am able, to represent the Exceptions fairly, and to
answer them, to add to, illustrate and confirm what I conceive needs it, to sum
up the Evidence on both sides, and to compare them, and to make such Remarks as
plainly arise from the Respective Evidence; and by that time I have done this,
it will, I presume, be very easy for the Reader to determine the Controversy,
and to assign the true Author of this Book, and repudiate the false one, and
Pretender.

In order to this, I shall in the first place consider a Memorandum, said to be
written by my Lord of Anglesey, in a vacant Page of one of these Printed Books,
which is in these words,

MEMORANDUM.
King Charles the Second, and the Duke of York did both (in the last Session of
Parliament 1675, when I showed them in the Lords House, the written Copy of
this Book, wherein are some Corrections, written with the late King Charles the
First's own Hand) assure me, that this was none of the said King's compiling,
but made by Doctor Gauden, Bishop of Exeter, which I here insert for the
undeceiving others in this Point, by attesting so much under my Hand: Anglesey.

To this it has already been answered, That both the said Kings have attested
the contrary by their Letters Patents to Mr. Royston, granting him the sole
Privilege to Print all the Works of King Charles the First. Those of King
Charles the Second bear Date, Nov. 29. 1660, and expressly mention the Fidelity
of Mr. Royston to King Charles the First, and to himself, and in these
remarkable Words; In Printing and Publishing many Messages and Papers of our
said Blessed Father, especicially those most excellent Discourses and
Soliloquies, by the Name of (...). Those of King James bear date Febr. 22.
1685, and expressly refer to the first Edition of the King's Works, 1662, in
which his Majesty declares. That all the Works of his Royal Father were
Collected and Published. Now a Man would imagine, that there could not be any
possible Dispute, which was to be preferred, a Public and Authoritative
Attestation of the Kings themselves, or a private Memor, by a third person. For
the immediate Question here is not Who was the Author of this Book? But who was
so in the Opinion and Judgment of those two Kings? And I would fain know,
whether the Testimony of my Lord of Anglesey is a better proof of their Sense
and Judgment, than their own Testimony; or a private, obscure, unattested,
posthumous Handwriting, a more valid Evidence, than the Broad Seals? And this,
one would think, abundantly sufficient to determine this part of the
Controversy, that is, that a Man's Word is to be taken for his own Sense and
Opinion before that of his Neighbors, and that high and authoritative Evidence
is always to carry the Cause in opposition to that which is no Evidence at all.

However (as clear as this is) Dr. Walker has something to say to it, tho, I
think, stranger Answers were never given in such a Case. And in the first place
he tells us, Page 28. That good Manners rather than want of good Reasons
restrain him from fuller answering: meaning, I presume, that these Kings did
not speak truth, tho he would not say so; and accordingly he says afterward,
it was but conniving at a vulgar Error, which it was not their interest too
nicely to discover. Now this Answer plainly gives up the Cause it pretends to
maintain; for if it was not their Interest to discover it, how came they both
so frankly to tell it to my Lord of Anglesey? and as the Memorandum speaks,
they both did assure him, that at was none of the said King's Compiling; and
that, I think, is a little more than a nice Discovery, even a very plain and
peremptory assurance. So that if this be an Answer to the Letters Patents, it is
equally so to the Memorandum. And the same Interest, I suppose, which kept it a
Secret from the whole Kingdom, would have kept it a Secret from my Lord of
Anglesey too, especially considering that it was not only far more easy, but
also far more honorable, to have concealed a matter of Fact within their
Knowledge, than to have wrongfully attested it, and contrary to their
Knowledge, under the Great Seal of England.

But notwithstanding that, Dr. Walker in further pursuit of this scandalous
Answer tells us, that this is Odiosum Argumentum, designed not for real proof,
but to involve the Answerer in some Odium or Danger, and which Respondents may
dismiss unreplyed to, not because they cannot, but because they dare not answer
it. Why, what was the matter? what Danger was there in reflecting on those two
Kings, had the Doctor spoke out, and in express Terms declared his Mind? Was he
afraid to be called to account, and punished for it? A Man that reads this
would imagine, that the Doctor was a perfect Stranger in his own Country, and
that he wrote his Book in some remote Corner of the World. But when he daily
saw the vilest things spoke of those two Kings (especially one of them) that
ever were said, not only of Kings, but of the worst of Men; when a great part
of this passed into the World not by stealth or connivance, but under the
Authority of a License, and in such seemed meritorious; in such a case to talk
of Odium, and Danger, and Fear, is to scorn his Readers, and to suppose they
had all lost their Senses. And therefore in plain terms the Doctor did not know
how fairly to answer this, and created imaginary and invisible Odiums and
Dangers, to get rid of an Argument he could not tell what to do with.

However, in the next place, the Doctor answers, That Kings use not so
critically to inspect all the minute Particulars of their general Royal Grants.
Meaning, no doubt, that the (...) was such a minute Particular, as needed great
Criticalness to find it out among the rest, whereas all the World knows what a
mighty Figure that Book leaves among the renowned Works of that Glorious
Martyr. And the Truth is, this Answer plainly insinuates, that those two Kings
knew nothing at all of this Books being inserted among the rest of their
Father's Works; and accordingly he tells us, that an Vnder-Secretary or Clerk,
who drew the Patents, put in what Mr. Royston reckoned up, and desired; and
never boggled at inserting it among King Charles 's Works. Now this is such an
Answer, that to reply to it, would be as shameless as to urge it, and would
equally reproach the Reader; for if the Doctor himself either did, or could
suppose, or if any other Man can suppose, that these two Kings did not believe
that this Book was inserted among the rest, nay, that they could possibly
believe, but that it was designed as a main and principal part, which for so
many years bore their Father's Name, and was more known and taken notice of
than any of the rest, it is high time to leave disputing, or to convince Men by
rational Motives of Credibility: and let this hereafter go for a Rule, that the
best way to gain belief, is to propound the most incredible things in the
World. For if any Man, who knows the state of this Matter, the current Sense of
this Kingdom, and the general Estimation concerning the Author of that Book,
can believe, that these two Kings did not think, or could otherwise than think
that it would be inserted among their Father's Works. That Man may believe any
thing, and if he will take this for an Answer, there is nothing how impossible
or incredible soever, but he may give his assent to. So that let it be granted,
that Kings do not always critically examine the Transcript of their Royal
Grants, except they neglected their Memories and Understandings, and left them
also to Vnder-Secretaries and Clerks: it is not possible for any Man to
believe, but that they knew that their Father was universally acknowledged and
reputed for the Author of that Book, and consequently, that a Grant to Reprint
his Works, must of necessity include that, although it had not been particularly
expressed in the Grant it self. But when this excellent Book is not only
particularly expressed, but mentioned also with particular Characters and Marks
of Recommendation, to talk of Critical Inspection, and of Vnder-Secretaries and
Clerks, is to suppose, that Vnder-Secretaries and Clerks make Royal Grants, and
not Kings themselves.

However, the Doctor adds, What understanding Man believes all the other
particular Pieces, which make up the whole Volume of the King's Works, to be
originally penned by himself, but knows many of them were prepared by his
Secretaries and Council, and then perused and approved of by him, and so became
his, by adding the Royal Stamp of his Approbation, and owning of them; and the
same was designed in this Book. Very good, then

1. It seems Things prepared by Secretaries and Council become the King's, by
his Perusal and approving them; and so I hope do Letters Patents too; and
therefore let the Grants to Mr. Royston be drawn by what Vnder-Secretary or
Clerk the Doctor pleases, if they came to be the Acts of the respective Kings,
by their Perusal and Approbation of them, then it is plain they testified their
Royal Father was the Author of this Book, and so the Doctor both contradicts
and confutes himself.

2. When the Doctor's Hand was in, I wonder he did not tell us, that the Papers
of Mr. Henderson to the King, and the Particulars insisted on by the
Parliaments Commissioners at the Treaty at Vxbridge, were not originally penned
by the King, and which are inserted in the Volume of the King's Works. And this
would have been a plain Case, and must needs have been granted him. And what
then? Why then by the Doctor's way of arguing, neither the King's Papers to Mr.
Henderson, nor his Papers about Episcopacy were originally penned by him; or
that because these two Kings did not believe, that these things inserted in the
King's Works [as relating to them] which bear the Name of other Authors, were
not of his own penning, therefore they believed, that the Writing which bears
his own Name, was not penned by him neither, although they mention it as written
by himself. These are pleasant Consequences.

3. Be it granted that Proclamations and such things are originally penned by
Secretaries, and become the King's, by adding his Royal Authority; what is this
to Books? Proclamations are really the King's Acts, because they derive their
Validity and Authority from Him, whoever pens them. But Books are quite of
another nature; no Royal Stamp can make a Book the King's own, which he did not
pen himself. And therefore these Attestations in the Royal Grants concerning
the Works of the Royal Martyr, are to be understood according to the nature of
things, that is, they attest the respective parts of that Volume were his
Works, in that sense in which they were his Works. Proclamations, etc. were his
by adding his Authority, and they were the same Acts of the King to all
purposes of Law, whether penned by himself, or by his Secretaries. But a Book
in no sense can be said to be the King's, of which he is not the Author. And
therefore these two Kings attesting, that this Book was their Royal Father's,
it plainly means, in that sense in which a Book is said to be so, and that is,
not by adopting it by consent and approbation, but by penning and writing it.
And it is a pleasant Consequence indeed, Proclamations are the King's by his
consent and authority whoever pens them, and therefore Bocks that bear his Name
are so too. Well! No body knows what a strange thing Reason is, when it falls
into the Hands of some Men.

The Doctor still adds, Admit Mr. Royston had obtained a Patent for the sole
Printing the Works of King David, and had got it explicitly inserted, all the
Works of King David, that is, the whole Book of Psalms, containing in number
one hundred and fifty, would it have followed hence, that he who granted this
Patent, had published to all the World that he knew and believed, that David
was the real Penman of them all, tho some of them were certainly written some
Ages after David 's Death. No truly, it would not have followed, nor does it
follow from the Grant of these Kings to Reprint their Father's Works, that
therefore they believed the King was the real Penman of Mr. Henderson's Papers.
But (by the Doctor's good favor) this would have followed, that if King
Solomon had granted a Patent to Collect or Print (had Printing been then in
use) his Father's Psalms, and had expressly and especially mentioned three or
four as his Fathers, it is plain, that he must be understood to believe, that
these were penned by his Father.

Having thus dispatched Dr. Walker's Answers, I have yet something farther to
observe concerning this Memorandum; and which seems sufficient to overthrow the
Validity of it: and that which I shall observe is taken from the Memorandum it
self. Intrinsic proof taken from things themselves is generally the most clear
and convincing; Frauds and Impostures are seldom managed with such art and
exactness, but a discerning Eye may easily discover them; and in this
Memorandum there are some observable Circumstances that make it highly liable
to suspicion, I mean, that it was never made by my Lord of Anglesey, but sorged
by some other person for the very ends for which it has been so often
produced; now if this Memorandum be defective in some Points, that are very
material in a thing of this Nature, if it discovers a great faultiness, with
respect to the very end for which it was pretended to be made, then it is
apparently unworthy of the Prudence and Foresight of my Lord of Anglesey, and
deserves to be ascribed to some other Author. For the proof of this, I shall
take my measures from the last Words of the Memorandum, which plainly declare
the end for which it was not made, nor fign'd by the said Lord. The Words are
these: Which I here insert for the undeceiving others in this Point, by
attesting so much under my Hand. Now here are these things observable, and
which in every respect makes this Memorandum defective and insufficient for the
attaining this end.

1. It bears no Date.

2. It is not attested by any Witness.

3. It was the most unlikely course to answer the ends of the Memorandum it
self.

4. There is no appearance that this was said to any other Person.

1. It bears no Date, and that in a double respect.

1. With respect to the exact time when the King and the Duke gave the Lord of
Anglesey this Assurance. It says indeed, in the last Sessions of Parliament,
1675. But this is expressed very ambiguously, and the Question is, whether by
last Session the Memorandum means the last before the writing the Memorandum,
or with respect to it, or the last Sessions of that year. If the last with
respect to the writing of the Memorandum, then we are not directed by the
Memorandum when that Session was; for it self having no Date, we have no
possible means to know the time of that Session. And it is not only unaccurate
upon all accounts, but abundantly faulty in a Testimonial of this Nature, to
direct us to a determinate time, when such Words were spoken, and yet leave the
World utterly in the dark; when that time was, i. e. in short, these Words were
spoken no body knows when, and (as the Case stands) it is impossible they ever
should know. i. e. It Is plainly a suspicious Evidence, as giving Testimony to a
matter of Fact, without fixing any determinate time in which it was performed.
But if the Memorandum had been more punctual in this particular, and had given
a handle to have known what particular Sessions was meant; or if by the last
Session is to be understood the last of that year. This is also liable to
considerable Inconvenience, as being a space of time too large and loose, to
found a competent Evidence upon, a Session of Parliament may continue five,
six, or seven Months. And so we have a matter of Fact fastened to the compass
of an hundred, two hundred, or more days. A pleasant Evidence indeed, and much
to be relied on; every Man knows what great Weight there is in the Circumstance
of time with respect to the Credibility of any Testimony. And if the compass be
laid large and wide, it is an argument of great suspicion, especially if the
Matter said to be done, was at no great distance from the time of giving this
Evidence: if a Man within a year or sooner, should evidence in Court, that such
a Fact was done in Parliament, during such a Session, and at the same time
could not tell whether it was at the beginning, about the middle, or toward
the latter end of that Session, and withal being himself a Member of
Parliament, and actually sitting, I would fain know whether this be not a just
and reasonable Prejudice against the competency of such Evidence; now this
Memorandum plainly labors under this Prejudice, and which is yet more, it can
never be removed, because there are no possible ways left to explain it, or to
bring it into a narrower compass of time, as all unexceptionable Evidence ought
to be; and therefore I shall leave it to the consideration of all wise men,
whether they can believe that a person of my Lord of Anglesey's Prudence and
Caution would transmit to Posterity, and with a design too to undeceive others,
such a Memorandum as is so palpably defective, and liable to just exception, in
such a material point as plainly relates to the validity of any Evidence; for
this I take to be Demonstration, that if my Lord of Anglesey had himself viva
voce given all the words of this Memorandum in Evidence, and at the same time
had not been able to answer the foregoing Questions, whether these Words of
King Charles and his Royal Brother were spoken about the beginning, the middle,
or the end of that Session? If this had been a just Prejudice against such
Evidence given by my Lord of Anglesey himself, it is certainly much more so
against a Paper pretended to be written and signed by him, which is guilty of
the same defects. And I think no reason can be given that a Paper Memorandum,
with the Name of my Lord of Anglesey to it, is a more valid and authentic
Evidence, than my Lord of Anglesey himself would have been.

1. As this Memorandum gives us no determinate time when these Words were
spoken, so likewise has it no date when the Memorandum it self was written. And
this is a fine Evidence indeed to determine Controversies, and undeceive others
with; for the matter pretended to be proved has a very loose date, and for it
self has no date at all, and both begins and ends like a fabulous story with
once upon a time. The truth is, this Memorandum is penned as if there was fear
of having it disproved; had the day been named when the King and the Duke of
York had said this, perhaps by some unlucky Circumstance or other it might have
appeared, that one or both of them together (which was very rare) were not at
the house that day. Had the Memorandum been punctually dated, something might
have happened to have proved that my Lord of Anglesey was at that time
traveling, or in the Country from his Study, or otherwise unlikely to have
made such a Memorandum at that time. And therefore it was far better to let
dates alone as dangerous things, and apt to tell Tales. And to this may be
added:

2. That this Memorandum is unattested by any Witness, and (as the Case stands)
it is impossible it should be, except there were one or more Persons who saw my
Lord of Anglesey write or sign it. Now I need not urge the necessity of witness
to prove the signing of a Memorandum that pretends to correct the World, and to
undeceive others, and that, upon the single Credit and Authority of that
Memorandum; every man knows that an unattested Paper is no Evidence, and that a
Man's Hand when he is dead, except it be well proved, signifies nothing at all,
nor can have any effect: And the World must be very willing to be undeceived
indeed, if they will alter their Judgments and Opinions upon that which neither
is, nor ever was admitted to be any Evidence, nor sufficient to determine the
least matter of Controversy. And therefore upon the whole, if my Lord of
Anglesey had made this Memorandum for his own private use, it might have done
well enough, because the defects of it might have been supplied by his own
Memory; but when it was designed for the use of Posterity, to undeceive others
when he was dead, to leave it so defective in all the necessary parts of Proof
is irrational and unaccountable, and consequently is not to be ascribed to a
person of his Lordships Character and Judgment, and great knowledge in the
Laws: For my Lord (had he wrote this) could not but know that this matter would
be disputed, and the Memorandum plainly implies it, and that nothing less than
plain and unexceptionable Proof would convince the World; and at the same time
to leave behind him a suspicious and inevident Memorandum, which may create
some Disputes but can end none, is unworthy of his Lordship, and ought not
without manifest Proof to be fathered upon him, nor indeed can be without some
reflection upon his Lordships Memory. And therefore:

3. This was the most improbable, and unlikely course that could be taken to
answer those ends mentioned in the Memorandum, (viz) to undeceive others: For
(besides what has been said before) what a pure Method is this to correct
public Mistakes, and to undeceive the World, to lodge a Memorandum in a vacant
page of a Book, never to be seen till after his death; and then also liable to
a thousand Contingencies, to be torn, to fall into private hands, to lie
neglected and never see the light: For I suppose his Lordship could never
divine that his Study of Books would be sold by Auction, and that Mr.
Millington would make the Sale. So that for any thing his Lordship either did
or could know, the World might never have been undeceived; and it is an
extraordinary caution indeed to take pains to undeceive others, and at the same
time leave them in a hopeful way never to be the better for it; had there been
no other way, such a one as this must have shifted as well as it could, but
when Men have Tongues in their Mouths, and may clear up mistakes by living and
undoubted Testimony, to commit it to a bit of Paper, and that also laid up in
darkness and obscurity, seems far from that Zeal to Truth which this Memorandum
pretends to, and for which end it pretends to have been written: had my Lord of
Anglesey (think we) no Friends, Acquaintance or Children to have communicated
this to? And where, I wonder, is the Man who ever heard my Lord say this, or
any thing like it? There can, as I know of, but one thing be said to this, and
that is, that there might be some danger in so doing; and that this, tho it was
not the securest, yet it was the safest way. But this is obviated by the
Memorandum it self, which plainly intimates that the two Kings made no Secret
of it themselves, nor enjoined him any Secrecy, but frankly and freely assured
him, which (as it is worded in the Memorandum) seems to express a design to
have it spread and propagated; and therefore if the Memorandum be true, there
could be no Reservedness and Caution upon that account, or fear of any
Displeasure from the King or his Royal Brother. Now indeed it must be owned,
that to rectify Mistakes and to set the World right, is a generous and
charitable Undertaking; but at the same time to neglect the direct and
unexceptionable means to do this without reason and necessity, and to perform
it in the dark, and expose it to manifest hazard and uncertainty, and after all
to leave it without Date or Witness, so as in no degree to amount to a
competent Evidence, in plain terms is to deceive others instead of undeceiving
them; and in truth the Memorandum is a Contradiction to itself, the End of it
is expressed to be to undeceive others, and yet the Memorandum it self is the
most unlikely course that could be taken to accomplish that End; and especially
when there were several others far better at hand. Upon all which Accounts I do
conclude, that this Memorandum was not made by my Lord of Anglesey, but by some
other hand, to deceive and impose upon the World. And certain I am that
whosoever insists upon this Memorandum is bound to do these two things: 1 To
prove that this was my Lord of Anglesey's Handwriting. And 2. To give a
satisfactory Reason why my Lord of Anglesey forbore to declare this by Word of
mouth; which the Memorandum intimates was so openly, and freely, and without
any Reserve declared to him, and when it was by a thousand degrees more fit to
answer the ends expressed in the Memorandum. And this has not yet been
attempted, and I presume can never fairly be done. And to this I add.

4. That there is no Appearance nor so much as Presumption, that the two Royal
Brothers ever said this to any other Person. This I confess is a Negative, but
I shall leave it with all the World, whether if this was their constant and
standing judgment it is by any means probable, that they would not one time or
other have declared the same to some other Persons, when they had done it with
such openness and unreservedness to my Lord of Anglesey, and consequently that
we should have heard of it from some other quarter, and in some better manner,
than by such a blind Memorandum.

I have now done with this Memorandum, and do conceive, That I have vindicated
the Memory of King Charles I. and his Right to this Book from any Exceptions
that can be taken from thence: I shall therefore proceed to some further
evidence to convince the unbiased and unprejudiced, that that glorious Martyr
actually was, and that no other could be, the Author of it. Now whereas
Evidence is of two Kinds; external, which relates to outward Testimony, and
internal, which is drawn from the thing it self; both these are plain in the
Case, and will sufficiently clear up the point before us.

1. External Evidence, i. e. the Testimony of other credible Witnesses to the
truth of it: But that I may deal fairly, I shall sum up the evidence on both
sides, and then leave it to the Readers Judgment; only I must premise, that
King Charles I. being in possession, and for so many years reputed and
acknowledged for the Author of this Book, whatsoever is offered to defeat his
title to it ought to be very plain, clear, and satisfactory, and to
overballance the contrary Evidence in point of Credibility and Sufficiency: For
an Equality of Evidence can never do it, because Possession preponderates, and
will weigh down on that side, where all other circumstances are equal. But if
the Evidence on that side be more in number, and as credible, if further there
be no just exceptions to the Evidence on that side, as having no personal
Bias, Partiality or Interest to sway them; and there be just exceptions to
that of the other, there then can be no Dispute which will carry the Cause. And
this I take to be the Case here, and which I conceive will plainly appear upon
comparing the Evidence, with respect to the Claim of King Charles and Bishop
Gauden to this Book. And to consider,

1. The Evidence that is produced for Bishop Gauden's being the Author of it,
and that in truth is included in a very narrow compass, and it is all finally
resolved into one single Evidence. and that Evidence is Bishop Gauden himself.
And this will appear upon a fair examining the respective Evidence that has
yet appeared on this side of the Question: And they are these two,

First, The Attestation of Dr. Walker. And Secondly, the Evidence of some
Papers now in the hands of Mr. North.

First The Attestation of Dr. Walker and what he says is this in short. 1. That
Dr. Gauden sometime before the whole was finished acquainted him with his
design, and showed him the Heads of diverse Chapters, and some of the Discourses
written of them, and after some time spent in the perusal, he asked his Opinion
concerning it; and he (Dr. Walker) told him he supposed it would be for the
Kings Reputation, but he expressly added, he stuck at the Lawfulness of it, and
asked him how he satisfied himself so to impose upon the World. To which he
replied; Look on the Title, it is the Pourtraicture, etc. and no man draws his
own Picture, etc. That he explained to him a Passage in the second Chapter, and
that he meant it of Dr. Juxton.

2. That being both in London, in an Afternoon Dr. Gauden a ked him to walk
with him to a friend, and in the going told him he was going to the Bishop of
Salisbury Dr. Duppa, (whom he had acquainted with his design) to fetch what he
had left with his Lordship to be perused, or to show him what he had further
written. That Dr. Gauden desired him after a general Conversation to withdraw,
which he did, and that upon return he told him, that my Lord of Salisbury told
him there were two Subjects more he wished he had thought on, and propounded
them, the Ordinance against the Common Prayer, and the denying his Majesty the
attendance of his Chaplains, and desired him to write two Chapters upon them,
which the Bishop recalled, and desired him to finish what remains and leave
those two to him; and that Dr. Gauden did not pretend to have written those, as
he did to have done all the rest.

3. Upon Dr. walkers asking Dr. Gauden (after the King was murdered) whether
the King had ever seen the Book, Dr. Gauden answered, I know it certainly no
more than you, but I used my best Endeavors that he might, for I delivered a
Copy of it to the Marquess of Hartford when he went to the treaty at the Isle
of Wight, and entreated his Lordship if he could obtain any private
Opportunity, he would deliver it to his Majesty, and humbly desire to know his
Majesty's Pleasure concerning it. But the violence which threatened the King
hastening so fast, he ventured to print it, and never knew what was the issue of
sending it, for when the thing was done, he judged it not prudent to make
further noise about it by enquiry.

4. Dr. Walker asking him (And adds in a Parenthesis; For we seldom were in
private but somewhat was discoursed of this Book, even to the last time I saw
him, after he was Lord Bishop of Worcester elect) whether King Charles II. knew
that he wrote it. He answered, I cannot positively and certainly say he does,
because he was never pleased to take express notice of it to me; but I take it
for granted he does, for I am sure the Duke of York does, for he has spoken of
it to me, and owned it as a seasonable and acceptable service; and he knowing
it, I question not but the King also does.

5. Mrs. Gauden the Doctor's Wife, Mr. Gifford and Dr. Walker believed it as
much as they could believe any thing, and were as much assured of it as it is
possible they could be of any matter of fact.

6. Dr. Gauden delivered to him with his own hand what was last sent up, (after
part was printed, or at least in Mr. Royston 's hand to be printed) and after
he had showed it him and sealed it up, gave him caution to deliver it, which he
did on Saturday, December. 23.48. in the Evening, according to direction, to one
Peacock, ( Brother to Dr. Gauden 's Steward) who was instructed by what hands
to deliver it to Mr. Royston, and in the same manner after the Impression was
finished he received six Books by the hand of Peacock as an acknowledgment, and
one of them he has still by him.

This is the Sum of Dr. Walker's Evidence in this matter, out of which I shall
at present only observe,

1. That all that is material in this Evidence is resolved into the Testimony
of Dr. Gauden himself, viz. That Dr. Gauden acquainted him with his design,
that Dr. Gauden told him the Discourse of the Bishop of Salisbury, that Dr.
Gauden told him he did not certainly know whether King Charles I. or King
Charles II. knew that he wrote it, etc. The Validity of which I shall consider
when I come to the next Evidence that appears in this matter.

2. That what seems to be otherwise is of no Validity at all, nor can have any
force with a rational and wise man. And that because,

1. It only seems to be something more, but in truth it is not, it is expressed
indeed as if Dr. Walker had given us ocular Testimony, that he had seen the
Heads and some of the Discourses; but this is very defective in a necessary and
material point, and does not come up to any strict Evidence: For although he says
that Dr. Gauden showed him the Heads of diverse Chapters and some of the
Discourses written of them, and some time being spent in the perusal, yet that
which should make this a Proof, that they were written by Dr. Gauden, is
altogether wanting, and that is, that they were written with Dr. Gauden's own
hand. This, which is the only material thing, there is not the least word of,
and which in a matter of this nature ought not, nor reasonably could be
omitted. And I think it is plain, either that Dr. Walker could say nothing to
this, or that he knew they were not written with Dr. Gauden's own hand, if the
latter the Evidence is corrupt, if the former insignificant; and if there be
any force in this part of the Evidence, it is not because Dr. Walker saw and
perused the Heads and Discourses; for that he might do whether Dr. Gauden wrote
them or not, but from these former Words, that Dr. Gauden acquainted him with
his Design. And I take it to be very observable, that of that Evidence which
has yet appeared, there is not the least said that comes up to this point,
that the original Manuscript was written by Dr. Gauden's own hand: which to me
is a plain Evidence that it was never written by him; for if such a thing had
been, Dr. Walker living (as he says) in Dr. Gauden's House, and being made so
privy to it, and (as he says) perusing the Heads and some of the Discourses,
and Mrs. Gauden (the Evidence of whose Papers I shall consider presently) must
needs have known it; and I shall leave it to any considering man what value is
to be put on such Evidence in such Circumstances, which pretends to prove that
one Person is the Author of a Book in opposition to another more generally
reputed Author, and at the same time never offers to prove, that that Book was
written by himself, or by his immediate dictating, and direction. This sure is
the direct Proof, and if it could be had, ought to have been produced, and the
World must be very easy and credulous, if they will take the main point upon
trust, and be put off with general Stories instead of that in which the Proof
does consist. Is it possible for any man to believe that Mrs. Gauden did not
know her Husbands Hand, or that Dr. Walker did not know it? Or further, that
Dr. Walker, being so early acquainted with the Secret, should not know of the
Progress made in that Work from time to time, or be able (upon Perusal) to
discover some Interlinings or Alterations made by: Dr. Gauden's own Hand; In
short, did any man ever see Dr. Gauden write it, or proceed with it, or add to
and amend it? These and more we have, as Evidence for King Charles's being the
Author; and it is a pleasant business indeed that this plain and direct
Evidence must be confionted by Collections and Inferences, and hold
Asseverations, without any manner of Proof to the direct matter in
Controversy. But this I shall further consider, when I come to compare the
Evidence on both sides. In the mean time:

2. This Evidence Dr. Walker has contradicted himself in another Testimony of
his in the hands of Dr. Goodal, and given March 23. 1690. Where among others
are these Words, Dr. Walker and Mr. Gifford were both privy to these Affairs,
living together in the Bishops House, though the Doctor is uncertain whether he
ever read this Book in Manuscript, or only saw it with its Title of the
Chapters, which plainly crosses and thwarts his Evidence in his printed Book,
in which he expressly attests, that Dr. Gauden showed him the Heads of diverse
Chapters, and that is not all; but it follows, and some of the Discourses
written of them: and if it had ended here, the Evidence might have agreed well
enough; but it still follows, and after some time spent in the Perusal: so that
it seems Dr. Walker had read some of the Discourses at least, and that not
transiently, but after some time spent in the Perusal. And in further
Confirmation of this the Doctor adds; And I perfectly remember, that in the
second Chapter, which is of the Death of the Earl of Strafford, there being
these Words, which now in the Printed Book of the first Edition are p. 8. l.
18, 19, 20. He only has been least vexed by them, who counseled me not to
consent against the Vote of my own Conscience. And which (he says) Dr. Gauden
told him he meant it of Bishop Juxton, so that here we have Dr. Walker not only
perfectly remembering the subject matter of that Chapter, but also an entire
Sentence, and a particular Explication relating to it. And this sure is not
very consistent with his being uncertain, whether he ever read this Book in
Manuscript, or only saw it with its Title of the Chapters. I need not reflect
upon this, every man knows that when an Evidence interferes with himself, and
contradicts his own Testimony, it renders the whole suspicious, and is a
prejudice to all he delivers in that Cause; and all I shall remark is, that Dr
Walker's Memory has failed him in that very Case, wherein a good Memory is
especially needful. And to show the Reader what weight there is to be laid upon
Dr. Walker's Memory or Confidence, he tells us, p. 8. I am as sure as I can be
of any thing, that Dr. Gauden made the extract out of this Book called
Apothegmata Carolina. And yet he is perfectly and notoriously mistaken; for as
Mr. Long says ( p. 8.) not he but Dr. Hooker was the Collector and Publisher,
who is now or lately was living in White Lion Court against Virginia street in
Wapping.

The next Evidence in the behalf of Bishop Gauden, is taken out of some Papers,
said to be in the Hands of Mr. Arthur North, Merchant, living on Tower Hill;
which Papers are said to be sent by Mrs. Gauden, the Bishop's Wife, to her Son
Mr. John Gauden, after his death they came into the Hands of Mr. Charles
Gauden, and after his death to Mr. North. A Summary of which is Printed in Page
35. and seq. of a Pamphlet entitled, Truth brought to Light, etc. and
according to that Print, I shall briefly set down what seems the most to
concern this Cause.

Amongst these Papers, there is said to be a Letter from the Bishop to the Lord
Chancellor Hyde, dated December 28. 1661, and a Copy of a Petition to the King,
written by the Bishop's own Hand. In which he declares what Hazards, etc. and
what he had done for comforting and encouraging the King's Friends, etc. And
that what was done like a King, should have a King-like Retribution, etc.
Another Letter there is to the Duke of York, dated Jan. 17. 1661, urging his
great Services, etc. As also a Letter from the Lord Chancellor Hyde to the
Bishop, (of the Chancellor's Handwriting) dated March 13. 1661, imparting the
Receipt of several Letters from him, that he was uneasy under the Bishop's
importunity. And toward the Close has this Expression, The Particular you
mention has indeed been imparted to me as a Secret, I am sorry I ever knew it;
and when it ceases to be a Secret, it will please none but Mr. Milton. Now by
all these Expressions, the Services the Bishop urges, the doing like a King,
and the Secret that will please none but Mr. Milton, at the end of my Lord
Chancellor's Letter, it is expected that we should understand the Writing, and
being the Author of this Book. But what necessity is there for that? Were there
no Services that Dr. Gauden had done besides? or at least, that he might plead,
whether he had done them or not? was it not possible for Dr. Gauden to have, or
pretended to have done like a King, i. e. freely and magnificently, (as that
Scripture-Expression means in the Case of Araunah) but this single Instance?
And was there no other Secret in the World but this, that the divulging of it
would gratify Mr. Milton? These therefore are mystical Expressions, and prove
nothing, and the utmost that can be built upon them is Presumption and
Conjecture, which are far too feeble to support that which is raised upon them.
However, if this were supposed, and that such was the meaning of those
Expressions, it will still be resolved into the single Testimony of Dr. Gauden
himself, and how valid that Testimony is in this Case, we shall see presently.
And in the mean time, this plainly contradicts Dr. Walker's Evidence, which is,
that Dr. Gauden told him, that He could not positively and certainly say, that
King Charles the Second knew that he wrote the Book. And it would look very
ridiculous to present a Petition to that King, and to use it as an Instance to
recommend him to his Favor, that in behalf of the Royal Family, he had done
like a King, meaning, he had writ the Book, and at the same time not know
whether that King knew he was the Author of it. But of this also more
presently. In the mean time, as to Dr. Gauden's Services, and which possibly
may be the Plea he made to the King, he did indeed write and publish two Books:
the one A Protestation against the King's Death, Printed for Mr. Royston, 1648:
and another proving the Non-obligation of the Covenant, which might put him
into the King's Favor; and in truth, it is very probable, that the
Protestation was the only thing Dr. Gauden was concerned in; and being Printed
by Mr. Royston, and about the same time, might be the occasion of all this
Mistake, and might be the Book he gave to the Marquess of Hertford, etc. if any
such thing was ever done.

Among these Papers there is also said to be, A Letter of Mrs. Gauden 's, after
the Death of her Husband, to her Son Mr. John Gauden, in which she speaks of
the Book commonly called the King's Book, and calls it the Jewel, and adds,
that her Husband hoped to make a Fortune by it, and wonders it should be
doubted whether her Husband wrote it, but says, she has a Letter of a very
great Man to clear it up.

There is also (said to be) a long Narrative of Mrs. Gauden 's Handwriting,
showing, that her Husband wrote the Book, and sent to her Son with the Letter.

This Narrative sets forth, that after her Husband had wrote the Book, he
showed it to the Lord Capel, who approved it, and was for the Printing it, but
wished the King might have a sight of it: that an opportunity was taken to
convey it to his Masesty by the Lord Marquess of Hertford, when he went to the
Treaty at the Isle of Wight.

That the Marquess, after his return from thence, told her Husband, that he
gave the Book to the King, and his Majesty did well like it, but was for
putting it out, not as his own, but another; but it being urged, that
Cromwell, and others of the Army, having got a Reputation with the People for
Parts and Piety, it would do best to be in the King's Name. His Majesty took
time to consider of it.

That her Husband not hearing the King's Pleasure about it, and finding Dangers
hastening on him, he having kept a Copy by him, sent it by one Mr. Simonds to
the Press, together with a Letter, that Mr. Royston was the Printer, but did
not know but the King wrote it; that Part was seized in the Press, together
with her Husband's Letter, and Mr. Simonds was taken. That nevertheless the
Work was carried on, and finished a few days after his Majesty's Death; that
when it was Published the Parliament was enraged; and her Husband, conceiving
his Life and Estate in danger, fled to Sir John Wentworth 's, near Yarmouth,
intending thence to pass the Seas, but Mr. Simonds falling sick, and dying, and
her Husband not being discovered, he altered his purpose, and returned home.

That there was an Epistle first intended, that the first Title was Suspiria
Regalia, but changed to Icon Basilice; and that there were two Chapters added.

That the Marquess of Hertford, the Lord Capel, Bishop Duppa, and Bishop Morley
were at first the only persons privy to it.

That Bishop Duppa of Winchester being very sick, her Husband went to the King,
and acquainted him, that he was the Author of the Book, and for the truth
thereof appealed to Bishop Duppa, his Majesty's Tutor, who was yet living, and
made an Apology for Printing it, without his Majesty's Father's Order, or his,
but pleaded the Circumstance of Time, and the King's Danger; that his Majesty
told her Hurband, That till then he never knew that he wrote it, but thought it
was his Father's, yet wondered how he could have time, and ob served, that it
was wrote like a Scholar, as well as like a King: and said, if it bad been
published sooner, it might have saved his Father's life, that at the same time
the King gave him a Promise of the Bishopric of Winchester.

That he afterward acquainted the Duke of York, that he was the Author, etc.
This is the Sum of the Evidence that is Collected from these Papers. And from
hence I have these things to observe.

1. That this is all finally resolved into the single Testimony of Dr. Gauden
himself, and of what Consideration that ought to be in the Case before us, will
appear from these Particulars,

1. A Man's own Evidence in his own Cause labors under very great Prejudices;
and as the Wisdom of all Lands exclude a Man from bearing witness for himself,
so such Testimony can never be admitted to conclude and determine a Matter in
Controversy in these two Cases.

1. When there is another Claim, and Pretender in possession of the thing in
controversy, in such a Case a Man's own single Testimony signifies nothing,
nor is of any Validity. The Book bears the Name of King Charles, and has for
many years been acknowledged to be his; and if Dr. Gauden should have said,
That he was the Author, and not the King, it would not be sufficient to defeat
the King's Title, nor to advance his own; Because a Man's own Testimony is
incompetent to determine the Controversy between two Rival Authors; on the one
side there is the Authority of the Book it self, which in every Line owns it
self to be the King's, as speaking in his Name, and the general Reputation of
the World consequent upon that. On the other is only the affirmation of another
Pretender, who would claim it for his own, upon his own Evidence. For let this
Evidence pass through never so many Channels, it is one and the same Evidence
still; if one Man tells a hundred, that he did such a thing, and they all
testify, that he said so, there are indeed a hundred Witnesses that he said
it, but there is but one that he did, and that is himself; if therefore Dr.
Gauden acquainted the King, the Duke of York, my Lord Chancellor, Mrs. Gauden,
Dr. Walker and several others, that he wrote the Book, the Evidence to the Fact
is still but one, and that is Dr. Gauden himself: or if Dr. Gauden told Mrs.
Gauden and Dr. Walker, that he acquainted the Marquess of Hartford, Bishop
Duppa, the King, etc. Mrs Gauden and Dr. walker may be two distinct Witnesses
that he said so, but there is but one that he did so, and that is himself. So
that this whole Matter is resolved into his own Evidence, which in this Case is
no Evidence at all, nor will any wise Man consider it as such: especially if to
this be added,

2. If there be any Interest or Advantage to be reaped by it. In this Case a
Man's own Testimony is always resused, because a Man is suspected as too
partial to himself, and apt to be swayed by his Interests. And if we are to
give any credit to these Papers, I am afraid Mrs. Gauden has revealed a great
Secret when she says, That her Husband hoped to make a Fortune by it. For if
that was the end of his owning himself to be the Author, it has too great a
mixture of carnal Ingredients to gain much Credit; for if Men witness for
themselves to advance their Ambition, and secular Designs, their Evidence is
tainted, and savours of Project and Artifice, and Men always uspect on that
Hand. And I am sorry to find, that these very Papers insinuate too much of this
very Temper to be in Dr. Gauden, in these two Instances;

1. They lay before us a very strange and immodest magnifying his own Merits,
and particularly in that to King Charles the Second, writ by his own Hand,
wherein he declares what Hazards he had run of Life and Estate. (And yet he
kept one of the most considerable Livings in England all the time of the
Usurpation.) And what great Advantage had accrued to the Crown by his Service.
(And in his Letter to the Duke of York, he strongly urges the great Services he
had done.) That what was done like a King should have a King-like Retribution;
and instances in the Cases of Joseph, Mordeeai and Daniel, who were honored and
rewarded for the Services they did to the respective Princes, and in particular
observes, that Ahasuerus was uneasy, till Mordecai had had his merited Reward.
Now these are fine Characters indeed, and give a good account of Dr. Gauden's
Performances, but they look a little scurvily coming from his own Mouth; had
the Dr. never a Friend at Court? methinks my Lord of Warwick or Manchester, his
known Friends and Patrons, or else my Lord Marquess of Hartford and Bishop
Duppa might have saved him this Trouble, and so certainly they would, had they
known by him such a thing as the writing the King's Book: but since the Dr. was
forced to make use of himself, it seems pretty plain, that there was no Body
else to employ in this Matter, and that no Person about the King knew the Drs.
Merits so well as himself, The Truth is, a Man that is clamorous in his own
Praise, always looks suspiciously; and he that can break through all the Bounds
of Modesty and Decency to magnify his own Merits, may possibly not be very shy
in straining at a point of Truth to make it good; Boasting always stands near
Untruth, and treads on the very Heels of it. To this may be added,

2. An immoderate Desire of Reward, and undue Solicitation for it: thus these
Papers represent him, as discontented with his preferment to the Bishopric of
Exeter, telling the King, that he had a high Rack, but a low Manger, although
there be several Bishoprics in England and Wales inferior to that in point of
Revenue, and at that time possessed by Men of very great Worth and Virtue. Thus
also he teaches the King to be grateful to him, by the respective Advancements
of Joseph, Daniel, and Mordecai. Thus in the Letter to the Duke of York he
importunately begs his Royal Highness to intercede for him with the King. And
in the Lord Chancellor Hyde's Letter to him it is expressed, That he was
uneasy under the Bishop's Importunity. These things plainly represent a very
ambitious Temper, covetous of Preferment, hasty and patient in the pursuit of
it; and when Men are under the power of such a Complexion, they do not
generally manage themselves by nice and punctual Methods, and to be sure such a
Man's Merits will lose nothing by his own telling them, nor himself any thing
for want of asking. And the truth is, over-valuing our own Merits, and claiming
those which are none of our own, differ very little in point of Modesty and
Virtue; and he that can do one, in all probability, will not stick at the
other, if he thinks it feasible to accomplish the ends he aims at. So that
those who have published these Papers, have done but little Service to the
Bishop's Memory, and as little to the Cause they pretend to maintain; for tho I
do not from hence conclude, that the Bishop ever told King Charles, the Duke of
York, or the Lord Chancellor, that he was the Author of this Book; yet if ever
he did so, or to any others, I do conclude, that it being his own Cause, and
for such Ends, and joined with such a Temper, it apparently sinks the Credit of
his own Testimony, and renders it of no value.

2. Another thing which would take off the Force of Dr. Gauden's Testimony in
this Case, supposing he ever attested it, is the Immorality and Infamy of the
whole Practice, which must be charged upon him upon such a supposition. And
that is writing a Book in the King's Name, and therein personating him in the
Acts of Piety, Devotion, and high point of Conscience, which, whatever the end
might be, in the softest Language, is first inventing a Falsehood, and then
imposing it upon the World, and (as these Papers intimate) upon the King too,
(for they plainly tell us he never had the King's Consent.) Had the Devotionary
Part been Composed for the King's private Use and Assistance, the Attempt might
have been dutiful and charitable, tho there had been no need for it, to a
Prince who was so admirably qualified himself, and the King, if he had thought
them suitable, might by them have expressed the Sense of his own Heart. But to
give them to the World as the King's own, which he never framed nor used, nor
so much as owned, is to counterfeit the King's Conscience, which, as I take it,
is a more audacious and far greater Crime, than to counterfeit his Coin, his
Hand, or his great Seal; for such a Practice mocks God as well as Men, and
dawbs and juggles in these very Cases, in which are required the greatest
plainness and sincerity. And in all respects, to counterfeit Prayers,
Repentance, Charity and other Graces, (abundantly expressed in that excellent
Book) and to impose them upon the World for true and genuine, is such a Piece
of Forgery and Imposture, Fraud and Hypocrisy together, that no end can
warrant, and nothing can parallel. And now if a Man had acted in such a manner,
methinks he should have but little stomach to own it, or if he did, in the same
breath he convicts himself of Falsehood, and lays a Bar to his own Testimony;
for it is obvious, that if a Man in such Circumstances can father his own Book
upon the King, he may with the same truth and justice lay claim to the King's
Book: and the pretense of Good Ends does not alter the Case, for no doubt a
good Bishopric may be thought a Good End too; and he that thinks the King's
Honor will justify the acting deceitfully for him, may as well think his own
Honor may justify the same measure for acting for himself. And what, I wonder,
is such a Testimony worth in this Case, when the Testimony it self plainly
declares, that he first abused the World, in giving them a Book for the King's,
which was not his, and afterward abused the King in taking great pains to
assume it to himself. And the truth is, this Evidence (such as it is) confronts
it self; for if Dr. Gauden was the Publisher of this Book (as these Papers
represent) then he gave as public an Evidence as was possible, that the King
was the Author of it, and as much as any Man does who sets his Name to his own
Works. And if he told Mrs. Gauden, Dr. Walker, or any other, that he himself
was the Author, then he told them one thing, and the whole Kingdom another,
which, at last, makes a fine Evidence of it, and very fit to determine the
Controversy, which in the very Case contradicts it self; and it is impossible
to reconcile Dr. Gauden the Publisher, to Dr. Gauden the private Relater. I
must confess, I am heartily sorry, and afflicted, that I have said thus much
concerning Bishop Gauden, considering both his Character and Station in the
Church, and that he has been long since dead. But those who have been so
earnest to assert his Right to this Book, are to be thanked for it; for it is
the very Character they have given him, and the very means they have used to
prove his Title. And if the Memory of King Charles the First must stand in
competition with the Memory of Dr. Ganden, I think there needs no Apology for
doing Right to that King's Memory, tho it should reflect on Bishop Gauden, or a
greater Subject than he. But this I have said only in supposition, that Dr.
Gauden did in truth own himself to be the Author. But that which follows, I
hope, will clear him from that Imputation, how severe soever those who plead
his Cause, have been to his Memory. And that is

2. The second thing I have to observe from these Papers of Mrs. Gauden, which
is, that they do, in direct Terms, and in notorious Instances contradict the
Testimony of Dr. Walker. And to make this very plain, I shall set them opposite
to one another in two Columns.

Doctor Walker, page 5. Dr. Gauden some time after the King was murdered, upon
my asking hm whether He (the King) had ever seen the Book, gave me this Answer:
I know it certainly no more than you, but I used my best Endeavors that he
might; for I delivered a Copy of it to the Marquess of Hartford, when he went
to the Treaty at the Isle of Wight, and entreated his Lordship, if he could
obtain any private opportunity, he would deliver it to his Majesty, and humbly
desire to know his Majesty's Pleasure concerning it. But the Violence which
threatened the King, hastening so fast, he ventured to Print it, and never knew
what was the Issue of sending it; for when the thing was done, he judged it not
prudent to make further noise about it by inquiry.

Mrs. Gauden, page 37. An Opportunity was taken to convey (the Book) to his
Majesty, by the Lord Marquess of Hartford, when he went to the Treaty at the
Isle of Wight: that the Marquess, after his return, told her Husband, that he
gave the Book to the King, and his Majesty did well like it, but was for
putting it out, not as his own, but as another. But it being urged, that
Cromwell and others of the Army having got a great Reputation with the People
for Parts and Piety, it would do best to be in the King's Name. His Majesty
took time to consider of it.

Dr. Walker, page 5. I asking him (for we seldom were in private but somewhat
was discoursed of this Book, even to the last time I saw him after he was Lord
Bishop of Worcester elect) whether that King Charles the Segnd knew that he
wrote it, he gave me this Answer: I can not positively and certainly say he
does, because he was never pleased to take express notice of it to me; but I
take it for granted he does, for I am sure, the Duke of York does, for he has
spoken of it to me, and owned it as a seasonable and acceptable service, and he
knowing it, I question not but the King also does.

Mrs. Gauden, page 38. Bishop Duppa of Winchester being very sick, her Hushand
went to the King, and acquainted him, that he was the Author of the Book; and
for the truth thereof appealed to Bishop Duppa, his Majesty's Tutor, who was
yet living, and made an Apology for printing it without his Majesty's Father's
order, or his, but pleaded the circumstances of time, and the Kings danger.
That his Majesty told her Husband, that till then he never knew that he wrote
it, but thought it was his Fathers, and wondered how he could have time; and
observed it was wrote like a Scholars as well as like a King; and said, that if
it had been published sooner, it might have saved his Fathers Life. That at the
same time the King gave him a Promise of the Bishopric of Winchester.

That he afterward acquainted the Duke of York, etc. That her Husband then
told his Highness, that the King promised him the Bishopric of Winchester, and
that his Highness assured him of his favor.

And now, what an admirable Harmony and Agreement have we here? Such Evidence
must needs be credited, they are so consistent with one another in their
Stories. In Dr. Walker's Evidence Dr. Gauden did not certainly know, and no
more than Dr. Walker himself, whether King Charles I. had ever seen the Book.
But in Mrs. Gauden's Evidence, the Marquess of Hartford told him, that he gave
the Book to the King. In Dr. Walker's, he never knew what was the Issue of
sending it. But in Mrs. Gauden's, that the King liked it well, but was for
putting it out, not as his own, etc. In Dr. Walkers, when the thing was done,
he judged it not prudent to make further noise about it by enquiry. Nor need
he, as Mrs. Gauden represents it, when the Marquess had told him already, and
by such a remarkable circumstance, That Cromwell, etc. having got a great
reputation with the People for Parts and Piety, it would do best to be in the
King's Name; and his Majesty took time to consider of it.

In Dr. Walker's Evidence, Dr. Gauden could not positively and certainly say
that King Charles II. knew that he wrote it. But in Mrs. Gauden's he told that
King himself, that he was the Author of it, and appealed to Bishop Duppa for
the truth of it. In Dr. Walker's he gave this as a Reason why he could not
positively say it, viz. because the King was never pleased to rake express
notice of it to him. But in Mr. Gauden's the King took express notice of it to
him; and told him that till then he never knew that he wrote it, but thought it
had been his Father's, yet wondered how he could have time, etc. That, had it
been published sooner it might have saved his Father's Life. And all this by a
very good token; That, at the same time the King promised him the Bishopric of
Winchester. In Dr. walker's he collects the King's knowing it by inference, and
takes it for granted, because he is sure the Duke of York does, and he knowing
it, he does not question but the King also does. But in Mrs Gauden's; he
acquainted the King himself; and not only so, but he acquainted the King first,
and the Duke of York afterward; as Mrs. Gauden expressly, That he afterward
acquainted the Duke, that he was the Author. And by the same token, That he
then told his Highness, that the King promised him the Bishopric of
Winchester. So that if it had not been said so expressly, this telling the Duke
must be subsequent to that Promise, which (as Mrs. Gauden says) was at the same
time that he told the King. And lastly, In Dr. Walker's, the Reason of Dr.
Gauden's Assurance that the Duke knew it, was, for that the Duke had spoken of
it to him; but in Mrs. Gauden's. That he had acquainted the Duke himself.

And now, how like ye this my Masters? Is not this rare Evidence, to convince
the World, that agrees at this rate? Do men use to believe a matter of fact
upon the Credit of Witnesses who contradict each other? Methinks, the example
of Daniel may serve to show us the value of such Testimony, as well as to teach
the King Gratitude: The two Elders were both positive as to the fact, but their
differing in circumstance detected their Falsity. And the two Elders did not
differ from one another, by many degrees, so much as Dr. Walker and Mrs.
Gauden. In short, either Dr. Gauden told these things respectively to Dr.
Walker and Mrs. Gauden, or he did not; if he did not, their Evidence is of no
value; if he did, his own is of no value as contradicting himself.

And so I have done with this part of the Discourse, the Evidence that is
produced to entitle Dr. Gauden to this Book. And I appeal to all the World,
whether such Testimony so circumstantiated be fit, or ever was admitted, to
determine the least Controversy in the World? And if there was no more to be
said for the Kings being the true Author, but only the bare Name and general
Acceptance, that is abundantly sufficient to vindicate it to him from all that
is here offered; and no rational and unprejudiced man can alter his Sentiments;
and translate it to Dr. Gauden upon such Evidence; and much less if this be
consronted by plain, direct and unexceptionable Evidence in behalf of the King.
And this is the third thing, viz.

3. I shall produce the Evidence that has appeared, to prove the King the
Author of this Book, and although there are some others, and which are of good
Credit and may deserve Consideration, yet I shall confine my self to these,
which are plain and direct, and come home to the very Case; a Testimony that
plainly gives Evidence to the King's Title, and that Evidence unexceptionably
conveyed to us: Some of these, and these the most considerable, are summed up
by Sir William Dugdale, (in his short view of the late troubles in England, p.
380.) in these Words: I shall make it evident from the Testimony of very
credible Persons yet living, that he had begun the penning of them long before
he went from Oxford to the Scots. For the Manuscript it self, written with his
own hand, being found in his Cabinet, which was taken at Navesby Fight, was
restored to him after he was brought to Hampton Court by the hand of Major
Huntington, through the favor of General Fairfax of whom he obtained it, and that
whilst he was in the Isle of Wight, it was there seen frequently by Mr. Thomas
Herbert, who then waited on his Majesty in his Bedchamber; as also by Mr.
William Levet, (a Page of the Back Stairs) the Title then prefixed to it being
Suspiria Regalia, who not only read several Parts thereof, but saw the King
diverse times writing farther on it. Add hereunto the Testimony of Mr. Richard
Royston a Bookseller at the Angel in Ivy Lane; who having in these rebellious
times adventured to Print diverse of his Majesty's Declarations, Speeches and
Messages; about the beginning of October 1648. (the King being then in the Isle
of Wight) was sent to by his Majesty to prepare all things ready for the
Printing some Papers, which he purposed shortly after to convey unto him, which
was this very Copy brought to him on the 23d. of December next following, by
one Mr. Edward Simonds a reverend Divine, who received it from Dr. Bryan Duppa
then Bishop of Salisbury, and afterward of Winchester. In the Printing whereof
Mr. Royston made such speed, that it was finished before that dismal 30th. of
January, that his Majesty's Life was taken away.

In this Summary are four considerable Evidences, Major Huntington, Mr.
Herbert, Mr. Levet, and Mr. Royston; three of them directly to the thing, and
Mr. Royston's so circumstantiated, as amounts very near to a direct Evidence.

1. Major Huntington. To this Dr. Walker excepts, (p. 33.) that at Tunbridge
the Major told him, that all he knew or ever said concerning it was, when that
Book was published, and so confidently reported to be the Kings, then surely,
or I believe these are the Papers I see him so usually take out of his Cabinet.
But this was but my Conjecture and I never declared it to be otherwise; for I
assure you I never read one Line or Word of the Papers in the King's hand; I
was not so rude, and I cannot say there was one Passage in those Papers which
is in this printed Book: For how should I, never having looked into them? Now
this Evidence of Dr. Walkers is confronted by another of Mr. Rich. Duke's in a
Letter to Dr. Charles Goodal June 15.92. in these Words:

Sir, I confess that I heard Major Huntington to say more than once, that
whilst he guarded Charles I. at Holmby-House (as I remember) he saw several
Chapters or Leaves of that great King's Meditations, lying on the Table,
several Mornings; with a Pen and Ink, with which the King scratched out or
blotted some Lines or Words of some of them: Upon which I must also confess,
that I concluded they were originally from the King; but others have drawn a
contrary Argument from the King's correcting the Papers, yet I put this under
my hand, that the Major told me that he did suppose them originally from that
learned Prince. Which is the totum that can be intimated, from, Sir,

Your humble Servant, Richard Duke.


In this Testimony of Mr. Duke these things are to be cleared.

1. That there is a difference between this account, and that of Sir William
Dugdale's. But notwithstanding both their Evidence are very consistent, and by
no means contradictory. Sir William Dugdale says that Major Huntintdon, through
the favor of Fairfax, restored to him the Manuscript after Navesby Fight; Mr.
Duke only says that the Major saw them lying on the Table etc. which the Major
might very well do, and yet before that restore them to the King from General
Fairfax; which as Mr. Duke says nothing of, so neither does what he says any
ways contradict; so that Mr. Duke's Evidence is not contrary to Sir William's,
but a Supplement to it, and a further account of the Major's Knowledge of this
matter: He testifies indeed more than Sir William, but by no means interferes
with him. So likewise when Sir William says it was at Hampton Court, this is
easily reconciled, because Mr. Duke speaks diffidently, that it was at
Holmby-House as he remembers, but is not positive but it might be some other
place, as these Expressions plainly denote.

2. The next thing is, that Mr. Duke does not say in express terms, that those
Meditations, which the Major saw lying upon the Table several Mornings, and the
King correct them; that those were the same that were printed in the King's
name. But it is plainly implied, for Mr. Duke says, that from the Major's
account to him he conceived they were originally from the King, and is positive
that the Major told him, that he supposed them originally from the King; that
is plainly the Meditations in Controversy, for the Word originally here can
refer to nothing else, but to another Pretender. And the saying that others
have drawn a contrary Argument from the Kings correcting the Papers, yet
further proves it. So that as Mr. Duke did not, so it is plain the Major
himself did not mean any other Papers, than the original Manuscript of the
King's Book or of some part of it, which he saw lie on the Table, and the King
correcting it. The Sum therefore is, that the Testimony of Major Huntington, as
it is represented by Mr. Duke, is contradictory to the same represented by Dr.
Walker, and the Validity of the respective Testimony must depend on the Credit
of the respective Witnesses. And how much Dr. Walker's Testimony is to be
relied on in this Case I have shown already; and Mr. Duke's Testimony is
confirmed by another; Mr. Cave Beck in a Letter to Dr. Hollingworth attesting;
That Major Huntington at Ipswich assured him, that so much of the said Book as
contained his Majesty's Meditations before Navesby Fight, Dr. Holl. Charact. of
King Charles I. p. 27
was taken in the King's Cabinet; and that Sir Thomas Fairfax delivered the
said Papers unto him, and ordered him, to carry them to the King: and also told
him that when he delivered them to the King, his Majesty appeared very joyful,
and said he esteemed them more than all the Jewels he had lost in the Cabinet.

2. The next Evidence is that of Mr. Herbert, afterward Sir Thomas Herbert;
who not only saw it, as Sir William Dugdale says, but moreover had the original
Manuscript given him by the King, and which was wrote by the King's own hand.
This has never yet appeared publicly to the World, and therefore I shall set
it down at large, as it was transmitted to me by the Reverend Mr. Cudworth
Rector of Barmbrough in Yorkshire, and attested by several worthy and learned
Persons, in these Words:

In a Manuscript Book in Folio of Sir Thomas Herbert's well bound, fairly
written, and consisting of 83 Pages, and by him called Carolina Threnodia,
having the Picture of King Charles I. in the Front, and beginning thus:

SIR,
By yours of the 22d. of August last I find you have received my former Letters
of the 1st. and 13th. of May, 1678. And seeing it is your farther desire I
should recollect what I can well remember upon that sad Subject more at large,
I am willing to satisfy you therein so far forth as my Memory will assist.
Some short Notes of Occurrences I then took, which in this long Interval of
time and several Removes of my Family are either lost, or so mislaid at present
I cannot find, which renders this Narrative not so methodical nor so large as
otherwise I should, and probably by you may be expected. Nor would I trouble
you much with what any other has writ, but in a summary way give you some Court
Passages, which I observed during the two last years of his Majesty's Life and
Reign; being the time of his Solitudes and Sufferings. -- In page 21.
Nevertheless, both times be carefully observed his usual times set apart for
private Devotion, and for writing. Mr. Harrington and Mr. Herbert continued
waiting on his Majesty as Grooms in the Bedchamber, he also gave Mr. Herbert
the Charge of his Books, of which the King had a Catalogue, and from time to
time had brought unto him such as from time to time he was pleased to call for:
The sacred Scripture was the Book he most delighted in; read often in Bishop
Andrew's Sermons, Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, Dr. Hammond's Works,
Villalpandus upon Ezekiel, etc. Sandy's Paraphrase upon King David's Psalms,
Herbert's divine Poems; and also recreated himself in reading Godfrey of
Bulloigne writ in Italian by Torquato Tasso, and done into English Heroic
Verse by Mr. Fairfax. A Poem his Majesty much commended, as he did Ariosto, by
Sir John Harrington a factious Poet, much esteemed of by Prince Henry his
Master; Spencer's Fairy Queen and the like, for alleviating his Spirits after
serious Studies. And at this time it was, (as is presumed) he composed his Book
called Suspiria Regalia published soon after his Death, and entitled, The
King's Portraicture in his Solitudes and Sufferings. Which Manuscript Mr.
Herbert found among those Books his Majesty was graciously pleased to give him,
(those excepted which he bequeathed to his Children hereafter mentioned) in
regard Mr. Herbert, tho he did not see the King write that Book, his Majesty
being always private when he writ, and these his Servants never coming into the
Bedchamber when the King was private until he called; yet comparing it with his
Handwriting in other things, he found it so very like, as induces his belief
that it was his own; having seen much of the King's Writings before. And to
instance particulars, in that his Majesty's Translation of Dr. Sanderson the
late Bishop of Lincoln's Book de juramentis, a like Title, concerning Oaths,
all of it translated into English, and writ with his own hand, and which in his
Bedchamber he was pleased to show his Servants, Mr. Harrington and Mr. Herbert,
and commanding them to examine it with the Original, they found it accurately
translated.


This is a true Copy taken out of the original Manuscript, and compared by Us,
Thomas Vincent. Thomas Fountain. Ra. Eaton, Rector of Darfield. J. Cudworth,
Rector of Barmbrough. Tho. Maulyverer, Rector of Spersbrough. Tho. Burton. Jo.
Newsome, Rector of Warmsworth.


This Manuscript is now in the Hands of Sir Thomas Harvey of Yorkshire, who (as
I think) married the Widow of Sir Thomas Herbert.

3. The next Evidence is Mr. Levet, who besides Sir William Dugdale's Testimony
has himself lately given an account of his Knowledge of this matter, in a
Letter to Seymour Bourman Esquire in Lincoln's Inn Fields. In these Words:

Dear Brother,
Yours of the 21. of this instant April I received, and one Letter before that
to the same effect, viz. To give a true account of my Knowledge of that
unparalled Book, which his sacred Majesty of blessed Memory King Charles I.
(murdered by his own rebellious Subjects before his own Palace at Whitehall,
with all the violent and malicious Circumstances that wicked men could invent)
which Book of my certain Knowledge I can depose was truly his own, having
observed his Majesty oftentimes writing his Royal Resentments of the bold and
insolent Behavior of his Soldiers, (his rebellious Subjects) when they had him
in their Custody. I waited on his Majesty as Page of the Bedchamber in
ordinary, during all the time of his Solitudes (except when I was forced from
him) and especially being nominated by his Majesty to be one of his Servants,
among others that should attend him, during the Treaty at Newport in the Isle
of Wight, had the Happiness to read the same oftentimes in Manuscript, under
his Majesty's own hand, being pleased to leave it in the Window in his own
Bedchamber, where I was always obliged to attend his Majesty's coming thither.
But the Treaty being ended in few days after, the Soldiers with one to conduct
them, by name Mr. Anthony Mildmay, then Cup Bearer, came to the Bedchamber
about Two of the Clock in the night, and knocked at the door, and one Mr.
Herbert, Mr. Kirk, and my self, having some hint of their Intentions, were
watching in an inner room, and hearing some noise, went into his Majesty's
Bedchamber, and asked who they were that durst disturb his Majesty at that
unseasonable time of the night; who answered, they were sent to tell the King
he must rise, and go with them. We acquainting his Majesty with their design,
he was pleased to command us to tell them, he would go with them, but it was
not his usual hour to rise so soon; we again acquainted the Soldiers with his
Majesty's Answer: They instead of complying with his Majesty bid us tell him,
if he did not rise presently, they must force him to it: His Majesty only said,
if I must give me my Clothes, and so he immediately arose. (Here ye may observe
a mirror of Patience in a distressed Prince); during the time of his Majesty's
making himself ready, he concerned himself only how to secure this Book of his,
and a small Cabinet, wherein he secured his Letters to his Queen, who was then
beyond the Sea; and his Majesty having procured a Pass for me from the
Governor, that I should wait on him there, he gave me in charge this said Book
and small Cabinet, which I faithfully presented to his Majesty's own hands that
night in Hurst Castle. But the Governor, by what Information is too tedious to
insert here, at this time, and therefore I omit it, did on Saturday banish me
out of the Castle.

I should have sent you a Relation which I had of Royston the King's Printer,
for the Printing the said Book, by his Majesty's special Command, brought to
him by a Divine, but not to be By Printed is to be understood Published.
Printed till after the King's Death, which he observed accordingly; for which
Cromwell sent for him to Whitehall, not only promising Rewards, but also
threatening Punishments, if he would not deny, that he Printed it by his
Majesty's Order, which he refusing to do, did imprison him for about a
Fortnight, but seeing he could not work upon him, released him, which is all at
present from

Your Affectionate Brother to serve you, William Levet.
From Savernack Park, near Marleborough, Apr. 29. 1691.

To this Dr. Walker answers, ( Page 34.)

There is no such Chapter or Title in all (...), meaning, as the Royal
Resentment of the bold and insolent Behavior of his Soldiers (his rebellious
Subjects.) Very right, Sir, but there is the thing; and Mr. Levet did not say
that was the Title to any Chapter in that Book, or a Title to what he saw the
King write, but the Subject Matter of it; and that it is of more Chapters than
one. In the mean time it is very pleasant, when a Man testifies, that he will
depose, the Book was the King's own, for that he had observed the King writing
his Royal Resentments, etc. to answer there is no such Chapter or Title. But I
pray, Sir, are there in that Book no Royal Resentments of the insolent
Behavior of the Rebellious Soldiers? If there be none indeed, then Mr. Levet
could not conclude they were part of the Book, tho he saw the King write them;
but if there be, it is extremely ridiculous to say, there is no such Chapter, or
no such Title; the Force of this Testimony therefore, is not about the Title,
but the thing, and that Mr. Levet could depose that the Book was the King's,
and that he read the same in Manuscript under the King's own Hand. And what
does Dr. walker say to this? why truly he says, I must beg his pardon to
believe he is mistaken. And so it seems Mr. Levet's deposing, and seeing the
King write some of it, and reading it under the King's own Hand is all
confuted, and it neither is, nor can be so, because Dr. Walker begs his pardon.
This is an excellent way of deseating the Force of an Evidence, and taking off
the Edge of the Testimony of an Eyewitness; and if this will do, Dr. Walker
must needs gain the Cause; for there is no doubt but he will beg the pardon of
all the King's Witnesses, if he can so easily quit his Hands of them. In the
mean time, that Mr. Levet was not mistaken, but delivered his Knowledge of this
Matter, we have confirmed by another Testimony of his, and of another Date, in
the possession of his Son, Fellow of Exeter College in Oxon. in these Words: If
any one has a desire to know the true Author of a Book entitled (...), Dr.
Hollingw. Charact. of King Charles. page 9.
I, one of the Servants of King Charles the First in his Bedchamber, do
declare, when his said Majesty was Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, that I read
over the abovementioned Book (which was long before the said Book was Printed)
in his Bedchamber, writ with his Majesty's own Hand, with several
Interlinings. Moreover his Majesty King Charles I. told me, Sure, Levet, you do
design to get this Book by heart: having often seen me reading of it. I can
testify also, that Royston the Printer told me that he was imprisoned by
Oliver Cromwell the Protector, because he would not declare, that King Charles
I. was not the Author of the said Book. Signed and sealed October 16. 1690.

Will. Levet.


4. The next Evidence is that of Mr. Royston, which contains very material
Circumstances viz. That the October before, the King sent a Message to him to
prepare all things ready for the Printing some Papers, which he purposed
shortly after to convey to him, and which was this very Copy brought the Twenty
third of December next following. This is very near to a direct Evidence; and
the King's sending to him to prepare himself, and this Book being sent to him
accordingly, is a plain proof that these were the Papers the King designed to
send him, and the King had intentions of Printing them in October, which it
seems, according to Dr. Walker and Mrs. Gauden was before he had seen them, or
heard any thing of them. I shall not need to add any more to this, but that
this Testimony of Mr. Royston is corroborated by two others, as Mr. Thomas
Milbourn, Printer by Jewin-street, who told Dr. Dr. Hellingwerth's, Defense of
King Charles I. page 12 13, 14.
Hollingworth before sufficient Witnesses: That in the Year 48 he was an
Apprentice to Mr. John Grisman a Printer, when Mr. Simonds, by Mr. Royston,
sent the King's Book to be Printed, and that his Master did Print it. That Mr.
Simonds always had the Name of sending it to the Press, that it came to them as
from the King, and they understood it no otherwise; that they had Printed
several other things with C. R. to them, and that it looked to them like the
same Hand, and the same sort of Paper with others that were so marked, and
looked upon as the King's Papers; for the King kept the Original by him, and
Mr. Odert the Secretary transcribed them. To the same purpose Mr. Clifford,
Reader of Prayers at Sergeants Inn in Fleet Street, who assisted Mr. Milbourn
in the Printing it: and who further adds, That the King entitled his Book the
Royal Plea, but Doctor Jeremiah Tailor coming accidentally to Mr. Royston 's
Shop, he having an assured Confidence in him, showed him the first Proof from
the Press, which when the Doctor viewed under that Title, he told him the Title
would betray the Book -- That Dr. Tailor wrote to the King, to let him know it
would be in danger of suppressing by two Informers, Chelsenham and Jones, who
would understand the Book by the Title. And therefore he thought (...) would be
a better Title, and less taken notice of by the Informers, being Greek. and
agreeing with the Title of his Father's Book, called (...); and to which the
King consented. -- And adds further, That he never heard, nay, that he is sure,
that Dr. Gauden never was concerned in that Book by which Milbourn and himself
Printed it, and that they had no part of the Copy from Dr. Walker, for it was
that transcribed by Mr. Odert they Printed it by.

To these Testimonies cited by Sir William Dugdale, and in this manner
strengthened and confirmed, we may add,

1. The Testimony of Doctor Gauden himself, when Bishop of Exeter, and attested
by Mr. Long, Prebendary of the Church of Exeter, Dr. Walker's Account examined,
page 4.
viz. That he had heard him often affirm, that he was fully convinced, that the
(...) was entirely that King's Work. This, I confess, is not a direct Proof to
the Matter, but it is full against Dr. Gauden; for if he was fully convinced,
that it was entirely the King's Work, he would himself never pretend to have
any hand in the Composure of it.

2. The Testimony of two Authors of two Books, and both of them Printed 1649,
whose Names I know not, tho possibly by the Titles of their respective Books
they may be known to some other persons.

The first is certainly a person of Worth and Learning, and the Title his Book
bears, is (...), written in answer to a scurrilous Pamphlet against the King's
Book, entitled (...), in which the Author ( page 4.) has these Words: The
Author might have informed himself of diverse, who have seen the Original Copy,
manuscribed by the King himself, he might have seen it himself for asking. --
And afterward, I take it to be the King's Book, I am sure of it, I knew his
Hand, I have seen the Manuscript, I have heard him own it. These are plain and
express, and if the Author was known, I doubt not but his Person would give
Value to his Testimony, for his Writings plainly show him a great Man, and of
excellent Qualifications.

The other is the Author of a Book called the Princely Pelican, written on
purpose (as the Title Page asserts) to satisfy the Kingdom, that the King was
the Author of this Book. And the Account the Author gives of himself is this, (
Page 1.) that he had been a constant Servant to the King, and that he had
remained constantly in his attendance upon his Majesty to the last Man, that
the King was often times pleased to communicate his private Councils and
Addresses to him. And after having given this Account of himself, he proceeds
to give Account of the Book, and in the first place tells us the very Beginning
of the King's Resolutions to undertake it. ( Page 4.) That he was pleased some
few days after he had retired from his Parliament, to communicate his Thoughts
in his Garden at Theobalds to some of his Gentlemen who were nearest to him,
and of whose Intimacy and Abilities he stood most confident, how he had set his
hand to Paper to vindicate his Innocence, in the first place, by showing the
Reasons he had of receding from the Parliament. And that not so much as one
Lane had falien from his Pen, which with Honor he might not confirm. The Author
goes on, His next Essay, as he told us, he intended should take its Discourse
from the faithfullest Servant, and incomparable States man that any Prince
could rely on, meaning the Earl of Strafford, and then gives us the King's
particular Discourse, condemning himself for suffering his Hand to thwart the
Resolution of his Heart, etc. And particularly recites at large the Discourses
of his Attendance on that Subject with his Majesty. He tells us further, ( Page
19.) that the King told them, That as his Morning Devotions took up the first,
so he ever reserved the next for these Meditations he had now in hand. The
Author yet further tells us, ( Page 21.) That at Naseby, those Divine
Meditations were seized by the Enemy, with other Papers of Concern, being
enclosed in a Cabinet reserved for that purpose: and that by the Benignity of
the Conqueror, or Divine Providence rather, it was recovered above all
expectance, and returned to his Majesty's Hand; and which infinitely cheered
him. And further ( Page 22.) That a Person of high Command in that Army gave
this Censure of it, saying, It was an handsome Piece of Hypocrisy. There are
several other observable Passages in this Author too long to transcribe. And I
heartily wish, we could recover the Author's Name. In the mean time, the
Testimony which he gives does so agree with the thing it self, and so concur in
some Particulars, with the other Evidence beforementioned, particularly the
seizing the King's Book (so much of it as was then done) at Naseby-Fight, and
the Recovery of it again, and the great Joy the King had on the receiving it:
that they plainly corroborate each other, and there can be no possible reason
to doubt the Truth and Sincerity of such Evidence, which at diverse times, and
upon several Occasions, give the same Testimony, and in the same Cirstances.

These are some of the Evidences which prove King Charles the First to be the
sole Author of this Book, and which, I conceive, are so plain, full and clear,
that it is impossible to avoid the Force of them, or without great obstinacy,
not to be convinced by them. For, I think, there is very little need to bestow
much pains in comparing the Evidence on both sides, and to show which
preponderates, and ought to determine us in a matter of this Nature. On the one
side we have but one single Evidence (if we have that) to the direct Matter,
and that is the Person himself about whom is the Controversy, and him also
under the presumption of Advantage and Interest. And on the other we have
several credible and unexceptionable and disinterested Witnesses, who neither
had, nor could have any personal Advantage from the Evidence they give. On the
one side we have two Witnesses giving their Testimony by Hearsay and Report,
that they heard the pretended Author say so, etc. on the other we have far more
for weight and number, declaring their proper knowledge of the Matter of Fact.
On the one side neither of the two Witnesses come home to the direct Matter, or
positively assert they saw Dr. Gauden write it, or dictate it, or saw it in his
own Handwriting, or any thing like it. But on the other, the direct contrary,
some attesting they saw the King writing some part of it; others saw it in his
own Handwriting, and which they knew; and one, that he had the original
Manuscript it self in possession, and given him by the King. On the one side we
have one of the two Witnesses contradicting himself, and both contradicting
each other in very important parts of their Evidence. On the other all
agreeing, not only in the main Fact, but in several Circumstances, and in all
the material Branches of their respective Testimony. And now, if Evidence must
carry it (and I know no reason to the contrary) it is plain, that all the
Advantage is on the King's side, and there is no manner of comparison between
them. And sure it is very easy to judge on which side the Right lies, when
plain, positive, direct and unexceptionable Proof, is opposed only by
entangled, indirect, contradictious Evidence, full of Inconsistency.

I have now done with the first thing proposed, the external Evidence, proving
the King to be the Author, and proceed to the next, viz.

2. The intrinsic Evidence, which arises from the Book it self: and if all the
Testimony for King Charles's being the Author was set aside, this would be
abundantly sufficient to determine the Matter, and would far over-balance all
that has been said in behalf of Dr. Ganden, and ten times as much more. The
Truth is, the Book discovers its own Author, and there is not a Line nor a
Sentence but plainly owns the King's Hand, and as plainly confutes all the
pretenses for Dr. Gauden. But this is a copious Argument, and to manage it
fully, would require a larger Book than that in Controversy. And therefore I
shall confine my self, and speak briefly to these Particulars.

1. The General Style. 2. The Historical Part of it. 3. Some Particulars of the
Subject Matter of it.
1. The General Style: By this I do not only mean the Phrase and Expression,
but, together with that, the manner of Management; and to this I add, the great
Weight of the Matter: all these are very great and Majestic, not only like a
King, but like that very King to whom they are ascribed; and let any Man
compare this Book with other the Works of this glorious Martyr, and he cannot
but see the same generous and free Expression, the same Clearness of Reason,
the same Greatness of Mind; in short, the same Majesty throughout. But for the
Works of Dr. Gauden, there is nothing in the World more unlike; a luscious
Style, stuffed with gaudy Metaphors, and fancy far more Expression than Matter,
a sort of noisy and Romantic Eloquence. These are the Ornaments of Dr. Gauden's
Writings; and differ as much from the Gravity and Majesty of the King's Book,
as Tawdriness does from a Genteel and Accomplished Dress. The Truth is, of all
the Authors of that Age, there is scarcely any Writings are more light and
thin, than those of Dr. Gauden; and let any Man compare the best of Dr.
Gauden's Writings with this Book, and do it with Judgment and Discretion, and I
dare say, he will be perfectly cured, and he can no more believe, that Dr.
Gauden was the Author of it, than he can believe, that the King's Picture at
Whitehall, and that upon a Sign-Post, were both drawn by the same Hand. I know
Mr. Walker talks fine things of a Man's changing his Style, and differing from
himself. (P. 25. But when all the Pieces put out in a Man's own Name shall be
loose, forced, stiff, and elaborate, and one single one put out in the Name of
another, incomparably great and excellent. This is such a Change, as I believe,
no Man is capable of, and no Man can give account for. The Force of this
therefore does not lie only in the difference of Style and Expression, but in
that total Disparity that is between them in every thing; for tho a Man may
vary his Style, (which yet Dr. Gauden, by the several Subjects he has writ on,
has given no reason to think that he had a Talent that way) yet he cannot be
Master of better and finer Thoughts when he pleases, or it he could, to be
sure, we should see something of them, or at least, something like them in the
Works which wear his Name, and by which he designed to communicate himself to
the present Age and his Memory to Posterity. Let a Man therefore who has any
Understanding in these things, compare this admirable Book with the genuine
Works of Dr. Gauden his Sermons, his Speech in the Lords House against the
Quakers and his other Tracts, and then let him believe they have all the same
Author if he can. This is so clear and convincing, that nothing ought, nothing
can deseat it, but the most plain and invincible Proofs. He that says, that Dr.
Gauden is the Author of the King's Book, lies only under this one Disadvantage,
that he says what is incredible in the nature of things, and according to the
common Rules of judging. And if ever he expects to convince reasonable Men, he
must produce such Evidence, so clear, full, and without Exception, and of such
undoubted Veracity, and Authority, as Men may resign up their Judgments and
Reasons to the Testimony. In short, there was in that Age, and in the Reign of
that Pious Prince many Great and Learned Men in all Faculties, (and without any
disparagement to him, or to his Memory) in all respects for superior to D.
Gauden. And yet, I believe, any Man who will carefully, and with attention
peruse this Book, and impartially judge when he has done, he will conclude,
that no Subject the King had was able to write this Book, and none less
qualified for it than Dr. Gauden.

2. The Historical Part of it.

And here I shall not need to observe, that this excellent Book contains the
most remarkable Passages of State from 41 to the middle of 48, and that not
only the outward Shell, or the mere Facts, but the secret Springs by which they
were moved; here we have the Rise and Growth of the several Factions, the Steps
that they made, the Intrigues they managed, with most wise and judicious
Remarks upon them, which plainly denote the Author to be an excellent
Statesman, of a clear and penetrating Judgment, and well versed in the Affairs
he wrote on; especially if we add these Matters personally relating to the
King; which (considering his various Fortunes and Removes, and particularly
after Navesby-Fight, and his Removal to the Scots, and from thence to Holmeby)
I question whether any one single Man in England could have given, not only
such an Account, but any clear Account at all. The Mystery of his going to the
Scots is plainly laid open in that Chapter of his leaving Oxford, and going to
the Scots, wherein are his Majesty's Reasons for so doing. And in the next
Chapter are as plainly insinuated the Proposals that were made to him of
Sacrilege, and the Attempts made upon him to gain his Consent against his
Conscience, etc. The Truth is, all the Meditations are weaved into a Form of
Devotion, and so they do admirably express the Piety and Goodness of the
Compiler: but they are withal Historical, and give the best Account of the
Mystery of Iniquity that then reigned, together with a more exact Judgment
concerning the several Particulars, than is yet extant in any other Book. All
which do very well agree with the Character of King Charles the First. But how
to reconcile them to Dr. Gauden's Character, is (I think) an
insuperable-Difficulty. For as to his Faculty at History, and how judicious a
Compiler he was, we have (as far as I know) but one single Instance, and that
is the Life of Mr. Hooker, wrote by him, and prefixed to one Edition of the
Ecclesiastical Polity, and which (to say no more) is certainly the most
injudicious History of a Man's Life that ever was written. There are so many
palpable Mistakes and Falsehoods so very little to any purpose of History, so
lean, jejune and empty Accounts of the Man, whose Life he undertook, that it
plainly betrays a Defect in every necessary Qualification of an Historian; and
it is written without Care, or Diligence, or Judgment. But I had rather leave
this to the Readers own Eyes, than extend it further; and if he please to
compare this Book and that Life together, let him judge for himself, and if,
after that, he can possibly believe they have both one and the same Author, he
is abandoned to the utmost degree of Easiness and Credulity, and may believe
any thing in the World.

3. Some Particulars of the Subject Matter. And these I shall mention are such
things as could only be known to the King himself, and consequently could have
no Author but him.

As 1. His secret Intentions.

2. The Matters of his own Conscience.

1. His secret Intentions. These are expressed all over the Book, I shall only
select two or three Passages, which contain not only his secret Intentions, but
his Appeals to Heaven for the Truth of them. In the Chapter on the Insolency of
the Tumults, -- God who is my sole Judge, is my Witness in Heaven, that I never
had any Thoughts of going from my House at White Hall, if I coud have had but
any reasonable fair Quarter. And in that Chapter Upon his Retirement from
Westminster, I may in the Truth and Vprightness of my Heart, protest before God
and Men, that I never wilfully opposed or denied any thing that was in a fair
way, etc. And again in the Prayer; Thou know, O Lord, how unwilling I was to
desert that place in which thou have set me, and whereto the Affairs of my
Kingdom at present did call me. And upon the Listing and Raising of Armies, God
knows, I had not so much as any hopes of an Army in my thoughts. And upon the
Troubles and Rebellion in Ireland, If I have desired or delighted in the woeful
days of my Kingdom's Calamities, if I have not earnestly studied, and
faithfully endeavored the preventing and composing of these Bloody
Distractions, then let thy Hand be against me, and my Father's House. And many
others of the like nature, and which, I think, I shall not need to make any
Remarks upon, only desire the Reader to tell me, whether he thinks these are
the Expressions of King Charles, or of Dr. Gauden, or whether he can believe
that Dr. Gauden durst make such Appeals and Imprecations upon Fictions and
Forgeries? If he does believe that Dr. Gauden durst do this, I am certain he
can believe nothing that Dr. Gauden asserts, nor can he believe Dr. Gauden if
he should appeal to Heaven, and imprecate the Divine Vengeance concerning the
Truth of his being the Author of this Book. For he that can appeal and
imprecate upon one Forgery, may do so upon a hundred.

2. The next thing I have to observe, is a Matter relating to the King's
Conscience, and of a high Nature. It Is in the Case of the Earl of Strafford,
where the King plainly charges himself as guilty of his Blood, by giving his
Consent to that Bill which took away his Life. In that Chapter upon the Earl of
Strafford 's Death, the King says, He preferred the outward Peace of his
Kingdoms, before that inward exactness of Conscience before God. And adds, I am
so far from excusing or denying that Compliance on my part (for plenary Consent
it was not) to his Destruction, whom, in my Judgment, I thought not, by any
clear Law, Guilty of Death; that I never bore any Touch of Conscience with
greater Regret, etc. Again, It is a sad, Exchange to wound a Man's own
Conscience, thereby to salve State-Sores. And speaks of his own Guilt in this
manner, Being in my Soul so fully conscious; these Judgments God has pleased
to send upon me are so much the more welcome, as a means (I hope) which his
Mercy has sanctified so to me, as to make me repent of that unjust Act, (for
so it was to me.) And the King adds, that nothing more fortified his
Resolutions against all these Opportunities to gain his consent to Acts wherein
his Conscience was unsatisfied, than the sharp Touches he had for what passed
him in my Lord Strafford 's Business. Further yet the King says, That he was
better assured of his Guiltlessness than any Man living could be. Again, this
Tenderness and regret I find in my Soul for having had any Hand (and that
unwillingly God knows) in shedding one Man's Blood unjustly. And in the Prayer
are these Expressions: But thou, O God of infinite Mercies, forgive me that Act
of sinful Compliance, which has greater Aggravations upon me than any Man. --
Deliver me from Blood-guiltyness, O God. -- Against thee have I sinned -- for
thou saw the Contradiction between my Heart and my Hand -- while I was
persuaded by shedding one Man's Blood to prevent After-trouble, thou have for
that, among other sins, brought upon me, and upon my Kingdoms, great, long, and
heavy Troubles. And now I would ask any Man living, whether he thinks these are
the Expressions of Dr. Gauden? whether Doctor Gauden did, or possibly could
know the inward State of the King's Conscience? or if he did, whether he would
in this manner, publicly, and in Print, have charged the King in downright
Terms with acting against his Conscience, and in the Case of Blood? or finally,
whether any Man, besides the King himself, would, or indeed could have
aggravated his Guilt in such a manner, That he was better assured of my Lord of
Strafford 's Guiltlessness than any Man living could be. That his sinful
Compliance had greater Aggravations upon him than any Man. That the Calamities
upon him and upon his Kingdoms were upon the score of that among other sins?
These are evidently the bearings of a sincere, and generous Repentance, and
plainly show that the King was not ashamed to give Glory to God, by a frank and
open Confession of his Faults, with all their aggravating Circumstances. But my
Business is not to vindicate the King's Virtue and Piety, which does not need
it, but to show that he was the Author of this Book. And which these
Expressions do very convincingly, and beyond contradiction, and that no other
Man could be the Author. And if after this any Man can believe, that these are
Fictions and Chimera's made to the King's Hand, and not proceeding from the
Heart of a penitent Prince himself, under the deep and painful sense of Guilt,
it is high time to leave disputing and offering any more Reasons to them whom
no Reason will convince, nor Truth satisfy.

And thus I have done, with what I have at present to say, in this
Controversy, and hope it may tend to the satisfaction of unbiased and
unprejudiced Men. I confess a great deal more might be said, especially in the
latter part, and with respect to the intrinsic proof. The Book it self affords
many Arguments, and of equal force with these, which convincingly evidence that
the King, and the King only was the Author of it; but I thought it sufficient
to point out these few, which may serve for a Handle to any judicious Reader to
observe many others of the same Weight and Importance.

I know but of one Objection more, and that respects a Prayer added to some
Editions of the King's Book, as used by the King, and said to be taken out of a
Romance, etc. Now, although I know no manner of harm in this, and the Objection is
plainly peevish and querulous; for why may not a Man use good Expressions in
his Prayers, let them be borrowed from whom they will, as well as a good
Sentence out of a Heathen Writer, and which was never any Blemish, tho on the
most pious Occasions, yet there is great reason to believe, that the King did
never make use of it, for that it is not found in the First, nor in several
other the most early Editions of this Book. And for the Readers satisfaction in
this Point, I have here subjoined a Catalogue of the several Editions of it,
both without and with the Prayers, Collected with great Care and Industry, by
Mr. Keeble at the Turks-Head in Fleet Street; and for preventing any Mistake,
he has with great Exactness given the Size of each Volume, the Time of
Printing, the Number of the Pages that the Contents consist of, and the Number
of the Pages of the Book it self, when there were any such. And in which it is
observable, that there are no less than Twenty six Editions without the
Prayers, and Sixteen of them Printed 1648.

An Account of the several Impressions, or Editions of King CHARLES the
Martyr's most Excellent Book, Entitled (...), that were Printed without the
Prayers at the End.
THE First Impression in Octavo, Printed 1648, last Page 269, Contents Two
Leaves. The 2d. Imp. in 8o. Prin. 1648. last page 268. Cont. 3 Leaves. The 3d.
Imp. in 8o. Prin. 1648. last p. 268. Cont. 2 Leaves. The 4th Imp. 8o. Prin. in
R. M 1648 last p. 268. Cont. 2 Leaves. The 5th. Imp. in 8o. Prin. 1648. last p.
270. Cont. 2 Leaves. The 6th Imp. in 8o. Prin. 1648. with only the Lady
Elizabeth's Relation. The 7th. Imp. in 8o. Print. 1648. the last p. 242. The
8th. Imp. 8o. Print. 1648. last p. 302. Cont. 2 Leaves. The 9th. Imp. in
Twelves, Print. 1648. last. p. 187. Cont. the last Page. The 10th. Imp. in 12o.
Print. 1648. last p. 164. Cont. 1 Leaf. The 11th. Imp. in 12o. Print. 1648.
last. p. 187. Cont. 1 Leaf. The 12th. Imp. in 12o. Print. 1648. last p. 225.
Cont. 1 Leaf. The 13th. Imp. in 12o. Print. 1648. last p. 269. Cont. 3 Leaves.
The 14th. Imp. in 12o. Print. 1648. last p. 269. Cont. 1 Leaf. The 15th. Imp.
in 24o. Printed 1648. last p. 342. Cont. 2 Leaves. The 16th. Imp. in 24o.
Print. 1648. no Figures, Cont. 2 Leaves. The 17th. Imp. in 8o. Print. 1649.
last p. 204. Cont. 1 Leaf. The 18th. Imp. in 12o. Print. 1649. last p. 264.
with Epitaphs. The 19th. Imp. in 12.o. Print. 1649. last p. 195. Cont. 1 Leaf.
The 20th. Imp. in 12o. Print. in 1649. (in La in) last p. 272. with Apothegms.
The 21st. Imp. in 12o. Print. 1649. (Latin) last p. 272. not the same. The 22d.
Imp. in 12o. with the Works Print. 1649. last p. 182 The 23d. Imp. in 12o.
Print. 1649. (Latin) last p. 272. not the same. The 24th. Imp. in 12o. Printed
(Latin) 1649. last p. 258. The 25th. Imp. in 24o. Printed at the Hague by Sam.
Brown, 1649. last p. 318. Cont. 4. The 26th. Imp. in 8o. Print. 1681. last page
256. Cont. 1 Leaf.
The same Book with the Prayers added at the latter End of the Book.
THE First Impression in Octavo, Printed 1648. last Page 270. added the Prayers
1619. The 2d. Imp. in 24o. Print. 1648. last p. 354. The 3d. Imp. in 8o. Print.
1649. last p. 258. The 4th. Imp. in 8o. Print. 1649. last p. 236. with
Apothegms. The 5th. Imp. in 8o. Printed 1649. last p. 247. Prayers added. The
6th. Imp. in 8o. Print. 1649. last p. 269. Cont. 3 Leaves. The 7th. Impression
in 12o. Print. 1649. with Apothegms. The 8th. Imp. in 12o. Print. 1649. in
Dutch. The 9th. Imp. in 12o. Printed 1649. in French. The 10th. Imp. in 12o.
Print. 1649. a different Edition. The 11th. Imp. in 12o. Print. 1649. a last p.
230. Cont. 1 Leaf. The 12th. Imp. in 12o. Print. 1649. last p. 260. Cont. 1
Leaf. The 13th. Imp. in 24o. Print. 1649. last p. 266. The 14th. Imp. in 24o.
Print. 1649. last p. 175 The 15th. Imp. in 24o. Printed in 1649. last p. 354.
The 16th. Imp. in 8o. with the Works, Print. 1657. The 17th. Impression in 24o.
with the Works, Print. 1651. 18 The King's Works in 8o. Printed at the Hague,
without Date, the last p. 119. 19 The King's Works in 2 Volumes in 8o. Printed
1659. 20 The King's Whole Works in Folio. Printed 1662. 21 The King's Whole
Works in Folio, Printed 1686. 22 The (...) in 8o. Printed 1685, last p. 272.
per Royston.
FINIS.

