A SERMON Preached at the ANNIVERSARY MEETING OF THE ETON-SCHOLARS, At St. Mary
le Bow, on December. the 6. 1681.

By WILLIAM PERSE, late Fellow of King's- College in Cambridge, and Chaplain
to the Right Honorable MARY, Countess of Feversham.

Published at the request of the Stewards.

London, Printed for Samuel Carr, at the King's- Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1682.

ACTS 22. part of the 3d Verse. Yet brought up in this City at the feet of
Gamaliel.
THe several Feasts and Solemn Meetings which the Jews, a particular Society or
Corporation of Men distinct from the rest of the World, held unto the Lord,
were instituted and appointed by God himself, either for a lasting Memorial of
some great and remarkable Deliverance, or for a grateful acknowledgment of that
extraordinary plenty of Temporal Blessing which they received from the open and
munificent hand of the Divine Providence: Another Reason as we are told of the
constant Celebration of those Festivals in that place where God chose to fix
his Name, was, that the general appearance of all the Tribes no less than three
times in the Year, might not only Combine them in the more strict bands of
Mutual Love and Friendship, but keep them up to the due and uniform observance
of that public Form of Worship which was established amongst them. The Feast of
the Passover, was Ordained for a continual remembrance of their Miraculous
Deliverance from their Egyptian Bondage, and the Feast of Harvest and
Ingathering was kept, that thereby they might have an opportunity unanimously
to praise the large bounty of their Heavenly Benefactor, who had Blessed them
in the City, and in the Field, in their Baskets and in their Store, giving them
a more than ordinary increase above their Neighbors round about them. And in
all these public Testimonies of their Gratitude, in all these Annual
demonstrations of their joy, none were to appear empty before the Lord.

The occasion, Dearly beloved Brethren, of our Solemn meeting together this
day, of this Anniversary Feast which we hold unto the Lord, has, though not
the same Divine Authority to warrant its Institution, yet, the same Pious and
Laudable ends to approve and commend its continuation. We are come (Most worthy
School-fellows, by what other titles soever you may be dignified above, or
distinguished from one another) from diverse parts of the Land, as the Jews to
the Celebration of the Passover, to this great City, the Center and Metropolis
of the Nation, to this our Jerusalem, to offer up an unbloudy Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving to our God for our happy deliverance from the land of
Darkness, from the heavy yoke of Barbarism and Ignorance under which so many
unfortunately labor, by the great advantages which we have by his goodness
obtained of a free and ingenuous Education.

To Praise him with our mouths, whose lips he has opened with the key of
Knowledge, to rejoice before him that our Lot fell to us in a good ground, that
he vouchsafed to plant us not only in a Literal, but a more exalted Sense, by
the Water-springs, by the Rivulets of Knowledge, that we might bring forth the
several Fruits of our proper Callings in our due time and seasons: We are met
together to Praise God for our Seed-time, and our Harvest, for the Blessing
which he gave to our first endeavors, by Crowning our tender Years with his
goodness, and also for the Ingathering the fruits of our labors; for the
Improvements we have made, and the Benefits we have reaped by being nurtured
and brought up at that Royal foundation to which we did sometime belong.

Neither in these our Meetings must we appear empty before the Lord; works of
Piety and Charity should go hand in hand and kiss each other: This is the
precious Ointment which no Feast should lack, which perfumes the whole Room,
and extends likewise its Odor to those which are at a great distance from us
This is the way to Sanctify our Feast, (for if the First Fruits be holy, the
lump is also holy) by making others who are in a worse condition than our
selves, by our kindness, in some measure partakers of that innocent mirth and
freedom which are the natural result of such loving and friendly entertainments.

And as these public Meetings are (Subordinately to that great end I have
already mentioned) designed to renew that Amity and Friendship, without which
no condition of life is tolerable, which by long absence, and variety of
accidents has for some time been interrupted, so likewise that I may finish
the parallel our appearance in this place dedicated to Gods Service does
testify our unanimous conformity to those most excellent rules of his public
Worship as they are by our wholesome Laws established and confirmed.

Neither is it without reason that we observe this Annual Solemnity for a
grateful remembrance of those many Blessings and Benefits we received under the
Care and Tuition of those who were appointed to be the Guides and Instructors
of our Youth, seeing St. Paul, the Learned Apostle, in the Defense which he
made for himself before his Brethren the Jews, takes a particular occasion to
make an honorable mention of his Masters Name, under whom he became so great a
proficient in the Knowledge and Practice of the Law; telling them, that
although he was Born in Tarsus, a City of Cilicia; and, as Strabo says, an
Academy furnished with Schools of Learning; yet that he might the better
complete, and bring to perfection those Studies which he had so happily begun,
he Traveled to Jerusalem, where the great Rabbis and Doctors of the Law
resided, and in that City was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel; alluding to
the Custom of the Jewish Masters, who were wont to sit, whilst their Disciples
and Scholars stood at their feet to receive those Precepts of Wisdom which
those Oracles of Knowledge delivered with a Gravity becoming their Years and
Profession.

Under the Tuition of this great Master was St. Paul Educated, and Instructed
in the Knowledge of the Law, wherein he made such vast improvements, having the
Advantage of being previously well grounded in the first Principles and
Elements of Learning, that he quickly outstript his fellow-disciples. And
indeed as if his Tribe, the Tribe of Benjamin had Entitled him to a double
share, he seems, though Born out of time, to have had a larger portion of
Knowledge than the rest of the Apostles.

And truly it seemed but fit that this great Minister of the uncircumcision,
whom God chose to bear his Name before the Gentiles, should have an Education
which might furnish him with all those useful parts of Learning that were
requisite for the accomplishment of that important Work for which he was
designed. He was to Dispute with the Heathen Philosophers, Men versed in all
the Learning of the Ancients, studied in all the Sophisms of the Schools; and
therefore he was to be so prepared, as to be able to answer all those
Objections which they could raise against that new Doctrine, as they thought,
which he should deliver to them, to convince them by their own Arguments, and
to turn their own Artillery upon themselves. Hence St. Hierome, in an Epistle
to Magnus, a Roman Orator, taking notice of that Innocent, but cunning Artifice
that St. Paul made use of at his coming to Athens, when he took occasion from
an Inscription which he met with upon one of their Altars, To the unknown God,
tolead them to the knowledge of the true one, highly applauds the Skill and
readiness of his Argumentation. Behold, says he, how this Invincible Orator
pleading in the behalf of the Christian Doctrine, turns the Inscription which
he seemed casually to light upon, on the Athenians themselves, having learnt
from the true David to wrest the Weapon out of the Enemies hand, and to cut off
Goliath's Head with his own Sword. And when this Learned Apostle would prove
against the Epicureans that we were not the product of Chance, but of Divine
Extraction, he refers them to their own Authors, to their own Poets, for whom
they had a great Veneration, and amongst whom the choicest Treasures of
Mysterious Knowledge were reposited; citing a place out of Aratus to that
purpose, (...). And though at first he seemed to some of them no better than a
Babbler, yet by his solid Discourses, and his rational Inferences, he gained so
much upon them, that at his first Lecture he Converted one of their chief
Doctors, Dionysius the Areopagite; and others there were of less note, who at
the same time embraced that Doctrine which he then with so much power and
strength of Argument delivered unto them. His Eloquence was so persuasive, and
his Reason so convincing, that it was hard to resist either the Charms of the
one, or the Force of the other: For though his Personage was mean, and almost
contemptible, yet all acknowledged that his Words were powerful, and his
Reasonings irrefragable.

When he writes to his Church at Corinth, (to which Learned City every one was
not fit to be sent an Ambassador) how does he bestir, and lay about himself?
What Elegant Tropes, and Figures of Speech, what easy Transitions, what
vehemence of Expression, what kind and pathetical Insinuations, what gentle,
and yet cogent Admonitions does he make use of? suitable to the nature of the
Subject of which he treated, and the Persons to whom he directed his Discourse:
So that Beza, in his Annotations upon the 11th. Chapter of his Second Epistle
to the Corinthians, tells us, That having well weighed the several Ornaments
and Elegancies of Speech diffused over that and others of his Epistles, he
could not meet with the same height and grandeur of Expression, with the like
smart and grave way of Reprehension; or with so attractive and winning a manner
of Persuasion, either in Plato or Demosthenes, in Aristotle or Galen, though
they were all great Masters and Professors of Eloquence. He that reads those
Excellent and Eloquent Defenses which he made in behalf of himself and his
Doctrine, before Felix and King Agrippa, by the last of which, he almost
persuaded his chiefest Auditor to become his Convert and Proselyte, will easily
find what Improvements he made, and what benefits he received by virtue of his
first Education in good Letters, by being brought up, as he tells us in my
Text, in the City of Jerusalem, at the feet of the Learned and great Rabbi,
Gamaliel.

In regard all the benefits and advantages of a free and ingenuous Education
have been most excellently and fully in this place, and upon the same Occasion
declared unto you; and that I may not build my Hay and Stubble upon that
Foundation, on which so much Gold and Precious Stones have been already laid: I
shall endeavor in my ensuing Discourse, taking the hint from St. Paul's
Institution, and the manner of it, to show you, 1. That Humane Learning, a
competent skill in Arts and Sciences, a Liberal Education in good Literature,
are very necessary qualifications for all those who are dedicated to the Sacred
Ministry, and thereby Authorized to Interpret unto the People the Oracles of
Divine Truth. 2. That a good Foundation in the Rudiments and Principles of
Learning does fit and capacitate all Persons whatsoever for the well governing
and improving themselves in those several Callings and Stations, to which the
Divine Providence has assigned them. 3. That Public Schools and Seminaries
are the best Nurseries for the training up of Youth in all those parts of
Knowledge which may render them Useful and Serviceable in their several
Capacities to the Commonwealth, or Society wherein they live. And 4. I shall
show you how that Royal Foundation, of which we were once Members, has at
least equal Advantages with any other of the same kind, in order to the
obtaining the forementioned great End.


My first Proposition was, that Humane Learning, an early Education in good
Literature, are very useful and necessary Qualifications for all those who are
Dedicated to the Sacred Ministry, and thereby Commissionated to Interpret the
Oracles of Divine Truth to the Congregation.

They are not improperly styled the Handmaids of Divinity, seeing they do very
much facilitate our access to that Divine Mistress, the Celestial Truth, which
does not Prostitute her Sacred Treasures to Profane and Ignorant Intruders, but
suffers her self to be gained like Heaven it self, whose Offspring she is, by
the Violence and Importunate solicitations of those Wise Charmers, whose force
she is neither able nor willing to withstand. They are not indeed the Heaven,
but they are the bright Stars that illustrate it; they are not the Crown, but
they are the Orient Gems that embellish it; they are not the Groundwork, but
they are the Rich Imbroidery that adorn it. They are the sweet Oil which feeds
those golden Lamps, those burning and shining Lights, which belong unto the
Sanctuary of our God: They are as the dew of Hermon, which makes fruitful, and
long may it do so, the Hill of our Sion.

That which some object, of our Saviors choosing poor simple Fishermen for the
propagation of his Doctrine through the World, being of no validity in this
case. For though our Savior chose out such illiterate Persons to be his first
Disciples, that those extraordinary endowments wherewith He their great Master
and Teacher furnished them for the execution of their Apostolical office might
appear to be derived to them by the immediate flowing in of his Spirit upon
them, and not conveyed to them by the ordinary and slow Channel of the Senses,
thereby to astonish the Learned Rabbis of that Age, and to make their
Incredulity under so clear a light, and so evident a Demonstration, the more
inexcusable; yet after he had left them, and in a Miraculous manner conferred
the gift of Tongues upon them, to qualify them for the discharge of that
Ministry which was committed to them, (which by the way shows the necessity of
such gifts for that purpose) now they were not only to guide and govern the
Church during their own time, but to be Patterns and Examples to all succeeding
Generations, these supernatural Illuminations by degrees vanished and
disappeared. Now, the Foundation was not only laid, but a superstructure
raised; these Scaffolds which were only erected for the more easy and safe
finishing of it, were taken down: He therefore, who from this example of our
Savior, will argue for a necessity of Enthusiastic Inspirations for the
Interpretation of Scripture, may by the same Rule maintain, that a Christian
Prince with an hundred Men may encounter a Pagan Enemy coming against him with
Twenty Thousand, because once by the especial Command of God, Gideon reduced
his great Army to three hundred, and with them Vanquished the Host of the
Midianites, which were as the Sand of the Sea for multitude.

We are to Guide and Govern the several Periods and Circumstances of our Lives
by those stated Rules and Measures which God in his Infinite Wisdom has
appointed for us, not to propose one or two extraordinary Examples for our
Patterns and Imitation. We must make use of those plain, easy, and natural
Methods which are laid down before us for the Improvement of our Reason, and
the Information of our Judgments, not expect that our Understanding, which the
Wise Man calls The Candle of the Lord, should be lighted, as the Wood upon his
Altar sometimes was, by an immediate fire from Heaven. And how necessary it is
for all those who are designed to be the Ministers, and dispenfers of the Word
of God, to apply themselves betimes to those means which are most proper for
the attainment of that Knowledge which may prepare them for the through
discharge of their Duty, will sufficiently appear by the great damage the
Church has in all Ages sustained by the Ignorance of foolish and unlearned
Men. He must not pretend to understand the Scriptures, or to be conversant in
the Style and Language of them, who does not acknowledge that they abound in
Tropes, and Figures; in Parables, and dark Speeches; and that there are diverse
weighty and important verities couched under those Allegorical and Enigmatical
forms of Speech, which cannot be discovered till that Vail and Covering be done
away by the Skill and Industry of those whose Education entitles them to that
sort of Learning. What Monstrous Opinions, what Prodigious Absurdities, what
Pernicious Doctrines has this want of Art to distinguish between what is to be
taken in a proper and literal, what in a Foreign and borrowed sense, begat in
the Christian World? To this the Error of the Millenaries, which began so
early, and has continued so long, more or less, in the Church, owes its first
rise and Original. Unskilful and unwary Men looking no farther than the bare
letter of the Text, applying those Glorious and specious Metaphors, under which
the Prophets of Old shadowed the Spiritual Riches and Happiness of Christ's
Kingdom, to their downright Natural meaning, made such a Platform and Idea of
that State as best suited with their Fancy and Imagination. And how hard a
matter it was, even for our Savior himself, the great Teacher of Truth, to
wean his own Disciples from that false Opinion they had in the time of their
Ignorance sucked in of his Earthly and Temporal Kingdom, the Evangelical
History does abundantly demonstrate.

This sort of Ignorance begat the Follies and idle Dreams of the
Anthropomorphites, whilst taking those things which were spoken Figuratively in
favor to the weakness of our shallow Understandings, concerning the Essence of
the Invisible God, in their Natural Capacity, they have represented him as a
Corporeal, Visible Substance, consisting of Humane Members; and even such a one
as themselves. And truly, one would almost think, that those of the Romish
Church, who stick so close to the literal sense of that Sacramental expression,
This is my Body, had forgotten that our Savior ever made use of any Figures of
Speech in the several Discourses which he made whilst he was conversant here on
Earth. And when their great Bellarmine crowds in that Text, Blessed are the
Poor in Spirit, to Patronize the Order of their Mendicant Friars, I should
almost judge him to be of the same Opinion, had we not more Reason to believe,
that he and the rest of them do rather endeavor to bend the Scriptures to
their Designs, than to accommodate their Designs to the Rules of Scripture.

And as the inconveniences are many which have accrued to the Church by the
Ignorance and Impudence of those who have presumed to touch the Mysteries of
the Sanctuary with unwash'd and unhallowed Hands; so on the other side, she
must acknowledge her self to owe the Defense of her Religion, the Propagation
of her Faith, and the Confutation of her Adversaries to the Learned Pens, and
the Eloquent Discourses of those Wise Master Builders which God raised up in
all Ages, for her Security and Preservation. The Ancient Fathers and Writers,
who spent themselves and their time to serve the Church, not only in their own
Age, but to succeeding Generations, had lost much of their aim, and the People
of God much of the Benefit was intended them, had their Learnned Apologies for
the Christian Religion, their Pious Explanations of the same Faith, their
useful Commentaries, their strong and solid Arguments layen moulding in
Libraries, without a Key to unlock the meaning of them, their Books had long
since undergone the same Fate with themselves, and become, as they have done, a
prey for Moths and Worms. But now by us, though dead, they yet speak, and
become profitable, like the Scriptures of which they treat, for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness. Who, unless he
attain to the Knowledge of the Greek Tongue, by the Advantages of a happy
Education, can discover the Golden Mines of St. Chrysostom's Eloquence? For
where is that Excellent, Fluent, Comprehensive Language Naturally now spoken?
Even Greece her self, once the great Nurse and Favourer of Arts, that labors
as well under the sad and deplorable Fate of Barbarism and Ignorance, as the
Yoke of Turkish Slavery, needs the help of acquired Learning to enable her to
understand the great Masters of her own Attick Elegance. I might Instance in
the other Famous Language, which, like a Vagabond, has no certain home; for
Rome her self has lost her Ancient Tongue, as well as her first Faith: Both,
whatever some pretend to say in the defense of them, are Corrupted; and her
Language as well as Manners in the decay and declination of her Empire,
degenerated into a soft, and effeminate Delicacy.

Should I pursue this Argument as far as it would go, I might tire both my self
and you; but I must remember that I told you, that that Learning which is the
product of a Liberal Education, was not only, though chiefly necessary for
those who wait at the Altar, but also serviceable to all Persons in those
several stations and Professions to which the Divine Providence has assigned
them, which was the second Proposition I laid down.

Setting aside the Studies of Law and Physic, in which none can be supposed
without a good Stock and Bottom of this sort of Learning to arrive at any
Degree of Eminence, either for their own, or others Advantage, I shall instance
in others, whose Callings may seem to be so remote, as not to be capable of
receiving any beneficial Influence from those Beams of early Knowledge,
wherewith their Infant-understandings were at first but faintly enlightened.

I am not of the Opinion of those who Argue for the parity and equality of
Souls; but this I may be bold to Affirm, That Education, a timely seasoning of
the Mind with the sound and wholesome Principles of Knowledge, has oftentimes
differenced those, who otherwise had the same intellectual Faculties: And
although all Souls have not the same Genius and Inclination, nor the same
Capacity and Comprehension, (the Almighty Wisdom having in some measure
proportioned the gifts of the Mind to the several Uses and Ends for which he
designed the Persons) yet an Ingenuous Breeding does fit and prepare every one
for that Employment to which his Choice and Inclination leads him: Like the
former and the latter Rain it raises and quickens those Seeds which before lay
dormant and unactive in the solid mass, and gives to every Grain its own Body.
It Is this that makes Men the easier to comprehend the several Mysteries of
their Profession, and to make considerable Additions to the ordinary Measures
and Standards of those Arts which they Profess. This puts them upon new
Discoveries and Improvements, and makes them Eminent in the Sphere wherein they
move, and in the place wherein they live. So that the Learned as well as the
Righteous Man, becomes more excellent than his Neighbor. Thus Education is the
Elixir that ripens all sorts of Metals, and brings them to their due
perfection; every thing taking a form suitable to that Spirit wherewith it was
first impregnated: It assimilates, and by a Spiritual Alchymy turns all that it
has digested, into its own Substance, and by its heat and vigor makes that to
be Gold, which otherwise would have continued an imperfect Mineral. Diverse,
perhaps, do not consider that those extraordinary Parts and Abilities of which
they are sometimes Masters, are the result of those Rudiments of Knowledge,
which were instilled into them in their first Years. But yet upon a serious
recollection they must be forced to allow those Improvements to be chiefly the
offspring of a good and virtuous Institution; for the faculties of the Mind
were thereby enlarged, and capacitated to entertain greater proportions of
Knowledge and Wisdom than they could have received, had they then been
un-employed. And although in some those Notions, which were, it may be, with
great difficulty and reluctance fixed upon their Minds, do not exert their
operations presently, not being able to extricate themselves from that viscous
and tenacious matter wherein they were absorpt; yet after they have conquered
their Phlegmatic temper, and wrought themselves into a clearer Liberty, they
must acknowledge, whatever other apprehensions they had in the days of their
dullness and obscurity, that their several accomplishments are the effect and
product of those first Characters, which were, though with much labor,
imprinted on them. It Is to a generous Education likewise that the Nobility and
Gentry, (of which kind no Foundation can boast more, or more deserving than our
own) are indebted for those excellent Qualities which render them not only
acceptable to all ingenuous Company, and useful to the Commonwealth, but for
the happy Comforts of entertaining themselves at their most leisure, and spare
hours. It being the saying of the Wise Lord Faukland, That he pitied an
unlearned Gentleman in a Rainy Day. Those who by virtue of the Rudiments which
were gently infused into them in their first years, (whose tincture, like that
of our first Notices, can never be washed off) arrive at any competency of
Learning, being able upon any emergent accident of their Life, or when either
Weather, or their present temper does not dispose them to Field-Recreations, to
employ their time, not only to their own private satisfaction, but for the
benefit of the Public also: Whereas the unthinking, and unitelligent Crowd are
forced upon such occasions, either to doze away their time in sleep and
idleness, or else to take up with some ungenerous and unmanly Vice for their
present Divertisement; thereby compounding for their Ignorance at no less a
rate than the price of their precious and immortal Souls. And the great Seneca
tells us to this purpose, in his Eighty second Epistle, Otium sine literis mors
est, and vivi hominis Sepultura. Those who have not learnt wisely to dispose of
their most vacant Minutes, being buried alive in that gross and heavy Earth,
which they carry about them: And surely there is neither Wit, nor Counsel, nor
Knowledge, nor Invention in that Grave.

But in vain do I inveigh against Ignorance, or commend the general usefulness
of Knowledge, unless I can show you the most ready and proper way to escape the
Follies and Inconveniences of the one, by attaining the Wisdom and Advantages
of the other, which is that which in the third place I am to speak to, viz.
That Public Schools and Seminaries of Learning are the best Nurseries for the
training up of Youth in all those parts of Knowledge which may render them
Serviceable and Useful in their several Capacities, to the Commonwealth or
Society wherein they live.

The first public Seed-plots for Learning amongst the Jews were in, or
adjoining to the Cities of the Levites, of which there were some in every
Tribe, for the greater convenience of Gods Worship, and the better Instructing
of those who were designed for the performance of it. Afterward about Samuel's
time, the Levites neglecting their Duty of Instructing their Charge, and
applying themselves chiefly to the deciding of Controversies arising about the
Ceremonial Law, which Trade was gainful to them, and the Priesthood it self
being much degenerated, the Priests being both loose and ignorant, that great
Prophet Founded two Societies or Colleges, which were called the Schools of
the Prophets for the training up of Young Students in all those Scholastical
Exercises, which might tend to the Improvement of their Natural Faculties, and
their Advancement in the Rules of Piety and Devotion, thereby to prepare them
for the Discharge of their Prophetical Office: The number of these in process
of time was increased, and their Foundations enlarged. Thus we read of diverse
of these Public Schools, at Bethel, Jericho, Jordan, and elsewhere; so
necessary did those great Masters and Governors of the Jewish Church think
those places of public Education for the Instructing of Youth in all those
Sciences, which might dispose them for the more orderly Celebration of Gods
Worship, and the better Information of his People. And indeed if we rightly
consider the Advantages which great Seminaries have above those Private Corners
wherein Youth are sometimes Instituted, we shall easily grant, that those
Ancient Foundations were Built upon a firm Basis and ground of Reason. Such
exact Methods of Teaching, such regular Discipline, such free and open
Communication of Notions, such generous Emulations, as are common and usual in
Public Schools, cannot be expected in those small and inconsiderable
Laboratories, as I may call them, that are set up in Country Villages.

Indeed it is not every ones good Fortune to go to Corinth, or to be brought up
at the feet of a Gamaliel, but it were to be wished, that we had more Public
Nurseries, and so conveniently Situated, that none of those who are designed
for the Study of good Letters might want the benefit of a Liberal Education,
nor be exposed to the hazards which diverse run by being tampered with in their
first years, by those little Mountebanks, those Dabblers in Grammar, who, like
other Quacks, Kill more than they Cure; who by infusing their unsound and
Sophisticate Notions into their easy and tender Minds, fix such ill habits
upon the several Faculties, as are scarce ever to be eradicated by the most
potent Remedies of a contrary Institution. Like Diseased Nurses, they Infect
those Children they should nourish, and by conveying their unwholesome Juices
into the empty veins of their Young Pupils, they not only weaken and corrupt
the before Healthy Constitution of the Soul, but leave such Marks and
Characters of their own Imperfections upon them, as are never to be obliterated
and worn out. Those raw Beginners, who it may be have made a transient Visit to
the University for Fashion-sake, cannot have those Qualifications that are
requisite in those to whom the Government of wild and unbridled Youth ought to
be committed. They want that Discretion, Prudence, and Moderation, (to say no
more) which are the most commendable Qualities in those who take that
difficult, but withal most useful Profession upon them. And not being able to
Govern their own Passions, nor having Judgment to proportion their Corrections
to the measure of the Fault committed, nor to distinguish between the several
dispositions of Youth, by their unreasonable and exorbitant Cruelties, they
force their little Flock to take Sanctuary at their own home, or else create
such an aversion and prejudice against all manner of Learning in their Minds
which is never to be removed: And indeed what else can be expected, when the
Young Orbilius, who has scarce the sound of the Ferula out of his Ears, nor
the smart of it out of his Hands, having gotten that wooden Scepter into his
power, begins to Rule Arbitrarily in his little Aedileship, and thinks it but
just to deal with others, as he was served himself. Whereas the grave Rector of
the Public School takes his measures from the Capacities and Dispositions of
those who are under his Care, whose Inclinations he knows as well as their
Faces, and from thence suits his demeanor toward them; he knows how to
quicken the Slothful, and to reclaim the Extravagant, by shaming them into
better Manners, and reduces more to Obedience by Stratagem than by Force. He
knows by proposing little Praemio's to make all so run as to strive for the
Mastery; and by mixing some few grains of pleasure with those useful Principles
he instills into them, he makes his Scholars in love with himself and their
Books at the fame time.

But alas, nothing of this Nature is to be expected from the Country Chancel,
which seldom produces any thing fit for the Use and Service of the Church.
Indeed some of us may remember, (and may we never see such days again) when
diverse of the choicest of Gods Servants, some of the Chief and most Eminent
Pastors of our Church, whose only Crime was their Loyalty, were forced for the
Testimony of a good Conscience, to wander up and down in Deserts, to bide
themselves in Dens and Caves of the Earth, destitute, and Afflicted, of whom
our English World was not worthy. These, I say, were glad to Teach Youth in
some private corner for a mean Livelihood, to retire into some by, unfrequented
place to shelter themselves from the Tyranny of those Oppressors, which then
rid on the Necks of Gods People. Under those shades did those great Shepherds
feed their Lambs, being driven from their Sheep, in the Noonday, in the heat
and fury of that Persecution that then raged amongst us: Amongst those were
many of our Loyal Nobility and Gentry bred, and by their wholesome Doctrines kept
steadfast in the Purity of that Worship, and in those just and honest Principles
for which their Worthy Parents then Suffered, either by Death, or Banishment,
or Consiscation of Goods, or else Imprisonment. But he that will urge this as
an Argument for the countenancing of private Schools, may as well make the
secret Meetings, and Nocturnal Assemblies of the Primitive Christians in Dens
and Caves, during the heat of Persecution, an Argument to uphold those unlawful
Conventicles which are but too frequent amongst us at this day. Neither do I
Condemn all private places which are made use of for the Breeding of Youth, in
some of which, without question, diverse Worthy and Eminent Men have been
Educated, who either have met with some extraordinary Master, or else who by
the strength of their Natural parts have conquered the Malignity of those ill
Principles wherewith they were first tainted. But still give me leave, as our
Learned Apostle St. Paul says upon another account, to tell you, That I show
unto you a more excellent way.

And thus having shown you the Usefulness of Humane Learning, as to the several
Occasions and Emergencies wherein we can be concerned in the World, and the
most probable way of attaining that Knowledge by an early Education in public
Schools: Suffer me, in the last place, that I may conclude my Discourse with
something pertinent to the Solemnity of this present Day, to offer somewhat in
behalf of that Royal Foundation of Eton College, the Pious and Charitable Work
of Henry the Sixth, one of the best, though most unfortunate, of our Princes,
at which we received the better part of our Education, and from which diverse of
us, amongst whom I my self (which I shall ever gratefully acknowledge) though
the most unworthy, derived other secular Advantages. I will not say, that
though her Sisters, of which she has many, and of great Renown, (but few of
the same Noble extract with her self) have all done virtuously, that yet she
has excelled them all: But I think I may affirm that which our Apostle does of
himself, That she comes not behind the very chiefest of them all.

If Experience, which cannot lie, be a sure Rule to go by, I have many living
Instances before me at this time to Witness those great and extraordinary
Improvements and Accomplishments which are the result and effect of those many
hours they carefully spent under the happy Tuition of the several Masters of
that Famous and well Disciplined School; and who do Naturally commend the same
Education to others, which they found so useful and beneficial to themselves.
But give me leave to show you likewise, how that Royal Society, to which you
did once belong, has all those conveniences which the Wisest and Discreetest
Men have judged to be most proper and conducing to that great End for which it
was designed. The most Learned of the Jewish Writers have given their Opinion,
that congruity of place, and separation from the World, were two Circumstances
not to be omitted in the Building of their Schools of the Prophets, in Order to
the quicker and easier attaining of that Natural Knowledge which might dispose
them the sooner for the gift of Prophecy. By congruity of place, they meant its
Situation in a good Air; by the other, a private Retirement from the noise and
hurry of the World; both very useful for the fitting and preparing the Mind for
the free Entertaining the Principles and Elements of good Learning. A cheerful
serene Air has a great Influence upon the temper and complexion of the Body,
it puts the Spirits upon a gentle, but active ferment, and thereby renders the
whole Crasis and Constitution more pliant and serviceable to the motions and
sallies of the Soul than otherwise it would have been: As Glasses are no where
made in the same perfection for Beauty and Luster, as in Murano, an Island near
to Venice, which is attributed to the clearness of the circumambient Air which
hangs over the place, and is continually purified and attenuated by the
constant fires; so it is observable, that no Wits have been so pure and refined
as those who were Bred and Educated in a Healthful and Temperate Clime. And on
the contrary, a gross, heavy, thick Air imprisons and chains up the Spirits,
and robs them of their elastick Faculty, so that the Soul cannot show forth her
Native brightness, but only put forth some dull and faint glimmerings, whilst
she labors under the indisposition of a Body choked up and oppressed with the
impurities of a foul and Corrupted Air.

Retirement also, and Solitude do very much incline the Mind to receive the
Characters and Images of Truth and Knowledge into the Sacred Treasury of the
unprejudiced Memory, which had it been distracted with variety of Objects,
would have been wholly filled, and prepossest with trifling and impertinent
Vanities. Hence most of the forementioned Schools of the Prophets were erected
not in the Towns, but in the Neighborhood of them. Not in the Towns, (I speak
with Reverence to the Famous Schools of this great City) in regard the
Temptations are so great, and the Avocations so many, amidst the throng and
concourse of the Multitude, the Youthful Fancy being apt to be taken with every
thing that is gay and new, and so please it self with those little useless
Trifles it first meets with, to its own prejudice and disadvantage. In the
Neighborhood, that so the Mind may not be altogether a stranger to what
passes in the World, but have some private notices of things and persons (as
she will necessarily have, if not purposely debarred of that Intelligence) for
the Improvement of her Judgment, and the polishing her Conversation. Otherwise
if she be kept still in the dark, and coopt up from the cognizance of the most
material passages that are the common Theme and Subject of the present Time,
when she comes abroad, she is frighted with the sudden Light, and her Organs
being not well fitted for the reception of those violent impressions, which if
entertained by degrees, had been easily perceptible, she becomes amazed, and
startles at that which every common Capacity that has had a more free and open
converse, understands. And this is the Reason why diverse who have been
Cloystered up from the Society of Men, and only Conversed with their Books,
when they have chanced to appear in the World, have rendered themselves
contemptible, and their Studies unfruitful, it being all one to have no
Learning; and not to know how to make a right use of it.

And here I cannot but praise and commend the Wisdom of our Pious Founder, in
Building that College which he designed for the Education and Instruction of
Youth in such a place, where the pleasantness of the Situation, the temperature
of the Air, not so subtle as to prey upon, yet so clear as to refine the
Spirits, and its proper distance from Town and Court, do insensibly inlighten
the Faculties of the Soul, and make them more quick and ready to apprehend
those excellent Lessons of Knowledge that are inculcated into them; and indeed
it seems as if it were contrived on purpose for the Head-Mansion-Seat of the
Muses, who have long dwelt in those delightful shades, and I hope will never,
through the levelling designs of those who would root up the Church, the
Government, and Leatning, the Supporter of them both, (as was once intended) be
forced to forsake their Ancient Habitation. This is our Nayoth, which, as Peter
Martyr tells us, signifies Green Pasture, Situate by those pleasant Meadows and
gentle Streams, which enliven the Fancy, and quicken and exalt the Imagination.
This is the Palace which Wisdom built for her self, setting it upon those seven
hewn Pillars, the seven Liberal Sciences, whose Foundation can never fail.
This is the place, that I may with the addition of a word allude as our Learned
Apostle, St. Paul, does in another case, to one of your own Poets, to your old
School-fellow, and Companion to one that will never leave your Society as long
as Learning is encouraged, to your beloved Homer. (...) for which Quotation,
not well to be omitted, I hope I shall easily obtain a Pardon from this Learned
Auditory, being assured that should I have occasion, which I shall rather avoid
than seek, of making use of any more of the same Nature, that I shall not incur
our Apostles displeasure, in speaking to you in an unknown Tongue. And now,
before I take my leave of you, suffer me, most worthy School-fellows and
Companions, to apply my self to you in a few words, and I shall cease to be
further troublesome to you at this time.

You were all, my dear Brethren, planted at first in the same Pleasant and
Fruitful Soil, had the same or the like cultivating, and Manuring, and drunk in
the same sweet dews of Knowledge which distilled from the lips of those who
were the Teachers and Governors of your Youth: And all of you in your due
seasons transplanted from that Nursery into larger Gardens of different Moulds
and goodness one from another, but all sufficient by virtue of that Original
tincture you had imbibed there, to enable you to bring forth in great abundance
the proper fruits of your several Callings and Professions. I need not desire
you, I know your own Ingenuity, and geinerous Inclinations lead you to behave
your selves so in your several Posts and Stations, as that you may neither
derogate from the place of your Education, nor the Credit of your Professions,
but prove rather, what I have great Reason to believe you are, Ornaments to
both. You have received largely at the hands of God, it will, and ought to be
expected that you make suitable returns. And though, as our great Apostle says
in another sense, when you were Children, you spoke, and thought, and
understood, and acted as Children; yet remember that now you write Men, and
such too, as by virtue of your ingenuous Education, have had greater Advantages
than many others of improving your Reason and Understanding. Wherefore
forgetting what is behind, reach forward toward that which is before you, that
you may prove as Eminent in your several ways, as the Nature and Quality of
your Employment will bear. To shut up all, Let your Garments, as the Preacher
Advises, Eccles. 9. v. 8. be white, and let your Heads, upon this Solemn
Festival, lack no Ointment; and carry along with you a cheerful Countenance,
and all the civil marks and signatures of an Innocent and inoffensive joy, to
the place whither you are going.

Innocence and true Mirth are near Allied, and it is pity they should ever be
asunder. It Is a good Conscience, a welcome Remembrance, that you have in some
measure answered the Ends of your Liberal Institution at that Royal Foundation
where you were Bred, which will be the best relish, and give the highest taste
not only to your public Entertainment this day, but be a continual Feast to
you afterward. And let us all, it being a Duty which my Text, and our own
Obligations require of us, retain a Venerable Esteem for those Wise, Learned,
and Good Men, who were the careful and painful Instructors of our Youth, who
brought us from Darkness unto Light; who by bearing with our Infirmities,
complying with our several Dispositions, informing our Judgments, and filling
up the Blanks and empty spaces of our Souls, distinguished us from the Common
Herd, who being void of Knowledge, are like the Beasts that perish. Let us
likewise praise the Lord for those Excellent Kings and Queens whom he raised in
several Ages to be the Nursing-Fathers, and the Nursing-Mothers of his Church,
especially let us return our hearty and unfeigned Thanks unto Almighty God, for
putting those good Thoughts into the Heart of our Religious Founder, Henry the
Sixth, of Blessed Memory, to erect that Famous Seminary and Nursery of good
Learning, Eton College, our Common and Indulgent Mother, from whose full and
overflowing Breasts we sucked that wholesome and kindly Nourishment, which has
added to the stature of our Knowledge, and increased the growth of our
Understanding.

Finally, seeing Et spes, and ratio studiorum in Caesare; Seeing we enjoy not
only the Freedom, but the Benefits and Advantages of our Studies by the
Protection, and under the Peaceable and Auspicious Government of our Gracious
Sovereign, Charles the Second, who is not only the Promoter and Encourager of
all Ingenious Learning, but a great Master of all those useful Arts and
Sciences which are worthy a Prince's knowledge: And seeing he vouchsafes to own
us in a particular manner as his own, and to Grace this our Meeting with
peculiar Marks of his Royal Favor, let us all unanimously, as our Duty and
Allegiance binds us, pray for the long and Prosperous Reign of His Most Sacred
Majesty, and that there may be still a continued Succession of Princes from
that Ancient Stock to Rule these Nations in Peace and Quietness till the
Dissolution of all Humane Authority; and that they may continue to be still
Defenders of the true Primitive Faith, till Faith it self be no more, and the
Church which is now Militant become Triumphant. And I hope in putting up this
Address to the Throne of Grace, I shall meet with no Dissenters in this
Congregation. Let all the Lucky Signs of a favorable Providence attend his
Sacred Person; Let the Sun offer him his Beams, the Earth her Fruits, and all
his Subjects their Loyal Hearts. Let the Poor Bless him, and his very Enemies
be forced to praise him. Let Peace remain in his Dwellings, and Integrity dwell
in his Bosom: Let true Religion and the welfare of the Church be ever dear unto
him; Let all his Laws and Commands be duly Executed, and Religiously Observed.
Let Wisdom be the Supporter of his Throne, and let her carry for him, as she
usually does, in her Right Hand length of Days, and in her left Hand Riches and
Honor. Let Patience (a Virtue he has but too much occasion to make use of)
possess his Royal Heart; Let Majesty sit still upon his Brow, and yet Mercy
continue to couch between his Eyelids. Let the Angels of God be his Guardians,
and his particular Providence his Shield of Defense. Let the many Headed Hydra
that hisses and spits its Venom in Libels and Pamphlets against the Government,
be destroyed, and those that speak evil of Dignities, receive their just
Reward; and let him trample all Rebellion and Conspiracies, wherever they be,
under his Feet: And after a long and happy Reign, let the Glorious Spirits,
those Winged Chariots of God, convey him to that Blessed place of Rest that is
prepared for all true Believers.

Where may all his Loyal Subjects who fear God, and Honor their King, meet
him, and amongst them we who are met together this Day.

And that for the sake, and through the Merits of our Blessed Savior and
Redeemer, Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, Three
Persons, and One God, be all Honor, Praise, and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

