OBSERVATIONS ON THE Venereal Disease, With the True way Of Curing the Same.

By CHARLES PETER Chyrurgeon.

(...) non nobis nati Sumus.

Licensed according to Order.

London Printed by D. Mallet, and are to be Sold by the Author, at his
Bathing-House in St. Martins-Lane near Long-Acre, 1686.

THE PREFACE,
THere will be some Readers that are Strangers to me, and it may be not amiss
to inform them, that in my juvenile years; my inclinations led me to
Surgery, in which I took so great delight, that I never thought my self so
happy, as when I was a Spectator of some or other Chyrurgical Operation, in
pursuance of what I so much delighted in; I was put Apprentice to a Master of
Anatomy, by reason of which, I was always present at Dissections, both public
and private, at which it is hard for me to say, whether I took more Pains or
Pleasure. Having thus laid a Foundation in order to attaining to the Art of
Surgery, and having several years seen many very good manual Operations,
performed in and about the City of London and elsewhere, I was sent in Company
of several Eminent Chyrurgeons, to Dress the wounded Men in the Hospitals of
Harwich and Ipswich, where much pains I took during the time of the War,
between us and the Dutch, Anno. 1665. Returning to London, the Plague soon grew
to a great height; I stayed in Town and had much business, and great success in
Curing of it. The great Fire of London happened soon after, and my Apprenticeship
being expired, I applied my self to my Study, reading the best of Authors I
could meet with; I likewise endeavored to read Men as well as Books, and
therefore sought out the most ingenicus practicers of Physic and Chyrurgery,
with whom I daily Conversed, making daily Observations of my own and other
Men's Practices; I ever had (since I first fancied the medicinal way,) an
earnest desire to the true knowledge of the Venereal Disease; I have by the
Dissecting of many Bodies, observed the nature and variety of the Distemper,
and have been most curious in observing the accidents that many times attend
the Disease, the different operations that I have observed in Medicines, made
me first take the trouble, and be at the charge of preparing several, and the
profit, besides my own satisfaction, has made me continue my Labors, and it is
well known, with how great pains and care I have attained to the knowledge, of
preparing such excellent Medicines as my Antivenereal Pill, etc. Besides no
small charge in my ordering those various ways of Sweating and Bathing, with
which, persons are accomodated at my House; I am the first English Chyrurgeon,
that ever prepared Baths of all sorts, and I thank God, I have as convenient
Bathing Rooms in my House, as any in England, and I think no Man in his way,
has been more laborious than my self; the following Treatise, I am sure
contains most certain Truths, if thou do question any thing therein, I shall
be willing to satisfy thee.

From my House in St. Martins-Lane near Long-Acre.
The Contents.
Chap. 1st. OF the Original of the Lues Venerea, and several names of it. Chap.
2d. The Causes of the Lues Venerea, and several ways of infecting. Chap. 3d.
The Signs of the Lues Venerea. Chap. 4th. The dangerous effects of the Lues
Venerea. Chap. 5th. Of the mischeifs caused by ignorant Pretenders. Chap. 6th.
Of several ways of Curing the Pox. Chap. 7th. The true way of Curing the Pox.
Chap. 8th. The true way of Curing the Gonorrhaea. Chap. 9th. The Conclusion.

CHAP. I. Of the Original of the Lues Venerea, and several Names of it.
COncerning the beginning of this Disease, Authors are various, and I find
that it has had variety of names, in several times and places, but my opinion
is, that the Disease is very ancient, and may challenge almost as much
Antiquity, as the Sin of Uncleanness, for the names of it, I will set down but
these few; the Italians call it Morbus Gallicus, the French call it Scabies
Hispanica, and Morbus Italicus, in Spain they call it Morbus Neapolitanus, in
England we call it Morbus Gallicus, and Lues Venerea, by the last name I intend
to treat of it.

CHAP. II. The Causes of the Lues Venerea, and several ways of Infecting.
THe causes of this Distemper are twofold, the first of an occult quality,
being as a scourge laid on Mankind (by the Almighty,) to restrain our too
wanton Lusts, the other is by an impure touch or contagion, especially in
Copulation; a Man receiving of an infected Vapor, or filthy Sanies, into the
Pores of the Skin, or into the Vrethra, as well before the ejecting of the
Seed, as after, the Woman having either a Gonorrhaea, or else an Ulcer, or
perhaps only the foul Seed of some infected Person left in her, some small time
before, which being lodged in the wrinckles of the Womb, may be drawn in by the
pores of the extended Penis, so that it is possible for a Man to get this
Disease, by a Woman that was never infected her self, for the oleaginous
moisture that is ever in the neck of the Womb, does many times defend it from
being infected, besides, in Women the parts being not so strait, nor yet so
hot, the infection is not so nourished and fomented, as it is in men, besides the
admirable cunning that Women of the Town use, is not a little to be observed.

There be many persons that will not believe any hurt can be gotten, any other
way than by Copulation with an infected person, but I will prove the contrary
by common experience, as for example.

A Gentleman about 25 years of age, having lain with a young Lass about 19 or
20 years old, was so excessive in the use of Venery with her, that having kept
her company three days, a violent Fever seized them both, with great pains in
the Back and Head, I was sent for to let them Blood, but when I came and had
inquired into the causes of their Distemperature, I would by no means take any
Blood away, for the Fever being caused by the diminution of the Spirits,
bleeding must have increased the Fever, rather than abated it, I therefore
ordered each a Glyster of the Decoct. Com. cum Sy Violar. and two hours after
the Glyster; an Emulsion of the cool Seeds, dulcisied with Sir. Citrini, and a
little Diacodion to refrigerate the parts and cause sleep, in two or three days
the Fever left them, the Woman was very well, but a Gonorrhaea attended the
man, without its usual symptoms, and it was carried off with much ease, for I
verily believe it was caused only by too much forcing of the spermatick
Vessels, and heating of the parts, especially the Prostate Glandules; it is not
impossible for this Disease to be gotten by Kissing, especially if either party
have an Ulcer in the Throat, or Ulceration in the Mouth, from which a slimy
juice proceeding, and the Lips being moistened thereby, may very easily infect
the other; the common Lacivious way of Kissing does much adjuvate this way of
infecting.

Children are very subject to be infected this way, for by reason the Pores of
their Skin being open, and apt to attract, they are injured by an unwholesome
Kiss, and they being once infected are hard to cure.

A man who had a large Ulcer in his Throat, came to me for help, (by Gods
blessing I cured him,) his Wife lying in Childbed at the same time, and her
Breasts being sore, I was called to give my advice, I found her in a Fever, and
her Niples Ulcerated; I called for her Child, whom I found infected with an
Ulcer in the Mouth, presently I declared them both to be infected with the Pox;
I will not stand to determine, whether the Woman was infected before her
delivery, and so the Child brought into the World with the Distemper; or
whether the Father did by kissing infect the Child, and so the malignity
conveyed to the Mother through the porous body of the Niples, but to make good
my assertion, pray observe the event.

A Neighbor who was a Nurse coming to visit the Woman, whose Breasts was sore,
and hearing her complain of the tenderness of her Niples, she taking up the
infected Child kissed it, and gave it her Breast, (she being ignorant of the
Distemper,) the Child sucked her and infected her, insomuch that her Lips and
Breasts broke out with ulcerous Sores; moreover a little Girl about Eight years
old, that used to play to the infected Child, and often to kiss it, was by it
infected.

The Disease is very often got by lactation, therefore I do advise those that
put their young Children to Nurse, to be wary in choosing of Nurses, and in like
manner, Nurses ought to be careful what and whose Children they take, for the
Venom is very often communicated from Nurses to Children, and as often
received by Nurses from them, for a very small matter is able to infect either,
and many Families have been undone by receiving the Venom this way.

It Is not to be imagined how many Children in a year are destroyed in this City
by this Distemper, though in the Weekly Bills they pass for griping of the
Guts, or Worms, Rickets, etc.

It Is dangerous to Sweat in a Bed with one that has the Pox, and young people
are often infected this way, but pray mistake me not, for many will fay they
have sain with those that have had it, and yet never got any hurt, which may
be, for some Constitutions are so hardy, that they will not be easily infected,
but any man of sense must believe, that not only the sweat of Pockey persons,
but the vapor which may come from them in a Bed, must needs be injurious,
especially having the advantage of heat to open the pores of the Body.

There be some Writers that do affirm, that the breath of a Pockey person is
infectious, but I think that assertion very ridiculous, for experience does
every day confirm the contrary.

There is a great deal of variety in Bodies, some being far more easily
infected than other, as sanguine and slegmatick persons, (but are more easily
cured than Choleric or Melancholy persons are,) and many have known several
men to be concerned with one Woman, one soon after the other, and some to come
of without being hurt, and the otehr to be dangeroufly Peppered.

CHAP. III. The signs of the Lues Venerea.
THe signs of this Distemper are various, according to the strength and
constitution of the Patient, the general signs are these, viz. A debility of
the whole body, as if wearied by much labor, (which is caused by the infection
of the Spirits,) a stifness of the Joints, but more especially of the Hips and
Thighs, great pulsation of the Arteries, a shooting pain in the Groins, pain in
the Cod, itching about the root of the Yard, sharpness of Urine, and a pricking
pain in erection, and flowing of yellow sanies from the Yard oftimes, pain in
the Back and in the Head; these are the infallible signs of a Gonorrhaea, some
of them happening to one, and some to another, and yet I have known all of them
to happen to one person, and at one time, some have other symptoms, as the
Prepuce and Glans, swelling immoderately with great pain, or perhaps the
Vrethra stopped up with Caruncles, the Glans almost covered with Warts,
sometimes excoriations of the Glans, or ulcers on the Glans, or Prepuce or
both, sometimes Buboes do arise in the Groins, which if once suppurate and
opened handsomely, the Cure is performed with much ease, but if they are drove
back into the Body, they make the Distemper more inveterate, seize the Liver
and confirm a Pox.

Some persons immediately after the receiving of the infection, are taken with
a giddiness of the Head, and most terrible pains in the Eyes and Ears, and in
most parts of the Body, breaking out with small red Pimples, which presently
return into the Body, and a while after break out with foul Scabs, some moist
and spreading, though more generally they are dry and hard, and very nearly
represent the cup of an Acorn both in shape and color.

Some have Ulcers on the body of the Yard, some in the Fundament, others have
large nodes upon the Bones in several parts, these are most certain symptoms
of the Pox.

Note, that this Distemper does vary much in its times, many times showing it
self in 1, 2, or 3 days, sometimes lying hid a Month, two or three, and
sometimes a year or more, but it lies not idle, for the longer it lies hid,
the more inveterate it proves, when once it appears, and of times disguised
under another name; it tyraniseth in the body to the destruction of the
Patient; I therefore advise all persons that so soon as ever they find
themseves touched with this venomous Dart, that they straightways repair to
such Persons as are able to help them.

CHAP. IV The dangerous effects of the Lues Venerea.
TO demonstrate all the effects of this raging Distemper, would take up much
time, therefore as breisly as possible, I will acquaint thee how great a Tyrant
this Disease is to those People, who either scorn to own they have it, or those
who being a shamed to confess their Condition rather venture to undergo it,
that wisely to seek for help; I have known some so sordidly foolish, that
having had Ulcers on the Penis, have so long slighted the Disease, until the
Penis has been mortified even unto the Belly, upon which insued immediate
Death, and some escaping with their Lives, have lost most part, if not all of
the Members; I have known others to have been almost eaten up by this Disease,
before they have known so much as the name of their Malady: I have seen many
Women with large Ulcers in the neck of the Womb, which have caused continual
pains, by corroding of the parts, others that have been Ulcerated from the
Pubes, even to the Anus, insomuch that the Labia have been eaten away in some,
and in many mortified; many have spongy excressencies on the Labia, with
multitudes of warts round the Labia and Anus, and many have the venereal
Fistula in Ano, which will admit of no Cure, without the use of Antivenereal
Medicines. I have known some who having been seized with a violent pain in the
Head, and in all the Limbs, have fallen into a Fever and Died Mad. Some have
sharp and continual pains in all the Joints, especially in the Shoulders: And
Nodes affixed to the Bones in many parts of the Body, insomuch that the very
Bones become Rotten, for the Disease is so Malign, that it will creep between
the Bone and the Flesh, and consume both.

These Nodes, are by some called Gummata, they are painful Swellings, and are
caused by the Phlegmatic part of the Disease, left behind in ill managed
Courses of Physic, but in some they are absolute Elevations of the Bone, the
Venom having penetrated the Periostium.

Some have the Penis so stopped with caruncles, that they cannot make Water,
some have the uvula and the Palate of the Mouth eaten away by Ulcer, and many
you see who loose their Noses by this violent Disease, some have the tip of the
Nose and Nostril eaten away some loose their Eyes, and many their hearing, and
some their Mouths drawn away, and indeed I could quote multitudes of Example of
the fury of it. Oh! how intolerable are the Pains that many poor Wretches
endure by this Distemper especially in the Night, at which time it most boldly
walks its rounds to afflict poor Mortals, for indeed all Pains are worse in the
Night, than the Day, by reason that the exercising of the Body in the Day does
divert the Pain, but the Warmness of the Bed at Night does stir up the
Malignity, and the very thoughts of the Patient in the Night being fixed on the
object of Pain, does make the Misery more intolerable.

Many Years have some undergone the Tyranny of this Distemper, till at last it
having enervated all the parts of the Body, and consumed the Flesh to the
Bones, it surrenders them to the Grave, whom perhaps, had they but used such
Medicines, as had been proper in such Cases, they might soon have eradicated
the Disease from their Bodies. It Is not a small Number, but many Thousands, that
have perished for want of such Noble Medicines as have force to over come the
Malignity of this Disease.

How many Consumptions, Catharrs, Astmaes, and innumerable more Diseases
proceed from nothing else but this Fountain, it is this is the dominering
Distemper of our Age; though too often it goes under the notion of some other
Disease, though many do believe the Scurvey is far more pre: vailing, which
indeed is a very destructive Malady, and incident to most Men, for the Relics
of the Lues Venerea, does many times convert into the Scurvey and sometimes the
Dropsy, and not seldom into the Gout; and I pray observe this, that where
ever any Distemper is complicated, with any Relic of the Venereal Disease, it
ever proves very stubborn, and will not yield to ordinary means, and indeed
cannot be perfectly Cured, without the use of good Antivenereal Medicines.

CHAP. V. Of the Mischiefs caused by ignor ant Pretenders.
THe diversity of my Practice in this City for several years has given me
occasion to observe, that many mischiefs are daily occasioned by impudent and
ignorant Pretenders. I mean not only those (Vagrants) who pretend to have
brought such strange and wonderful Medicines from Foreign Parts: But many of
our own Country men, who too boldly venture on the Curing of Diseases without
ever knowing the Nature or Causes of them; nay, many times not so much as the
Name of the Distemper: Who although illiterate persons, and never bred to the
Knowledge of the Practice of Physic and Chyrurgery, yet boldly fly at all,
valuing a Patients Life, no more than their own little or no Credits, most of
them pretending to the Cure of this Disease, and making the most small
appearance, seem to be the highest degree of the Pox, especially when the
Patient confesses a guilt, they speedily pronounce an infection, making most of
those People that go to them for advice, to believe they have the Pox, although
they are never so free from it, for if the Patient but propose this unhappy
question. Sir, do you not think I have the foul Disease? They then as suddenly
reply yes, yes: Thus many a harmless person is ensnared, and by their own
credulity, are caused to undergo such strange courses of Physic, as perhaps
may (and does too often) ruin both Body and Purse, nay the misery of their
rashness ends not here, for oftimes such differences between Man and Wife, are
occasioned by these Proceedings, as causes a disorder their whole life time, as
for Example.

A Woman (whom I believe to be a civil person) going lately to one who
pretended to great Judgment in Urines (and carrying her Urine to have his
advice) he plainly told her she had the Pox, he looked in her Throat, and told
her she had an Ulcer there, and that in a short time she would loose her Nose;
this much startled the Woman, whereupon she told him she was troubled with a
pain in her Head (which was all she ailed, and was occasioned only by
obstructions) he forth with pronounces the pain of her Head to be Venereal,
telling her the Pox was in her Brain; upon this home she goes, rails at her
Husband, and resolves to be Cured whatever it cost, her Husband advised her to
come to me, which she did, and desired me to tell her what I would have to Cure
her of this her (immaginary) Disease. I making strict quiry concerning the
State of her Body; all I could observe was, that she had pain in her head,
which I supposed was occasioned by the foulness of her Stomach and
Obstructions: I enquired of her whether her pain was nocturnal or no? whether
she had any pains in her Shoulders, Back, Arms, Thighs, Shins, or any of her
Joints, any Breaking-out, any Nodes, etc. in a word, I could no way find she
was infected; whereupon I declared she was free from the Pox, she was very
angry, and told me she had an Ulcer in her Throat; I then looked in her Throat
and found all well, which I affirmed to her; she went home much dissatisfied,
and fell into a great Melancholy, because her Husband would not suffer her any
more to go to the person who told her she had the Pox. She being in this
condition, her Husband came to me and consulted me, upon which, I agreed to
humourher Fancy: So I went to visit her, she complained much of her woeful
condition; I told her I had considered her Case, and that I would take care to
Cure her, upon which she was very cheerful (for she knew several that I had
Cured of the Pox.) I Purged her five or six times with my head Pill, and gave
her some Medicines that cleansed her Stomach and opened her obstructions, by
which means her pain in the head left her, and she remains very well; being
thus Cured of her immaginary Pox, but I fear a reconciliation between her and
her Husband will take up a longer time; I could instance many more such like
Examples, but must not be too voluminous.

But to pass by many such sort of abuses, let us suppose the unhappy Patients
to be really infected with the Pox, and see then what these Imposters do to
them, and how strangely they handle them.

Here indeed the Patients condition is most deplorable, for as the Whore gives
the Clap, here the Quack gives them the Pox, for not one Gonorrhaea in a
hundred that these Fellows carry off as they ought: For their common custom
is, after they have administered five or six Purges, or perhaps not so many,
then they use restringents, which stops the humor until it fouls the Blood and
confirms a Pox. Others of them who sancy not restringents, Purge the Patient
continually with one or other violent Medicine which debilitates the Body, but
perhaps never corrects the Malignity of the Disease, thus these sort of persons
many times bring their Patients into incurable Consumptions, and some they so
strangely inflame by their exceeding hot and sharp Purges, that the Blood and
humors being made thin, and the parts so weak, that great inflammations often
happen, and many times the ill treating of Gonorrhaea's, at the beginning makes
them very difficult to be carried off (although the Patient at last happens
into the hands of an experienced Artist) great swelling of the Testicules are
often occasioned by the barbarous usuage of these unexperienced persons, and
their ill prepared Medicines, and many Examples I could quote, but time will
not allow, however this one I cannot but insert. A Young Gentleman having a
Gonorrhaea, had the ill Fortune to meet with a person who (as the Sequel will
inform you) was a more dangerous Enemy than his Distemper: The Gentleman having
made known his Disease, the undertaker soon agrees upon a Price for the Cure,
in order to which he gives the Patient six Pills to take the next Morning,
which Pills gave him near Thirty Stools, inflaming his Body very much; you the
next day the poor Gentleman was ordered to take six Pills more, which gave him
between Thirty and Forty Stools, causing much Blood to come from him by stool,
with most violent tortions of the Guts: The third day he being very ill, was
advised to send for me. I went to visit him, and found him very weak in a
Fever, and often falling into Fainting-Fits, which was occasioned by the
expense of Spirits; his Yard was much tumified, and violent pain in making
water. I declared his Case to be very dangerous, and advised to call in some
able Physician, for I was unwilling to take him in hand before I had consulred
with some learned Artist, while I thus advised, in comes the person who had
given him the Pills, who did not know me, whereupon I desired him to let me
know his Opinion concerning his Patient. In order to which, down he sets, pulls
his Hat over his Eyes, and gravely putting the Head of his Cane to his Lips he
begins in a formal way, these very Words. Sir, my Patient has now had enough of
the purgative part, therefore it will be convenient to proceed unto
restringents, to Night he shall take half an Ounce of Cinnamon in Powder in a
Glass of Claret, to stay the Flux of his Belly, to morrow I will give him some
restringent Pills to stay his running.

You cannot but imagine this Fellows impudence might justly have raised a
Passion in any Man, who knew any thing of Medicine, but to be short he was soon
dismissed, and an able Physician (as I desired) was sent for, to whom I
proposed what I thought fit to do to the Patient, all which he well approved
of, and persuaded the Patient to rely upon the course I had proposed. I then
began in manner following. First I gave him a Balsamic Glyster, that might
heal his excoriated Bowels, and abate his Gripings. I then gave him a Cordial
Haustus that might refrigerate, and comfort his weak Stomach, and moderately
restore his too much diminished Spirits, each of these I repeated as often as I
thought fit, and for his Diet: I prescribed Chicken-Broath, in which was Boiled
Endive and French-Barley, thus his strength was by Degrees increased: I all
this while, not offering at any Antivenereal Medicines, but every Day bathed
his Yard, which took down the Swelling. At last I began to use gentle
Antivenereals, keeping him to Emulsions, and Diuretic Decoctions, never
Purging him above once in 3 Days, and then but moderately, by which means I
perfectly Cured him, and I believe for the future, he will be wary of venturing
his Life in the Hands of such a Person as he had like to have been ruined by.

Not long since, I was called to visit a Person who was supposed to have taken
Poison, coming into the Room, I smelt a Cadaverous Scent; such as usually
attends those that are Fluxed. I observed the Patient, his Face much swellen,
his Tongue hanging out of his Mouth, and much drivling from his Mouth, I
declared he had taken some Mercurial Medicines that Fluxed him. The Patient
could not utter one word, but made signs for Pen and Paper, which was brought
him; he wrote that he had taken nothing but 4 Pills which a Person pretending
to Physic, had given him, for to carry of an infection, which he supposed he
had of a common Woman some time before, and that he feared his Blood was much
infected, by reason such strance Accidents happened upon stirring the Humor.

I could not but smile, to observe the timidity of the Patient; wherefore I
made search for some Symptom of the Venereal Disease, which I was very Curious
in doing, but through all his Body I could not find the reast sign of any such
Disease: I declared my opinion was, the Patient was abused. I inquired of the
Nurse, whether there was any of the Pills left, she showed me one which I
broke, and could plainly see the small particles of the Crude, Quicksilver in
it; I tasted it, and do really believe it was nothing but crude Quicksilver,
mixed with Turpentine, etc. I cannot say mortified, the Preparation being so
imperfect. And I do believe, that the Person who Administered the Pills, did
design to have frighted the Patient into the believe of a real Pox, and by that
means to have extorted a Sum of Money from him; the Patient by Writing, desired
me to take care of him, whereupon I injected a Purging Glyster, which gave him
Three or Four Stools, which I repeated once every Day, I washed his Mouth with
a Restringent Lotion, and gave often fresh extracted Cassia, with Salt of
Tartar, and caused him to swallow a Golden-Bullet very often, by these means I
precipitated the Mercury, and the Patient regained his former Health.

Thus may you see how dangerous it is, to meddle with such as are either
Ignorant of the use of Medicine, or that have neither Conscience or Honesty,
justly to consider each man's Case.

CHAP. VI. Of several ways of Curing the Pox.
AS there is great variety in the Nature of this Disease, so is there several
ways used for the Curing of it, among which, some are so dangerous, that many
persons have perished in their supposed Cure, and others have been attended by
such fierce Accidents, that neither time nor care could ever Remedy; as for
Example, Fumigation by Cinnaber, that old and dangerous way, has proved it
self so pernicious that the Use of it is almost quite left.

2dly. Unction by the Common Mercurial Unguent, a way thought commonly used,
yet not commendable for by the Use of the Unguent, many times the Salivation
rises so fiercely that the Patient is suffocated, moreover by this way, the
Natural heat of the Joints is oft-times so dissipated that not only a debility
of the parts, but Lameness has insued, more over the uncertainty of this way
is great, for sometimes the Mercury precipitates it self so suddenly, that the
Salivation proves ineffectual, by not continuing a sufficient time, nor can the
undertaker judge exactly, what quantity o^ the Medicine has penetrated; yet in
those Diseases that are intercutaneous this way may be apt enough.

3dly. Salivation by Medicine gives at the Mouth, which is much safe^ than the
former, and I am certain much more sure; for first, this is, or ought to be
done by some Mercurial Medicine, neatly prepared, which may be given according
to the strength of the Patient, still observing to augment, or else to diminish
the Dose as may be thought fit.

Those that Salivate any person, ought to be careful, to observe the variety
there is in Bodies; for they may find that Sanguine and Phlegmatic Bodies are not
only more easy to Salivate, but will likewise spit much more, and endure it
much longer than Choleric, or Melancholy Bodies can. The preparation of the
Body is no small matter in this sort of Cure; besides Care ought to be taken to
carry off the Mercury well at last.

4thly. Sweating which, is diverse ways to be caused, some use the Hot-House,
Stuva's, Bannio, others the Tub or Box, and Cradle, etc. Some make a little
Stove, wherein the Patient sits with his Head out, and is Sweated by a Pan of
Charcoale, but it is a most dangerous way, for the Fume which arises from the
Coals, does much hurt to the Nerves, and likewise to the Lungs, for although
the head be out, and thereby the danger of suffocating be prevented, yet the
ill Vapor does, and will penetrate through the Pores of the Body, and has an
injurious quality.

The best way of Sweating is in the Stuva, where the Patient being well rubbed,
Sweat is more easily procured, or else the Box or Tub with Spirit of Wine, and
this way is very convenient for the Pox; for a Sweating-Box is easily conveyed
to the Patients Chamber, where with little trouble the Party moves from the Bed
into the Box, Sweats, and to Bed again; by which means taking Cold is avoided,
which is really the greatest Enemy in the World to all Pocky Persons, both
these last mentioned ways of Sweating I have often found instrumental in the
Cure of the Pox, for it throws out much of the virulency by the Pores of the
Skin, and procures the speedy sealing and falling away of the Scabs, and
abateth Pains in the Shoulders, Shins, or any part of the Body; I have found
great Nodes to be much helped by Sweating.

5thly. Diet, which is a safe way, working moderately, and yet surely. My
meaning here is, by the use of a good convenient. Diet-Drink, aptly sitted to
the Constitution of the Patient. For although a late French Writer (as well as
some of our own Country men) does deny that either Sarsa, China, Sarsafras, or
Guacum, have any Power in Curing the Pox. I know they are in the wrong, and I
have by great Experience found the Essicacy of them, being justly prepared; yet
I must allow that some men do much hurt by the unadvised Use of Die^ Drinks,
partly by ignorance, and par^ly by avarice, making use of too much Guacum, both
VVood and Bark, which not only too much exsiccates, but often inflames the Body
by its excessive hea^ for it is most common among some me^ to rely too much upon
the Fame o^ these or other Drugs; imagining that (...) long as that they have
but great stor^ of Drugs in their Diet-Drinks, the^ cannot do amiss, when
indeed the only matter is in dispencing prope^ quantities of this or that Drug,
according to the Nature of the Disease, o^ the Constitution of the Patient: For
some men are satisfied since they know an Antivenereal is used never
considering that in weak Persons that are emaciated by the Distemper they must
a^ avoid the use of Guacum, or its Bark, o^ that in Choleric Persons, the use
o^ such hot Medicines are dangerous, an^ yet used with good success in
Plethori^^ Bodies; more-over I have observed great mistakes in many (who
undertake to Cure this Disease by Diet) in suffering their Patients to go
abroad, constantly in the time of their Cure when as reason directs the
contrary; for those which undergo a course of Diet-Drink, ought to keep in
their Chambers, and to keep their Bodies very warm, to help perspiration with
Custom (although seldom observed here) is constantly used in Spain, Italy,
and other parts.

6thly. Purging which, is a safe way, and daily Experience, teaches that many
Venereal Cases are treated by no other means, and yet are very handsomely
Cured. And I can with modesty affirm that I have Cured many hundreds by this
way alone, for what other way can or may be used to those poor unhappy
Wretches, where Pox and Poverty are complicated, and it is to be observed, that
although none of the fore mentioned means are able to Cure this Disease without
the help of Purging, yet this way has Cured many without other helps; but I do
not here mean the common use of ordinary Catharticks, but Purging by some noble
Preparation, which has the powerful quality of of Correcting the Venereal
Venom, and restoring Vigor to the Body, whereby it may be able to throw off
the Disease; and indeed I have seen many strange Cases, wherein no other
Medicine has been used but my Antivenereal Pill, which being took once in two
days, for some time, has worked of the Disease to a Miracle.

7thly. Ishues upon which, the Spainards so doted formerly, that it was their
common Cure, and I have my self used this way with success in confirmed Poxes,
for they cleanse the Body much, and accelerate the Cure several ways, by
evacuating the Humor, and many times by revulsion in Ozena's, I commonly make a
Fontinel in each Arm, and a Seton in the Neck, these adjugate a cure,
especially if the Patient have a Catharr or Astma. But Ishues are of themselves
not able to overcome the malignity of this Disease, however necessary for all
persons who labor under the Pox, excepting those who are to undergo the
Salivation, and those I always advise to dry up their Ishues upon the beginning
of a Salivating Course, it being then no way proper to dry the Body least
juices be wanting to maintain the spitting its proper time.

CHAP. VII. The true way of Curing the POX.
NOw since so many ways are, or may be used for to cure this Disease, it is the
Duty of every honest Artist rightly to consider the Patients case, and justly
to weigh, what sort of cure may be most fit for them, for as there is great
variety in the Disease, so must there be in the cure; some persons must of
necessity keep up, others have not, nay cannot have the convenience of
retirement, some Bodies will admit of the most rough ways of cure, others must
have more gentle means used.

First, Observe, there is degrees of the Pox, that no internal Medicine can
reach, no Fume, no Salivation, no Diet, Purgation, Sweating, etc. can help,
what is then to be done? where Medicine cannot reach, manual Operation must, for
where ever the Pox fouls a Bone, naught but exfoliating can avail, therefore,
if the Cranium or any other Bone be foul lay it bare, so far as is convenient,
and with detergent and exsiccating Powders, keep the part as dry as possibly
you can, that the Bone may scale; in the Arms and Shins lay open all foul
Bones, nor ever attempt the cure any other way, for every man's reason will
direct that, naught but laying open can be proper where a Bone is foul, and it is
wonderful to observe, how Nature will help to discharge the malignant matter,
so that the Patient being aptly dressed once or twice in 24 hours, there will
be little more to do, unless you will make use of a good Sarsa-Drink, which if
the Patient can be at the charge of, will accelerate the cure, and restore the
strength by amending the habit of body, and indeed I never missed in this sort
of cure, for I have made it my resolution, where ever I begin, to go through
with my work, and therefore in this case especially, will take care that the
Patients Poverty be not my Disgrace, for if good Nutriment and convenience of
place etc. be wanting, it will be hard for Nature to support it self in this
sort of cure.

Chankers or Ulcers on the Glans, or Prepuce require a careful head and hand to
manage rightly, and I am most certain, that the major part of mankind which
have suffered by the Pox, may date the Original of their miseries from the
neglect of these Sores, but let no man mistake me, nor yet his own case, for I
do not mean Excoriations of either Glans or Prepuce, for these are cured in a
few hours, but venomous Chankers require both time and care, such as carry a
hardness all round the Sore, for though they appear never so small, yet must
they be esteemed as particular Poxes, from which confirmed Poxes too often
proceed; the true cure consists in being well digested, all repelling Medicines
being avoided, for it is an inhumane Cruelty to make slight of such Sores, as too
many do, assuring the Patient they are but slight matters, a few dressings and
as few Purges will secure all as they pretend, thus lulling the party into a
dangerous Pox, as six Months or may be less will show. I say therefore, that
all Chankers must be strongly digested; the Patient ought to Purge and sweat
often, and a good Diet-drink would confirm the Cure, but if upon healing the
Chankers, the hardness remain, you must be forced to salivate before you can be
safe; I have seen Chankers that naught but salivation could Conquer, whose
callous Lips no corrosive could consume; for, suppose a Patient who has a
sharpness of Blood from a venereal cause, you will find to your no small
trouble, how difficultly such a man's Chankers will admit of Cure. On the
contrary, a Patient of a good habit of Body, whose very Blood is a Balsom, from
him you shall have more easy Digestion and all your Medicines more success,
but care must be taken in all, that you repel not.

Caruncles, commonly called Carnosities, these lie in the Vrethra, which is the
passage of the Yard, and some time at the very neck of the Bladder; I have seen
some persons so stopped up, they could not make one drop of Urine, but by the
help of a Catheter. This sort of Pox requires great care, for you must by the
use of Corrosives, consume, and eat away, all that you can come at, of the
Carnosity at the same time, duly considering to avoid Defluxion of humors,
therefore must the Patient use a convenient Diet-drink, relating to his Age and
Constitution, for you must observe, that you may treat a man of Forty or Fifty
in this case, differently from one of half his Age, and you must not omit to
observe, that all the Durity be Consumed; Sweating and Bathing is of great use
in this Cure, for it relaxes and softens the part, and prevents inflammation,
which in men of years does often happen. In cases of this nature, after I have
done what is possible by my Candle, if I feel or suspect the least hardness to
remain, I salivate my Patient, or if I omit that, I am sure to give a good
Diet-drink, and to purge so often as need requires, and many times I order a
Milk-Diet to finish the Work.

Bubo's or Poulaines, (as the French call them,) in the Cure of these, all
sorts of Evacuation is to be avoided; let the Patient Eat, Drink, and be Merry,
let him Eat plentifully of the hottest-Meats, and Drink the Strongest Liquors
to encourage the Natural Heat, to throw out the Malignant Matter; let the
swelling be anointed with some Supparative, keep a strong Suppurating
Cataplasme on it, it may not be amiss once in twenty four hours to apply a
large Cupping-Glass to help forward the humor; great care must be taken that
the Matter do not return, and caution used not to open the part, until it be
suppurate, and then so opened, that it may not become Fistulous, for though no
sort of Pox, is so easy to cure as this, yet many Patients miscarry, by
wanting such Surgeons as rightly understand the method of curing Buboes, and I
have met with several persons, who have had their Buboes so ill treated, that
they have become Cancerous, and difficultly admitted of Cure, these Sores ought
to be well digested, and kept running so long as possible, with convenient
Purging and Sweating, toward the end of the Cure, and when all is healed a
good Diet drink would make sure Work.

Ulcers, in the Throat or Mouth, must be cleansed by strong detergent
Medicines, nor must any Salivation be performed upon persons so affected, until
the particular Cure be first performed, least the parts already weak, should
suffer damage by a too sudden flux of humors, but after the Ulcers are once
Cured, the general Cure may more safely be performed, (the same observation
ought to be made in Ozena's,) nor do the Ulcers of the Throat, threaten less
than the fall of the Nose, where they are neglected, for the matter that flows
from the Ulcer, does often foul the Os Spongiosum and Cribriforme, where the
matter once lodged, soon becomes an inveterate Enemy; I know some persons, who
have often large Ulcers in the Throat, which soon disappear, but I never think
any Patient Cured in such a case, until they undergo the Salivation.

The preparation of Bodies is very material in the cure of this Difease, for
suppose a Patient in years, of a choleric temperament emaciated by the
Disease, having missed of his Cure, two or three, or more times, this Patient,
any man must believe would be hard to cure, every man would say, nothing but a
Salivation could help him, yet it would be dangerous to Salivate such a person,
without the due preparation, viz. First, Let him be sed with fresh-Meats, that
breed phlegmatic Juices, such are New laid Eggs, Cream, Almond-Milk, Veal,
Pullet, the whitest Bread, sweet and nourishing Wines, pleasant Tisans,
fresh-Fish, and all sorts of Pulse, that may breed a quantity of humors, which
may create matter for the Salivation, nor will it be amiss, to treat such a
Patient in the beginning of the Salivation, with nourishing Broaths, adding now
and then the yelk of a new laid Egg, Endive, or Succory are most properly put
into Broth, for such a person, by reason they cool and abate the sharpness of
the humors, and moderately loosen the Belly: Glisters of Chicken-Broath are
proper in this case, one in four or five days, by reason they nourish the
Bowels, which would be subject to Tortions, the Acrimonious humors some times
slipping downwards.

Moreover, after the Salivation, a nourishing Restorative Diet drink is proper,
wherein care be took to avoid all things that exsiccate, and great care ought
to be in giving of Nutriment, that easily digests, for it must be took often,
it being requisite to get such a Patient in strength, as fast as Nature can
give leave.

But on the contrary, if a Patient be Young and Robust, of a Sanguine or
phlegmatic Constitution, then must another course be taken, if Salivation be
intended, and it may be convenient to purge this Patient, four or five times,
to Bleed and Bathe, to abate and prepare the humors, least the Salivation
should rise too fiercely. A moderate Diet is convenient, of such things as
breed good, but little Juices, such are Partridge, Lark, Rabbets, Mutton, etc.
Diet-drinks, or Tisans that gently exsiccates, are convenient in the
preparation.

In the beginning of the Salivation, use no Broth, but Posset Drink, or thin
Water-Gruell, and so continue; and it may be observed, that a Patient of this
Constitution, may be expected to Spit, six or seven Pints in twenty four hours,
(whereas in the case before mentioned, four Pints is as much as can be
expected;) after the Salivation, a Diet-drink may be given, that exsiccates
powerfully, and moves Sweat, observing to purge the Body well, by this you may
observe, how much more bold you may be, with a person of a Plethorick
Constitution, and consequently succulent, than with a Body Emaciated, where
Juices are wanting, and let none omit to observe, that in Salivations, there
will happen to some Fainting Fits, for which there is no better Cordial, than a
small Glassof Clarret, which comforts sufficiently, and sencibly does
precipitate the Medicine. The manner of defending the Mouth, and curing the
Ulcers, caused by the Saliva, is so common, I need not mention it.

The Venereal Astma, which is but seldom Cured, for where the Lungs are
affected, the Party is generally brought so low, before the Cure is attempted,
that Nature can assist but little, and here no Salivation can be admitted, the
Cure must be attempted by Restoratives, such as Sarsa, China, with Pectoralls,
with moderat Sweats, and large Fontanells in the Shoulders, Asses-Milk, or Cows
Milk, mixed with the Diet-drink, very moderate purgatives, and those mixed with
Pectoralls, until strength be attained, and then having a fit time of the
Year, and all needful supplies, a gentle Flux may be raised, but not continued
too long, least while thou go about to cure thy Patient of the Pox, you Bury
him of a Consumption.

Many other Accidents may happen, which having their Original from the Pox,
will admit of no other Cure, for we many times find a Venereal Opthalmia, a
Venereal Fistula, some time on the Lacrymal Glandule, that fouls the Bone, and
makes Mad-work, and often the Pockey Fistula in Ano; in many the Venereal
Scorbute, in others a Venereal Itch, to all which may be added, the foul
Ulcerous Sores, which are taken for the King's Evil, but will with the
forenamed, come within compass of the Pox, and therefore must be attacqued as
it.

Tumors of the Prepuce, of which are several sorts, viz. Crystallines, which
are transparent swellings of the Prepuce, and are to be discussed by
somentations, or by Bathing the part. Paraphymosis, which is a swelling of the
Prepuce, occasioned by some Ulcer on the Glans, or Prepuce, or perhaps by Warts
on the Glans, which becoming Raw, do Ulcerate, Inflame, and swell the Prepuce,
to that degree, that it will no way strip, by which means the Ulcer being hid,
does become more inveterate, and by the Venereal Salts, cause so great a
humor, that many times Mortification happens, and from thence the Death of the
Patient; in this case, the part must be Fomented, or Bathed, to draw out the
Salts that have swelled the Prepuce, or if that will not do, Amputation must
follow; I mean, to cut off so much of the Prepuce, that the Glans may be bare,
and consequently, the better to come at the Ulcer, for it may be observed, that
it is impossible to cure the Ulcer, unless you can come fairly at it, and
therefore those persons that attempt by a Syringe, to cleanse between the Glans
and Prepuce, make their Patients too dearly to buy their Experience, nor is
this all, for if the remaining part after Amputation be found hard, it will be
convenient not only to digest it, but to salivate the Patient gently, to make
Revulsion of humors, and timely to correct the Malignity of the Ulcer, which
too often does infect the whole Mass of Blood. He has had but little
experience of this Disease, who does not know from how small a matter this
Accident does happen, particularly in those men who have naturally contracted
Prepuces.

Warts and Excressencies, on the Privities happening to either Sex, must not be
neglected, for they are as so many Land Marks to assure the Pox confirmed, and
although many people take little notice of them, where ever I see them, I know
all is not well, and therefore take care, not only to remove them by Causticks,
or else by Binding, but likewise to Eradicate the cause by such a course, as I
judge most fitting for the Patients constitution.

CHAP. VIII. The true way of Curing a Gonorrhaea.
THis is the common name of that Disease we call a Clap, although the word
Gonorrhaea signifies an involuntary flowing of the Seed, which a Clap is not,
but since it will be hard to remove so common received a name, I will treat of
it by either name of Clap, or if you will have it so Gonorrhaea.

A Clap is an Ulcer of the Prostate Glandules, which are seated at the root of
the Yard, and from the Ulceration of these Glandules, the matter or Pus comes,
that either runs, or is squeesed out from the Penis, and it sometimes happens,
that the Vrethra, or passage of the Yard is Ulcerated all along, from whence is
caused the Pain in Erection, commonly called Cordee, for the Acrimony of the
humor that runs from the Ulcer, does irritate the part, and cause the Erection
of the Yard, and the Nerves being much distended thereby, causes the
extraordinary Pain, they suffering no less than a Convulsion, by the pricking
of the Acrimonious humor, during the time of Erection, besides, the Glandules
at the root of the Yard, hear their share in the Pain, by the violent
stretching of the Yard, although in some Claps, the Patient scarce feels the
least of these Accidents, and some not so much as the Pain in Pissing,
particularly Women, who are not so much afflicted in this case as Men, but then
are not so certain in making Observations of it, the reason why, sew Women seek
for help, until the Distemper be so long Lodged, that it becomes a confirmed
Pox, nay, some men are so fool hardy, that they will little value the Disease,
(saying, they have nothing but a Running,) until the Ulcer has caten away the
Prostate Glandules, or perhaps the humor so far fermented by disorderly
Living, that the whole Mass of Blood is infected; others, (foolishly cry out,
it is but a Clap,) not considering the difference there is in this Disease, for
some Claps are really so gentle, that I have known one Box of my Antivenercal
Pills to carry off all, and on the contrary, some are so inveterate, that they
will employ, both Patient and Undertaker in the Cure, for men ought to
consider, that there is degrees of Infection, and that the ill habit of the
Body, does very much contribute to the afflicting of the Patient, and this is
one reason why some are cured in three weeks and less, and others perhaps not
well in as many Months, but to hasten, (for I do not design a Volume,) to the
true and safe way of curing this Disease, pray observe, that the first thing to
be advised is Liquids, such are proper Tisans, Emulsions, or any other Liquors
that breed no Acids, but that are slippery, that easily pass the Stomach, and
create a soft Serum, which passing by Urine, washes the Ulcer, and dints the
points of the Venereal Acids, for it is a fault among many Patients, to fear to
make Urine because of Pain, when they ought to do the contrary, by filling the
Bladder continually, by pouring in of convenient Liquors, and often making
water, by which means (the Urine being made balsamic, by the Anodine Liquors
frequently drank,) the Ulcer so often washed, the Acrimony becomes less, nor
has the Matter which Runs, the power of hurting the passage of the Yard,
because, it is not suffered to lie in the part any considerable time. The Body
must be continually kept soluble, therefore it is convenient to Purge the
Patient once in two days, or oftener if need require, and in some Bodies, to
Purge once in three days is often nough. Anodine Glisters, once in two days are
convenient, but I do not approve of that common French Fashion, of continually
stuffing the Breech, with two or three Glisters a day. Volatile and other Salts
I frequently give, once or twice in twenty four hours, which work by Urine,
helping the Liquors off the Stomach, which otherwise, would be apt to Nauseate
because of their Quantities, it will not be amiss, to allow the Patient half a
pint of Wine a day, or more if he has accustomed his Body to it, for all sudden
alterations are injurious to the Body, those that are by reason of their
Circumstances obliged to keep Company, may Drink White Wind, or Rhenish, with
Water and Lemon, or as much Tea as they please; Chicken-Broath, with Endive,
Succory, and Lemon, is proper to Drink great Quantities, especially when they
Purge, always observing to keep the Body as still as possible, for exercise is
very injurious, by reason it heats and inflames the parts, and therefore the
less the Patient Walks, the better it is. Diet must be observed, and all salted
Meats, and things hard of Digestion must be avoided; all Fatty-Meats are ill,
so are windy things; be sure to avoid, Salted-Beef, Pork, Bacon, Salt-Fish,
Cheese- Fruit, etc. Let the Patient eat, Chicken, Rabbet, Mutton, Partridge,
Veal, Barly-Broath, Water Gruel, Panadoes, Fresh Fish Boiled, and all things of
easy Digestion, avoiding all Hot-Sawces, that provoke Lust, or breed Acids;
great care must be taken, that the Purgations used, be not too strong, nor yet
too often used, for violent Purging, oftimes heats the parts, procures
Inflammation, and not seldom occasions swellings in the Testicules, extreme
painful, from which, many times are occasioned violent Fevers, with
extraordinary debility of the Body, but we must leave no Accident unprovided
for, and therefore when ever this happens, the Patient must forbear all
Purgatives, except such as are very Cool and Gentle. An Anodine, and
discussing Cataplasme, with a convenient Truss is here to be used, if the tumor
be large, it will be the more Painful, and may require to take Blood from the
Arm, to make Revulsion; a slender Diet is likewise convenient, to abate the
quantity of humors; a Decoction of Emollient and Discutient Herbs and Seeds
applied by way of Fomentation, or as a Semicupium, for the Patient to sit in is
not amiss, with Emulsicns of the cold Seeds, to abat^ inflammation and cause
sleep.

Another extraordinary Acciden^ too often happens, either by the to violent
Purging, or disorderly management of the Patient, in either slighting his
Medicines, or many times repeating of the Distemper getting two or three Claps
one upon the head of another, by which mean the Prostate Glandules, so often
(o^ so long) Ulcerated, are much eaten away, and a Gleete, or as some ca^ it, a
Weeping is occasioned.

And this Disease is really most difficult to help, by reason the humors so
long accustomed to flow to the part, will not easily be diverted, and loss of
substance with great difficulty repaired.

But let me not accuse our Sparks, of too great intemperance, nor make them
more Guilty than really they are, for many of them are put upon, especially by
our beyond Sea-Surgeons, who pretend to do wonders with the Pot of Turpentine,
Glister and Syringe, which last they too soon use, and by some restringent
injection stop the Running, which in a few days break out again, and then (
Be-Gar Sir) you have got a fresh one, (which ten to one, but they manage as
wisely as they did before.) but indeed is the first Clap, which for the time of
it is continuance, may serve for two or three.

Now the true way of curing a Gleete, or Weeping, is first to observe whether,
it be really so or not, for I have had many persons that have come to me to be
cured of a Gleete. which when I have viewed, I have found to be a virulent
Clap, which I have both Treated and Cured, as such, it may therefore be
convenient to mention what a Gleete or Weeping really is, and then to set down
the means of curing the same.

The Prostate Glandules being either eaten away, or too much relaxed, and so
weakened by the continual Ulceration, or otherwise heated, and distended by
continual strong Purgatives, a thin Seminal Matter, continually flows from the
Yard, and this is the true Gleete, for Nature has placed these Glandules at
the root of the Yard, to hinder the too soon ejecting of the Seed, in the Act
of Generation, and makes them serve as Strainers, through which the Seed
pressing, is more violently emitted, and is most plainly proved, by those who
labor under this Infirmity, they being too sensible of the loss of that
Natural Force, even before the course of Nature can be said to have deprived
them of it: And from hence it likewise happens, that such persons are troubled
with the slipping away of a thin and seminal Matter, when they go to Stool, and
that in great Quantities, by which the Patient is much weakened, and in some
time rendered incapable of performing the conjugal Duty.

The Cure of this Disease does require much care on both sides, for the Patient
must be as regular, as the Surgeon must be careful; first then let the Patient
be Purged, gently with such Medicines as are cool, and leave a styptick quality
behind them, purge but once in three or four days at most. Use cooling
Emulsions, and Balsamic Tisans, Stiptick Drops in Water is proper, or Water
and Claret for common Drink: Glisters of Decoctions of the cold Seeds are good,
be sure to avoid all forts of Exercise, and all manner of Diet that may
inflame; be very moderate in the use of Venery, but do not forbear altogether,
use Balsamic Injections, but let not them be injected with too much force,
least they hurt the parts already too tender. Avoid all sharp Injections, least
they hurt the Vrethra, and destroy the Tone of the Part; take Blood from the
Arm to make Revulsion. Bathe the Patient once in two days, but let him not
Sweat, and pray observe, that you use no Medicines of Tereb: For all such must
be avoided, for they do more Dilate than Contract, and therefore your
Balsamicks must be framed after another manner; Hypnoticks may be used once in
two Nights, for they allay sharp Humors, and destroy Acids, and prevent
Inflammation; let the Patient be careful to prevent taking Cold, which many
times causes a Defluxion of Humors upon the Glandules, and Neck of the Bladder
with retention of Urine, but if by accident such a case should happen, take
heed of meddling with Catheter or Candle, the latter of which, had like to have
destroyed a Friend of mine, a Noble Spaniard, who being afflicted with this
Distemper, and his Urine somewhat suppressed, he made use of a Candle, which he
put up to the Root of the Yard, and wounding the Glandules causes Inflammation,
and from thence a Total suppression of Urine followed, which endangered his
Life, for, he made not one drop of Urine in ten days, notwithstanding I used
all proper means, having likewise the Assistance of a Learned Physician. At
last, upon the taking a Dose of the Calom: in a proper Vehicle, his Urine came
away with great quantities of Sordes, and was followed by a Sanious Matter
flowing from the Ulcer, occasioned by wounding the Part; therefore I say, all
care imaginable must be taken in the Treating of this Distemper, least your
Remedy prove worse than the Disease.

CHAP. IX. The CONCLUSION.
I Am now arrived at Forty years of Age, and must therefore know it is
impossible to please all Men, my little Book will be Read by people of all
sorts, and I must endure the Snarling of Knaves and Fools, who neither will,
nor can, do the like to advance the common Good, and Fops will find fault, with
what they cannot mend. I have known far greater Authors than my self Censured,
and that by such indiscerning Wherebes, who could not did guish, between the
Beauty or De^ormi^y, of a Work, some perhaps may blame me, for too much
exposing the Noble Art of Chyrurgery, others I am sure, will think me too
Obstruce, but none I hope will blame my Integrity, in endeavoring to deliver
Mankind, from so vast a Labyrinth of Misery, as is too often known, to proceed
from the Subject here treated of Calumnious Tongues will censure the best
Works, but ingenious persons will always applaude, what ever may be
instrumental for public Good, and those that herein find something useful,
either to their Selves or their Friends will commend it.

Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus.

Virg. AEneid. lib. etc. Some people perhaps may be displeased, that I have not
been more particular, in setting down the Receipts of my Medicines, that they
might know my Diet-Drinks, Tisans, Emulsions, etc. which indeed must be varied,
according to the Case or Constitution of the Patient, for I do not use to let
one Pot of my Diet-Drink serve all Patients. (as some I know do,) but I prepare
such as reason directs. Indeed, for my Antivenereal-Pill, I must needs say, I
order all Venereal Patients to be Purged, (where Purging is required) by that
only, and that for many reasons; for First, there is no Pill yet known, that
works so effectually, and that in so small a Dose, for fifteen Grains which is
three small Pills, is a sufficent Purge for most Men, and above a Scruple I
give not to any Man. Moreover it is observable, that my Antivenereal-Pill; does
not debilitate as most other Purgatives do, nor does it Nauseate the Stomach,
(like most Clap Physic,) but strengthens it, and preserves the Appetire,
causing no unsavory Belches, and if ever Cito, tuto, and jucunde, were
applicable to any Medicine, it must be to this, and now that I may not amuse my
Reader, who cannot otherwise imagine, but that this Pill must be some Panacea,
of three pounds and ten shillings a Dose, I will plainly tell him, that I now
mean my common Yellow-Pill, that I have this twenty years Sold for four
shillings a Box, which contains thirty Pills, and which many have admired, but
none ever equalled, and why I have so Sold it, I will freely declare, it has
always been known that too many poor R -- and W -- will be getting of Claps,
before they have Money to pay the Surgeon, (although I have often told them,
that such Distempers are fit only for the better sort,) and many poor Wretches
have been lost for want of Cure, for what can such Persons do, in such a Case?
It Is worth no Man's time to pretend to any other Cure, than what may be managed
by the poor Patients own Care: And if such a Medicine be not to be had, that
the meaner sort may purchase, what miserable Objects should we every where
meet. To tell a poor Laboring Man of Drinking Tisans, and Emulsions, or taking
Aperitive Salts, Balsamic Glisters, etc. would be only to tantalize him, or
what shall many a poor Patient do, (if the Pill were not effectual,) whose
Circumstances are so consining, that he cannot have the convenience of all
things requisite, without rendering him liable to a discovery, which Accident
may appear as terrible to him, as the Pox it self, and whose Reputation may be
utterly destroyed by his unhappy, and perhaps never before perpetrated Crime,
it is therefore absolutely necessary, that some extraordinary Medicine may be
afforded at a reasonable Rate, and that such a Medicine is not to be found
among common Pretenders, is natural enough to believe; but let no Man imagine
that I pretend to Cure Claps for the price of any Pills, or yet think me so
uncharitable as to deny my advice to the Poor.

Moreover, many poor Sinners that have lain under the Torment of Doubt, have
received no small comfort from the assistance of this one particular Medicine,
for many times excess in Venery, joined with the Debauch of Wine, begets so
great an Acrimony in the Urine, and the Guilt so far possessing the mind, the
poor Devil loofes it is little Senses, till by taking three or four Doses of the
Antivenereal-Pills, and no Clap appearing, it becomes as joyful as penitent.
But now to return to the matter of my Book, they which know me will wonder I
have not commended that all this while.

('It Is a great fault I have, in being oftimes too passionate, in commending my
Horse, my Dog, my Servant, etc.) And indeed, it is hard for me to forbear it,
for I am sure the substance of my Book is new, though the Disease be old, I
have borrowed from no man, I have stolen from no Author, I have Writ nothing
but what I have seen, and often experimented, and that in this Town, there is
not a word in it, but what those that know me, have at one time or other heard
from me, upon occasion in Discourse, or in Consultations with Physicians, and I
hope I may without Vanity say, that he which takes the pains to Read it, will
find something in it, either like his own, or some Friends case, and that it
will not be altogether his labor lost.

FINIS.

